
HEALTHCARE REFORM
I N  A M E R I C A
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
Contemporary
World Issues
Series
Consumer Culture, Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Dating and Sexuality, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Forest Conservation Policy, V. Alaric Sample and Antony S. Cheng
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Religion and Politics, Glenn H. Utter and John W. Storey
The Religious Right, Second Edition, Glenn Utter and 
John W. Storey
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick and 
Robert H. Blank
U.S. Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
Women and Equality in the Workplace, Janet Z. Giele and 
Leslie F. Stebbins
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks
Work and Family in America, Leslie Stebbins

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


HEALTHCARE REFORM
I N  A M E R I C A
A Reference Handbook
Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld 
and Michael R. Kronenfeld
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
A
ABC-CLIO
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright 2004 by Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and Michael R. Kronenfeld
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kronenfeld, Jennie Jacobs and Michael R. Kronenfeld
Healthcare reform in America : a reference handbook / Jennie Jacobs
Kronenfeld and Michael R. Kronenfeld
p.
cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-977-5 (hardcover : alk. paper); 1-57607-978-3 (eBook)
1. Health care reform—United States—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Kronenfeld, Michael R.
II. Title.
III. Series.
RA395.A3K7593
2004
362.1'0973—dc22
2004005417
08
07
06
05
04
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper I.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

Contents
Preface, xi
Acknowledgments, xv
1
Healthcare Reform: Cost, Quality, Access, and 
the Government’s Role, 1
Health Policy Formulation and the Role of 
Government in Healthcare Reform, 5
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System: 
Cost, Quality, and Access, 8
Patterns of Health Insurance and Access to Care, 8
Healthcare Costs and Expenditures, 14
Quality of Healthcare, 19
References, 24
2
The Role of the Federal Government in Health 
and Earlier Healthcare Reform Efforts, 27
Federal Involvement in Health (through the 1920s), 27
The Federal Role during the Depression, 
World War II, and the 1950s, 31
Kennedy-Johnson Years and Expansion of 
Federal Involvement in Health, 35
Controversy, Contraction, and Unsettled 
Times in the Federal Role (1969–1979), 41
The Limited and Reactive Change of the 
Reagan-Bush Period (1980–1992), 45
The Clinton Administration, Failure in Major 
Healthcare Reform, and the Current Situation, 53
References, 63
vii

3
Chronology, 65
4
People and Events, 91
George W. Bush, 91
Hillary Rodham Clinton, 91
William (Bill) Jefferson Clinton, 92
Wilbur J. Cohen, 92
Ronald Dellums, 93
Marian Wright Edelman, 93
Alain C. Enthoven, 94
William H. Frist, 94
Newt Gingrich, 95
Lister Hill, 95
Lyndon Baines Johnson, 96
Edward M. Kennedy, 97
C. Everett Koop, 98
Philip R. Lee, 98
Ira Magaziner, 99
Richard Nixon, 99
Ron Pollack, 100
Ronald Reagan, 100
Franklin D. Roosevelt, 101
Theodore Roosevelt, 102
Tommy G. Thompson, 102
Harris Wofford, 103
5
Facts and Documents, 105
Federal Agencies and Health-Related Data 
Collections, 106
Historical Health Data and Government 
Publications, 109
Use of Various Federal and Other Data, 110
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ 
Data and Documents, 128
6
Organizations, 221
Professional Societies and Nonproﬁt Issue 
and Advocacy Associations, 221
Government Agencies, 229
7
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 233
Books and Government Reports, 233
viii
Contents

Electronic Library-Based Resources, 239
Health Research and Healthcare Policy 
Organization Web Sites, 241
Glossary, 245
Index, 251
About the Authors, 267
Contents
ix


Preface
I
n the last 100 years in the United States, the emergence of a na-
tional health system, such has been developed by almost every
other developed country during this time period, has always
seemed to be at least 5 to 10 years in the future. In the beginning
of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the problem is again becoming criti-
cal. Although some limited reforms have occurred in the 1990s
(some control of managed care; CHIP program), many major
problems remain, including those of limited access to care, con-
cerns about quality, and issues about costs of care, rising costs of
care, costs of health insurance, costs of prescription medicine,
and consumer satisfaction. This handbook reviews the failed at-
tempts of the last century, identifying the economic, social, and
political issues that both pushed for the creation of a national sys-
tem and prevented it from being implemented. These issues will
then be reviewed in the context of today, the ﬁrst decade of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, as healthcare reform issues will again be in
the forefront of the political process.
Some of the key issues to be presented are:
•
Cost of healthcare
•
Access to healthcare
•
The political process and healthcare reform
This handbook on healthcare reform presents issues and
questions relevant to the full range of social science disciplines
in high school and college level courses. By showing the inter-
play and significance of these issues as they focus on the
healthcare system, the reader should be able to see the impor-
tance and interplay of the work of the different disciplines as
xi

they relate to concerns about healthcare delivery, healthcare re-
form, and healthcare policy.
This book is very different than it would have been if it had
been written ten years ago before the emergence of the World
Wide Web and the Internet as increasingly important platforms
for the presentation of information, analysis, and advocacy on the
relevant (and sometimes not so relevant) issues of our time. Be-
fore the Web, access to information and viewpoints on a topic
were both limited and often untimely. Although many of the
issue advocacy groups existed before the Web, ﬁnding out about
them and obtaining information on them was both difficult and
time consuming. Government data were available at many public
and academic libraries but it was harder to ﬁnd and access the
relevant information. Periodical indexes were also available at li-
braries but they were harder to use and the tracking down of the
articles identiﬁed was much more difficult and time consuming.
Although the issues relating to the healthcare sector and the de-
livery of healthcare in the United States have not changed so
greatly in this time period, the ability to access information on the
topic has grown almost exponentially.
The ability to access large volumes of information about
health and healthcare delivery, the healthcare sector more gener-
ally, and government programs relating to the delivery of health-
care has not necessarily made the task of understanding the is-
sues any easier for someone just beginning to explore and
understand them. It is very easy to become overwhelmed by the
total volume of information now available. In addition to being
overwhelmed by the volume, a more important and difficult
issue is to assess the accuracy, utility, and perspective of the infor-
mation presented by competing and contradictory advocacy
groups. The ﬁrst two chapters of this book should introduce the
reader to the basic issues involved in healthcare reform and give
the reader the context to use in the further exploration of the var-
ious issues relating to healthcare delivery and healthcare reform.
As with learning about any new topic or using information pre-
sented by any individual or group advocating a speciﬁc view-
point, a reader must be a careful “consumer” of the information
presented on this topic that so directly impacts all of us.
We would like to thank many people for assistance in writ-
ing this book. Jennie’s department chair, Verna Keith, and her as-
sociate chair, Deborah Sullivan, were helpful throughout the
process, from, as good department administrators do, helping to
xii
Preface

facilitate time commitments to writing on certain days. Michael
wants to thank Ted Wendel, associate provost for the Mesa Cam-
pus of ATSU, for his support and encouragement. He also wants
to thank various advocacy groups who generously allowed us to
reprint materials from their Web sites. If this book had been writ-
ten ﬁve years earlier it would have been very different with an
emphasis on print rather than Web-based sources. The World
Wide Web provides a platform for the presentation of informa-
tion, analysis, and advocacy on the various issues we face today.
There is not a topic in which this is more evident than in the de-
bate on the organization and reorganization of our healthcare sec-
tor with its direct impact on the health of us all.
Preface
xiii


Acknowledgments
W
e would also like to thank our family, our three sons, two of
whom, Shaun and Aaron, were living at home while we
were writing this book, Shaun in college and Aaron in his
last two years of high school. Our third son, Jeffrey, was in his
ﬁrst and second years of college during this time. They were pa-
tient at times as we needed to work on aspects of the manuscript
at home, helpful at times when we were discussing issues of
healthcare reform by participating in discussions, and helping us
to realize what the public more generally is and is not familiar
with in terms of healthcare reform issues, and distracting at times
as we had to deal with the life crises and concerns of teenagers
and young adults in today’s world.
xv


1
Healthcare Reform: 
Cost, Quality, Access, 
and the Government’s Role
H
ealthcare reform, or modiﬁcation of the U.S. healthcare sys-
tem so that affordable, high-quality healthcare services are
available to everyone, is a public-policy issue that has re-
ceived discussion in the United States off and on since World War
II. The amount of discussion at any one time varies with changes
in leading politicians and how much healthcare issues, including
healthcare reform, are viewed as issues of high public concern.
Just to look back at the most recent decades, the prominence of
the topic of healthcare reform varied even between the two ad-
ministrations of a single president; healthcare reform went from
being a central issue in the ﬁrst term of the Clinton administra-
tion to a position of lower concern by Clinton’s second term. With
the administration of George W. Bush, especially once the events
of September 11, 2001, and the war with Iraq in 2003 led to a
greater focus on international concerns and terrorism, the promi-
nence of healthcare issues became fairly low. However, concerns
about healthcare problems and the need for reform have not dis-
appeared. For example, the need for Medicare reform and help
for senior citizens in dealing with healthcare costs, especially
drug costs, has again received discussion as the reality of election
years approaches. Other issues will also revive attention to
healthcare reform, since all of the major issues that led to the
most recent failed attempt to pass major U.S. health reform legis-
lation during the Clinton administration remain unresolved.
1

Why is there discussion about healthcare reform in the
United States now? One reason is that, compared to almost all
other industrialized countries in the world today, the United
States has not resolved some very basic issues about the role of
the government in the provision of care and in assuring that all
citizens are able to receive good-quality care when they need it.
In most of the world’s industrialized countries, the government
has been part of a process that guarantees access to many if not
most healthcare services for all citizens. Not all countries arrive at
the same solution for guaranteeing access for all. Some create a
major national healthcare system (for example, Great Britain);
others use more of a health insurance–based system. These insur-
ance-based systems can vary widely. In Canada, there is a single-
payer national health insurance system that some believe could
be a model for reform in the United States. Unlike Great Britain,
the system varies from one province to another (provinces are
more or less the equivalent of states), and most physicians are
still paid by health insurance, rather than on a yearly or per-
patient 
salary. 
In 
Germany, 
nongovernmental 
insurance
providers form the basis of the system, but there are various
mechanisms in place to assure that all Germans are covered for
most services. Many argue the United States does not really have
a clear healthcare system but rather a confusing variety of public
and private healthcare insurers and providers who function in
different, and often competing, ways. Thus, while most countries
have mechanisms in place to assure at least basic access to health-
care for all and to maintain quality while keeping overall costs
reasonable, this is not true of the United States.
For almost fifty years, cost, quality, and access have been
the three key watchwords for scholars in many of the different
disciplines that study healthcare and the delivery of healthcare
services. The name given to these types of studies and studies
related to many aspects of the healthcare system is health ser-
vices research. This name came into use about thirty years ago to
describe research related to the use of, the organization and de-
livery of, the financing of, and the outcomes of health services
such as quality of care and health status changes. Over the last
fifteen years, it has become the most widely accepted term to
describe interdisciplinary research on health and healthcare
services. Disciplines that are often part of health services re-
search include sociology, economics, political science, manage-
ment sciences, epidemiology, and more applied fields such as
2
Healthcare Reform

public health, health services administration, health education,
and policy sciences.
The importance of these three concepts (cost, quality, and
access) should not be surprising, and, actually, these concepts are
of primary importance with regard to many kinds of services that
a person might receive, not just healthcare. For any service (or
product), one thing of importance is the cost. For an individual
about to visit a doctor (or a store), the simple question is, what
must I pay? The more complicated question is whether the price
is fair, reasonable, and appropriate. When this question is applied
beyond the individual to a large group or the nation as a whole,
we begin to ask questions such as, what are the total dollars being
spent? how do these dollars relate to other kinds of services? and
how do they relate to how much people in other places pay for
these kinds of services?
A related question is, can I get the service or product? This
is the concept of access. Access has at least two components—one
component is simply the availability of the service. Are there doc-
tors or hospitals around? Are the doctors taking new patients? Do
the hospitals have empty beds? In healthcare, this question is
often termed geographical access and is linked to speciﬁc places.
Although the answers to policy questions about geographical ac-
cess can be complex, the more complex side of access is ﬁnancial
access, or, do I have the money to pay for care? Increasingly in the
United States, the answer to this question relates less to the
amount of money any individual has in his or her wallet or bank
account, and more to whether the person (and the person’s fam-
ily) has health insurance. The most important factor in having
health insurance in the United States today is having a good job
with beneﬁts. In addition, certain categories of people, such as
the elderly, many of the poor, and increasingly the children of the
near poor, now have access to governmentally sponsored health
insurance. Thus, access for an individual is partially linked to
cost of care and also to speciﬁc aspects of that person’s situation
in the society. It is easy to see how access issues quickly become
one major issue in healthcare reform.
Moving beyond the individual to the society as a whole,
cost of care is linked to access, and at a broader policy level, this
is particularly true. If a governmental unit, such as a state, is will-
ing or able to spend a certain amount of dollars on healthcare for
the poor and those without insurance, the state can provide more
access to care to greater numbers of people if the average cost of
Healthcare Reform
3

care per person is $500 versus $1,000. Thus, as a public policy
issue, costs and access are important and interrelated.
The third related concept is quality of care. Again, quality is
a question we would ask about any type of service or even a spe-
ciﬁc product to be purchased. Is it a quality product, or is the care
I will receive of high quality? Is it at least of acceptable quality?
For consumer products, we often trade off between quality and
cost. People decide to accept a less-well-made product (one that
may not last as long—for example, disposable razors) if the price
is lower. Once we begin to talk about a service such as healthcare,
which involves the person’s body and possibly entails life-or-
death consequences, the willingness of many people to accept
trade-offs between cost and quality is often low. Many people
adopt the attitude that only the best quality is acceptable. In
healthcare, experts discuss how everyone feels they deserve the
best and most advanced care, even if they would not make the
same choice about other goods and services. But what is the best
quality? Are we always able to measure quality in healthcare?
Consider an analogy to other service areas in American society.
Although even the wealthiest people often eat fast food at some
times and dine in elegant restaurants at other times, most people
want elegant, outstanding healthcare at all times, not “fast food”
healthcare. Issues of quality are very important and quickly be-
come interwoven with policies about cost and access. That the
government and individuals should not pay for inferior quality
healthcare is a statement about which almost everyone agrees.
But must everyone have the most technologically sophisticated
care for it to be of high quality? The terms two-tiered and two-class
were often used in the past to describe the U.S. healthcare system,
with one tier or class for individually (and insured) paying pa-
tients and another for charity (or more recently, governmentally
funded) patients. Providing different levels of quality of care is
generally no longer viewed as appropriate, unless all of it is at a
minimum standard of quality. Clearly, quality becomes a third
major consideration, along with cost and access. The rest of this
chapter will return to these and other related concepts, such as
rising costs of healthcare and managed care, after a discussion of
health policy formulation, the role of government, and a few
comments about why healthcare reform has been harder to
achieve in the United States than in many other countries in the
world. Chapter 2 will focus on a review of healthcare reform ef-
forts in the United States, looking more critically at the speciﬁcs
4
Healthcare Reform

of previous attempts at healthcare reform and also reviewing the
development of the role of the federal government in healthcare.
That chapter will focus on how healthcare issues have become
government issues in the United States and on what has hap-
pened over the past one hundred years that left the United States
in the position of being one of the only developed, industrialized
countries that does not guarantee access to healthcare at some
level to all of its citizens.
Health Policy Formulation and the 
Role of Government in Healthcare Reform
Healthcare reform is one part of U.S. health policy that has occu-
pied an important place in the country’s domestic policy agenda,
and its importance within that agenda has been growing during
the last thirty-ﬁve years. A nation’s health policy is part of its
overall social policy. Given that, health policy formulation is in-
ﬂuenced by the variety of social and economic factors that impact
social policy development. Generally, policies are authoritative
decisions made in the legislative, executive, or judicial branch of
government that are intended to inﬂuence the actions, behaviors,
or decisions of others. If a policy relates to improvement of
health, having enough healthcare professionals, or issues such as
cost, quality, and access of healthcare services, it is a part of
healthcare policy. In the United States today, the government
plays a major role in the planning, directing, and ﬁnancing of
healthcare services, although this was less true in earlier time pe-
riods (Kronenfeld 1997).
Compared to some countries in the world, the United
States has a complicated system of government that makes pol-
icy formulation and passage of subsequent enabling legislation
difficult, not only in health but in other policy areas as well. The
United States has a federal system of government, created by
the U.S. Constitution. At the time of the founding of the country
in the 1790s, federalism was a legal concept that defined the
constitutional division of authority between the federal govern-
ment and the states. Federalism stressed the independence of
each level of government from the other while also incorporat-
ing certain functions (especially foreign policy) that were the ex-
clusive area of the central (federal) government. Other policy
Health Policy Formulation and the Role of Government
5

areas, including healthcare, were initially conceived of as the
states’ responsibility. As a result of the expansion in domestic
programs that began with the New Deal programs in the 1930s,
an expanded role for the federal government in many areas has
become an accepted aspect of the way government works in the
United States today. Nonetheless, the complexity of a federal
system still creates some complications in how health programs
operate. Certain health programs are joint federal-state efforts.
One of the biggest and best-known examples of such a joint ef-
fort in the health area is the Medicaid program, the program
that provides healthcare coverage for many poor, lower-income
Americans. Because this is a shared program in which both fed-
eral and state funds are used, but for which states must meet
certain federal government rules, differences can occur between
the two units of government. A cutback or an increase in man-
dated eligibility at the federal level may force a state to adjust
its budget (Lee and Benjamin 1999). Meeting the state share of
the program can be difficult for states in times of declining state
revenues, such as during the recession in the United States that
followed the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. In fact, the
continued economic recession in the first half of 2003 has even
led to some discussion in state legislatures about whether cer-
tain states will be able to provide the needed funds to continue
to participate in Medicaid. During the last few decades, as eligi-
bility for Medicaid has been expanded at certain points, states
have had to find the dollars in their budgets to match the fed-
eral expenditures. These Medicaid match dollars have become
one of the more rapidly rising areas of expenditure for states in
recent decades. These complexities have become one cause be-
hind the push from states for the federal government to become
a major player in and leader of healthcare reform efforts.
In addition to the complexity the federal system creates
across levels of government, government in the United States has
other limitations. The U.S. Constitution contains notions of lim-
ited government resulting from the framers’ fears of a strong cen-
tral government and the importance they placed on protecting
rights of individuals. Two important aspects that relate to these
fears are the reserve clause and the creation of three branches of
government. The reserve clause states that any powers not ex-
plicitly given to the federal government are reserved for the
states, and this clause is the basis of the important role of states
within the United States.
6
Healthcare Reform

There are three branches of government in the United
States: the executive, legislative, and judicial. At least in theory,
these branches are separate and equal in power. Although popu-
lar culture in the United States has now exalted the executive
branch, in the person of the president, to seem to be more power-
ful than the other branches, in reality the U.S. president is much
less powerful than the heads of state under certain other political
systems. In opposition to a parliamentary system of government
like Great Britain’s where the head of the party in the parliament
is the prime minister, the head of the executive branch in the
United States (the president) is separately elected from the leg-
islative branch (Congress), and different political parties can be
represented by the different branches. Thus, at any point in time,
it may be much more difficult for the president’s suggested poli-
cies to be enacted into law, since the president may represent a
different political party than the party that controls Congress.
This can be made even more difficult by there being two different
legislative bodies represented with the Congress: the House of
Representatives and the Senate. At any given time, the majority
party of each branch of Congress can be different from the other
branch; for example, the Senate may have a Republican majority
while the House has a Democratic majority, or vice versa. In com-
bination, this division of powers between units of government
and between branches of government creates an institutional
structure that makes reform policies and major policy changes
more difficult to enact into laws. Under a parliamentary system,
the prime minister can propose new policies and generally have
those enacted into legislation, since the prime minister’s party
also controls the legislative branch of government. Generally, this
has been given as one (although not the only) explanation of why
major reforms, including reforms in the healthcare delivery sys-
tem, are so difficult to accomplish in the United States (Steinmo
and Watts 1995).
In addition, the presence of two different legislative bodies,
the House of Representatives and the Senate, only compounds
the difficulty of having healthcare reform legislation enacted.
This is not accidental. The creation of two legislative bodies was
part of a compromise between large and small states at the time
of the writing of the Constitution. The House of Representatives
was viewed as the body that was closer to the people, and each
representative is responsible to and for a small district. Districts
in each state are created in proportion to the percentage of the
Health Policy Formulation and the Role of Government
7

population in the United States that resides within that district,
so that large or densely populated states have many more repre-
sentatives in the House than do small or sparsely populated
states. In contrast, each state has only two senators (no matter
what the state’s population), and they represent the entire state.
Until the twentieth century, senators were not popularly elected
but were appointed by the legislatures of the states. The two
houses of Congress create a further opportunity for divided and
weakened government, so that even if the party of the president
wins a majority in one of the houses of the legislature, it still
might not have a majority in both, thus making it more difficult
for new ideas to be passed into law.
All of these structural factors in the basic operation of the
government of the United States make it more difficult to have
major policy changes enacted. Despite this, the role of the federal
government in healthcare has expanded over the past several
hundred years, and there have been times when change has oc-
curred and other times when change appeared likely, yet failed
politically. These speciﬁcs are discussed in Chapter 2.
Three Watchwords of 
the Healthcare System: 
Cost, Quality, and Access
Cost, quality, and access have been the three major watchwords
of the healthcare system. What are the current trends in terms of
those issues now? How do these three aspects of healthcare relate
to each other? This section will review some basic patterns in
each of these areas and then conclude by discussing some of the
interactions between the three aspects.
Patterns of Health Insurance 
and Access to Care
Although there is a range of estimates about the numbers of peo-
ple uninsured and underinsured in the United States from the
early 1980s on, most sources agree that there has been an increase
in the numbers of uninsured persons since the late 1970s (Wilen-
sky and Ladenheim 1987; Freeman et al. 1987; Robert Wood John-
8
Healthcare Reform

son Foundation 1987). Traditionally, the United States has always
had many uninsured individuals. In fact, health insurance was
not common in the United States prior to World War II, although
some specialized groups did have insurance for some needs.
During the 1950s, Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans began to op-
erate in most states, and most municipal and state workers, as
well as school employees, were given some form of coverage.
Unionized employees increasingly also won health insurance
coverage as a beneﬁt. By the 1960s, coverage rates grew for peo-
ple in many jobs and evolved into a typical beneﬁt in many full-
time jobs, including office, manufacturing, and government jobs.
Some groups were less likely to be covered, especially those in
service and retail jobs, the self-employed, and farm laborers.
By the early 1960s, most full-time workers and their families
had some coverage, but if workers lost their jobs or retired, they
and their families lost this coverage. Those without jobs, of
course, generally did not have health insurance. Therefore, prior
to the Medicaid program, income was a major determinant of ac-
cess to care, especially access to outpatient and physician ser-
vices. Because hospital care is typically for more urgent prob-
lems, people of more limited means often obtained hospital care
in an emergency, sometimes as part of charity care provisions of
hospitals. One of the policy successes of the 1960s was the pas-
sage of Medicare and Medicaid, which provided health insurance
coverage to the elderly and the poorest who received welfare ser-
vices. Over the next decades, Medicare also expanded to cover
the disabled, the blind, and in 1972 persons with end-stage renal
disease (ESRD) were added. Although at the time some people
felt that Medicare would continue to expand and add additional
disease categories and perhaps become the model for more com-
prehensive health insurance provided through the government,
that has not happened. No new disease categories have been
added to Medicare coverage since the addition of kidney dis-
eases. Nonetheless, Medicare and Medicaid have increased the
availability of healthcare services to the poor. Several studies
have demonstrated that the gap in levels of physician use be-
tween the poor and the rest of society narrowed in the ten- to ﬁf-
teen-year period after the passage of these programs (Wilson and
White 1977; Aday, Anderson, and Fleming 1980).
In the late 1970s, the best estimates were that 25 to 26 mil-
lion people in the United States were without healthcare insur-
ance. This was about 13 percent of the population under age 65.
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
9

The numbers of uninsured grew in the 1980s. Estimates range
from a low of 22 million to a high of 37 million uninsured persons
(Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 1987; Wilensky and Laden-
heim 1987; Wilensky 1987; Moyer 1989). From 1980 to the begin-
ning of the new century, most sources agree that there has been
an increase in the number of uninsured, with typical ﬁgures
showing around 14 percent of people under 65 years of age with
no coverage in 1984, up to 16 percent in 1996 and 17.4 percent in
1997, with small declines in 1998 and 1999, down to 16.6 and 16.1
percent respectively (Budrys 2001; Eberhardt, Ingram, and
Makuc 2001). One clear pattern has been a decline in the percent-
age of people with private insurance coverage, such as through
their workplace. For example, this ﬁgure declined from almost 77
percent in 1984 to 71 percent in 1996, and the percent uninsured
would be higher except for a growth in Medicaid coverage in that
same time frame, so that while only 7 percent of people under 65
had Medicaid coverage in 1984, almost 12 percent did in 1996,
and the further expansions with the Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP) program should continue to increase the per-
centage of children with government-based health coverage. In
the United States today, most elderly persons are eligible for and
are enrolled in Medicare, so that health insurance coverage rates
in this group are very high. Recent immigrants are the group
within the elderly least likely to have Medicare coverage.
Who are the Americans who have neither private health in-
surance nor coverage for healthcare services under public insur-
ance programs such as Medicare and Medicaid? Why is this so
important? One reason having some type of health insurance is
so important is that health insurance coverage is an important
determinant of access to care. When we discuss the uninsured,
we are discussing those groups that are most likely to have major
problems obtaining access to healthcare services. In general,
about two in ﬁve American adults who do not have health insur-
ance end up going without needed care (Cassil 1997). Uninsured
adults are not a homogeneous group. Although some of the peo-
ple without health insurance are those who we might assume are
the major groups who would make up this population—the
homeless, the socially dislocated—others are people who work in
jobs either part or all of the year but nonetheless have no health
insurance coverage, or those who are temporarily unemployed.
Surprising to some people, those without insurance even include
some relatively high-income families in which the primary
10
Healthcare Reform

breadwinner has a serious chronic illness, can no longer work,
and yet is not a recipient of public health insurance programs.
Critical to understanding how some groups of people have
no health insurance in American society today is the realization
that most private health insurance in the United States is pur-
chased through employer-based group insurance policies. These
policies represent about 85 percent of all private coverage. By the
late 1990s, rates of workplace health insurance coverage were
lower than in the 1970s. One report in 1998 indicated that despite
the nation’s strong economy in the 1990s, the number of unin-
sured Americans continued an upward trend and was partially
linked to size of employer. Although two-thirds of all workers in
large ﬁrms of over 1,000 employees had health insurance, the ﬁg-
ure declined to 52 percent in ﬁrms of 25 to 99 employees, and to
less than 30 percent in ﬁrms of fewer than 25 employees (Aston
1998). Shifts in the sector of employment and shifts in the number
of part-time versus full-time jobs are both related to ongoing
changes in the economy. Many experts believe the United States
has moved from a manufacturing-dominated economy to a ser-
vice economy. Thus, typical changes would be decreases in the
numbers of people employed in automobile manufacturing (a
group with extensive health insurance coverage) and increases in
the number of people employed in fast-food establishments.
Many of these service-job employers pay only the minimum
wage and often hire a large group of part-time workers. Typically,
these part-time workers do not receive beneﬁts such as health in-
surance. If the part-time worker is a high-school student covered
under his or her parents’ insurance or a person over sixty-ﬁve
supplementing his or her Social Security income, the lack of
health insurance provision in these jobs does not lead to an in-
crease in the number of uninsured Americans. If these jobs are
ﬁlled by heads of households or single adults who cannot obtain
other jobs, however, there is an impact on the numbers of persons
without health insurance.
In a more recent study of why workers are uninsured, spe-
cial survey data were used to try to understand more about link-
ages between employment and health insurance status (Thorpe
and Florence 1999). The 1997 Current Population Survey (CPS)
data were combined with data from a special survey of workers
including workers in contingent jobs (that is, those designed to
last a speciﬁed period of time) and workers who are independent
contractors or workers for temporary agencies. These types of
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
11

work settings have been growing over the last decade. About 72
percent of all workers in this study were employed by a ﬁrm that
offered health insurance coverage. Of these workers, 11 percent
were not eligible for the coverage typically because of the num-
ber of hours worked. Some people do not actually enroll in the
coverage offered by an employer. About 85 percent of eligible
workers accepted coverage. About two-thirds of those who
turned down coverage did so because they were covered by an-
other family member, and some had purchased their own private
insurance. About 22 percent of workers who declined coverage
were uninsured. The high cost of insurance was generally cited as
the most important factor in the decision to decline coverage. Of
the ineligible workers, 37 percent were uninsured, 11 percent re-
ceived some form of public coverage already, and 44 percent
were insured through another family member. The survey also
included information on workers in ﬁrms that did not offer any
health insurance coverage. Of those, 40 percent were uninsured.
Several suggestions are provided by the authors of this study.
They recommend that, absent comprehensive healthcare reform,
some smaller reforms could be helpful. Workers in alternative-
type jobs, at all income levels, are less likely to be eligible for em-
ployee health insurance plans and more likely to be uninsured. It
would be possible to increase the eligibility of such workers for
beneﬁts. Similarly, nondiscrimination workplace rules could be
modiﬁed to include those working less than 20 hours per week.
Such changes would probably make 3.5 million more workers el-
igible for health insurance (Thorpe and Florence 1999). Whether
those workers would be able to afford such insurance remains an
issue.
Some of the people without health insurance coverage are
people with special health problems, especially those with a his-
tory of serious medical problems. Many people with serious
health problems do maintain health insurance coverage as long
as they keep their jobs. If they lose their current jobs due to the
general economy or their health but can still work, they may ex-
perience problems in ﬁnding employment because of their
health. Not only do businesses not want employees with illnesses
that may require repeated absences, but, increasingly, health in-
surance companies are “experience rating” individual company
policies. A workplace with a few high utilizers of healthcare due
to chronic illness can raise the insurance rates for the entire com-
pany. Employers are thus more reluctant to hire a worker who
12
Healthcare Reform

may increase overall costs in this area. Although people who are
medically uninsurable are a small part of those without health in-
surance, they represent a much larger proportion of the uncom-
pensated care expenses because they are very high utilizers of
health services.
Some other social factors are also important in the lack of
health insurance coverage. Nationally, the age-adjusted percent-
age of the nonelderly population without health insurance
varies by urbanization levels. Residents of fringe counties of
metropolitan areas are least likely to lack coverage, while resi-
dents of central cities and nonmetropolitan counties are most
likely to lack coverage (Eberhardt, Ingram, and Makuc 2001).
Race or ethnicity also matters. In fact, Hispanics are the group
least likely to have health insurance coverage, and this has been
true for almost two decades. In 1984, about 29 percent of all His-
panics did not have any health insurance, as compared with 12
percent of white non-Hispanics and 20 percent of African Ameri-
can non-Hispanics. Ten years later, in 1994, the lack of health in-
surance had increased slightly for Hispanics and white non-His-
panics (32 and 14 percent, respectively) and had not really
changed for African Americans. In 1998 and 1999, Hispanics re-
mained the group with the highest percentage of its population
lacking health insurance (about 34 percent versus ﬁgures of 14 to
12 percent for whites and 19 to 21 percent for African Ameri-
cans). Within the Hispanic population, it is people of Mexican
origin who are the most likely to lack health insurance. About 35
percent of Mexican-origin Hispanics lacked health insurance in
1984, and this increased to 38 percent by 1999 (Eberhardt, In-
gram, and Makuc 2001).
The newest concern about potentially growing rates of the
uninsured relates to the economy. With the economy slowing
down and workers being laid off, fewer people may have access
to employer-provided coverage. The unemployment rate grew
from 4 percent in December 2000 to 5.4 percent in October 2001,
following the terrorist attacks of September 11 (Rising Unem-
ployment 2001). Since then, the economy has shown great volatil-
ity, especially in terms of stock market values. In addition, conﬁ-
dence levels in business have decreased, in part as a result of
business ethics scandals, such as the Enron debacle. One recent
estimate was that 75 million Americans, or 30.1 percent of the
population, were uninsured at some point during 2001 or 2002.
Ninety percent of these people were uninsured for at least three
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
13

months, and about 80 percent were in working families (Meckler
2003).
Not only are rates of unemployment increasing, leading to
higher percentages of people without health insurance, but the
costs of premiums for health insurance are also increasing, at
fairly rapid rates. Premiums for employer-provided health insur-
ance grew 11 percent in 2001, the largest increase in a decade. Al-
though the federal COBRA legislation now allows people laid off
from ﬁrms with 20 or more employees to continue their healthcare
coverage at group rates, workers must pay the entire premium
once laid off. This payment is often much higher than when they
were employed since many employers subsidize the cost of health
insurance for their employees. The average employer-sponsored
coverage now without employer subsidy is $2,650 for the em-
ployee and over $7,000 for family coverage. For many unem-
ployed workers, this amount is prohibitive. A recent analysis ar-
gues that for every 100 persons who lose their job, the number of
uninsured persons grows by 85 (Rising Unemployment 2001).
Medicaid could help to pick up some of these persons; however,
in many states, Medicaid represents as much as 15 percent of the
state budget (Medicaid Coverage 2001). In bad economic times,
many states end up needing ways to cut state costs, especially
since state sources of revenue such as income tax and sales tax are
very sensitive to economic declines. If states respond to worsen-
ing ﬁscal situations by cutting Medicaid, the ability to secure pub-
lic coverage to make up for lost insurance will diminish. These is-
sues of the linkages between economic trends and access to health
insurance and therefore to healthcare are very important. Al-
though a country’s overall economic health always plays a role in
the amount of ﬁnancing available for various services, because the
United States depends on employment for coverage for many
people and, unlike most European countries, generally does not
have in place a system that guarantees access to health insurance
or healthcare services, economic declines can lead to serious ac-
cess problems for many people. At times, economic declines lead
to more calls for reform of the U.S. healthcare system, but overall
reform has been difficult to accomplish in the United States.
Healthcare Costs and Expenditures
One important factor to remember about how much healthcare
costs in the United States and how we ﬁnance or pay for care is
14
Healthcare Reform

that the system for ﬁnancing healthcare in the United States is not
really a uniﬁed system. In Canada to the north, there are provin-
cial budgets for healthcare, with a speciﬁed amount contributed
by the Canadian federal government. In the United States, how-
ever, there is not a preset state or national budget for healthcare.
We can present national data, but ﬁnancing of healthcare services
reﬂects the fragmentation in the U.S. system as a whole. How
people pay for care varies by the insurance that people have and
may also vary by type of provider and type of service.
One useful approach used by some analysts of our health-
care ﬁnancing system is to talk of different categories of expenses:
how much money is spent, where the money comes from (direct
out-of-pocket, private insurance, government), and what it is
spent on (fees paid to individual providers, to hospitals, for
drugs or medically related supplies). National healthcare expen-
ditures have grown at a rate substantially outpacing the gross na-
tional product (GNP) for most of the years since 1940, although
there was a steadier rate of growth in the decade of the 1990s.
Prior to World War II, only 4 percent of the nation’s overall
wealth each year was spent on healthcare. By 1960, this ﬁgure
had increased only to 5.1 percent of the gross domestic product
(GDP). Expressed in per-capita terms, the growth in health ex-
penditures appears much larger, partially because this was a pe-
riod of rapid economic growth. Per-capita expenses increased
from $30 in 1940 to $143 in 1960 (Waldo, Levit, and Lazenby 1986;
National Health Expenditures Tables 2001). These trends contin-
ued and accelerated in the next twenty years, as the percent of
GDP spent on healthcare increased to 7 percent in 1970 and 8.8
percent in 1980. Per-capita expenses also continued to increase,
going from $348 in 1970 to $1,067 in 1980 in constant dollars
(Waldo, Levit, and Lazenby 1986; National Health Expenditures
Tables 2001).
These decade-long ﬁgures actually mask important trends
occurring within each decade. Health expenditures as a percent-
age of GNP and GDP were quite stable from 1950 to 1955, with
more of an increase in the latter part of that decade (Kronenfeld
and Whicker 1984). Major impacts on expenditures were created
by the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965 and the com-
mencement of those programs’ operation in 1966. After a brief
period of wage and price controls from 1971 to 1973, the
Medicare program expanded to more completely include the dis-
abled, and costs rose again from 1973 to 1976. Then a voluntary
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
15

effort to hold down healthcare costs ensued from 1976 through
1979 but gradually lost its effectiveness. During the decade of the
1980s, spending for healthcare continued to grow by almost all
measures, with particular acceleration from 1986 to 1989
(Lazenby and Letsch 1990). By 1990, healthcare expenditures
reached $695 billion, up to 12 percent of the GDP, an increase of
about 10 percent from 1989 to 1990. This was an inﬂation rate
substantially greater than the increase in overall GDP. In fact, the
increase in the share of GDP spent for healthcare from 1989 to
1990 was the second-largest such jump since 1960 (Levit et al.
1991). One explanation for the large jump was the slowdown in
the general economy. The percentage of GDP spent on health is
very sensitive to overall economic growth because the denomina-
tor ﬁgure in percentage of GDP spent on health is a measure of
overall output of the economy. The trends on per-capita expendi-
ture are less dependent on overall economic trends. Per-capita ex-
penditures also continued to increase during the decade of the
1980s, up to $2,737 by 1990 (Levit et al. 1991).
Costs continued to increase from 1990 to 1993. National health
expenditures as a percentage of GDP remained relatively stable
from 1993 through 1999, ranging from 13.4 percent in 1993 to 13.0
percent in 1998 and 1999 (National Health Expenditures Tables
2001; Cowan et al. 2001). One explanation for the small decrease in
the percentage of GDP spent on healthcare in the late 1990s is the
large increase in the GDP during that time period, a period of ex-
pansive economic growth. Other factors that helped to stabilize
costs in that time period were one-time effects of managed care and
some impact of federal legislation, such as the Balanced Budget Act
of 1997, which limited growth in some of the government health
spending programs. Per-capita health expenditures have continued
to increase in the 1990s, going from the $2,737 ﬁgure in 1990 to
$3,842 in 1996 and $4,358 in 1999 (National Health Expenditures Ta-
bles 2001; Cowan et al. 2001). The fact that per-capita expenditures
are continuing to increase is one reason why experts are concerned
that healthcare expenditures are increasing as a percentage of GDP
in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Figure 1.1 shows both where the nation’s health dollars
came from and went to in 1960 and in 1999. This allows a com-
parison of types of revenue sources and expenditures over time,
before beginning a more detailed examination of, ﬁrst, types of
healthcare expenditures and then sources of revenue. A compar-
ison of the sources of funds between 1960 and 1999 shows the
16
Healthcare Reform

greater inﬂuence of the role of government by 1999. Only 24
cents out of every health dollar in 1960 came from government
programs. By 1999, government programs of all types con-
tributed 45.3 cents out of every healthcare dollar. Almost 18
cents is being spent for Medicare, almost 16 cents for Medicaid
and the CHIP program, and 12 cents for all other public pro-
grams. The importance of public programs has been increasing
in almost every decade. For example, by 1990, government pro-
grams of all types covered 42 cents out of each healthcare dollar:
17 cents for Medicare, 11 for Medicaid, and the rest for other
types of government programs both at the federal level and at
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
17
FIGURE 1.1
The Nation’s Health Dollar—Where It Came From and Went in 1960 and in 1999
The Nation's Health Dollar 1960
The Nation’s Health Dollar 1999
Where It Came From
Government Programs 
$.24
Private 
Health 
Insurance 
$.22
Out of 
Pocket 
Payments 
$.49
Other Private 
$.05
Where It Went
Physician Services $.19
Other 
Personal 
Healthcare 
$.31
Other Spending $.12
Hospital Care 
$.34
Nursing Home 
Care $.04
Where It Came From
Where It Went
Other Private $.07
Private 
Insurance 
$.33
Out of Pocket $.15
Medicare $.18
Medicaid & 
CHIP $.16
Other Public $.12
Prescription 
Drugs 8%
Program Admin. 
& Net Cost 6%
Other Spending 
24%
Hospital Care 33%
Physician & 
Clinical Services 
22%
Nursing Home 
Care 7%
Source: Health Care Financing, Office of the Actuary. Health Care Financing Review. 22(4), Summer 2001.

state and local levels. Of course, in 1960, Medicare and Medicaid
did not exist as federal programs, and the CHIP program did not
exist in 1990. The next largest source of the healthcare dollars by
1999 was private health insurance, accounting for 33 cents of
every healthcare dollar, the same amount as in 1990, but an in-
crease from 22 cents in 1960. Far and away the largest source of
the healthcare dollar in 1960 was out-of-pocket payments (that
is, costs not reimbursed to the consumer). This category ac-
counted for 49 cents, or almost half of all the healthcare dollar in
1960, but was only 15 cents by 1999, a continued decrease from
20 cents in 1990.
A comparison of where the healthcare dollar actually
went in 1960 and 1999 reveals much greater similarities over
the forty years. Hospital care was the largest single category of
expense at both points in time, and consumed 34 cents of the
healthcare dollar in 1960 and 33 cents in 1999, reflecting a small
decline in the importance of expenditures in hospitals with the
growth of outpatient care. This is a fairly new decline, since in
1990, 38 cents of the healthcare dollar was going to hospital ser-
vices. The catch-all category of other spending in 1999 was the
next largest single figure and covered such services as dental,
other professional services, home health, durable medical
products, and over-the-counter medicines. This category of
spending accounted for 24 cents of each healthcare dollar. In
earlier years, the categories were not identical, but the category
of personal healthcare services was the second largest in 1960
(31 cents) and also in 1990 (23 cents), and included dental,
home healthcare, drugs, and other nondurable products. Physi-
cian and clinical services took 19 cents of the health expendi-
ture dollar in 1960 and 1990 and was up to 22 cents in 1999.
Nursing-home care is one category that has almost doubled,
taking only 4 cents of the healthcare dollar in 1960, 8 cents in
1990, and 7 cents in 1999, the small reduction being due to the
growth in home health–based services (Levit et al. 1991; Office
of National Cost Estimates 1990; Cowan et al. 2001). The impor-
tance of prescription drugs is indicated by its being given a
separate category by 1999 and accounting for 8 cents of the na-
tional health dollar.
As the ﬁgures just discussed partially show, government ex-
penditures as part of the healthcare system grew a great deal, es-
pecially from 1960 to 1990. During this time period, various re-
forms were implemented to try to control rising costs. The
18
Healthcare Reform

diagnosis-related group (DRG) prospective hospital-payment re-
form system was implemented by Medicare in 1983 as part of the
Social Security amendments of that year and is explained in more
detail in Chapter 2. The other major area of cost-related reform
within the Medicare program in recent years was a new physi-
cian-payment approach begun in January 1992 and enacted as a
way to deal with problems of rising costs in the Medicare pro-
gram. One cost-related issue that has been receiving increased
policy attention in terms of coverage for the elderly is drug costs.
Since the failure of the Clinton healthcare reform efforts in the
early 1990s, some policy experts have argued that drug costs for
the elderly need to be covered in some way, perhaps through
adding a prescription-drug beneﬁt to Medicare, since prescrip-
tion-drug costs now represent the fastest-growing segment of
healthcare spending (Prescription Drug Trends 2001). Concern
about rising drug costs may be the leading concern about the re-
turn of rising healthcare costs since 1999.
After six years of slower growth, estimates are that total na-
tional healthcare expenditures have increased yearly between 7
and 10 percent from 2000 to 2002 (Gardner 2001). Federal laws
such as the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 included some caps on
growth that restrained cost increases from 1997 to 1999. Increased
numbers of patients in managed care plans in the 1990s also
slowed cost increases. Few experts believe this will be the trend in
the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century. As the large baby-boom
population begins to age, the pressures of care for that large group
will help create increased costs, as will growth in new technology,
new drugs, and changes in the organization of medical care.
Costs of health insurance have started to have double-digit
increases since 1999 in some parts of the United States. During
the economic expansion of the late 1990s, many employers ab-
sorbed health insurance cost increases. As the economic down-
turn began in late 2001, many employers planned to pass along
such price increases, which ranged from 12 to 14 percent in large
companies and 18 to 20 percent for small businesses (National
Journal Examines Rises 2001).
Quality of Healthcare
Quality of care is inextricably intertwined with societal, profes-
sional, and patient expectations concerning the role of healthcare
in society. Over the last twenty years, there have been several
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
19

critical periods of more-detailed attention to what quality means
and how to deﬁne it. In 1990, the Institute of Medicine deﬁned
quality as “the degree to which health services for individuals
and populations increase the likelihood of desired health out-
comes and are consistent with current professional knowledge”
(Lohr and Schroeder 1990). Another way to think of this is that if
providers deliver good-quality services, they are providing ser-
vices in a technically competent manner, with good communica-
tion, shared decision making, and cultural sensitivity.
One older, classic assessment of quality, especially as related
to patient care, is to divide aspects of quality into three compo-
nents: structure, process, and outcome (Donabedian 1968; Brook,
Williams, and Davis-Avery 1976; Donabedian, Wheeler, and
Wyszewianski 1982). The simplest assessment in terms of avail-
ability of information is structure. Measures of structure of care
relate to the personnel and facilities used to provide services and
the manner in which they are organized. Licensure as a type of
structural measure of quality is the most pervasive, most basic,
and oldest quality-assurance approach. Licensure is used for
most healthcare professions. Process measures typically reﬂect
what was actually done to a patient, such as the numbers and
types of procedures and laboratory tests that were performed
(Donabedian 1968). One advantage of this approach over moving
to outcome measures is that process of care, at least the technical
aspect, is usually well documented in the medical record. One
major caveat when using process measures is that the linkage be-
tween the process—what is done to a patient—and outcome is
not always clear.
Outcome measures reﬂect the outcomes or impacts of care.
Another way to think of outcome measures is as net changes that
occur in a patient’s health status as a result of the medical care re-
ceived. Many experts now favor greater emphasis on outcomes to
assess quality. This approach is not without controversy, how-
ever. One major concern is that many factors affect health, not
just the care received, and too simplistic a focus on outcomes
does not reﬂect these various factors. For example, if an elderly
person is having problems hearing, it is not an appropriate qual-
ity outcome to say that the person has received good care only if
her hearing is restored to the condition of her youth, since in
most cases this is not possible with the current levels of health
knowledge. Lost hearing often cannot be restored, but hearing
aids can improve daily functioning. This would be the more ap-
20
Healthcare Reform

propriate measure of an outcome for visits of an elderly person to
an ear specialist. Another concern is that for outcomes to be used
as an indicator of quality of care, the outcomes need to be sensi-
tive to different levels in the process or content of care, and not all
outcomes are. For a patient with cardiovascular disease, an ap-
propriate outcome might be enabling the patient to resume pain-
free physical activities, if a person has coronary artery disease for
which surgical procedures are appropriate. Some people, how-
ever, choose medication over surgery. Sometimes this is the cor-
rect choice for medical reasons due to other existing complica-
tions in the person’s health. In other cases, it may be the choice of
the patient to try medication ﬁrst. In either case, the appropriate
outcome measurement may need to be good control of pain
rather than restoration of pain-free activities.
Major concerns about quality of healthcare are not new. In
the ﬁrst six months of 1988, four different public agencies released
reports about issues in quality of healthcare (Becher and Chassin
2001). After this ﬂurry of activity, physician organizations, quality
experts, and legislators ended up agreeing that new efforts were
needed. The initial most-visible result of this concern was the cre-
ation of a new federal agency to invest in research on the effective-
ness of healthcare services and to develop practice guidelines to
assist providers in improving quality. By 1994, this effort led to the
creation of MEDTEP, the Medical Treatment and Effectiveness
Program. One of the most important parts of this effort was the ef-
fectiveness research program known as Patient Outcomes Re-
search Teams (PORTS). The effort has produced mixed results.
A number of recent articles have tried to summarize the
new quality concerns in the United States, incorporating espe-
cially the critiques of the Institute of Medicine (2001) report that
argued that physicians, nurses, and other health professionals are
doing their best to provide good-quality care but that the current
system does not reward innovation and communication. The
1999 report To Err Is Human found that more people die each year
from medical mistakes than from highway accidents, breast can-
cer, and AIDS (Institute of Medicine 2001). This report created
enormous concern among the public and controversy among U.S.
physicians and physician organizations, many arguing that the
public was becoming unnecessarily panicked about such prob-
lems. The more recent report has been received more favorably
from within the medical profession and is raising among experts a
number of questions about how to best think about quality issues.
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
21

One way to think about quality issues is that patients may
suffer harm from three different types of quality problems
(Becher and Chassin 2001). The ﬁrst type of harm is if patients do
not receive beneﬁcial health services. The second is when patients
undergo treatments or procedures from which they do not bene-
ﬁt. The third situation is when patients do receive appropriate
medical services, but the services are provided inappropriately. A
simple way to summarize these three types of problems is as un-
deruse, overuse, and misuse. Health services research literature
demonstrates that, on average, half of Americans do not receive
recommended preventive care, 30 percent do not receive recom-
mended care for acute conditions, and 40 percent do not receive
care for chronic conditions. Similarly high rates of overuse have
been demonstrated—about 30 percent for acute conditions and
40 percent for chronic conditions (Schuster, McGlynn, and Brook
1998). Studies of misuse are more complicated. Many have oc-
curred in hospitals and one of the best known of these studies,
the Harvard Medical Practice Study (1990), found that 1 percent
of patients hospitalized in New York hospitals in 1984 had an in-
jury from negligence. A different quality study using medical
records from 1995 and 1996 at seven Veterans’ Administration
medical centers found that almost one-quarter of active-care pa-
tient deaths were possibly preventable by optimal care, and 6
percent were rated as probably or deﬁnitely preventable (Hay-
wood and Hoffler 2001).
The 2001 Institute of Medicine report argues that the cur-
rent U.S. healthcare system is a tangled, highly fragmented web
that often wastes resources with unnecessary services and du-
plicated efforts. Possible solutions are to revamp the system to
deal not only with the needs and values of patients but also to
develop greater teamwork among health professionals and
greater use of information technology. Some of the technologi-
cal suggestions are better use of computers in the maintenance
of medical records and information, automated medication-
order entry systems to reduce human error, and the use of e-
mail to facilitate communication between patients and doctors.
A recent editorial in a major medical journal argues that more
guidelines and better continuing education for physicians will
be one key. Moreover, the development of better computer tech-
nology may make it possible for physicians to have handheld
computers and computerized clinical-decision support systems
in the future (Shaneyfelt 2001).
22
Healthcare Reform

In the past decade, a number of speciﬁc studies have exam-
ined issues such as the type of organizations that deliver health-
care and the impacts that factor may have on quality. From a
number of such studies have come recommendations that groups
such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and preferred
provider organizations (PPOs) continue to develop standardized
performance measures. A number of these measures are currently
in use, such as the Health Plan Employer Data and Information
Set (HEDIS®) and the Consumer Assessments of Health Plans
(CAHPS) (Kleinman 2001).
Some recent research on quality of care has explored the issue
of settings of care. Research has demonstrated for some time that
managed care settings can provide a quality of care as good as that
provided in older fee-for-service settings; however, much of that
research has been conducted on older, nonproﬁt managed care set-
tings in which many of the physicians were in group and staff
models. The more important question in today’s managed care set-
tings is whether quality of care varies between investor-owned and
not-for-proﬁt managed care settings. Compared to not-for-proﬁt
HMOs, investor-owned plans scored lower in a recent study on
fourteen different quality-of-care indicators (Himmelstein et al.
1999). Investor-owned plans are more concerned about producing
a proﬁt for their investors and may skimp on some aspects of care
to produce that proﬁt. The domination of today’s healthcare mar-
ket by investor-owned plans may indicate growing concerns about
quality. Some of these concerns about managed care have become
part of the push among patients to have a patients’ bill of rights,
partially as a way to deal with quality-of-care issues and overall is-
sues of patient satisfaction. Although different groups mean differ-
ent things by the term patients’ bill of rights, many versions would
include allowing patients to sue an HMO in state court for denial
of beneﬁts or quality-of-care issues. A patients’ bill of rights has
been under serious discussion in the U.S. Congress since 1998 at
least, but it has not yet been passed.
Quality concerns are not new to the health policy arena, nor
are issues of access and cost. Issues of quality, cost, and access are
intertwined, and will continue to receive attention as being
among the most important issues facing the healthcare system of
the United States. Although some legislation to deal with reform
in these speciﬁc areas, such as a patients’ bill of rights or legisla-
tion to cover drug costs for the elderly, may occur in the next few
years, the examples just given are piecemeal, small reforms as
Three Watchwords of the Healthcare System
23

compared to major overall healthcare system reform. The next
chapter reviews the federal role in healthcare and periods of
healthcare reform, with greater focus on major changes but some
coverage of interim, smaller changes as well.
References
Aday, Luann, Ronald Anderson, and Gretchen Fleming. 1980. HealthCare
in the U.S.: Equitable for Whom? London: Sage Publications.
Aston, G. 1998. Number of Uninsured Continues to Rise. American Med-
ical News October 26: 5–6.
Becher, E. C., and M. R. Chassin. 2001. Improving the Quality of Health-
care: Who Will Lead? Health Affairs 20: 164–179.
Brook, R. H., K. N. Williams, and A. Davis-Avery. 1976. Quality Assur-
ance Today and Tomorrow: Forecast for the Future. Annals of Internal
Medicine 85: 809–817.
Budrys, G. 2001. Our Unsystematic Healthcare System. Lanham, MD: Row-
man and Littleﬁeld.
Cassil, A. 1997. Uninsured Patients Do Suffer, New Survey Reveals. AHA
News 33 (48): 3.
Cowan, C. A., H. C. Lazenby, A. B. Martin, P. A. McDonnell, A. L.
Sensenig, C. E. Smith, L. S. Whittle, M. A. Zezza, C. S. Donham, A. M.
Long, and M. W. Stewart. 2001. National Healthcare Expenditures, 1999.
Health Care Financing Review 22: 77–110.
Donabedian, A. 1968. Promoting Quality through Evaluating the Process
of Patient Care. Medical Care 6: 181–202.
Donabedian, A., J. R. Wheeler, and L. Wyszewianski. 1982. Quality, Cost
and Health: An Integrative Model. Medical Care 20: 975–992.
Eberhardt, M. S., D. D. Ingram, and D. M. Makuc. 2001. Urban and Rural
Health Charts, Health USA, 2001. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for
Health Statistics.
Freeman, H. E., R. J. Blendon, L. H. Aiken, S. Sudman, C. F. Mullinix, and
C. R. Corey. 1987. Americans Report on Their Access to Health Care.
Health Affairs 6 (Spring): 11–27.
Gardner, J. 2001. The 800 Pound Gorilla Returns. Modern Healthcare
March 12: 5, 15.
Harvard Medical Practice Study. 1990. Patients, Doctors and Lawyers: Med-
ical Injury, Malpractice Litigation, and Patient Compensation in New York.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
24
Healthcare Reform

Haywood, R. A., and T. P. Hoffler. 2001. Estimating Hospital Deaths Due
to Medical Errors. Journal of the American Medical Association 286: 415–420.
Himmelstein, D. U., S. Woolhandler, I. Hellender, and S. M. Wolfe. 1999.
Quality of Care in Investor-Owned vs. Not-for-Proﬁt HMOs. Journal of
the American Medical Association 282: 159–163.
Institute of Medicine. 1999. To Err Is Human. Washington, DC: National
Academy of Sciences.
———. 2001. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st
Century. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Kleinman, L. C. 2001. Conceptual and Technical Issues Regarding the
Use of HEDIS and HEDIS-Like Measures in Preferred Provider Organi-
zations. Medical Research and Review 58: 37–57.
Kronenfeld, J. J. 1997. The Changing Federal Role in U.S. Healthcare Policy.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kronenfeld, J. J., and M. L. Whicker. 1984. U.S. National Health Policy: An
Analysis of the Federal Role. New York: Praeger.
Lazenby, H. C., and S. W. Letsch. 1990. National Health Expenditures,
1989. Health Care Financing Review 12: 1–26.
Lee, Phillip, and A. E. Benjamin. 1999. Health Policy and the Politics of
Healthcare. In Introduction to Health Services, ed. Stephen J. Williams and
Paul Torrens, pp. 439–465. Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers.
Levit, K. R., S. W. Lazenby, C. A. Cowan, and S. W. Letsch. 1991. National
Health Care Expenditures, 1990. Healthcare Financing Review 13: 29–54.
Lohr, K., and S. A. Schroeder. 1990. A Strategy for Quality Assurance in
Medicare. New England Journal of Medicine 322: 707–712.
Meckler, L. 2003. Thirty Percent in U.S. without Health Care Coverage in
2001–02. Arizona Republic. March 5, p. A17.
Medicaid Coverage During a Time of Rising Unemployment. 2001.
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. http://www.kff.
org/medicaid/4026index.crm (Accessed 1 January 2004). 
Moyer, M. E. 1989. A Revised Look at the Number of Uninsured Ameri-
cans. Health Affairs 8 (Summer): 102–110.
National Health Expenditures Tables. 2001. http://www.hcfa.gov/
statistics/nhe/historical/ (Accessed 20 January 2004).
National Journal Examines Rises in Health Care Costs. 2001. Kaiser Daily
Health Policy Reports. http://www.Kaisernetwork.org (Accessed 21 June
2001). 
References
25

Office of National Cost Estimates. 1990. National Health Expenditures,
1988. Health Care Financing Review 11: 1–54.
Prescription Drug Trends: A Chartbook Update. 2001. http://www.kff.
org/content/2001/3112 (Accessed 1 June 2001).
Rising Unemployment and the Uninsured. 2001. Kaiser Family Founda-
tion. http://www.kff.org/uninsured/6011-index.cfm (Accessed 20 Janu-
ary 2004). 
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. 1987. Access to Health Care in the
United States: Results of a 1986 Survey. Special Report Number 2. Prince-
ton, NJ: The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Schuster, M. A., E. A. McGlynn, and R. H. Brook. 1998. How Good Is the
Quality of Healthcare in the United States? The Milbank Quarterly 76:
517–563.
Shaneyfelt, T. M. 2001. Building Bridges to Quality. Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association 286: 2600–2601.
Steinmo, S., and J. Watts 1995. It’s the Institutions Stupid: Why Compre-
hensive National Health Insurance Always Fails in America. Journal of
Health Politics, Policy and Law 20: 329–372.
Thorpe, K. E., and C. S. Florence. 1999. Why Are Workers Uninsured? Em-
ployer-Sponsored Health Insurance in 1999. Health Affairs 12: 213–218.
Waldo, D. R., K. R. Levit, and H. C. Lazenby. 1986. National Health Ex-
penditures, 1985. Health Care Financing Review 8: 1–21.
Wilensky, G. R. 1987. Viable Strategies for Dealing with the Uninsured.
Health Affairs 6: 33–40.
Wilensky, G. R., and K. E. Ladenheim. 1987. The Uninsured. Frontiers of
Health Services Management 4 (Winter): 3–31.
Wilson, R. W., and E. L. White. 1977. Changes in Morbidity, Disability,
and Utilization Differences between the Poor and the Nonpoor. Medical
Care 15: 636–650.
26
Healthcare Reform

2
The Role of the 
Federal Government in 
Health and Earlier Healthcare
Reform Efforts
T
his chapter will focus on the role of the federal government in
health and how its role in the healthcare system has been ex-
panding over the past 100 years in particular. As part of that
review, we will focus on the efforts to pass more comprehensive
healthcare reform in the United States and the movement along
that path, much of which has occurred in the past 50 years.
Federal Involvement in Health 
(through the 1920s)
Most of the federal involvement in health in the United States
occurred after 1900, and the bulk of the legislation actually was
passed after 1950. Given the reserve clause (the provision in the
Constitution reserving for the states all powers not explicitly
given to the federal government) and the idea that health was
mostly a state concern in the United States, early federal legisla-
tion focused on special groups for whom the federal govern-
ment had special responsibilities. Most books mark the begin-
ning of federal involvement in healthcare with the Act for the
Relief of Sick and Disabled Seamen in 1798, also referred to as
the Merchant Marine Services Act of 1798. This act provided
27

health services for this special group of great interest to the
young nation that depended on maritime trade. Shortly there-
after, legislation was passed to set up Merchant Marine Hospi-
tals, the first major federally funded facilities to provide health-
care services. Other early federal government activities in
health were legislation to impose quarantines on ships entering
U.S. ports to prevent epidemics and legislation in 1800 to autho-
rize federal officials to cooperate with state and local officials to
enforce quarantine laws. In the period up to the Civil War in
1860, most federal health efforts focused on special groups, such
as members of the military and the merchant marines, and drew
the authority to deal with health issues from the constitutional
power to raise and support armies and navies and the power to
regulate foreign and interstate commerce. The types of issues
that are most important in health policy and health reform
today, such as special programs for the elderly and regulation of
hospital and physician payment, were not considered issues for
government involvement at that point in time. In addition,
healthcare was much more of a small business at that time, with
individual doctors setting up their own practices and negotiat-
ing with patients for fees. Some experts have called this era one
when medicine was first a domestic enterprise and then became
a commercial enterprise. During this period, government had
little to do with the private transactions between medical practi-
tioners and their patients except for redressing negligence (mal-
practice) and guaranteeing the sanctity of a contract, if a physi-
cian agreed to provide care for a group of patients (Starr 1982).
The Civil War was a major deﬁning event in American his-
tory in many ways, and this included the role of the federal gov-
ernment in healthcare, although the changes in healthcare were
slow and gradual in the period from 1865 to 1900. One of the crit-
ical aspects of the Civil War as an overall deﬁning event for the
United States was that gradually the federal government became
more active in many ways. Some of the initial growth in the gov-
ernment’s activity was in areas that were essential to the conduct
of the war, such as raising an army. Other changes, however, be-
came very important in healthcare. These included the beginning
of federal aid to the states with the Morrill Act in 1862. Although
this act focused on granting federal lands to each state and allow-
ing the proﬁts of those lands to be used for support of public in-
stitutions of higher education, these institutions became the land-
grant colleges that hosted many programs in nursing, nutrition,
28
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

and later, medicine. Just as important to healthcare policy as it
has developed in the United States was the origin of the use of
the general welfare clause of the U.S. Constitution to justify some
federal actions. Today, that clause is the major justiﬁcation for
most federal involvement in healthcare, including most medical
research, Medicare, Medicaid, and health training programs
(Kronenfeld 1997).
In the Civil War and post–Civil War era, events that brought
greater government involvement in health included immigration
growth. As a result of the expanding immigrant population and a
general fear of the spread of disease in the population, health leg-
islation was passed that gave the surgeon general of the Marine
Services Hospitals authority to impose quarantines to prevent the
spread of diseases. The ﬁrst general immigration law in 1882 in-
cluded provisions to exclude immigrants for medical reasons and
allowed federal inspectors and doctors on board ships to check
for diseases. Some of the impact of the federal government in the
healthcare area continued to be in collaboration with state pro-
grams, as states and cities began to establish departments of pub-
lic health, often to deal with the growth of cities due both to for-
eign immigration and internal mobility. By 1902, a health act was
passed that clariﬁed some federal health functions by renaming
the Marine Services Hospitals the Public Health and Marine Ser-
vices and setting up a system of communications among state,
territorial, and federal health officials. The surgeon general, the
administrative head of the Public Health Service (PHS), was au-
thorized to have an annual meeting of state and territorial health
officers to discuss major health policies issues and concerns of the
day. Early concerns were the control of trachoma (an eye disease),
typhoid fever (a highly infectious disease transmitted by contam-
inated food and water), and nutritional-deﬁciency diseases such
as pellagra (caused by a lack of niacin in the diet).
In the early 1900s, some of the major health policy issues in-
volved reform not in the area of healthcare services delivery,
since this was still viewed as an area of mostly private concern,
but in the area of basic foods and drugs. Fueled by the investiga-
tion of journalists of that era into corruption in the production of
drugs and foodstuffs, and by the success of novels that focused
on this topic, such as The Jungle by Upton Sinclair that focused on
the lack of sanitation in meat-processing factories, reformers
pushed for a greater role for the federal government in food and
drug safety. These concerns resulted in the passage in 1906 of the
Federal Involvement in Health
29

Pure Food and Drug Act. Initially, this legislation focused on reg-
ulations about adulteration and misbranding of food and drugs
and the control of substances within these products. This act has
become the basis for most of the present-day regulation of test-
ing, marketing, and promotion of both prescription and over-the-
counter medication. Today, hot topics related to this area are
whether tobacco can be considered a drug under this act and the
control of herbal food supplements, and whether these need to be
considered as “drugs” under federal law.
There were many groups in the United States pushing for
various types of reform. The American Association for Labor
tried to stimulate health insurance programs through state gov-
ernments and through labor unions, and there were efforts to try
out options such as sickness funds, which were being used in
Germany in the early 1900s. Despite these reform attempts, other
social changes prevented any of these options from becoming na-
tional legislation. World War I led to discrimination against Ger-
man-based ideas, and sickness funds became viewed as too “Ger-
man” a solution for the United States. Labor unions focused more
on recruitment and their own growth and less on broader social
programs and goals, especially in the period after World War I
when the United States began a more conservative political era
and labor unions felt threatened. In addition, pushing for a
greater role for government in the provision of healthcare ser-
vices became more difficult during the decade of the 1920s as sus-
picions of “socialist” types of programs grew and such programs
were increasingly viewed as “un-American.”
One of the major pieces of legislation passed in the latter
part of this time frame was the Maternity and Infancy Act, also
known as the Sheppard-Towner Act. Despite the conservative
era, this legislation was passed in 1921 and provided grants to
states to help them develop health services for mothers and
their children. In addition to the specific content of this legisla-
tion, this idea of providing grants to states in the area of health
has served as a prototype for later federal grant-in-aid pro-
grams. Although the goal of this program may seem simple and
straightforward today, at the time, the program became very
controversial. It generated criticism from conservative political
groups and from the American Medical Association (AMA),
which even described it as “an imported socialistic scheme.” In
addition to the controversy over its essential nature, the act also
specified that the services had to be available to all residents of
30
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

a state, regardless of race, and this provision was also contro-
versial in the 1920s, given the reality of discrimination based on
race in programs in many states. The act was not renewed in
1929, although some of the functions of this legislation were
later restored as part of the Social Security Act of 1935 (Skocpol
1992; Wallace et al. 1982).
The Federal Role during the Depression,
World War II, and the 1950s
Although major healthcare reform legislation was not passed
during this era, there were movements to try to examine aspects
of the healthcare system and major movements in the area of so-
cial services provision and reform. The Great Depression of the
1930s did lead to major federal actions in a number of areas, in-
cluding banking, employment patterns in the federal govern-
ment, business regulation, and the creation of the Social Security
system. Major healthcare reform, however, did not end up being
part of the legislation enacted as part of the Social Security Act of
1935. Some of the private reform groups that were considering
broad social policy change as part of the reaction to the Depres-
sion did urge some national coverage of healthcare, as the Com-
mittee on the Costs of Medical Care did in its 1932 report.
Nonetheless, President Franklin D. Roosevelt did not support
adding a health insurance component to the Social Security Act,
partially because of concern that this would arouse opposition
from the AMA to the Social Security legislation. The Social Secu-
rity legislation did create a social insurance program to provide
economic security to the elderly and marked the initiation of the
welfare state in the United States. In addition to creating Social
Security for the retired worker, it created a means-tested social-
assistance program, Old Age Assistance, for the aged poor, and
categorically based welfare programs, such as the Aid to Depen-
dent Children program (later changed to the Aid to Families with
Dependent Children [AFDC]), which was the major general wel-
fare program in the United States prior to welfare reform in the
early 1990s. Over the years from 1935 to the 1970s, the welfare
state expanded to include beneﬁts for spouses and widows
(1937), disability insurance for workers of all ages unable to work
due to health concerns (1965), and Medicare and Medicaid,
The Federal Role during the Depression, World War II, and the 1950s
31

which will be discussed in more detail a bit later in this chapter
(Quadagno 2002).
In addition to these individually based beneﬁts, the Social
Security Act of 1935 included a section (Title V) that provided
grants to the states for maternal and child health services and
child welfare services, and for services to crippled children. An-
other section (Title VI) authorized annual federal grants to the
states for investigation of the problems of disease and sanitation,
leading to the creation of new local health departments in many
states and signiﬁcantly increasing overall federal assistance for
state and local public health programs. By the end of the 1936 ﬁs-
cal year, about 175 new local health departments were created as
part of this legislation (Kronenfeld 1997).
The program for crippled children represented a new thrust
in federal legislation, since it included demonstration monies that
became the precedent for amendments in later legislation that
covered innovative program grants. The program included both
comprehensive and preventive aspects, and covered all related
medical care costs for crippled children or children with crip-
pling conditions. Although this was a small, specialized group in
the population, the program did represent the initiation of the
federal government providing funds for direct care for a special-
ized group of the general population, not a group entitled to ser-
vices due to their occupation and service to the country (such as
being on active duty in the military, being a wounded veteran of
a war, or in the merchant marine service).
The federal government led the way in other areas related
to health and protection of the public health during this era.
Consumer protection in the drug arena was expanded by the
passage in 1938 of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, requiring
manufacturers to demonstrate the safety of drugs before mar-
keting them. The role of the federal government in research
was expanded through the Ransdell Act of 1930, which created
the beginning of the National Institute of Health from the U.S.
Health Service Hygienic Laboratory that had been established
in 1901. The act provided money for buildings to house re-
search activities, created a system of health fellowships, and
authorized the acceptance of public donations for research on
the cause, prevention, and cure of disease (Strickland 1978).
This role expanded in 1937 with the creation of the National
Cancer Institute that was authorized to award grants to non-
government scientists and institutions, to provide fellowships
32
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

for the training of scientists, and to fund direct federal govern-
ment cancer research.
The federal government has a longer history of playing a
major part in the direct provision of healthcare services for veter-
ans. Although some limited efforts to provide services to seri-
ously disabled veterans had begun at the end of World War I, the
Veterans Act of 1924 codiﬁed and extended the role of the federal
government in the provision of healthcare services to veterans.
That act extended medical care to veterans not only for treatment
of disabilities associated with military service but also for other
conditions requiring hospitalization. Preference was given to vet-
erans who could not afford private care. In 1930, the Veterans’
Administration was created as an independent U.S. government
agency to handle disabled soldiers and other veterans’ matters,
such as pensions.
The Roosevelt administration was interested in the consoli-
dation of federal health functions as part of an overall adminis-
trative reorganization of the federal bureaucracy. In a 1939 reor-
ganization, the PHS became a component of the Federal Security
Agency (FSA). A major piece of legislation, the Public Health Ser-
vice Act, was passed in 1944. This legislation created the Office of
the Surgeon General, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and
the bureaus of medical services and state services. Activities that
now came under the new federal agencies included research and
investigation into selected diseases and health problems, work-
ing with state and local health agencies on projects including the
collection of vital statistics (records on births, deaths, and other
life events), and special grants for major diseases of the time,
such as venereal disease and tuberculosis control. One of the
major amendments to the Public Health Services Act was the
Hill-Burton Amendment (also known as the U.S. National Health
Policy Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946), which was
the outcome of a major effort to reform healthcare services in the
United States in the period after the end of World War II.
The Hill-Burton legislation was the ﬁrst major amendment
to the Public Health Service Act. This major piece of legislation
was one of the ﬁrst of several post–World War II federally funded
health programs. Several different interpretations exist about the
importance of this legislation and why it was passed. In the
post–World War II era, many of the European countries passed
legislation to reform their healthcare systems, as a reward to the
general population for the toil of over ﬁve years of warfare on the
The Federal Role during the Depression, World War II, and the 1950s
33

European continent, as a way to enhance concerns about social
equity, and as a way to deal with the lack of attention given to
civilian needs and civilian building during the wartime years.
The United States had some similar concerns after the end of
World War II. Very little hospital construction had occurred dur-
ing the Great Depression and World War II, setting the stage for a
need for federal legislation funding the building of hospitals.
Many soldiers had received health services through the federal
government during the war and hoped to continue to receive
health services in the postwar era. Many laborers had received
health insurance beneﬁts in lieu of raises during the war, since
providing health insurance was one way to reward workers dur-
ing the price controls of the war. Within the United States, debate
about a more comprehensive national health insurance system
occurred, with Truman as president and the more liberal wing of
the Democratic Party preferring that type of legislation. Orga-
nized labor, a major supporter of the Democratic Party at that
time, was also in favor of more comprehensive healthcare reform.
Some of the major support groups assumed signiﬁcant reform
was likely; however, important groups became vocal opponents
of major reform, including the AMA and business interests. Re-
publicans and the more moderate wing of the Democratic Party
wished to have less-comprehensive legislation passed, although
everyone recognized the need to increase the involvement of the
federal government in healthcare and in meeting unmet health-
care needs. As a compromise once more-comprehensive legisla-
tion failed to pass, the Hill-Burton Amendments became the
major postwar initiative of the federal government. Senator Lister
Hill of Alabama was a crucial player in devising the strategy of
having the government provide funds for hospital construction,
with the assumption that the private marketplace would be able
to meet the less-expensive needs of provision of health insurance.
The Hill-Burton Amendments provided grants to assist
states to inventory their existing hospitals and health centers
and to survey the need for the construction of additional health
facilities. After state surveys were completed, grants for hospital
construction were available. Funds for surveys and planning
were allocated to the states based on total state population. Fed-
eral funding covered up to one-third of the total costs. Funds for
construction were allocated through a formula based on popula-
tion and per-capita income and again covered up to one-third of
the costs.
34
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

Major healthcare changes and reform did not occur under
the Eisenhower administration, or the years 1952 through 1960.
In fact, Eisenhower campaigned against national health insur-
ance in 1952. Given that, it is not surprising that the federal gov-
ernment’s role in healthcare did not expand much during this
time period, even though expansions of the federal role in other
service areas did occur. It is interesting to realize that the same
types of arguments about the importance of transportation and
education to national defense used to expand the federal role in
these areas under Eisenhower might have been applied to
health, but they were not. For example, the federal highway
program to build the interstate highway system was justified as
a national-defense measure, as were federal funds to public-
school systems to increase the competence of American stu-
dents in science and math to keep up with the Russians after the
success of the Russian space program in the launching of Sput-
nik in 1957. No such rationales were used to expand the federal
role in healthcare services, perhaps because major supporters of
the Republican Party, both the AMA and business groups, were
opposed to major healthcare reform. The types of changes that
did occur were modest, organizational changes. In 1953, reflect-
ing the growth in the size and number of domestic social pro-
grams, the FSA was renamed and given department status as
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare (DHEW).
During the Carter administration in the late 1970s, a separate
Department of Education was created, leaving federal health
and welfare functions in the renamed Department of Health
and Human Services (DHHS).
Kennedy-Johnson Years and Expansion of
Federal Involvement in Health 
Many major federal health policy developments occurred in this
time period. The largest and most important was the passage of
the Medicare and Medicaid programs as amendments to the So-
cial Security Act. These programs will be discussed after brieﬂy
reviewing some of the other less major changes enacted. An im-
portant series of legislation related to health, but not to overall
healthcare reform, was the 1962 amendments to the Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act. These amendments were partially passed as a
Kennedy-Johnson Years and Expansion of Federal Involvement
35

reaction to the thalidomide disaster in Europe, in which a new
drug turned out to cause serious birth defects in unborn babies,
especially to their limbs. Although the drug was not approved for
use in the U.S. market, the amendments were nevertheless a reac-
tion to the situation and speciﬁed that a new drug needed to be
effective, as well as safe, before it could be marketed in the
United States.
A number of disease-oriented categorical programs that
provided speciﬁc aid were passed, along with some programs
aimed at speciﬁc regions of the country, such as the Appalachian
Regional Commission, or at speciﬁc catchment (regional or dis-
ease) areas for health problems. Two important programs dealt
with education for health professionals and mental health con-
cerns. The Health Professions Educational Assistance Act of 1963
authorized direct federal aid mostly in the form of construction
aid to medical, dental, pharmacy, and other health professional
schools as well as scholarship and student-loan aid to the stu-
dents in the schools. The grants were contingent on the schools
increasing their ﬁrst-year enrollment, and thus were part of a pol-
icy designed to address the concern about the lack of adequate
numbers of health professionals. Increasing the supply of health-
care professionals was one attempt, though not through direct
provision of services, to deal with access issues. In the mental
health area, the 1963 Mental Retardation Facilities and Commu-
nity Mental Health Centers Construction Act provided assistance
in combating mental retardation through grants for construction
of research centers and grants for facilities for the mentally re-
tarded. In addition, assistance was provided for construction of
community health centers, and this proved to be a major effort at
a time when many states were beginning the process of deinstitu-
tionalization within state inpatient mental health facilities. The
next year, in 1964, a separate Nurse Training Act was passed that
authorized funding for construction grants to schools of nursing.
One interesting fact about many of the new programs en-
acted in this time period (of which this is only a partial list) is that
few of them, even ones like Medicaid that we think of as part of a
direct provision of services, were administered by the federal
government. Medicare was one of the very few programs to deal
with direct provision of services and to be administered at the
federal level. Many of the other programs involved grants to
states or to private health-related agencies. Grant-in-aid pro-
grams grew during the Johnson administration (excluding
36
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

Medicare and Social Security) from $7 billion at the beginning of
the presidency of John F. Kennedy in 1961 to $24 billion in 1970
(Lee and Benjamin 1993). These programs became the prototypi-
cal type of involvement of the federal government in healthcare.
Federal funds for biomedical research, health personnel develop-
ment funds, hospital construction funds, healthcare ﬁnancing,
and a large range of categorical programs all grew in this time pe-
riod, one of an expanding role for the federal government in
healthcare.
In 1960, the introduction of a modest new program, the
Kerr-Mills Act, expanded the federal government role in directly
paying for health services. This legislation established a new pro-
gram of medical assistance for the aged. Federal aid was given to
the states to pay for medical care for medically indigent people
sixty-ﬁve years of age and older. State participation was optional.
The program became the forerunner of Medicaid and was imple-
mented in twenty-ﬁve states before being superseded by
Medicare and Medicaid.
The Social Security Amendments of 1965 established the
Medicare program, the program of national health insurance for
the elderly, through a new title, Title XVIII. They also established
a special program of grants to the states for medical assistance to
the poor through Title XIX (Medicaid). These programs went
into effect in 1966. The debate over the enactment of these pro-
grams was ﬁerce and focused on Medicare (with Medicaid being
created almost as an afterthought and as an expansion of the
Kerr-Mills program), and opposition was strong. The AMA led
the opposition and not only lobbied Congress against the pro-
gram but provided negative material about the program for doc-
tors to place in their offices for patients to read. In some parts of
the country, state and local chapters of the AMA suggested that
doctors discuss their opposition to the program with patients to
try to convince them to oppose the legislation and make their
opposition known to Congress. The AMA opposed the program
because of fears that it would lead to regulation of fees, a con-
centration of purchasing power, and a loss of physician control
and autonomy. Although almost forty years and many other
changes in healthcare have led to some of the results feared by
the AMA, those results were not the initial impacts of the legisla-
tion. The program was passed largely as a result of the over-
whelming electoral majority that the Democrats held after the
sweeping victory of Lyndon Baines Johnson in the 1964 election.
Kennedy-Johnson Years and Expansion of Federal Involvement
37

In addition, LBJ’s knowledge of Congress and his political skills
in assembling a coalition of support were important, as was the
presentation of data demonstrating that in the early 1960s, older
Americans were disproportionately poor (45 percent of those
sixty-ﬁve and over versus 13 percent of people between twenty-
ﬁve and ﬁfty-four) and could not afford to buy their own health
insurance at that time.
The Medicare program is complicated to explain and has
a number of major limitations in benefits, partially because at
the time of passage, the goal was to create a program that pro-
vided health insurance coverage for the elderly that would re-
semble the typical insurance that many middle-class people
had from their work-based health insurance plans. At that
time, the use of copayments at the time services were received
and deductibles (a set amount of expenses a person must reach
before the plan would cover any costs) was common, so these
were included in the plan. Coverage of medications was not
common, and at this point is still not a part of Medicare, al-
though there has been discussion over the past decade about
passage of a drug benefit for Medicare. Many plans had
slightly different provisions for hospital service and for med-
ical care (doctor) services, and this type of differentiation in
benefits was also created as part of the plan.
For the Medicare program, part A of the title provided basic
protection against the cost of hospital and certain post-hospital
services. Inpatient hospital service of up to 90 days during any
episode of illness and psychiatric and inpatient services for up to
190 days in a lifetime were included. Extended care services, such
as nursing-home care, were covered for up to 100 days during
any episode of illness. Some home health services and hospital
outpatient diagnostic services were covered initially (and these
areas were expanded over time with new amendments).
Part B provided supplemental medical insurance beneﬁts
and was a voluntary insurance program, ﬁnanced by premium
payments from enrollees, along with matching payments from
general Social Security revenues. Initially, enrollment was very
high (over 90 percent), and even now, enrollment is generally
above 98 percent, so that for realistic purposes, most elderly in
the United States have both parts A and B of the Medicare pro-
gram available to them. Physician and related services, such as 
X-rays, laboratory tests, supplies, and equipment, were covered,
as were additional home health services. Both part A and part B
38
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

physician and related services involved cost sharing by the Social
Security recipient in the form of deductibles and copayments.
Claims and payment were not handled directly by the So-
cial Security Administration but were paid through ﬁscal inter-
mediaries such as large health insurance groups, especially Blue
Cross-Blue Shield in many parts of the country. The Social Secu-
rity recipient and the institutional providers, such as hospitals
and nursing homes, were not directly reimbursed by the federal
government but received payments from the ﬁscal intermediaries
in their geographic area. Institutional providers had to meet con-
ditions of participation, such as utilization reviews, that were
aimed at ensuring a minimum quality of service. This program is
an important departure from many earlier federal health pro-
grams in that it provides direct services to citizens, through a ﬁs-
cal intermediary, but not through states and localities as has been
the case with many other federal health-related programs. It is
consistent with the model of Social Security, however, in which
direct payments are sent to individuals from the federal govern-
ment, except that because healthcare services are very expensive
and bills come in slowly after services rather than quickly, the ini-
tial decision was to model payment after the major health insur-
ance programs in the United States at that time, in which patients
did not receive the money directly nor did they pay the health-
care provider, but rather healthcare providers sent bills to a third
party (the insurance company or the ﬁscal intermediary), and
then many of the bills were paid directly. Medicare, administra-
tively, was more complex in some ways than the earlier portion
of Social Security.
The Medicaid program is more complex in its administra-
tive structure, although it follows a more standard pattern in
healthcare of joint federal-state programs with a matching com-
ponent in terms of funding. Medicaid was started as a program
of medical assistance to public-welfare recipients, with participa-
tion on a voluntary basis by any particular state. Thus from the
beginning there was variability in coverage and amounts of ser-
vices funded across the states, as well as in participation. By 1970,
all but one state, Arizona, participated in the program. But not all
states included all possible components, such as a medically
needed category. States had the option of extending eligibility to
the medically indigent persons not on welfare who had a border-
line-poverty level of income but earned too much to be eligible
for federally subsidized welfare.
Kennedy-Johnson Years and Expansion of Federal Involvement
39

Under Medicaid, all states were initially required to provide
at least ﬁve basic services: inpatient hospital care, outpatient hos-
pital services, other laboratory and X-ray services, skilled nurs-
ing-home services, and physician services. A large number of op-
tional services, such as optometric services, were available for
states to consider as portions of the program. States could also
opt to provide more-essential mental health coverage, ambulance
transportation, and dental care, but they were not required to do
so by the federal government.
Amendments to the Medicare and Medicaid legislation
began only a few years after the initial passage, with many
amendments having either the goal of extending the program or
amount of services provided, or modifying the institutional eligi-
bility requirements and reimbursement schedules. The 1967
amendments featured expanded coverage for durable medical
equipment for use in the home, for podiatry services for nonrou-
tine foot care, and for outpatient physical therapy under part B of
Medicare, as well as adding a lifetime reserve of sixty days of
coverage for inpatient hospital care over and above the ninety-
day original coverage for any spell of illness. Certain payment
rules were also modiﬁed in favor of providers. More signiﬁcant
changes were incorporated into the 1972 amendments. Some new
services such as chiropractic services and speech pathology were
added. Family-planning services were added to the list of basic
Medicaid services. One set of changes increased eligibility in sev-
eral important ways. Persons who were eligible for cash beneﬁts
under the disability provisions of the Social Security Act for at
least twenty-four months were made eligible for medical beneﬁts
under the Medicare program. Additionally, Medicare services
were extended to people who required hemodialysis or renal
transplants for chronic renal disease by declaring them disabled
and eligible for Medicare coverage under Title XVIII. This aspect
became known as the ESRD (end-stage renal disease) program.
Although this expansion represented a numerically small cate-
gory of people eligible for Medicare coverage, the average med-
ical expenses of these people and those in the disability category
proved to be very high. At the time this provision was passed,
some health policy experts believed this adding of various dis-
ease categories would be the model of expansion of Medicare as a
form of universal health insurance coverage to more and more
people. However, the expense of the program and changing
times and attitudes have resulted in no further expansions of
40
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

Medicare based on speciﬁc disease categories. Moreover, the
growing costs would increase concerns about federal costs and
overall costs in the healthcare areas in years following this 1972
legislation.
Controversy, Contraction, and Unsettled
Times in the Federal Role (1969–1979)
Attempting to divide the recent past into clear periods is always
difficult. Although there are ways in which to divide the years
from 1969 to the present (by presidencies  or by shifts in political
parties, for example), the rest of this chapter will discuss the
Nixon administration and its failed attempt at major healthcare
reform, along with some changes that occurred during the pe-
riod; the contradictory trends of the Reagan presidency and the
1980s; and the failed attempt at major reform by the Clinton ad-
ministration in the 1990s and the changes that occurred in the
healthcare system in that decade, often less linked with federal
legislation than in some of the earlier time periods. The period
from 1969 through 1979 covers the policies and laws of the Nixon
administration, the brief Ford administration, and the Carter ad-
ministration—or two Republican presidencies (one in which the
president was not elected to the office) and one Democratic presi-
dency. One thing that has remained consistent since 1969 (given
the failure of major healthcare reform in the ﬁrst term of the Clin-
ton presidency) is the controversy about the appropriate role of
the federal government and the contraction in federal funding of
healthcare in some ways (often due to the press of the growing
federal debt and the need to constrain growth in all government
programs, including healthcare).
During the Nixon and Ford administrations, considerable
conﬂict developed between the branches of government, espe-
cially between the executive and legislative branches, over domes-
tic social policy. President Nixon coined the term New Federalism
to describe his efforts to move away from the categorical-pro-
grams focus of the Johnson years toward general revenue sharing.
In revenue sharing, federal dollars are transferred into state and
local governments (often through block grants) for many different
purposes with fewer restrictions (strings) than was the case in spe-
ciﬁc-grant programs that often speciﬁed that funds should be
Controversy, Contraction, and Unsettled Times
41

spent on a certain type of program in the maternal and child
health area, for example. Congress generally favored categorical
grants with their detailed provisions and control, while Nixon
pushed for revenue sharing and block grants to states. The Nixon
administration also, in contrast to the Johnson administration,
preferred actions in the private rather than the public sector. Cate-
gorical programs continued to grow, however, but in the health-
care area, the huge growth of the Medicare and Medicaid pro-
grams swamped all other policy efforts. Some major policy
initiatives outside of Medicare and Medicaid occurred in the
1970s. Health personnel policy over the decade of the 1970s
shifted to more focus on areas with special needs rather than a
focus on growth in all categories and places.
Most changes during the Nixon presidency and the brief
presidency of Ford involved Medicare and Medicaid and at-
tempts to control costs. These changes will be discussed in the
following paragraphs. A number of the policies enacted in this
period were designed to deal with rising costs through placing
constraints on payments, reviewing care to be sure it was actually
needed, and initiating changes in the organization of care deliv-
ery, with the ﬁrst legislation encouraging the development of
health maintenance organizations (HMOs), the forerunner of
today’s growth in managed care. Nixon had a goal of passing
more-comprehensive national health insurance of some type in
his second term, which began in 1972. In fact, at the time, many
health policy experts believed major legislation might be passed,
since the Democrats in Congress, led by Senator Edward
Kennedy, were drafting such legislation and were in favor of it. A
push from a Republican president made the passage of major re-
form appear possible, and both sides were interested in a com-
promise. However, during that term the Watergate scandal grew
in importance and overtook all other legislative agendas. By the
time Nixon resigned, the push for national health insurance had
dissipated.
There were some important programs enacted in the
health personnel and health facilities area, however. Federal
subsidies of hospitals and other healthcare facility construction
were ended, partially as a reaction to skyrocketing healthcare
costs. In their place, some programs began to explore planning
and regulatory mechanisms to control expansion of facilities.
The National Health Planning and Resources Development Act
of 1974, discussed in more detail under amendments to the Pub-
42
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

lic Health Service Act, was one such program. Health personnel
policies by the mid-1970s began to focus on specialty and geo-
graphic maldistribution of physicians rather than physician
shortages, and by the end of this period there was a concern
about physician oversupply.
As discussed in Chapter 1, costs of healthcare began to in-
crease rapidly after the passage of Medicare and Medicaid, as ac-
cess to healthcare services increased, and many services that
some physicians and hospitals had provided as charity care be-
came actual costs in the healthcare system, paid for by the federal
government. Although it may appear contradictory, the 1972
amendments, along with the expansive provisions, also marked
the ﬁrst amendments to help control the growing costs of the
Medicare program. Among the most important of the 1972 modi-
ﬁcations was the establishment of Professional Standards Review
Organizations (PSROs) to address problems of cost, quality case
control, and medical necessity of services. Associations of physi-
cians reviewed the professional activities of physicians and other
practitioners within institutions. The use of PSROs by Medicaid
was made optional in 1981, and later federal funding for PSROs
was deleted, but the initial goal of the program was to ensure
quality of care and also to control costs. Another modiﬁcation
linked to cost control was the addition of a provision to limit pay-
ments for capital expenditures by hospitals that had been disap-
proved by state or local planning agencies as a way to put some
enforcement aspects into the health-planning mechanisms.
In 1976 through 1977, a major reorganization of the U.S.
DHEW led to the establishment of a separate agency, the Health
Care Financing Administration (HCFA), whose job was to as-
sume the primary responsibility for implementation of the
Medicare and Medicaid programs. This new agency took over
functions that had been located in the Bureau of Health Insurance
of the Social Security Administration (Medicare) and in the Med-
ical Services Administration of the Social and Rehabilitative Ser-
vices (Medicaid), and made issues of Medicare and Medicaid ad-
ministration more easily centralized, but also more visible.
A major set of amendments dealing with antifraud and
abuse in both Medicare and Medicaid was passed in 1977. These
strengthened the criminal and other penalties for fraud, included
federal monies for state Medicaid fraud units, and required uni-
form reporting systems for participating healthcare institutions.
These were attempts to control costs and ensure quality.
Controversy, Contraction, and Unsettled Times
43

A speciﬁc set of cost-control measures, the Medicare End-
Stage Renal Disease Amendments, was passed in 1978 to deal
with the ESRD program. Incentives were added to encourage the
use of home dialysis and renal transplantation. A larger variety of
reimbursement options for renal dialysis facilities was also in-
cluded. Studies of the diseases and its treatment were also allo-
cated, especially those focusing upon possible cost reductions in
care for the disease.
There were few new policy initiatives in healthcare during
the presidency of Jimmy Carter (1977–1980), both due to some
lack of overall interest in the issue and due to lack of having poli-
cies enacted (such as failed attempts to have Congress enact new
hospital cost-containment legislation). By the end of the Carter
presidency, the climate for expansion in government programs
was further diminished. By 1980, antiregulatory procompetition
approaches were gaining in popularity at the national level, as
were pushes to give more autonomy and control to state and
local units, rather than the centralization of planning and regula-
tory programs that had been occurring in earlier decades. One
major piece of legislation passed at the end of Carter’s term was
the 1980 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, or OBRA 1980. This
act included extensive modiﬁcations in Medicare and Medicaid,
with 57 separate sections. Many sections focused on controlling
costs, although some also expanded the services available, con-
tinuing the tradition of contradictions within the legislation, with
some portions aimed at containing costs while other portions
aimed at expanding services, which generally leads to at least
modest cost increases. For example, the home health services pro-
vision of the Medicare legislation removed the 100-visit-per-year
limit, but required that patients pay a deductible for home care
visits under part B of the program. The goal of these changes was
the encouragement of home care over the more-expensive institu-
tional care. Some new services and providers were added, such
as alcohol detoxiﬁcation under part A of Medicare and nurse
midwifery under Medicaid.
The series of amendments in Medicare and Medicaid set the
stage for the Reagan administration efforts in health, many of
which focused on the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The
changes in the 1970s already demonstrated the differing concerns
of cost containment, rationalization of care, expansion of some
services, and the creation of new alternatives (such as the use of
midwives for Medicaid that might have as its goal both an expan-
44
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

sion and improvement of quality of care, along with cost contain-
ment). They also demonstrated how these two programs became
more and more the focus of health-related legislation from 1980
forward. For example, coverage for some mental health services,
services for the disabled, and alcohol detoxiﬁcation all were
added to the programs through amendments and became ways
in which two programs initially aimed at physical healthcare for
the aged and care for some groups of the poor became a way to
address growing health and societal problems, such as alcohol
abuse, drug abuse, and disability. Expansions, however, were
never without costs, and cost increases, along with overall con-
cerns about too large a role for the federal government in the
lives of citizens and too high a growth of taxes, set the stage for a
complicated period in health policy after Reagan was elected
president in November 1980.
The Limited and Reactive Change of the
Reagan-Bush Period (1980–1992)
Many of the important aspects of health changes and pushes for
certain types of health reform in this period were linked to the
overall policy directions of the Reagan administration and the
Bush administration that followed it. At the time, the phrase “the
Reagan Revolution” was often used to refer to an ascendancy of
conservative values and goals, which included a questioning of
the role of government and a belief that the private sector was
better able to accomplish many societal goals. Although these no-
tions were applied most strongly to economic policy, they also af-
fected, at a philosophical level, ideas about how to deal with
health problems, even though issues in healthcare ended up
pushing certain reforms during this time frame. Among some of
the themes in this time frame were a decline of planning, an inter-
est in block-grant mechanisms, and a desire to control federal ex-
penditures in healthcare.
Often, broader social and economic themes of an adminis-
tration impact what happens in the healthcare sector, which then
may drive the healthcare reform efforts of that administration.
Under Reagan, there emerged a signiﬁcant reduction in federal
spending for domestic social programs, including the elimination
of revenue-sharing funds that helped local areas fund various
The Limited and Reactive Change of the Reagan-Bush Period
45

types of special programs, including health programs. Tax reduc-
tion for all became a major theme, and this led to signiﬁcant in-
creases in the national debt and consequently a decline in the ca-
pacity of the federal government to fund many domestic social
programs, including health programs. Connected to the declines
in availability of funds was a goal of decentralization of program
authority and “devolution” of powers to the states. Block grants
to states became one mechanism to accomplish this goal in many
social programs, including healthcare. Block grants gave wide
discretion to states in how funds were used and ended up in-
creasing inequities across states. Although the Reagan adminis-
tration did not accomplish its complete goal of consolidating all
of the twenty-six public health programs into two large block
grants, it did succeed in having twenty programs combined into
four block grants, while six remained categorical.
Deregulation was one overall Reagan administration goal.
As applied to health, this eventually resulted in the end of fed-
eral health-planning efforts, since the Comprehensive Health
Planning and Public Health Service Amendments of 1966 were
not renewed in the 1980s. Given the Reagan political philosophy
that government regulations should be reduced, funds for health
planning were gradually eliminated. In ﬁscal year 1981, before
Reagan was president, the entire health-planning program was
funded for $126.5 million. By ﬁscal year 1983, the funding level
was reduced by 54 percent, and the presidential budget had re-
quested the removal of all planning funds. The Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) of 1982 led to the dropping of
requirements for local planning agencies known as Health Sys-
tems Agencies (HSAs) and made the use of the quality-control
agencies known as professional review organizations (PROs) op-
tional in hospitals for patients funded by Medicare and Medic-
aid, whereas it had previously been required (Kronenfeld 1997).
From a philosophical perspective, the deregulatory attitude of
the Reagan administration was grounded in a belief that the reg-
ulatory costs exceeded the regulatory beneﬁts (Williams and Tor-
rens 1993).
Consistent with its philosophy, a reform enacted during the
Reagan administration was to reduce the role of the federal gov-
ernment in health personnel planning and training. Funds were
cut drastically for new scholarships that had been provided
through the National Health Service Corps to encourage physi-
cians and nurses to work in rural, underserved areas after their
46
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

professional training was completed. Grants to health profes-
sional schools based on their enrollment (known as capitation
grants) were either totally eliminated or cut back drastically. Stu-
dent-loan programs in the health professions were cut in half
from ﬁscal year 1982 to ﬁscal year 1985.
Some of the reforms in healthcare appear partially contra-
dictory. Funds were eliminated for HMOs, despite the emphasis
in the Reagan administration on a procompetition model of
healthcare. Under this model, HMOs were one mechanism for
care delivery and a part of increasing competition in healthcare,
since multiple HMOs in the same geographic area would be able
to compete for customers. The stance of the administration, how-
ever, was that federal funds were unnecessary to stimulate this
competition and that private market forces would be sufficient to
facilitate HMO growth.
Some legislative actions did not have major budgetary im-
plications but rather were focused on issues relating to quality of
care. One of the last major pieces of general health-related legisla-
tion before the election of President Clinton was the OBRA 1990
(Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) legislation, passed under
Bush. This legislation included the Patient Self-Determination
Act as part of that OBRA 1990 legislation. Healthcare institutions
participating in Medicare or Medicaid (virtually all medical care
institutions) had to provide all patients with written information
on policies regarding self-determination and living wills. Addi-
tionally, facilities had to determine whether patients had advance
medical directives. The goal for the legislation was to increase
discussion and consideration of the conditions under which a
person might no longer wish to receive many medical services.
Although institutions are complying with the legislation by hav-
ing patients sign additional pieces of paperwork, it is less clear
that the requirement increases the real level of discussion about
these issues.
The majority of the reforms to the healthcare system during
this period related to the Medicare and Medicaid programs, par-
tially because these programs had become such an important
part of overall expenditures for healthcare. The Reagan adminis-
tration supported major legislative changes in Medicare and
Medicaid. The majority of both proposed and enacted changes in
Medicare were attempts to deal with the problem of healthcare
costs. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (OBRA
1981) was massive in its impact and number of changes to
The Limited and Reactive Change of the Reagan-Bush Period
47

Medicare and Medicaid, with forty-six different sections relating
to the programs. A number of things were deleted from coverage.
This reduction in covered services included eliminating the cov-
erage for alcoholic detoxiﬁcation facilities and the removal of oc-
cupational therapy as a basis for entitlement for home health ser-
vices. The part B deductible on Medicare was also increased. In
1981, matching federal Medicaid payments to the states were re-
duced by 3 percent in ﬁscal year 1982, 4 percent in ﬁscal year
1983, and 4.5 percent in ﬁscal year 1984, although the cutback
could be lowered by 1 percent in each ﬁscal year if a state oper-
ated a qualiﬁed hospital cost-review program, had an unemploy-
ment rate over 15 percent of the national average, and had an ef-
fective fraud and abuse recovery program. Prior to 1981,
Medicaid required states to offer recipients freedom of choice in
the selection of providers. After 1981, states could apply for
waivers of the freedom-of-choice requirements and could require
Medicaid recipients to receive care from a specially designated
pool of providers, the beginning of mandatory Medicaid HMOs
for some recipients.
The TEFRA 1982 made a number of important changes in
the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Copayments for basic ser-
vices, previously prohibited by federal statute, were made op-
tional for states under the 1982 amendments for Medicaid. The
regulations on acceptable error rates for Medicaid were tight-
ened. For Medicare, hospice services were added as a covered
service. The most important changes were part of an effort to
control rising costs. The TEFRA set a limit on how much
Medicare would reimburse hospitals on a per-case basis and lim-
ited the annual rate of increase for Medicare’s reasonable
charges per discharge.
Even-larger changes in the reimbursement policies of
Medicare were passed in 1983. The Medicare Prospective Pay-
ment System (PPS) was created, which based payments to hospi-
tals on predetermined rates per discharge for diagnosis-related
groups (DRGs) as contrasted to the earlier cost-based system of
reimbursement that had been in place since the initial passage of
the Medicare program. In this act, Congress also directed the ad-
ministration to study physician-payment reform options.
The DRG payment system was a major break with how
payment had occurred in the past and was also a complex system
that was regulatory in content. The federal government listed de-
tailed regulations that explained how the new system would
48
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

work and forced hospitals that received Medicare funds (basi-
cally all hospitals in the United States) to completely rethink and
redesign payment systems. For an administration committed to
competition and the private marketplace as the determinant of
the distribution of healthcare resources, this regulatory approach
seems quite surprising. The Reagan administration, in this case,
demonstrated that healthcare issues were less critical to it than
many other policy areas. If rising costs in healthcare were going
to make tax cuts and other policy goals of the Reagan administra-
tion impossible, then a regulatory strategy to hold down health-
care costs was acceptable.
The DRG prospective hospital-payment reform system did
help to contain the growth in hospital costs to some extent. Most
hospitals in the United States are reimbursed by Medicare as part
of this system, although psychiatric, rehabilitation, children’s,
and long-term care hospitals have a somewhat different arrange-
ment. The rate of growth in annual hospital expenses did slow
for a few years after the implementation of the DRG system, but
then the rate of growth began to increase again. Some of the early
fears about the implementation of this system were that hospitals
would discharge sick patients too quickly and lead to unneces-
sary readmissions. There was some evidence that this occurred
during the early phases of the DRG payment system (Gay et al.
1989). Some reforms in payment for readmissions have occurred,
so that readmissions within too short a period of time no longer
generate the start of a new DRG payment for that hospitalization.
Overall, the system has led to shorter lengths of stays. Lengths of
stays have dropped, about 0.9 days in 1984 and 0.6 days in 1985
compared to an average drop of 0.2 days per year from 1967 to
1983 (Koch 1988). For the majority of patients, it no longer ap-
pears that access to needed care has lessened under DRG reim-
bursement (DesHarnais et al. 1987), and hospitals have shifted
more care into outpatient settings. By the early 1990s, it was clear
that the DRG system led ﬁrst to a decline and then a stabilization
in inpatient hospital use from 1987 on, while outpatient hospital
care continued to increase, as did costs for physician care (Ed-
wards and Fisher 1989). Thus the actual impact of the payment
reform system on total costs was less than hoped. Many would
agree that the DRG payment system has been a success in the
United States, and this approach to payment has been adopted or
discussed for adoption by a number of other countries, such as
Australia, Belgium, Norway, Sweden, and Portugal (Wiley 1992).
The Limited and Reactive Change of the Reagan-Bush Period
49

As with so many reforms that affect only one payer and one type
of service, there is much room for hospitals and other providers
to learn how to “game” the system, that is, maximize revenue
given the new rules. Many analysts contend that piecemeal re-
forms of the healthcare system generally lead to disappointing re-
sults after a few years.
In 1984, the Deﬁcit Reduction Act (DEFRA) continued to
make changes in both payment of hospitals and payment of
physicians. Further amendments for the rest of the decade also
made changes in both areas, as well as other overall policy shifts.
First, this section will discuss hospital payment and general pol-
icy changes, and then issues in reform of physician costs. The
DEFRA legislation placed a speciﬁc limit on the rate of increase in
the DRG payment rates in the following two years. The Graham-
Rudman-Hollins Act of 1985 established mandatory deﬁcit-re-
duction targets for the ﬁve subsequent years. This had a signiﬁ-
cant impact on the Medicare program, leading to cuts in
payments to both hospitals and physicians. The Consolidated
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1985 adjusted
payments under Medicare for hospitals that served a dispropor-
tionate share of poor patients. Hospice care was made a perma-
nent part of the program. PPS payment rates were frozen at 1985
levels for part of the year as a way to hold down healthcare costs,
and payment to hospitals for indirect costs of medical education
was modiﬁed. Further, more-technical modiﬁcations continued
in 1986 through 1989.
Although many of the earlier changes were attempts to con-
trol costs, some reform was directed at improving quality and ac-
cess to care, even in the cost-conscious Reagan era. In the Medic-
aid program, expansion of services was included, with states
being required to cover eligible children up to age six, with an
option up to age eight. Additionally, the distinction between
skilled nursing facilities and intermediate-care facilities was elim-
inated, and a number of features designed to enhance the quality
of care in nursing homes were included.
A major potential reform, the Medicare Catastrophic Cover-
age Act, was passed in 1988 that included a large expansion in
Medicare beneﬁts. This act included provisions to add coverage
for outpatient prescription drugs, respite care, and a cap on out-
of-pocket spending for copayments by the elderly. The new bene-
ﬁts were to phase in over four years and be paid for by premiums,
including an income-related supplemental premium, charged to
50
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

Medicare enrollees. This legislation was a major departure from
previous policy making in the area of social insurance, because
the expanded beneﬁts were to be funded entirely by those who
were current beneﬁciaries, and there would be overt redistribu-
tion among them. Despite being supported at the time by Presi-
dent Reagan, majorities in both houses of Congress, and the na-
tion’s largest senior-citizen interest group, the American
Association of Retired Persons (AARP), the legislation was re-
pealed less than eighteen months later after enormous criticism
(Himmelfarb 1995). Wealthier elderly persons objected to paying
the income-tax surcharge and additional premiums. Many aver-
age-income elderly persons were upset to discover that what they
considered the biggest need in the catastrophic coverage area,
coverage for nursing homes and long-term care costs, was not in-
cluded. Others failed to grasp what the extensions of the program
would provide to them, even though the legislation would have
beneﬁted all of the elderly without supplemental coverage and
might have provided those beneﬁts at a lower cost to many of
those paying for that coverage. As is often the case in politics and
public opinion, perceptions matter, at times, more than facts. The
pressure on Congress from both elderly constituents and interest
groups increased, and the legislation was repealed before most
provisions were implemented.
The other major area of reform within the Medicare pro-
gram was to control physician costs, ultimately through a new
physician-payment approach. In 1984, the DEFRA temporarily
froze increases in physician payment under Medicare and man-
dated that the Office of Technology Assessment study alternative
means of paying for physician services as a way to guide reform
of Medicare. The act also created a differential between two
classes of physicians, participating and nonparticipating, under
Medicare. The OBRA 1987 reduced physician fees for twelve
“overvalued” procedures and built in higher fee increases for pri-
mary care than for specialty care.
The major reform in physician payment was in the OBRA
1989 legislation. The HCFA was directed to begin implementing a
resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS) for reimbursing
physicians under the Medicare program with a four-year phase-
in period. The new system began in January 1992.
Previously, physicians had been paid on the basis of what
their charges were for various services. In the studies prior to
the development of the scales, how long it took physicians to
The Limited and Reactive Change of the Reagan-Bush Period
51

perform various kinds of tasks was determined. Each service
was assigned a relative weight based upon three geographically
adjusted values for work, practice costs, and malpractice premi-
ums. Thus new payment schemes were created related to the
time and resources used. For the final application, a scale of rel-
ative weightings or relative values was formed as the basis of
the new physician-reimbursement system for Medicare patients
(Hsiao et al. 1988; Hsiao et al. 1990). Physician groups launched
protests in June 1992 when the initial draft regulations were first
released. The AMA was so upset that they threatened to seek
congressional action to change the proposed new system of re-
imbursement (McIlrath 1991a). Physicians argued that the reim-
bursement scheme was not fair and that transition rules were
particularly inappropriate (McIlrath 1991b). Based on the com-
plaints in reaction to the initial drafts, the HCFA did revise the
rules somewhat. Whereas the initial regulations would have in-
creased slightly the fees paid to generalist physicians and de-
creased the fees paid to specialists, negotiations with various
groups from organized medicine including the AMA were used
as a basis for some modifications.
One other reform included in the OBRA 1990 legislation
was aimed at simpliﬁcation of Medigap policies, those policies
that the elderly buy to supplement their Medicare coverage. Most
of these policies cover some of the drug costs and the copayments
that are required by the current structure of Medicare. Before this
legislation, Medicare beneﬁciaries had a choice of hundreds of
Medigap policies, with widely varying beneﬁts that were difficult
to compare from one plan to the next. Because of the new legisla-
tion, by July 1992 all Medigap policies had to conform to one of
ten standardized packages developed by the National Associa-
tion of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). In a study of the im-
pact of this legislation, most consumers have picked plans that
offer the most coverage of Medicare’s patient cost-sharing re-
quirements. Fewer consumers have picked the more expensive
plans that offer additional beneﬁts such as preventive care, at-
home recovery, and prescription drug coverage.
The Medicare and Medicaid reforms, especially the major
ones on payment of hospitals and physicians, as well as other
changes in the Reagan-Bush years, yielded mixed results as
viewed from a policy perspective. Although the elimination of
regulatory approaches was one goal of these administrations, this
was accomplished only in the health-planning area. Especially in
52
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

Medicare and Medicaid, the Reagan and Bush administrations
used regulations to limit hospital reimbursement and physician
fees in the Medicare program. Even on a smaller scale, they used
regulation to control the variety of Medigap policies offered so as
to protect elderly consumers from purchasing worthless policies.
Despite the talk about stimulation of procompetition approaches,
HMOs did not receive ﬁnancial incentives and encouragement,
and growth in this area was modest in many sections of the coun-
try during this twelve-year period. The largest impact on health
services during this time period came from the dramatic reduc-
tion in federal ﬁscal capacity due to tax cuts, the growing federal
deﬁcit, and initial attempts to control the deﬁcit. Congressional
efforts focused on controlling cost increases through regulation
rather than procompetitive approaches. Even though the num-
bers of uninsured had been increasing in this twelve-year period,
access concerns were not a major policy focus; rather, most atten-
tion was given to controlling healthcare costs, partially because
healthcare spending outpaced the growth of most of the economy
through this time period. As has often happened with a shift in
political administration, the view of major problems in the health
policy area also shifts gradually. The beginning of the Clinton ad-
ministration arrived at a point of growing concerns about access
to care, as well as costs and attempts at large reforms, as dis-
cussed in the next section.
The Clinton Administration, Failure in 
Major Healthcare Reform, 
and the Current Situation 
There were a number of major pushes toward reform that were
part of the policy climate in early 1993 at the time of the ﬁrst in-
auguration of President Clinton, the time when his push for
major healthcare reform began to seriously take shape. The fac-
tors behind the pushes toward reform included (1) changes in
health insurance coverage within the United States; (2) fear of
unemployment and the overall economic climate and its link-
ages to healthcare; (3) the political pushes from within the Dem-
ocratic Party and those advising the presidential candidate that
healthcare might be an important issue for winning an election;
The Clinton Administration and the Current Situation
53

and (4) the policy goals of the president that focused on his desire
to pick a major issue in American society and have a lasting impact
upon that issue, both to help achieve the political goals of a second
term and to help achieve broader goals of having a presidency that
makes an important impact upon American society.
Having good health insurance coverage is one of the most
basic indicators of access to healthcare services in the United
States. After the introduction of private insurance in the United
States, issues of lack of health insurance coverage became a prob-
lem of special groups, such as the aged, the poor, and more re-
cently the unemployed. Medicare helped to deal with access
problems for the aged, and Medicaid helped for some of the
poorest. Although there is a range of estimates about the num-
bers of people uninsured and underinsured in the United States
from the early 1980s on, most sources agree that there has been an
increase in the numbers of uninsured since the late 1970s (Access
to Health Care 1987; Andersen and Davidson 1996). In the late
1970s, the best estimates were that 25 to 26 million people in the
United States were without healthcare insurance. This was about
13 percent of the population under 65. The numbers of uninsured
grew in the 1980s. Recent estimates range from a low of 22 mil-
lion to a high of 37 million by the late 1980s. In a review of statis-
tics from 1980 to 1993, one source estimates that the uninsured
population increased from 13 to 17 percent from 1980 to 1993
(Andersen and Davidson 1996). Medicaid coverage was made
available to more of the population (from 6 percent to 10 percent)
but coverage by private health insurance became available to less
of the population (from 79 to 71 percent). The proportion covered
by private health insurance decreased for every age group, and
the decline was especially noticeable for children under 15.
Critical to understanding how some groups of people have
no health insurance in American society is the realization that
most private health insurance in the United States is purchased
through employer-based group insurance policies. This type of
insurance represents about 85 percent of all private coverage.
One major factor in the increase in the number of uninsured per-
sons during the 1980s and early 1990s was the growth in unem-
ployment in the early 1980s and again in the early 1990s. There is
another group of people with no insurance—those with a history
of serious medical problems. Many people with serious health
problems do maintain health insurance coverage as long as they
keep their jobs. If they lose their current jobs due to the general
54
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

economy or their health but can still work, they may experience
problems in ﬁnding employment due to their health. Although
people who are medically uninsurable are a small part of those
without health insurance, they are important because they are
very high utilizers of health services. Studies have estimated that
.5 to 1.0 percent of the U.S. population is currently “medically
uninsurable.”
It is never clear at the time what events will push a new or
revised political agenda forward. In 1990, while most of the
trends described in the previous two sections about rising num-
bers of Americans without health insurance and growing fears of
the middle class about not having health insurance due to
changes in the economy were already known, nevertheless nei-
ther health policy experts nor politicians considered it politically
feasible to talk about major governmental reform in healthcare
(Skocpol 1995). Certainly some major pressures were building.
The Journal of the American Medical Association published a special
issue in 1991 that focused on the issue of caring for the uninsured
and underinsured. But while these kinds of actions resonated
with the health policy community, they did not lead to broad dis-
cussion among the public. Then, unexpectedly, in the summer of
1991, the type of event described by policy experts as a “focusing
event” occurred (Kingdon 1984). Following the tragic death of
Senator John Heinz in an aviation accident, the relatively un-
known (but long-time political activist) Harris Wofford became
the Democratic senatorial candidate in a special election in Penn-
sylvania. He aired a television commercial during the campaign
that argued: “If every criminal in America has the right to a
lawyer, then I think every working person should have the right
to see a doctor when they’re ill.” This spot resonated with the
public, and led to a focus in his campaign on calls for national
health insurance. Wofford managed to defeat his opponent, and
the Democratic Party began to realize that access to healthcare
was an issue on the minds of the public.
During the Democratic primary debates, health insurance
was a topic of major discussion. Several of the candidates devel-
oped well-thought-out, detailed proposals about health reform.
Although Clinton was not particularly identiﬁed with health is-
sues in the early days of the primary campaign, after being
pushed by rivals, he released a ten-page-long healthcare policy
paper during the New Hampshire primary debates in January
1992. In the summer of 1992, when it was clear that Clinton had
The Clinton Administration and the Current Situation
55

won the Democratic nomination for the presidency, Clinton and
his aides realized that healthcare could be an important issue in
the upcoming election. In his acceptance speech at the Demo-
cratic convention in Madison Square Garden in 1992, Clinton
vowed “to take on the healthcare proﬁteers and make healthcare
affordable for every family.” This rhetoric provided a sense of di-
rection and commitment to the public at large, but the campaign
advisors were leery of providing more details. Campaign polls
showed that voters wanted the system changed, but were not cer-
tain what changes would help them (Johnson and Broder 1996).
After Clinton won election in November 1992 the immedi-
ate issue was how important healthcare reform would be in his
administration. For a politician who thought of himself as a pol-
icy wonk or detailed policy expert, who was concerned about
how presidents are viewed by history, and who wanted to leave a
lasting impact on the country, healthcare reform was the most
challenging issue on the domestic agenda and the one that would
impact the greatest number of people. It was an issue in which
everyone in the country shared some concern, as contrasted with
welfare reform, which would impact a more limited number of
people in the country. Five days after the inauguration, President
Clinton announced the formation of the president’s Task Force on
National Health Reform. The job of the task force was to prepare
healthcare reform legislation to be submitted to Congress within
100 days of beginning in office. Hillary Rodham Clinton, wife of
the president, was named head of the task force. Despite advice
against the creation of the commission, against tackling overall
healthcare reform as one big piece, and against appointing his
wife as the head of the commission, Clinton moved ahead with
his plans.
Many of his former aides argue that, in some ways, Clin-
ton’s own intellectual capacities worked against successful
healthcare reform. He was not intellectually inclined to follow the
advice of more piecemeal reform efforts. He wanted a large im-
pact, and he saw the interconnections between health problems.
He wanted to tackle the entire issue. A number of books and arti-
cles have now reviewed, in greater detail than is possible here,
how this effort at major healthcare reform faltered (Starr 1994;
Blendon et al. 1995; Johnson and Broder 1996; Yankelovich 1995).
These analyses point to difficulties with the commission, prob-
lems with understanding the political process, weaknesses in
overall Democratic strength and support of the plan, and prob-
56
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

lems in presentation of the issue to the public and communica-
tion to the general public, as well as the lack of coalescing impor-
tant interest groups to lobby for the plan, especially since groups
opposed to the plan did develop effective lobbying and public-
communication approaches.
Some experts argue that one of the important ﬂaws in the
process was the lack of a real public debate over and public con-
sensus regarding the issues (Yankelovich 1995; Blendon et al.
1995). Daniel Yankelovich, a public-opinion expert, has argued
that both the defeat of the catastrophic-coverage plan for the el-
derly in 1989 and the defeat of the Clinton healthcare reform plan
in 1994 reﬂect a “massive failure of public deliberation”
(Yankelovich 1995, 8). He argues that the nation’s leadership class
(including leaders of medicine, industry, education, the legal pro-
fession, science, religion, and journalism) does not talk effectively
with the public. All the groups crafting the healthcare reform
plan were from this leadership class, and the average American
did not understand it and what it meant for them. Because of this,
Yankelovich argues that the plan lost public support because its
opponents found it easy to raise public fears about a plan people
did not understand. In support of this argument, Yankelovich
demonstrates that public knowledge about the plan decreased
over time. Right after Clinton presented his health address to the
nation, only 21 percent of the public said they knew much about
it. But, instead of these numbers increasing over time, by the next
month, the numbers had decreased to 17 percent, and they con-
tinued to fall up to the time that Congress considered the legisla-
tion in August 1994, when only 13 percent of Americans felt they
were very well informed about the debate in general
(Yankelovich 1995). If the support of the public helps to push
major reforms, the public must understand some aspects of the
plan, at least enough to form an opinion about the proposed plan.
If Yankelovich is correct that the defeat represented massive
failure of public deliberation and was linked to a lack of public
understanding about the plan (or plans as they changed), what
does public-opinion data show about overall support for the
plan? Blendon and colleagues (1995) also have reviewed public-
opinion data and concluded that within a twelve-month period,
support for the Clinton plan fell from 71 percent to 43 percent. Al-
though some of this loss of support was attributed to substantive
choices and speciﬁcs of the plan, some is attributed to a lack of
communication with the public, especially the middle class, who
The Clinton Administration and the Current Situation
57

became convinced the plan beneﬁted the poor more than them-
selves (and perhaps was part of the reason that some Democratic
politicians became convinced that they were going to lose control
of the Senate over the issue of healthcare reform). To make the
process more difficult, the general public also distrusted the abil-
ity of government to do what is right most of the time, an impor-
tant change from the public’s attitudes in the 1960s when
Medicare and Medicaid were enacted. Thus, building public sup-
port is harder in the 1990s, but no less important, especially for a
president in a relatively weak position as regards congressional
majorities.
Other types of criticism and explanations for failure based
partially on process and partially on content focus on the whole
development process and the presentation of the reform plan by
the president. One historian who has reviewed the failure of the
Clinton healthcare reform plan from the vantage point of histori-
cal experience has argued that the entire process used by the
Clinton administration allowed comprehensive healthcare re-
form to be too deﬁned as a purely presidential initiative, and did
not allow for either public involvement and discussion of trade-
offs or for negotiations with Republicans who supported the gen-
eral goal but did not want to contribute to the triumph of a new
Democratic president (Heclo 1995). In comparison to the success
that President Johnson was able to accomplish in passing his War
on Poverty legislation including Medicare and Medicaid, Presi-
dent Clinton’s reform also came to be viewed as a test of the pres-
ident’s personal popularity, but Clinton lacked the large congres-
sional majorities that allowed Johnson to successfully have
legislation passed. (In addition, Clinton enjoyed neither the un-
derstanding of congressional operations that Johnson had gained
from his decades of service in the Senate nor Johnson’s strong
personal contacts with senators).
Not all of the problems of process were due only to mis-
steps by the Clintons. According to more recent reports, some
conservative experts had concluded that successful passage of a
Clinton healthcare plan would provide enormous trouble for the
success of Republicans in the next sets of congressional and pres-
idential elections. Bill Kristol, who worked for the conservative
think tank The Project for the Republican Future, argued that
congressional Republicans should work to kill, rather than
amend, the Clinton plan. He argued that doing so would enhance
Republican chances of winning Congress and of becoming the
58
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

majority party, dovetailing with the views of Newt Gingrich
whose “Contract with America” would become a theme for the
1994 elections (Johnson and Broder 1996). This strategy became a
reality in the plans of the Senate Republicans, who blocked the
discussion of healthcare bills, as well as in the statements of Gin-
grich on the House side and his ability to ﬁrst delay the health
bill and then link its consideration to defeats in other areas.
The 1994 congressional elections had the potential to be
major transforming elections in the United States. Republicans
gained a majority in both houses of Congress, taking control of
the House of Representatives for the ﬁrst time in forty years.
Gains were large, with ﬁfty-two seats gained in the House and
eight in the Senate. Although the healthcare issue was not the
only reason the Democrats did poorly in the election, the defeat
of healthcare reform certainly played a role in the defeats. One
study (Blendon et al. 1995) that examined public-opinion survey
data at the time of the election and national Election Day exit sur-
veys determined that most voters did not choose a candidate for
Congress based on healthcare or even other national issues. Only
22 percent of voters said that stands on national issues were one
of the most important factors, as contrasted with the candidate’s
experience, character and ethics, and political party. However, if
voters were asked about concerns with speciﬁc issues, healthcare
became more important. Looking at data from Election Day sur-
veys, healthcare was rated as number one in two of the surveys
and tied for fourth in the third. Another question asked voters to
name their top priorities for the new Congress. Only two surveys
asked this question, and in both, healthcare was listed as number
one. In examining issues of importance to voters and programs
people support, voters were more in favor of providing health in-
surance to certain “deserving” groups. Voters favored covering
children ﬁrst and then people who were uninsured. About half
were willing to pay a modest increase in taxes or health insurance
premiums to see some changes made in the healthcare system.
Traditional Social Security and healthcare programs received
wide support. Only 17 percent were willing to see cuts in Social
Security or Medicaid as ways to deal with deﬁcits, and even
fewer (7 to 8 percent) were willing to see cuts in Medicare and
veterans’ beneﬁts, versus much higher support for welfare cuts in
programs such as food stamps, public housing, and AFDC.
Given the Republican control of both houses of Congress,
legislators did propose a balanced budget by 2002 with large cuts
The Clinton Administration and the Current Situation
59

(20 percent in Medicare and 30 percent in Medicaid). Given the
Republican domination of the House, these cuts passed the
House, but were opposed by Clinton. It became clear that year
that Gingrich was willing to shut down the government if Clin-
ton opposed the cuts. Government shutdowns occurred, ﬁrst in
mid-November and then again later in December after a tempo-
rary spending bill expired. One major aspect of the budget dis-
agreement involved cuts in Medicare and Medicaid, along with
other domestic programs. Eventually the government reopened
and only modest cuts occurred in Medicare and Medicaid.
By the election year of 1996, everyone wanted a more success-
ful session of Congress, and some minor reforms were passed in the
health area, such as consolidation of programs that provided pri-
mary healthcare centers in certain communities and some health-
care for the homeless. Two more important reforms were added
dealing with mental health and HMO care, as well as the passage of
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, an
act with some important healthcare reforms. The mental health pro-
vision may be more important as a reminder of the importance of
mental health than in its immediate changes in the healthcare deliv-
ery system. The mental health provision requires that annual and
lifetime caps on mental health beneﬁts be at parity with those for
physical illnesses. Some plans have had lifetime maximums of
$50,000 for mental illness versus $1 million lifetime caps for physi-
cal illness. One limitation on the mental health provision is that it
does not apply to small businesses with fewer than ﬁfty employees.
The HMO provision in the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act was linked to maternity care and was a clear
reaction to the growth of HMOs. As a cost-cutting technique,
some managed care companies had put into effect policies that
forced mothers to leave hospitals with their newborns fairly
quickly, generally within twenty-four hours but in a few in-
stances as soon as ten hours after a normal vaginal birth. By the
time the federal law was enacted, thirty states had already en-
acted provisions similar to the new federal ones that require
HMOs to allow mothers to stay in the hospital up to forty-eight
hours after a normal vaginal delivery and up to ninety-six hours
after a cesarean delivery. Thus, while the new law may not
change the actual care available to many people, it sends an im-
portant message to HMOs that, given their growth, enrollees may
be so concerned that they not only generate state restrictions, but
even federal restrictions.
60
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

The main portions of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act involve ending the hesitation of some peo-
ple to take new jobs because of loss of health insurance due to
the reimposition of preexisting clauses for serious health prob-
lems. The bill specifically prohibits employers who offer health
coverage from limiting or denying coverage to individuals cov-
ered under a group health plan for more than twelve months for
a medical condition that was diagnosed or treated in the previ-
ous six months. Once the twelve-month limit passes, no new
preexisting limit may ever be imposed on people who maintain
coverage with no more than a sixty-three-day gap, even if they
change jobs or health plans. The legislation also prohibits em-
ployers from excluding an employee or dependent from cover-
age because their specific costs are too high. The legislation
guarantees renewability of health coverage to employers and
individuals except in the case of fraud or misrepresentation by
an employer. The legislation also provides for medical savings
accounts as an option for small businesses and the self-em-
ployed. This is important reform legislation and addresses sev-
eral of the most important problems for employed individuals
with health insurance.
The most important health-related piece of legislation
under Clinton dealt with access-to-care issues. In fall 1997 Con-
gress passed the new joint federal-state Children’s Health Insur-
ance Program (CHIP) as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
This act initially made available $24 billion in funds to states over
the ﬁve years from 1998 forward to help provide health insurance
to children. This program was particularly aimed at children of
the working poor, which often includes parents who are in the
labor force but who work for an employer that does not provide
healthcare insurance. The CHIP is having some success in im-
proving the insurance levels of children. By 1999, 86 percent of
children had health coverage, a small increase from 85 percent in
1998, and leading to the lowest rates of no insurance coverage for
children since 1993. By 1999, 23 percent of children were covered
by public programs such as Medicaid and the CHIP, as compared
with only 11 percent in 1987, before the CHIP and some of the
Medicaid expansions (Federal Interagency Forum Focus on Child
and Family Statistics 2001).
Healthcare reform was not a major focus of the George W.
Bush campaign, but some aspects of healthcare reform were dis-
cussed, especially a patients’ rights bill and prescription-drug
The Clinton Administration and the Current Situation
61

coverage for Medicare recipients. In summer 2001 many experts
expected some action during the next congressional session on
those issues, so that the Republicans would be able to point to
some policy successes for the 2002 elections in November of that
year. Instead, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, oc-
curred. Little domestic legislation passed in 2002, and the focus of
the administration was on foreign-policy concerns, terrorism, the
declining economy that was partially a result of the attacks, and
scandals in the business community. The focus of the administra-
tion has continued to be on foreign policy, with the war against
Iraq taking major attention in the ﬁrst half of 2003 and issues with
the reconstruction of Iraq continuing to be a major issue in the
second half of 2003. The presence of a Republican majority in the
Senate and a new leader of the Republicans, William Frist, who is
a physician, has helped to focus some attention on healthcare is-
sues in the second half of 2003. Although there is growing con-
cern about the rising costs of health insurance, the future of re-
form in this area may come later, in 2004. The major
health-related effort in the second half of 2003 was the passage of
a Medicare reform bill. Though bitterly opposed by many Demo-
crats and some Republicans, the legislation did pass at the end of
November 2003. Although the measure has been publicized as
providing drug coverage for the elderly, initially the plan will
make available some prescription-drug cards in spring 2004. By
2006, seniors will be able to join privately administered drug
plans for about $35 a month, and receive 75 percent of drug costs
up to $2,250 after a $250 copayment. One reason for the opposi-
tion to the bill is that it also creates means testing for wealthier el-
derly persons beginning in 2007, so that higher-income elderly
persons will pay more for Medicare beneﬁts, and encourages the
elderly to enter managed care plans. In addition, in 2010,
Medicare would test competition between private health plans
and the government in six metropolitan areas. Many liberals be-
lieve these two aspects of the bill will undermine the strength of
the government program and could be a ﬁrst step to the disman-
tling of Medicare. Also, over time, the commitment of the mid-
dle-class elderly to the program may diminish overall support if
income ranges for the extra charges are not changed. The bill also
provides substantial funding increases for some doctor and hos-
pital services, and does nothing to control the costs of drugs. In
the long run, this could lead to even greater concerns about rising
healthcare costs in future years.
62
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

References
Andersen, Ronald M., and Pamela L. Davidson. 1996. Measuring Access
and Trends. In Changing the U.S. Health Care Delivery System, edited by
Ronald M. Andersen, Thomas H. Rice, and Gerald F. Kominski. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Blendon, Robert J., Mollyann Brodie, and John Benson. 1995. What Hap-
pened to Americans’ Support for the Clinton Health Plan? Health Affairs
14: 7–23.
DesHarnais, S., E. Kobrinski, and J. Chesney. 1987. The Early Effects of
the PPS on Inpatient Utilization and the Quality of Care. Inquiry 24: 7–16.
Edwards, W. O., and C. R. Fisher. 1989. Medicare Physician and Hospital
Utilization and Expenditure Trends. Health Care Financing Review 11:
111–116.
Federal Interagency Forum Focus on Child and Family Statistics. 2001.
America’s Children: Key National Indicators of Well-Being. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Gay, G., J. J. Kronenfeld, S. Baker, and R. Amidon. 1989. An Appraisal of
Organizational Response to Fiscally Constraining Regulation. Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 30: 41–55.
Heclo, Hugh. 1995. The Clinton Health Plan: Historical Perspectives.
Health Affairs 14: 86–98.
Himmelfarb, Richard. 1995. Catastrophic Politics: The Rise and Fall of the
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Hsiao, W. C., D. B. Yntema, P. Braun, and E. Becker. 1988. Resource Based
Relative Values: An Overview. Journal of the American Medical Association
260: 2347–2353.
———. 1990. Reﬁnement and Expansion of the Harvard RBRVS. Ameri-
can Journal of Public Health 80: 799–803.
Johnson, Haynes, and David S. Broder. 1996. The System: The American
Way of Politics at the Breaking Point. Boston: Little, Brown.
Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives and Public Policies. Boston:
Little, Brown.
Koch, A. L. 1988. Financing Health Systems. In Introduction to Health Ser-
vices, 3rd ed., edited by Stephen J. Williams and Paul R. Torrens. New
York: John Wiley and Sons.
Kronenfeld, Jennie Jacobs. 1997. The Changing Federal Role in U.S. Health
Care Policy. Westport, CT: Praeger.
References
63

Lee, Phillip R., and A. E. Benjamin. 1993. Health Policy and the Politics of
Health Care. In Introduction to Health Services, 4th ed., edited by Stephen
J. Williams and Paul R. Torrens. Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers.
McIlrath, S. 1991a. HCFA Issues Final RBRVS Rules. American Medical
News (December): 1, 26–47.
———. 1991b. RBRVS Launch Could Be Difficult. American Medical News
(December): 1, 37.
Quadagno, Jill. 2002. Aging and the Life Course: An Introduction to Social
Gerontology. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. 1987. Access to Health Care in the
United States: Results of a 1986 Survey. Special Report Number 2. Prince-
ton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Skopcol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins
of Social Policy in the United States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
———. 1995. The Rise and Resounding Demise of the Clinton Plan.
Health Affairs 14: 66–85.
Starr, Paul. 1982. The Social Transformation of American Medicine: The Rise
of a Sovereign Profession and the Making of a Vast Industry. New York: Basic
Books.
———. 1994. The Logic of Healthcare Reform. New York: Penguin Books. 
Strickland, Stephen. 1978. Research and the Health of Americans: Improving
the Public Policy Process. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Wallace, Helen, Edward M. Gold, and Allan C. Oglesby. 1982. Maternal
and Child Health Practices: Problems, Resources and Methods of Delivery. 2nd
ed. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Wiley, M. M. 1992. Hospital Financing Reform and Case-Mix Measure-
ment: An International Review. Health Care Financing Review 13: 119–135.
Williams, Stephen J., and Paul R. Torrens. 1993. Inﬂuencing, Regulating
and Monitoring the Health Care System. In Introduction to Health Services,
4th ed., edited by Stephen J. Williams and Paul R. Torrens. Albany, NY:
Delmar Publishers.
Yankelovich, Daniel. 1995. The Debate That Wasn’t: The Public and the
Clinton Plan. Health Affairs 14: 7–23.
64
The Role of the Federal Government in Health

3
Chronology
1798
Merchant Marine Services Act (Act for the Relief of
Sick and Disabled Seamen) of 1798 is the first fed-
eral act with any important health provisions. It
provides health services to U.S. seamen by taxing
the employers of merchant seamen. It funds the
arrangements for their healthcare through the Ma-
rine Hospital Service.
1800 
Legislation authorizes federal officials to cooperate
with state and local officials to enforce quarantine laws.
Early 
The Merchant Marine Hospitals is established in 
1800s
major seaports of the United States, as authorized by
the 1798 legislation, to deal with the healthcare needs
of people in the merchant marine lines of work.
1862 
The Morrill Act focuses on granting federal lands to
each state and allowing the proﬁts of those lands to
be used for support of public institutions of higher
education. These institutions become the land-grant
colleges and host many programs in nursing and nu-
trition, and later, in medicine.
President Lincoln appoints a chemist, Charles M.
Wetherill, to serve in the new Department of Agricul-
ture. This is the beginning of the Bureau of Chemistry,
forerunner to the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA).
65

1870
The Marine Hospitals Services Act of 1870 provides a
national agency with central headquarters to oversee
Merchant Marine Hospitals and staffing. These hospi-
tals had already been in existence, but the national
agency with a central headquarters to deal with them
is new.
1878
The Federal Quarantine Act of 1878 and amendments
give the Marine Services Hospitals the authority to
develop quarantine laws for ports that lack state or
local regulation. Because immigration expands dur-
ing this time frame, the act becomes important legis-
lation that later expands to give the service full re-
sponsibility for foreign and interstate commerce.
1882 
The ﬁrst general immigration law includes provisions
to exclude immigrants for medical reasons. To enforce
this law, federal inspectors and doctors have to be al-
lowed on board ships to check for diseases.
1887
The federal government opens a one-room laboratory
on Staten Island for research on disease, thereby
planting the seed that is to ultimately grow into the
National Institutes of Health (NIH).
1899
The Commission Corps Act of 1899 and the amend-
ments thereto allow the hiring of physicians and other
health personnel to provide public health services.
1901
The U.S. Health Service Hygienic Laboratory is estab-
lished.
1902
The Public Health and Marine Service Act of 1902
clariﬁes some federal health functions by renaming
the Marine Hospital Service the Public Health and
Marine Services. In addition, this act creates a system
of communications among state, territorial, and fed-
eral health officials. The surgeon general, the admin-
istrative head of the Public Health Service (PHS), is
authorized to have an annual meeting of state and
territorial health officers to discuss major health pol-
icy issues and concerns of the day.
66
Chronology

The Biologics Control Act of 1902 gives the PHS the
responsibility to license and regulate biologically de-
rived health products.
1906 
The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 (Wiley Act) al-
lows the Bureau of Chemistry in the Department of
Agriculture to prohibit shipment of impure foods and
drugs across state lines. By giving this authority to
the Bureau of Chemistry, the act makes it possible for
the bureau to regulate drug products and later to cre-
ate specialized categories of drugs such as controlled
substances in the case of narcotics and opium-derived
drugs.
1912 
President Theodore Roosevelt’s ﬁrst White House
Conference urges creation of a Children’s Bureau to
combat exploitation of children. The conference deals
with many aspects of the lives of children, including
health-related concerns.
1917
The Vocational Educational Act of 1917 (Smith-
Hughes Act) provides funds to establish early li-
censed practical nursing (LPN) programs.
1920
The Snyder Act of 1920 is the ﬁrst federal legislation
to deal with healthcare for Native Americans. The act
provides general assistance and directs the Bureau of
Indian Affairs to direct, supervise, and expend
monies for the beneﬁt, care, and assistance of Native
Americans throughout the United States, setting up
the beginnings of what later became the Indian
Health Service (IHS).
1921
The Maternity and Infancy Act of 1921 (Sheppard-
Towner Act) provides grants to states to plan mater-
nal and child health services. Although the law is al-
lowed to lapse in 1929, it is very important because
the mechanism of providing grants to states is new
within the health area, and thus the legislation serves
as a prototype for federal grants-in-aid to the states in
the area of health.
Chronology
67

1924
The Veterans Act of 1924 codiﬁes and extends the role
of the federal government in the provision of health-
care services to veterans.
1930
The Ransdell Act of 1930 creates the National Institute
of Health from the U.S. Health Service Hygienic Lab-
oratory and sets in place the growth of federally
funded health research through the different insti-
tutes of health that are now part of the modern Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH).
The Veterans’ Administration is created as an inde-
pendent U.S. government agency.
1932
The Committee on the Costs of Medical Care report is
published and raises concerns about the costs of med-
ical care at this time and the numbers of people who
are effectively denied access to healthcare services
due to the costs and their limited incomes.
1935
The Social Security Act of 1935, including Title V of the
act, provides for a system of old-age pensions and other
old-age beneﬁts. This landmark legislation passes par-
tially as a reaction to the Great Depression. In addition
to the overall establishment of the old-age pension sys-
tem, Title V includes grants to states for maternal, child
health, and child welfare services, and for services to
crippled children. The act also provides incentives for
the establishment of state unemployment funds. Title
VI authorizes annual federal grants to states for investi-
gation of the problems of disease and sanitation, lead-
ing to the creation of new local health departments and
overall signiﬁcantly increasing federal assistance for
state and local public health programs.
1937
The Social Security Act is expanded to include bene-
ﬁts for spouses and widows.
An additional nationally funded health research insti-
tute is created, the National Cancer Institute, which
later also becomes part of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH).
68
Chronology

1938
The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938
and the amendments thereto regulate for safety the
market entry of new drug, cosmetic, and therapeutic
products by extending the federal authority to ban
new drugs from the market until they are approved
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
The Venereal Disease Control Act of 1938 (LaFollette-
Bulwinkle Act) coordinates state efforts to combat
syphilis and gonorrhea by providing grants-in-aid to
the states to support their investigation and control of
venereal disease.
1939
The Reorganization Act of 1939 plays a major role in
the reorganization of many health-related functions
in the federal government. The act transfers the Pub-
lic Health Service (PHS) from the Treasury Depart-
ment to the new Federal Security Agency (FSA). This
is changed again in 1953 with the creation of the De-
partment of Health, Education and Welfare (DHEW)
and in 1980 with the creation of the Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS).
1944
The Public Health Service Act of 1944, a multipart act,
makes many changes in the role of the federal gov-
ernment in public health services. The act speciﬁes a
role for the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) in work-
ing with state and local health departments. It also re-
vises and consolidates into one place all existing leg-
islation pertaining to the PHS, and provides for the
organization, staffing, and functions and activities of
the PHS. The act also incorporates the provisions of
the Biologics Control Act as a PHS responsibility, in-
cluding allowing use of quarantines and inspections
for the control of communicable diseases. Services are
extended to inmates of penal and correctional institu-
tions. The act is subsequently used as a vehicle,
through amendments to the legislation, for a number
of important federal grant-in-aid programs.
1945
The McCarran-Fergurson Act of 1945 exempts the
business of insurance from federal antitrust legislation
Chronology
69

(such as the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 and the
Clayton Act of 1914). This act provides instead that in-
surance is to be regulated by state law, and the act
does not involve acts of boycott, coercion, or intimida-
tion as the reason why insurance, including health in-
surance, is exempted.
1946
The U.S. National Health Policy Hospital Survey and
Construction Act of 1946 (Hill-Burton Amendments
to the Public Health Service Act [PHS]) provides
grants to states to inventory and survey existing hos-
pital and public healthcare facilities in each state and
to plan for new ones. The new act authorizes grants to
both survey existing facilities and plan construction
of new facilities, as well as grants to assist in such
construction. As part of this initiation of a process of
planning about health facilities, the act requires the
establishment of state planning agencies and submis-
sion of a state plan for the construction of hospital fa-
cilities to receive the federal funds.
The National Mental Health Act of 1946 (an amend-
ment to the PHS of 1944) authorizes federal support
for mental health research and treatment programs.
Included in the federal support is the authorization
of grants-in-aid to the states for mental health activi-
ties. The act transforms the Division of Mental
Health in the PHS into the National Institute of Men-
tal Health.
1948
The National Health Act of 1948 expands the capac-
ity of the National Institute of Health by making it
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and creating
a second categorical institute, the National Heart In-
stitute.
1953
The Federal Security Agency is renamed and given
department status as the Department of Health, Edu-
cation and Welfare (DHEW).
1954
Medical Facilities Survey and Construction Act of
1954. These amendments to the U.S. National Health
70
Chronology
1945
(cont.)

Policy Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946
(the Hill-Burton Act) greatly expand the program’s
scope by authorizing grants for surveys and construc-
tion of diagnostic and treatment centers, including
hospital outpatient departments, chronic disease hos-
pitals, rehabilitation facilities, and nursing homes.
1956
The Health Amendments Act of 1956, which amends
the basic Public Health Service Act of 1944, adds spe-
cial projects dealing with problems of state mental
hospitals. The act also authorizes federal assistance
for the education and training of health personnel, in-
cluding traineeships for public health personnel and
for the advanced training of nurses.
The Dependents Medical Care Act of 1956 establishes
the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uni-
formed Services (CHAMPUS) for the dependents of
military personnel.
1958
The Food Additives Amendment of 1958 amends the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 to re-
quire premarketing clearance from the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for new food additives.
This new act includes the Delaney clause, named
after Representative James Delaney, stating that no
additive shall be deemed to be safe if it is found to in-
duce cancer when ingested by human or animal.
1959
The Federal Employees Health Beneﬁt Act of 1959
permits Blue Cross to negotiate a contract with the
Civil Service Commission to provide health insurance
coverage for federal employees.
1960
The Social Security Amendments of 1960 (Kerr-Mills
Act) amend the Social Security Act to establish a pro-
gram of medical assistance for the aged. Through this
program, the act also provides aid to the states for
payments for medical care for “medically indigent”
persons who are sixty-ﬁve years of age or older. The
participation by states is optional, with only twenty-
ﬁve states participating. The Kerr-Mills program is
Chronology
71

the forerunner of the Medicaid program established
in 1965.
1961
Community Health Services and Facilities Act of
1961. Although this act is passed as a separate statute,
the act mostly amends the U.S. National Health Pol-
icy Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946 (the
Hill-Burton Act of 1946) by increasing the amount of
funds available for nursing-home construction and by
extending the research and demonstration grant pro-
gram to other medical facilities.
1962
The Health Services for Agricultural Migratory Work-
ers Act of 1962 (an amendment to the Public Health
Service Act of 1944) establishes a program of federal
grants for family clinics and other health services for
migrant workers and their families.
The Drug Amendments of 1962 (Kefauver-Harris
Amendments) modify the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act of 1938 to significantly strengthen the
provisions related to the regulation of therapeutic
drugs. They also require improved manufacturing
processes and procedures and evidence to assure
that new drugs proposed for marketing are effective
as well as safe. The amendments follow widespread
negative publicity about the serious negative side ef-
fects of the drug thalidomide and reflect the con-
cerns of Americans about ensuring the safety of new
drugs.
1963
Maternal and Child Health and Mental Retardation
Planning Amendments; Amendments to Title V of the
Social Security Act in 1963, 1965, and 1967. These
amendments modify the basic Social Security Act to
assist states and communities in preventing and com-
bating mental retardation through expansion and im-
provement of the maternal, child, and crippled chil-
dren’s programs. They also add special project grants
for maternity and infant care for low-income mothers
and infants and add special project grants for child
dental services.
72
Chronology
1960
(cont.)

The Health Professions Education Assistance Act of
1963 (an amendment to the Public Health Service Act)
provides construction grants for facilities that train
physicians, nurses, dentists, podiatrists, pharmacists,
and public health personnel. The act also provides for
student-loan funds and scholarship funds to schools
of medicine and osteopathy. It also includes construc-
tion grants that are contingent upon schools increas-
ing their ﬁrst-year enrollments. Later amendments
extend loan funds to a variety of health and allied
health professions.
1964
The first Surgeon General’s Report on Smoking and
Health is released, and thus begins the growing
public recognition of the negative health effects of
smoking.
The Nurse Training Act of 1964 provides schools of
nursing with support to permit them to increase en-
rollments and improve their physical facilities.
1965
The Health Professions Educational Assistance Amend-
ments of 1965 (which amend the 1963 act) authorize
basic improvement (institutional grants), special im-
provement grants, and scholarship grants to schools of
medicine, dentistry, osteopathy, optometry, and podia-
try. The amendments also authorize scholarship grants
to schools of pharmacy, expand the student-loan pro-
gram, and include a provision through which 50 per-
cent of a professional student’s loan can be forgiven in
exchange for practice in a designated shortage area.
Health Insurance for the Aged of 1965—Title XVIII
of the Social Security Act (Medicare) and amend-
ments. Through these amendments, a program of
national health insurance for elderly Social Security
recipients is established. Part A provides basic pro-
tection against the costs of hospitalization and se-
lected posthospital services. Part B is a voluntary
program financed by premium payments from en-
rollees with matching federal revenues and provides
supplemental medical insurance benefits. In later
Chronology
73

years, additional amendments extend coverage to
patients who receive cash payments under the dis-
ability provisions of the Social Security Act and thus
provide health insurance for the aged with federal
funds. Because of the use of federal funds, this act
also becomes the mechanism for later federal regula-
tions dealing with quality assurance, institutional
minimum standards, utilization review, and cost
controls.
Grants to the States for Medical Assistance Programs
of 1965—Title XIX of the Social Security Act (Medic-
aid) and amendments. These amendments create a
federal-state matching program with voluntary state
participation to partially replace the Kerr-Mills pro-
gram. These amendments provide a federally sup-
ported (with state matching funds) program that pro-
vides some healthcare services for the categorically
poor receiving welfare payments. Participating states
have to provide ﬁve basic services: inpatient and out-
patient, other laboratory and X-ray, physician, and
skilled nursing-home services. In addition, states can
include a number of other optional services. Over
time, the required and optional services change with
amendments, as does the eligibility of various groups
of the poor. Although federal categorical welfare re-
cipients are eligible from the beginning, by option,
states can include medically needy with incomes too
high for cash federal welfare payments through the
provision of health services for low-income federal
public-assistance recipients and the medically needy.
Eventually, the linkage with receipt of welfare bene-
ﬁts is removed, but the program remains a means-
tested one with income eligibility rules. As with
Medicare, the program becomes a mechanism for fed-
eral regulation of quality assurance, institutional min-
imum standards, utilization review, and cost controls
in healthcare.
The Older Americans Act of 1965 establishes an Ad-
ministration on Aging to administer, through state
agencies, programs for the elderly. There are ten spe-
74
Chronology
1965
(cont.)

ciﬁc covered objectives for the elderly, including sev-
eral relating to health.
1966
The Comprehensive Health Planning and Public
Health Service Amendments of 1966 (Partnership for
Health) provide for state and local planning for
health services facilities through A (state level) and B
(community level) agencies. Block grants are pro-
vided to state health departments for discretionary
purposes. The act seeks to create comprehensive
planning for health facilities, services, and personnel
within the framework of a federal-state-local partner-
ship. Section 314a authorizes grants to states for the
development of comprehensive state health planning
while Section 314b authorizes grants to public or non-
proﬁt organizations for developing comprehensive
regional, metropolitan area, or other local area plans.
1967
Mental Health Amendments of 1967 and Mental Re-
tardation Amendments to the Mental Retardation Fa-
cilities and Community Mental Health Centers Con-
struction Act of 1960. These amendments extend
construction grants to community mental health cen-
ters to cover acquisition of existing buildings. The act
also extends the program of construction grants for
university-affiliated and community-based facilities
for the mentally retarded.
The Social Security Amendments of 1967 are the ﬁrst
of many modiﬁcations to the Medicare and Medicaid
programs established ﬁrst by the Social Security
Amendments of 1960. These amendments provide ex-
panded coverage for durable medical equipment for
use in the home, podiatrist services, and outpatient
physical therapy, and add sixty days of coverage for
inpatient hospital care over and above the original
coverage for up to ninety days during any spell of ill-
ness. Some payment rules are also modiﬁed, gener-
ally in favor of providers of care. New conditions are
provided that have to be met by nursing homes want-
ing to participate in the Medicare and Medicaid pro-
grams as part of a quality-control mechanism.
Chronology
75

1970
The Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Prevention and
Control Act of 1970 provides for special project grants
for drug abuse and drug dependence treatment pro-
grams and programs related to drug education.
The Poison Prevention and Packaging Act of 1970 re-
quires that most drugs be dispensed in containers de-
signed to be difficult for children to open.
The Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act of 1970
establishes the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism. The act also provides a separate
statutory base for programs and activities relating to
alcohol abuse and alcoholism, including a program of
aid to states and localities in their efforts to combat al-
cohol abuse and alcoholism.
The Communicable Disease Control Amendments of
1970 (amendments to the Public Health Service Act of
1944) reestablish categorical grant programs to con-
trol communicable diseases such as tuberculosis,
venereal disease, measles, and rubella. They also re-
name the CDC the Centers for Disease Control and
broadens its concern beyond the communicable dis-
eases to other preventable conditions such as malnu-
trition, certain chronic health problems, and acciden-
tal injuries.
1971
The Comprehensive Health Manpower Training Act
of 1971 (a Public Health Service Act amendment) is a
complex series of amendments that replace institu-
tional grants with a new system of capitation grants
in which health professions schools receive ﬁxed
sums of money for each student enrolled contingent
on increasing ﬁrst-year enrollments. The act also cre-
ates project grants and ﬁnancial-distress grants and
revises loan and scholarship provisions so that 85 per-
cent of education loans to a student can be canceled
by health professionals who practice in a designated
shortage area. The legislation also establishes the Na-
tional Health Manpower Clearinghouse and directs
76
Chronology

the Secretary of the Department of Health, Education
and Welfare (DHEW, now the Department of Health
and Human Services [DHHS]) to make every effort to
provide to counties without physicians at least one
National Health Service Corps physician.
The National Cancer Act is signed into law.
1972
Social Security Amendments of 1972 to the Social Se-
curity Act of 1935 and the Medicare and Medicaid
Amendments of 1965. These amendments make sig-
niﬁcant changes in the Medicare program to try to
control growing costs. One of the ways to control
costs is through the establishment of Professional
Standards Review Organizations (PSROs) that are to
monitor both the quality of services provided to
Medicare beneﬁciaries as well as the medical neces-
sity for the services. Payment for capital expenditures
that have been disapproved by state or local planning
agencies is limited. The act also authorizes a program
of grants and contracts to conduct experiments to
achieve increased efficiency and economy in the pro-
vision of health services and also increases access to
services for certain groups of people (which raises the
costs of the program). For the ﬁrst time, people who
are eligible for cash beneﬁts under the disability pro-
vision of the Social Security Act for at least twenty-
four months are made eligible for medical beneﬁts
under the program. Also, persons insured under So-
cial Security and their dependents who require he-
modialysis or renal transplantation are deﬁned as dis-
abled for the purpose of having them covered under
the Medicare program for the costs of treating their
end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
1973
The Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973
(an amendment to the Public Health Service Act)
and amendments in 1976, 1978, and 1981 are aimed
at encouraging the development of health mainte-
nance organizations (HMOs). The act specifies the
basic medical services that an HMO has to provide
to be eligible for federal funding, including specified
Chronology
77

requirements for fiscal responsibility for broad pop-
ulation enrollment and a policy-making board. As a
way to encourage enrollment in HMOs, it is man-
dated that every employer of twenty-five or more
persons offer an HMO option. Later amendments
mitigate the stringency of the original requirements
for HMO service provision to be eligible for federal
funding.
1974
The National Health Planning and Resources Devel-
opment Act of 1974 (an amendment to the Public
Health Service Act PL-93-641) adds two new titles,
XV and XVI, to the Public Health Service Act and
substantially replaces the programs established
under Sections 314a and 314b of the Comprehensive
Health Planning and Public Health Service Amend-
ments of 1966, as well as some of the provisions of
the U.S. National Health Policy Hospital Survey and
Construction Act of 1946 (the Hill-Burton Act), by
creating a system of local and state planning agencies
supported through federal funds. This includes the
designation of State Health Planning and Develop-
ment Agencies (SHPDAs) and State Health Coordi-
nating Councils (SHCCs), along with creating a net-
work of local Health Systems Agencies (HSAs) to
improve the health of area residents. The HSAs are
also supposed to increase accessibility, acceptability,
continuity, and quality of health services and to play
a role in the restraining of health cost increases by
preventing duplication of healthcare services and fa-
cilities. As part of the control over too much duplica-
tion of services, the law permits the states to establish
certiﬁcate-of-need (CON) programs to conduct re-
views and make recommendations about new
healthcare facilities and services. States can also reg-
ulate funds for new capital expenditures and for ren-
ovations for health institutions, and provide assis-
tance for modernization or construction of inpatient
and outpatient facilities. Although this is a major
piece of legislation that for over a decade creates a
system of local- and state-based planning in terms of
healthcare facilities, it is repealed by Congress in
78
Chronology
1973
(cont.)

1986, leaving the responsibility for CON programs
entirely in the hands of states.
1976
The Medical Devices Amendment of 1976 (an amend-
ment to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of
1948) strengthens the regulation of medical devices
partially as a reaction to concerns over the Dalkon
Shield intrauterine device.
1977
The Health Care Financing Administration is created
to manage Medicare and Medicaid separately from
the Social Security Administration.
The Health Maintenance Organization Amendments
of 1977 (amending the 1973 Health Maintenance Or-
ganization Act) ease the requirements that have to be
met for a Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) to
be federally qualiﬁed and require that an HMO has to
be federally qualiﬁed to receive Medicare and Medic-
aid funds.
The Indian Health Care Improvement Act of 1977
deals with ﬁlling gaps in the delivery of healthcare
services to Native Americans, mostly through the In-
dian Health Service (IHS).
The Rural Health Care Services Amendments of 1977
(amendments to the Medicare and Medicaid legisla-
tion of 1965) modify the categories of practitioners
that can provide services under these programs.
Rural health clinics that do not routinely have physi-
cians on site can be reimbursed for services provided
by nurse practitioners if they meet certain require-
ments. The amendments also authorize demonstra-
tion projects with these practitioners for underserved
urban areas.
The Medicare and Medicaid Antifraud and Abuse
Amendments of 1977 (amendments to the Medicare
and Medicaid legislation of 1965) are passed as part
of an effort to try to reduce fraud and abuse in the
programs as a means to help contain costs. The
Chronology
79

amendments strengthen criminal and civil penalties
for fraud and abuse, modify the operation of Profes-
sional Standards Review Organizations (PSROs), and
require uniform reporting systems and formats for
hospitals and certain other healthcare organizations
participating in Medicare and Medicaid.
1980
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of
1980 begins a new trend of omnibus legislation cover-
ing many aspects of health and other policy areas
being passed as part of the budget reconciliation
process. The act is contained as part of Title IX of the
Medicare and Medicaid Amendments of 1980. This
act makes extensive modiﬁcations in the Medicare
and Medicaid program aimed at dealing with the
growing costs of the programs. For Medicare, exam-
ples of some of the changes include the removal of the
100-visits-per-year limitation on home health ser-
vices, the requirement of a deductible for home care
visits under part B, the granting of permission to
small rural hospitals to use swing beds (which alter-
nate between acute or long-term care beds as the need
occurs), and the authorizing of demonstration pro-
grams of swing beds in large urban hospitals. The
most important change for Medicaid is requiring the
program to pay for the services that the states have
authorized nurse-midwives to perform.
1981
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1981
(in Title XXI, Subtitles A, B, and C as further amend-
ments to the Medicare and Medicaid programs). This
legislation also includes extensive changes to the
Medicare and Medicaid programs with forty-six sec-
tions, including eliminating the coverage of alcohol
detoxiﬁcation facilities, removing occupational ther-
apy as a basis for entitlement for home health ser-
vices, and increasing the part B deductible. In addi-
tion, the amendments replace twenty categorical
programs in areas of prevention, alcohol and drug
abuse, mental health, primary care, and some areas of
maternal and child health with block grants in four of
the major areas listed above. In addition, the legisla-
80
Chronology
1977
(cont.)

tion reduces funds by 25 percent in the process of re-
placing categorical programs with block grants. In the
preventive-programs area, the act consolidates sepa-
rate programs such as rodent control, ﬂuoridation,
hypertension control, and rape crisis centers into one
block grant distributed among the states by a formula
based on population and other factors. In the mental
health area, the act combines the existing programs
under the Community Mental Health Centers Act, the
Mental Health Systems Act, the Comprehensive Alco-
hol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment,
and Rehabilitation Act, and the Drug Abuse and Pre-
vention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act. For legis-
lation relating to primary care, the block grant re-
places the Community Health Centers, and in the
Maternal and Child Health block grant consolidates
seven categorical programs from Title V of the Social
Security Act and the Public Health Service Act, in-
cluding maternal health and crippled children’s pro-
grams, Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), ge-
netic disease services, hemophilia treatment, Social
Security Insurance (SSI) payments to disabled chil-
dren, and lead-based poisoning programs.
Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndrome (AIDS) is
identiﬁed. In 1984, the human immunodeﬁciency
virus (HIV) is identiﬁed by the Public Health Service
and French scientists. In 1985, a blood test to detect
HIV is licensed.
1982
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA)
of 1982 makes important changes in the Medicare and
Medicaid programs and in some other health-related
programs. It replaces Professional Standards Review
Organizations (PSROs) that had been established by
the Social Security Amendments of 1972 and elimi-
nates requirements for local Health Systems Agencies
(HSAs), cuts their funding, and increases gubernator-
ial discretion concerning their future role. The act also
replaces PSROs with Professional Review Organiza-
tions (PROs) and makes their use in hospitals optional
for patients covered under government programs. The
Chronology
81

act makes some changes in reimbursement and
methodology for both Medicare and Medicaid. For
Medicare, the act makes extensive changes in reim-
bursement methodologies for hospital-related services
under Medicare and begins a shift to case mix (diag-
nosis-related groups [DRGs]) for reimbursements for
most acute-care hospitals. In addition, the act elimi-
nates nursing salary cost differentials and private-
room subsidies, eliminates the lesser-of-cost-or-charge
provision, and makes reimbursement changes for
health maintenance organizations (HMOs). For Med-
icaid, the act tightens regulations on acceptable error
rates and overpayments, and makes a number of
changes in payment methodology. It also adds cover-
age for hospice services to Medicare beneﬁts and re-
duces Medicaid funding for states, but allows a partial
gain back for improved program administration, in-
cluding fraud detection and error-rate reduction.
Changes in manpower and personnel policy also
occur through this act, which eliminates capitation
payments for nursing and medical schools and re-
duces capitation payments for selected other health
professional schools and also greatly reduces funding
for new entrants into the National Health Service
Corps.
1983
The Social Security Amendments of 1983 include a
major landmark in the Medicare program. This legis-
lation amends the basic rules of the Medicare pro-
gram to be a prospective payment system for hospital
care by basing payments to hospitals on predeter-
mined rates per discharge for diagnosis-related
groups (DRGs) as contrasted to the earlier cost-based
system of reimbursement that had been used since
the initial passage of the Medicare program. In addi-
tion, the act authorizes a study of physician-payment
reform options.
1984
The Deﬁcit Reduction Act (DEFRA) of 1984 temporar-
ily freezes increases in physician payment under
Medicare and places a speciﬁc limit on the rate of in-
crease in the diagnosis-related group (DRG) payment
82
Chronology
1982
(cont.)

rates in the following two years. It also establishes the
Medicare Participating Physician and Supplier Pro-
gram (PAR) that creates two classes of physicians in
regard to their relationships to the Medicare program
and outlines different reimbursement approaches for
them depending upon whether one was classiﬁed as
“participating” or “nonparticipating.” Additionally,
the act mandates that the Office of Technology As-
sessment study alternative means of paying for
physicians’ services to guide reform of Medicare.
The National Organ Transplant Act is signed into law.
1985
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1985 (COBRA 1985) especially impacts the
Medicare program by an adjustment in the dispropor-
tionate share payments made to hospitals that serve
many poor patients. In addition, hospice care is made
a permanent part of Medicare and made available to
states also for Medicaid. The act freezes Medicare
Prospective Payment System (PPS) payment rates for
part of a year and provides modiﬁed hospital indirect
rates for medical education. The act also establishes
the Physician Payment Review Commission (PPRC)
to aid Congress on physician-payment policies and
requires that employers continue health insurance for
employees and their dependents who would other-
wise lose their eligibility due to reduced hours or ter-
mination of employment.
1986
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986
(OBRA 1986) alters the Prospective Payment System
(PPS) payment rate for hospitals, reduces payment
amounts for capital-related costs, and establishes fur-
ther limits to balance billing by physicians by setting
maximum-allowable charges for physicians who do
not participate in the Participating Physician and
Supplier Program (PAR).
The Omnibus Health Act of 1986 liberalizes coverage
under the Medicaid program by using federal income
up to the federal poverty line as a criterion. (The
Chronology
83

change allows states to offer all pregnant women and
infants up to one year of coverage with a phase-in
schedule up to ﬁve years of age.) The act also includes
the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act that estab-
lishes a federal vaccine-injury compensation program
system. Another portion, the Health Care Quality Im-
provement Act, provides immunity from private
damage lawsuits under federal or state law for a pro-
fessional review action that follows standards set out
in the legislation.
1987
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987
(OBRA 1987) alters a number of aspects of both
Medicare and Medicaid. For Medicare, the major
changes are that the wage index used to calculate hos-
pital payments is updated and capital-related costs
are reduced by 12 percent for ﬁscal year 1988 and 15
percent for ﬁscal year 1989. For physician payment,
fees for twelve overvalued procedures are reduced
and higher fee increases are allowed for primary care
than for specialized physician services. For Medicaid,
states are required to cover eligible children up to age
six with an option for up to age eight. In addition, the
distinction between skilled nursing facilities and in-
termediate-care facilities is eliminated, and a number
of provisions designed to enhance the quality of care
in nursing homes are included.
1988
The National Organ Transplant Amendments of 1988
amend the National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 to
extend the prohibition against the sale of human or-
gans to the organs and body parts of human fetuses.
The Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act (an amend-
ment to the Medicare Act of 1965) provides the largest
expansion of beneﬁts since the creation of the pro-
gram, including some added coverage for outpatient
drugs and respite care. The act places a cap on out-of-
pocket spending for copayment costs and covered
services. The funding for the program is to come from
increased premiums to all Medicare enrollees and an
income-related supplemental premium. Once the act
84
Chronology
1986
(cont.)

is passed and the elderly realize that many of the ad-
ditional costs will impact the elderly the most, some
groups of the elderly become upset. Because many el-
derly (especially the more affluent) already have
some of these services, and because they realize that
long-term care services are not going to be covered,
there is dissension about the act, and it is repealed be-
fore provisions go into effect.
The McKinney Act is signed into law, providing
healthcare to the homeless.
1989
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989
(OBRA 1989) includes provisions for minor, predomi-
nantly technical changes in the Prospective Payment
System (PPS). These include some coverage for men-
tal health beneﬁts and Pap smears and small adjust-
ments in disproportionate-share rules. The major
change is to begin the implementation of a resource-
based relative value scale (RBRVS) for physician pay-
ment, phased in over a four-year period starting in
1992. Also, a new agency, the Agency for Health Care
Policy and Research (AHCPR), is created to replace
the National Center for Health Services Research and
Technology Assessment (NCHSR). The focus of the
new agency is to conduct and foster the conducting of
studies of healthcare quality, effectiveness, and effi-
ciency, including those conducted on outcomes of
medical care treatment.
1990
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990
provides a broad range of protections for the dis-
abled, and thus combines former protections from the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, and the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1988.
The ADA legislation helps the disabled toward a goal
of independence and self-support, and gives them
greater rights in a variety of settings, such as schools
and workplaces.
The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources
Emergency Act of 1990 (an amendment to the Public
Chronology
85

Health Service Act of 1944) sets up special programs
to distribute funds related to AIDS through grants.
The act also creates mechanisms to involve the public
in the process and creates mechanisms for planning
and evaluation of the process.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990
(OBRA 1990) includes the Patient Self-Determination
Act, a variety of minor changes in the Prospective
Payment System (PPS), and other technical adjust-
ments to payments for Medicare. The Patient Self-De-
termination Act requires healthcare institutions that
participate in Medicare and Medicaid to provide all
patients with written information on policies regard-
ing self-determination and living wills, and to inquire
whether patients have advance medical directives.
The act also makes further adjustments in the PPS
wage-index calculation and the capital-related pay-
ment reduction. As part of deﬁcit reduction, the act
includes a ﬁve-year deﬁcit-reduction plan to reduce
Medicare outlays by over $43 billion between ﬁscal
years 1991 and 1995. Another important change is to
require that all Medigap policies sold after July 1992
conform to one of ten standardized packages so that
consumers can more easily compare coverage and
costs from one insurance company to another.
The Human Genome Project is established.
1993
The National Institutes of Health Revitalization Act of
1993 provides for some structural and budgetary
changes in the operation of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH). This act includes guidelines for the
conduct of research on transplantation of human fetal
tissue and adds HIV infection to the list of excludable
conditions covered by the Immigration and National-
ity Act.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993
(OBRA 1993) puts into place a record ﬁve-year cut in
Medicare funding and includes other changes in
Medicare such as a provision to end return-on-equity
86
Chronology
1990
(cont.)

(ROE) payments for capital to proprietary skilled
nursing facilities (SNFs). The act reduces the rate of
increase of inpatient rates for care provided in hos-
pices, cuts laboratory fees, and freezes payments for
durable medical equipment, parenteral and enteral
services, and orthotics and prosthetics.
The Childhood Immunization Act supports the provi-
sion of vaccines for children eligible for Medicaid,
children without health insurance, and Native Ameri-
can children.
1994
The Social Security Act Amendments of 1994 make a
number of technical and other changes in the
Medicare program. These include a modiﬁed Mater-
nal and Child Health block-grant program and modi-
ﬁed income security, human resources, and related
programs for Medicare. The amendments also adjust
standardized amounts for wages and wage-related
costs. The amendments also provide more coverage
for psychologists, reﬁne the geographic-cost-of-prac-
tice index for physician payment, limit extra billing of
physicians, and require the creation of complete rela-
tive values for pediatric services as had been done
earlier for other types of services. The amendments
also modify durable medical equipment rules and set
in place mammography certiﬁcation requirements.
The legislation also places an annual cap on Medicare
payment for outpatient physical therapy and occupa-
tional therapy services and provides speech-language
pathology and audiology services. In the maternal
and child welfare area, the legislation increases the
authorization and places more emphasis on protec-
tions for foster children, child welfare traineeships,
and payments of state claims for foster care and adop-
tion assistance. This act adds new enforcement proce-
dures in child support programs along with other
changes linked more closely to welfare than to med-
ical services.
The Veterans Health Programs Extension Act of 1994
adds the treatment of sexual trauma and repeals the
Chronology
87

limitation on time to seek services for this issue. The
act increases research relating to women veterans and
increases authority to provide priority healthcare for
veterans exposed to toxic substances.
Scientists supported by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) discover the genes responsible for
many cases of hereditary colon cancer, inherited
breast cancer, and the most common type of kidney
cancer.
1995
The Social Security Administration becomes an inde-
pendent agency on March 31.
1996
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996 (also known as the Kennedy-Kassebaum
Act) improves portability and continuity of health in-
surance coverage in group and individual markets
when an individual loses a job. The act also promotes
the use of medical savings accounts, improves access
to long-term care services and coverage, and provides
for changes in membership and duties of the national
committee on vital and health statistics.
The Health Centers Consolidation Act of 1996 (an
amendment to the Public Health Service Act of 1944
and its amendments) consolidates and more clearly
deﬁnes health centers, primary care services, and
medically underserved areas. Included as part of this
legislation is the planning of grants and managed
care loan guarantees. There are some special provi-
sions for services to the homeless.
The Indian Health Care Improvement Technical Cor-
rections Act of 1996 (amendment to the Indian Health
Care Improvement Act of 1977) extends demonstra-
tion programs for direct billing of Medicare, Medic-
aid, and other third-party payers.
The Veterans Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of
1996 amends previous veterans’ healthcare legislation
88
Chronology
1994
(cont.)

so as to reform eligibility for healthcare provided by
the Department of Veterans Affairs. The act also
makes changes related to the provision of care as to
the extent and amount provided in advance by autho-
rization legislation, and, as part of this, outpatient
care priorities separate from inpatient care priorities
are deleted. Some major facility-construction projects
for the department are allowed, as are improved ad-
ministration of healthcare by the department. More
care is provided for women veterans, including read-
justment counseling and mental health care. Special
studies on hospice care begin, along with special pay
arrangements for physicians and dentists who enter
residency training. There is also a provision for evalu-
ation of the health status of spouses and children of
Persian war veterans.
The Ryan White Care Act Amendments of 1996
(amendments to the Ryan White Comprehensive
AIDS Resources Emergency Act of 1990) set new deﬁ-
nitions of eligible areas and eligible population num-
bers, and make modiﬁcations in membership of the
councils to aid in distribution of funds. Grievance
procedures are modiﬁed for grant distribution, and
some aspects of grant application and planning and
evaluation are modiﬁed.
Welfare reform is enacted under the Personal Respon-
sibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act.
This act modiﬁes welfare and changes programs such
as the Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) program to the Temporary Assistance to
Needy Families (TANF) program. This legislation
provides for limits on how long someone can remain
on welfare and adds work requirements.
1997
The State Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP) is established. This is passed as an addition to
the Medicaid program, and states have to pass en-
abling legislation to participate. States can set this up
as a part of Medicaid or as a separate program.
Chronology
89

1998
The Initiative to Eliminate Racial and Ethnic Dispari-
ties in Health is launched. This Clinton initiative com-
mits the nation to the goal of eliminating disparities
in various areas of health status by racial and ethnic
minority status by 2010.
1999
The Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improve-
ment Act of 1999 is signed, making it possible for mil-
lions of Americans with disabilities to join the work-
force without fear of losing their Medicaid and
Medicare coverage. It also modernizes the employ-
ment services system for people with disabilities.
Initiative on combating bioterrorism is launched.
2000
Human genome sequencing is published.
2001
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is
created, replacing the Health Care Financing Admin-
istration. Although this is mostly an administrative
change, it does focus attention more clearly on how
the Medicare program and how the federal aspects of
the Medicaid program work.
90
Chronology

4
People and Events
George W. Bush (July 6, 1946–)
George W. Bush is the forty-third president of the United States,
having taken office on January 20, 2001, after the controversial
election in 2000. Bush’s healthcare agenda (http://www.
whitehouse.gov/infocus/medicare/health-care/) is based upon
patient choice within the current system. His proposal involves
changes in current programs rather than a major reformulation of
the system, as he does not support a single-payer, national
healthcare system. Many critics do not feel that his proposals ad-
equately address the crisis caused by rapidly rising healthcare
costs.
Hillary Rodham Clinton (October 26, 1947–)
Hillary Rodham Clinton is the wife of Bill Clinton, the forty-sec-
ond president of the United States. With a law degree from Yale,
she was the ﬁrst ﬁrst lady to have her own career at the time her
husband was elected as president. She served as a key policy ad-
visor to her husband and led the failed effort in 1993 and 1994 to
pass comprehensive reform of the U.S. healthcare system. This
failure was largely the result of both Clintons’ lack of experience
in national politics. Much of the development of the plan was
done without signiﬁcant input from the key congressional lead-
ers. Although there was a process of input that included industry
leaders, health policy analysts, and government officials, this
group was not able to reach a consensus about a proposal quickly
enough to ensure the emergence of a strong-enough coalition to
lead to its passage. For the rest of her husband’s presidency, she
91

adopted a somewhat lower proﬁle, although her interests in poli-
tics remained strong. This was most clearly demonstrated by her
decision to seek her ﬁrst elective office by running for the U.S.
Senate seat in New York. She succeeded in this effort and was
elected to the U.S. Senate from New York in 2000.
William (Bill) Jefferson Clinton 
(August 19, 1946–)
William (Bill) Jefferson Clinton was the forty-second president of
the United States, serving from 1993 to 2001. He was the ﬁrst
Democrat since Franklin Roosevelt to be elected to a second term.
A major campaign promise in his ﬁrst campaign in 1993 was to
enact a major reform in the U.S. healthcare system that would en-
sure access to all while controlling costs. He appointed his wife,
Hillary, to lead the effort to develop and enact a national health-
care proposal. This effort at developing a national healthcare sys-
tem was unsuccessful (see the “Hillary Rodham Clinton” entry in
this chapter). After this failure in 1994 and the subsequent loss of
control of the House of Representatives to the Republican Party,
Clinton declared the era of big government over and, instead, fo-
cused on incremental change in government programs including
health-related programs. The subsequent healthcare reform pro-
grams passed included the Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP). This program is focused upon provision of health insur-
ance to children of the working poor and near poor, and it repre-
sents the largest expansion of direct government programs to
provide health insurance coverage to Americans since the pas-
sage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965.
Wilbur J. Cohen (June 10, 1913–
May 17, 1987)
Wilbur J. Cohen had a long career in government services and in
education. After graduating from the University of Wisconsin in
1934, he took the job as research assistant to Executive Director
Witte of President Roosevelt’s cabinet-level Committee on Eco-
nomic Security. This committee drafted the original Social Secu-
rity Act, in which Cohen, only twenty-one years old, played a sig-
niﬁcant role. In 1935 he was a member of the Committee on Public
Administration of the Social Science Research Council and even-
92
People and Events

tually became director of the Bureau of Research and Statistics in
charge of program development and legislative-coordination
work with Congress. In 1960, President-elect John F. Kennedy
named Cohen to head up a Task Force on Health and Social Secu-
rity, which would make recommendations for improving national
programs in these areas. Shortly after taking office, President
Kennedy appointed Cohen assistant secretary (for legislation) of
Health, Education and Welfare; and, in 1968, President Johnson el-
evated him to director of the department. In these positions, he
played a critical role in the development of key health-related leg-
islation, including Medicare and Medicaid. After leaving govern-
ment service after Nixon’s election to the presidency, Cohen con-
tinued to be active in trying to inﬂuence and support Social
Security, eventually founding the Save Our Security coalition.
Ronald Dellums (November 24, 1935–)
Ronald Dellums served as a congressman from California from
1970 to 1998. Although his service in Congress had a strong focus
on military and foreign issues, he also introduced in 1977 the Na-
tional Health Service Act, a proposal that for two decades repre-
sented the most comprehensive and progressive healthcare pro-
posal before the Congress. It was the ﬁrst legislation introduced
to Congress that called for the creation of a national health ser-
vice. This proposal has helped to guide the debate on major
healthcare reform over the past few decades.
Marian Wright Edelman (June 6, 1939–)
Marian Wright Edelman is the founder and president of the Chil-
dren’s Defense Fund (CDF), a strong advocacy group for the rights
and welfare of children and families. As the issues of poverty, edu-
cation, and health (including access to healthcare) of America’s
children are strongly interrelated, Edelman and her advocacy
group have been leading efforts to increase the government’s ef-
forts to support the welfare of this country’s children. Her agency
was a major public advocate for the passage of the CHIP (Chil-
dren’s Health Insurance Program) legislation, which many have
viewed as the largest expansion of publicly funded healthcare
since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. This legisla-
tion has the potential of greatly reducing the number of uninsured
children in the United States, although issues of adequate state
People and Events
93

funding for the required state matching and enrollment of children
may partially limit the success of this effort. Another effort by the
CDF has been to modify and increase the comprehensiveness of
public-welfare legislation. With major modiﬁcations, this effort re-
cently culminated in the passage of the comprehensive child wel-
fare legislation known as the Leave No Child Behind program.
Alain C. Enthoven (September 10, 1930–)
Alain C. Enthoven is considered the creator of the concept of
“managed competition,” which has developed into the managed
care approach of healthcare that has come to dominate healthcare
in the 1990s and beyond. Enthoven started his public service as one
of Robert McNamara’s chief “Whiz Kids” in the 1960s, in the De-
fense Department. From 1973 on, he has held the Marriner S. Ec-
cles Professorship of Public and Private Management at Stanford
University. In 1977, he presented to the Carter administration his
“Consumer Choice Health Plan,” which he built on the concepts of
prepaid group practice plans developed in the 1930s and 1940s and
on the health maintenance organization (HMO) strategy pushed in
the early 1970s (Enthoven 1977). The plan was based on what he
called “regulated competition.” He then added to the concept “de-
sign proposals to deal with such issues as ﬁnancing, biased selec-
tion, market segmentation, information costs, and equity” (En-
thoven 1993). The key to his vision of managed care is competition,
with consumers having a choice among competing plans.
References and Further Reading
Enthoven, Alain C. 1977. Consumer Choice Health Plan: A National
Health Insurance Proposal. Memorandum to Health, Education, and
Welfare Secretary Joseph Califano. September 22.
———. 1993. The History and Principle of Managed Competition. Health
Affairs Supplement. (March) pp. 22–48.
White, Jane H. 1993. Cutting through the Confusion of Managed Compe-
tition. Health Progress (March). http://www.chausa.org/PUBS/PUBSART.
ASP?ISSUE=HP9303&ARTICLE=H (Accessed on 1 January 2004).
William H. Frist, M.D. (February 22, 1952–)
William H. Frist, M.D., was elected the U.S. Senate majority
leader in January of 2003 at the start of the 108th Congress, thus
replacing Trent Lott. Frist was the ﬁrst practicing physician
94
People and Events

elected to the Senate since 1928. After receiving his A.B. in health
policy from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and Interna-
tional Affairs at Princeton University, Frist obtained his M.D. at
Harvard Medical School. Before entering politics (that is, from
1986 to 1993), he headed the Vanderbilt University Medical Cen-
ter Multi-Organ Transplant Center, where he also performed
heart and lung transplants. In 1994, he was elected to the Senate,
representing Tennessee. One of his expectations as he became in-
volved in public service was that he would become a key player
in healthcare reform legislation, although there was not much
focus on healthcare reform in his ﬁrst eight years in the Senate.
He moved up rapidly in the Senate leadership, culminating in his
position as Senate majority leader in 2003. Given his background
of expertise in health as well as his new Senate leadership posi-
tion, he is expected to play an important role in helping to formu-
late Republican suggestions for healthcare reform during George
W. Bush’s presidency. For the 2003 year in the Senate, these
changes will likely include some examination of Medicare and
some suggestions on prescription-drug coverage for the elderly.
Newt Gingrich (January 17, 1943–)
Newt Gingrich served as the Speaker of the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives from 1995 to 1999 after having led the Republicans in
their effort to regain control of the House. He used the ﬁght
against the Clinton health reform initiative as a stepping stone to
lead the Republicans to that victory as he developed his Contract
with America in response to the “big government” approach of
the Clinton healthcare proposal. He took responsibility for the
Republican election setbacks in 1998 and resigned from the
House and from his role as Speaker of the House in early 1999.
Since then, he has been working as chief executive officer of The
Gingrich Group, a communications and management-consulting
ﬁrm, and has remained a strong and vocal proponent on national
policy issues, including healthcare.
Lister Hill (December 29, 1894–
December 21, 1984)
A congressman and senator from Alabama from 1922 to 1968, Lis-
ter Hill guided healthcare and medical-research legislation and
funding from after World War II to the early 1960s. In 1946, he
People and Events
95

sponsored the Hill-Burton Act, which introduced the concept of
communities obtaining matching federal funds to meet health-
care needs. Under this program 9,200 new hospitals, nursing
homes, clinics, and public health facilities were constructed
throughout the country. The communities were required to pro-
vide free indigent care as part of receiving these construction
funds. Although a key program that guided the development of
healthcare in this country for ﬁfteen years, the Hill-Burton legis-
lation was actually passed in order to head off President Tru-
man’s efforts to pass a national healthcare system. In the 1950s,
Hill dominated the federal government’s development of the Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH) into the world’s premier med-
ical-research center. He accomplished this through his dual roles
as chair of the Senate Health, Education and Welfare Committee;
its Health Subcommittee; and the Health, Education and Welfare
Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. Thus he
was able to guide both the enabling legislations and the appropri-
ations legislation that built the NIH into the world-premier’s re-
search center and enabler. During Eisenhower’s terms in office,
Hill routinely doubled the president’s funding recommendation
for the NIH’s budget.
Lyndon Baines Johnson (August 27, 1908–
January 22, 1973)
The thirty-sixth president of the United States was able to facili-
tate the enactment of major accomplishments in civil rights and
in social programs as part of his Great Society programs. Beyond
the health area, many major aspects of social legislation dealing
with education, welfare, and voting reform were passed. Within
health, the Johnson administration was responsible for the enact-
ment of the two major U.S. government programs that still form
the fundamental basis for the U.S. government’s role in the direct
provision of healthcare to Americans. Passage of Medicare legis-
lation provided health insurance all across the United States for
the retired segment of the population. The coverage was compa-
rable to that offered by many businesses at the time and was
available to all Social Security recipients, independent of the
amount of income and wealth they possessed. The Medicaid pro-
gram provided healthcare coverage to recipients of major welfare
programs through a joint federal-state program, and thus it was a
beneﬁt linked to a means-tested welfare system. This was part of
96
People and Events

an expansion of welfare-type beneﬁts that were known as the
Great Society initiative.
Edward M. Kennedy (February 22, 1932–)
Edward Kennedy is the youngest brother of John F. Kennedy
(thirty-ﬁfth president of the United States) and Robert F.
Kennedy (attorney general in JFK’s cabinet and presidential con-
tender when he was assassinated in 1968). Edward Kennedy was
elected to the U.S. Senate from Massachusetts in 1962 when JFK
resigned to run for the presidency. In 2003, he is serving in his
seventh term and is the third-most-senior senator in the Senate.
Throughout his time in the Senate, he has been a leading Demo-
crat on health-related issues. In the early 1970s, Kennedy intro-
duced legislation for the establishment of a national healthcare
system. The legislation was close to proposals President Nixon
was developing when his efforts were ended by the Watergate
crisis. In recent years, Kennedy was critical in the passage of the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,
which makes it easier for those who change their jobs or lose their
jobs to keep their health insurance, and the Children’s Health In-
surance Program of 1997 (CHIP), which makes health insurance
far more widely available to children through age eighteen in all
ﬁfty states. He is currently a leader in the Senate in the effort to
enact the patients’ bill of rights, which is designed to end the
abuses of health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and man-
aged care health plans and to provide greater protection for pa-
tients and physicians in dealing with insurance companies. He
also became a pivotal person in opposition to the Medicare pre-
scription reform bill, which was debated in Congress in Novem-
ber 2003. Although Kennedy had initially positioned himself as
being in favor of a bill to provide some type of prescription cov-
erage to the elderly through Medicare, by the time the Bush ad-
ministration proposal reached Congress, it included a provision
to test, in certain large urban areas, Medicare versus some private
companies as a way to deliver beneﬁts, and Kennedy led the un-
successful opposition to the legislation. His opposition was based
on the bill only providing limited coverage initially through a
card rather than a real prescription beneﬁt; the high costs with
extra funds to doctors and hospitals; the lack of cost-control pro-
visions for drugs; and the notion of the testing of Medicare,
which could be a ﬁrst step to the dissolution of the program.
People and Events
97

C. Everett Koop (October 14, 1916–)
C. Everett Koop, one of the most inﬂuential and controversial
surgeon generals, was appointed deputy assistant secretary for
Health for the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) in February 1981
and was sworn in as surgeon general on November 17, 1981. Ad-
ditionally, he was appointed director of the Office of International
Health in May 1982. He served in these positions until his resig-
nation in 1989. After graduating from Cornell Medical School in
1941, Koop spent most of his career before joining the PHS at the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. He started there
as an intern, then stayed as a graduate student, and then as a fac-
ulty member. After promotions up the academic ladder, he was
named professor of Pediatric Surgery at the University of Penn-
sylvania School of Medicine in 1959 and professor of pediatrics in
1971. During this time he also practiced, quickly becoming an in-
ternationally respected pediatric surgeon and becoming surgeon-
in-chief of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia in 1948 and
serving in that capacity until he left the academic world in 1981.
As surgeon general, Dr. Koop was outspoken on health matters
such as smoking and health, diet and nutrition, environmental
health hazards, and the importance of immunization and disease
prevention. He was also the government’s leading spokesman
about the then-emerging AIDS epidemic. Even though he was
known before his government service as a conservative, he
strongly advocated, from a public health viewpoint, the impor-
tance of sex education in schools.
Philip R. Lee (April 17, 1924–)
Philip R. Lee is senior advisor to the School of Medicine regard-
ing the development of the social, behavioral, and policy sciences
at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF). From July
1993 through January 1997, he served as assistant secretary for
health in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS), a post he also held under President Lyndon B. Johnson.
In both of these administrations, he was a key advisor for health
policy. Before going to Washington, D.C., in 1993, Dr. Lee served
as director of the Institute for Health Policy Studies, which he
founded at UCSF in 1972 with Lewis H. Butler, L.L.B., and from
1969 to 1972 he was chancellor of UCSF. Dr. Lee has frequently
been an advisor to federal, state, and local health policy makers,
98
People and Events

and has served on numerous advisory boards and in planning
groups. Dr. Lee’s research and teaching endeavors in the ﬁeld of
health policy have focused on physician payment, prescription
drugs, reproductive-health policy, and AIDS-related issues. Cur-
rently, he also is doing research on population health, public
health, and medical care, particularly the role of multispecialty
group practice.
Ira Magaziner (November 8, 1947–)
Ira Magaziner was a key policy advisor and friend to President
Clinton. Their association went back twenty-ﬁve years to their
years together as Rhodes scholars at Oxford University. Along
with Hillary Clinton, Magaziner cochaired President Clinton’s
failed healthcare reform initiative in 1993 and 1994. He subse-
quently became a key advisor to Clinton on Internet and tech-
nology policy. Prior to his White House appointment, Mr. Maga-
ziner earned respect as one of America’s most successful
corporate strategists, building two successful consulting ﬁrms
with a focus on corporate strategy and directing policy analysis
for major corporations.
Richard Nixon (January 9, 1913–
April 22, 1994)
The thirty-seventh president of the United States is most remem-
bered for his China initiative and his fall from power because of
the Watergate scandal. Less well known is the fact that the top
priority of his second administration was to be the passage and
implementation of a single-payer, national healthcare system. In
his ﬁrst administration in the early 1970s, one of the major overall
economic problems was high inﬂation. To deal with this problem,
wage and price controls were instituted, including controls in the
healthcare sector. The period of price controls was one of the few
periods since 1965 when the growth in costs of healthcare did not
exceed the overall rate of inﬂation. These trends helped to sensi-
tize the major advisors to Nixon and Nixon himself to the impor-
tance of instituting some changes in the healthcare system. In
1973, Congress passed Nixon’s Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO) Act that was focused on increasing the numbers of pre-
paid group practice plans, which then became renamed as
HMOs. After the 1974 election, preliminary discussions with the
People and Events
99

Democrats in Congress led to some agreement about the useful-
ness of considering major reform along the lines of a single-payer,
national healthcare system. Many health policy analysts believe
that the positions of the two major political parties, the Demo-
crats and the Republicans, were as close to agreement on major
reform as they had ever been. However, this growing consensus
for reform and change in the healthcare system was shattered by
the political crisis of Watergate, which led to impeachment hear-
ings. This made health reform another victim of the Watergate
break-in.
Ron Pollack (February 21, 1944–)
Ron Pollack is an attorney and activist on public-policy issues.
He has been the director of Families USA, an advocacy group
representing families. Although families are an important focus
of this advocacy group, it has also had a focus on health issues
since its inception as the Villers Foundation in 1982. During 1997
and 1998, Pollack was appointed to serve on the Presidential Ad-
visory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the
Health Care Industry. He was the sole consumer-organization
representative on that body. He worked on the preparation of
the patients’ bill of rights, legislation to help improve the ability
of patients to have options and to be able to register formal com-
plaints against healthcare insurance companies, healthcare man-
agement companies, and other healthcare providers. This legis-
lation has been passed in many states and is pending in the U.S.
Congress. His organization was one of the groups that pushed
for the passage of the Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP) as a step forward in health insurance coverage for fami-
lies through the provision of health insurance coverage to chil-
dren of the near poor and working poor. He was also the
founder and chair of the Health Assistance Partnership, an entity
that works with healthcare ombudsman programs across the
country to help consumers navigate the increasingly complex
U.S. healthcare system.
Ronald Reagan (February 6, 1911–)
Ronald Reagan was the fortieth president of the United States,
serving from 1981 to 1989. The Reagan presidency began the shift
from the activist government that had dominated federal policy
100
People and Events

from Franklin D. Roosevelt until Reagan’s presidency. The Rea-
gan Revolution was focused on reducing the government’s im-
pact on individuals and reducing their dependence on the gov-
ernment. As an actor from the late 1930s until the early 1960s,
Reagan became politically active as a member of the Screen Ac-
tors Guild, eventually becoming its president. In this role he
shifted his political views from liberal to conservative. In 1966 he
was elected to the ﬁrst of his two terms as governor of California.
While conservative and in favor of less federal regulation for
health issues in general, a major regulatory-oriented reform, di-
agnosis-related groups (DRGs), was enacted during Reagan’s
presidency as a cost-containment measure.
Franklin D. Roosevelt (January 30, 1882–
April 12, 1945)
Franklin D. Roosevelt was the thirty-second president of the
United States, serving from 1933 until his death in 1945. He is the
only president to serve for more than two terms. Roosevelt be-
came president in the depths of the Great Depression. To deal
with the unprecedented economic conditions, including massive
unemployment, Roosevelt introduced the New Deal, a series of
government programs intended to stimulate the economy, create
jobs, and help provide relief for various groups of the poor, in-
cluding unemployed young men, families with unemployed
breadwinners, and portions of the elderly. Among the programs
introduced, Social Security, which provides basic levels of income
support to the elderly, has had the most lasting effect. Although
in some of the early discussions, Social Security was going to in-
clude a health program (with some similarities to what was even-
tually passed as the Medicare program in 1965 under President
Johnson), as introduced to the Congress, the Social Security legis-
lation did not include a health component. This was left out due
to concerns that a health portion would lead to organized opposi-
tion to the Social Security legislation from groups such as the
American Medical Association (AMA). Although his programs
had some limited success economically, the U.S. economy did not
totally recover until the outbreak of World War II in 1939. Al-
though Roosevelt did not introduce any programs relating to
healthcare due to his concerns about alienating the AMA (which
opposed such programs), he greatly expanded the role of the fed-
eral government in social-welfare issues, setting the stage for the
People and Events
101

major expansions of the government role into health with the
passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965.
Theodore Roosevelt (October 27, 1858–
January 16, 1919)
Theodore Roosevelt was the twenty-sixth president of the United
States, serving from 1901 to 1909. In 1912, he was the candidate
for president on the Progressive Party ticket. He ran on a plat-
form of social reform. His Progressive Party (a creation of Roo-
sevelt’s that was more popularly known as the Bull Moose Party)
included a health insurance plank in its campaign platform. This
was the ﬁrst inclusion of a health insurance plank in any national
platform with a major candidate, although the Socialist Party had
endorsed a compulsory system as early as 1904. Many of his
ideas about health insurance reform came from the American As-
sociation of Labor Legislation (AALL), founded in 1906. This
group spearheaded drives for workers’ compensation (ultimately
successful) and for a government-sponsored health insurance
system for the general population (unsuccessful, as was Roo-
sevelt’s candidacy in 1912).
Tommy G. Thompson (November 19, 1941–)
Tommy G. Thompson is the current (2003) secretary of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). As such, he
is the leading spokesperson for a variety of health- and welfare-
related issues in President George W. Bush’s administration.
Thompson has spent most of his career in public service in Wis-
consin, serving as its governor from 1987 to 2001. During that
time, he was part of major welfare reforms within the state of Wis-
consin that included a push toward requiring welfare recipients to
work. Some of these ideas were part of the change in welfare pol-
icy in the United States in 1996 that led to the passage of TANF
(Temporary Assistance to Needy Families) to replace programs
such as AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children). In
1996, while governor of Wisconsin, Thompson pushed for the en-
actment of Wisconsin Works, or “W-2,” the state’s landmark wel-
fare-to-work legislation, which served as a national model for
welfare reform. The program required participants to work, while
at the same time providing the services and support to make the
transition to work feasible and permanent. W-2 provided a safety
102
People and Events

net through child care, healthcare, transportation, and training as-
sistance. Wisconsin’s monthly welfare caseload declined by more
than 90 percent, while the economic status of those taking part in
W-2 improved. The average family on AFDC had been living at 30
percent below the federal poverty line. However, at the average
wage of people leaving W-2, families were 30 percent above the
poverty line. After this program was under way, Thompson
pushed the state to provide health insurance to many low-income
children and families. As of November 2000, the BadgerCare pro-
gram—Wisconsin’s Medicaid/State Children’s Health Insurance
Program for uninsured families—had enrolled more than 77,000
individuals. In addition, Wisconsin’s Pathways to Independence
was the nation’s ﬁrst program to allow the disabled to enter the
workforce without the fear of losing health beneﬁts. The program
provides ready access to a coordinated system of services and
beneﬁts counseling. As governor, Thompson also created Family-
Care, designed to help elderly and disabled citizens, allowing
them to receive care in their homes for as long as possible. Thomp-
son’s participation in leading reform in an innovative state in
areas of welfare and health reform provides important experience
and expertise within the Bush administration.
Harris Wofford (April 9, 1926–)
Harris Wofford was elected to the U.S. Senate from Pennsylvania
in a special election in November 1991. In his campaign, he
strongly called for reform of the U.S. healthcare system, and his
victory was widely seen as an indication of strong support for
such reform among the American electorate. His election and its
interpretation as a call for healthcare reform were a major impe-
tus for such reform, culminating in President Clinton’s failed at-
tempt, partially led by his wife, Hillary (currently the senator
from New York), to craft a national health plan in 1993 and 1994.
Wofford has a long history of public service, including playing a
key role in the founding of the Peace Corps in 1961. Wofford lost
his reelection effort for a full term in 1994, but was then ap-
pointed by President Clinton as the CEO of the Corporation for
National and Community Service, serving in that role from 1995
to 2001.
People and Events
103


5
Facts and Documents
M
uch of the data available in the healthcare area is govern-
ment data, much of which is collected at the federal level.
Although federal agencies have been involved in collection
of health-related data for decades, much of this data is more eas-
ily available now than ever before. Whereas in the past, govern-
ment-collected data were available in compiled form in certain li-
braries that were designated as government repository libraries,
most of the more common health-related data that a person
might want to consult today is available through a variety of dif-
ferent government-maintained Web sites. In addition to the gov-
ernment Web sites with their focus on data, there are numerous
health policy and organizational Web sites that also present data
but with more of a policy emphasis. Many of these sites are pre-
sented in this chapter and Chapter 6.
Although almost all federal agencies have their own Web
sites that display various types of government data, there is now
also a specialized Web site, http://www.fedstats.gov, that pro-
vides easy access to government information sorted by topics,
one of which is health, and by agencies that produce health-re-
lated statistics. In the ﬁrst part of this chapter, descriptions are
provided of some of the major data sets and types of data avail-
able at the national level, including some explanations of which
agencies are responsible for which data sets. For people inter-
ested in obtaining data on speciﬁc states, some of this is also
available through the federal government Web sites. In addition,
in some states, state agencies may also have more state or local
data available, but this chapter does not attempt to summarize or
review the information available through states or local govern-
ments. A good overview of health statistics and the problems in
105

ﬁnding and using them is presented in the University of
Chicago’s John Carter Library’s Health Statistics Research Guides,
located at http://www.lib.uchicago.edu/e/su/med/healthstat.
Federal Agencies and 
Health-Related Data Collections
Although there are many different federal agencies that may
have some information related to health, there are four that con-
tain the most information relevant to healthcare and healthcare
reform, and these agencies will be the ones discussed in this
chapter. They are the Agency for Health Care Policy and Re-
search (AHCPR), the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ),
and the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) at the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Of the four major federal agencies that collect health-related
data, the most important, with the most data, is the NCHS
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/), which is part of the CDC. This
agency is responsible for the collection, analysis, and dissemina-
tion of statistics on the nature and extent of the health, illness,
and disability of the U.S. population. This includes gathering in-
formation on the impact of illness and disability on the economy;
the effects of environmental, social, and other health hazards; the
use of healthcare services; health resources; family formation,
growth, and dissolution; and vital events (i.e., births and deaths
as well as marriages and divorces).
The CDC (http://www.cdc.gov/) provides data on mor-
bidity, infectious and chronic diseases, occupational diseases and
injuries, vaccine efficacy, and safety studies. Examples of the
more speciﬁc things on which data are gathered by this agency
include information on the common cold, inﬂuenza, asthma, dia-
betes, disabilities/impairments, health insurance coverage, heart
disease, home health/hospice care, hospital utilization, hyperten-
sion, child and infant health, mammography/breast cancer, and
men’s health. In certain of their reports, the NCHS aggregates
these data to provide information about the key national indica-
tors of well-being, the leading causes of death, and typical life-ex-
pectancy ﬁgures for various population groups, all the types of
data that are important in determining how well a country’s
106
Facts and Documents

healthcare system is functioning and whether there are important
groups within the country, based on geographical criteria or race
and ethnicity, that are not having as positive an experience in
their overall health and their healthcare.
The AHRQ (formerly AHCPR—Agency for Health Care
Policy and Research) (http://www.ahcpr.gov/) produces and
disseminates scientiﬁc and policy-relevant information about the
cost, quality, access, and medical effectiveness of healthcare. Al-
though some data are provided back to 1992, most of the data are
presented back to 1996. This agency does much of its work
through several special surveys that it conducts. The AHRQ is re-
sponsible for the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), a
detailed survey that is conducted once every ten years to produce
national estimates for a variety of measures related to health sta-
tus, health insurance coverage, healthcare use and expenditures,
and sources of payment for health services. The agency’s other
major data collection effort is the Healthcare Cost and Utilization
Project (HCUP), which collects information using an inpatient
sample about hospitalization trends. Through this agency, one
can get some instant access to hospital statistics. Special reports
are produced, such as a recent Fact Book No. 3: Care of Women in
U.S. Hospitals (2000). The agency also provides information on
quality indications, including information on prevention quality
indicators, inpatient quality indicators, and data at a state level
for the states that participate in HCUP. There is also information
available on state ambulatory-surgery statistics. Another special
effort is the Kids’ Inpatient Database (KID).
The CMS (http://cms.hhs.gov/) collects administrative
data associated with its oversight of the Medicare and Medicaid
programs, and also studies the quality of care delivered by those
programs. The Health Care Indicators program contains data and
analysis of recent trends in healthcare spending, employment,
and prices. The National Health Statistics Group tracks trends in
healthcare-related industries and presents this information quar-
terly. These data are valuable for understanding the relationship
between the healthcare sector and the overall economy. In addi-
tion, they allow the National Health Statistics Group to anticipate
the direction and magnitude of healthcare cost changes prior to
the availability of more comprehensive data. For the Medicare
program, detailed data on many aspects of Medicare enrollment
are available, including Medicare National Enrollment Trends for
1966–2001; Medicare State Enrollment: 2001, 2000, and 1999; state
Federal Agencies and Health-Related Data Collections
107

enrollment trends for certain years; and some information by
county. Data about the Medicaid program and the Children’s
Health Insurance Program (CHIP) program are also available,
but not always as easily or in as much detail as the Medicare data.
The HRSA (http://www.hrsa.gov/) collects data about
general health services, the health professions workforce, and re-
source issues relating to access, equity, quality, and cost of care,
and also maintains the Scientiﬁc Registry for organ transplants.
One of its major data efforts is the United States Health Workforce
Personnel Factbook. This fact book provides a compilation of data
from more than a dozen professional associations and govern-
ment agencies. From this fact book, a person can learn a great
deal about the healthcare workforce. The report covers the cur-
rent and historical supply of physicians, dentists, nurses, phar-
macists, optometrists, podiatrists, and allied health professionals.
The fact book also looks toward the future, detailing the number
of schools and ﬁrst-year enrollment patterns for most healthcare
disciplines. Trends in practice are depicted in tables that track the
number of hospitals, hospital-based personnel, and national
healthcare spending over time.
Some other federal agencies that make health-related data
available are the following:
•
The Indian Health Service (IHS) (http://www.ihs.
gov/) has some data, but it is more specialized. The
IHS, for example, collects social and economic statistics
on all American Indians and Alaska Natives, as well as
patient care and morbidity information for those who
use IHS services.
•
The NIH (National Institutes of Health) (http://www.
nih.gov/) supports the design and implementation of
epidemiological studies, clinical trials, biomedical
research, and laboratory investigations conducted by
the various institutes.
•
The Office of Environment, Safety, and Health (ESH)
(http://tis.eh.doe.gov/portal/home.htm) in the
Department of Energy conducts epidemiological
studies of the health effects of exposure to radiation
and other hazardous substances.
•
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) (http://www.samhsa.
gov/) provides information on health problems related
108
Facts and Documents

to the use and abuse of drugs and alcohol, substance-
abuse treatment, and the mental health condition of the
population, and administers and evaluates federal
block grants to the states. 
These agencies may obtain some federal data, but are not the
major sources in the way that the ﬁrst four agencies are.
Historical Health Data and 
Government Publications
The best sources for historical data are two government publica-
tions—The Statistical Abstract of the United States, published annu-
ally by the U.S. Census Bureau, and Health, United States, pub-
lished annually by the NCHS.
The Statistical Abstract of the United States (available at http://
www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-us.html) is the
national data book for the United States and contains a collection
of statistics on social and economic conditions in the United States.
One of its major sections is Section 3, Health and Nutrition. This
section presents tables with data by year, with some tables going
back as far as 1960 and with many going back as far as 1980. The
site provides online access to the abstracts back to 1995.
Health, United States (available at http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/hus.htm) is an annual report on national trends in health
statistics. Published annually it provides data in tables on eleven
topics relating to healthcare in the United States. The topics in the
2001 edition are:
•
population,
•
fertility and natality,
•
mortality,
•
determinants and measures of health,
•
ambulatory care,
•
inpatient care,
•
personnel,
•
facilities,
•
national health expenditures,
•
healthcare coverage and major federal programs, and
•
state health expenditures and health insurance.
Historical Health Data and Government Publications
109

Many of the tables go back twenty years or more. The an-
nual editions on the Web site are available back to 1975. The
next part of this chapter presents nine tables from these two
publication with a brief explanation of how to interpret the data
presented.
Use of Various Federal and Other Data
Federal data and data from other sources can be presented in a
variety of formats. The most common way for data to be dis-
played is in tables. Sometimes data are displayed in more visu-
ally oriented forms. Bar graphs and pie charts are two common
visually oriented ways to display data. A good example of pie
charts that clearly and easily present data are the two charts dis-
played in Figure 5.1. These charts, as their titles indicate, display
how the nation’s dollar was used for healthcare in 2001. The ﬁrst
pie chart shows where the money within the healthcare system
came from that year. The second pie chart displays how the na-
tion’s healthcare dollar was spent in 2001 and is labeled “Where
It Went.”
This chapter also includes nine different examples of data
tables from federal data sources. These tables are but a sampling
of the wealth of data presented in two key federal documents de-
scribed earlier in this chapter—The Statistical Abstract of the United
States and Health, United States. The tables presented below are
from the 2002 edition of The Statistical Abstract and the 2003 edi-
tion of the Health, United States publications. New editions are
published on the Web every year, so the Web site should make
the most current data available easily accessible.
Table 5.1 presents extensive data on national health expen-
ditures from 1960 to 2000 with projections through 2011. The title
presents the subject of the table—a summary of health expendi-
tures in the United States over time. Below the title is an explana-
tion of the scale of the table (each number represents billions of
dollars). As with complex tables, this table is made up of several
tables put together for comparative purposes. The ﬁrst and sec-
ond sections (Private Expenditures and Public Expenditures)
give the breakdown of expenditures by source of payment,
adding together to make up most of the Total Expenditures col-
umn. The third section gives the broad breakdown of most of
these expenditures by where they went. Several observations can
110
Facts and Documents

be made from this table. One is the absolute increase in expendi-
tures with an almost ﬁftyfold increase in the forty years from
1960 to 2000. The growing importance of private insurance is in-
dicated by its rapid growth relative to out-of-pocket expendi-
tures. Also of interest in the Health Services and Supplies part of
Use of Various Federal and Other Data
111
FIGURE 5.1
The Nation’s Health Dollar: 2001
Where It Came From
Medicaid and SCHIP 16%
Medicare 17%
Out-of-pocket 14%
Private Insurance 35%
Other Private  5%
Other Public  13%
a
b
Where It Went
Prescription Drugs 10%
Nursing Home Care 7%
Physician and 
Clinical Services 22%
Hospital Care 32%
Other Spending  23%
Program Administration and Net Cost 6%
c
a. “Other Public” includes programs such as workers’ compensation, public health activity, Department of Defense, 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Indian Health Service, and state and local hospital subsidies and school health.
b. “Other Private” includes industrial in-plant, privately funded construction, and non-patient revenues, including 
philanthropy.
c. “Other Spending” includes dental services, other professional services, home health care, durable medical products, 
over-the-counter medicines and sundries, public health activities, research, and construction.
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics Group.

TABLE 5.1
National Health Expenditures—Summary, 1960 to 2000, and Projections, 2001 to 2011
(In billions of dollars [27 represents $27,000,000,000]. Includes Puerto Rico and outlying areas.)
Year
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
Private Expenditures
Public Expenditures
Health Services and Supplies
Total
Expendituresa
Totalb
Out-of-
Pocket
Insurance
Total
Federal
State and
Local
Totalc
Hospital Care
Physician
and Clinical
Services
Prescription
Drugs
(continues)
Nursing
Home Care
27
29
31
34
38
41
45
51
58
65
73
81
91
101
114
130
149
20
21
23
25
28
31
32
32
36
40
45
50
56
61
67
75
87
13
13
14
15
17
18
19
19
21
23
25
26
29
32
35
37
41
6
7
7
8
9
10
10
11
12
13
16
18
21
23
26
30
37
7
7
8
9
9
10
14
19
22
24
28
31
35
39
46
55
62
3
3
4
4
4
5
7
12
14
16
18
20
23
25
30
36
43
4
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
14
16
19
20
25
27
29
31
34
37
41
47
53
59
67
75
84
93
106
121
139
9
10
11
12
13
14
16
18
21
24
28
31
34
39
45
52
60
5
6
6
7
8
8
9
10
11
12
14
16
17
19
22
25
28
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
8
9
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
4
5
6
6
7
9
10

TABLE 5.1
National Health Expenditures (continued)
Year
Private Expenditures
Public Expenditures
Health Services and Supplies
Total
Expendituresa
Totalb
Out-of-
Pocket
Insurance
Total
Federal
State and
Local
Totalc
Hospital Care
Physician
and Clinical
Services
Prescription
Drugs
(continues)
Nursing
Home Care
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
169
189
214
246
285
321
354
390
427
457
498
558
623
696
762
827
888
937
99
110
124
141
164
187
206
229
252
267
289
332
371
414
441
469
498
510
45
48
53
58
66
72
79
86
96
103
109
119
126
137
142
146
147
144
45
52
60
68
81
94
104
118
130
135
148
175
205
234
254
274
298
312
70
80
90
105
121
134
148
161
175
190
209
226
252
283
321
359
390
427
47
54
61
71
83
92
102
113
122
132
143
154
172
193
222
251
274
299
23
26
29
34
39
42
46
48
52
59
66
72
79
90
99
107
116
129
160
179
203
234
271
305
336
372
409
439
478
535
599
670
735
797
856
905
68
76
87
102
119
135
146
156
167
178
192
209
229
254
280
302
320
332
33
35
41
47
55
61
68
77
90
100
112
127
142
158
175
190
201
211
9
10
11
12
13
15
17
20
22
24
27
31
35
40
45
48
51
55
12
13
15
18
20
23
26
28
31
34
36
41
46
53
58
62
66
68

TABLE 5.1
National Health Expenditures (continued)
Year
Private Expenditures
Public Expenditures
Health Services and Supplies
Total
Expendituresa
Totalb
Out-of-
Pocket
Insurance
Total
Federal
State and
Local
Totalc
Hospital Care
Physician
and Clinical
Services
Prescription
Drugs
aIncludes medical research and medical facilities construction, not shown separately.
bIncludes other private expenditures, not shown separately.
cIncludes other objects of expenditure, not shown separately.
Source: U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “Health Accounts,” <http://cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/default.asp>.
Nursing
Home Care
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001 proj.
2002 proj.
2003 proj.
2004 proj.
2005 proj.
2006 proj.
2007 proj.
2008 proj.
2009 proj.
2010 proj.
2011 proj.
990
1,040
1,091
1,150
1,216
1,300
1,424
1,546
1,653
1,773
1,902
2,037
2,175
2,320
2,476
2,639
2,816
534
558
589
629
667
712
776
849
913
980
1,050
1,121
1,192
1,263
1,340
1,417
1,500
147
152
162
175
184
195
210
227
243
259
276
294
311
330
351
372
396
330
345
359
383
409
444
487
537
580
624
672
720
767
813
862
912
966
456
482
502
521
549
587
648
697
741
794
853
916
983
1,057
1,136
1,222
1,316
322
344
359
368
385
412
453
484
511
546
585
626
670
719
771
828
891
134
138
144
153
164
176
195
213
230
248
268
290
313
338
365
394
425
958
1,006
1,054
1,112
1,175
1,256
1,377
1,497
1,601
1,718
1,843
1,973
2,107
2,248
2,399
2,557
2,728
344
356
368
379
392
412
446
476
502
532
565
599
632
666
701
737
775
221
229
241
257
270
286
311
336
361
388
415
443
469
498
528
559
593
61
67
76
87
104
122
142
161
182
204
228
253
280
309
341
376
414
75
80
85
89
89
92
99
104
107
113
120
126
134
141
149
157
166

the table is the fact that the relative proportion of expenditures in
the four categories has not changed dramatically over the ﬁfty
years covered by the table. The notes at the bottom explain why
the totals are slightly off from the sum of the categories totaled.
The source of the data is also presented. These are examples of
what can be learned in using data to better understand the
healthcare system.
Table 5.2 also relates to national health expenditures, focus-
ing on the type of expenditure. This table, as indicated in the title,
provides more details from 1990 to 2000, and includes speciﬁc
ﬁgures for 1990 and for each year from 1994 through 2000. This
table provides the annual percentage change, the percent of gross
domestic product that health expenditures represent for that spe-
ciﬁc year, and more details on the sources of expenditures, both
private and public. As contrasted with the previous table, this
table includes more detail on some of the speciﬁc sources of pub-
lic expenditures, with actual ﬁgures for programs such as
Medicare and Medicaid.
Table 5.3 provides data about national health expenditures
also, again mostly covering the year 1990 and years 1994 to 2000,
along with a column for 2001 projections. As contrasted with the
previous table, this one provides expenditures by object. This
means details are provided for such categories as hospital care,
physician and clinical services, dental care, home healthcare, and
prescription drugs, along with other categories.
Table 5.4 provides information about average annual expen-
ditures per consumer unit, providing ﬁgures for 1985, 1990, 1995,
and 1997 through 2000. The ﬁgures are also provided by certain
basic characteristics of the person, such as age, race, origin, size
of consumer unit, and income. Depending on the interest of the
reader, this table provides a great deal of information about vari-
ation in expenditures. Looking at the age ﬁgures, for example, the
amount column makes the point clearly that average annual ex-
penditures increase as people become older. Following the vari-
ous columns, the table also illustrates that this trend of increasing
expenditures by age is true for health insurance and drugs and
medical supplies, but is not as consistent a pattern for medical
services. For that category, people ﬁfty-ﬁve to sixty-four have
higher expenditures than those sixty-ﬁve to seventy-four and
seventy-ﬁve and over.
Table 5.5 moves away from expenditures and presents sim-
ple information about the numbers of people enrolled in
Use of Various Federal and Other Data
115

TABLE 5.2
National Health Expenditures by Type: 1990 to 2000
(in billions of dollars [696.0 represents $696,000,000,000],
except percent. Includes Puerto Rico and outlying areas)
Total
Annual percent changea
Percent of gross domestic product
Private expenditures
Health services and supplies
Out-of-pocket payments
Insurance premiumsb
Other
Medical research
Medical facilities construction
Public expenditures
Percent federal of public
Health services and supplies
Medicarec
Public assistance medical paymentsd
Temporary disability insurancee
Workers’ compensation (medical)e
Defense Dept. hospital, medical
Maternal, child health programs
Public health activities
Veterans’ hospital, medical care
Medical vocational rehabilitation
State and local hospitalsf
Otherg
Medical research
Medical facilities construction
aChange from immediate prior year. For explanation of average annual percent change, see Guide to Tabular
Presentation.
bCovers insurance benefits and amount retained by insurance companies for expenses, additions to reserves, and
profits (net cost of insurance).
cRepresents expenditures for benefits and administrative cost from federal hospital and medical insurance trust funds
under old-age, survivors’, disability, and health insurance programs; see text, of this section.
dPayments made directly to suppliers of medical care (primarily medicaid).
eIncludes medical benefits paid under public law by private insurance carriers, state governments, and self-insurers.
fExpenditures not offset by other revenues.
gCovers expenditures for Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Indian Health Service, school
health, and other programs.
Source: U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “Health Accounts,” <http://cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/
default.asp>.
Type of Expenditure
1990
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
696.0
11.8
12.0
413.5
401.9
137.3
233.5
31.1
1.0
10.7
282.5
68.2
267.7
110.2
78.7
0.1
17.5
10.4
1.8
20.2
11.3
0.5
13.1
3.8
11.7
3.1
937.2
5.5
13.3
510.3
496.8
143.9
312.1
40.7
1.4
12.1
427.0
69.9
408.0
165.8
139.2
0.1
22.2
11.8
2.2
30.0
15.1
0.7
15.3
5.6
14.8
4.2
990.3
5.7
13.4
534.1
521.6
146.5
330.1
44.9
1.4
11.1
456.2
70.6
436.1
182.7
149.5
0.1
21.9
12.1
2.2
31.4
15.4
0.7
14.1
6.0
15.7
4.4
1040.0
5.0
13.3
558.2
545.0
152.1
344.8
48.2
1.6
11.6
481.8
71.4
460.8
197.5
157.6
0.1
21.9
12.0
2.3
33.0
16.3
0.7
13.6
6.0
16.2
4.8
1299.5
6.9
13.2
712.3
695.6
194.5
443.9
57.2
2.3
14.3
587.2
70.1
559.9
224.4
208.5
0.1
23.3
13.0
2.6
44.2
18.9
0.8
15.6
8.7
23.0
4.3
1215.6
5.7
13.1
666.5
651.1
184.4
409.4
57.3
2.2
13.3
549.0
70.1
524.0
212.6
191.8
0.1
22.5
12.5
2.5
40.9
17.7
0.7
14.8
7.8
20.9
4.2
1149.8
5.4
13.1
628.8
613.3
174.5
383.2
55.6
2.0
13.6
520.9
70.6
498.2
209.5
176.6
0.1
20.8
12.2
2.4
37.9
16.9
0.8
14.2
6.9
18.6
4.1
1091.2
4.9
13.1
588.8
573.9
162.3
359.4
52.1
1.6
13.3
502.4
71.4
480.1
208.2
164.8
0.1
20.5
12.1
2.3
35.5
16.3
0.7
13.4
6.1
17.1
5.2

TABLE 5.3
National Health Expenditures by Object, 1990–2000, and Projections, 2001
(in billions of dollars [696.0 represents $696,000,000,000], except percent. Includes Puerto Rico and outlying areas)
Total
Spent by—
Consumers
Out-of-pocket
Private insurance
Government
Othera
Spent for—
Health services and supplies
Personal health care expenses
Hospital care
Physician and clinical services
Dental services
Other professional servicesb
Home health care
Prescription drugs
Other nondurable  medical products
Durable medical equipmentc
Nursing home care
Other personal health care
Type of Expenditure
1990
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001 proj.
(continues)
696.0
370.8
137.3
233.5
282.5
42.8
669.6
609.4
253.9
157.5
31.5
18.2
12.6
40.3
22.5
10.6
52.7
9.6
937.2
456.1
143.9
312.1
427.0
54.2
904.8
816.5
332.4
210.5
41.4
25.7
26.1
54.6
24.3
13.3
68.3
19.9
990.3
476.7
146.5
330.1
456.2
57.4
957.7
865.7
343.6
220.5
44.5
28.5
30.5
60.8
25.6
14.2
74.6
22.9
1,040.0
496.8
152.1
344.8
481.8
61.4
1,005.7
911.9
355.9
229.4
46.8
30.9
33.6
67.2
27.1
15.3
79.9
25.8
1,149.8
557.7
174.5
383.2
520.9
71.1
1,111.5
1,009.9
379.2
256.8
53.2
35.5
33.6
87.2
28.6
16.5
89.1
30.2
1,423.8
697.1
210.4
486.7
648.1
78.6
1,377.3
1,235.2
446.3
310.6
64.4
42.7
35.9
141.8
32.8
19.9
99.2
41.5
1,299.5
638.4
194.5
443.9
587.2
73.8
1,255.5
1,130.4
412.1
286.4
60.0
39.0
32.4
121.8
31.2
18.5
92.2
36.7
1,215.6
593.8
184.4
409.4
549.0
72.7
1,175.0
1,062.6
392.2
270.2
56.4
36.7
32.3
103.9
30.4
17.6
89.3
33.7
1,091.2
521.8
162.3
359.4
502.4
67.0
1,053.9
959.2
367.5
241.0
50.2
33.4
34.5
75.7
27.9
16.2
85.1
27.8

aIncludes nonpatient revenues, privately funded construction, and industrial inplant.
bIncludes services of registered and practical nurses in private duty, podiatrists, optometrists, physical therapists, clinical psychologists, chiropractors, naturopaths, and Christian Science practitioners.
cIncludes expenditures for eyeglasses, hearing aids, orthopedic appliances, artificial limbs, crutches, wheelchairs, etc.
dIncludes administrative expenses of federally financed health programs.
eResearch and development expenditures of drug companies and other manufacturers and providers of medical equipment and supplies are excluded from research expenditures, but are included in the
expenditure class in which the product falls.
Source: U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “Health Accounts,” <http://cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/default.asp>.
TABLE 5.3
National Health Expenditures by Object, 1990–2000, and Projections, 2001  (continued)
(in billions of dollars [696.0 represents $696,000,000,000], except percent. Includes Puerto Rico and outlying areas)
Type of Expenditure
1990
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001 proj.
Government administration and net cost
of private health insuranced
Government public health activities
Medical researche
Medical facilities construction
40.0
20.2
12.7
13.7
58.3
30.0
16.3
16.2
60.6
31.4
17.1
15.5
60.9
33.0
17.8
16.4
63.7
37.9
20.6
17.7
59.2
33.5
18.7
18.5
71.5
40.9
23.1
17.5
80.9
44.2
25.3
18.6
92.7
49.5
26.6
19.8

TABLE 5.4
Average Annual Expenditures per Consumer Unit for Health Care: 1985 to 2000 (in dollars, except percent)
1985
1990
1995
1997
1998
1999
2000
Age of reference person:
Under 25 years old
25 to 34 years old
35 to 44 years old
45 to 54 years old
55 to 64 years old
65 to 74 years old
75 years old and older
Race of reference person:
White and other
Black
Item
Health Care, Total
Amount
(continues)
Percent Distribution
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Percent of Total
Expenditures
1,108
1,480
1,732
1,841
1,903
1,959
2,066
504
1,256
1,774
2,200
2,508
3,163
3,338
2,198
1,107
4.7
5.2
5.4
5.3
5.4
5.3
5.4
2.2
3.2
3.9
4.8
6.4
10.3
15.2
5.6
3.9
375
581
860
881
913
923
983
211
640
850
976
1,132
1,608
1,631
1,030
639
496
562
512
531
542
558
568
178
367
555
699
721
686
658
620
191
238
337
360
428
448
479
515
115
250
369
525
655
870
1,049
548
276
33.8
39.3
49.7
47.9
48.0
47.1
47.6
41.9
51.0
47.9
44.4
45.1
50.8
48.9
46.9
57.7
44.8
38.0
29.6
28.8
28.5
28.5
27.5
35.3
29.2
31.3
31.8
28.7
21.7
19.7
28.2
17.3
21.5
22.8
20.8
23.2
23.5
24.5
24.9
22.8
19.9
20.8
23.9
26.1
27.5
31.4
24.9
24.9

TABLE 5.4
Average Annual Expenditures per Consumer Unit for Health Care: 1985 to 2000 (in dollars, except percent) (continued)
Item
Health Care, Total
Amount
Percent Distribution
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Percent of Total
Expenditures
Origin of reference person:
Hispanic
Non-Hispanic
Region of residence:
Northeast
Midwest
South
West
Size of consumer unit:
One person
Two or more persons
Two persons
Three persons
Four persons
Five persons or more
Income before taxes:
Complete income reportersb
Quintiles of income:
Lowest 20 percent
(continues)
1,243
2,144
1,862
2,172
2,147
2,001
1,488
2,307
2,596
2,080
2,143
2,018
2,120
1,470
3.8
5.6
4.8
5.5
6.2
4.8
6.5
5.2
6.7
4.6
4.1
4.1
5.3
8.2
600
1,019
908
1,047
1,063
853
657
1,119
1,241
1,031
1,062
970
985
690
364
587
504
575
533
669
418
631
663
575
651
588
583
339
280
538
450
550
552
479
413
557
692
474
429
460
552
441
48.3
47.2
48.8
48.2
49.5
42.6
44.2
48.5
47.8
49.6
49.6
48.1
46.5
46.9
29.3
27.4
27.1
26.5
24.8
33.4
28.1
27.4
25.5
27.6
30.4
29.1
27.5
23.1
22.5
25.1
24.2
25.3
25.7
23.9
27.8
24.1
26.7
22.8
20.0
22.8
26.0
30.0

TABLE 5.4
Average Annual Expenditures per Consumer Unit for Health Care: 1985 to 2000 (in dollars, except percent) (continued)
Item
Health Care, Total
Amount
Percent Distribution
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Drugs and
Medical Suppliesa
Medical Services
Health Insurance
Percent of Total
Expenditures
aIncludes prescription and nonprescription drugs.
bA complete reporter is a consumer unit providing values for at least one of the major sources of income.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Expenditure Survey, annual.
Second 20 percent
Third 20 percent
Fourth 20 percent
Highest 20 percent
Incomplete reporters of income
1,968
1,964
2,312
2,864
1,919
7.5
5.7
4.9
3.8
6.0
945
943
1,090
1,254
977
424
524
659
968
524
619
497
563
642
419
47.5
48.0
47.1
43.8
50.9
21.3
26.7
28.5
33.8
27.3
31.1
25.3
24.4
22.4
21.8

Medicare from 1980 to 2000. Numbers are presented for those
who are in both the aged and disabled categories, and ﬁgures are
also provided for those with hospital insurance coverage and
also for those with supplemental medical insurance.
Tables 5.6 through 5.8 provide information about health in-
surance coverage or the lack of such coverage. Table 5.6 provides
ﬁgures on health insurance coverage status for 1990 to 2000 by
such characteristics as age, sex, race, and household income. Ac-
tual numbers are provided along with percentages, and ﬁgures
are presented for coverage by private or government health in-
surance. Looking at the income breakdowns, for example, the
percentage covered by any insurance increases as income in-
creases. This is because as income increases, the percentage of
private health insurance increases from 41 percent for those earn-
ing less than $25,000 to 90 percent for those earning $75,000 or
more. In contrast, the highest percentage of people with Medicaid
coverage are those in the lowest income category.
Table 5.7 also includes information on persons with and
without health insurance coverage, but provides information for
one year, 2000. Rather than examining these ﬁgures by individual
characteristics, this table focuses on variation by state and also
provides information about all persons not covered and speciﬁ-
cally about whether children are covered.
122
Facts and Documents
TABLE 5.5
Medicare Enrollees: 1980 to 2000
(in millions [28.5 represents 28,500,000]. As of July 1. Includes Puerto Rico and
outlying areas and enrollees in foreign countries and unknown place of residence)
Total
Aged
Disabled
Hospital insurance
Aged
Disabled
Supplementary medical insurance
Aged
Disabled
Source: U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, “Medicare Enrollment Trends 1966–
1999”; published 16 November 2000; <http://www.hcfa.gov/stats/enrllmd.htm> and unpublished data.
Item
1980
1985
1990
1995
1997
1998
1999
2000
28.5
25.5
3.0
28.1
25.1
3.0
27.4
24.7
2.7
31.1
28.2
2.9
30.6
27.7
2.9
30.0
27.3
2.7
34.2
30.9
3.3
33.7
30.5
3.3
32.6
29.7
2.9
37.5
33.1
4.4
37.1
32.7
4.4
35.7
31.7
3.9
38.4
33.6
4.8
38.1
33.2
4.8
36.5
32.2
4.3
38.8
33.8
5.0
38.4
33.4
5.0
36.8
32.3
4.5
39.1
33.9
5.2
38.7
33.5
5.2
37.0
32.4
4.6
39.6
34.2
5.4
39.2
33.8
5.4
37.4
32.6
4.8

TABLE 5.6
Health Insurance Coverage Status by Selected Characteristics: 1990 to 2000
(Persons as of following year for coverage in the year shown [248.9 represents 248,900,000].
Government health insurance includes Medicare, Medicaid, and military plans.)
1990
1995d
1999d
1999d, e
2000, totald, e, f
Age:
Under 18 years
Under 6 years
6 to 11 years
12 to 17 years
18 to 24 years
25 to 34 years
35 to 44 years
Characteristic
Group Healthb
(continues)
Number (mil.)
Percent
Covered by Private or Government Health Insurance
Private
Government
Total
Totala
Total Persons
Medicare
Medicaidc
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Covered by Private or
Government Health Insurance
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Totala
Private
Medicaidc
248.9
264.3
274.1
274.1
276.5
72.6
23.7
24.8
24.1
27.0
37.4
44.8
214.2
223.7
231.5
234.8
237.9
64.1
21.0
22.0
21.1
19.6
29.5
37.8
150.2
161.5
172.0
174.1
177.3
48.1
15.3
16.6
16.2
14.4
25.5
33.3
182.1
185.9
194.6
197.5
200.2
51.2
15.9
17.5
17.8
17.5
27.0
35.2
32.3
34.7
36.1
36.1
37.0
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.8
13.9
15.4
15.5
14.3
14.0
11.6
11.1
11.5
12.2
27.3
21.2
15.5
9.7
12.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
20.3
24.2
20.6
16.2
8.7
6.3
5.4
73.2
70.3
71.0
72.1
72.4
70.6
67.1
70.5
74.0
64.8
72.1
78.6
86.1
84.6
84.5
85.7
86.0
88.4
88.9
88.5
87.8
72.7
78.8
84.5
34.7
40.6
42.6
39.3
38.7
8.4
2.6
2.8
2.9
7.4
7.9
6.9
24.3
31.9
27.9
28.2
28.6
14.7
5.7
5.1
3.9
2.3
2.4
2.4

TABLE 5.6
Health Insurance Coverage Status by Selected Characteristics: 1990 to 2000 (continued)
(Persons as of following year for coverage in the year shown [248.9 represents 248,900,000].
Government health insurance includes Medicare, Medicaid, and military plans.)
Characteristic
Group Healthb
Number (mil.)
Percent
Covered by Private or Government Health Insurance
Private
Government
Total
Totala
Total Persons
Medicare
Medicaidc
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Covered by Private or
Government Health Insurance
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Totala
Private
Medicaidc
45 to 54 years
55 to 64 years
65 years and older
Sex: Male
Female
Race: White
Black
Asian and Pacific Islander
Hispanic origing
Household income:
Less than $25,000
$25,000–$49,999
$50,000–$74,999
(continues)
38.0
23.8
33.0
135.2
141.3
226.4
35.9
11.3
33.9
61.1
75.4
59.3
33.5
20.5
32.7
115.1
122.8
197.2
29.3
9.3
23.0
47.2
62.6
52.8
31.1
18.0
20.3
98.4
101.8
169.8
21.2
7.9
16.3
25.2
52.9
49.4
29.0
15.9
11.2
88.3
89.0
149.3
19.6
7.1
15.1
16.9
45.9
45.9
1.3
2.1
31.7
16.2
20.8
32.0
3.8
0.9
2.2
17.6
11.1
4.2
1.9
1.6
3.3
12.7
15.9
19.4
7.3
1.3
6.3
16.9
7.4
2.5
4.6
3.2
0.2
20.1
18.5
29.2
6.6
2.0
10.8
13.9
12.8
6.5
88.0
86.3
99.3
85.1
86.9
87.1
81.5
82.0
68.0
77.3
83.0
89.0
81.6
75.8
61.5
72.8
72.1
75.0
58.9
69.9
47.9
41.2
70.2
83.3
4.9
6.8
10.0
9.4
11.3
8.6
20.3
11.3
18.6
27.7
9.8
4.3
12.0
13.7
0.7
14.9
13.1
12.9
18.5
18.0
32.0
22.7
17.0
11.0

TABLE 5.6
Health Insurance Coverage Status by Selected Characteristics: 1990 to 2000 (continued)
(Persons as of following year for coverage in the year shown [248.9 represents 248,900,000].
Government health insurance includes Medicare, Medicaid, and military plans.)
Characteristic
Group Healthb
Number (mil.)
Percent
Covered by Private or Government Health Insurance
Private
Government
Total
Totala
Total Persons
Medicare
Medicaidc
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Covered by Private or
Government Health Insurance
Not Covered
by Health
Insurance
Totala
Private
Medicaidc
aIncludes other government insurance, not shown separately. Persons with coverage counted only once in total, even though they may have been covered by more than one type of policy.
bRelated to employment of self or other family members.
cBeginning 1997, persons with no coverage other than access to Indian Health Service are no longer considered covered by health insurance; instead they are considered to be uninsured. The effect of this
change on the overall estimates of health insurance coverage is negligible; however, the decrease in the number of people covered by Medicaid may be partially due to this change.
dData based on 1990 census adjusted population controls.
eEstimates reflect results of follow-up verification questions.
fIncludes other races not shown separately.
gPersons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Current Population Reports, P60-215; and unpublished data.
$75,000 or more
Persons below poverty
80.8
31.1
75.3
21.9
72.8
8.6
68.6
5.8
4.2
4.6
1.7
12.3
5.5
9.2
93.1
70.4
90.1
27.8
2.2
39.8
6.9
29.6

TABLE 5.7
Persons with and without Health Insurance Coverage by State: 2000
(237,857 represents 237,857,000.)
U.S.
AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
State
Total Persons
Covered
(1,000)
Total Persons Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
(continues)
Percent of
Total
Total Children Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
State
Total Persons
Covered
(1,000)
Total Persons Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
Total Children Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
237,857
3,851
522
4,124
2,261
28,454
3,665
3,056
705
434
12,537
6,638
1,039
1,061
10,627
5,117
2,615
2,306
38,683
600
125
793
364
6,281
563
263
82
73
2,620
1,135
117
196
1,659
701
248
301
14.0
13.5
19.3
16.1
13.9
18.1
13.3
7.9
10.4
14.4
17.3
14.6
10.1
15.6
13.5
12.1
8.7
11.5
8,405
98
38
173
82
1,507
154
22
15
10
570
154
23
51
371
201
46
75
11.6
8.5
17.7
12.8
11.6
15.4
13.7
2.6
7.2
9.9
16.5
8.1
8.3
14.7
10.8
13.9
6.2
11.3
3,462
3,423
1,121
4,618
5,661
8,964
4,354
2,425
4,930
714
1,494
1,680
1,155
7,257
1,366
15,608
6,541
538
513
810
145
501
595
982
430
364
586
162
164
311
85
1,049
427
2,802
980
69
12.9
19.1
11.5
9.8
9.5
9.9
9.0
13.1
10.6
18.5
9.9
15.6
6.8
12.6
23.8
15.2
13.0
11.3
73
162
22
92
124
179
117
71
124
39
40
90
23
203
105
486
187
18
7.7
15.7
7.8
7.4
7.8
6.7
9.3
9.2
8.5
18.7
8.8
14.9
7.0
9.3
20.2
10.5
10.1
11.9

Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Current Population Reports, P60-215; and unpublished data.
TABLE 5.7
Persons with and without Health Insurance Coverage by State: 2000 (continued)
(237,857 represents 237,857,000.)
State
Total Persons
Covered
(1,000)
Total Persons Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
Total Children Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
State
Total Persons
Covered
(1,000)
Total Persons Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
Total Children Not Covered
Number
(1,000)
Percent of
Total
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY
10,284
2,651
2,935
11,063
881
3,321
615
5,003
1,255
636
465
905
55
448
82
577
10.9
19.3
13.7
7.6
5.9
11.9
11.8
10.3
309
134
111
145
5
68
20
63
9.5
16.8
12.9
4.9
2.5
8.6
11.6
4.7
16,167
1,913
564
6,091
5,075
1,524
5,032
418
4,425
296
67
886
780
254
386
70
21.5
13.4
10.7
12.7
13.3
14.3
7.1
14.4
1,273
75
15
206
126
37
56
16
21.5
10.1
8.5
11.7
8.1
9.8
3.7
12.5

The third table on healthcare insurance coverage, Table 5.8,
provides information about healthcare coverage for people under
sixty-ﬁve years of age for the years from 1984 to 2000. Greater de-
tails are provided on race and Hispanic origin, and information is
provided about all ages and those under eighteen as related to
percent of poverty level.
Table 5.9 presents different health-related data. This table
provides information on life expectancy at birth, as well as at
ages 65 and 75, according to race and sex. Depending upon the
age group, different years are covered. The broadest coverage is
at birth, with ﬁgures provided for 1900, each decade from 1950
through 1990, and 1990 through 2000. The information is pre-
sented for all races, for whites, and for blacks. Within each of
these groups, the life expectancy ﬁgure is provided for both sexes
together, and for males and females separately. By comparing
sets of ﬁgures, for example, it is clear that black female life ex-
pectancy is now closer to that of white females (a gap of 5.1 years
in 2000) than is true for black males (6.6 years), whereas in 1950
the gap for females was 9.3 years and for males was 7.4 years.
These tables are examples of the vast wealth of data pro-
vided by the federal government. These tables were selected both
to provide an example of the type of data available and because
together they provide a good starting point in the use of data to
understand the state of the United States’ healthcare system and
why there is such interest in its reform. Also, remember that these
two publications are updated annually, so go online to retrieve
the most up-to-date data available.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and 
Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
The healthcare industry represents more than 15 percent of the
U.S. economy and is vital to all citizens. Therefore there are
many nonproﬁt issue-advocacy groups representing the various
players such as physicians, consumers, government policy mak-
ers, insurance companies, and so forth. The Web sites main-
tained by these groups contain news, analysis, and data relating
to the healthcare system and to health reform, and they are thus
another excellent source for summary data and statistics on
healthcare and reform. Although these sites represent a speciﬁc
128
Facts and Documents

TABLE 5.8
No Health Care Coverage among Persons under 65 Years of Age, According to Selected Characteristics: United States, Selected Years 1984–2000
(Data are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population)
Number in millions:
Totalb
Percent of population:
Total, age adjustedb, c
Total, crudeb
Age:
Under 18 years
Under 6 years
6–17 years
18–44 years
18–24 years
25–34 years
35–44 years
45–64 years
45–54 years
55–64 years
Sex:c
Male
Female
Characteristic
(continues)
1984
1989
1994a
1995
1996
1997a
1998
1999
2000
29.8
14.3
14.5
13.9
14.9
13.4
17.1
25.0
16.2
11.2
9.6
10.5
8.7
15.0
13.6
40.5
16.8
16.8
12.4
11.7
12.8
22.0
29.7
22.7
16.8
12.7
12.8
12.5
17.8
15.8
38.5
16.1
16.1
11.9
11.0
12.3
21.0
27.4
22.1
16.3
12.2
12.8
11.4
17.2
15.0
30.2
16.5
16.6
12.7
11.5
13.3
21.4
29.0
22.2
16.4
12.2
12.6
11.4
17.5
15.5
41.0
17.4
17.5
14.0
12.5
14.7
22.4
30.1
23.8
16.7
12.4
12.8
11.8
18.5
16.2
38.6
16.5
16.6
13.2
11.7
13.9
21.1
29.3
22.4
15.2
12.1
12.4
11.6
17.8
15.2
37.1
15.9
16.1
13.4
11.8
14.3
20.4
28.0
21.1
15.1
10.9
11.6
9.9
17.2
14.6
40.0
17.2
17.5
15.0
13.4
15.8
21.7
30.8
21.9
15.9
12.0
12.5
11.2
18.5
16.1
33.4
15.3
15.6
14.7
15.1
14.5
18.4
27.1
18.3
12.3
10.5
11.0
10.0
16.4
14.3

TABLE 5.8
No Health Care Coverage among Persons under 65 Years of Age, According to Selected Characteristics: United States, Selected Years 1984–2000 (continued)
(Data are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population)
Characteristic
1984
1989
1994a
1995
1996
1997a
1998
1999
2000
Race:c, d
White only
Black or African American only
American Indian and Alaska Native only
Asian only
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander only
2 or more races
Hispanic origin and race:c, d
Hispanic or Latino
Mexican
Puerto Rican
Cuban
Other Hispanic or Latino
Not Hispanic or Latino
White only
Black or African American only
Age and percent of poverty level:e
All ages:c
Below 100 percent
100–149 percent
(continues)
13.4
20.0
#
18.0
---
---
29.1
33.2
18.1
21.6
27.5
#
11.8
19.7
34.7
27.0
17.4
14.2
21.4
#
18.5
---
---
32.4
38.8
23.3
20.9
25.2
#
11.9
21.3
35.8
31.3
21.8
16.6
19.7
#
20.1
---
---
31.8
36.2
15.7
27.4
30.7
#
14.4
19.3
33.1
35.0
26.1
15.3
18.2
#
18.2
---
---
31.5
36.2
18.3
22.1
29.7
#
12.9
18.1
31.7
31.7
24.0
15.8
19.6
#
19.0
---
---
32.4
37.5
15.1
18.8
30.5
#
13.3
19.5
34.5
33.3
24.3
16.3
20.2
#
19.3
---
---
34.3
39.2
19.4
20.5
32.9
#
13.7
20.1
34.4
36.1
25.9
15.2
20.7
#
18.1
---
---
34.0
40.0
19.4
18.4
31.1
#
12.5
20.7
34.6
36.5
26.7
14.6
19.5
38.3
16.4
*
16.8
33.9
38.0
19.8
19.7
30.8
13.5
12.1
19.4
34.4
35.8
27.7
15.2
20.0
38.2
17.3
*
18.4
35.4
39.9
16.4
25.2
32.7
14.1
12.5
20.0
34.2
36.5
27.3

TABLE 5.8
No Health Care Coverage among Persons under 65 Years of Age, According to Selected Characteristics: United States, Selected Years 1984–2000 (continued)
(Data are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population)
Characteristic
1984
1989
1994a
1995
1996
1997a
1998
1999
2000
150–199 percent
200 percent or more
Under 18 years:
100–149 percent
150–199 percent
200 percent or more
Geographic region:c
Northeast
Midwest
South
West
Location of residence:c
Within MSAf
Outside MSAf
5.8
28.9
22.8
12.7
4.2
10.1
11.1
17.4
17.8
13.3
16.4
#Estimates calculated upon request.
*Estimates are considered unreliable. Data not shown to have a relative standard of error of greater than 30 percent.
---Data not available.
aThe questionnaire changed compared with previous years.
bIncludes all other races not shown separately and unknown poverty level.
cEstimates are age adjusted to the year 2000 standard using three age groups: under 18 years, 18–44 years, and 45–64 years.
dStarting with data year 1999, estimates by race and Hispanic origin are tabulated using the 1997 Standards for federal data on race and ethnicity; prior to data year 1999 the 1977 Standards are used
(continues)
6.8
31.6
26.1
15.8
4.4
10.7
10.5
19.4
18.4
14.9
16.9
9.2
22.1
27.7
19.1
7.1
13.6
12.2
21.0
20.4
16.7
19.0
8.6
20.0
24.8
18.0
6.4
13.1
12.1
19.2
17.7
15.2
18.7
8.6
21.0
25.0
16.0
6.1
13.5
12.2
20.0
18.6
15.6
19.7
8.8
22.4
26.1
19.7
6.1
13.4
13.1
20.7
20.4
16.7
19.9
8.0
21.5
28.0
17.3
5.0
12.3
11.9
20.0
19.9
15.8
19.2
7.7
21.6
24.9
18.8
4.4
12.2
11.5
19.8
18.6
15.3
18.9
8.7
20.4
25.6
16.8
5.5
12.1
12.3
20.4
20.2
16.3
18.8

TABLE 5.8
No Health Care Coverage among Persons under 65 Years of Age, According to Selected Characteristics: United States, Selected Years 1984–2000 (continued)
(Data are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population)
Estimates for specific race groups are shown when they meet requirements for statistical reliability and confidentiality. Starting with data year 1999, the categories “White only,” “Black or African American
only,” “American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) only,” “Asian only,” and “Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander only” include persons who reported only one racial group; and the category “2 or
more races” includes persons who reported more than one of the five racial groups in the 1997 Standards or one of the five racial groups and “Some other race.” Prior to data year 1999, estimates for the
race categories shown include persons who reported one race or who reported more than one race and identified one race as best representing their race; and the category “Asian only” includes Native
Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander. Because of the differences between the two Standards, race-specific estimates starting with data year 1999 are not strictly comparable with estimates for earlier years.
To estimate change between 1998 and 1999, race-specific estimates for 1999 based on the 1977 Standards can be used. In comparison with the 1999 estimates based on the 1997 Standards, estimates of
the age-adjusted percent with no health coverage based on the 1977 Standards are: 0.1 percentage points higher for the white group; identical for the black group; 0.1 percentage points lower for the Asian
and Pacific Islander group; and 1.5 percentage points higher for the AI/AN group.
ePrior to 1997 percent of poverty level is based on family income and family size using Bureau of the Census poverty thresholds. Beginning in 1997 percent of poverty level is based on family income,
family size, number of children in the family, and, for families with two or fewer adults, the age of the adults in the family. Missing family income data were inputed for 17 percent of the sample under 65
years of age in 1994, 15 percent in 1995, and 16 percent in 1996. Percent of poverty level was unknown for 19 percent of the sample persons under 65 in 1997, 24 percent in 1998, 27 percent in 1999,
and 26 percent in 2000.
fMSA is metropolitan statistical area.
Notes: Persons not covered by private insurance, Medicaid, Child Health Insurance Program (CHIP), public assistance (through 1996), state-sponsored or other government-sponsored health plans (starting
in 1997), Medicare, or military plans are included.
Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Health Interview Survey, health insurance supplements (1984, 1989, 1994–1996). Starting in 1997 data
are from the family core questionnaires.

TABLE 5.9
Life Expectancy at Birth, at 65 Years of Age, and at 75 Years of Age,
According to Race and Sex: United States, Selected Years 1900–2000
(Data are based on death certificates)
All Races
(continues)
White
Blacka
Both Sexes
Male
Female
Both Sexes
Male
Female
At birth
1900b, c
1950c
1960c
1970
1980
1985
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
At 65 years
1950b
1960b
1970
1980
1985
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
At 75 years
1980
1985
1990
Specified
Age and
Year
Both Sexes
Male
Female
47.3
68.2
69.7
70.8
73.7
74.7
75.4
75.5
75.8
75.5
75.7
75.8
76.1
76.5
76.7
76.7
76.9
13.9
14.3
15.2
16.4
16.7
17.2
17.4
17.5
17.3
17.4
17.4
17.5
17.7
17.8
17.7
17.9
10.4
10.6
10.9
33.5
62.9
66.3
68.3
72.5
73.4
73.6
73.8
73.9
73.7
73.9
73.9
74.2
74.7
74.8
74.7
74.9
14.9
15.1
15.7
16.8
16.9
17.2
17.2
17.4
17.1
17.2
17.1
17.2
17.6
17.4
17.3
17.4
10.7
11.1
11.2
32.5
59.1
61.1
60.0
63.8
65.0
64.5
64.6
65.0
64.6
64.9
65.2
66.1
67.2
67.6
67.8
68.2
12.7
12.7
12.5
13.0
13.0
13.2
13.4
13.5
13.4
13.6
13.6
13.9
14.2
14.3
14.3
14.5
8.3
8.7
8.6
33.0
60.8
63.6
64.1
68.1
69.3
69.1
69.3
69.6
69.2
69.5
69.6
70.2
71.1
71.3
71.4
71.7
13.9
13.9
14.2
15.1
15.2
15.4
15.5
15.7
15.5
15.7
15.6
15.8
16.1
16.1
16.0
16.2
9.7
10.1
10.2
48.7
72.2
74.1
75.6
78.1
78.7
79.4
79.6
79.8
79.5
79.6
79.6
79.7
79.9
80.0
79.9
80.0
15.1
15.9
17.1
18.4
18.7
19.1
19.2
19.3
19.0
19.1
19.1
19.1
19.3
19.3
19.2
19.2
11.5
11.7
12.0
46.6
66.5
67.4
68.0
70.7
71.8
72.7
72.9
73.2
73.1
73.3
73.4
73.9
74.3
74.5
74.6
74.8
12.8
12.9
13.1
14.2
14.5
15.2
15.4
15.5
15.4
15.6
15.7
15.8
16.0
16.1
16.1
16.3
8.8
9.0
9.4
47.6
69.1
70.6
71.7
74.4
75.3
76.1
76.3
76.5
76.3
76.5
76.5
76.8
77.1
77.3
77.3
77.4
---
14.4
15.2
16.5
16.8
17.3
17.5
17.6
17.4
17.5
17.6
17.6
17.8
17.8
17.8
17.9
10.4
10.6
11.0
48.3
71.1
73.1
74.7
77.4
78.2
78.8
78.9
79.1
78.8
79.0
78.9
79.1
79.4
79.5
79.4
79.5
15.0
15.8
17.0
18.3
18.5
18.9
19.1
19.2
18.9
19.0
18.9
19.0
1902
19.2
19.1
19.2
11.5
11.7
12.0
46.3
65.6
66.6
67.1
70.0
71.1
71.8
72.0
72.3
72.2
72.4
72.5
73.1
73.6
73.8
73.9
74.1
12.8
12.8
13.1
14.1
14.5
15.1
15.3
15.4
15.3
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.9
16.0
16.1
16.3
8.8
9.0
9.4

viewpoint or a speciﬁc component of the healthcare system, they
can be very useful in understanding different issues relating to
healthcare reform as long as the reader remembers the speciﬁc
viewpoint they represent. The following is information on many
of these organizations and their Web sites, including sample doc-
uments to illustrate their content. These documents have also
been chosen to show the various perspectives on the issues iden-
tiﬁed in the ﬁrst two chapters of this book. Additional relevant
organization and issue-oriented Web sites are presented in
Chapter 6. Due to space limitations, sample documents from
those sites could not be presented here.
134
Facts and Documents
TABLE 5.9
Life Expectancy at Birth, at 65 Years of Age, and at 75 Years of Age,
According to Race and Sex: United States, Selected Years 1900–2000 (continued)
(Data are based on death certificates)
All Races
White
Blacka
Both Sexes
Male
Female
Both Sexes
Male
Female
Specified
Age and
Year
Both Sexes
Male
Female
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
11.1
11.2
10.9
11.0
11.0
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.2
11.3
9.5
9.6
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
10.0
10.0
10.1
12.1
12.2
11.9
12.0
11.9
12.0
12.1
12.2
12.1
12.1
11.1
11.2
11.0
11.1
11.1
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.2
11.3
9.5
9.6
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
10.0
10.0
10.1
12.1
12.2
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.1
12.2
12.1
12.1
10.2
10.4
10.2
10.3
10.2
10.3
10.7
10.5
10.4
10.5
8.7
8.9
8.7
8.9
8.8
9.0
9.3
9.2
9.2
9.4
aData shown for 1900–1960 are for the nonwhite population.
bDeath registration area only. The death registration area increased from 10 states and the District of Columbia in
1900 to the coterminus United States in 1933.
cIncludes deaths of persons who were not residents of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
Notes: Beginning in 1997 life table methodology was revised to construct complete life tables by single years of age
that extend to age 100. (Anderson RN. Method for Constructing Complete Annual U.S. Life Tables. National Center for
Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 2(129). 1999.) Previously abridged life tables were constructed for 5-year age
groups ending with the age group 85 years and older. Data for additional years are available.
Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics
System; Grove RD and Hetzel AM, Vital Statistics Rates in the United States, 1940–1960. DHEW Pub. No. (PHS)
1677, Public Health Service, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1968; life expectancy trend data
available at www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/dvs/mortdata.htm; Minino AM, Arias E, Kochanek KD, Murphy SL,
Smith BL, Deaths: Final data for 2000. National vital statistics reports, vol. 50 no 15. Hyattsville, Maryland: National
Center for Health Statistics, 2002.
11.2
11.4
11.1
11.2
11.1
11.2
11.5
11.3
11.1
11.2

Alliance for Health Reform
http://www.allhealth.org/
We have included here a number of examples of the material available as
issues and fact sheets. We have included fact sheets on a number of the
most important health reform–related topics. These fact sheets provide
key points on the issues and a link to additional information on the topic.
These include The Uninsured, Children’s Coverage, Employer-Spon-
sored Coverage, Individual Coverage, Medicaid, Medicare, Prescription
Drugs, Health Care Costs, Chronic Care, Long-Term Care, and Man-
aged Care. The ﬁrst four of these provide speciﬁc facts about aspects of in-
surance coverage and the lack of such. The next two provide this group’s
explanation of the two most important and long-standing programs to
provide health insurance through government programs. Three of the
sheets focus on some current issues in healthcare costs, and the last two
focus on two more specialized issues of healthcare reform: long-term care
and managed care.
The Uninsured: Key Facts
•
In 2001, 41.2 million Americans, or 14.6 percent of the
population, were uninsured for the entire year,
according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
•
In 2001, 10 percent of whites, 19 percent of blacks, and
33 percent of Hispanics were uninsured for the full
year.
•
More than 8 out of 10 of those who lack insurance are
in working families.
•
Of the nonelderly uninsured in 2000, nearly two-thirds
(64 percent) lived on incomes below 200 percent of the
federal poverty level for that year, or $28,300 for a
family of three.
•
In 2001, young adults (ages 18–24) were less likely
than other age groups to have health insurance
coverage. Twenty-eight percent of young adults were
uninsured, compared with 16.7 percent of those ages
25–64 and less than 1 percent of those 65 years and
older (due to widespread Medicare coverage for the
elderly).
•
The uninsured are more likely to experience avoidable
hospitalizations and more likely to die during
hospitalizations than those with health coverage.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
135

•
Uninsured adults were three times as likely as insured
adults to have gone without a needed doctor visit, not
ﬁlled a prescription, or not followed up on a
recommended medical test or treatment in the past year
because of an inability to pay (49 percent vs. 18 percent). 
Children’s Coverage: Key Facts
•
Some 8.5 million children under the age of 18 were
uninsured for all of 2001, or 11.7 percent of all children
under the age of 18.
•
Hispanic children were more than three times as likely
as white, non-Hispanic children to be uninsured.
Nearly 24.1 percent of Hispanic children lacked health
insurance, compared to 7.4 percent of white, 13.9
percent of Black, and 11.7 percent of Asian and Paciﬁc
Islander children.
•
Among the poor, 21.3 percent of children were
uninsured during 2001.
•
Estimates in 2000 suggested that 63 percent of
uninsured children were low-income and eligible for
Medicaid or the State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP), but were not enrolled.
•
Sixty-four percent of children are covered through a
parent’s employer.
•
About 4.6 million children were enrolled in SCHIP at
some point during ﬁscal year 2001, up from the 3.3
million in 2000.
•
Medicaid covered more than one in four children at
some point during 2002—23.9 million children under
the age of 19.
•
Uninsured kids are ﬁve times more likely to use the
emergency room as a regular source of care than
children with coverage. 
Employer-Sponsored Coverage: Key Facts
•
About 177 million Americans—62.6 percent of the
population—had health coverage through an employer
in 2001.
•
The average monthly premium for health insurance in
2002 was $255 for an individual and $663 for a family.
136
Facts and Documents

The worker’s share averaged $38 for individual
coverage and $174 for family coverage.
•
Premium costs rose 12.7 percent for the 12 months
ending in spring 2002, compared with a 1.6 percent rise
in general inﬂation and a 3.4 percent rise in wages.
•
Just 55 percent of the smallest ﬁrms (three to nine
workers) offered health insurance in 2002, compared
with 99 percent of large companies (200 or more
workers).
•
Some 45 percent of low-wage workers (those earning
$7 an hour or less) are not offered coverage on the job.
•
Of low-wage workers who are offered coverage, 76
percent take it, even though most must pay a share of
the premium. Of those declining coverage, more than
half have coverage elsewhere, such as through a
spouse’s policy.
•
Among higher-wage workers (those earning $15 an
hour or more), 96 percent are offered coverage on the
job. Some 94 percent of these eligible workers take the
coverage.
•
About two-thirds of current workers with health
insurance would be guaranteed the right to continue
their coverage under federal law if they were laid off.
They would have to pay the costs of the entire
premium.
•
Five out of six workers who were offered health
beneﬁts in 2002 (84 percent) participated. 
Individual Coverage: Key Facts
•
About 16 million people, or 6.7 percent of those
between the ages of 19 and 64, were covered by an
individual health insurance policy in 1999. An
individual policy is obtained in the private market to
cover an individual or single family, and is not part of
group coverage offered by an employer or government
program.
•
In all but ﬁve states, individuals or families buying
insurance on their own can be charged higher
premiums, or denied coverage, if they have health
problems. The ﬁve exceptions are New Jersey, New
York, Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
137

•
Federal law requires insurance companies to sell
policies to anyone who has had at least 18 months of
continuous coverage and is moving from a group
policy to the individual market. There are no federal
restrictions on how much companies may charge for
coverage in such cases, although some states have set
limits.
•
High-risk pools existed in 30 states as of mid-2002,
mostly for persons with big health care needs and no
access to on-the-job coverage. Enrollment in all high-
risk pools totaled about 105,000 in 1999. High-risk
pools allow individuals with health problems, who
can’t afford or get coverage through private insurers, to
obtain subsidized health insurance through the state.
•
Many proposals to reduce the number of Americans
without health insurance would subsidize coverage in
the individual market, often through federal tax
credits. 
Medicaid: Key Facts
•
Medicaid covered 44 million people at some time
during 2000, including 22.6 million low-income
children, 9.2 million low-income adults (ages 19 to 64),
and 12 million low-income older persons or persons
with disabilities. Over the course of a year, more people
are covered by Medicaid than by Medicare.
•
Medicaid spending is estimated to have accelerated
sharply for 2001, growing at a projected 11.5 percent
rate, compared with an 8.5 percent rise in 2000.
•
Medicaid expenditures are expected to total $280
billion in 2003—$159 billion from the federal
government and $121 billion from the states.
•
Medicaid’s share of state general fund spending grew
from 10.5 percent in 1991 to 14.7 percent in 2001.
•
Medicaid spending by states is expected to grow more
than three and a half times faster than state revenues
for 2002.
•
Children account for 51 percent of those enrolled in
Medicaid, but services to them consume only 15
percent of the Medicaid budget. The elderly and
disabled account for approximately 27 percent of
138
Facts and Documents

persons enrolled in Medicaid, but their services
consume 67 percent of the budget.
•
Medicaid paid for approximately 17 percent of all
hospital and 17 percent of all prescription drug
spending in the U.S. in 2000.
•
Medicaid is the largest source of health care ﬁnancing,
public or private, for people with disabilities. Medicaid
covers one in ﬁve people with a speciﬁc, chronic
disability. 
Medicare: Key Facts
•
In 2001, Medicare covered 40.1 million people, including
34.4 million elderly Americans (99 percent of the elderly
population) and 5.7 million people under age 65 with
disabilities or end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
•
Medicare spending was $240 billion in 2001, or 12
percent of the federal budget, and is projected to rise to
$600 billion, or 25 percent of the federal budget, in
2025.
•
The government spent an average of about $6,100 per
Medicare beneﬁciary in 2001.
•
In 1998, 6 percent of Medicare beneﬁciaries accounted
for nearly one-half of total expenditures.
•
Fifty-one percent of Medicare beneﬁciaries have
incomes below $25,000.
•
In 1999, Medicare managed care enrollment peaked at
6.3 million, or 16 percent of Medicare beneﬁciaries, and
declined to 5 million, or 12 percent, as of July 1, 2002.
•
Thirty-eight percent of Medicare beneﬁciaries lacked
prescription drug coverage in the fall of 1999. 
Prescription Drugs: Key Facts
•
Thirty-two new drugs and treatments were approved
in 2001 by the Food and Drug Administration for
conditions like HIV/AIDS, arthritis, cancer,
Alzheimer’s disease, heart disease, and schizophrenia.
•
In 1999, doctors prescribed 146 drugs for every 100
visits, compared with 109 drugs per 100 visits in 1985.
•
The average person had 10.3 prescriptions ﬁlled in
2000, compared with 8.3 ﬁve years earlier.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
139

•
The average price of a prescription from a retail
pharmacy rose 10 percent in 2001, climbing to $49.84,
from $45.27 the year before.
•
Generic drugs accounted for 45 percent of
prescriptions ﬁlled in 2001, but just 8 percent of dollars
spent.
•
Some 42 percent of uninsured adults who needed
medications for high blood pressure were not taking
them, compared with 25 percent of insured adults.
•
Medicare beneﬁciaries are 14 percent of the U.S.
population, but account for 43 percent of
pharmaceutical prescriptions.
•
People over 65 spent an average of $706 on drugs in
1999, or about 2.7 percent of their household spending,
compared with $370 for all consumers, or 1 percent of
household spending.
•
Medicare beneﬁciaries with drug coverage used an
average of 24 prescriptions in 1998, compared with 17
for Medicare beneﬁciaries without coverage.
Beneﬁciaries in poor health who had drug coverage
used 42 medications, compared with 27 for uninsured
people in poor health who lacked drug coverage. 
Health Care Costs: Key Facts
•
Total national health care spending reached $1.3
trillion in 2000, or 13.2 percent of the nation’s gross
domestic product. Health care spending is projected to
reach $2.6 trillion in 2010, an estimated 16.8 percent of
the GDP.
•
Total national spending on health care climbed 6.9
percent during 2000, marking the greatest one-year
increase since 1993.
•
Health care spending per capita rose 10 percent during
2001.
•
Prescription drug costs have climbed dramatically over
the past few years, increasing 18 percent in 2000 and 17
percent in 2001.
•
In 2000, hospital costs rose 5.1 percent to $412 billion,
the ﬁrst one-year increase above the 4 percent level
since 1993.
•
Overall hospital spending increased 12 percent in 2001.
140
Facts and Documents

•
Health insurance premiums for employers rose 11
percent in 2001, the largest increase since 1992. The
increase in 2002 was 12.7 percent.
•
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs) serving
members of the California Public Employees’
Retirement System (CalPERS), a large state employee
beneﬁt program, have negotiated premium hikes
averaging 25 percent for 2003. 
Chronic Care: Key Facts
•
There are 125 million people with chronic conditions, a
ﬁgure expected to rise to 171 million by 2030.
•
Thirty-seven percent of all working-age Americans
have at least one chronic health condition.
•
The treatment of chronic conditions, combined with
lost productivity, costs our society more than $650
billion a year.
•
Average spending for a person with a chronic condition
is $6,032 a year and can go as high as $16,000 a year if
the individual needs help with the activities of daily
living.
•
Only one in four people with high blood pressure
receive any treatment for this condition.
•
Twenty percent of Medicare beneﬁciaries have ﬁve or
more chronic conditions, and they account for two-
thirds of Medicare spending.
•
Asthma is the number one cause of school absences
due to chronic conditions, with an average of 7.3 school
days missed annually per student. The cost of care for
asthma sufferers totals $7.5 billion a year. 
Long-Term Care: Key Facts
•
Of the estimated 13 million Americans needing long-
term care, about 56 percent are over the age of 65.
•
About 1.6 million people with long-term care needs
reside in nursing homes.
•
A year’s stay in a nursing home costs roughly $50,000,
and the average nursing home stay is about two and
one-half years. The average annual cost for hiring
someone to provide care at home is about $15,000.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
141

•
Medicare pays for virtually no custodial nursing home
care.
•
Six of every 10 Americans who reach age 65 eventually
need some long-term care services.
•
The average age of a nursing home resident is 84, and
74 percent of these residents are women. 
Managed Care: Key Facts
•
In 2001, 93 percent of Americans with health coverage
were in managed care plans, compared with 54 percent
in 1993.
•
Preferred provider plans have become the dominant
form of managed care, covering 48 percent of workers
with health coverage in 2001, up from 16 percent in
1988.
•
The percentage of Medicare beneﬁciaries enrolled in
managed care peaked from 1998 to 2000 at 16 percent,
up from 4 percent in 1992. That share dropped to 12
percent in July 2002.
•
Medicaid enrollees in managed care rose to 57 percent
in 2001, from 9 percent in 1990. 
•
Forty-two states have set up independent panels to
review coverage decisions by managed care
companies. 
Center for Studying Health System Change
http://www.hschange.org/
The most recent reports the center has available on its Web site are cata-
loged in Tables 5.10 and 5.11, taken directly from the Web site.
We have included more details on two topics covered by this
group. One document is an example of the tracking reports that the
center produces, and the other is an example of an issue brief. The
tracking report “So Much to Do, So Little Time: Physician Capacity
Constraints, 1997–2001” deals with the important health policy is-
sues of availability of physicians and their ability to manage the
amount of work that needs to be done within the healthcare delivery
system on an aggregate level. The second selection is an example of an
issue brief. This particular brief uses the HSC data obtained from their
project-site visits to discuss some particular healthcare cost and access
issues.
142
Facts and Documents

Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
143
TABLE 5.10
HSC Data Bulletins
Aging Plays Limited Role in Health Care Cost Trends
Tracking Health Care Costs
Tracking Health Care Costs
Tracking Health Care Costs
Some Communities Make Progress in Reducing Children’s Uninsurance
Who Is Likely to Switch Health Plans?
Patients Concerned About Insurer Influences
Why People Change Their Health Care Providers
Source: Center for Studying Health System Change. http://www.hschange.org/index.cgi?func=pubs&what=1.
Accessed on January 27, 2003.
Title
Date
September 2002
September 2002
September 2001
November 2000
October 2000
July 2000
June 2000
May 2000
So Much to Do, So Little Time: 
Physician Capacity Constraints, 1997–2001
Tracking Report No. 8 
May 2003 
Sally Trude
Signs of tightened physician capacity1—or physicians’ ability to
provide services relative to demand—appeared between 1997
and 2001, according to a study by the Center for Studying Health
System Change (HSC). Patients waited longer for appointments,
and more physicians reported having inadequate time with
patients. Despite signs of tightened physician capacity, the
TABLE 5.11
HSC Tracking Reports
Back in the Driver’s Seat: Specialists Regaining Autonomy
Mounting Pressures: Physicians Serving Medicaid Patients and the Uninsured,
1997–2001
Kinder and Gentler: Physicians and Managed Care, 1997–2001
Working Families’ Health Insurance Coverage, 1997–2001
Who Do You Trust? Americans’ Perspectives on Health Care, 1997–2001
The Insurance Gap and Minority Health Care, 1997–2001
Treading Water: Americans’ Access to Needed Medical Care, 1997–2001
Source: Center for Studying Health System Change. http://www.hschange.org/index.cgi?func=pubs&what=15.
Accessed on January 27, 2003.
Title
Date
January 2003
December 2002
November 2002
August 2002
August 2002
June 2002
March 2002

supply of physicians grew modestly, the proportion of
physicians working with nurse practitioners and other
caregivers increased and doctors spent more time in direct
patient care. This seeming contradiction emerged as the retreat
from tightly managed care gave patients freedom to seek more
care without substantial out-of-pocket cost increases. Current
physician capacity constraints may ease if higher out-of-pocket
costs prompt patients to seek less care.
Physician Supply Grows
The number of physicians in the United States continued to
increase between 1995 and 2000, from 260 to 276 physicians per
100,000 people.2 However, debates about a potential physician
shortage have re-emerged.
As the practice of medicine changes rapidly and becomes
increasingly complex, physicians have more diagnostic and
treatment options for a larger pool of patients. Medical advances
have transformed once terminal diseases—for example, many
types of cancer—into chronic conditions that physicians must
manage long term. Increased treatment capabilities may be
causing physicians to shift how they spend time as they provide
and interpret more diagnostic information and discuss results
and treatment options with their patients and other physicians.
The current transition in the health care marketplace away
from tight health plan restrictions also may have sparked
temporary capacity constraints for physician services,
complicating the debate about a potential physician shortage.
Physicians Spend More Time on Patient Care
Physicians spent more time in direct patient care between 1997
and 2001, but they worked fewer hours overall, according to the
HSC Community Tracking Study Physician Survey. The time
physicians spent in direct patient care grew from 44.7 hours a
week in 1997 to 46.6 hours in 2001, while their average medically
related work week fell from 55.5 hours to 54.4 hours during the
same period (see Table 1). Overall, the proportion of time
physicians spent in direct patient care activities increased from
81 percent in 1997 to 86 percent in 2001.
Medically related activities include time spent on
administrative tasks, professional activities and direct patient
care but exclude time spent on call when not actually working.
Direct care of patients includes face-to-face contact with patients,
144
Facts and Documents

as well as patient record-keeping and office work, travel time to
see patients and communication with physicians, hospitals,
pharmacies and others on patients’ behalf.
Constrained physician capacity also may be affecting
physicians’ willingness to accept new patients. A growing
proportion of physicians no longer accepts all new Medicare and
privately insured patients, possibly because physicians face more
patients seeking care and growing time pressures. The proportion
of physicians accepting all new Medicare patients fell from 73
percent in 1997 to 69 percent in 2001, while the proportion of
physicians accepting all new privately insured patients fell from
70.8 percent to 68.2 percent over the same period.
At the same time, more physician practices employed
physician assistants, nurse practitioners, nurse midwives and
clinical nurse specialists. The proportion of physicians in
noninstitutional practice settings who worked with these
caregivers increased from 40 percent in 1997 to 48 percent in 2001
(see Figure 1). The trend was most noticeable for group practices
of three or more physicians, where the proportion employing
nonphysician caregivers grew from 53 percent in 1997 to 66
percent in 2001.
Despite spending more time in direct patient care, a
growing proportion of physicians reported having inadequate
time with their patients.
More People Saw Doctors
The proportion of Americans who saw a physician at least once
during the year grew slightly between 1997 and 2001, from 77
percent to 78 percent. Although slightly more people saw a
doctor, and physicians spent more time in direct patient care, the
average number of doctor visits per person remained constant.
Between 1997 and 2001, people had an average of 3.8
physician office visits a year. Practices’ employment of
nonphysician practitioners did not boost the average number of
office visits per person, and the average number of office visits to
either a physician or nurse practitioner remained unchanged—
about four a year. Yet, more people reported seeing a nurse
practitioner at least once during the year, with the proportion
rising from 12 percent in 1997 to 15 percent in 2001.
Since the average number of office visits to either a
physician or nurse practitioner was constant between 1997 and
2001, a possible explanation for the increase in people seeing a
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
145

146
Facts and Documents
FIGURE 1
Physicians in Practices with Allied Health Professionals, by Type of Practice
a
b
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
All Practices
Solo/2-Physician Practice
Group (3 or More Physicians)
Group- or Staff-Model HMO
2001
1999
1997
83.3
86.9
85.8
53.0
58.8*
65.7*#
40.3
44.0*
47.5*#
23.7
24.6
26.8#
a. Practices in noninstitutional settings.
b. Includes physician assistants, nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, and clinical nurse specialists.
*Change from previous survey is statistically significant at p < .05.
#Change from 1997–2001 is statistically significant at p < .05.
Source: HSC Community Tracking Study Physician Survey.
TABLE 1
Physician Time Spent in Medically Related Activity and Direct Patient Care
Medically related: Average weekly hours
Direct patient care: Average weekly hours
Percent of time in direct patient care
aChange from previous survey is statistically significant at p < .05.
bChange from 1997–2001 is statistically significant at p < .05.
Source: HSC Community Tracking Study Physician Survey.
1997
1999
2001
55.5
44.7
81.0
54.5a
44.7
82.6
54.4b
46.6b
86.3a, b

nurse practitioner is that more patients are seeing both a
physician and a nurse practitioner during the same visit.
Where Does All the Time Go?
Despite spending more time in direct patient care, a growing
proportion of physicians reported having inadequate time with
their patients. When asked to agree or disagree with the
statement, “I have adequate time to spend with my patients
during office hours,” 34 percent disagreed in 2001, compared
with 28 percent in 1997 (see Figure 2). Other research, however,
shows that time physicians spend face to face with patients did
not change during the same period.3
Medical advances mean more treatment options are
available to more patients. People are living longer with chronic
illnesses that may require more complex coordination with other
caregivers. With more diagnostic and treatment options
available, physicians’ increased time in direct patient care may
reﬂect more time spent on patient care activities other than face-
to-face visits with patients.
A growing list of recommended preventive services also
may be consuming primary care physicians’ time with patients.
A recent study4 estimated that if doctors followed all
government recommendations aimed at preventing disease and
injury, they would spend more than seven hours a day on the
standards. Physicians may be frustrated by having too much to
discuss with their patients in too little time.
Another indication of strained physician capacity is the
growing proportion of people who did not get or postponed
needed care because they could not get a timely appointment. In
2001, 5 percent of Americans did not get or postponed care
because they couldn’t get an appointment soon enough,
compared with 3.4 percent in 1997.
Less-restrictive managed care practices and broader
provider networks likely have made it easier for patients to see
the physician of their choice. More patients can now bypass
gatekeepers and preauthorization requirements when seeing
specialists. Moreover, in 2001, because of the tight labor market,
employers were reluctant to pass the rising costs of health
insurance on to their workers and only made small increases to
copayments and deductibles.
People may be receiving more care as a result of fewer
restrictions and no substantial out-of-pocket cost increase. Without
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
147

a signiﬁcant expansion in physician capacity, fewer managed care
restrictions may have led to longer waits for appointments.
However, as consumers must pay more out of pocket at the
doctor’s office, current capacity constraints may ease.
More Specialty Referrals
A growing proportion of primary care physicians reported
referring more patients to specialists. In 2001, about one in four
primary care physicians said they had referred more patients to
specialists in the past two years, compared with less than one in
ﬁve physicians in 1997 (see Table 2). Over this same period,
managed care plans lifted many of the restrictions they had
imposed on access to specialists, which likely accounts for some
of the increase in referrals.
Yet, the proportion of primary care physicians who
reported problems arranging referrals to specialists also grew
148
Facts and Documents
FIGURE 2
Physicians Reporting Inadequate Time with Patients
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
2001
1999
1997
*Change from previous survey is statistically significant at p < .05.
#Change from 1997–2001 is statistically significant at p < .05.
Source: HSC Community Tracking Study Physician Survey.
27.6
33.1*
34.2#

slightly. Physicians were asked whether they were always,
almost always, frequently, sometimes, rarely or never able to
obtain referrals to high-quality specialists. Physicians were
considered to have problems obtaining referrals if they reported
“sometimes, rarely or never.” Between 1997 and 2001, the
proportion of primary care physicians reporting problems
arranging specialty referrals increased from 4.8 percent to 7.2
percent. In contrast, the proportion of medical specialists who
reported problems stayed about the same, while the proportion
of surgical specialists who reported problems fell.
Waiting times for an appointment with a specialist grew
between 1997 and 2001, but waiting times for primary care
physicians remained unchanged. Half of all patients seeing a
specialist for a speciﬁc illness waited 8.1 days or more in 2001,
compared with 6.6 days or more in 1997. Half of all patients
seeking an appointment with a primary care physician for a
speciﬁc illness waited about a day.
Changes in specialists’ willingness to accept all new
patients regardless of their insurance coverage depended on the
physician’s specialty. Surgical specialists’ willingness to accept
all new Medicare, Medicaid and privately insured patients
declined from 51 percent to 45 percent between 1997 and 2001. In
contrast, a growing proportion of medical specialists accepted all
new patients, while there was no change in the proportion of
primary care physicians who accepted all new patients.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
149
TABLE 2
Referrals to Specialists
Primary care physicians reporting increased
referrals to specialists over the last two years
Reporting problems obtaining referral to
specialists
Primary care physicians
Medical specialists
Surgical specialists
aChange from previous survey is statistically significant at p < .05.
bChange from 1997–2001 is statistically significant at p < .05.
Source: HSC Community Tracking Study Physician Survey.
1997
1999
2001
17.8%
4.8
10.8
12.2
21.6%a
4.6
11.3
12.2
25.5%b
7.2a, b
10.2
7.8a, b

The Shifting Marketplace
Revived debates about the adequacy of physician supply are
occurring during an imbalance between patients seeking medical
care and physician capacity. Yet, people on both sides of the
debate agree that physician supply decisions should reﬂect long-
term needs and not temporary ﬂuctuations and imbalances in
the availability of physician services.5
Currently, the U.S. health care marketplace is in transition
from managed care restrictions such as gatekeeping and
preauthorization to increased cost sharing for those who seek
care. Although fewer managed care restrictions may have
prompted people to seek more care and physicians to provide
more care, physician capacity constraints may ease if people seek
less care when faced with higher out-of-pocket costs.
The relative prominence of primary and specialty care may
shift over time as well. When managed care plans’ use of
primary care physicians as gatekeepers swept the country in the
early 1990s, the emphasis shifted away from specialist care to
primary care.6 As the number of people in tightly managed care
increased, use of specialists was expected to fall. Estimates based
on specialist-to-patient ratios in health maintenance
organizations forecast a serious oversupply of specialists.7 With
fewer managed care restrictions limiting access to specialists,
more people may seek specialist care, either directly or through
their primary caregiver, but higher out-of-pocket costs may
temper how often they seek specialty care.
Data Source
This Tracking Report presents ﬁndings from the HSC
Community Tracking Study Physician Survey, a nationally
representative telephone survey of physicians involved in direct
patient care in the continental United States conducted in
1996–97, 1998–99 and 2000–01. For discussion and presentation,
we refer to a single calendar year of the survey (1997, 1999 and
2001). The sample of physicians was drawn from the American
Medical Association and the American Osteopathic Association
master ﬁles and included active, nonfederal, office- and hospital-
based physicians who spent at least 20 hours per week in direct
patient care. Residents and fellows were excluded. Each round of
the survey contains information on about 12,000 physicians, and
the response rates ranged from 59 percent to 65 percent.
150
Facts and Documents

Notes
1. Physician capacity depends on a range of factors, including
physician supply, the amount of time physicians are willing to devote to
patient care, the mix of types of physicians and patients’ demand for
physician services.
2. Salsburg, Edward S., and Gaetano J. Forte, “Trends in the Physician
Workforce, 1980–2000,”Health Affairs, Vol. 21, No. 5 (September/October 
2002).
3. Mechanic, David, Donna D. McAlpine and Marsha Rosenthal, “Are
Patients’ Office Visits with Physicians Getting Shorter?” The New England Journal
of Medicine, Vol. 344, No. 3 (Jan. 18, 2001).
4. Yarnall, Kimberly S. H., et al., “Primary Care: Is There Enough Time for
Prevention?” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 93, No. 4 (April 2003).
5. Cooper, Richard A., et al., “Economic and Demographic Trends Signal
an Impending Physician Shortage,” Health Affairs, Vol. 21, No. 1
(January/February 2002).
6. Grumbach, Kevin, “Fighting Hand to Hand Over Physician Workforce
Policy,” Health Affairs, Vol. 21, No. 5 (September/October 2002).
7. Weiner, Jonathan P., “Forecasting the Effects of Health Reform on
U.S. Physician Workforce Requirement: Evidence from HMO Staffing
Patterns,” Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 272, No. 3 (July 20,
1994).
TRACKING REPORTS are published by the Center for Studying Health
System Change. President: Paul B. Ginsburg Director of Public Affairs:
Richard Sorian Editor: The Stein Group. Contact HSC at: 600 Maryland
Avenue SW, Suite 550, Washington, DC 20024–2512 Tel: (202) 554–7549 (for
publication information) Tel: (202) 484–5261 (for general HSC information)
Fax: (202) 484–9258, www.hschange.org.
Source: Center for Studying Health System Change. http://www.
hschange.org/CONTENT/556/. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
Health Care Cost and Access 
Problems Intensify
Initial Findings From HSC’s Recent Site Visits
Issue Brief No. 63 
May 2003 
Cara S. Lesser, Paul B. Ginsburg
[Note: Only the ﬁrst half of this report is included below.]
More detailed information on survey methodology can be found
at www.hschange.org.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
151

Continued high-cost trends are threatening the
affordability of health insurance and many consumers’ access to
care. Early ﬁndings from the Center for Studying Health System
Change’s (HSC) 2002–03 site visits to 12 nationally representative
communities show the retreat from tightly managed care
continues to shape local health care markets. Employers are
aggressively shifting higher health costs to workers, and absent
tight managed care controls to limit the use of care and slow
payment rate increases, hospitals and physicians in many
markets are competing ﬁercely for proﬁtable specialty services.
These developments have sparked growing skepticism about the
potential for market-led solutions to the cost, quality and access
problems facing the health care system today.
Déjà Vu All Over Again
Two years ago, new cost and access problems emerged in the
U.S. health care system as managed care lost its bite in the wake
of a powerful consumer backlash. Health plans responded to
consumer demand for broad choice of doctors and hospitals and
loosened restrictions on care. Fewer restrictions on care led to
higher utilization and taxed the capacity of many hospitals and
physicians to meet demand. With broad provider networks and
tighter capacity the norm, plans lost leverage over providers to
negotiate price discounts—a key element in lower health cost
trends throughout much of the 1990s. Facing rising premiums
and reduced proﬁts, some employers began to increase patient
cost sharing in a bid to control health beneﬁt outlays.
Along with higher costs, consumers confronted new
barriers to care. Providers’ greater clout sparked contract
showdowns between prominent hospitals or physician groups
and health plans, jeopardizing continuity of care for patients.
Hospital capacity problems emerged for the ﬁrst time in decades,
causing emergency department diversions and endangering
patients’ access to timely care. Competition for high-margin
specialty services, especially cardiac, cancer and orthopedic care,
heated up among hospitals and physicians, prompting some
providers to expand capacity for select proﬁtable services rather
than address broader capacity problems. Indeed, the aggressive
copycat behavior and one-upmanship observed in many markets
suggested a new medical arms race was underway.
Over the past two years, these trends have intensiﬁed.
Higher cost sharing is widespread, affecting more employees
152
Facts and Documents

and a greater number of services. Traditional strategies for
managing care have continued to lose ground, and providers
have stepped up expansion of lucrative specialty services,
escalating concerns about costs and the implications of possible
excess capacity in some areas. At the same time, many states face
substantial budget shortfalls, prompting some immediate cuts in
public health insurance programs and proposals for deeper cuts.
Access at a Cost: A New Deal for Employees
With the slow economy and three consecutive years of double-
digit health insurance premium increases cutting into ﬁrms’
bottom lines, employers are moving more aggressively to shift
more health costs to workers. In some respects, this conﬂuence of
events recalls the early 1990s when employers struggled with
rapidly rising premiums during an economic downturn and
responded by aggressively shifting health beneﬁt offerings to
tightly managed care.
However, there are some key differences today. While labor
markets have loosened since the late 1990s, they are not as
severely depressed as a decade ago. The current 6 percent
national unemployment rate is not high by historical standards,
so employers are still somewhat cautious in responding to rising
health costs. In addition, there was a great deal of optimism in
the early 1990s about managed care and integrated delivery as
an effective strategy to control rising health care costs and
rationalize the health care system.
Today, a more modest vision is emerging as employers pin
their hopes on the ﬂedgling consumerism movement in health
care to help rein in costs. The price and quality information
consumers will need to make informed choices about the trade-
offs among costs, quality and accessibility of care are still lacking
for the most part, making the idea of consumer-driven health
care a long-term strategy at best. Furthermore, some question
whether incentives can be made powerful enough to lead to
substantial changes in behavior without being perceived as
barriers to care.
In the meantime, more employers are increasing cost
sharing than two years ago, and employers are applying this
strategy to a broader scope of services. Some employers,
especially unionized ﬁrms and public sector employers, for the
ﬁrst time are requiring employees to make up-front
contributions to health insurance premiums. Employers that
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
153

already required premium contributions are increasing
copayments and deductibles. And, in many cases, employers are
replacing copayments, or ﬁxed-dollar payments, with
coinsurance, where patients pay a percentage of the price for
services. The end result: Employees are seeing more of their
paycheck going to premiums and paying more out of pocket
when they ﬁll a prescription or see a doctor.
Indeed, employers and beneﬁt consultants interviewed in
the 12 sites comment that, under the premise that managed care
would control costs, employers assumed a much larger
proportion of their employees’ health care costs over the past
decade. They now hope to readjust employee expectations and
signiﬁcantly increase workers’ share of costs. However, unlike
the move to managed care in the early 1990s, there is less
conﬁdence this strategy will have signiﬁcant, long-term effects
on care utilization patterns and delivery system efficiency.
Health Plans Prosper, Managed Care Wanes
Most health plans are more proﬁtable than they were two years
ago, mainly because premium increases have exceeded medical
cost trends and plans have exited unproﬁtable lines of business,
such as Medicare and Medicaid. But they are still reeling from
the vigorous managed care backlash, and without a strong
mandate from employers to reintroduce aggressive cost-control
measures, plans have few tools to control costs.
Broad provider networks are now the norm, leaving plans
with little credible threat of excluding hospitals as a way to
negotiate lower payment rates. Global capitation arrangements,
where providers assumed total ﬁnancial risk for patients’ care in
return for a ﬁxed payment, have all but disappeared in most
communities, and even primary care capitation has declined
substantially, eliminating a key ﬁnancial incentive for providers
to control care utilization. Many plans have scaled back
traditional utilization management techniques, such as prior
authorization and primary care gate-keeping, and some have
moved away from conventional disease management programs.
Most plans continue to pursue case management for the small
percentage of high-cost patients who account for a large share of
health care services, but the effect of these efforts is still quite
limited.
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) have replaced
health maintenance organization (HMOs) as the platform of
154
Facts and Documents

choice for health plan products. Plans also are experimenting
with new PPO or HMO designs that sort network providers into
different tiers with varying cost-sharing requirements, and they
are developing consumer-driven health plans, or high-
deductible plans with a personal spending account.
For the most part, these products are still on the drawing
board or have been introduced only recently, with few takers to
date. Although employers are now more interested in these
products, most remain skeptical and are reluctant to be the ﬁrst
to sign up. Tiered-network products have faced stiff resistance
from hospitals, which question the methodology used to
establish the tiers. In some cases, hospitals have refused to
participate in tiered networks and, in other cases, have used
their negotiating leverage and political inﬂuence to avoid
placement in high-cost tiers, limiting plans’ ability to establish
different tiers.
Some plans are emphasizing more customized products,
with combinations of different beneﬁt packages and network
conﬁgurations. For example, in Indianapolis and Cleveland,
Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield has introduced a product, called
Anthem by Design, that offers a choice of beneﬁt add-ons to a
base insurance product. Anthem likens the approach to buying a
car, where a customer can add upgrades to a base model. As
with other new product designs, such as consumer-driven
products and tiered networks, these features are intended to
reduce costs without sacriﬁcing the broad choice of providers
demanded by consumers. Critics, however, contend that
consumers do not have enough information to make meaningful
choices among these options.
Some plans are experimenting with incentive-based
provider payments as an alternative to capitation. Rather than
placing providers at ﬁnancial risk for overutilization of care,
these payment schemes reward providers for meeting quality
and efficiency standards by supplementing base compensation
with a bonus payment. Plans are experimenting with this
approach in advanced managed care markets, such as Boston
and Orange County, as well as in smaller markets with less
managed care experience, such as Indianapolis, Cleveland and
Syracuse. While incentive payments are more attractive to
providers than ﬁnancial risk, it is unclear whether the payments
will be signiﬁcant enough to get providers’ attention and affect
practice patterns and care delivery.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
155

The Commonwealth Fund
http://www.cmwf.org
An example of the issue briefs produced by this group is included here.
It is “Covering the Uninsured: Prospects and Problems.” This is a mul-
tipage review of issues connected with covering the uninsured that also
includes a list of thirty-nine additional citations at the end of the brief.
The brief reviews some of the most pertinent facts about the current
state of health insurance coverage, prospects for coverage expansion,
and barriers to coverage expansion.
Covering the Uninsured: 
Prospects and Problems
Juliette Cubanski, John F. Kennedy School of Government, and
Janet Kline, Health Policy Specialist
Introduction: The Current Status of 
Health Insurance Coverage
Increasing the number of Americans with health insurance has
been a recurrent focus of federal and state policymaking, and
recent trends suggest that the issue continues to warrant
legislative attention. The number of people without health
insurance coverage in the United States increased in 2001, a
reversal of two years of falling rates of uninsurance. According
to the Census Bureau, an estimated 14.5 percent of the total
population (41.2 million people) lacked health insurance for the
entire year in 2001, up from 14.2 percent in 2000—an increase of
1.4 million people.1 Insurance coverage varies by state of
residence, with New Mexico and Texas having the highest
average uninsured rates from 1999 to 2001 (23 percent) and
Rhode Island and Minnesota the lowest (7.8 percent). Private
employment-based insurance remains the primary source of
insurance coverage for most Americans, but public programs
such as Medicare, Medicaid, and the state Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) are an important source of coverage
for millions of elderly and disabled individuals and low-income
children and adults.
Gaps in private and public coverage leave many
Americans without access to health insurance or with only
limited coverage. Many workers do not have access to
156
Facts and Documents

employment-based insurance because they cannot afford it or
their employer does not offer it.2 Coverage in the private, non-
group insurance market has been limited because premiums
are based on an individual’s age and health status, and are
substantially more expensive than group plans purchased by
employers.3,4 Medicaid and CHIP cover many low-income
Americans, primarily children, but eligibility criteria and
covered services for these programs vary across states,
resulting in coverage disparities. In addition to gaps that leave
millions without insurance, researchers estimate that about
one-fifth of insured individuals are underinsured, meaning
that they face limits on coverage or substantial financial
barriers to receiving treatment if they become ill.5 Overall,
these limitations in public and private coverage are not new.
Yet recent trends—such as rising health care costs that fuel
growth in health insurance premiums, and higher
unemployment rates linked to a weakened economy—could
lead to an erosion of the modest coverage improvements seen
at the end of the 1990s.
Who Are the Uninsured?
People without insurance cannot easily be categorized.
Demographic factors such as age, race, and ethnicity, as well as
socioeconomic and employment status, affect health insurance
coverage rates. The poor and near-poor have the greatest risk of
being uninsured, but the large majority of uninsured also come
from working families.6 Exhibit 1 presents rates of the uninsured
in 2001 by selected characteristics.
Trends in Public and Private Coverage
In 2001, almost 200 million people had private health insurance
coverage. The vast majority, 176.5 million people, had employer-
sponsored coverage. Public programs covered 71.3 million
people, including 38 million enrolled in Medicare, 31.6 million
covered by Medicaid, 9.5 million with military health care
(including care provided by the Veterans Administration), and
2.3 million covered by CHIP. (Coverage estimates by type of
plan are not mutually exclusive, since people can have both
public and private coverage as well as both Medicare and
Medicaid.) Rates of employment-based coverage gradually
increased in the mid- to late-1990s, fueled by a good economy,
low unemployment, and slower growth in insurance
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
157

EXHIBIT 1
Rates of the Uninsured in 2001 by Selected Characteristics
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 202 Annual Demographic Supplement.
Income
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
$75,000 or more
$50,000–$74,999
$25,000–$49,999
Less than $25,000
23.3%
17.7%
11.3%
7.7%
Ethnicity
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Hispanic
Asian
Black
White
13.6%
19.0%
18.2%
33.2%
Work experience
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Did not work
Worked part-time
Worked full-time
Worked during year
17.0%
16.0%
22.0%
24.7%
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
65 years and older
45–64 years
35–44 years
25–34 years
18–24 years
Under 18 years
11.7%
28.1%
23.4%
16.1%
13.1%
0.8%

premiums.7 Enrollment in Medicaid declined following welfare
reform in 1996, but state efforts to increase outreach and expand
eligibility helped to stabilize Medicaid coverage. The CHIP
program, begun in 1997, increased insurance coverage among
low-income children. In 1999 and 2000, these coverage trends
resulted in a decrease in the total number of uninsured.
However, recent trends in coverage and rising health care costs
may threaten coverage improvements. As described below,
premiums for employer-sponsored coverage are increasing and
many employers pass on these rising costs to their employees.
States are facing budget constraints that may lead to cuts in
eligibility and beneﬁts in public programs such as Medicaid and
CHIP. Reﬂecting these trends, half of insured individuals are
worried about not being able to afford insurance or having
beneﬁts cut back in the coming year.8
EMPLOYER-SPONSORED INSURANCE TRENDS
The percent of people covered by employer-sponsored
insurance decreased in 2001, from 63.6 to 62.6 percent.9 The
declining rate of employer coverage has been accompanied by
increasing premiums. Between spring 2001 and spring 2002,
monthly premiums for employment-based coverage rose 12.7
percent, signiﬁcantly faster than wage gains for non-supervisory
workers (3.4 percent).10 Between 2001 and 2002, the worker’s
share of the overall premium rose by 27 percent for single
coverage (an average of $454 per year in total) and 16 percent
more for family coverage (an average of $2,084 per year in
total).11 In 2001, the average annual cost to an employer was
$3,060 for individual coverage and $7,954 for family coverage.12
With a 15 percent average increase in health care premiums
projected for 2003, additional increases in employee
contributions are likely to occur in the future.13 A variety of
surveys ﬁnd that employers plan to deal with rising health care
costs by increasing employees’ share of premiums as well as
other cost-sharing measures. An employer survey found that 78
percent of large ﬁrms (200 or more workers) plan to increase
employee premium contributions in the future, up from 44
percent in 2000.14 Forty percent of workers in January 2002
reported that they paid more for employer-sponsored coverage
in 2001 than in the previous year.15 Along with increasing the
employee contribution for premiums, employers are adopting
cost-sharing methods that increase employees’ responsibility for
decisions about care. These include raising costs for care received
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
159

out-of-network and copayments for physician and hospital
services and prescription drugs. One-third of working adults
report higher deductibles or copayments or beneﬁt reductions in
2001 compared with the previous year.16
Employers are also evaluating new health plan beneﬁt
designs, such as deﬁned contribution and consumer-driven or
consumer-directed plans. These insurance arrangements are
designed to give workers more choice, ﬂexibility, and control in
making health care decisions.17 In deﬁned contribution plans,
employers offer employees a ﬁxed sum to pay for coverage on
their own. The employee pays any insurance costs that exceed
the employer’s contribution. Approximately one-quarter of ﬁrms
say it is likely they will adopt this approach in the next few
years.18 Consumer-driven plans combine a high-deductible,
catastrophic insurance policy (i.e., a major medical plan) with a
health reimbursement account (HRA). In this arrangement, a
portion of the employer’s insurance contribution is placed in a
personal health account from which employees can draw to
purchase health care services with tax-exempt dollars.18, 19 In
June 2002, the Department of Treasury issued a ruling that
clariﬁes that HRAs must be funded solely by the employer and
cannot be funded by salary reductions, deﬁnes HRAs as group
health plans subject to the COBRA continuation requirements,
and allows unused balances in HRAs to carry over from one year
to the next.20 These features could increase the appeal of
consumer-driven plans. According to a recent survey, about 30
percent of large employers say they will offer a consumer-driven
plan by 2003.21
Requiring workers to pay higher cost-sharing amounts at
the time of use reverses the trend toward lower cost-sharing
amounts that accompanied the shift from indemnity insurance to
managed care (e.g., a shift from a $100 deductible and 20 percent
coinsurance to $10 per visit copayments). Some might argue that
such a shift is overdue, since insurance arrangements have
tended to insulate consumers from the actual cost of care, which
may increase consumption of marginally beneﬁcial services.
Some might also argue that this shift is timely because managed
care restrictions on use, which accompanied the lower cost-
sharing, have been relaxed in recent years—giving rise to the
term “managed care lite.” Giving employees more control over
their health spending through the use of consumer-driven plans
could make basic coverage more available and affordable,
160
Facts and Documents

thereby increasing coverage and relieving employers of
increasing cost pressures, but it could also mean that some
workers will pay more in costs at the time of use than under
their old policies. The degree to which this ultimately will shift
costs to workers will depend to a great extent on the amount the
employer contributes as the lump sum and the correlation of
high spending across years; i.e., whether high spending in one
year is offset by low spending in another, so that in the low-
spending year the worker comes out ahead. Requiring workers
to pay higher premiums for the same coverage may lead some
employees to drop coverage and thus exacerbate the problem of
the uninsured.
TRENDS IN PUBLIC COVERAGE: MEDICAID AND CHIP
Among the entire population, the percent covered by
government insurance programs rose in 2001, from 24.7 to 25.3
percent. This increase was largely due to an increase in the rate
of Medicaid coverage, from 10.6 percent in 2000 to 11.2 percent in
2001.22 According to the Census Bureau, Medicaid covered 31.6
million people in 2001. Beneﬁciaries include low-income mothers
and children, and elderly and disabled individuals. Congress
enacted CHIP as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
providing $20.3 billion in federal funds over ﬁve years for states
to expand coverage to low-income uninsured children.
Enrollment in CHIP grew slowly during the initial years, but as
of the end of 2001, total enrollment exceeded three million
children. If the downward trend in private employer-sponsored
insurance coverage continues beyond 2001, further increases in
public program enrollment are likely to occur, absent changes at
the state level to limit coverage expansions in order to reduce
expenditures.
Prospects for Coverage Expansions
Recent policy debates have emphasized targeted approaches to
expanding coverage. Current proposals include increasing
enrollment in existing public programs, establishing tax beneﬁts
for purchasing health insurance, and expanding coverage
through public-private linkages.
PUBLIC PROGRAM CREATION AND EXPANSION
Some policymakers support expanding coverage by
building on existing public programs or creating new state-based
programs. Proponents of these strategies argue that increasing
coverage can be most easily accomplished by expanding
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
161

eligibility for existing programs. Opponents are concerned about
the substitution of public coverage for private coverage, and
concerned that such expansions create a larger and less desirable
role for government given that the private market is the
predominant source of coverage.
Despite these concerns, a number of states have increased
enrollment in existing programs by raising income or age
eligibility levels for Medicaid and CHIP beyond federal
minimums, and opening enrollment to parents of children
eligible for these programs. Section 1115 of the Social Security
Act provides authority to the secretary of the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) to waive statutory provisions
of the federal law to permit demonstration programs that further
Medicaid program goals. As of May 2002, 8.2 million individuals
received coverage under Section 1115 waivers, accounting for
nearly one-ﬁfth of all Medicaid spending.23 The Bush
administration has also enhanced the ﬂexibility of states to
increase coverage in Medicaid and CHIP through the Health
Insurance Flexibility and Accountability (HIFA) waiver
initiative. Announced in August 2001, HIFA is targeted at
populations with incomes below 200 percent of the federal
poverty level ($17,720 for an individual in 2002). HIFA allows
states to ﬁnance coverage expansions by reducing the cost of
public coverage in ways not otherwise permitted, such as
reducing beneﬁts and increasing cost-sharing for certain
groups.24 Such ﬂexibility is viewed as essential by some states
facing budget shortfalls that nevertheless want to implement
public program expansions.
Using waiver authority, a few states have taken steps to
extend Medicaid or CHIP coverage to low-income parents whose
children are eligible for these programs. Research suggests that
by covering parents, states can also increase the extent to which
uninsured children are enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP.25, 26 In
1999, 11 states and the District of Columbia expanded coverage
to parents through either Medicaid or a separate state-funded
program.27 As of October 2002, HHS had approved waivers to
cover parents using Medicaid or CHIP funds in six states (three
of which also implemented expansions in 1999).28, 29 Some states
have created programs that target uninsured adults, ﬁnanced
solely through non-federal sources. For example, Pennsylvania’s
Adult Basic program uses $76 million from the state’s share of
the national tobacco settlement to provide low-cost health
162
Facts and Documents

insurance for uninsured individuals ages 19 to 64 with low
incomes (below 200 percent of the federal poverty level).
However, current economic conditions have reduced state tax
revenues nationwide and placed competing demands on limited
state funds. Thus, the prospects for covering a large number of
uninsured people through such state-based programs may be
limited in the foreseeable future.
ESTABLISHING TAX BENEFITS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE
Many policymakers favor expanding coverage by creating
tax beneﬁts that provide ﬁnancial incentives for individuals or
employers to purchase health insurance. Options include
creating a refundable tax credit for all workers, expanding and
permanently extending Archer medical savings accounts
(MSAs), creating tax credits for small employers, and expanding
tax beneﬁts for the self-employed.30 Proponents of tax beneﬁt
approaches argue that they give consumers greater choice and
control over their health insurance arrangements, and that they
address equity and efficiency problems in current law regarding
tax beneﬁts. Opponents argue that these approaches are
unlikely to make much difference for people who do not now
purchase insurance. A primary concern with the tax credit
approach is that depending on the size of the credit, it might not
beneﬁt lower-income families who cannot afford to purchase
insurance before the subsidy kicks in. Opponents also argue
that tax beneﬁt approaches could erode the employment-based
system but leave consumers with inadequate and more costly
alternatives.
The 107th Congress considered various tax beneﬁt
proposals. Proposals were made to expand and permanently
extend the authorization for MSAs (set to expire December 31,
2003); to allow self-employed taxpayers to deduct 100 percent of
the cost of their insurance beginning in 2002; to allow
individuals to deduct 100 percent of their insurance premiums,
regardless of whether they itemize; and to authorize a tax credit
for small employers (2 to 50 employees). In his Fiscal Year 2003
budget, President Bush allocated $89 billion over 10 years to
establish a refundable tax credit for individuals under age 65.
Under this approach, people who purchase coverage in the
individual market could reduce their federal tax payments by
some or all of the amount spent for insurance. A refundable tax
credit would enable low-income people to claim the credit even
if they owed no taxes.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
163

While most of these proposals were not enacted in the
107th Congress, a tax credit provision was included in trade
legislation signed into law in August 2002. The Trade Act of 2002
(P.L. 107–210) provides $12 billion over 10 years for beneﬁts to
trade-displaced workers, including a refundable tax credit to
cover 65 percent of the cost of health insurance premiums.
Uninsured workers who lose their jobs due to increased
importation could use the tax credit to purchase insurance
through employer-sponsored coverage offered by their former
employers (i.e., COBRA coverage), or through state-sponsored
insurance purchasing pools and high-risk pools.
EXPANDING COVERAGE THROUGH PUBLIC-PRIVATE
LINKAGES
Some policymakers have proposed to expand coverage by
using public funds to subsidize the purchase of employer-
sponsored insurance. Such an approach could assist low-income
people who are offered coverage by their employer, but who
cannot afford the employee share of the premium. Proponents of
premium assistance, or “buy-in,” programs argue that the
combination of public funds with employer contributions lessens
the strain on both public and private payers and potentially
allows funds to cover more people. Building on employer
coverage could also help increase coverage by avoiding the
stigma associated with enrollment in public programs.
Under current law, states can create premium assistance
programs through the Medicaid Health Insurance Premium
Payment (HIPP) program or through CHIP.31 The cost of the buy-
in must be no higher than what the state would have paid to
enroll the individual in the public program (the cost-
effectiveness test). Establishment of premium assistance
programs to date has been limited because states have found the
cost-effectiveness test difficult to demonstrate and have had
trouble identifying eligible people—those who are enrolled in
public programs but who could access employer-sponsored
coverage.32 HIPP enrollment represents only 1 percent of states’
total Medicaid program enrollment.33 To date, seven states have
received approval from HHS to develop premium assistance
programs using CHIP funds.34 Despite limited experience with
premium assistance, the use of this strategy is likely to increase.
The HIFA initiative strongly encourages states to integrate
Medicaid and CHIP funds with funds for private health
insurance, and relaxes the cost-effectiveness guidelines to
164
Facts and Documents

facilitate this activity. According to HIFA guidelines, states are
not required to adhere to the cost-effectiveness test, but must
monitor total costs and ensure that they are not signiﬁcantly
higher than if “buy-in” participants were enrolled in public
programs. With this ﬂexibility, states have opportunities to use
public funds to subsidize private coverage among the low-
income uninsured, while keeping within budget limits.
Potential Barriers to Coverage Expansions
Policymakers face difficult challenges in dealing with the
uninsured problem, some of which are due to the design of the
insurance system and the nature of public and private coverage.
For instance, loss of employment can lead to loss of insurance,
but the unemployed are not automatically covered elsewhere.35
For those who lack a source of employment-based or public
coverage, the individual market is the only option. Yet, coverage
in this market is unstable and often unobtainable, the result of
high prices, medical underwriting practices, and a small risk
pool.36 Also, many uninsured people may be eligible for public
programs but do not participate because of enrollment barriers,
lack of awareness, or concerns about stigma.
As states implement eligibility expansions through
Medicaid and CHIP that target people at higher income levels,
policymakers are concerned about minimizing the extent to
which public coverage substitutes for existing private coverage.
Estimates of the magnitude of this substitution effect, known as
“crowd out,” vary.37 A primary concern is that employers might
reduce or drop beneﬁts for employees because of the availability
of public coverage. In their public program expansions, states
have implemented measures to minimize crowd out, such as
imposing premiums and establishing waiting periods after
losing private coverage. Such policies may prevent crowd out
but also may result in more limited enrollment among the
uninsured. Other barriers to expanding coverage stem from
more recent trends in health care. For the ﬁrst time in more than
a decade, per capita health care spending rose at a double-digit
rate in 2001, increasing by 10 percent.38 National health spending
is expected to grow faster than the gross domestic product
(GDP) for the rest of the decade, with the health share of GDP
projected to rise from 13.2 percent in 2000 to 17.0 percent by
2011.39 Thus, even if the uninsured rate does not increase
signiﬁcantly in the near future, health care cost growth makes
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
165

any measures that would reduce the current uninsured
population more expensive.
Conclusion
Incomplete insurance coverage has been a formidable problem
for policymakers. Solutions, whether incremental or broader in
scope, involve decisions about how to invest public funds.
Reaching out to a broad spectrum of uninsured individuals
could require a substantial investment of public and private
dollars. Conversely, minimizing costs in the current constrained
budget environment may mean restricting or limiting the target
population for coverage expansions. The factors that currently
exist—higher health care costs, increasing insurance premiums
and cost-sharing amounts, unemployment growth, and state
budget restrictions—suggest that making signiﬁcant inroads in
the uninsured population may be difficult in the foreseeable
future.
166
Facts and Documents
EXHIBIT 2
Percent of People Without Health Insurance for the Entire Year by State:
3-Year Average, 1999–2001
United States—Total
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2002 Annual Demographic Supplement.
State
Percent
State
Percent
State
Percent
14.5
13.2
17.7
18.4
15.0
19.2
15.1
9.7
9.5
13.6
17.8
15.3
9.7
16.5
13.6
10.8
8.0
11.4
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
13.0
19.7
10.7
11.3
8.7
9.9
7.8
15.2
8.8
16.0
9.6
17.2
9.0
12.5
23.2
15.8
14.2
10.9
10.8
17.9
13.1
8.7
7.2
13.3
10.4
10.8
23.0
13.6
9.7
11.9
13.5
14.2
8.5
15.6

References
1. Robert J. Mills. Health Insurance Coverage: 2001. Current Population
Reports P60-220. U.S. Census Bureau, September 2002.
2. Jeanne M. Lambrew. How the Slowing U.S. Economy Threatens Employer-
Based Health Insurance. The Commonwealth Fund, November 2001.
3. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. The Uninsured: A
Primer. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, March 2002.
4. Jon Gabel, Kelley Dhont, and Jeremy Pickreign. Are Tax Credits Alone the
Solution to Affordable Health Insurance? Comparing Individual and Group Insurance
Costs in 17 U.S. Markets. The Commonwealth Fund, May 2002.
5. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. Underinsured in
America: Is Health Coverage Adequate? Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, July
2002.
6. Kaiser Commission, The Uninsured: A Primer, March 2002.
7. John K. Iglehart, “Changing Health Insurance Trends,” New England
Journal of Medicine 347 (September 19, 2002): 956–62.
8. Kaiser Commission, Underinsured in America, July 2002.
9. Mills, Health Insurance Coverage: 2001, September 2002.
10. Iglehart, “Changing Health Insurance Trends,” September 19, 2002.
11. Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust.
Employer Health Beneﬁts: 2002 Summary of Findings. Kaiser Family Foundation,
September 2002.
12. Ibid.
13. Hewitt Associates. “Health Care Cost Increases Expected to Continue
Double-Digit Pace in 2003.” Press Release, October 14, 2002. Accessible at
http://was.hewitt.com/hewitt/resource/newsroom/pressrel/2002/
10-14-02.htm/, accessed October 21, 2002.
14. Kaiser/HRET. Employer Health Beneﬁts, September 2002.
15. Jennifer Edwards et al. The Erosion of Employer-Based Health Coverage
and the Threat to Workers’ Health Care. The Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief,
August 2002.
16. Ibid.
17. Hewitt Associates. “Health Care Cost Increases,” October 14, 2002.
18. Kaiser/HRET. Employer Health Beneﬁts, September 2002.
19. Iglehart, “Changing Health Insurance Trends,” September 19, 2002.
20. The ruling specifies that maximum reimbursement amounts
deposited by an employer in an employee’s HRA in one year would be
increased by any unused reimbursement amounts from previous years. The
ruling is accessible at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/docs/rev.rul.
pdf/, accessed November 22, 2002.
21. Kathy Kristof, “New Health Care Plans May Not Be a Panacea.” Los
Angeles Times, August 25, 2002.
22. Mills, Health Insurance Coverage: 2001, September 2002.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
167

23. Jennifer Ryan. 1115 Ways to Waive Medicaid and CHIP Rules. National
Health Policy Forum, Issue Brief No. 777, June 2002.
24. Jennifer Ryan. Health Insurance Family Style: Public Approaches to
Reaching the Uninsured. National Health Policy Forum, Issue Brief No. 767,
September 24, 2001.
25. Lisa Dubay and Genevieve Kenney. Covering Parents Through Medicaid
and CHIP: Potential Beneﬁts to Low-Income Parents and Children. Kaiser
Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, October 2001.
26. Institute of Medicine. Health Insurance Is a Family Matter. Washington,
D.C.: National Academies Press, 2002.
27. Dubay and Kenney, Covering Parents, October 2001.
28. Ryan, Health Insurance Family Style, September 24, 2001.
29. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) Approved Section 1115 Demonstration Projects,
October 7, 2002. Accessible at http://www.cms.gov/CHIP/1115waiv.pdf/,
accessed November 4, 2002.
30. Medical savings accounts are personal savings accounts for
unreimbursed medical expenses. They are used to pay for health care not
covered by insurance, including deductibles and copayments. The formal name
of MSAs is now Archer MSAs. The original MSA legislation (the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, P.L. 104-191) authorized a
limited number of MSAs under a demonstration beginning in 1997.
31. Ryan, Health Insurance Family Style, September 24, 2001.
32. Leslie Conwell and Ashley Short. Premium Subsidies for Employer-
Sponsored Health Coverage: An Emerging State and Local Strategy to Reach the
Uninsured. Center for Studying Health System Change, Issue Brief No. 47,
December 2001.
33. Ryan, Health Insurance Family Style, September 24, 2001.
34. Ibid.
35. Lambrew, How the Slowing U.S. Economy, November 2001.
36. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation,
Department of Health and Human Services. Assessing the Individual Health
Insurance Market in the Post-HIPAA Era: A Review of the Literature, June 2001.
37. See, for instance, Richard Kronick and Todd Gilmer, “Insuring Low-
Income Adults: Does Public Coverage Crowd Out Private?” Health Affairs 21
(January/February 2002): 225–37; David Cutler and John Gruber, “Does Public
Insurance Crowd-Out Private Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2):
391–430; Linda Blumberg et al., “Did the Medicaid Expansions for Children
Displace Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the SIPP,” Journal of Health
Economics 19 (1): 33–60.
38. Bradley Struck et al. “Tracking Health Care Costs: Growth Accelerates
Again in 2001,” Health Affairs Web Exclusive, September 25, 2002. W299–W310.
39. Alliance for Health Reform. Health Care Costs & Health Coverage, August
2002. August 21, 2003.
168
Facts and Documents

Families USA
http://www.familiesusa.org/html/about/about.htm
Two examples of Families USA materials are included here. One of these
is “The President’s Budget Shortchanges America’s Health Care
Needs.” This brief report provides an overview of the budget proposals
of 2003 and is an excellent example of the types of critiques this organi-
zation makes of the proposed programs for that year. Issues related to
Medicare, prescription drugs, and Medicaid are included in the com-
ments. The second report, “Nearly One Out of Three Non-Elderly
Americans Were Uninsured for All or Part of 2001–2002,” highlights a
report it released detailing the increasing problem of uninsured Ameri-
cans. Below are the press releases for these reports, with the full reports
available at their site at no cost.
The President’s Budget Shortchanges 
America’s Health Care Needs
Bush’s budget priorities don’t add up to his State of the Union promises
Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, released
the following statement today in response to President Bush’s
budget proposal:
“The budget released today by President Bush does not
add up to the health care promises he made to the American
people in his State of the Union address. The President’s budget
falls far short of the ﬁscal commitment needed to fulﬁll his
promise of ‘quality, affordable health [care] for all.’
“Even worse, the Administration’s proposals to coerce
seniors into HMOs and managed care plans, and its proposal to
create a block grant in lieu of Medicaid coverage for millions of
low-income families, will do considerable harm. These
proposals will force seniors to lose their doctors and will cause
many of the most vulnerable people to join the ranks of the
uninsured.
Medicare and Prescription Drugs
“President Bush’s budget includes $400 billion for both Medicare
restructuring and prescription drug coverage over the next ten
years. Unfortunately, $400 billion only covers a very meager
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
169

share of seniors’ prescription drug costs, which are projected to
total $2 trillion over the same ten-year period.
“The President’s new proposal to force seniors into private
health plans, as a condition for receiving prescription drug
coverage, pressures seniors into choosing between the drug
coverage they so desperately need and the doctors they have
come to depend on.
“Private health plans participating in Medicare have a poor
record serving seniors. They are unavailable in many rural
communities, and they frequently leave communities that are
deemed unproﬁtable. The private plans that continue to enroll
seniors are, with each passing year, signiﬁcantly increasing
seniors’ costs and decreasing the services offered.
“The coupling of prescription drug coverage with
enrollment in HMOs and managed care plans will make it much
more difficult to enact prescription drug coverage in this
Congress. President Bush should not hold seniors’ prescription
drug coverage hostage to the achievement of his goal to privatize
Medicare.
Medicaid
“The President’s Medicaid budget represents a cruel hoax for
three very important reasons. First, the President offers a slight
increase in Medicaid funding in the ﬁrst years, but then reduces
such funding in the later years. Over the long term, this proposal
would signiﬁcantly reduce the federal aid needed to sustain
Medicaid coverage for low-income families.
“Second, the President’s proposal would establish ironclad
caps in federal funding for health care to low-income families.
As a result, when the economy turns sour, or health care costs
skyrocket, or more people become uninsured, states will have a
diminished capacity to meet their needs.
“Third, the President’s proposal offers modest upfront
money in a manner that is reminiscent of a loan shark. The
modest upfront money comes attached with a heavy cost—less
money in the long run and much less ﬁscal ﬂexibility in future
years. In effect, the Bush Administration is forcing cash-strapped
states to buy into a very bad deal so that they can receive quick
money now.
“The President’s proposed block grant is similar to the
failed proposal in 1995 by then-Speaker Newt Gingrich. This
170
Facts and Documents

block grant will force states to ration care by limiting the
number of people enrolled in Medicaid, reducing the services
covered, and increasing the amount of money low-income
people must pay.
Access
“Once again, the President included $89 billion over ten years in
his budget for health tax credits. The tax credit proposed is far
too small to make health coverage affordable for the low-wage
workers targeted for this plan. It is like throwing a 10-foot rope
to a person stuck in a 40-foot hole.
“Also, in these tough economic times, the proposed tax
credit offers no relief for many recently unemployed workers
because the tax credit cannot be used to continue employer-
based coverage through COBRA. Thus, this proposal does not
reﬂect the President’s promise to reduce the number of
uninsured Americans.”
Families USA is the national organization for health care
consumers. It is nonproﬁt and nonpartisan and advocates for high-
quality, affordable health care for all Americans.
Source: Families USA. http://www.familiesusa.org/site/PageServer?
pagename=PresidentsBudgetShortchange. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
Nearly One Out of Three Non-Elderly 
Americans Were Uninsured for All or 
Part of 2001–2002
New State-by-State Report Finds That 75 Million People Were
Uninsured in Last Two Years, Most for Very Long Periods of Time
Families USA prepared a report for Cover the Uninsured Week
(CTUW) that was released today by The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation as part of the kickoff for CTUW. The Families USA
report, based on Census Bureau data, found that 74.7 million
Americans under 65 years of age—almost one out of three (30.1
percent)—were uninsured at some point during 2001–2002.
Almost two-thirds (65 percent) of these uninsured people were
without health coverage for at least six months, and nearly one-
quarter (24 percent) were uninsured throughout the two-year
period.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
171

The following is the statement of Ron Pollack, executive
director of Families USA, concerning the report:
“The ﬁndings in this report should represent a sea
change in the way we think about the uninsured.
Now that almost one out of three non-elderly
Americans experienced signiﬁcant periods without
health insurance, the uninsured problem is no longer
simply an issue of altruism about other people, but it
is also one of self-interest for us all.
“As the 75 million who were uninsured over the past
two years reﬂect, working families are increasingly at
risk of becoming uninsured—whether due to a pink
slip from a job, unaffordable cost increases, or cutbacks
in employer and public health coverage.
“With large and growing portions of the U.S.
population becoming uninsured, we are moving
towards a political tipping point that will require real
and meaningful action to expand health coverage.”
Source: Families USA. http://www.familiesusa.org/site/PageServer?
pagename=nearly. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
http://www.kff.org/
Two examples of portions of some of the Henry J. Kaiser reports are in-
cluded here. One, “The Cost of Not Covering the Uninsured Project,”
is an excerpt from research conducted for the foundation on issues of
the uninsured. The second is “Bush Administration Medicaid/SCHIP
Proposal” and includes a discussion of issues related to President
Bush’s proposals concerning these two important publicly funded pro-
grams. This information was reprinted with permission of the Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation. The Kaiser Family Foundation, based in
Menlo Park, California, is a nonproﬁt, independent national healthcare
philanthropy and is not associated with Kaiser Permanente or Kaiser
Industries.
The Cost of Not Covering the Uninsured Project
June 2003
Much of the ongoing debate over ensuring health coverage
for the over 40 million Americans who have no health insurance
172
Facts and Documents

today revolves around the questions of how much it will cost
and who ought to pay. The debate periodically stalls, perhaps in
part, because the full beneﬁts of universal coverage—
particularly the economic beneﬁts—to both the individual and
the nation as a whole, have not yet been fully measured and
discussed.
The Kaiser Family Foundation initiated The Cost of Not
Covering the Uninsured project to explore what is known and
what should be known about the costs society incurs when so
many have no health insurance coverage. Under this initiative,
we convened an expert advisory group that worked with staff of
the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured to plan
and oversee new analyses and reports that would further the
understanding of this critical issue.
This brief summarizes the initiative’s ﬁrst three analyses
and reports, conducted by Jack Hadley, Ph.D. and John Holahan,
Ph.D. of the Urban Institute. The project’s advisory group was
chaired by Robert Reischauer, President of the Urban Institute,
and consisted of Sheila Burke, Arnold Epstein, Judy Feder, Uwe
Reinhardt, Dorothy Rice, Earl Steinberg, Jim Tallon, and Marta
Tienda.
Key Findings
•
The uninsured receive less preventive care, are
diagnosed at more advanced disease stages, and once
diagnosed, tend to receive less therapeutic care and
have higher mortality rates.
•
A conservative estimate based on the full range of
studies is that a reduction in mortality of 5–15% could
be expected if the uninsured were to gain continuous
health coverage.
•
Better health would improve annual earnings by about
10–30 percent and would increase educational
attainment.
•
On average, the uninsured receive about half as much
care as people who are insured all year. In 2001,
persons uninsured for the full year used $1,253 per
year in medical care compared to $2,484 for persons
with private coverage for the full year.
•
Total uncompensated care provided in 2001 was
estimated to be $35 billion. The primary source of
funding for uncompensated care is government, which
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
173

spent an estimated $30.6 billion for care of the
uninsured, two thirds of which is federal.
•
If insurance coverage were comparable to an “average”
public health plan, estimated per person spending by
people uninsured for any part of the year would rise by
a little over 50%, increasing from $1,383 to $2,121.
Under an “average” private health plan, spending
would rise to $2,676.
•
Expanding coverage to the entire uninsured population
would increase spending by $34 billion under a public
coverage standard and $69 billion under a private
coverage standard. Including the $99 billion in medical
care already used by the uninsured, the total cost of
medical care used by the previously uninsured under
universal coverage would range from $133 billion to
$168 billion.
•
The overall impact of universal coverage on total
health care costs would be an increase of 3–6% in total
health care spending in the U.S., less than the annual
inﬂation in health care spending (8.7% in 2001) in the
current health care system.
Source: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/content/
2003/4118/4118.pdf. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
Medicaid and the Uninsured: 
Bush Administration Medicaid/SCHIP Proposal
[Note: Only the ﬁrst part of this report is included below.]
May 2003
With states facing their worst ﬁscal crisis since World War
II, the Medicaid program now is in a period of signiﬁcant stress.
In light of severe budget problems and rising Medicaid costs,
states have called on the federal government for more help in
paying for Medicaid and more ﬂexibility over Medicaid funds.
In response, some in Congress have put forth proposals to
temporarily increase the share of Medicaid that is paid for by the
federal government, while others have encouraged a
reexamination of Medicaid’s role in paying for long-term care
and prescription drugs for seniors enrolled in Medicare.
In January of 2003, the Administration put forth a proposal
to restructure Medicaid and SCHIP in ways that could
174
Facts and Documents

fundamentally alter the two programs. The proposal, which is
the subject of this policy brief, is now being considered on
Capitol Hill and by a Taskforce established by the nation’s
Governors to develop and evaluate Medicaid reform proposals.
It gives states the choice of remaining in the current
Medicaid/SCHIP program or opting into a new system that
combines increased ﬂexibility over beneﬁts and coverage with
capped federal ﬁnancing. The proposal gives states immediate
ﬁnancial incentives to opt for the new system, but federal
funding would be reduced in later years. In states that take the
option, the new system would end Medicaid as an entitlement
program for many beneﬁciaries and eliminate open-ended
federal ﬁnancing. Although capped federal funding would
increase over time by a speciﬁed trend factor, the combination of
fewer rules over how the funds are used, repeal of matching
requirements, and ﬁxed federal allotments make the new
structure essentially a block grant.
This policy brief begins with a brief overview of key
challenges confronting the Medicaid program (Section I). It then
provides a detailed explanation of what is known about the key
elements of the Administration’s proposal (Section II). The brief
concludes with a discussion of the implications of the
Administration’s proposal (Section III).
I. Key Challenges Confronting Medicaid
Medicaid is the nation’s major public ﬁnancing program for
providing health and long-term care coverage to over 50 million
low-income Americans. . . . It plays a major role in the nation’s
health care system, paying for 17% of hospital care, 17% of
prescription drug spending, and half of nursing home care. An
entitlement to states and individuals, Medicaid provides open-
ended federal matching funds to enable states to respond to
unexpected changes in economic conditions, increases in
poverty, rising health and long-term care costs, public health
epidemics, and emergencies or disasters.
As a program ﬁnanced jointly by the federal government
and the states, Medicaid now is in a period of signiﬁcant stress.
States are facing their worst ﬁscal crisis since World War II due to
dramatic declines in their revenues. Over the last two years state
revenues have fallen faster and further than anyone predicted,
creating state budget shortfalls of $49 billion this year and close
to $70 billion for FY 2004. . . . The states’ ﬁscal crisis is being
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
175

driven by the economic downturn and outdated state tax
structures, but also affects states’ ability to ﬁnance their share of
Medicaid costs, particularly given that Medicaid spending is
growing relatively rapidly.
In ﬁscal year 2002, Medicaid spending grew 13 percent and
this year it is expected to increase by 10 percent. The growth in
the program is due in large part to the rapidly rising cost of
providing prescription drugs and other health and long-term
care services to elderly and disabled beneﬁciaries. . . . Of
particular note is the cost to Medicaid of covering “dual
enrollees,” low-income seniors and disabled individuals who are
enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid. Although dual
enrollees receive their basic health care beneﬁts through
Medicare, they use Medicaid to help with the cost of prescription
drugs, long-term care and other services not generally covered
by Medicare, as well as with Medicare premium and cost-
sharing obligations. Many dual enrollees have particularly
extensive health care needs and, as a result, they consume a
disproportionately high share of Medicaid spending—a little
under one-ﬁfth of Medicaid enrollees also are enrolled in
Medicare, but these dual enrollees consume more than a third of
all Medicaid spending. . . .
Turning ﬁrst to rainy day and tobacco settlement funds,
states have tried to preserve Medicaid and keep the federal
dollars in the program and their state economies. But as these
sources have become depleted, states have had to turn to cuts in
Medicaid. A recent KCMU survey found that 49 states were
planning or taking action to reduce the growth in Medicaid
spending. Nearly half of the states were turning to reducing
beneﬁts or limiting eligibility. . . .
In response to these fiscal pressures, states have called
on the federal government for more help with the cost of
operating Medicaid, particularly with the expense of
providing prescription drugs and long-term care to Medicare
beneficiaries also enrolled in Medicaid. They also have
renewed long-standing calls for additional flexibility over
how they use their Medicaid funds. The Administration’s
proposal . . . also is being considered by members of Congress
and Governors as a vehicle for addressing the concerns of
states.
Source: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/content/
2003/4117/4117.pdf. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
176
Facts and Documents

Heritage Foundation 
http://www.heritage.org/Research/HealthCare/index.cfm
The Heritage Foundation is a conservative think tank. Its Health Care Web
page provides access to Heritage-sponsored reports on the healthcare sys-
tem and health reform from a conservative viewpoint. An example of one of
their reports is “Building a Better Medicare Program: The Senate Aging
Committee’s Focus on Patient Choice and Market Competition.” This brief
report summarizes testimony about reform to Medicare and focuses on de-
mographic challenges, structural design issues, and cost control.
Building a Better Medicare Program: 
The Senate Aging Committee’s Focus on 
Patient Choice and Market Competition 
by Derek Hunter 
WebMemo #279
May 22, 2003
The U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging examined ways to
strengthen and improve the Medicare program, the huge
government health care program that insures 41 million senior
and disabled citizens. The Special Committee, chaired by Sen.
Larry Craig (R-ID) with Sen. John Breaux (D-LA) as the ranking
minority member, held the hearing on May 6, 2003.
Three panelists testiﬁed on the value of patient choice and
market competition:
1.
Robert E. Moffit, Ph.D., director of the Center for
Health Policy Studies at The Heritage Foundation;
2.
Joseph R. Antos, Ph.D., health policy analyst at the
American Enterprise Institute; and
3.
Walton Francis, an economist and consultant on health
policy. 
The witnesses cited the record and experience of the Federal
Employees Health Beneﬁts Program (FEHBP), the health plan
that covers 8.3 million federal workers including Members of
Congress, federal retirees, and their families. Also testifying
before the Senate panel was Abby Block, senior advisor for
employee and family support policy with the U.S. Office of
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
177

Personnel Management (OPM), the government agency that
administers the FEHBP.
Block outlined the ﬂexible FEHBP structure and how it
differs from the rigid Medicare program, where an act of
Congress or a complicated administrative process is required to
change or modify the health beneﬁts package.
“While all participating plans offer a core set of beneﬁts
broadly outlined in statute, beneﬁts vary among plans because
there is no standard beneﬁts package,” Block told the Senate panel.
While Congress must approve new procedures and
technologies in order for them to be covered by Medicare, the
FEHBP offers competition among plans offering many sets of
beneﬁts so that members can choose what best suits their needs.
Setting up a basic framework without micromanaging beneﬁts,
said Block, allows “OPM to focus on three key elements: policy
design, contract negotiations, and contract administration
including ﬁnancial oversight.”
The Demographic Challenge. Moffit questioned whether
the existing Medicare structure was capable of absorbing the
coming retirement of the baby-boom generation. “The central
policy question facing Congress and the Administration” said
Moffit, “is whether Medicare, as it exists today, can absorb the
demographic shock of the baby-boom generation and continue
to deliver high-quality medical care in an economically efficient
fashion. I do not think that it can.”
The Structural Design Problems. Francis called Medicare’s
design “obsolete,” a “vintage 1960 design.” Francis said that
Medicare not only fails to cover prescription drugs, preventive
care, dental costs, or care received abroad (with the exception of
Canada and Mexico), but also “does not provide a catastrophic
ceiling on costs even for those costs it covers.” In sharp contrast,
Francis argued, “None of these deﬁciencies affect the FEHBP.
That program was also created vintage 1960, but it has painlessly
evolved over time through the competitive, consumer-driven
process that is its central feature.”
The Record on Cost Control. Antos, a former Assistant
Director of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), addressed
the issues of comparative cost between private-sector plans and
Medicare, including recent research on the subject. Antos noted,
“Medicare has been more successful than the private sector in
constraining spending growth over the long term.” Examining
data over three decades, he further noted that “private insurance
178
Facts and Documents

became more generous over that time period, covering a growing
proportion of the total cost of health services. In 1970, private
insurance paid for about 60 percent of the total private cost of
hospital and physician services. By 1999, that had grown to 85
percent.”
In conclusion, Antos said, “A Medicare reform modeled
after FEHBP would provide both the incentive and the
opportunity for seniors to choose health plans that best meet their
needs.” Echoing that view, Francis told the Senate panel that:
The choice before the Congress ultimately is between
these two models—consumer choice or detailed
legislative and bureaucratic control. By good fortune
we have as an example the successful performance of
the consumer choice model in meeting the health
insurance needs of 9 million employees and retirees.
Surely we can use that model to aid in reforming the
Medicare program.
Moffit likewise urged the Senate panel to examine the FEHBP
model as a way to accommodate the needs of a large and diverse
baby-boom generation that is set to start retiring in eight years.
Source: Heritage Foundation. http://www.heritage.org/Research/
HealthCare/wm279.cfm. Accessed on August 21, 2003.
National Center for Policy Analysis
http://www.ncpa.org/
Many of the center’s reports are more in-depth examinations of topics,
rather than responses to a specific new proposal. An example of one of
these is the report “Reforming Medicaid.” Included here is the execu-
tive summary of this report, which focuses on a more comprehensive
review of Medicaid, its past, variation by state, and special groups of
Medicaid recipients (such as the disabled and those receiving long-
term care).
Reforming Medicaid 
by James R. Cantwell
U.S. House Committee on the Budget 
Policy Report No. 197NCPA
August 1995, ISBN #1–56808–062-X
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
179

Executive Summary
While growth in private-sector health care spending has declined
recently, spending on Medicaid, the federal-state health insurance
program for the nation’s poor, has continued to explode—
growing at an average annual rate of 19.1 percent between 1990
and 1994. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that federal
outlays for Medicaid will be $89.2 billion in 1995, and states will
spend an additional $67.3 billion, for a total of $156.5 billion.
Unless Congress reins in the growth of Medicaid, any attempt to
balance the federal budget will be futile.
Both the Republican-led Congress and the Clinton
administration have proposed budgets that call for reducing the
rate of growth of Medicaid spending. The congressional plan,
providing for less growth than the administration’s plan, calls
for giving Medicaid funds to each state in the form of a block
grant. Block-granting the funds would allow the federal
government to limit the ﬁnancial exposure of taxpayers while
giving states maximum ﬂexibility to design a health care
program that meets local needs.
Critics have charged that slowing the rate of growth of
Medicaid spending would force states to reduce the number of
people covered, reduce beneﬁts, reduce payments to providers
or some combination of these. However, six constructive steps
described in this study could achieve Medicaid savings of $185.4
billion over seven years without any reduction in beneﬁts for
needy people.
•
Changing incentives for recipients and providers
through Medical Savings Accounts and/or managed
care would produce $37.2 billion savings in acute care
programs and $64 billion in long-term care.
•
Enforcing estate recovery provisions would produce
savings of $35 billion.
•
Redirecting and capping “disproportionate share
hospital” payments would produce savings of $13.9
billion.
•
Reducing administrative costs would produce savings
of $3.7 billion.
•
Making Medicaid the payer of last resort would
produce savings of $31.5 billion.
•
Reducing waste, fraud and abuse through greater state
vigilance would produce savings of an unknown but
substantial amount.
180
Facts and Documents

Introduction
Congress cannot balance the federal budget unless the spiraling
costs of Medicaid, the nation’s health care ﬁnancing program for
the poor, are brought under control. Without fundamental
change, over the next seven years the federal government will
spend nearly $1 trillion on this one program. Additionally, the
states will spend more than $400 million on their share of
Medicaid.
The U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate have
agreed on the need to restructure Medicaid, and the key feature of
their approach is to provide federal Medicaid funds in block grants
to the states. Block-granting Medicaid would allow the federal
government to limit the ﬁnancial exposure of federal taxpayers
while, at the same time, giving states maximum ﬂexibility to
design a health care program tailored to meet local needs.
Critics have charged that slowing the rate of growth of
Medicaid spending, as required by the 1996 Budget Resolution
Conference Report,1 would force states to (1) reduce the number
of people covered by Medicaid, (2) reduce the beneﬁts enjoyed
by those who continue to be covered, (3) reduce payments to
doctors, hospitals and other providers, or (4) some combination
of the above. These criticisms are wrong. The purpose of this
paper is to show that by adopting sensible reforms Congress can
not only meet its budget target but, at the same time, the states
can more effectively meet the needs of low-income families.
Medicaid’s Financial Crisis
Medicaid is the federal-state health insurance program for the
nation’s poor. It was created in 1965 as part of the Johnson
administration’s initiative to expand health insurance to the poor
(Medicaid) and elderly (Medicare). Both the federal and state
governments provide funds for Medicaid, which is administered
by the states under federal guidelines. States match federal funds
based on a formula, ranging from as little as 21 cents for each
dollar spent in low-income states to 50 cents in high-income
states.
Among those entitled to receive Medicaid beneﬁts are
recipients of Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC);
the aged, blind and disabled receiving Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) cash assistance; and pregnant women and children
up to age 6 with family incomes less than 133 percent of the
poverty level. As a result, the program touches the lives of a
great many people:
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
181

•
Medicaid ﬁnances the health care of one out of four
American children, and pays for one-third of all U.S.
births.
•
About 60 percent of those living in poverty are
receiving assistance from Medicaid, including 10
percent of the elderly or disabled on Medicare.
•
Medicaid pays for about half of all nursing home care. 
“Medicaid spending grew at an average annual rate of 19.1 percent
between 1990 and 1994.”
Medicaid is facing a ﬁnancial crisis. Even without reform at
the federal level, state legislators are already looking for ways to
reduce costs. The reason is that Medicaid spending is out of
control:
While growth in private-sector health care spending has
declined recently, Medicaid spending has continued to
explode—growing at an average annual rate of 19.1 percent
between 1990 and 1994.2 [See Figure I.]
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that federal
outlays for Medicaid will be $89.2 billion in 1995, and states will
spend an additional $67.3 billion, for a total of $156.5 billion.
Unless Congress reins in the growth of Medicaid, any
attempt to balance the federal budget will be futile. The ﬁrst step
in controlling Medicaid spending is to return Medicaid money to
the states. The next step is to allow the states to implement some
important reforms.
Returning Medicaid to the States
As Figure II shows, if the approach proposed by the Republican-
led Congress were adopted, the growth in expected Medicaid
spending would be signiﬁcantly lower than has been projected
by the CBO and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
[See Table I.] The Clinton administration’s recent “balanced
budget” also calls for somewhat lower Medicaid outlays.
“By adopting sensible reforms Congress can not only meet its
budget target but, at the same time, the states can more effectively meet
the needs of low-income families.”
Block Grants
As part of Congress’ most recent budget plan (the 1996 Budget
Resolution Conference Report), Medicaid funds would be given
to each state in the form of a block grant:
182
Facts and Documents

Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
183
FIGURE I
Health Care Spending (Average annual percent change)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Medicaid
Private
1995*
1994
1993
1992
1991
1990
10.9
18.6
5.6
30.6
6.9
27.4
7.2
8.2
4.4
10.6
6.7
11.8
*Projected.
Source: Health Care Financing Administration, Office of the Actuary (includes administrative costs). 
TABLE I
Medicaid Outlays, 1995–2002 ($ billions)
CBO
OMB
Clinton
Congress
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
1995
89.2
88.4
88.4
89.2
110.0
104.6
100.0
102.1
99.3
95.9
92.0
95.7
122.1
114.4
109.0
106.2
134.8
124.5
117.0
110.5
148.1
136.5
127.0
114.9
162.1
149.0
138.0
119.5
177.8
163.0
150.0
124.3

•
Over the seven-year period from 1996 through 2002,
total outlays would be $773 billion.3
•
This would be $329 billion more than the $444 billion
spent during the previous seven years (1989–95).4
•
But it would be $181.6 billion less than the CBO’s
projection of spending under current law.5 [See Figure III.]
The Impact of Block Grants
How Medicaid recipients are affected by the block grants will
depend upon how the states use the funds. Opponents of
reform are predicting dire consequences. According to a recent
article in the Wall Street Journal: 
[E]xperts on all sides of the issue agree that a 4
percent cap on Medicaid spending won’t be enough
to cover the expected growth in population in the
program. And they say the situation can only result
in one or a combination of three things: fewer
beneﬁts for Medicaid beneﬁciaries; lower payments
184
Facts and Documents
FIGURE II
Medicaid Spending
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Congress’s Budget
Clinton Budget
OMB Projection
CBO Projection
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
$ billions

to doctors, hospitals and other medical care
providers who treat patients in the program; or
reduced eligibility.6
“One of the merits of block grants is that they encourage states to
innovate.”
Such criticisms ignore the fact that one of the merits of
block grants is that they encourage states to innovate and to
improve the way Medicaid operates. In fact, Medicaid savings
can be achieved without reductions in beneﬁts for needy people.
How? By doing the following:
•
Change incentives for recipients and providers through
Medical Savings Accounts and/or managed care.
•
Enforce estate recovery provisions.
•
Redirect “disproportionate share hospital” payments.
•
Reduce administrative costs.
•
Make Medicaid the payer of last resort.
•
Reduce waste, fraud and abuse through greater state
vigilance.
Implementing these reforms in the ways explained below would
allow states to provide better health care for the poor—with less
money.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
185
FIGURE III
Medicaid Spending: The Last Seven Years and the Next ($billions)
$ billions
Source: Congressional Budget Office.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Status Quo 
1996–2002
Balanced Budget 
1996–2002
1989–95
$444
$773
$955

Although only about one-ﬁfth of Medicaid recipients are
currently enrolled in a managed care plan, about 93 percent of
Medicaid payments are for fee-for-service patients, according to
a recent report by Lewin-VHI.7 As a result, the potential savings
from managed care are even greater than the above statistics
would suggest. Because most of Medicaid’s managed care
waivers were granted in the last few years, the programs’ costs
have not been fully evaluated. An exception is Arizona, which is
discussed below. Where evaluations have been completed,
ample evidence shows that managed care can reduce Medicaid
costs, especially for acute care services physician and hospital
visits (both inpatient and outpatient) and prescription drugs.”
A General Accounting Office (GAO) report states that “a
1991 analysis of previous evaluations of 25 managed care
programs in 17 states concluded that managed care programs . . .
were able to achieve modest cost savings.” The report also said
that for the most reliable evaluations, “approximately 80 percent
of the (13) programs reported cost savings ranging from 5 to 15
percent.”8 In addition, the CBO has reported that, for the general
population (not just Medicaid), “group/staff HMOs reduce use
of medical services by an estimated average of 19.6 percent.”9
“Managing acute care could save an estimated $37.2 billion over
the next seven years.”
Some argue that managed care costs are lower only because
it is primarily the healthy people who move into managed care,
leaving sicker and more expensive patients in the fee-for-service
pool. But an analysis of 1992 Health Interview Survey data
concluded that “the most striking ﬁnding is how little HMOs and
indemnity plans differ in the prevalence of chronic conditions.”10
Case Study: Arizona
Until recently, state efforts to enroll Medicaid recipients in
managed care programs have targeted the AFDC population.
The Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System (AHCCCS)
is an exception in that all recipients are in managed care.
Compared with the costs if Arizona were running a typical fee-
for-service Medicaid program, the savings are substantial. In the
acute care portion of the program, managed care saved about 3.6
percent per year from 1984 through 1988 and 8.3 percent per year
from 1989 through 1993.11
Potential Savings
As shown in Table II, the CBO estimates that over the next seven
years (1996 through 2002), spending on Medicaid acute care
186
Facts and Documents

beneﬁts will total $511.7 billion. Since 93 percent of Medicaid
program payments are made on a fee-for-service basis, we can
multiply 93 percent of each year’s acute care outlays by the
savings rate achieved in Arizona to estimate the potential
savings to Medicaid. Assuming that the potential savings are
achieved from the ﬁrst year of the Medicaid block grant, our
estimate of Medicaid savings for the next seven-year period from
managing acute care is $37.2 billion. [See Table II.]
Managed care also can yield substantial savings in long-
term care. The Arizona Long-Term Care System (ALTCS),
begun in December 1988, serves the elderly, the physically and
developmentally disabled and the mentally retarded.
According to the evaluation report cited above, ALTCS
achieved savings of 8 percent in 1990, 15 percent in 1991, 22
percent in 1992 and 21 percent in 1993 over the costs of a
traditional Medicaid program. Applying these savings
percentages to the long-term care outlays projected by the CBO
results in total expected savings of $64 billion from 1996
through 2002. [See Table III.]
“Savings from managing long-term care could total $64 billion
from 1996 through 2002.”
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
187
TABLE II
Acute Care Savings Estimate ($ billions)
Year
Acute Care Benefits
(CBO)
0.93 × Row 1
Savings rate*
Acute care
*Based on the savings achieved in Arizona’s AHCCCS, 1983–93.
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Total
51.2
47.6
.036
1.7
57.6
53.6
.083
4.4
64.7
60.2
.083
5.0
72.1
67.1
.083
5.6
80.2
74.6
.083
6.2
88.6
82.4
.083
6.8
97.3
90.5
.083
7.5
511.7
457.9
37.2
TABLE III
Long-Term Care Savings Estimate ($ billions)
Year
Long-term care (CBO)
Savings rate*
LTC savings
*Based on the savings achieved in Arizona’s ALTCS, 1990–93.
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Total
35.4
.08
2.8
38.8
.15
5.8
42.8
.22
9.4
47.2
.21
9.9
51.7
.21
10.9
57.0
.21
12.0
62.7
.21
13.2
335.6
64.0

Summing up:
•
The expected savings from managed care are $37.2
billion for acute care plus $64.0 billion for long-term
care.
•
The total savings would be $101.2 billion over the next
seven years. 
Medical Savings Accounts
Medical Savings Accounts can create incentives for patients to
help control rising Medicaid costs. A typical Medical Savings
Account option gives people the opportunity to move from a
conventional, low-deductible health insurance plan to one with a
high deductible (say $2,000 to $3,000) and to put the premium
savings in a personal account. Beneﬁciaries pay all medical bills
up to the deductible from their MSAs and out-of-pocket funds.
Catastrophic insurance pays all expenses above the deductible.
Providing MSAs to Medicaid participants would permit
beneﬁciaries to use the funds in their accounts to pay for small
and routine health care expenditures, relying on catastrophic
health insurance to pay the major bills. Under this approach,
Medicaid beneﬁciaries would control a portion of their own
health care dollars and would have incentives to use these
dollars wisely.12
Recently, legislation introduced in ﬁve states (Indiana,
Louisiana, Ohio, Oregon and West Virginia), working from a
model proposed by the American Legislative Exchange Council,
would have provided vouchers to Medicaid recipients.
Beneﬁciaries would have been able to choose among competing
health care plans and MSAs would have been one of the options.
In addition, Texas has enacted a pilot project to use MSAs for a
limited number of Medicaid recipients.13
The political difficulty with MSA proposals has been to
construct a program in which Medicaid recipients beneﬁt from
being prudent health care shoppers, but use remaining funds for
constructive purposes. For example, under a 1994 Indiana
proposal (which passed in the state’s Senate but not the House)
Medicaid beneﬁciaries who incurred less than $3,250 of medical
expenses would have been able to use 10 percent of what they
did not spend for services such as day care and job training.
Could MSAs for Medicaid recipients save the states
money? That is unclear. While there is evidence that adopting
MSAs in the private sector has enabled many businesses to
188
Facts and Documents

reduce their health care costs signiﬁcantly, there are no
operational Medicaid MSAs to be evaluated. However, a new
study of Medicare by Mark Litow (Milliman & Robertson)
indicates that MSAs combined with managed care can save as
much money as managed care alone, or more.14
“Medical Savings Accounts combined with managed care can
save as much money as managed care alone, or more.”
Reform No. 2: Enforce Estate Recovery
Long-term care is one of the fastest-growing segments of the
Medicaid budget, increasing about 15 percent per year since 1990.
Although the elderly have more assets than any other segment of
the population, nearly half of those who enter a nursing home get
Medicaid assistance. One reason is that many people either
“spend down” or hide their assets in order to qualify for
Medicaid’s means-tested beneﬁts. The Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA) requires each state to look
back three years when determining eligibility for long-term care
services to see if a Medicaid recipient has transferred money or
other assets to other persons, such as their children. Furthermore,
when a Medicaid recipient dies, the state is expected to recover
some of the past cost of providing long-term care.
“One source has estimated $25 billion in savings over ﬁve years
if estate recovery provisions were enforced.”
Many states have been lax in enforcing these provisions.
The result has been that Medicaid-ﬁnanced nursing home
services intended for the elderly poor are sometimes channeled
to those with substantial assets. Indeed, books giving
instructions on how to qualify for beneﬁts by transferring assets
are widely available.15 Medicaid-covered nursing home services
would cost much less if the states enforced the law.16 Speciﬁcally:
•
One source has estimated that if the OBRA 1993
provisions were enforced, $25 billion could be saved
over ﬁve years.17
•
Extrapolating from that estimate gives a seven-year
saving from estate recovery of $35 billion. 
Note that the estimated savings from managed care ($101.2
billion) and estate recovery ($35 billion) add up to $136.2 billion.
This is equal to about 75 percent of the aggregate reduction in
outlays from the CBO baseline needed to meet Congress’s
budget goal ($181.6 billion).
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
189

Reform No. 3: Redirect “Disproportionate 
Share Hospital” Payments
As noted above, federal spending on Medicaid is growing at an
unacceptably high rate. One reason for this rapid growth
(totaling 28 percent in 1991 and 29 percent in 1992) was the
shifting of states’ Medicaid costs to the federal government.
According to the New York Times:
The program has become a giant slush fund that
governors use to balance budgets or to free up money
for other programs. Although Medicaid costs are
supposed to be shared, many states have found ways
to get more Federal dollars at little or no cost to local
taxpayers. One approach used in the past is for a state
to enact a new tax on hospitals, add the revenue to its
Medicaid budget, demand Federal matching funds
and then reimburse the hospitals for the tax by paying
them higher Medicaid rates. “We’re funding our
judicial system, our highway program and everything
else out of a Medicaid loophole,” said . . . a
legislator.18 Although the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Acts of 1991 and 1993 restricted such
practices, problems persist. Tax loopholes that allow
states to manipulate federal matching funds remain.
Another problem involves disproportionate share hospital
(DSH) payments. DSH payments refer to a supplemental
payment Medicaid makes to hospitals with a disproportionate
share of patients who are low-income, either on Medicaid or
indigent. Federal DSH payments grew from $547 million in 1990
to $9.9 billion in 1992 and then declined to $8.5 billion in 1995.
The CBO estimates that over the next seven years DSH payments
will total $70.7 billion. [See Table IV.]
“Freezing ‘disproportionate share hospital’ payments at 1995
levels would save $13.9 billion.”
The Senate budget resolution assumes that DSH payments
will be frozen at 1995 levels. This assumption allows the Senate
to achieve savings of about $13.9 billion over seven years. Even if
frozen, DSH payments would still be sufficient to meet
legitimate needs, making payments to those hospitals that
provide a disproportionate share of care to low-income
populations.
190
Facts and Documents

Reform No. 4: Reduce Administrative Costs
According to the CBO, Medicaid’s 1995 administrative costs will
be $3.4 billion. This annual cost will double over the next seven
years and reach a seven-year total of $36.7 billion.
Administrative savings can be achieved by eliminating
requirements that states develop a state plan and receive
approval from the Secretary of the Department of Health and
Human Services for any changes to the plan. We estimate this
change could result in at least a 10 percent savings in
administrative costs, amounting to about $3.7 billion.
Reform No. 5: Make Medicaid the 
Payer of Last Resort
As a public assistance program, Medicaid is intended to pay for
health care services only after a Medicaid recipient’s private
health insurance has been exhausted. Indeed, according to the
1990 Census, more than 13 percent of Medicaid recipients had
some health insurance, either an individual policy or coverage
provided by an employer. Medicaid also is supposed to pay only
after workers’ compensation or liability insurers have paid. But
state Medicaid programs generally are not recovering such
payments from third-party insurers. Finally, noncustodial
parents of Medicaid children are to provide health insurance
when it is available through their employment. Yet, again states
have not vigorously enforced these requirements.
“Recovering payments from third parties could save $31.5 billion.”
A series of General Accounting Office (GAO) reports
suggests that the amount of funds not being collected by the
states is substantial. One recent report estimated that funds
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
191
TABLE IV
CBO Medicaid Projections ($ billions)
Year
Acute care benefits
Long-term care benefits
DSH*
Administration
Total
*Disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments.
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Total
51.2
35.4
8.9
3.8
99.3
57.6
38.8
9.4
4.2
110.0
64.7
42.8
9.8
4.7
122.1
72.1
47.2
10.3
5.2
134.8
80.2
51.7
10.5
5.7
148.1
88.6
57.0
10.8
6.3
162.6
97.3
62.7
11.0
6.8
177.8
511.7
335.6
70.7
36.7
954.7

owed but not collected were between $500 million and more
than $1 billion in 1985.19 Since total federal Medicaid outlays
were $22.7 billion that year, between 2.2 and 4.4 percent of total
Medicaid outlays by the states should have been paid by
someone else. With total federal Medicaid outlays projected to be
$955 billion over the next seven years, a rough estimate of the
future savings from this reform would be $21 billion to $42
billion. We will use the midpoint ($31.5 billion) as our seven-year
savings estimate.
Reform No. 6: Reduce Waste, Fraud and Abuse
The GAO estimates that the level of waste, fraud and abuse in
health care may be as high as 10 percent. Medicaid Fraud Control
Units, the FBI and the Health and Human Services Inspector
General’s office investigate health care fraud, but the investigative
resources of all are stretched thin. Further, states may have had a
reduced incentive to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse aggressively.
The reason is that Medicaid funding is unlimited. Since the states
supply as little as 21 cents of each dollar spent, their beneﬁt from
eliminating one dollar of waste is as low as 21 cents.
“After block grants, a state will gain a dollar for each dollar of
waste eliminated.”
By capping the level of federal funding through a block
grant, each state’s incentive to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse
will change. After the block grant, states will gain a dollar for
each dollar of waste eliminated. However, reliable estimates of
potential savings under this reform are not available.
Conclusion
The six factors discussed above can substantially reduce the cost
of Medicaid without adversely affecting Medicaid recipients. As
Table V shows, the expected total savings over the seven-year
period are $185.4 billion.
Block-granting would allow the federal government to
limit federal taxpayer exposure for Medicaid costs. This is
essential if the federal budget is to be balanced by 2002.
Allowing the federal grant to the states to grow at about half of
the currently projected rate would provide the states with
enough resources to meet the immediate and long-term care
needs of the poor, disabled and elderly.
The mechanisms for cost reduction are available now but
“absent rigorous federal spending restraints” the states lack
192
Facts and Documents

incentives to use them. Federal block grants will provide those
incentives.
“Six reforms would meet Congress’s budget goals without any
reduction in health care beneﬁts for Medicaid beneﬁciaries.”
Notes
1. All references to a particular year of the federal budget refer to the
government’s ﬁscal year, which runs from October 1 through September 30. 
2. Federal Medicaid outlays grew by 27.8 percent in 1991 and by another
29.1 percent in 1992.
3. The plan assumes Medicaid outlays of $89.2 billion in 1995, with
increases held to 7.2 percent in 1996, 6.8 percent in 1997 and 4 percent per year
thereafter. The level of proposed spending is compatible with higher growth
rates for beneﬁts and administration if disproportionate share hospital payments,
which are explained later in this paper, are frozen at 1995 levels.
4. If the block grant spending were compared with Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) projections, substantially smaller seven-year Medicaid
savings would result from the block grant because the administration assumes
slower Medicaid growth. Over the period 1996 through 2002, OMB Medicaid
projections are $66.8 billion less (cumulatively) than the CBO projections. Seven-
year Medicaid savings from OMB projections would total $114.8 billion under the
Budget Resolution Conference Report block-grant assumptions.
5. Based on which projection is used, the block grant proposal promoted
by Congress could result in savings of between $114.8 billion and $181.6 billion
over the seven-year period between 1996 and 2002.
6. Hilary Stout, “Contrasting Reactions to GOP Proposals to Cut Medicare,
Medicaid Reﬂect Voting Blocs’ Power,” Wall Street Journal, May 30, 1995. The
same theme is developed in a Families USA report titled “Hurting Real People:
The Human Impact of Medicaid Cuts,” Washington, DC, June 1995. 
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
193
TABLE V
Summary of Savingsa
Factor
1.
System reform:
Acute care
Long-term care
2.
Estate recovery
3.
DSH
4.
Administrative costs
5.
Third party collections
6.
Reduce waste, fraud, and abuse
Total
aEffects of interaction are not included.
Total
37.2
64.0
35.0
13.9
3.7
31.5
?
185.3

7. Lewin-VHI, “States as Payers: Managed Care for Medicaid Populations,”
National Institute for Health Care Management, Washington, DC, February 1995.
8. U.S. General Accounting Office, “Medicaid: States Turn to Managed
Care to Improve Access and Control Costs,” GAO/HRD-93-46, March 1993, p. 39.
9. Based on its analysis of the 1992 National Health Interview Survey, “The
Effects of Managed Care and Managed Competition,” CBO Staff Memorandum,
February 1995, p. 2. 
10. Teresa Fama, Peter D. Fox and Leigh Ann White, “Do HMOs Care for
the Chronically Ill?” Health Affairs, Spring 1995, p. 237.
11. Nelda McCall et al., “Evaluation of Arizona’s Health Care Cost
Containment System Demonstration,” Draft Fourth Outcome Report, submitted
to HCFA April 1995.
12. See Brant S. Mittler and Merrill Matthews Jr., “Can Managed Care
Solve the Medicaid Crisis?” National Center for Policy Analysis, NCPA Brief
Analysis No. 155, April 10, 1995.
13. Molly Hering Bordonaro, “Medical Savings Accounts and the States:
Growth From the Grassroots,” National Center for Policy Analysis, NCPA Brief
Analysis No. 170, August 3, 1995.
14. Mark E. Litow, “Reform Options for Medicare,” National Center for
Policy Analysis, NCPA Policy Report, forthcoming, August 1995.
15. See, for example, Armond D. Budish, Avoiding the Medicaid Trap: How
to Beat the Catastrophic Cost of Nursing Home Care, 3rd Ed. (New York: H. Holt,
1995).
16. U.S. General Accounting Office, “Medicaid Estate Planning,”
GAO/HRD-93-29R, July 20, 1993; and “Medicaid: Recoveries From Nursing
Home Residents’ Estates Could Offset Program Costs,” GAO/HEHS-94-133,
August 1, 1994. 
17. Marrilyn Seraﬁni, “Plugging a Drain on Medicaid,” National Journal,
March 3, 1995, p. 687.
18. Paul Offner, “Medicaid Games,” New York Times, May 19, 1995, p. A 31.
Also see GAO, “Medicaid: States Use Illusory Approaches to Shift Program Costs
to Federal Government,” GAO/HEHS-94-133, August 1, 1994.
19. U.S. General Accounting Office, “HCFA Needs Authority to Enforce
Third-Party Requirements on States,” GAO/HRD-91-60, April 1991. Also see
GAO, “Medicaid: Millions of Dollars Not Recovered From Michigan Blue
Cross/Blue Shield,” GAO/HRD-91-12, November 1990.
Source: National Center for Policy Analysis. http://www.ncpa.
org/studies/s197/s197.html. Accessed September 9, 2003.
National Committee for Quality Assurance
http://www.ncqa.org
The NCQA’s Web site states that HEDIS® (Health Plan Employer
Data and Information Set) is the performance-measurement tool of
194
Facts and Documents

choice for more than 90 percent of the nation’s managed care organiza-
tions. It is a set of standardized measures that specify how health plans
collect, audit, and report on their performance in important areas rang-
ing from breast cancer screening to helping patients control their cho-
lesterol to customer satisfaction. Although there is a charge for in-
depth access to the data, its summary report, The State of Managed
Care Quality, 2001, is available via the Web site. Its table of contents is
reproduced below.
The State of Managed Care Quality, 2001
Table of Contents
I.
Introduction
1.
About the State of Managed Care Quality Report 
2.
Managed Care and the U.S. Health Care Industry 
II.
Key Findings
1.
About HEDIS®
2.
Patterns of Change Over Time 
i.
Incremental Increases 
ii.
Sharp Increases 
iii.
Decreasing Variability 
3.
Improvement in Heart Disease Measures 
4.
Improvement in Women’s Health Measures 
5.
Improvement in Patients’ Experiences with Health
Plans 
i.
Consistently High Performance 
ii.
Steady Increase 
iii.
Substantial Increases 
6.
Opportunities for Improvement 
III.
Measure-by-Measure Reports
1.
Adolescent Immunization Status 
2.
Advising Smokers to Quit 
3.
Use of Appropriate Medication for People 
with Asthma 
4.
Beta Blocker Treatment After a Heart Attack 
5.
Breast Cancer Screening 
6.
Cervical Cancer Screening 
7.
Childhood Immunization Status 
8.
Chlamydia Screening in Women 
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
195

9.
Cholesterol Management After Acute Cardiovascular
Events 
10.
Comprehensive Diabetes Care 
11.
Controlling High Blood Pressure 
12.
Follow-Up After Hospitalization for Mental Illness 
13.
Management of Menopause 
14.
Prenatal and Postpartum Care 
IV.
Consumer Experiences in Managed Care Organizations:
Results from the 2001 CAHPS® 2.0H Survey
1.
2001 CAHPS® 2.0H: Purpose and Methodology 
2.
2001 CAHPS® 2.0H Composites and Overall Ratings:
National Trends and Regional Analyses 
3.
2001 CAHPS® 2.0H: Analysis of Individual Items 
4.
CAHPS® 2.0H Survey Results for Preferred Provider
Organizations (PPO) 
V.
The Business Case for Quality 
1.
Introduction 
2.
Direct vs. Indirect Costs 
3.
HEDIS: Measuring What Matters 
4.
The Quality Dividend Calculator: Using HEDIS and
Accreditation to Quantify Savings 
5.
Case Study: Comprehensive Diabetes Care 
6.
The Productivity Dividend 
7.
Bibliography 
VI. Appendix Tables
1.
Comparing the HEDIS 2001 Results of Accredited/
Not Accredited HEDIS Participants 
2.
Comparing the HEDIS 2001 Results of Public
Reporting/Not Public Reporting HEDIS 
Participants 
3.
Impact of Rotation on HEDIS 2001 Results 
Source: National Committee for Quality Assurance. http://www.ncqa.
org/communications/publications/hedispub.htm. Accessed January 27, 2003.
New Democrats Online 
http://www.ndol.org/
New Democrats Online (NDOL.org) is the shared online home of the
Democratic Leadership Council. Its Health Care page provides position
196
Facts and Documents

papers on health and health reform–related topics. Often the material in-
cluded on this Web site is taken from other groups, and this site is often
a repository of health policy–related material from a more centrist to lib-
eral perspective interested in expansion of health insurance coverage.
The example of its material included here is the report “A Performance-
Based Approach to Universal Health Care,” which was a proposal pre-
pared for the Covering America project conducted by the Economic and
Social Research Institute (ESRI) and funded by The Robert Wood John-
son Foundation. This report focuses on the issue of accountability and
how to create a framework for that as part of an approach toward uni-
versal health care.
A Performance-Based Approach to 
Universal Health Care
Policy Report November 15, 2002 
By David Kendall, Jeff Lemieux and S. Robert Levine
Editor’s Note: This proposal was one of 13 prepared for the Covering
America project, conducted by the Economic and Social Research
Institute (ESRI) and funded by The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation. The proposals were published in Covering America:
Real Remedies for the Uninsured, Volumes 1 and 2. All 13
proposals are available at the ESRI web site at: www.esresearch.
org/covering_america.php.
Overview 
For as long as health insurance rates have been measured
systematically in the United States, there has been no progress in
reducing the number of uninsured. Even after slight
improvements in coverage rates at the tail end of arguably the
strongest economy in the nation’s history, coverage rates are still
lower now than they were in 1987. Failure is all too common in
health care policy and reform efforts.
Covering the uninsured requires a new approach to
health policy. Current policies are based on propagating rules
and manipulating behavior, rather than on achieving results.
For example, Medicaid provides substantial federal funding
in exchange for compliance with federal requirements. Yet,
even where federal law requires coverage for certain
categories, such as low-income, pregnant women and
children, there is no automatic assessment of how effective
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
197

state efforts are to enroll people. Not surprising, large gaps
between eligibility and enrollment rates persist, especially in
the case of children.
Rules and incentives are necessary and important tools, but
they are more useful in helping to set the conditions for success
than as ends in themselves. Health policy needs to include real-
time assessment of performance and continuous recalibration of
methods to achieve the desired outcome. Describing success so
everyone can help to pursue it is more likely to inspire progress
than merely prescribing behavior based on an incomplete theory or
an inappropriate model.
Our vision of success is that nearly all U.S. residents have
health care coverage, which they select for themselves and which
provides them with a level of coverage that is appropriate to
their health status and income level. Health care would be
delivered safely without waste and with the best possible
individual and population-based outcomes. People who remain
uninsured for whatever reason would be assured access to
community-based outpatient and preventive care services rather
than having to rely on emergency room and hospital-based care
only, often delivered too late in the course of illness to be
effective.
In general, the government would ensure that everyone has
the opportunity to get coverage, and individuals would be
responsible for obtaining it and using resources wisely. We seek
broad recognition that as a community, decisions about the use
of health care resources affect our common health and our
common wealth.
There can be no real progress or success without clearly
deﬁned accountability. Our framework for accountability is
straightforward: The federal government provides a basic level
of subsidy to everyone according to need and supports the
research and encourages the information ﬂow necessary for
high-quality, cost-effective use of health care services. The states
make sure that coverage is affordable and a choice of health
plans is available to people in diverse circumstances. Employers
act as conduits for enrolling and paying for coverage (even if
they choose to make no contribution themselves), and
individuals are responsible for securing coverage and paying
their fair share.
198
Facts and Documents

Here, then, are the key ingredients of our proposal that are
necessary for success:
Tax credits for employer-sponsored and individual health
insurance to improve affordability. Our tax credits would apply
to both employer-sponsored coverage and individually
purchased coverage. They would be available to the uninsured
as well as people who are struggling to afford coverage they
already have. The existing tax exclusion for employer-sponsored
coverage would not be repealed. Therefore, the tax credits would
not disrupt employer-sponsored coverage. In addition, the
credits would be refundable, which means that low-income
workers can use them even if they pay no income tax. They
would also be advanceable so workers could use the credit at the
time they purchase coverage.
Workplace focus to make coverage easy to get. People are
accustomed to getting coverage at work, and our proposal
would enable all uninsured workers to do so. However, it
would not require employers to sponsor or contribute to
coverage.
Voluntary purchasing groups or other options to make
choices widely available. As a condition for receiving new
federal grants, states would ensure that all employers and
individuals could choose among competing group insurance
plans through at least one, but preferably several, private
purchasing groups. Alternatively, a state could issue a menu of
options to make choosing coverage convenient. A modiﬁed
version of the federal employees’ system would be made
available to individuals and small businesses as a backup if a
state did not follow through.
Performance-based grants to assist states in improving
coverage and health care for all their citizens, and to reward
those that succeed. All states would receive a base amount to
help them improve insurance options in the state, disseminate
information about obtaining coverage, advertise the importance
of coverage, protect people with high health care costs, and help
assure basic care for those who lack coverage. To reward states
that succeed, the federal government would give additional
grants to states that could document increases in coverage rates.
These new state grants would not require state spending to
receive federal funding as current programs like Medicaid
require. Moreover, these grants would not dictate the means for
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
199

making improvements. Instead, the federal government would
reward states that improve coverage rates so that coverage is
equally available and affordable to the young and old, sick and
healthy, poor and rich. A portion of the base grant would be set
aside for states to participate in national collaborative efforts to
develop and test measures of health care quality, access,
outcomes, and public health. Those measures would become the
basis for additional performance-based grants to states when the
data become available.
Information networks to assess state performance,
improve quality, and inform policy. In order to fully assess the
performance of states, much more data about health care
processes and outcomes will be needed. This very same kind of
data is important to health professionals, hospitals, and
patients in order to avoid costly medical mistakes and to
improve quality generally. The same data is also important for
research on “the benefit of benefits,” which is the subject of
controversies involving insurance coverage decisions in the
private and public sectors. The federal government would
catalyze the creation of information networks that can
economically produce this data while keeping patients’ medical
records private.
Individual responsibility to obtain coverage. With State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), Medicaid, tax
credits, purchasing groups, and the new state grants, coverage
for children would be universally available and affordable. A
few years after enactment, parents would be denied the
personal exemption—a small tax benefit—for any of their
children who remained uninsured. As it becomes clear that
coverage is more affordable and easy to obtain, adults
remaining uninsured would lose their personal exemption as
well.
Our plan is divided into two phases to encourage
adjustments in federal policy based on a systematic, objective
assessment of experience and to allow for an evolution in the
political dynamic surrounding issues related to health care
coverage. The focus of Phase One is simply getting people
coverage through tax credits and performance grants, because
some coverage is better than no coverage. Phase One would
set in place the accountability framework, rules, and
incentives described above. Focusing on the relationship
200
Facts and Documents

between work and coverage would help correct the
misperception that the uninsured are non-workers (most are
not). It also would help bind together the interests of the
middle class with those who are trying to enter the middle
class by making health care coverage more secure for
everyone.
The focus of Phase Two is solving the problem of
underinsurance (inadequate beneﬁts for a given health condition
or income level) and enforcement of an individual mandate for
coverage for all adults—explicitly shifting the burden of
responsibility for having coverage to the individual. Five years
after our proposed tax credits and other reforms went into effect,
we propose a commission to study the impact of the credits and
performance grants, to recommend changes if necessary, and,
most important, to recommend whether to deny uninsured
adults the personal exemption on their taxes. Because any
coverage mandate must decide what level of coverage is
sufficient, the commission would also need to examine the
prevalence of underinsurance. Ultimately, the remaining
uninsured must take responsibility for their own health
coverage. But before we take that ﬁnal step, we must make
health insurance considerably more affordable and easier to
acquire than it is today.
Source: New Democrats Online. http://www.ndol.org/ndol_ci.
cfm?contentid=251284&kaid=111&subid=137. Accessed on August 20, 2003.
Physicians for a National Health Program 
http://www.pnhp.org/
The Basic Information section of the Physicians for a National Health
Program’s Web site presents brief reports on key issues relating to the
need for a national health system, and its News and Updates section
contains press releases and news updates from 1995 to the present. Two
of the group’s documents are included here. The ﬁrst is a brief report,
“Single-Payer Myths; Single-Payer Facts,” that succinctly presents the
organization’s overall approach to healthcare reform. The second docu-
ment, “Why the U.S. Needs a Single Payer System,” is a more detailed
and documented analysis of the advantages this group sees in a single-
payer system. 
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
201

Single-Payer Myths; Single-Payer Facts
Facts about National Health Insurance (NHI) 
You Might Not Know
The health care delivery system remains private. As
opposed to a national health service, where the government
employs doctors, in a national health insurance system, the
government is billed, but doctors remain in private practice.
A national health insurance program could save
approximately $150 billion on paperwork alone. Because of the
administrative complexities in our current system, over 25% of
every health care dollar goes to marketing, billing, utilization
review, and other forms of waste. A single-payer system could
reduce administrative costs greatly.
Most businesses would save money. Because a single-
payer system is more efficient than our current system, health
care costs are less, and therefore, businesses save money. In
Canada, the three major auto manufacturers (Ford, GM, and
Daimler-Chrysler) have all publicly endorsed Canada’s single-
payer health system from a business and ﬁnancial standpoint. In
the United States, Ford pays more for its workers health
insurance than it does for the steel to make its cars.
Under NHI, your insurance doesn’t depend on your job.
Whether you’re a student, professor, or working part-time
raising children, you’re provided with care. Not only does this
lead to a healthier population, but it’s also beneﬁcial from an
economic standpoint: workers are less-tied to their employers,
and those that dislike their current positions can ﬁnd new work
(where they would be happier and most likely more productive
and efficient).
Myths about National Health Insurance (NHI)
The government would dictate how physicians practice
medicine. In countries with a national health insurance system,
physicians are rarely questioned about their medical practices
(and usually only in cases of expected fraud). Compare it to
today’s system, where doctors routinely have to ask an insurance
company permission to perform procedures, prescribe certain
medications, or run certain tests to help their patients.
Waits for services would be extremely long. Again, in
countries with NHI, urgent care is always provided immediately.
Other countries do experience some waits for elective
202
Facts and Documents

procedures (like cataract removal), but maintaining the US’s
same level of health expenditures (twice as much as the next-
highest country), waits would be much shorter or even non-
existent.
People will overutilize the system. Most estimates do
indicate that there would be some increased utilization of the
system (mostly from the 42 million people that are currently
uninsured and therefore not receiving adequate health care),
however the staggering savings from a single-payer system
would easily compensate for this. (And remember, doctors still
control most health care utilization. Patients don’t receive
prescriptions or tests because they want them; they receive them
because their doctors have deemed them appropriate.)
Government programs are wasteful and inefficient. Some
are better than others, just as some businesses are better than
others. Just to name a few of the most successful and helpful: the
National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control,
and Social Security. Even consider Medicare, the government
program for the elderly; its overhead is approximately 3%, while
in private insurance companies, overhead and proﬁts add up to
15–25%.
Source: Physicians for a National Health Program. http://www.pnhp.
org/facts/singlepayer_myths_singlepayer_facts.php. Accessed August 21, 
2003.
Why the U.S. Needs a Single 
Payer Health System
by David U. Himmelstein, MD, and Steffie Woolhandler, MD
Our pluralistic health care system is giving way to a
system run by corporate oligopolies. A single payer reform
provides the only realistic alternative.
A few giant ﬁrms own or control a growing share of
medical practice. The winners in the new medical marketplace
are determined by ﬁnancial clout, not medical quality. The result:
three or four hospital chains and managed care plans will soon
corner the market, leaving physicians and patients with few
options. Doctors who don’t ﬁt in with corporate needs will be
shut out, regardless of patient needs.
A single ﬁrm—Columbia/HCA—now owns one quarter of
all Florida hospitals, and has announced plans to move into
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
203

Massachusetts. In the past year alone the ﬁrm has purchased
more than a dozen hospitals in Denver and Chicago, closing
unproﬁtable ones and shutting out unproﬁtable physicians and
patients.
In Minnesota, the most mature managed care market, only
three or four plans and three or four hospital chains are left. In
many rural areas a single plan dominates the market,
presenting patients and physicians with a take it or leave-it
choice.
Managed care plans in California, Texas and Washington,
DC have “delisted” thousands of physicians—both primary care
doctors and specialists—based solely on economic criteria. One
Texas physician was featured in Aetna’s newsletter as “Primary
Care Physician of the Month,” and thrown out of the plan
shortly thereafter when he accumulated high cost patients in his
practice. In Massachusetts, BayState HMO “delisted” hundreds
of psychiatrists, instructing their patients to call an 800 number
to be assigned a new mental health provider. The for-proﬁt ﬁrm
running Medicaid’s managed mental health care plan has just
informed psychiatrists that many of them will be barred from the
plan as a cost cutting measure.
HMOs are racing to take over Medicare, despite evidence
that HMOs have actually increased Medicare costs. The
managed care plans sign up mainly the healthy elderly, often
illegally inquiring about their health history. The physician
contracts offered by plans such as Secure Horizons/Tufts
virtually exclude small practices as well as academic physicians
who practice less than full time. Financial incentives that
penalize the primary care physician for every specialty referral,
diagnostic test, and hospital visit pit patients against doctors,
and specialists against primary care physicians.
HMOs/insurers that can raise massive amounts of capital
by selling stock have a decisive advantage. Their deep pockets
allow them to mount massive ad campaigns, market nationally
to large employers, and set premiums below costs until
competitors are driven out. Once they’ve cornered the market
they can drive hard bargains with hospitals and doctors. As a
result not-for-proﬁt plans across the country are going for-proﬁt
(even Blue Cross), and small plans are being taken over. Even the
largest physician-owned plans cannot compete with U.S.
Healthcare, Prudential and similar ﬁrms with multibillion dollar
war chests.
204
Facts and Documents

Large drug ﬁrms are preparing to directly take over much
of specialty care. Merck, Lilly and others are developing
“Disease Management” subsidiaries to sub contract with HMOs
to care for patients with expensive chronic diseases such as
depression, diabetes, asthma and cancer.
A single payer system would save on bureaucracy and
investor proﬁts, making more funds available for care.
Private insurers take, on average, 13% of premium dollars
for overhead and proﬁt. Overhead/proﬁts are even higher, about
30%, in big managed care plans like U.S. Healthcare. In contrast,
overhead consumes less than 2% of funds in the fee-for-service
Medicare program, and less than 1% in Canada’s program.
Blue Cross in Massachusetts employs more people to
administer coverage for about 2.5 million New Englanders than
are employed in all of Canada to administer single payer
coverage for 27 million Canadians. In Massachusetts, hospitals
spend 25.5% of their revenues on billing and administration. The
average Canadian hospital spends less than half as much,
because the single payer system obviates the need to determine
patient eligibility for services, obtain prior approval, attribute
costs and charges to individual patients, and battle with insurers
over care and payment.
Physicians in the U.S. face massive bureaucratic costs. The
average office-based American doctor employs 1.5 clerical and
managerial staff, spends 44% of gross income on overhead, and
devotes 134 hours of his/her own time annually to billing.
Canadian physicians employ 0.7 clerical/administrative staff,
spend 34% of their gross income for overhead, and trivial
amounts of time on billing2 (there’s a single half page form for all
patients, or a simple electronic system).
According to U.S. Congress’ General Accounting Office,
administrative savings from a single payer reform would total
about 10% of overall health spending. These administrative
savings, about $100 billion annually, are enough to cover all of
the uninsured, and virtually eliminate co-payments, deductibles
and exclusions for those who now have inadequate plans—
without any increase in total health spending.
The current market-driven system is increasingly
compromising quality and access to care.
The number of uninsured has risen rapidly, to 39.7 million
nationally [update: This ﬁgure is now over 42 million!]. The
proportion of people with coverage paid by an employer is
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
205

dropping, and those with employer-paid coverage face rising
out-of-pocket costs. Only massive Medicaid expansions—$10.5
million nationally since 1989—have averted a much larger
increase in the uninsured. Proposals for welfare reform and
Medicaid managed care programs would shrink Medicaid
enrollment (increasing the number of uninsured) and threaten
the quality of care for those left on Medicaid.
U.S. Healthcare and other investor-owned managed care
plans are inserting “gag” clauses in physicians’ contracts. Our
own U.S. Healthcare contracts forbid physicians to “take any
action or make any communication which undermines or could
undermine the conﬁdence of enrollees, potential enrollees, their
employers, their unions, or the public in U.S. Healthcare or the
quality of U.S. Healthcare coverage” and forbid any disclosure of
the terms of the contract. Meanwhile, Leonard Abramson, U.S.
Healthcare’s CEO, took home $20 million in a single year, and
holds company stock valued at $782 million.
Insurers are gutting mental health beneﬁts, denying needed
care, cutting payment rates, and insisting on the cheapest—and
often not the best—form of therapy.
HMOs have sought to proﬁt from Medicare and Medicaid
contracts by providing substandard care, and even perpetrating
massive fraud. The largest Medicare HMO, IMC in Florida,
induced thousands of the elderly to sign over their Medicare
eligibility and then absconded with $200 million in federal
funds. Nationwide, Medicare HMOs provide strikingly
substandard homecare and rehabilitation to the disabled elderly.
Tennessee Medicaid HMOs have failed to pay doctors and
hospitals for care.
After 360,000 women and children were enrolled (and $650
million was spent annually), Florida suspended enrollment in its
Medicaid HMO program because of ﬂagrant abuses.
Administrative costs consumed more than 50% of Medicaid
spending in at least 4 Florida HMOs. In one plan that enrolled
48,000 Medicaid recipients, 19% of total Medicaid dollars went
for the three owners’ salaries. Thousands of patients were denied
vital care; sales reps often illegally pressured healthy people into
joining HMOs, while discouraging those who were ill; patient
complaints, and inspectors’ ﬁndings of substandard care were
repeatedly ignored. Overall, a cursory state audit found serious
problems at 21 of the 29 HMOs participating in the program. A
more extensive evaluation is just beginning. These Florida
206
Facts and Documents

scandals are a virtual replay of California’s earlier Medicaid
HMO experience.
HMO payment incentives increasingly pressure primary
care physicians to avoid specialty consultations and diagnostic
tests. In this coercive climate, errors of judgment will inevitably
occur, denying patients needed specialty care, while specialists
are idle. In some areas of the nation (e.g. New York City and
California) market imperatives have led to growing
unemployment of physicians, while huge numbers of patients
don’t get adequate care.
Surveys show that patients greatly prefer care in the small-
scale, non-institutional practices that are being wiped out in the
current system.
A single payer system is better for patients and better for
doctors. Canada spends $1000 less per capita on health care
than the U.S., but delivers more care and greater choice for
patients. Combining the single payer efficiency of Canada’s
system with the much higher funding of ours would yield
better care than Canada’s or ours at present.
Canadian patients have an unrestricted choice of doctors
and hospitals, and Canadian doctors have a wider choice of
practice options than U.S. physicians.
Canadians get more doctor visits and procedures, more
hospital days, and even more bone marrow, liver and lung
transplants than Americans.
While there are waits for a handful of expensive procedures,
there is little or no wait for most kinds of care in Canada. An oft-
cited survey that alleged huge waiting lists counted every patient
with a future appointment as “in a queue.” (The fringe group that
conducted the survey also advocates the abolition of the licensing
of physicians to open up free competition among “healers.”)
More legitimate research shows that the average waiting time for
knee replacement in Ontario is 8 weeks, as compared to 3 weeks
in the U.S. But patient satisfaction levels with the procedure and
care are identical. The time from ﬁrst suspicion to deﬁnitive
therapy for breast cancer is actually shorter in British Columbia
than in Washington State. There are virtually no waits for
emergent coronary artery surgery in Canada, though elective
cases face delays, particularly with the surgeons held in highest
regard. Interestingly, though Canadian MI patients receive
substantially fewer invasive diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures, death and reinfarction rates are comparable in the
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
207

two nations. Finally, under a single payer system we would face
much less restraint on care than Canada because we spend (and
would certainly continue to spend) much more, and have many
more specialists and high tech facilities. Hence even the modest
limitations on care seen in Canada are unlikely here.
Surgical outcomes for the elderly (all of whom are insured
in the U.S.) are, on average, slightly better in Canada.
Surveys show that Canadian doctors are far happier with
their system than we are with ours. According to a 1992 poll,
85% prefer their system to ours; 83% rate the care in Canada as
very good or excellent, and most physicians would urge their
children to enter the profession. Fewer than 300 out of Canada’s
50,000 physicians emigrate to the U.S. each year, and a survey of
doctors who have practiced in both nations shows a clear
preference for the Canadian system. Medicine has remained an
extremely desirable profession; medical school admission is even
more competitive in Canada than here.
Surveys show very high patient satisfaction in Canada. 96%
prefer their system to ours, and 89% rate care good or excellent
(up from 71% 4 years ago).
Canadian physicians’ incomes are comparable, in most
specialties, to those in the U.S., and have kept pace with inﬂation
for the past 25 years.
It is perhaps comforting to know that Canada’s highly
regarded and efficiently managed health system is run by a
government no more competent nor popular than our own.
Their postal service and public railroad system generally receive
lower marks than ours; their government’s record on ﬁscal
management is not better than ours; and polls show that
Canadians distrust their government even more than we do.
Many of us have negative feelings toward government, and
examples of government inefficiency and incompetence abound.
Yet the record of private insurers is far worse. Their overhead is,
on average, 600% above that of public programs, and no private
insurer’s overhead is as low as Medicare’s. Dozens of ﬁnancial
scandals have wracked insurers and HMOs in the past year
alone (our personal favorite is the $500,000 travel budget
consumed by the head of one Blue Cross plan, including a $7000
junket to Africa to lecture on insurance fraud). Moreover,
Medicare treats doctors and patients more respectfully than most
private insurers, funds virtually all residency training, and pays
Massachusetts hospitals higher rates than do most HMOs.
208
Facts and Documents

Finally, when a public program misbehaves we have channels to
seek redress; we know where Congress meets, and can vote them
out. For-proﬁt ﬁrms must answer only to their stockholders.
References
1. U.S. Healthcare 1994 Annual Report.
2. NEJM 1991; 324:1253.
3. NEJM 1993; 329:400–3.
4. U.S. General Accounting Office. Canadian Health Care: Lessons for the
U.S. 1991.
5. Data from U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey March
Supplement.
6. U.S. Healthcare primary care physician contract.
7. Modern Healthcare, 5/1/95:60.
8. Health Care Financing Review 1994; 16:187.
9. Fort Lauderdale Sun Sentinel. Florida’s Medicaid HMOs: Proﬁts from
Pain. 12/11–12/15, 1994 and State Health Watch April 1995.
10. JAMA 1993; 270:835.
11. NEJM 1990; 323:884.
12. NEJM 1993; 328:772.
13. NEJM 1994; 331:1063, Ann Int Med 1992; 116:507, and OECD Health
Database.
14. Waiting Your Turn. Fraser Institute, 1994.
15. NEJM 1994; 331:1068.
16. Medical Care 1993; 34:264.
17. Health Affairs 1991; 10(3):110.
18. NEJM 1993; 328:779.
19. Health Affairs, Summer 1992:61.
20. Toronto Globe and Mail, 10/23/92.
21. American J Public Health 1993; 83:1544.
22. Medical school application statistics from JAMA medical education
issue, multiple years.
23. Toronto Star, 9/13/93.
24. NEJM 1990; 322:562.
Source: Physicians for a National Health Program. http://www.
pnhp.org/facts/why_the_us_needs_a_single_payer_health_system.php.
Accessed on August 21, 2003.
RAND Corporation
http://rand.org/
The report “Health Care Coverage for the Nation’s Uninsured” is a good
example of the types of reports produced by the RAND Corporation. This
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
209

report focuses on how to cover the nation’s uninsured and whether, if in
doing so, the country would move closer to universal coverage. The re-
port draws upon data collected by other groups, such as The Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, and explores issues of insurance utilization,
health status, and demographic information. The report highlights the
variation across states in the numbers of uninsured and the correspond-
ing issues of access to care, and concludes that many states may need fed-
eral assistance to expand access.
Health Care Coverage for the 
Nation’s Uninsured 
Can We Get to Universal Coverage?
The goal of expanding public health insurance programs is to
provide coverage to most of the nation’s uninsured. But
policymakers face a number of challenges in determining
whether this goal can be reached. For example, how much will it
cost? How should new public programs be ﬁnanced? How will
beneﬁts be distributed? Can expanding insurance be left up to
the states?
These and related issues are explored in a series of studies
by economists Stephen Long and Susan Marquis. Their work
draws on data from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
(RWJF) Family Health Insurance and Employer surveys,
conducted in 1993–1994 in Colorado, Florida, Minnesota, New
Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Vermont,
and Washington. Collectively, these states are similar to all states
in their health care systems and population characteristics, and
span the variation observed in all 50 states in important
population and health policy characteristics. The surveys, which
Long and Marquis designed in collaboration with leading survey
organizations, compiled extensive insurance, utilization, health
status, and demographic information.
Among key study ﬁndings to date:
•
States vary substantially in the number of uninsured
residents and in their population’s health and access to
care.
•
As a consequence, effects of policies will vary across
states.
•
Many states may need federal assistance to expand
access. 
210
Facts and Documents

How Much Will It Cost States to 
Expand Health Insurance Coverage? 
Many states have proposed or implemented programs to
provide insurance to low-income, uninsured residents. How
much will these programs cost?
Long and Marquis estimated eligibility and costs for three
programs illustrative of those enacted or under consideration.
The number of people who would be eligible for the new
programs ranges from 6 to 10 percent of the 10 RWJF survey
states’ combined population, depending on the speciﬁc program
parameters. The cost of the expanded coverage in the 10 states
combined ranges from about $4.3 to $7.9 billion, depending on
program features. This represents 3 to 5 percent of total personal
health care spending in the 10 states.
But aggregate estimates mask substantial variation. Indeed,
health problems cluster within states: Residents of states with
the highest percentage of uninsured are more likely to be in ill
health and to have more severe problems with access to care.
The percentage of the nonelderly population without
insurance coverage varies substantially, ranging from 27 percent
in New Mexico to 10 percent in Minnesota. However, across all
10 of the RWJF survey states, the percentage of the population
with public coverage varies little. Thus, the interstate spread of
the noninsured stems from variations in the rate of private
coverage.
Long and Marquis took a detailed look at the interactions
among insurance coverage, health status, and access to care.
They grouped the three states with the highest percentage of
uninsured persons (Florida, New Mexico, and Oklahoma) and
the three having the lowest (Minnesota, North Dakota, and
Vermont). They used these groupings to characterize access and
health status in states with similar uninsured rates. The
following proﬁles emerge.
Health status: Persons living in states with a higher
percentage of uninsured are about twice as likely to be reported
in fair or poor health as those living in states with a lower
percentage.
Access to care: Residents in states with a higher percentage
of uninsured have less access to care. Figure 1 shows variation in
several measures of access separately for children and adults.
The ﬁrst two measures (no usual source of care and no
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
211

emergency care when needed) are about two to three times
higher in the high-uninsured states.
Can Federal Policies Help? 
Because of differences such as those described above, policies
designed to expand health care coverage will have different
effects in different states. One example:
Long and Marquis investigated a prototype plan similar to
the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), a federal-
state partnership intended to extend health care coverage to a
signiﬁcant proportion of the nation’s uninsured children.
Expanding public insurance would substantially improve
access for low-income uninsured children. On average, across all
10 RWJF states, a CHIP-like plan would increase physician
212
Facts and Documents
FIGURE 1
Access to Care Varies Substantially Across States
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
States with higher percentage of uninsured
States with lower percentage of uninsured
No usual 
source of care
No emergency care
when needed
No doctor visit in
past 12 months
Not fully
immunized
Children
Adults
Children
Adults
Children
Adults
Children
Adults
Percent of state’s population

contact from 2.3 to 4.6 visits per year. But the increase in visit
rates for uninsured children would vary signiﬁcantly, ranging
from lows of 41 percent in Minnesota and 50 percent in New
York to highs of 135 percent in New Mexico and Vermont and
189 percent in Oregon.
A state’s safety net capacity, assessed by measures such as
public hospital beds as a percentage of total hospital beds and
emergency room visits per low-income person, plays an
important role in this variation. Predicted access gains for the
three states ranking lowest in safety net capacity are 150 percent,
whereas the gains are 80 percent for the three states with the
highest capacity.
This analysis suggests that a CHIP-like program is likely to
boost the number of low-income children who will be newly
insured, substantially increase their access to physician services,
and do so across the country. But the magnitude of the effects
will vary greatly from one state to another. The biggest potential
improvements in access to care are in states that have
traditionally provided the scantiest health safety nets.
Can the States Go It Alone? 
Can independent actions by states, taken collectively,
substantially reduce the nation’s uninsured? Probably not.
Here’s why.
States with a high percentage of uninsured face a signiﬁcant
challenge in expanding health insurance coverage. They will
have to spend more per capita than other states to attain
equivalent outcomes. But they lack the tax capacity to do so.
Long and Marquis used the additional federal income taxes
that a family would pay to ﬁnance an illustrative national
program of subsidized health insurance for low-income persons
as a measure of a state’s capacity to ﬁnance health reform. They
compared this measure of tax capacity with the additional state
income taxes the family would be required to pay if each state
introduced the same program.
They grouped the 48 states of the continental United States
into four groups of 12 states, ordered by the uninsured rate in
the state. Figure 2 shows the percentage of uninsured in each
group, ranging from 10 to 21 percent. It also shows that the
illustrative program Long and Marquis considered would extend
coverage to most of the uninsured in all of the states, no matter
how many uninsured residents a state had initially.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
213

How much an extended insurance program will cost is
directly related to how many people it will cover; however, the
costs can be distributed in different ways. In a national program,
they are distributed according to the distribution of family
incomes among the states. As a result, per capita taxes are higher
in the 12 states with the lowest uninsured rates—about $188—
because these states have higher-income populations. In the 12
states with the highest rates of uninsured, the per capita tax
increase is about $154; tax increases are lower in these states
because they have lower-income populations.
In contrast, under the state-ﬁnanced plan, costs are
distributed according to where the newly insured live. Thus,
costs will be higher in states that have more uninsured residents.
The estimated per capita tax increase for such states is $230. For
214
Facts and Documents
FIGURE 2
Percent of Population That Is Uninsured, Current and with Illustrative Reform
0
5
10
15
20
25
Current
With reform
12 states with lowest 
percentage of uninsured
Percent of state’s population that is uninsured
Second group
of 12 states
Third group
of 12 states
12 states with highest
percentage of uninsured

residents of the states with the lowest uninsured rates, the
average per capita tax increase would be about $130 (in 1993
dollars).
The Long and Marquis analysis illustrates that very
unequal programs among the states would result if each state
ﬁnanced a program with a budget limited to its capacity to
ﬁnance health reform. As Figure 3 shows, the 24 states with the
smaller percentage of uninsured would essentially be able to
ﬁnance the full insurance reform plan because they are also the
states with the highest tax capacity. The 24 states with the larger
percentage of uninsured would not be able to cover all of their
low-income uninsured population with a budget limited to their
estimated capacity to ﬁnance health system reform.
In sum: the states that most need to expand insurance
coverage have the smallest capacity to do so. As a consequence, a
strategy relying on incremental, state-by-state action is likely to
leave the nation with signiﬁcant lingering gaps in health care
coverage. Some states may need targeted federal assistance—for
example, a program like CHIP, which provides federal matching
funds to help states implement expanded coverage.
Future Issues 
The research by Long and Marquis is helping individual states
develop and implement changes in health care ﬁnancing and
delivery that will lead to improved access for the uninsured. But
the researchers emphasize that other factors will affect program
costs and cost-effectiveness.
For example, on the one hand, not all the people who are
eligible enroll in public programs, and participation rates may
vary among states because of differences in program
implementation. As a result, estimates of program effects may
overstate both the number of uninsured who will actually be
covered and program costs.
On the other hand, the public program may “crowd out”
private insurance. Some families may shift from employer plans
to a public program because the latter is cheaper. Or families
may lose the opportunity to purchase private insurance—for
example, if some employers stop offering insurance because they
know that employees can be covered by the public program.
This kind of crowd-out could increase program costs.
Moreover, the program would not be reaching the target
population—the uninsured.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
215

Long and Marquis will use data from before and after the
expanded programs to cast light on these, and other, critical issues. 
For more information:
Cantor, Joel C., Stephen H. Long, and M. Susan Marquis. 1998. “Challenges of
State Health Reform: Variations in Ten States.” Health Affairs
17(1):191–200.
Long, Stephen H., and M. Susan Marquis. 1999. “Geographic Variation in
Physician Visits for Uninsured Children: The Role of the Safety Net.”
JAMA 281(21):2035–2040.
Long, Stephen H., and M. Susan Marquis. 1996. “Some Pitfalls in Making Cost
Estimates of State Health Insurance Coverage Expansions.” Inquiry
33(1):85–91.
Marquis, M. Susan, and Stephen H. Long. 1997. “Federalism and Health System
Reform: Prospects for State Action.” JAMA 278(6):514–517.
216
Facts and Documents
FIGURE 3
Only Half of the States Can Cover All of Their Uninsured with a 
Budget Limited to Their Tax Capacity to Finance Health Reform
0
50
100
12 states with lowest 
percentage of uninsured
Percent of low-income uninsured who would be covered
Second group
of 12 states
Third group
of 12 states
12 states with highest
percentage of uninsured

Selected Bibliography: Increasing Health Care 
Coverage for the American People
Acs, G., S.H. Long, M.S. Marquis, and P.F. Short. 1996. “Self-Insured Employer
Health Plans: Prevalence, Proﬁle, Provisions, and Premiums.” Health
Affairs 15(2):266–278.
Cantor, J.C., S.H. Long, and M. S. Marquis. 1998. “Challenges of State Health
Reform: Variations in Ten States.” Health Affairs 17(1):191–200.
———. 1995. “Private Employment-Based Health Insurance in Ten States.” Health
Affairs 14(2):199–211.
Coburn, A. F., E. H. Kilbreth, S. H. Long, and M. S. Marquis. 1998. “Urban-Rural
Differences in Employer-Based Health Insurance Coverage of Workers.”
Medical Care Research and Review 55(4):484–496.
Coburn, A. F., S. H. Long, and M. S. Marquis. 1999. “Effects of Changing
Medicaid Fees on Physician Participation and Enrollee Access.” Inquiry
36(3):265–279.
Goldman, D., J. Buchanan, and E. Keeler. April 2000. “Simulating the Impact of
Medical Savings Accounts on Small Business.” Health Services Research 
35.
Goldman, D., A. Leibowitz, J. Buchanan, et al. 1997. “Redistributional
Consequences of Community Rating.” Health Services Research 32(1):71–86.
(Also available as RAND Reprint RP-640, 1997.)
Karoly, L.A., and J. A. Rogowski. 1998. “Retiree Health Beneﬁts and Retirement
Behavior: Implications for Health Policy.” In U.S. Department of Labor,
Pension and Welfare Beneﬁts Administration, Health Beneﬁts and the
Workforce, Volume 2. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
Chapter Three, pp. 43–71.
Klerman, J. A. 1997. Health Insurance Among Children of Unemployed Parents. Santa
Monica, Calif.: RAND, MR-883-DOL.
Long, S. H., and M. S. Marquis. 1999a. “Comparing Employee Health Beneﬁts in
the Public and Private Sectors, 1997.” Health Affairs 18(6):183–193.
———. 1998. “Effects of Florida’s Medicaid Eligibility Expansion for Pregnant
Women.” American Journal of Public Health 88(3):371–376.
———. 1993. “Gaps in Employer Coverage: Lack of Supply or Lack of Demand?”
Health Affairs 12(Supplement):282–293; a similar version appears as “Gaps
in Employment-Based Health Insurance: Lack of Supply or Lack of
Demand?” in U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Beneﬁts
Administration, Health Beneﬁts and the Workforce. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1992, pp. 37–42.
———. 1999b. “Geographic Variation in Physician Visits for Uninsured Children:
The Role of the Safety Net.” JAMA 281(21):2035–2040.
———. 1999c. “Pooled Purchasing: Who Are the Players?” Health Affairs
18(4):105–111.
———. 1996. “Some Pitfalls in Making Cost Estimates of State Health Insurance
Coverage Expansions.” Inquiry 33(1):85–91.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
217

———. 1999d. “Stability and Variation in Employment-Based Health Insurance,
1993–1997.” Health Affairs 18(6):133–139.
———. 1994. “The Uninsured Access Gap and the Cost of Universal Coverage.”
Health Affairs 13(2):211–220.
Long, S. H., M. S. Marquis, and J. Rodgers. 1998. “Do People Shift Their Use of
Health Services over Time to Take Advantage of Insurance?” Journal of
Health Economics 17(1):105–115.
Marquis, M. S., and S. H. Long. 1997. “Federalism and Health System Reform:
Prospects for State Action.” JAMA 278(6):514–517.
———. 1999a. “The Medicaid Eligibility Expansions in Florida: Effects on
Financing and the Delivery System for Maternity Care.” Family Planning
Perspectives 31(3):112–121.
———. 1999b. “Recent Trends in Self-Insured Employer Health Plans.” Health
Affairs 18(3):161–166.
———. 1996. “Reconsidering the Effect of Medicaid on Health Care Services
Use.” Health Services Research 30(6):791–808.
———. 1999c. “Trends in Managed Care and Managed Competition, 1993–1997.”
Health Affairs 18(6):75–88.
———. 1994/1995. “The Uninsured Access Gap: Narrowing the Estimates.”
Inquiry 31(4):405–414.
———. 1992. “Uninsured Children and National Health Reform.” JAMA
268(24):3473–3477.
———. 1995. “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the Non-Group Market.”
Journal of Health Economics 14(1):47–63.
Pacula, R. L., and R. Sturm. 2000. “Mental Health Parity Legislation: Much Ado
About Nothing?” Health Services Research 35.
Rogowski, J. A., and L.A. Karoly. 1998. “COBRA Continuation Coverage: Effect
on the Health Insurance Status of Early Retirees.” In U.S. Department of
Labor, Pension and Welfare Beneﬁts Administration, Health Beneﬁts and the
Workforce, Volume 2. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
Chapter Four, pp. 73–93.
Studdert, D. M. 1999. “Expanded Managed Care Liability: What Impact on
Employer Coverage?” Health Affairs 18(6):7–27.
Sturm, R. 1997. “How Expensive Is Unlimited Mental Health Care Coverage
Under Managed Care?” JAMA 278(18):1533–1537. 
Sturm, R., W. Goldman, and J. McCulloch. 1998. “Mental Health and Substance
Abuse Parity: A Case Study of Ohio’s State Employee Program.” The
Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 1:129–134.
Sturm, R., and R. L. Pacula. “State Mental Health Parity Laws: Cause or
Consequence of Differences in Use?” Health Affairs 18(5):182–193.
Sturm, R. and K. B. Wells. April 2000. “Health Insurance May Be Improving—But
Not for Individuals with Mental Illness.” Health Services Research 35.
Sturm R., W. Zhang, and M. Schoenbaum. 1999. “How Expensive Are Unlimited
Substance Abuse Beneﬁts Under Managed Care?” Journal of Behavioral
Health Services & Research 26(2):203–210.
218
Facts and Documents

The research summarized in this Research Highlight was supported by the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, N.J.
Source: The RAND Corporation. http://www.rand.org/publications/
RB/RB4527/. Accessed August 21, 2003. Copyright @ RAND 2000. Reprinted
with permission.
Nonproﬁt Think Tanks’ and Policy Coalitions’ Data and Documents
219


6
Organizations
Professional Societies and Nonproﬁt 
Issue and Advocacy Associations
Academy for Health Services Research and Health Policy
1801 K Street NW, Suite 701-L
Washington, DC 20006-1301
(202) 292-6700
http://www.academyhealth.org
This association is made of individuals and organizations in-
volved in health services research. It works to educate the public
on the value of health services research in improving the health
of the nation. It also works to represent its members in inﬂuenc-
ing legislative and administrative policies concerning health ser-
vices research.
Alliance for Health Reform
1444 I Street NW, Suite 910
Washington, DC 20005-6573
(202) 789-2300
http://www.allhealth.org/
The Alliance for Health Reform is a major coalition studying
health reform and how to provide health coverage for all Ameri-
cans at a reasonable cost. Its Web site provides fact sheets (under
the link titled Issues) and in-depth analysis (under the Resources
link) on topics relating to health reform.
221

American Hospital Association (AHA)
1 N. Franklin
Chicago, IL 60606-3421
(312) 422-3000
http://www.aha.org
AHA is the leading national organization representing hospitals
and other health care provider organizations and institutions. It
works to represent these organizations in the national health care
policy debate and in legislative and administrative issues relating
to its member organizations.
American Medical Association (AMA)
515 N. State Street
Chicago, IL 60610
(312) 464-5000
http://www.ama-assn.org/
The AMA is the oldest and largest association representing physi-
cians in this country. In addition to activities relating to the prac-
tice and standards for physician practice, it also works to educate
and represent physicians on major national policy issues relating
to health care.
American Nurses Association (ANA)
600 Maryland Avenue SW, Suite 100 W. Washington, DC 
20024-2571
(202) 651-7000
http://www.nursingworld.org
ANA, representing over 120,000 registered nurses is the leading
professional organization for the nursing profession. In addition
to being actively involved in practice and accreditation issues re-
lating to nursing, its political action represents the nursing per-
spective on health policy related issues.
American Public Health Association (APHA)
800 I Street NW Washington, DC 20001-3710
(202) 777-2742
http://www.apha.org
APHA is made up of over 32,000 health care professional in a
wide range of disciplines who work to protect and support the
publics health including individuals who do not access to health
222
Organizations

care, state and local public health and environmental protection
departments, community level health issues and communicable
diseases.
Center for Health Care Strategies
P.O. Box 3469
Princeton, NJ 08543-3469
(609) 895-8101
http://www.chcs.org
The Center for Health Care Strategies (CHCS) is an affiliate of
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation that “promotes high qual-
ity health care services for low-income populations and people
with chronic illnesses and disabilities.” The center claims to
“achieve this objective through awarding grants and providing
‘real world’ training and technical assistance to state purchasers
of publicly ﬁnanced health care, health plans, and consumer
groups.” It directs four national initiatives of The Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation: Medicaid Managed Care, State Action for
Oral Health Access, Covering Kids and Families: Access Initia-
tive, and Improving Asthma Care for Children. Its publications
page contains access to pdf versions of its reports relating to these
initiatives.
Center for Studying Health System Change
600 Maryland Avenue, SW, Suite 550
Washington, DC 20024
(202) 484-5261
http://www.hschange.org/
The Center for Studying Health System Change (HSC) is a non-
partisan policy research organization located in Washington, D.C.
Its Web site states that the “HSC designs and conducts studies fo-
cused on the U.S. health care system to inform the thinking and
decisions of policy makers in government and private industry.”
The site includes an array of statistics and provides access to nu-
merous issue briefs and tracking reports that present information
over time on insurance coverage and costs, access to care and
local markets, and managed care.
The Commonwealth Fund
One East 75th Street
New York, NY 10021
Organizations
223

(212) 606-3800
http://www.cmwf.org
The Commonwealth Fund describes itself as “a private founda-
tion that supports independent research on health and social is-
sues and makes grants to improve health care practice and policy.
The Fund is dedicated to helping people become more informed
about their health care, and improving care for vulnerable popu-
lations such as children, elderly people, low-income families, mi-
nority Americans, and the uninsured.” The Web site provides the
fund’s numerous reports in pdf format at no charge.
Employee Beneﬁt Research Institute
2121 K Street, NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20037-1896
(202) 659-0670
http://www.ebri.org
The Employee Beneﬁt Research Institute (EBRI) describes itself as
“the only nonproﬁt, nonpartisan organization committed exclu-
sively to data dissemination, policy research, and education on
economic security and employee beneﬁts.”
Families USA
1344 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 628-3030
http://www.familiesusa.org/site/PageServer
Families USA describes itself as “a national nonproﬁt, nonparti-
san organization dedicated to the achievement of high-quality, af-
fordable health and long-term care for all Americans. Working at
the national, state and community levels,” the organization
claims it has “earned a national reputation as an effective voice
for health care consumers for over 15 years.” The organization’s
Web site contains links to reports and fact sheets on many current
health access and insurance issues.
George Washington University Center for Health 
Services Research and Policy
2021 K Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 296-6922
http://www.gwhealthpolicy.org/chsrp
224
Organizations

The George Washington University Center for Health Services
Research and Policy describes itself on its Web site as being
“dedicated to providing policymakers, public health officials,
health care administrators, and advocates with the information
and ideas they need to improve access to quality, affordable
health care.”
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
2400 Sand Hill Road
Menlo Park, CA 94025
(650) 854-9400
http://www.kff.org/
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation is a California-based
foundation that is a nonprofit, independent national health-
care philanthropy that focuses on a variety of healthcare and
health policy concerns. This group sometimes provides grants
to universities and researchers to study important health pol-
icy issues. 
Heritage Foundation
214 Massachusetts Avenue, NE
Washington, DC 20002-4999
(202) 546-4400
http://www.heritage.org/Research/HealthCare/index.cfm
Founded in 1973, the Heritage Foundation is a research and ed-
ucational institute—a think tank—whose mission is to formu-
late and promote conservative public policies based on the
principles of free enterprise, limited government, individual
freedom, traditional American values, and a strong national
defense.
Institute for Health Freedom
1825 I Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 429-6610
http://www.forhealthfreedom.org/index.html
The Institute for Health Freedom is a Washington-based think
tank looking at the healthcare policy debate from the perspective
of maximizing personal freedom in choice of healthcare and in
privacy of personal health information.
Organizations
225

Institute for Health Policy Solutions
1444 I Street, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 789-1491
http://www.ihps.org
The Institute for Health Policy Solutions describes itself on its Web
site as “an independent not-for-proﬁt organization established in
April 1992 to identify, analyze, and develop strategies to solve
health care system problems. In general, the Institute’s work ad-
dresses reforms to improve access, contain costs and promote cost-
effective ﬁnancing and delivery systems. Although committed to
no ideological perspective, the Institute brings special expertise
and interest to approaches that reﬂect complementary roles for the
public and private sectors.” The institute’s data and reports focus
on insurance coverage of children and working families.
Institute of Medicine (IOM)
500 Fifth Street NW
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-2352
http://www.iom.edu
The IOM is a nonproﬁt organization affiliated with the National
Academy of Sciences. It is designed to serve as an adviser to the
nation to improve health. The Institute provides unbiased, evi-
dence-based, and authoritative information and advice concern-
ing health and science policy to policy-makers, professionals,
leaders in every sector of society, and the public at large. It has
produced a number of inﬂuential reports relating to many as-
pects of health care organization and delivery. Membership is
considered an honor and includes many of the leading policy, re-
search and clinical practice professional in the United States.
National Academy for State Health Policy
50 Monument Square, Suite 502
Portland, ME 04101
(207) 874-6524
http://www.nashp.org
The National Academy for State Health Policy is a nonproﬁt,
nonpartisan organization set up to analyze health reform and
policy on the state level.
226
Organizations

National Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Suite 950
Washington, DC 20004
(202) 585-0100
The National Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems
represents over 100 hospitals and health systems that together
comprise the essential infrastructure of many of America’s largest
metropolitan health systems. Since its inception in 1980, the
NAPH has cultivated a strong presence on Capitol Hill, with the
executive branch, and in many state capitols. The association has
made signiﬁcant strides in its twenty-year history in educating
federal, state, and local decision makers about the unique needs
of and challenges faced by member hospitals and the nation’s
most vulnerable populations.
National Center for Policy Analysis
601 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 900, South Building
Washington, DC 20004
(202) 628-6671
http://www.ncpa.org/
The National Center for Policy Analysis is a private policy-ori-
ented group that publishes material on a variety of policy topics,
including healthcare policy. The center has a more conservative
point of view and lists its mission as “developing and providing
private alternatives to government regulation” in a variety of
public-policy areas including health, Social Security, welfare,
criminal justice, environmental, and educational issues.
National Coalition on Healthcare
1200 G Street, NW, Suite 750
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 638-7151
http://www.nchc.org/
The National Coalition on Healthcare is a nonproﬁt and self-pro-
claimed rigorously nonpartisan coalition of almost 96 groups,
employing or representing approximately 100 million Americans.
Its focus is examining health-related issues to look at ways to
achieve better, more-affordable healthcare for all Americans.
National Committee for Quality Assurance
2000 L Street, NW, Suite 500
Organizations
227

Washington, DC 20036
http://www.ncqa.org
The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) pro-
vides information about the quality of the nation’s managed care
plans. It accredits many of the nation’s healthcare plans and pro-
duces data and reports on the quality of these plans via its
HEDIS®—Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set.
National Health Policy Forum
2131 K Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20037
(202) 872-1390
http://www.nhpf.org
The National Health Policy Forum (NHPF), located at George
Washington University in Washington, D.C., provides a forum
for a nonpartisan exchange of ideas between senior government
staff and experts from many healthcare settings.
Physicians for a National Health Program
29 East Madison, Suite 602
Chicago, IL 60602
(312) 782-6006
http://www.pnhp.org/
Physicians for a National Health Program is an association of
physicians who advocate a single-payer national healthcare sys-
tem. This group does both issue analysis and advocacy and pro-
vides a liberal analysis of how to deal with healthcare reform,
given its advocacy of a single-payer system.
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
(310) 393-0411
http://rand.org/
The RAND Corporation is a major public-policy-oriented re-
search institute that began during World War II and since then
has become an independent, nonproﬁt research and policy orga-
nization. The RAND Corporation conducts research on a wide
variety of public-policy topics, including healthcare, education,
228
Organizations

and welfare. Often its reports are results of funded studies by re-
searchers connected with RAND.
UCLA Center for Health Policy Research
10911 Weyburn Avenue, Suite 300
Los Angeles, CA 90024
(310) 794-0909
http://www.healthpolicy.ucla.edu/
The UCLA Center for Health Policy Research is a research center
at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), that focuses
on the health needs of communities and populations that are at
risk for adverse health conditions or are underserved by the
health system.
Government Agencies
Agency for Healthcare Research and Policy
540 Gaither Road
Rockville, MD 20850
(301) 427-1364
http://www.ahcpr.gov/
In examining what works and does not work in healthcare,
AHRQ’s mission includes both translating research ﬁndings into
better patient care and providing policymakers and other health-
care leaders with information needed to make critical healthcare
decisions.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
(404) 639-3534
http://www.cdc.gov/
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is recog-
nized as the lead federal agency for protecting the health and
safety of people at home and abroad, providing credible informa-
tion to enhance health decisions, and promoting health through
strong partnerships. CDC serves as the national focus for devel-
oping and applying disease prevention and control, environmen-
tal health, and health promotion and education activities de-
signed to improve the health of the people of the United States.
Organizations
229

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
7500 Security Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21244-1850
(877) 267-2323
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/
CMS is the federal agency responsible for administering the
Medicare, Medicaid, SCHIP (State Children’s Health Insurance),
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act),
CLIA (Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments), and sev-
eral other health-related programs.
Health Resources and Services Administration
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Parklawn Building
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
The Health Resources and Services Administration’s mission is to
improve and expand access to quality healthcare for all. It is mov-
ing toward 100 percent access to health care and 0 health dispari-
ties for all Americans. The HRSA seeks to assure the availability
of quality healthcare to low-income, uninsured, isolated, vulnera-
ble- and special needs populations and meets their unique
healthcare needs. The administration strives to eliminate barriers
to care, eliminate health disparities, assure quality of care, and
improve public health and healthcare systems.
Indian Health Service
The Reyes Building
801 Thompson Avenue, Suite 400
Rockville, MD 20852-1627
(301) 443-1083
http://www.ihs.gov/
The Indian Health Service’s mission is to raise the physical, men-
tal, social, and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level. The service strives to assure that
comprehensive, culturally acceptable personal and public health
services are available and accessible to American Indian and
Alaska Native people. It upholds the federal government’s oblig-
ation to promote healthy American Indian and Alaska Native
people, communities, and cultures and to honor and protect the
inherent sovereign rights of tribes.
230
Organizations

National Institutes of Health
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892
http://www.nih.gov/
Begun as a one-room Laboratory of Hygiene in 1887, the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) today is one of the world’s foremost
medical research centers. An agency of the Department of Health
and Human Services, the NIH is the federal focal point for health
research. It is the steward of medical and behavioral research for
the nation. Its mission is science in pursuit of fundamental knowl-
edge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the ap-
plication of that knowledge to extend healthy life and reduce the
burdens of illness and disability. The goals of the agency are as fol-
lows: (1) foster fundamental creative discoveries, innovative re-
search strategies, and their applications as a basis to advance sig-
niﬁcantly the nation’s capacity to protect and improve health; (2)
develop, maintain, and renew scientiﬁc human and physical re-
sources that will assure the nation’s capability to prevent disease;
(3) expand the knowledge base in medical and associated sciences
in order to enhance the nation’s economic well-being and ensure a
continued high return on the public investment in research; and
(4) exemplify and promote the highest level of scientiﬁc integrity,
public accountability, and social responsibility in the conduct of
science.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Rm 12-105, Parklawn Building
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
(301) 443-4795
http://www.samhsa.gov/
SAMHSA is the federal agency charged with improving the qual-
ity and availability of prevention, treatment, and rehabilitative
services in order to reduce illness, death, disability, and cost to so-
ciety resulting from substance abuse and mental illnesses.
Organizations
231


7
Selected Print and 
Nonprint Resources
W
ith the emergence of the Internet and the World Wide Web,
public and school libraries are able to make available a
much stronger selection of research resources. Additionally,
a myriad of research and policy organizations now have their
own Web sites, many of which present their own research docu-
ments or links to research conducted by others. This chapter will
present information on some of these Web and print-based re-
sources. Although your library may not have all of these re-
sources, they should have some of them, as well as additional re-
sources not listed here. When you go to your library, go to the
reference desk and ask for assistance in locating information on
your topic. Many of these resources are available to you via the
Web so that you can access them from home or from wherever
you are doing your research.
Books and Government Reports
Although the Internet and the World Wide Web are becoming in-
creasingly important sources for information on many topics, in-
cluding health reform, books and reports are still important
sources of information. They can often give a more in-depth
overview and analysis of the topic than can easily be found on
the Web. The materials listed below are good sources of informa-
tion on health reform and are representative of print resources
available at this time. When checking with your local library to
233

obtain these resources, be sure to look for other relevant re-
sources available.
Budrys, Grace. 2001. Our Unsystematic Healthcare System. Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld Publishers.
This book reviews different topics relating to the U.S. healthcare
system for nonacademics. Among the chapters included are: Two
Sociological Perspectives of the Healthcare System; Hospitals and
Other Healthcare Organizations; Alternative Medicine; Health
Insurance; HMOs and Managed Care; Reform; and Healthcare
Systems in Other Countries.
Budrys, Grace. 2003. Unequal Health: How Inequality Contributes
to Health or Illness. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld. 
This book focuses upon the issue of health disparities among
Americans. The book contrasts popular beliefs about the impor-
tance of factors such as race, poverty, and sex and health habits
with academic research on the same topics. In addition, the book
explores such topics as access to medical care, genetics, and
stress. Several chapters also deal with the relationship between
social inequality and health status. The author challenges some of
the basic tenets of the American belief system and the ideal that
most Americans could improve their health signiﬁcantly if they
chose to do so. Instead, the book shows how health and well-
being in American society today are linked to economic status.
Gordon, Colin. 2003. Dead on Arrival: The Politics of Health
Care in Twentieth Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. 
From a historical perspective, this book tries to answer the question
of why, alone among its democratic capitalist peers, the United
States does not have national health insurance. The book presents
three different types of explanations: the liberal or pluralist view,
the institutionalist view, and the radical view. The author focuses on
the privileged status enjoyed by economic interests in American
politics as the major answer, but uses detailed information from
past debates and ﬁghts to have certain pieces of health-related legis-
lation passed to help answer this question. The book provides de-
tails about both the political and ideological clout of leading health
interests and the organizational struggles of health reformers. 
234
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Health Insurance Association of America. 2002. Source Book of
Health Insurance Data, 2002. Washington, DC: Health Insurance
Association of America.
This book provides data and tables on a range of topics relat-
ing to health insurance such as the private health insurance in-
dustry; public health coverage; medical care costs; health ser-
vices, resources, and utilization; and disability, morbidity, and
mortality.
Himelfarb, Richard. 1995. Catastrophic Politics: The Rise and
Fall of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988. Univer-
sity Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
This book explores in depth why this legislation ended up being
repealed. Upon its enactment in July 1988, the Medicare Cata-
strophic Coverage Act (MCCA) was initially hailed as the ﬁrst
major expansion of Medicare since its creation in 1965. Only eigh-
teen months later, the House and the Senate, responding to a
huge amount of criticism about the legislation, repealed the legis-
lation despite its having been initially supported by President
Reagan and the nation’s largest senior citizen interest group, the
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP). A variety of
source materials including interviews with policy makers and
surveys of senior citizen opinion are used to help explain why
this legislation was repealed. 
Institute of Medicine. 2000. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer
Health System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
This book presents a state-of-the-art review of issues in im-
proving the quality of patient care and patient safety. What is
meant by errors in healthcare is reviewed, as are the major
causes of death and injury and an analysis of why errors occur.
The book also discusses error-reporting systems, setting perfor-
mance standards, and ways to create safer systems in health-
care organizations.
Institute of Medicine. 2001–2003. Consequences of Uninsurance.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
With support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Insti-
tute of Medicine is completing a three-year, comprehensive study
of uninsurance and its implications for uninsured individuals. This
Books and Government Reports
235

project has published six reports from 2001 to 2004 which deal with
key issues on the topic. The reports are:
Insuring America’s Health: Principles and
Recommendations. January 14, 2004
Hidden Costs, Value Lost: Uninsurance in America. June
17, 2003
A Shared Destiny: Community Effects of Uninsurance.
March 6, 2003
Health Insurance Is a Family Matter. September 18, 2002
Care without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late. May 21, 2002
Coverage Matters: Insurance and Health Care. October 11,
2001
Johnson, H., and D. S. Broder. 1996. The System: The American
Way of Politics at the Breaking Point. Boston: Little, Brown.
This book presents a review of the events leading up to the defeat
of the Clinton Health Security bill. The book is written by well-
known journalists and relies heavily on interviews with many of
the people involved in the efforts, including congressional
staffers and some elected officials, presidential staff, and staff of
the special committees formed by President Clinton to plan the
healthcare reform efforts. In addition, the book relies on newspa-
per and other media coverage of the events. This book focuses
upon the internal political aspects of the failure as well as the lack
of proper management of support within Congress.
Kronenfeld, Jennie Jacobs. 2002. Healthcare Policy: Issues and
Trends. Westport, CT: Praeger.
This book, written by one of the authors of the book you are read-
ing, provides an overview and analysis of current key issues in
U.S. healthcare policy. Chapters include Physical Health and Dis-
ease Trends; Mental Health Concerns and Behavioral Health; The
Reorganized U.S. Healthcare System; Healthcare Personnel;
Health of Children, Youth and Elderly; Reproductive Health and
Abortions; Costs; and Health Reform.
Light, Paul. 1985. Artful Work: The Politics of Social Security Re-
form. New York: Random House.
The book provides a detailed overview of many aspects of the So-
cial Security system from a political perspective. From an interest
236
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

in health reform, one important portion of the book examines the
1983 Social Security rescue and discusses the lessons from that for
the Social Security budget for the future and for the Medicare bud-
get for the future. The review of these past efforts to solidify the ﬁ-
nancial basis of the program is germane to many of the current de-
bates about the role of Medicare in any type of healthcare reform
and about the past ways in which major programs such as Social
Security and Medicare have been funded in the United States. 
National Organizations of the United States. 2003. Encyclopedia
of Associations. 39th ed. Farmington, MI: Gale Group. 
This resource is available in both print and electronic formats.
The database covers national, international, regional, state, and
local organizations and contains information on over 135,000 not-
for-proﬁt membership organizations. The online database con-
tains all the records, while there are separate print publications
for the national; international; and regional, state, and local orga-
nizations. The print version will be found in the reference section
of most libraries, and the electronic version will be available at se-
lected libraries. The online encyclopedia provides keyword and
subject access, while the print version organizes the information
alphabetically within each topic.
Navarro, Vincente. 1994. The Politics of Health Policy: The US
Reforms, 1980–1994. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. 
This book analyzes the socioeconomic and political forces that
explain the federal health policies of the United States in this
time period, from a more left-oriented political perspective. The
book challenges some of the major positions held in many of the
social and political sciences in the United States about the nature
of political power in Western capitalist countries and its impact
on public policy. The book emphasizes the connection between
what Navarro calls “the crisis of health care”—high costs and
lack of or limited healthcare coverage—and the correlation of
class forces in the United States. In addition, there is discussion
of the proposed but not enacted Clinton healthcare reforms from
the author’s perspective.
Oberlander, Jonathan. 2003. The Political Life of Medicare.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Books and Government Reports
237

This book focuses on political developments in Medicare from
1965 to 2002. The focus is on the dynamics surrounding program
ﬁnancing and beneﬁts, in contrast to a number of other studies
that have focused on the politics of cost control. The author ar-
gues that a variety of tensions have been important in the history
of the program. These include a gap between the promise of
Medicare as understood by the public (that it should protect the
elderly against the potentially devastating costs of medical care)
and the actual performance of the program. Other tensions relate
to how to ﬁnd the ﬁnancing to pay for the costs of the program
and the limitations linked to the social insurance ﬁnancing ap-
proach that was adopted to secure Medicare’s political success
but that has proven to be ill suited, in the author’s judgment, to a
health insurance program. 
Shi, Leiyu, and Douglas A. Singh. 1998. Delivering Healthcare
in America: A Systems Approach. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen
Publishers.
This book provides an overview of the U.S. healthcare system
and its components. Chapters include Beliefs, Values and Health;
Health Services Professionals; Medical Technology; Outpatient
and Inpatient Facilities and Services; Cost, Access and Quality;
and Health Policy.
Skocpol, Thesa. 1997. Boomerang: Healthcare Reform and the
Turn against Government. New York: W.W. Norton.
This book presents an appraisal by a social scientist of the defeat
of the Clinton Health Security bill. In contrast to some other books
that focus on the interpersonal and political maneuvers and rely
partially on extensive retrospective interviews (see Johnson and
Broder 1996), this book began as a paper at a scholarly conference
and an article in a scholarly journal. In its shorter form, the article
presented the story of the failed effort to pass healthcare reform
from the perspective of past and future U.S. domestic politics. The
expanded version in the book argues that the health reform bill
became an ideal foil for concerted antigovernment countermobi-
lization, led by ideologically committed conservatives.
Williams, Stephen J., and Paul R. Torrens, eds. 2002. Introduction
to Health Services. 6th ed. Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers.
238
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This book presents seventeen different chapters by leading schol-
ars in the ﬁeld of health services administration and health ser-
vices research. Each chapter reads well as stand-alone material.
Topics covered include historical evolution and overview of
health services in the United States, disease and care-seeking
trends, patterns of diseases in the United States, access to care, ﬁ-
nancing of care, managed care, private health insurance, evolution
of public health, ambulatory healthcare services, hospitals, long-
term care, mental health services, pharmaceuticals, healthcare
professionals, health policy, quality of care, and ethical issues.
Electronic Library-Based Resources
The following resources are electronic products with extensive
full-text content that can be accessed by subject. Many public and
school libraries make these resources available to their patrons
via their library card number. These can be accessed via the Inter-
net from any location. Check your local library to see which are
available to you via its system.
EBSCO MasterFILE Premier is designed speciﬁcally for
public libraries. It provides full text for nearly 1,950 general peri-
odicals covering a broad range of disciplines, including general
reference, business, education, health, general science, multicul-
tural issues, and much more. In addition to the full text, this data-
base provides indexing and abstracts for all of the 2,540 publica-
tions in the collection. You may search the database by keyword
or by subject heading. Under the Healthcare Reform heading,
there are 132 newspaper references, 1,723 periodical references,
and 8 review references. These are further broken down into over
80 subheadings by subtopic.
Health and Wellness Resource Center is another online re-
source to full-text information from a variety of resources, includ-
ing journals, pamphlets, and medical encyclopedias. The Health-
care Reform subject heading has over 3,600 articles and is
subdivided into more than 15 subject and geographic headings.
In addition, the following health reform topics are covered: cost
shifting (medical care); healthcare industry; healthcare rationing;
health insurance; health insurance industry; health planning;
health policy; and health services administration.
MedlinePlus (http://www.MedlinePlus.gov) is the most
important government-sponsored consumer health site. Although
Electronic Library-Based Resources
239

available at no charge, many library Web sites provide a link to it,
so it is included here. The site is maintained by the National Li-
brary of Medicine, the world’s largest and most important med-
ical library. In addition to extensive information on speciﬁc dis-
ease and health conditions, it contains extensive sections relating
to health policy issues, including Health Insurance, Medicare, Pa-
tient Issues, Mental Health, and Health Professions. The site con-
tains extensive links to National Institutes of Health (NIH) Web
sites as well as other quality sites.
NewsBank NewsFile (1991–current) is a full-text database
of news articles covering social, economic, environmental, gov-
ernment, sports, health, and science issues and events from more
than 500 U.S. regional and national newspapers, wire services,
and broadcasts. In addition to being searchable by keyword,
there are the following relevant subject headings: Health Insur-
ance, Health Care Reform, Health Care Provision, Health Care In-
dustry, Quality of Care, Nursing Homes, Medical Test Laborato-
ries, Managed Care, Hospice Care, Home Health Care Services,
Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs), Health, Clinics,
Medical Records, Medical Personnel, Prenatal Care, Health Insur-
ance Industry, Elder Care, and Dental Care Services. This an ex-
cellent source to conﬁrm dates as well as to obtain short discus-
sions of relevant topics.
ProQuest ABI/INFORM is an online business database
with extensive full-text entries. The database contains content
from thousands of journals that help researchers track business
conditions, trends, management techniques, corporate strategies,
and industry-speciﬁc topics worldwide. ABI/INFORM indexers
have an extensive list of more than 8,000 subject headings to use
in indexing the articles so that very speciﬁc searches can be per-
formed. The most relevant of these subject headings for a general
search on health reform is “national health insurance.” As is indi-
cated by its business focus, this database provides information on
various aspects of health reform from a business perspective.
ProQuest News & Magazines is a digital database offering
indexed full-text content from popular magazines and journals,
and national and local newspapers. Complete articles are always
available in one or more formats. Newspapers and magazines
are a good source to ﬁnd information about events when they
happened.
SIRS Publishing inc is a company that provides in both
print and electronic formats articles on issues of current interest.
240
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Its articles are selected to provide a balanced view of the topic
and for the conciseness, accuracy, and relevance of their content.
The content is aimed at a high-school-level audience. The com-
pany markets several online products, including the following
(this product description is taken from Web site at http://www.
sirs.com/products/index.htm):
SIRS Knowledge Source® (SKS) is a comprehensive
database portal which is comprised of several distinct
reference databases including SIRS Researcher®, SIRS
Government Reporter®, SIRS Renaissance® and SKS
WebSelect™ with available links to SIRS Interactive
Citizenship™, SIRS Discoverer® and coming soon
Discoverer’s WebFind™. Updated daily, SKS provides
relevant, credible information on social issues, science,
history, government, the arts and humanities. Full-text
articles and Internet resources are carefully selected
from thousands of domestic and international publica-
tions and respected organizations.
In SIRS Knowledge Source, the most relevant topic
for health reform is in the Domestic Affairs: Health
Care Industry section with subtopics of Economics,
Ethics, Facilities, Fraud, Insurance, Reform, and Work-
ers. Under the Reform subheading are the subtopics of
Health Security, Legislation, Prescription Drugs/Phar-
maceuticals, and State/Regional Perspective.
Health Research and Healthcare 
Policy Organization Web Sites
As indicated in Chapter 5, the following are relevant organiza-
tions and issue-oriented Web sites, similar to those presented
above. However, due to space limitations sample documents
from the following were not included.
AcademyHealth
http://www.academyhealth.org
The AcademyHealth Web site states that it “is the professional
home for health services researchers, policy analysts, and practi-
tioners, and a leading, non-partisan resource for the best in health
Health Research and Healthcare Policy Organization Web Sites
241

research and policy.” The site contains pdf versions of Academy-
Health-produced reports on quality issues in healthcare, insur-
ance coverage and strategies, state responses to coverage, and
purchasing issues, as well as a good glossary of health service
and health reform terms.
Employee Beneﬁt Research Institute
http://www.ebri.org
In the Program section of the Employee Beneﬁt Research Insti-
tute’s Web site, three sections relevant to health appear: Consumer
Health Education Council, which includes a section with informa-
tion on the uninsured; Health Conﬁdence Survey, with results
back to 1997; and The Health Security and Quality Research Pro-
gram, which produces print reports used in health policy analysis.
George Washington University Center for Health Services
Research and Policy
http://www.gwhealthpolicy.org/chsrp
This site provides free, electronic access to a large number of re-
ports it produces as well as access to reports produced by other
groups. Typical focuses of the reports include federal and state
legislation, laws, and policies; managed care contracting; Medic-
aid, CHIP, and Medicare; HIV/AIDS; safety net provider and un-
derserved populations; welfare reform; people with disabilities;
and maternal and child health.
Institute for Health Freedom 
http://www.forhealthfreedom.org/index.html
Its Web site provides access to press releases and reports on the dif-
ferent aspects of healthcare from the organization’s perspective.
Moving Ideas Network
http://www.movingideas.org
Moving Ideas Network (MIN), formerly the Electronic Policy
Network!, is an organization that tries to bring to a wider audi-
ence the resources and work of progressive research and advo-
cacy organizations. Under the Weekly Round Up section of the
Web page are links to reports by subject. Under Healthcare Policy,
there are annotated links to over 200 full-text reports on health
policy and reform issues from a conservative perspective.
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

National Academy for State Health Policy
http://www.nashp.org
The academy’s Web site makes available in pdf format a range of
reports that it has produced on the various health policy–related
issues and how states should deal with them.
National Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems 
Issues Advocacy section
http://www.naph.org/template.cfm?Section=Issues_Advocacy
The National Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems
(Issues Advocacy section) Web pages present the position of
major hospitals and healthcare systems on major healthcare pol-
icy issues. It is a good site for the hospital perspective on current
health reform issues.
National Coalition on Healthcare
http://www.nchc.org/
Its Web site contains a section called “Did You Know,” which brieﬂy
reviews key issues in health reform, and a section titled “Policy
Studies,” which contains more in-depth analysis of these issues.
National Health Policy Forum
http://www.nhpf.org
The Web site provides summaries of and links to reports from
sessions between government staff and experts from many
healthcare settings.
Stateline.org
http://www.stateline.org
Stateline.org was founded in order to help journalists, policy
makers, and engaged citizens become better informed about in-
novative public policies. The organization’s Web site is operated
by the Pew Center on the States, a research organization adminis-
tered by the University of Richmond, and funded by the Pew
Charitable Trusts. Its Healthcare section contains stories and sta-
tistics related to healthcare issues and reform.
UCLA Center for Health Policy Research 
http://www.healthpolicy.ucla.edu/
Health Research and Healthcare Policy Organization Web Sites
243

The site contains extensive pdf reports, briefs, and data relating
to policy issues with a focus on California.
YourDoctorintheFamily.com 
http://www.yourdoctorinthefamily.com
YourDoctorintheFamily.com is a Web site set up in January 2002
by a group of physicians who are disaffected with the healthcare
system. This group of physicians states that what is “especially
intolerable to us is the degree to which the interests of physicians
are being systematically separated from the interests of their pa-
tients. The programmed destruction of the traditional doctor-pa-
tient relationship leaves both doctors and patients increasingly
isolated and marginalized in a complex and hostile health care
system.” The organization’s Web site presents a somewhat irrev-
erent view of health policy and reform issues from the physi-
cian’s viewpoint.
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
Access
Ability of persons needing healthcare services to obtain appro-
priate care in a timely manner. While access is not the same as hav-
ing health insurance coverage, having such coverage is a major
factor in having access to care.
Acute care
Short-term care, often of an intense nature, for injury or ill-
ness; can include hospitalization.
AHCPR
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, now renamed
AHRQ. This agency deals with issues of healthcare policy and
health services research. (Formerly known as NCHSR, National
Center for Health Services Research.)
AHRQ
The Agency for Health Care Research and Quality (formerly
AHCPR) deals with issues of healthcare policy, health services re-
search, health quality issues, and health practice guidelines. The
agency also conducts several important surveys to obtain data on
healthcare expenditures and some hospital-related data.
Ambulatory care
Sometimes also called outpatient care, that is, care
given to people in a doctor’s office, outpatient center, or other spe-
cial parts of hospitals, for which patients do not need to stay
overnight in any type of formal healthcare facility.
CDC
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is the federal
agency that includes the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) and has responsibility for a variety of prevention-oriented
programs, including chronic diseases as well as acute problems
and infectious disease.
Chronic disease
Medical conditions that persist over time. Chronic
problems may lead to permanent healthcare problems. Chronic
care can occur in many settings, such as outpatient, hospital, or
long-term care facilities.
245

CMS
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is the new name
for the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA). This is the
agency that administers the Medicare and Medicaid programs, as
well as the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).
Copayment
A portion of the healthcare expenses that the patient must
provide. Generally a health insurance plan or health maintenance
organization (HMO) will specify this amount to the insured person.
Deductible
A portion of healthcare costs that the insured person must
pay ﬁrst before insurance payment begins.
DHHS
The Department of Health and Human Services.
DRG
Diagnosis-related group. This is the current payment approach
used for Medicare hospital payment. Rather than paying for spe-
ciﬁc services as they occur in the hospital, hospital charges are
paid for a bundled group of all services as related to a federally
speciﬁed list of diagnoses.
Entitlement programs
Healthcare programs that certain categories of
people are entitled to. For example, most people at sixty-ﬁve years
of age are entitled to Medicare because of their payroll taxes dur-
ing the years when they were employed.
Fee-for-service
Payment of speciﬁc fees (generally to a physician) for
each service that a patient receives, such as the office examination,
a shot, or a diagnostic test.
Gatekeeper physician
Generally a primary care physician who func-
tions as the regular source of care for a patient and who must ap-
prove the use of specialists and other services as part of a managed
care plan.
GDP
Gross domestic product. It is a measure of all the goods and ser-
vices produced by a nation in a given year.
Generalist
A family practice, general internal medicine, or general pe-
diatrics physician. These types of physicians often function as
gatekeepers within certain managed care systems.
HCFA
The Health Care Financing Administration was the name of the
agency that administers the Medicare and Medicaid programs, as
well as the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). The
agency has now been renamed the Centers for Medicare and Med-
icaid Services (CMS).
HMO
A health maintenance organization is a type of managed care or-
ganization that generally provides comprehensive medical care for
a set predetermined annual fee per employee, generally with only
modest copayments and no deductibles.
246
Glossary

Home health services
Nursing, special therapy services such as physi-
cal therapy, and health-related homemaker services that are pro-
vided to patients in their homes, generally because the patients
have a chronic illness or a disability that makes them unable to
leave their home to receive services.
Hospital services
The healthcare services that patients receive while they
are overnight patients in a hospital. Similar to inpatient services.
Independent Practice Association (IPA)
A legal entity that physicians
in private practice join so that the organization can represent them
in the negotiation of contracts with managed care organizations.
Infant mortality rate
The number of deaths that occur to infants in the
ﬁrst year of life. The infant mortality rate is often considered one of
the best indicators of how well a country’s healthcare system is
working.
Infectious diseases
Diseases that are transmitted in various ways,
through the air, through water, and through sexual modes of trans-
mission. Currently, many of the most important infectious diseases
are sexually transmitted and transmitted through the bloodstream,
such as AIDS.
Inpatient services
Services received while a patient is temporarily con-
ﬁned to a hospital or nursing home, where he or she stays
overnight.
Insurance carrier
The insurer.
Insured
The person who contracts with an insurance company for cov-
erage; also known as the policy holder or the subscriber.
Long-term care
Services received as part of extended care needed for
people with chronic illnesses, mental illnesses, or serious disabili-
ties. These services are often provided in nursing homes and often
focus on basic daily needs.
Managed care
A system of provision and payment for healthcare that
unites the functions of health insurance and the actual delivery of
care.
MCO
A managed care organization.
Medicaid
A joint federal-state program that provides health insurance
coverage to many of the poor.
Medicare
The federal program that provides health insurance cover-
age to the elderly and to some disabled people.
Medigap
Commercial health insurance policies purchased by people
with Medicare coverage to cover the expenses (such as drugs) not
Glossary
247

covered by Medicare; the insurance also provides coverage for cer-
tain other costs within Medicare, such as required copayments for
certain services.
Morbidity
Sickness.
Mortality
Death.
Neonatal death rate
Refers to deaths of infants in the ﬁrst twenty-eight
days of life. The neonatal death rate is generally considered more
sensitive to genetic factors and conditions during the birth, as con-
trasted to the infant mortality rate.
Organized medicine
Refers to the activities of physicians, generally to
protect their own interests, such as organizing and acting through
groups such as the American Medical Association (AMA).
Outcome
The results of healthcare delivery, of great interest now as a
way to measure the effectiveness of the healthcare delivery system.
Out-of-pocket costs
Costs of healthcare that are paid by the patient,
the consumer of services. Depending on the type of health insur-
ance that a person has, this would include required deductibles
and copayments for care.
Outpatient services
Healthcare services that are provided that are not
part of an overnight stay in a hospital (as contrasted to inpatient
services).
Payer
The party that actually makes the payment for services covered by
an insurance policy. Generally, the payer is the same as the insurer.
Physician-hospital organization
A legal entity that is formed between
a hospital and a physician group, generally to share a market, pa-
tients, and other mutual interests.
Preexisting condition
A condition (either physical or mental) that ex-
isted prior to the beginning of an insurance policy. Some policies
will exclude these kinds of conditions. Generally workplace poli-
cies will not.
Preferred provider organization (PPO)
These types of organizations
are related to managed care. Often insurance companies set up
their own contracts with companies and with providers for the
provision of care. In these types of groups, the insurance company
makes a contractual arrangement with a group of providers or in-
dividual providers for provision of services at a discounted fee.
Premiums
Amount charged by an insurance company for a policy.
Primary care
Medical care provided in the office or clinic by a provider
such as a doctor, physician’s assistant, or nurse practitioner. This is
248
Glossary

the ﬁrst level of contact by a patient within the healthcare delivery
system.
Prospective Payment System (PPS)
In this type of payment system,
how much is to be paid for a particular service is predetermined,
as contrasted with retrospective reimbursement.
Reimbursement
Amount paid to a provider (i.e., doctor, hospital, etc.)
by the insurance company or managed care group. This payment
may only be a portion of what the provider charges. In a managed
care setting, the amount may have been negotiated in advance.
Resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS) 
A system in place in
Medicare to determine physician fees. Each treatment or visit with
a physician is assigned a “relative value” based on the training,
skill, and time that is required to treat the condition.
Retrospective reimbursement
The amount to be paid is determined
on the basis of the actual costs incurred, generally after services
have been delivered.
Safety net
Programs that enable people to receive healthcare services
(as well as many other social services) even if they lack the re-
sources to pay for those services. Medicaid is an example of a
safety net program in healthcare, as are community health centers.
These are generally government programs.
Single-payer system
A proposal for healthcare reform that empha-
sizes the creation of a single organization, typically a government
agency, to pay all healthcare claims.
Uncompensated care
Services provided to consumers as a charity
without the person paying for the services.
Welfare programs
Means-tested programs that provide income or ser-
vices to people with low enough incomes to qualify for the pro-
gram. In healthcare, Medicaid is an example of a welfare program.
Glossary
249


Index
251
Page numbers in bold type indicate
glossary deﬁnitions.
Abramson, Leonard, 206
Academy for Health Services
Research and Health Policy,
221
AcademyHealth, 241–242
Access, 2–3, 54, 171, 211–212, 245
cost linked to, 3–4
economy and, 13–14
employment linked to, 9, 11, 14
patterns, 8–14
uninsured persons and, 10–11
Accountability, 198
Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS), 81, 89,
98
Act for the Relief of Sick and
Disabled Seaman (1798),
27–28
Acute care, 245
Administration on Aging, 74–75
Advance medical directives, 47, 86
Agency for Health Care Policy
and Research (AHCPR), 85,
107, 245
Agency for Healthcare Policy and
Research (AHRQ), 106, 107,
229, 245
Agriculture Department, 65, 67
Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC), 31, 89,
102–103, 182
Alcohol abuse, 45, 76, 81
Alliance for Health Reform,
135–142, 221
Ambulatory care, 245
American Association for Labor, 30
American Association of Labor
Legislation (AALL), 102
American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP), 51, 235
American Hospital Association
(AHA), 222
American Medical Association
(AMA), 30–31, 35, 37, 52,
101, 222
American Nurses Association
(ANA), 222
American Public Health
Association (APHA),
222–223
Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) of 1990, 85–86
Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield,
155
Antitrust legislation, 70
Antos, Joseph R., 177–179
Arizona, 186, 187–188
Arizona Long-Term Care System
(ALTCS), 187–188

Artful Work: The Politics of Social
Security Reform (Light), 237
Baby-boom population, 19
BadgerCare, 103
Balanced Budget Act of 1997, 16,
19, 51, 161
Balanced budget amendment
(2002), 59–60
Biologics Control Act of 1982, 67, 69
Bioterrorism, 90
Block, Abby, 177–178
Block grants, 41–42, 46–47, 81, 87,
184
Medicaid, 180, 181, 184–186
Blue Cross, 71, 204, 205
Blue Cross Blue Shield, 9, 39
Books and government reports,
233–239
Boomerang: Health Care Reform and
the Turn against Government
(Skocpol), 238
Branches of government, 6–7
Breaux, John, 177
Budget Resolution Conference
Report (1996), 181, 184
Budrys, Grace, 234
“Building a Better Medicare
Program” (Heritage
Foundation), 177–179
Bureau of Chemistry, 65, 67
Bureau of Health Insurance, 43
Bureau of Indian Affairs, 67
“Bush Administration and
Medicaid/SCHIP Proposal”
(Kaiser Family Foundation),
172, 174–176
Bush (George H. W.)
administration, 45, 47
Bush (George W.) administration,
1, 61–62, 95, 102, 162–163
budget, 163, 169–171
California Public Employees’
Retirement System
(CalPERS), 141
Canada, 2, 202–209
Cancer research, 88
Cantwell, James R., 180–194
Capitation, 47, 154, 155
Carter, Jimmy, 44
Carter administration, 35, 41, 44,
94
Catastrophic coverage, 50–51
Catastrophic Politics: The Rise and
Fall of the Medicare
Catastrophic Coverage Act of
1988 (Himelfarb), 235
Categorical programs, 41–42, 46,
81
Census Bureau, 109, 156
Center for Health Care Strategies
(CHCS), 223
Center for Studying Health
System Change (HSC),
142–155, 223
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 76, 106,
229–230, 245
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS),
90, 106, 107, 230, 246
Certiﬁcate-of-need (CON)
programs, 78–79
Charity care, 9, 43
Childhood Immunization Act
(1993), 87
Children
crippled, 32, 68, 72, 81
death rates, 247, 248
insurance coverage, 54, 61, 136
Medicaid and, 50, 84, 90, 93–94,
138, 162, 182
see also State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP)
Children’s Bureau, 67
Children’s Defense Fund (CDF),
93–94
Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP). see State
Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP)
252
Index

Chronic disease, 141, 147, 205, 245
Cities, 13, 29
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 85
Civil Rights Restoration Act of
1988, 85
Civil Service Commission, 71
Civil War, 28
Civilian Health and Medical
Program of the Uniformed
Services (CHAMPUS), 71
Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments (CLIA), 230
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 56,
91–92, 103
Clinton, William (Bill) Jefferson,
56, 91, 92, 99, 103
health care policy paper, 55–56
Clinton administration, 1, 41,
53–62, 90, 95, 180
factors in push for reform,
53–54
failure of health care plan,
56–58, 91, 236, 238
COBRA. see Consolidated
Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act (COBRA)
of 1985
Cohen, Wilbur J., 92–93
Coinsurance, 154
Columbia/HCA, 203–204
Commission Corps Act of 1899, 66
Committee on Economic Security,
92
Committee on Public
Administration, 92
Committee on the Costs of
Medical Care, 31, 68
Commonwealth Fund, 156–169,
223–224
Communicable Disease Control
Amendments of 1970, 76
Community Health Centers, 81
Community Health Services and
Facilities Act of 1961, 72
Community Mental Health
Centers Act, 81
Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism Prevention,
Treatment, and
Rehabilitation Act of 1970,
76, 81
Comprehensive Drug Abuse and
Prevention and Control Act
of 1970, 76
Comprehensive Health
Manpower Training Act of
1971, 76–77
Comprehensive Health Planning
and Public Health Service
Amendments of 1966, 46, 75,
78
Congress, 7–8, 23, 83, 94
1994 elections, 58–59
Medicare legislation and, 37–38
Consequences of Uninsurance
(Institute of Medicine), 236
Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act (COBRA)
of 1985, 14, 50, 83, 160, 171
Constitution, U. S., 5, 29
Construction, 33–34, 70, 71, 72, 75,
96
Certiﬁcate-of-need (CON)
programs, 78–79
Consumer Choice Health Plan, 94
Consumer protection, 32, 100
Consumer-driven plans, 153, 155,
160–161
Contingent jobs, 11–12
Contract with America, 59, 95
Copayments, 38, 50, 52, 159–160,
246
Corporation for National and
Community Service, 103
Cost, 2–3, 14–19
access linked to, 3–4
control efforts, 42–43
hospitals, 18, 48–49, 140
key facts, 140–141
of Medicaid, 181, 185, 190–191
of Medicare, 51–52
of not being covered, 173–174
Index
253

Cost, continued
prescription drugs, 19, 52, 62,
140
shifting to workers, 19,
153–154, 159–160
to states, 14, 212–213
trends, 151–155
see also expenditure
“Cost of Not Covering the
Uninsured Project, The”
(Kaiser Family Foundation),
172–174
Cover the Uninsured Week
(CTUW), 171
Covering America project, 197
“Covering the Uninsured:
Prospects and Problems”
(Commonwealth Fund),
156–169
Craig, Larry, 177
Crowd out effect, 165
Cubanski, Juliette, 156–169
Current Population Survey (CPS),
11
Databases, 106–110, 239–241
Dead on Arrival: The Politics of
Health Care in Twentieth
Century America (Gordon),
235
Deaths
children, 247, 248
medical mistakes as cause, 21,
22, 135
Deductibles, 38, 246
Deﬁcit Reduction Act (DEFRA)
1984, 50, 51, 82–83
Delaney, James, 71
Delaney clause, 71
Delivering Healthcare in America: A
Systems Approach (Shi and
Singh), 238
Dellums, Ronald, 93
Democratic Party, 34, 55, 58–59,
197–201
Department of Health, Education
and Welfare (DHEW), 35,
69, 70, 77
Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS), 35, 69, 77,
98, 102, 162, 231, 246
Department of Veterans Affairs, 89
Dependents Medical Care Act of
1956, 71
Deregulation, 46
Diagnosis-related groups (DRGs),
19, 49–50, 82, 83, 101, 246
Disabilities
Americans with Disabilities
Act, 85–86
employment and, 61, 90
Medicaid and Medicare, 15, 90,
138–139
Social Security provisions, 31,
40, 74, 77
Disease control, 69, 76, 106
Disproportionate share hospital
payments (DSH), 181, 185,
190
Districts, 7–8
Domestic social policy, 5, 41, 45–46
Drug abuse, 76, 81
Drug Abuse and Prevention,
Treatment and
Rehabilitation Act, 81
Drug Amendments of 1962
(Kefauver-Harris
Amendments), 72
Drugs, 18–19
key facts, 139–140
Medicare and, 19, 38, 51–52, 62,
140, 170
regulation, 29–30, 67, 72
Dual enrollees, 176
EBSCO MasterFILE Premier, 239
Economic and Social Research
Institute (ESRI), 197
Economy, 11, 13–14, 19, 101, 157
Edelman, Marian Wright, 93–94
254
Index

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 35
Eisenhower administration, 35
Elderly, 10, 37, 51, 62, 85
forced to join HMOs, 170
Kerr-Mills Act, 37, 71–72, 74
Older Americans Act of 1965,
74–75
see also Medicare; Medigap
Electronic library-based resources,
239–241
Employee Beneﬁt Research
Institute (EBRI), 224, 242
Employers
experience rating, 12–13
performance-based approach,
197–201
shifting health costs to
workers, 153–154
Employment, 10–12
access linked to, 9, 11, 14
disabilities and, 61, 90
insurance linked to, 54–55, 97,
136–137, 156–157
insurance trends, 159–161
Encyclopedia of Associations, 234
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 9,
40, 44, 77, 139
Enron debacle, 13
Enthoven, Alain C., 94
Entitlement programs, 246
Estate recovery provisions, 181,
185, 189
European countries, 7, 30, 33–34,
49
Executive branch, 7, 41
Expenditures, 14–19
categories, 15, 18, 111–121
government programs, 17–18
by object, 115, 117–118
per-capita, 15, 16
per consumer unit, 115,
119–121
projected, 2001–2011, 114
projections, Medicaid, 183, 185,
187, 191, 193
summary, 1960–2000, 112–114
types, 115, 116
see also cost
Experience rating, 12–13
Facts and documents
databases, 106–110, 239–241
federal agencies and health-
related data collections,
106–109
historical health data and
government publications,
109–110
think tanks and policy
coalitions, 128, 134–219
use of federal and other data,
110–128
Families USA, 100, 169–172, 224
Family-Care (Wisconsin), 103
Federal agencies, health-related
data collections, 106–109
Federal Employees Health Beneﬁt
Act of 1959, 71
Federal Employees Health
Beneﬁts Program (FEHBP),
177–179
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act of 1938, 32, 35–36, 69,
71, 72
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act of 1944, 79
Federal Quarantine Act of 1878,
65
Federal role in health care, 2, 5–8
1798–1865, 27–29
through 1920s, 27–31
1960–1990, 18–19
1969–1979, 41–45
food and drug safety, 29–30
Kennedy-Johnson years, 35–41
post–World War II era, 33–34
Reagan-Bush period, 45–53
Federal Security Agency (FSA), 33,
35, 69, 70
Federalism, 5–6
Index
255

Fee-for-service payments, 23, 185,
186–187, 246
Financial access, 3
Food Additives Amendment of
1958, 71
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 65, 69, 71
Food and drug safety, 29–30
Ford administration, 41
For-proﬁt ﬁrms, 23, 204–205
Francis, Walton, 177–179
Fraud, 43, 61, 79–80, 181, 185, 192,
206–207
Free rider issues, 180
Frist, William H., 62, 94–95
Gag clauses, 206
Gatekeeper physician, 246
General welfare clause, 29
Generalist, 246
Geographical access, 3
George Washington University,
228
George Washington University
Center for Health Services
Research and Policy,
224–225, 242
Germany, 30
Gingrich, Newt, 59, 60, 95, 171
The Gingrich Group, 95
Ginsburg, Paul B., 151–155
Gordon, Colin, 235
Government agencies, 229–231
Graham-Rudman-Hollins Act of
1985, 50
Grants, 67–68
categorical programs, 41–42,
46, 81
see also block grants
Great Britain, 7
Great Depression, 31, 68, 101
Great Society, 96–97
Harvard Medical Practice Study, 22
Health, United States (NCHS),
109–110
Health Amendments Act of 1956,
71
Health and Wellness Resource
Center, 239
Health Assistance Partnership, 100
“Health Care Cost and Access
Problems Intensify” (HSC),
151–155
Health Care Cost and Utilization
Project (HCUP), 107
“Health Care Coverage for the
Nation’s Uninsured”
(RAND Corporation),
209–219
Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA), 43,
51–52, 79, 90, 246
Health Care Indicators, 107
Health Care Quality Improvement
Act (1986), 84
Health Centers Consolidation Act
of 1996, 88
Health departments, 29, 32, 68
Health Insurance Association of
America, 235
Health Insurance Flexibility and
Accountability (HIFA)
waiver, 162, 164–165
Health Insurance for the Aged of
1965, 73
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA), 60–61, 88, 97, 230
Health Insurance Premium
Payment (HIPP), 164
Health Maintenance Organization
Act of 1973, 77–78, 99–100
Health Maintenance Organization
Amendments of 1977, 79
Health maintenance organizations
(HMOs), 23, 77–78, 79, 82,
246
early efforts, 42, 94
fraud and abuse by, 97, 206–207
Medicare administration and,
204
256
Index

premium hikes, 141
Reagan administration and, 47,
53
reduction in, 154–155
Health Plan Employer Data and
Information Set (HEDIS),
195–196, 228
Health professionals
1970s programs, 42–43
education, 46–47, 67, 73, 76–77
nurses, 67, 79, 145–147
see also physician
Health Professions Education
Assistance Act of 1963, 73
Health Professions Educational
Assistance Amendments of
1965, 73
Health reimbursement account
(HRA), 160
Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA), 230
Health Services for Agricultural
Migratory Workers Act of
1962, 72
Health services research, 2–3
Health Systems Agencies (HSAs),
46, 78, 81–82
Healthcare Policy: Issues and Trends
(Kronenfeld), 237
Heinz, John, 55
Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation, 172–176, 225
Heritage Foundation, 177–179, 225
High blood pressure, 140, 141
Hill, Lister, 34, 95–96
Hill-Burton Act. see U.S. National
Health Policy Hospital
Survey and Construction
Act of 1946
Himelfarb, Richard, 235
Himmelstein, David U., 203–209
HIV, 81, 87
Home health services, 18, 247
Homeless, 85
Hospice care, 50
Hospital chains, 203–204
Hospital services, 247
Hospitals
charity care provisions, 9, 43
construction, 33–34, 70–72, 75,
78–79, 96
costs, 18, 48–49, 140
Merchant Marine, 28, 65, 66
payment systems, 48–50
House of Representatives, 7–8
HSC Community Tracking Study
Physician Survey, 144, 150
Human Genome Project, 86
Human genome sequencing, 90
Hunter, Derek, 177–179
Immigration, 10, 29, 66
Immigration and Nationality Act,
86
Incentive-based provider
payments, 155
Independent Practice Association
(IPA), 247
Indian Health Care Improvement
Act of 1977, 79, 88–89
Indian Health Care Improvement
Technical Corrections Act of
1996, 88–89
Indian Health Service (IHS), 67,
79, 108, 230
Individual (private) health
insurance, 12, 18, 137–138,
157, 165
Individual responsibility,
200–201
Infant mortality rate, 247
Infectious diseases, 247
Information networks, 200
Information technology, 22
Initiative to Eliminate Racial and
Ethnic Disparities in Health,
90
Inpatient services, 247
Institute for Health Freedom, 225,
242
Institute for Health Policy
Solutions, 226
Index
257

Institute for Health Policy Studies,
98
Institute of Medicine (IOM), 20,
21, 22, 226, 236
Insurance
by age and race, 128, 129–132
children’s coverage, 54, 61, 136
cost-sharing measures, 19,
153–154, 159–160
coverage statistics, 122, 123–125
economy and, 11, 13–14, 19, 157
employment linked to, 54–55,
136–137, 156–157
experience rating, 12–13
high-risk pools, 138
individual coverage, 18,
137–138, 157, 165
prospects for coverage
expansion, 161–165
by state, 122, 126–127, 156, 166
trends, 157–161
underinsured, 156–157, 201
see also uninsured
Insurance carrier, 247
Insurance-based systems, 2
Insured, 247
Introduction to Health Services
(Williams and Torrens),
238–239
Johnson, Lyndon Baines, 37–38,
58, 93, 96–97, 98
Johnson administration, 42
Journal of the American Medical
Association, 55
Judicial branch, 7
Jungle, The (Sinclair), 29
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid
and the Uninsured, 173
Kaiser Family Foundation,
172–176
Kefauver-Harris Amendments, 72
Kendall, David, 197–201
Kennedy, Edward M., 42, 97
Kennedy, John F., 93, 97
Kennedy, Robert F., 97
Kennedy administration, 37
Kennedy-Kassebaum Act, 88. see
Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of
1996
Kerr-Mills Act (1960), 37, 71–72, 74
Kids’ Inpatient Database (KID),
107
Kline, Janet, 156–169
Koop, C. Everett, 98
Kristol, Bill, 58–59
Land-grant colleges, 28–29, 65
Lawsuits, 23
Leadership class, 57
Leave No Child Behind, 94
Lee, Philip R., 98–99
Legislative branch, 7, 41
Lemieux, Jeff, 197–201
Lesser, Cara S., 151–155
Levine, S. Robert, 197–201
Lewis, George W., 91
Life expectancy, 128, 133–134
Light, Paul, 237
Lincoln, Abraham, 65
Living wills, 47, 86
Long, Stephen, 210–215
Long-term care, 141–142, 187–188,
247
Magaziner, Ira, 99
Managed care, 16, 19, 42, 94, 142,
247
Less-restrictive practices,
147–148, 150, 152
Medicaid and, 181, 185–187
replacement of with PPOs,
154–155
Managed competition, 94
Marine Hospitals Services Act
(1870), 66
Marine Services Hospitals, 29, 66
Marquis, Susan, 210–215
Maternal and Child Health and
Mental Retardation
258
Index

Planning Amendments
(1963), 72–73
Maternal and Child Health Block
Grant, 81, 87
Maternity and Infancy Act of 1921
(Sheppard-Towner Act),
30–31, 67–68
Maternity and infant care, 60,
72–73, 81, 84, 87–88
McCarran-Ferguson Act of 1945,
69
McKinney Act, 85
McNamara, Robert, 94
MCO (managed care
organization), 247
Means-tested programs, 31, 62, 74,
96–97
Medicaid, 9, 35, 74
administration, 39, 90, 181, 185,
190–191
amendments, 40, 43, 54, 75–76,
82, 84
block grants, 180, 181, 
184–186
Bush administration proposal,
170–171, 174–176
challenges confronting,
175–176
children and, 50, 84, 90, 93–94,
138, 162, 182
disproportionate share hospital
payments, 181, 185, 190
estate recovery provisions, 181,
185, 189
expenditures, 15–18
fee-for-service payments, 185,
186–187, 246
ﬁnancial crisis, 182–183
fraud, 43, 79–80, 181, 185, 192
Health Insurance Premium
Payment (HIPP), 164
key facts, 138–139
means-tested, 96–97
medical savings accounts, 181,
185, 188–189
number enrolled, 157, 159
as payer of last resort, 181, 185,
191–192
projected expenditures, 183,
185, 187, 191, 193
reform proposals, 179–194
waiver programs, 162, 185–186
Medical devices, 79, 87
Medical Devices Amendment of
1976, 79
Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS), 107
Medical Facilities Survey and
Construction Act of 1954,
71
Medical savings accounts (MSAs),
61, 163, 181, 185, 188–189
Medical Services Administration,
43
Medical Treatment and
Effectiveness Program
(MEDTEP), 21
Medically uninsurable, 12, 54–55
Medicare, 9–10, 31, 35, 247
2003 reform bill, 62
administration, 43, 79, 90
amendments, 40, 43, 54, 75–76,
82
catastrophic coverage, 50–51,
84–85
Congress and, 37–38
copayments, 38, 50, 52
data, 107–108
disabled and, 15, 90
disease categories, 40–41
drug coverage, 19, 38, 51–52,
97, 140, 170
end-stage renal disease (ESRD),
9, 40, 44, 77, 139
expenditures, 15–18
fraud, 43, 79–80
key facts, 139
Medigap policies, 52, 53, 86,
247–248
number enrolled, 115, 122, 157
parts A and B, 38–39, 44, 73–74
payment systems, 48–49
Index
259

Medicare, continued
physician and related services,
38–39, 51–52
Prospective Payment System
(PPS), 50, 83, 85, 86, 249
PSROs, 43, 46, 77, 80, 81–82
reform model, 178–179
supplemental premiums, 50–51
Medicare and Medicaid
Amendments of 1965, 73–74,
77, 79
Medicare and Medicaid
Amendments of 1980, Title
IX, 80
Medicare and Medicaid Antifraud
and Abuse Amendments of
1977, 79–80
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
Act (MCCA) of 1988, 50–51,
84–85, 235
Medicare Dissipating Physician
and Supplier Program
(PAR), 83
Medicare National Enrollment
Trends for 1966–2001, 107
Medicare State Enrollment, 107
Medigap, 52, 53, 86, 247–248
MedlinePlus, 239–240
Mental health, 45, 60, 75, 206
Mental Health Amendments of
1967, 75
Mental Retardation Amendments
(1967), 75
Mental Retardation Facilities and
Community Mental Health
Centers Construction Act of
1965, 75
Merchant Marine Hospitals, 28,
65, 66
Merchant Marine Services Act of
1798, 27–28, 65
Middle class, 55, 57–58
Migrant workers, 72
Military personnel, 33, 34, 71, 88,
89, 157
Moffit, Robert E., 177–179
Morbidity, 248
Morrill Act (1862), 28, 65
Mortality, 248
Moving Ideas Network, 242
National Academy for State
Health Policy, 226, 243
National Academy of Sciences,
226
National Association of
Insurance Commissioners
(NAIC), 52
National Association of Public
Hospitals and Health
Systems, 243
National budget deﬁcit, 53
National Cancer Act, 77
National Cancer Institute, 32–33,
69
National Center for Health
Services Research and
Technology Assessment
(NCHSR), 85
National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS), 106–107,
109
National Center for Policy
Analysis, 179–194
National Childhood Vaccine
Injury Act (1986), 84
National Coalition on Health
Care, 227, 243
National Committee for Quality
Assurance (NCQA),
195–196, 227–228
National debt, 46
National defense, 35
National Health Act of 1948, 70
National health care system, 157
creation and expansion,
161–163
facts and myths, 202–203
Nixon and, 99–100
proposals, 96–97
260
Index

National Health Manpower
Clearinghouse, 76–77
National Health Planning and
Resources Development Act
of 1974, 42–43, 78–79
National Health Policy Forum
(NHPF), 228, 243
National Health Service Act
(1977), 93
National Health Service Corps,
46–47, 77, 82
National Health Statistics Group,
107
National Institute of Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism, 76
National Institute of Mental
Health, 70
National Institutes of Health
(NIH), 32, 33, 66, 68, 69, 70,
88, 231
web site, 108
National Institutes of Health
Revitalization Act of 1993,
86–87
National Mental Health Act of
1946, 70
National Organ Transplant Act of
1984, 83, 84
National Organ Transplant
Amendments of 1988, 84
Native Americans, 67, 79, 87,
88–89, 230
Navarro, Vincente, 238
“Nearly One Out of Three Non-
Elderly Americans Were
Uninsured for All or Part of
2001–2002” (Families USA),
169, 171–172
Neonatal death rate, 248
New Deal, 6, 101
New Democrats Online, 196–201
NewsBank NewsFile, 240
Nixon, Richard, 42, 93, 99–100
Nixon administration, 41–42
Nonphysician caregivers, 145
Nurse Training Act of 1964, 73
Nurses, 67, 79, 145–147
Nursing facilities, 18, 38, 50, 72,
75–76, 87, 141–142
Nursing schools, 73
Oberlander, John, 237
Office of Environment, Safety, and
Health (ESH), 108
Office of International Health, 98
Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), 183
Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), 178
Office of Technology Assessment,
51, 83
Office of the Surgeon General, 33
Old Age Assistance, 31, 68
Older Americans Act of 1965,
74–75
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Acts (OBRA)
1980, 44, 80
1981, 47–48, 80–81
1986, 83–84
1987, 51, 84
1989, 85
1990, 47, 52, 86
1993, 86–87, 189, 190
Omnibus Health Act of 1986, 83–84
Organizations
government agencies, 229–231
professional societies and
nonproﬁt issue and
advocacy associations,
221–229
Our Unsystematic Health Care
System (Budrys), 234
Outcome, 20–21, 248
Outpatient hospital settings, 49
Outpatient physical therapy, 87
Partnership for Health, 75
Pathways to Independence
(Wisconsin), 103
Index
261

Patient outcomes research teams
(PORTS), 21
Patient Self-Determination Act, 47,
86
Patients, self-determination, 47, 86
Patients’ bill of rights, 23, 97, 100
Payer, 248
Peace Corps, 103
Pennsylvania Adult Basic
program, 162–163
People and events, 91–103
“Performance-Based Approach to
Universal Health Care, A”
(NDOL), 197–201
Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation
Act (1996), 89
Pharmacy schools, 73
Physician Payment Review
Commission (PPRC), 83
Physician-hospital organization,
248
Physician-payment approach
(1992), 19
Physicians
capacity constraints, 142–151
costs, 38–39, 51–52
delisted, 204
distribution, 43
information technology and,
22
participating/nonparticipating,
51, 83
reimbursement, 51, 82, 83–84,
246
resource-based relative value
scale (RBRVS), 51–52, 85,
249
specialty referrals, 148–149
supply, 43, 144, 150
time spent with patients,
144–145, 147–148
Physicians for a National Health
Program, 201–209, 228
Poison Prevention and Packaging
Act of 1970, 76
The Political Life of Medicare
(Oberlander), 237
Political parties, 7, 34–35, 55,
58–59, 95, 102
The Politics of Health Policy: The
U.S. Reforms, 1980–1994
(Navarro), 238
Pollack, Ron, 100, 169, 172
Preexisting condition, 61, 248
Preferred provider organizations
(PPOs), 23, 142, 154–155, 248
Premiums, 248
Prepaid group practice plans, 94
Presidency, 7, 45–46, 56
see also individual presidents and
administrations
Presidential Advisory
Commission on Consumer
Protection and Quality in
the Health Care Industry,
100
“President’s Budget Shortchanges
America’s Health Care
Needs, The” (Families
USA), 169–171
Primary care, 248–249
Print and nonprint resources
books and government reports,
233–239
electronic library-based
resources, 239–241
web sites, 241–244
Private health insurance. see
individual health insurance
Professional Standards Review
Organizations (PSROs), 43,
46, 77, 80, 81–82
Progressive Party, 102
Project for the Republican Future,
58
ProQuest ABI/INFORM, 240
ProQuest News & Magazines, 240
Prospective Payment System
(PPS), 50, 83, 85, 86, 249
Public, understanding of issues,
55, 57–58
262
Index

Public Health and Marine Service
Act of 1902, 66
Public Health and Marine
Services, 66
Public Health Service Act of 1944,
33, 69–70, 71, 72
amendments, 42–43, 73, 76,
77–78, 88
Public Health Service (PHS), 29,
66, 69, 98
Public opinion, 51, 57–58
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906
(Wiley Act), 29–30, 67
Quality, 2–3, 4, 19–24, 46, 47
harm to patients, 21–22
outcome measures, 20–21
Quarantine laws, 28, 29, 65, 66
Racial and ethnic issues, 13, 31,
90
RAND Corporation, 209–219,
228–229
Ransdell Act of 1930, 32, 68
Reagan, Ronald, 100–101, 235
Reagan administration, 41, 44–49,
101
Reagan-Bush period (1980–1992),
45–53
“Reforming Medicaid” (Cantwell,
National Center for Policy
Analysis), 179–194
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 85
Reimbursement, 51, 82, 83–84, 160,
246, 249
Reorganization Act of 1939, 69
Republican Party, 35, 58–59, 95
Research, 32–33
Reserve clause, 6, 27
Resource-based relative value
scale (RBRVS), 51–52, 85,
249
Return-on-equity (ROE)
payments, 87
Revenue sources, 16, 17
Revenue-sharing, 41–42, 45–46
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
197, 210, 211, 223, 236
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 31, 92,
101–102
Roosevelt, Theodore, 67, 102
Roosevelt administration, 33
Rural Health Care Services
Amendments of 1977, 79
Ryan White Care Act
Amendments of 1996, 89
Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS
Resources Emergency Act of
1990, 85–86
Save Our Security, 93
SCHIP. see State Children’s Health
Insurance Program
Scientiﬁc Registry, 108
Section 314a and b
(Comprehensive Health
Planning and Public Health
Services Amendments of
1966), 75, 78
Section 1115 waivers, 162
Secure Horizons/Tufts, 204
Self-determination, 47, 86
Senate, 7–8, 94–95
Senate Special Committee on
Aging, 177–179
September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, 1, 6, 13, 62
Sex education, 98
Sexual trauma, 88
Sheppard-Towner Act (1921),
30–31, 67–68
Shi, Leiyu, 238
Sickness funds, 30
Sinclair, Upton, 29
Singh, Douglas A., 238
“Single-Payer Myths; Single-Payer
Facts” (Physicians for a
National Health Program),
201, 202–203
Single-payer system, 249
SIRS Knowledge Source (SKS), 241
SIRS Publishing, Inc., 240–241
Index
263

Skocpol, Theda, 238
Smoking, 73
Snyder Act of 1920, 67
“So Much to Do, So Little Time:
Physician Capacity
Constraints, 1997–2001”
(HSC), 142–151
Social and Rehabilitative Services
(Medicaid), 43
Social policy, 5
Social Science Research Council, 92
Social Security Act of 1935, 31, 68,
92
disability provisions, 31, 40, 74,
77
Section 1115, 162
Title V, 32, 68, 72, 81
Title VI, 32, 68
Title XIX, 37, 74
Title XVIII, 73–74
see also Medicare
Social Security Administration, 43,
88
Social Security Amendments
1960 (Kerr-Mills Act), 37, 71–72,
74
1965, 37, 75
1967, 75–76
1972, 77, 81
1983, 19, 82
1994, 87
Social Security Insurance (SSI), 81
Source Book of Health Insurance
Data, 2002 (Health
Insurance Association), 235
Specialists, 148–149
Speciﬁc-grants programs, 41–42
State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP), 10, 17, 89,
92, 93–94, 108, 136, 156, 159,
174–176, 230
Health Insurance Premium
Payment, 164
number enrolled, 136, 161
passage of, 61, 90, 100, 157
proposals, 200, 212–213
State Health Coordinating
Councils (SHCCs), 78
State health officers, 29
State Health Planning and
Development Agencies
(SHPDAs), 78
State of Managed Care Quality, 2001,
The (National Committee for
Quality Assurance), 194–196
Stateline.org, 243
States, 28
Certiﬁcate-of-need (CON)
programs, 78–79
costs of insurance, 14, 212–213
districts, 7–8
grants to, 46, 67–68
independent action, 213–215
insurance by, 122, 126–127, 156,
166
performance-based grants and,
199–200
reserve clause, 6, 27
see also block grants; Medicaid
Statistical Abstract of the United
States, The, 109, 110
Stockholders, 204
Structure, 20
Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA),
108–109, 231
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
(SIDS), 81
Supplemental Security Income
(SSI), 182
Surgeon General’s Report on
Smoking and Health, 73
Surgical specialists, 149
System, The: The American Way of
Politics at the Breaking Point
(Johnson and Broder), 236
Task Force on Health and Social
Security, 93
Task Force on National Health
Reform, 56
264
Index

Tax Equity and Fiscal
Responsibility Act (TEFRA)
of 1982, 46, 81–82
Taxes, 14, 46, 53, 163–164, 171, 199,
200
Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families (TANF), 89, 102
Territorial health officers, 29
Terrorism, 1, 6, 13, 62, 90
Think tanks and policy coalitions,
128, 134–219
See also individual titles
Thompson, Tommy G., 102–103
Ticket to Work and Work
Incentives Improvement Act
of 1999, 90
Tiered-network products, 155
To Err Is Human: Building a Safer
Health System (Institute of
Medicine), 21, 235
Torrens, Paul R., 238–239
Trade Act of 2002, 164
Truman, Harry, 34, 96
Two-tiered health care system, 4
UCLA Center for Health Policy
Research, 229, 243–244
Uncompensated care, 249
Underinsured, 156–157, 201
Unemployment, 13–14, 54
Unequal Health: How Inequality
Contributes to Health or
Illness (Budrys), 234
Uninsured, 8–9, 53, 103, 205–206
2001–2002, 13–14
access to care, 10–11, 211–212
characteristics, 157, 158
current status, 156–157
employment and, 54–55
health problems and, 12–13
key facts, 135–136
percentage of population, 9–10
performance-based approach,
197–201
potential barriers to coverage
expansion, 165–166
public-private linkages,
164–165
tax beneﬁts, 163–164
trends in public and private
coverage, 157–161
waiver programs, 162–163
Unionized employees, 9
United States
Constitution, 5, 29
federal system, 5–6, 15
gross domestic product (GDP),
15, 16, 165, 246
United States Health Workforce
Personnel Factbook (HRSA),
108
University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA), 229
U.S. Health Service Hygienic
Laboratory, 32, 66, 68
U.S. Healthcare, 206
U.S. National Health Policy
Hospital Survey and
Construction Act of 1946
(Hill-Burton Act), 33–34, 70,
71, 72, 78, 96
Utilization reviews, 39
Venereal disease, 69
Venereal Disease Control Act of
1938 (LaFollette-Bulwinkle
Act), 69
Veterans. see military personnel
Veterans Act of 1924, 33, 68
Veterans Administration, 22, 68,
157
Veterans Health Care Eligibility
Reform Act of 1996, 88–89
Veterans Health Programs
Extensive Act of 1994,
87–88
Vocational Educational Act of
1917 (Smith-Hughes Act),
67
Waiver programs, 162–163
Watergate scandal, 42, 99, 100
Index
265

Web sites, 105–106, 233, 241–244
federal agencies and health-
related data collections,
106–109
Welfare, 74, 87–88, 96–97, 249
reform, 31, 89, 102–103, 159,
182
Wetherill, Charles M., 65
White House Conference (1912),
67
“Why the U.S. Needs a Single
Payer System” (Physicians
for a National Health
Program), 201, 203–209
Williams, Stephen J., 238–239
Wisconsin Works (“W-2”),
102–103
Wofford, Harris, 55, 103
Woolhandler, Stephanie, 203–209
World War I, 30, 33
World War II, 101
Yankelovich, Daniel, 57
YourDoctorintheFamily.com, 244
266
Index

About the Authors
267
Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld is professor of sociology at Arizona State Uni-
versity. She has published over 100 articles on medical sociology, public
health, and health care policy. She has authored, coauthored, or edited
over 20 books on a wide variety of topics related to health and social pol-
icy, professional development, health policy concerns, and research in
sociology of health care. 
Michael R. Kronenfeld is director of the Educational Resources Center
at the A.T. Still University of the Health Sciences, Mesa Arizona. He has
published over 20 articles. In 2001 he received the Ida and George Eliot
Prize from the Medical Library Association for the publication that was
most effective in furthering medical librarianship in 2001. In 2003 he re-
ceived the David A. Kronick Traveling Fellowship, also from the Medical
Library Association, for research on trends and future directions for aca-
demic medical libraries.

