Heat guns  
how heat guns work - temperature settings -heat gun 
features - safety points  
Electric heat guns have now largely replaced the 
'old fashion' paraffin and bottled gas blowlamps for 
stripping paint on timber. The paraffin and bottled 
gas blowlamps still have a place in the tool kit 
where electricity is not readily available but they 
have to be used with care to avoid scorching the 
wood, setting fire to the stripped paint or cracking 
the glass when working on a window frame 
The hot air flow of a heat gun is less dangerous 
than a naked flame but it can still cause highly 
inflammable items to catch fire, crack glass and 
injury if directed onto skin. One great advantage is 
that the heat is almost instantaneous so the heat gun can be switched off during pauses in 
the work while the flame blowlamps have the inconvenience of needing to be relit if the flame 
is extinguished, 
The electric heat guns now available are lightweight, easy-to-use tools which make it far less 
likely 
to 
scorch 
wood 
or 
crack 
glass 
when 
used 
correctly 
to 
strip 
paint.  
 
How heat guns work  
Heat guns look a lot like hair dryers - but, as many instructions thoughtfully point out, should 
never be used for drying hair! The method of operation of a hot air gun is similar to a hair 
dryer: a fan pulls air into the body of the tool and drives it across an electric heating element 
and out through a nozzle.  
For stripping paint, the heated air is directed onto the painted surface, causing it to soften so 
that it can be easily stripped off - either by using a stripping knife or hook. For best results it is 
best to work up the surface with the heat gun above the stripping tool, softening the paint just 
before the stripping tool reaches it. The tool is used one-handed, with the other hand to hold 
the stripping tool.  
Some heat guns can be used sitting on a bench so that two hands are free to use the hot air 
for other applications. 
Temperature settings  
Very basic heat guns have just one heat setting and one fan speed and are designed 
primarily for paint stripping. More complicated models have two or three heat settings or even 
fully variable adjustment with in a range, together with a choice of two, three or variable 
speeds of air flow.  
The effective temperature of any heat gun can be reduced by holding it further away from the 
surface, but having variable settings gives more choice.  
For paint stripping, the maximum speed and the maximum air flow is generally required - 
these settings are also needed for other jobs such as soldering plumbing joints and freeing 
rusty nuts. There are other uses of the heat gun where having lower air flows and/or lower 
temperatures can be useful. Other uses for the heat gun include:  

• 
drying paint or varnish - 30 to 130 °C - care has to be taken as dust particles may be 
blown onto the paint/varnish.  
• 
drying out damp wood (before filling or painting) - around 100 to 200°C.  
• 
softening adhesive (such as when applying worktop edge trim or lifting floor tiles) - 
300 to 400°C.  
• 
bending plastic pipes - 200 to 300°C.  
• 
heat-shrinking plastic film - 200 to 300°C.  
• 
welding some plastics - 330 to 400°C.  
A heat gun should always be used with care around copper plumbing where solder 
connectors have been used as the heat can melt the solder and weaken the joints.  
Special nozzles are available for most models of heat gun for specific uses other than 
stripping paint.  
Heat Gun features  
As such a simple tool, there are not many differences between one model of heat gun and 
another - but there are some features which are important.  
• 
Wattage - commonly from 1000W to 2000W (a measure of the power of the gun). 
Providing that there are heat and/or airflow controls, the higher the wattage, the 
better.  
• 
Main control switch - usually mounted on the front of the pistol grip, and normally a 
'dead man' switch so that power is switched off when the finger pressure is removed - 
an ideal safety feature as the heat gun stops if it is accidentally dropped.  
• 
Temperature setting - at least 500°C is needed for stripping paint - the lower the 
bottom end of the range the more useful. A choice of controls make the tool more 
useful.  
• 
Airflow setting - having variable or more than one speed makes the tool more 
versatile.  
• 
Thermal cut out - this will switch off the tool if it becomes overheated. If this occurs, it 
indicates a fault in the tool or method of use - for safety, the fault must be identified 
and corrected before the heat gun is again used.  
• 
Flex length - lengths of 2.5 to 3 m are normally fitted, this means that when using an 
extension lead, the tool can be used at the full reach without having the socket 
hanging in mid air.  
• 
Hanging hook - useful for storing the tool.  
• 
Surface stand - this enables the heat gun to be safety 'rested' during pauses in the 
work and after uses. It also allows the gun to be used 'hands-free' when two hands 
are required on the work piece (such as when bending a plastic pipe).  
• 
Nozzles - most heat guns have a range of nozzles that can be fitted for specific uses, 
generally these need to be purchased separately. The main types of nozzles are:  
 
1. Reducer nozzle - when you want to concentrate the heat onto a specific area.  
2. Reflector nozzle - wraps round a plastic or copper pipe to spread the heat 
around the pipe surface.  
3. Flat nozzle - for spreading the hot air over a wider narrower area.  
4. Glass protector nozzle - for use when stripping paint on a window to keep the 
direct heat off the glass.  

Safety with heat guns  
Although safer than using a naked-flame blowlamp, care is still required when using a heat 
gun. Specific point are:  
• 
Because of the power of these tools (up to 2000W), when an extension lead is 
necessary, only use a lead rated at 10 amp or greater and always completely unwind 
the lead.  
• 
Never obstruct or cover the air inlet grills. If the air flow is reduced the heat gun will 
overheat and possible catch fire.  
• 
Never operate the heat gun with the outlet nozzle hard up against a surface, this will 
reduce the air and can have the same effect as obstructing the air inlet grills,  
• 
Do not use a heat gun near inflammable materials.  
• 
Always switch the tool off before putting it down on any surface.  
• 
Allow the tool to cool before storing it.  
• 
Do not place the nozzle next to anything whilst it is hot.  
• 
Never touch the hot metal nozzle with clothing or skin.  
• 
Do not use for stripping lead-based paints.  
• 
Do not allow any paint to stick to the nozzle - and if some paint does stick, allow the 
gun to cool down and remove the paint.  
• 
Do not look down the nozzle while the gun is turned on.  
• 
Do not insert anything down the nozzle with the gun.  
 
 

