
: 
PHENOMENOLOGY 
OF 
SELF- CONS CI 0 USN ES S 
• text and commentary • 
Leo Rauch 
and 
David Sherman 
S TATE UNIVER S IT Y  O F  N E W  Y O R K  P R E S S  

Published by 
State University of New York Press 
© 1999 Scare University of New York 
All rights reserved 
Printed in rhe United States of America 
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner 
whatsoever without written permission. No part of this book may be 
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any 
means including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, 
photocopying. recording, or otherwise without the prior permission 
in writing of the publisher. 
For information, address the State University of New York Press, 
State University Plaza, Albany, NY 12246 
Marketing by Dana Yanulavich 
Production by Bernadine Dawes 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Rauch, Leo 
Hegel's phenomenology of self-consciousness : text and commentary 
I Leo Rauch and David Sherman 
p. 
em.- (SUNY series in Hegelian studies) 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-7914-4157-1 (alk. paper).- ISBN 0-7914-4158-X (pbk. : 
alk. paper) 
l. Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. Wahrheir der 
Gewissheir seiner selbst. 2. Consciousness-History-19th century. 
I. Sherman, David, 1958-
. II. Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 
1770-1831. Wahrheit der Gewissheit seiner selbst. English. 
III. Title. IV. Series. 
B2929.R38 
1999 
193-dc21 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
99-19061 
CIP 

CONTENTS 
Preface and Acknowledgments I vii 
INTRODUCTION by David Sherman I 1 
PART I 
G. W. F. HEGEL 
PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
translated by Leo Rauch 
1. Chapter IV: The Truth of Self-Certainty I 13 
2. Hegel's Summary of Self-Consciousness from the 
"Phenomenology of Spirit" in the Philosophical Propaedeutic 
(1809) I 47 
PART II 
A DISCUSSION OF THE TEXT 
by Leo Rauch 
3. What is "Self-Consciousness"?: An Overview I 55 
4. On Hegel's Aims and Methods I 65 
5. Before "Self-Consciousness" I 71 
6. Self-Consciousness and Self-Certainty (Para. 1-12) I 79 
7. Mastery and Slavery (Para. 13-31) I 87 
8. Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness 
(Para. 32-65) I 1 03 
9. After "Self-Consciousness" I 121 
10. Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism I 125 

Vt 
PART III 
THE DENIAL OF THE SELF: 
THE REPUDIATION OF HEGELIAN SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
IN RECENT EUROPEAN THOUGHT 
by David Sherman 
11. Overview I 163 
12. Georges Bataille I 167 
13. Gilles Deleuze I 179 
14. Jacques Lacan I 191 
15. ]i.irgen Habermas and Axel Honneth I 205 
Notes I 223 
Index I 233 

PREFACE AND 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
In early 1997, I was contacted by Leo Rauch, who offered me the oppor­
tunity to co-author a book on the "Self-Consciousness" chapter of Hegel's 
Phenomenology of Spirit. In fact, much of the book had already been writ­
ten: Professor Rauch had completed his translation of the chapter, a 
"Discussion" section, and a basic overview of the chapter's reception by 
various early-rwentieth-century European philosophers. My task, quite 
simply, was to write an Introduction to the book and a section on the 
chapter's treatment by more contemporary European thinkers. I was 
pleased to come along for the ride. Sadly, however, Professor Rauch died 
in the summer of 1997, and the pleasure of seeing this book published is 
now, unfortunately, mine alone. Although I never had the opportunity to 
meet Professor Rauch, in my many telephone conversations with him I 
came to see him as a kind and wise old soul. I hope that this completed 
work does justice to his original vision. 
As with any book, there are many people to whom a debt of gratitude 
is owed. First, I would like to express my appreciation to Bernadine 
Dawes, Jane Bunker, and William Desmond for shepherding this book 
through the publishing process under difficult circumstances. I would 
also like to express my appreciation to Professor Gila Ramras-Rauch for 
her continuing moral support. Moving closer to home, I would like to 
thank Robert C. Solomon, teacher and friend, who made my involvement 
in this book possible, and reviewed earlier drafts of my contribution to it. 
Vll 

viii • Preface and Acknowledgments 
So, too, I would like to thank Kelly Oliver, who reviewed an earlier draft 
of my discussion of Jacques Lacan. (Needless to say, all errors are mine.) 
Moving yet closer to home, I would like to express my love and gratitude 
to my mother and late father, Lenore and Jerrold Sherman. And finally, 
and most of all, I would like to thank my wonderful wife, Nancy, who 
makes all things possible. 
David Sherman 

INTRODUCTION 
by 
David Sherman 
This book deals with chapter IV of the Phenomenology of Spirit, which is 
generally taken to be Hegel's first significant work. This chapter, which is 
entitled "Self-Consciousness," contains an introduction, "The Truth of 
Self-Certainty," and two sections, which are called "Independence and 
Dependence of Self-Consciousness: Mastery and Slavery" and "Freedom 
of Self-Consciousness: Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy 
Consciousness." At first blush, it may appear somewhat odd to devote an 
entire book to one short chapter of a much larger work, but "Self­
Consciousness" is no ordinary chapter. As an initial matter, in a pivotal 
passage that concludes the introductory part, in which he reviews the 
gains that consciousness has made in its attempts to better know the world 
and indicates the advances that remain for it to make, Hegel suggests that 
chapter IV constitutes the "turning point" in the Phenomenology: 
A self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only in this way is it 
self-consciousness indeed-for only in this way does it become aware of 
the unity of itself in its otherness . . . .  Since a self-consciousness is the 
object, it is just as much "I" as it is object. With this we have arrived at 
the concept of spirit. Still ahead, for consciousness, is the experience of 
what spirit is-this absolute substance which, in the total freedom and 
independence of its opposite {i.e., different independent self-conscious­
nesses), is their unity. Namely, it is the "I" that is "We," the "We" that 
is "I." Only in self-consciousness, as the concept of spirit, does con-

2 • David Sherman 
sciousness have its turning point. Here it turns away from the colorful 
illusion of the sensuous here-and-now and the empty night of the super­
sensuous beyond, and it strides into the spiritual day of the present. 
(Para. 1 2)1 
Furthermore, the section on mastery and slavery, which follows on the 
heels of this passage, is, in particular, much more than just the "turning 
point" in the Phenomenology. This section, in which two lone self-con­
sciousnesses meet in the "state-of-nature" and engage in a "fight to the 
death" that culminates in master and slave, heralded a new approach for 
understanding ourselves, as well as the ways in which we come to know 
the world, and heavily influenced generations of subsequent thinkers 
(including-indeed, perhaps especially-those who most vociferously dis­
agree with its message}. As a result, chapter IV also constitutes nothing less 
than a "turning point" in the history of modern philosophy. 
More broadly, the Phenomenology itself is basically an assemblage of 
successive "forms of consciousness." Each form of consciousness, which 
reflects the world view or Weltamchauung of a specific time period (and 
not merely an individual consciousness}, has its own particular way of 
looking at the world, which means that each form of consciousness has its 
own truths. But the object of philosophy is "the Truth," according to 
Hegel, and when the contradictions that inhere in a particular way of 
looking at the world can no longer be satisfactorily reconciled within the 
context of that distinctive form of consciousness, a new form of con­
sciousness will emerge that is more adequate to the task. This "dialectical" 
process does not merely involve a ceaseless, indiscriminate swapping of 
forms of consciousness and their concomitant truths, however. Instead, 
inasmuch as the truths for any particular form of consciousness always 
capture some aspect of the "the Truth," however tenuously, the insights 
that are associated with a superseded form of consciousness are incorpo­
rated into all subsequent forms of consciousness. Consequently, shifts 
from one form of consciousness to another characterize an expanding, 
more comprehensive conception of the world. This process of conceptual 
growth continues until consciousness ascends to that state which Hegel 
calls "Absolute Knowing," in which consciousness recognizes that its 
knowledge of objects is ultimately self-knowledge, and that self-knowl­
edge is always conditioned by some existing set of sociohistorical cate­
gories. Thus, in spite of its pretentious connotations, ''Absolute Knowing" 
involves the recognition that there is no absolute standpoint from which 

Introduction • 3 
human beings can reflect upon the world, which means that all thought is 
necessarily context bound. 
Although they inauspiciously arise more than one hundred pages into 
the Phenomenology, the forms of consciousness that correspond to master 
and slave betoken Hegel's own distinctive philosophical contribution, for 
the first three chapters of the book, as well as the introductory part of the 
fourth, are basically a recapitulation of the philosophical failures of Hegel's 
predecessors. In large part, the first three chapters deal with epistemolog­
ical concerns, and it is, perhaps, for this reason that the interpretations of 
important social thinkers, such as Alexandre Kojeve (who will be consid­
ered later), take off from Hegel's seemingly unrelated discussions of "life" 
and "desire" at the start of chapter IV. (Indeed, this is precisely where the 
present translation begins.) But given the fact that Hegel is a deeply his­
torical thinker, and that the Phenomenology is a deeply historical work (in 
the sense that we are dealing with a "logical" characterization of the his­
torical evolution of consciousness), it is a mistake to simply disregard the 
earlier chapters. For Hegel's discussion of "life" and "desire," which cul­
minates in the "fight to the death" between two stripped-down, "self-cer­
tain" self-consciousnesses, is actually not unrelated to the earlier 
epistemological concerns at all. 
The meeting of these two self-consciousnesses, which initially "recog­
nize themselves as mutually recognizing one another" (para. 19), is the 
"turning point," according to Hegel, because with it "we have arrived at 
the concept of spirit," which signals nothing less than his repudiation of 
the philosophical tradition's penchant for approaching epistemological 
questions from an individual standpoint. Spirit, which pertains to the sub­
jectivity of the human collective, is the interpersonal medium whose basic 
character both forms and is formed by our personal self-conceptions, 
which, in turn, condition our conceptions of the world around us. For 
Hegel, therefore, the concepts that are brought to bear on epistemological 
questions are intersubjectively generated, and this suggests that the hard 
and fast distinction that is usually drawn between ethical and epistemo­
logical issues becomes much less distinct. But as consciousness marches 
toward a social reconciliation that is tantamount to "Absolute Knowing," 
in which it sees that Spirit is "the 'I' that is 'We,' the 'We' that is 'I,'" it is 
not merely the case that the social concepts drive the epistemological ones, 
for the socially engendered epistemic concepts that lead us to comprehend 
the natural world in a particular way reciprocally determine our collective 
and personal self-conceptions. As we shall see, it is this reciprocal dynam-

4 • David Sherman 
ic that leads master and slave to not only be alienated from one another, 
and thus themselves (inasmuch as social and individual self-conceptions 
are inextricably interrelated), but also leads them to be alienated from the 
objects of the natural world. And it is this alienation from self, other, and 
the objects of the natural world that leads to forms of consciousness such 
as Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness, each of which 
finally fails to satisfactorily redress these problems in turn. This failure to 
reconcile self and other, subject and object, is what drives consciousness 
past "Self-Consciousness" to "Reason," which is what motivates the forms 
of consciousness that appear in chapter V of the Phenomenology. For our 
purposes, however, it is necessary to put the forms of consciousness that 
appear in chapter IV into sharper focus by more clearly delineating the 
philosophical problems that informed them. 
In the lengthy passage from the Phenomenology that is excerpted 
above, Hegel says that in comprehending itself as self-consciousness, con­
sciousness "turns away from the colorful illusion of the sensuous here-and­
now and the empty night of the supersensuous beyond, and it strides into 
the spiritual day of the present." This passage implicitly refers to the phi­
losophy of Kant, who had attempted to make sense of the stark epistemo­
logical division that had previously existed between empiricism and 
rationalism by turning to self-consciousness, but had become enmeshed in 
his own contradictions, and thus ended up postulating a supersensuous 
beyond of his own making. The first three chapters of the Phenomenology, 
which crudely correspond to certain versions of empiricism, rationalism, 
and Kant's so-called "Critical Philosophy," are characterized by Hegel as 
"Sense-Certainty," "Perception," and "Force and the Understanding," 
respectively. And, the Kantian turn to self-consciousness in chapter III 
notwithstanding, these three theories of knowledge are all classified under 
the general title of"Consciousness," for they all ultimately view the object 
that one knows as, in some sense, independent of the process of knowing. 
Thus, in "Sense-Certainty," we are presented with a form of consciousness 
that thinks that the particular objects it apprehends are immediately given 
to it-in other words, that knowing the world is nothing more than a 
matter of attending to the way that objects affect our senses. In Hegel's 
view, however, there is no direct acquaintance with objects, for all knowl­
edge requires the mediation of concepts. Indeed, without concepts, there 
can be no knowledge whatsoever, and consciousness is not even in a posi­
tion to gesture at the object to communicate what it purportedly knows. 
Consequently, a different view of knowledge must be undertaken in order 

Introduction • 5 
to overcome this impasse, and the form that it assumes is "Perception." 
While "Sense-Certainty" approached the object from the standpoint of 
the object's sensuous particularity but failed because it lacked concepts, 
"Perception" would tackle the problem by approaching the object from 
the standpoint of its properties ("sensuous universals")-in other words, 
the object is viewed as just a collection of its properties. But as a form of 
consciousness, "Perception" also comes up short, for it fails to connect 
with the object's sensuous particularity, which essentially falls out of the 
picture. In the final analysis, then, the one-sided supersensible conceptual 
approach to the object is no more able to grasp the object in its particu­
larity than the one-sided sensible approach; consciousness is, therefore, 
impelled to move beyond the two one-sided approaches if it is to actually 
come to terms with the object. 
The form of consciousness found in "Force and the Understanding" 
involves a series of philosophical and scientific views in which both the 
sensible and supersensible approaches to the world subsist, implicitly or 
explicitly, in a more comprehensive explanatory theory. For example, in 
scientific views on "Force," Hegel contends, there is the notion that force 
both expresses itself in physical phenomena as they appear and is the 
impetus that hangs behind the appearance. This dualistic view, which 
Hegel finds untenable, reaches its highest point of tension in the philoso­
phy of Kant, and it is with Kant's philosophy that the chapter is primari­
ly preoccupied. According to Kant, the empiricists were correct in 
maintaining that all we can ultimately know is the world of our experi­
ence. However, in contrast to the empiricists, for whom this position cul­
minated in the skepticism of Hume, Kant relied upon the rationalists' 
notion of a priori concepts, but views them as innate to our own minds. 
These unconditioned universal concepts, which precede experience, are 
called ".:ategories" by Kant, and they are the foundation upon which all 
human experience is made possible. In other words, in every person there 
is "the Understanding," which furnishes the laws and principles that are 
necessary in order for us to even have an experience. We can therefore 
depend Uf n what our senses tell us about the objects that we apprehend 
because we ourselves "constitute 
these objects through the 
Understanding, which initially synthesizes them. But the shortcoming of 
Kant's "Copernican Revolution," which, epistemologically, shifts the 
emphasis from the object to the subject, is that it maintains that there is 
some way that the object actually is independent of our possible knowl­
edge of it. This implies that a "world-in-itself" hangs behind our "appar-

6 • David Sherman 
ent" world, and bears some unknown relationship to it. Once again, there­
fore, we are left holding the bag in terms of knowing the actual nature of 
particular objects, a fact that is forcefully brought home by Hegel in his 
"inverted world" hypothesis. In this reductio ad absurdum, Hegel wryly 
speculates that a second supersensible world actually hangs behind Kant's 
supersensible world, and that in this even truer world objects are diamet­
rically opposed to the way in which we apprehend them-that is, what is 
sweet for us is really sour, what is black for us is really white, what is up 
for us is really down, and so forth. 
To get past this dualism, consciousness seeks to do away with the idea 
that objects subsist independently of our experience of them, and this 
brings us to the first form of self-consciousness that appears in chapter IV, 
which corresponds to Fichte's alteration of Kant's dualistic philosophy. 
Fichte, who rejected the idea of a world-in-itself, was of the view that all 
epistemological inquiries essentially take place within a practical context, 
not a theoretical one. For Fichte, in other words, it is not knowledge, but 
self-knowledge and action, that is of primary importance. In this way, we 
move from Kant's notion of the Understanding, which shifts the episte­
mological emphasis to the subject but still sees the enterprise of compre­
hending the world in theoretical or objective terms, to Fichte's idea of the 
engaged subject, for whom the quest for knowledge is inextricably inter­
twined with life's pragmatic (and moral) concerns. And these concerns are, 
in part, bound up with our personal desires, which stand in a negative 
relationship to the otherness of the world. As a result, for Fichte, and to a 
somewhat lesser degree Hegel as well, our desire-driven attempts to know 
the world involve a process of conceptualization that would-figuratively 
speaking-break down and wholly assimilate all objects, leaving no 
remainder. According to Hegel, however, this voraciousness is without 
limit, and what Fichte fails to comprehend is that such desire will never be 
satisfied because "self-consciousness attains its satisfaction only in another 
self-consciousness" (para. 1 0). In other words, what Hegel rejects is 
Fichte's view (or, at least, the view that Hegel attributes to him) that the 
knowing self is an individual self, for the individual self in Hegel's view is 
indeterminate: the self-certain self-consciousness of Fichte is only "the 
motionless tautology of 'I am I"' (para. 2). Only by relating to another 
self-consciousness can a self-consciousness develop into a determinate self, 
and thereby attain a truer view of knowledge. 
Furthermore, Hegel's difficulties with Fichte are not limited to the lat­
ter's characterization of an individual self. Although Hegel agreed with 

Introduction • 7 
Fichte's rejection of Kant's world-in-itself, he also thought that Fichte 
went too far in the other direction, for Fichte's all-encompassing subject 
sees the natural world only in subjective terms, thus losing the objective 
perspective of the natural sciences. Fichte thus breaks down the unbridge­
able subject-object duality that Kant produces with his introduction of the 
world-in-itself, but loses the objectivity of the object in the process. Or, in 
Hegel's parlance, Fichte has merely given us a "subjective Subject-Object." 
To counteract Fichte's partial perspective, Hegel's draws upon the philos­
ophy of his erstwhile friend, Schelling, whose philosophy of nature affords 
an "objective Subject-Object" to counterbalance the Fichtean outlook. 
According to Schelling, whose philosophy greatly influenced the contours 
of the Phenomenology, but, for structural reasons, is not presented until the 
beginning of chapter V ("Reason"), there is an absolute identity between 
consciousness and nature since consciousness, despite its pretensions, is 
only a part of nature. Thus, from the first-person standpoint, we (indi­
vidually and collectively), as subjective Subject-Objects, are nature, and 
nature, as an objective Subject-Object, is us, meaning that we can only 
comprehend ourselves by comprehending nature. Furthermore, the two 
sides of the equation, each of which grows in a purposive fashion, are uni­
fied in a higher order ''Absolute," which comes to realize itself in this enor­
mous growth process. And it is because of this identity between 
consciousness and nature, Schelling contends (according to Hegel's con­
tentious account), that we can come to know the world through (tran­
scendental) intuition. But this is where Hegel and Schelling part company, 
for Hegel believes that knowledge of the world can only be obtained 
through "the Concept"; accordingly, in the Preface to the Phenomenology, 
he says that Schelling's "determinateness of intuition" is a "formalism" that 
is "predicated in accordance with a superficial analogy." 
We are now in a position to see that the master-slave section does not 
reflect a radical shift in the Phenomenology, but rather builds upon the ear­
lier chapters, which themselves are prototypal representations of earlier 
positions taken in the philosophical tradition. This section, in particular, 
and the "Self-Consciousness" chapter, more generally, symbolizes, in short, 
a radically different approach for dealing with a variety of problems relat­
ing to the knowing self. During the course of the Phenomenology, con­
sciousness must surmount the forms of consciousness that correspond to 
master and slave, for each is alienated from the external world, the other, 
and, ultimately, himself. (And in terms of this condition of thoroughgoing 
alienation, the remaining forms of consciousness in the "Self-

8 • David Sherman 
Consciousness" chapter-Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy 
Consciousness-exhibit only marginal improvement.) A large assortment 
of forms of consciousness must still be transversed before a situation in 
which "one [self-consciousness] is only recognized, the other only recog­
nizing" (para. 20) becomes one in which consciousness sees that "it is the 
T that is 'We,' the 'We' that is 'I'." But with the master-slave encounter, 
we have reached the "turning point" that has put consciousness on the 
proper path-the path that will lead to "Absolute Knowing." 
Hegel's discussion of the dialectic of self-consciousness (as well as the 
remainder of his large and varied body of work) had an enormous impact 
in the years following its publication.2 In Hegel's immediate aftermath, 
there were the so-called "Young Hegelians," who were particularly enam­
ored of the radical role that Hegel's historicized reason plays in critiquing 
existing institutions so as to move beyond them toward an ultimate social 
reconciliation. These Young Hegelians, as well as Ludwig Feuerbach, 
whose materialism had inspired them, gave rise, in turn, to Marx, who was 
strongly influenced by the master-slave section. In his Economic and 
Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, for example, Marx contends that 
the outstanding achievement of Hegel's Phenomenology and of its final 
outcome, the dialectic of negativity as the moving and generating prin­
ciple, is thus first that Hegel conceives the self-creation of man as a 
process, conceives objectification as loss of the object, as alienation and 
as transcendence of this alienation; that he thus grasps the essence of 
labor and comprehends objective man-true, because real man-as the 
outcome of man's own labour.3 
Although he (somewhat unfairly) goes on to claim that Hegel stands the 
dialectic "on its head" by holding that "the Idea" creates the "real" world, 
as opposed to simply being "the material world reflected in the mind of 
man,"4 Marx closely adheres to the form of Hegel's "dialectic"; in fact, the 
structure of Capital is patterned after Hegel's Science of Logic. 
Where Marx unequivocally takes issue with Hegel, however, is in the 
latter's view of the (bourgeois) State. In the Philosophy of Right, which is, 
arguably, Hegel's most conservative work, Hegel contends that the ration­
al state is the highest social manifestation of Spirit, and that the task of 
the "universal" class of civil servants that comprise it is to effectively 
harmonize the various interests in civil society. Unlike modern societies, 
however, in which particular interests come to dominate the State (which 

Introduction • 9 
was, in no small part, Marx's criticism of Hegel's view of the State), or 
come to be alienated from it, all elements of civil society regard the ration­
al State as satisfYing both their specific interests and the general public 
interest. And, according to Hegel, the monarchical Prussian State within 
which he lived met this ideal. While Marx and other leftist thinkers clear­
ly rejected this conclusion out of hand, a reactionary group known as the 
Right Hegelians embraced Hegel on these very grounds. The Right 
Hegelians, many of whom held high office in Prussia, argued that religion 
and the State were the organic ties that bound a citizenry together, and 
that the "negativity" within Hegel's philosophy, which was so heavily 
relied upon by the left, was simply a mistake. Accordingly, they brought 
back an embittered and now conservative Schelling to teach at the uni­
versity after Hegel's death in order to bring this point home, and, while 
there were still many Left Hegelians on the faculty, Schelling was not 
without his influence. Engels, who was obviously not dissuaded from his 
revolutionary path, attended Schelling's lectures, along with Kierkegaard, 
the self-styled Christian who was nominally the father of existentialism. 
For Kierkegaard, unlike Schelling (who thought that Hegel stole and 
then misrepresented his own ideas), Hegel was first and foremost an intel­
lectual nemesis. According to Kierkegaard, who was inclined to view 
Hegel through the lens of his own religious preoccupations, Hegel was a 
metaphysician who subsumed religion under philosophy, and, thereby, the 
moment of faith under the moment of reason. (Indeed, the forms of con­
sciousness that directly precede 'ᅐbsolute Knowing" in the Phenomenology 
are religious.) For Kierkegaard, however, faith is not simply a matter that 
is to be dissolved within an overarching, reconciling reason; instead, it is a 
chosen way of life that is to be lived passionately if it is to be lived at all. 
Reason can tell us nothing about how to live our lives, much less our 
faith-a point that Kierkegaard brings home when he recounts the bibli­
cal episode in which God tells Abraham to take the life of his son, which 
would, of course, be in violation of all rational ethical precepts. Like 
Abraham, we are all ultimately confronted with the decision as to whether 
we should make an irrational "leap of faith." Even as Kierkegaard attacks 
the Hegelian "system" in the name of Christianity and "the individual," 
who would be namelessly subsumed by it, however, he embraces a dialec­
tical method that is akin to the one that Hegel uses in the Phenomenology. 
In Either/Or, Kierkegaard posits three "modes of existence," namely, the 
aesthetic, the ethical, and the religious, and claims that contradictions in 
each of the first two modes of existence inexorably lead one to choose the 

10 • David Sherman 
religious life. Still, for Kierkegaard, the religious life is an unhappy one, 
and the form of consciousness that ends the "Self-Consciousness" chapter 
in the Phenomenology, the "Unhappy Consciousness," is an anticipatory 
caricature of him. 
In contrast to Kierkegaard, for whom Christianity involves ceaseless 
suffering, Nietzsche declares that one should love one's fate. But while pro­
claiming amor foti, Nietzsche also attacks the very notion of "the individ­
ual"-at least to the extent that this notion gives rise to the idea that there 
is a discrete, self-contained "self" that subsists over time, and in its free­
dom should be held morally responsible for its actions. For Nietzsche, this 
view of the self is fundamentally "slavish." Accordingly, in the Genealogy 
of Morals, he forcefully argues that the categories of "master" and "slave" 
pertain to those human beings who are innately stronger and weaker, and 
that the Judea-Christian tradition reflects the success of the weak in over­
turning the rule of the strong through the imposition of their own life­
denying, otherworldly values. In contrast to Hegel, therefore, for whom 
the master-slave encounter gives rise to the notion of selfhood, which will 
progressively be perfected in society, Nietzsche views the notion of self­
hood as one that was basically slavish at its inception. And, at least in this 
sense, he appears to valorize premodern values (although it must be quick­
ly added that while Nietzsche is hostile toward modern mass society, the 
superior individuals of whom he often speaks generally take the form of 
great artists, such as Goethe, rather than the "blond beast"). Nevertheless, 
in a variety of respects, which cannot be considered here, Nietzsche and 
Hegel are more alike than not. For our purposes, however, it must be 
pointed out that more than a few contemporary anti-Hegelian philoso­
phers have used Nietzsche (who died in 1900) as a cudgel with which to 
attack Hegel, which has tended to unduly diminish the thought of both. 
The purpose of this book, which is comprised of three parts, is to revisit 
Hegel's remarkable "Self-Consciousness" chapter from the Phenomenology 
of Spirit. The first part of the book consists of Leo Rauch's translation of 
this chapter, as well as a supplement in which he translates the relatively 
brief self-consciousness section from Hegel's Philosophical Propadeutic of 
1 809. The second part of the book is comprised of Leo Rauch's extensive 
discussion of the "Self-Consciousness" chapter and his brief overview of its 
early-twentieth-century European reception. Lastly, in the third part of 
the book, I will offer a critical exposition of the chapter's interpretation by 
those European thinkers whose views on it tend to hold sway today. 

PART I 
G. W. F. HEGEL 
PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT: 
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
translated by 
LEO RAUCH 


1 
CHAPTER IV: 
THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY 
Translator's Note: In working with the text ofPhanomenologie des Geistes, 
I have adhered to Hegel's paragraphing, but I have taken the liberty of break­
ing up some of the paragraphs for easier reading. To indicate where Hegel's 
paragraphs occur, I have assigned consecutive numbers to them. Explanatory 
words and phrases of my own are in square brackets. Italics are Hegel's. 
[1] In the modes of certainty considered so far, what is true for consciousness 
is something other than consciousness itself. Yet the concept of this truth 
vanishes in the experience of it. Whatever the object immediately was in 
itself
-whether it was something existing in sense-certainty, the concrete 
thing in perception, or something the understanding saw as force-the 
object now turns out to be not truly so. Rather, the in-itselfis revealed as 
a mode in which the object is merely so for another. The concept of the 
object is superseded in the actual object; i.e., the first immediate presen­
tation of the object is superseded in experience, and certainty loses itself 
in the truth. 
Now, however, something arises that was not there in the previous 
relationships, namely a certainty that is identical to its truth-since the 
certainty is [now] its own object, and consciousness is the truth for itself. 
In this there is indeed an otherness; consciousness does make a distinction. 
But it is a distinction that, for consciousness, is at the same time not some-
13 

14 • Leo Rauch 
thing distinct. If what we call the concept is knowing in process, while the 
object is knowing as a passive unity or "I," we can see that the object cor­
responds to the concept-not only for us but for knowing itself. 
On the other hand, if what we call the concept is what the object is in 
itself, but what we call the object is what it is as object for an other, it 
becomes clear that its being for itself and its being for another are one and 
the same. This is because the in-itselfis consciousness, although it is like­
wise that for which an other is the in-itself. And it is for consciousness that 
the in-itself of the object and the being of the object for another are one 
and the same. The "I" is the content of the relation and the relating itself. 
The "I" is its own self in juxtaposition to another "I," and at the same time 
it reaches beyond this other "I," which, for the "I," is equally only the "I" 
itself. 
[2] With self-consciousness, then, we have arrived at truth's own territory. 
What we must now see, above all, is how the form of self-consciousness 
makes its appearance. If we consider this new form of knowing, i.e., self­
knowledge, and consider it in relation to the foregoing, i.e., knowing 
something other, we see that the latter has indeed vanished. And yet at the 
same time, its elements have remained. And the loss consists in that they 
are still present here, as they are in themselves. The being of an opinion, 
the particularity of a perception (and the universality opposed to it), along 
with the empty inwardness of the understanding-all these are no longer 
there as realities, but as mere elements of self-consciousness, i.e., as 
abstractions or distinctions which are at the same time not really there for 
consciousness, are not distinctions but are purely vanishing entities. 
Thus it seems [that in self-consciousness] it is only the main element 
itself that has been lost-namely the simple independent existence for con­
sciousness. Yet the fact is that self-consciousness is a reflection out of the 
existent world as sensuously perceived, and is essentially the return from 
otherness. As self-consciousness, it [this otherness] is movement. But inas­
much as what it distinguishes from itself is only itself, as itself, the distin­
guishing of otherness is immediately negated for it. [Thus] the distinction 
is not, and it [self-consciousness] is then merely the motionless tautology 
of "I am I." Insofar as the distinction does not also have the form of being 
for self-consciousness, it is not self-consciousness. 
Accordingly, otherness is there for self-consciousness as an entity, 
a distinct element-yet it is also for self-consciousness the unity of itself 
with this distinction, as a second distinct element. With that first element of 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 15 
otherness, self-consciousness is there as consciousness-and for it the entire 
expanse of the sensory world is maintained. Yet at the same time [that 
world] is related only to the second element, the unity of self-conscious­
ness with itself-and hence this world is, for self-consciousness, some­
thing existing independently, although this is only appearance, a distinc­
tion that in itselfhas no reality. 
This opposition between its appearance and its truth has as its essence 
only the truth, namely the unity of self-consciousness with itself. This 
[unity] must become essential for self-consciousness. That is to say, self­
consciousness is desire in general. Consciousness, as self-consciousness, 
henceforth has a double object: one of these is the immediate object which 
is the object of sense-certainty and perception, although for self-conscious­
ness this has the character of negativity; the other object is self-conscious­
ness itself, which is the true essence and is primarily there in opposition to 
the first object. In this, self-consciousness presents itself as the process 
wherein this opposition is overcome, and it becomes for itself its own 
identity with itself 
[3] The object, however, which is the negative element for self-conscious­
ness-whether it is so for us or in itself-has for its part gone back into 
itself, just as consciousness has done. Through this reflection into itself, 
the object has become Lift. [Thus] whatever it is that self-consciousness 
distinguishes from itself, as having [independent] being, not only has the 
modes of sense-certainty and perception attached to it (insofar as the thing 
is posited as existing); but it is also an entity reflected into itself, and the 
object of immediate desire is a living thing. This is because the in-itse/f(i.e., 
the general result of the understanding's relation to the inwardness of 
things) is the distinguishing of what is not to be distinguished, or the 
unity of what is distinguished. 
Yet as we saw, this unity is just as much its repulsion from itself. And 
this concept divides itself into the opposition between self-consciousness 
and life: the former is the unity for which there is this infinite unity of dif­
ferences, while the latter is merely this unity itself so that it is not at the 
same time for itself Thus, to the degree thar consciousness is independ­
ent, to that degree its object is independent in itself Self-consciousness, 
which is simply for itself, and which directly characterizes its object as a 
negative element (which is why self-consciousness is primarily desire), will 
therefore on the other hand have the experience of the object's inde­
pendence. 

16 • Leo Rauch 
[ 4] The determination of life-as this determination emanates from the con­
cept or from the general outcome [of the understanding] with which we 
enter this sphere-is sufficient to characterize it, without our having to 
develop its nature further. Its sphere is determined in the following ele­
ments: Essence is the infinitude as the overcoming of all differences, [like] 
the pure motion around an axis whose self-repose is an absolutely restless 
infinity; independence itself, in which the differences of motion are 
resolved; the simple essence of time, which in this self-identity has the sta­
ble form of space. 
The diferences, however, are just as much there in this simple univer­
sal medium, as diferences-since this universal fluidity has its negative 
nature only in that it is the overcoming of them. Yet it cannot overcome the 
differentiated elements if they do not have an enduring existence. This 
very fluidity, as self-identical independence, is itself the enduring exis­
tence, or their substance wherein the elements are there as differentiated 
members, [independent] parts existing for themselves. Being no longer 
means abstract Being, nor does their pure essentiality mean abstract uni­
versality. Rather, their being is just that simple fluid substance of pure 
motion in itself. Yet the difference of these members with regard to one 
another, as difference, generally consists in no other determinacy than that 
of the elements of infinity, or pure motion itself. 
[5] The independent members are for themselves. Yet this being-for-self is just 
as much their reflection into a unity as this unity is the division into inde­
pendent forms. This unity is divided because it is an absolutely negative 
or infinite unity. And because it is the enduring existence, the differentia­
tion also has its independence only in that unity. This independence of 
form appears as something determinate, for an other, since the form itself 
is something divided. And the overcoming of the division therefore occurs 
through something other. Yet the overcoming is just as much a part of that 
form itself, because the aforementioned fluidity is the substance of the 
independent forms. This substance is infinite, however. The form is there­
fore division in its very existence, i.e., the overcoming of its being-for-self. 
[6] If we differentiate more precisely the elements included here, we see that 
the first element is the subsistence of independent forms, i.e., the suppres­
sion of what differentiation is in itself (which means not to exist in itself 
and to have no subsistence). The second element, however, is the subjection 
of that subsistence to the infinitude of the difference. In the first element 

The Truth oJSelfCertainty • 17 
there is the subsistent form: As existing for itself or in its determinacy as 
infinite substance, the form makes its appearance in opposition to the uni­
versal substance-thus belying this fluidity and continuity with it and 
asserting itself as not dissolved in this universality, but rather as maintain­
ing itself by separating itself from this its inorganic nature and consuming 
it. Life-in the universal fluid medium, a quiescent array of forms-there­
by becomes a movement of those forms, becomes Life as process. The sim­
ple universal fluidity is the in-itself, and the differentiation of forms is the 
other. Yet this fluidity itself becomes the other through this differentia­
tion-for it is now something for this diference, which exists in and for 
itself and is thus the endless movement by which the quiescent medium is 
consumed: Life as a living thing. 
This inversion, however, is for this reason again the invertedness in its 
own self. What is consumed is the essence. That is, the individuality which 
maintains itself at the expense of the universal and that gives itself the feel­
ing of its unity with itself, thereby overcomes its opposition to the other, by 
means of which it exists for itself The unity with itself, which it gives itself, 
is precisely the fluidity of the differences, the general dissolution. Yet con­
versely, the overcoming of individual existence is also what produces that 
existence. For since the essence of the individual form is the universal life, 
and since what exists for itself is in itself simple substance, it negates its 
own simplicity (which is its essence) since it posits the other within itself. 
That is to say, it divides that unity, and this division of the undifferentiat­
ed fluidity is precisely the positing of individuality. 
The simple substance of life is thus the division of itself into forms, 
and at the same time the dissolution of these existing differences. And the 
dissolution of the division is just as much a division into members. With 
this, the two sides of the total movement that had been differentiated­
namely the formative process quietly articulated in the universal medium 
of independence, and the Life-process itself-collapse into one another. 
The latter is just as much a formative process as it is an overcoming of 
form. And the former, the process of formation, is just as much an over­
coming as it is an articulation of members. 
The fluid element is itself only the abstraction of essence, so it is actu­
al only as form. And so that it articulates itself, there is again a division 
of what is articulated or its dissolution. This entire cycle is what com­
prises life: being neither that which was expressed to begin with, the 
immediate continuity and stability of its essence, nor the persistent form 
and the discrete element that is for itself, nor its pure process, nor yet the 

18 • Leo Rauch 
simple synopsis of these elements-but rather the self-developing totali­
ty, dissolving its development, and [yet] in this movement simply main­
taining itsel£ 
[7] Since we proceeded from the first immediate unity, through the elements 
of formation and process, and through these to the unity of both these ele­
ments, and thus have returned to the first simple substance, this [latter] 
reflected unity is different from the first. The first is an immediate unity, 
expressed as an entity; and opposed to this, the second is the universal 
unity, containing within itself all these elements as [now] superseded. It is 
the simple species which, in the movement of life, does not itself exist for 
itself as this simple thing. Rather, in this result, life points to something 
other than itself, namely to consciousness, for which it exists as this unity, 
or as spec1es. 
[8] This other life, however-for which the species exists as such, and which is 
for itself the [human] species, i.e., self-consciousness-is there for itself, 
first of all, merely as this simple entity and has itself for an object as pure 
"I." In its experience, which is now to be considered, this abstract object 
will be enriched for it, and will attain the unfolding we have seen to be 
associated with life. 
[9] The simple "I" is this species, the simple universal, for which the differ­
ences are no longer differences-but only because the "I" is a negative enti­
ty of articulated, independent elements. And thus self-consciousness is 
certain of itself only through the overcoming of this other which presents 
itself to self-consciousness as independent life. Self-consciousness is desire. 
Certain of the nothingness of this other, self-consciousness asserts for itself 
this nothingness as its truth [about the other], destroys the independent 
object [i.e., negates the other's independence] and thereby gives itself its 
certainty of itself as a true certainty, a certainty that has now become 
explicit for it in an objective manner. 
[I O] In this satisfaction, however, experience [presents] the independence of its 
object. Desire, and the self-certainty arrived at in the satisfaction of desire, 
are conditioned by the object, since the self-certainty is [arrived at] 
through the overcoming of this other. In order for this overcoming to 
occur, there must be this other. Thus, self-consciousness, through its neg­
ative relation, cannot overcome the other. [Rather,] it thereby creates it all 

The Truth of Self Certainty • 19 
the more [in desiring it], along with creating desire. Indeed, it is some­
thing other than self-consciousness that is the essence of desire, and 
through such experience self-consciousness has grasped that truth. Yet at 
the same time self-consciousness is absolutely for itself, which it is only 
because it negates the object-and this must become its satisfaction, for it 
is the truth. 
For the sake of the object's independence, self-consciousness can 
therefore attain satisfaction [only] in that the object achieves its own nega­
tion. And it must achieve its own negation in itself, since it is in itselfthe 
negative element and must be for the other what it is. Since the object is 
its own negation and is thereby independent, it is consciousness. 
In regard to life, which is the object of desire, negation either is pres­
ent in an other, namely in desire, or as determinacy in opposition to anoth­
er indifferent form, or as its inorganic universal nature. Yet this 
independent universal nature (wherein negation is there as absolute) is the 
species as such, i.e., as self-consciousness. Self-consciousness attains its satis­
faction only in another self-consciousness. 
[1 1] It is only in the following three aspects that the concept of self-conscious­
ness is fulfilled: (a) The pure undifferentiated "I" is its first immediate 
object. (b) Yet this immediacy is itself absolute mediation, only as the 
overcoming of the independent object, i.e., as desire. The satisfaction of 
desire is indeed the reflection of self-consciousness into itself, i.e., certain­
ty becomes truth. (c) Yet the truth of this certainty is really a double reflec­
tion, the duplication of self-consciousness. [In this,] consciousness has as 
its object that which posits its own otherness, or asserts the difference to 
be nothing, and is thereby independent. 
The differentiated and merely living form does indeed suspend its 
independence in the process of life, yet with this differentiation it ceases 
to be what it is. The object of self-consciousness, on the other hand, is 
equally independent in this negativity of itself; and thus the object of self­
consciousness is a species for itself, a universal fluidity in the peculiarity of 
its distinctness-it is living self-consciousness. 
[12] A self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only in this way is it self­
consciousness indeed-for only in this way does it become aware of the 
unity of itself in its otherness. The "I" that is the object of its own concept 
is in fact not object. The object of desire, on the other hand, is merely inde­
pendent, because that object is the universal indestructible substance, the 

20 • Leo Rauch 
fluid self-identical essence. Since a self-consciousness is the object, it is just 
as much "I" [subject] as it is object. 
With this we have arrived at the concept of spirit. Still ahead, for con­
sciousness, is the experience of what spirit is-this absolute substance 
which, in the total freedom and independence of its opposite (i.e., differ­
ent independent self-consciousnesses), is their unity. Namely, it is the "I" 
that is "We," the "We" that is "I . "  Only in self-consciousness, as the con­
cept of spirit, does consciousness have its turning point. Here, it turns 
away from the colorful illusion of the sensuous here-and-now and the 
empty night of the supersensuous beyond, and it strides into the spiritual 
day of the present. 
A. Independence and Dependence of Self-Consciousness: 
Mastery and Slavery 
[13] Self-consciousness exists in and for itselfby virtue of the fact that it is in 
and for itself for another. That is, it exists only in being recognized. The 
concept of its unity in its duplication--of an infinitude realizing itself in 
self-consciousness-is an interrelation of many aspects and many mean­
ings. Thus its elements must in part be kept strictly distinct, in part be 
undifferentiated in that very differentiation, so that its elements are always 
taken in their opposite significance. The two-sided significance of these 
differentiated elements must, in the nature of self-consciousness, be infi­
nite, i.e., the direct opposite of the determinacy in which it is posited. 
Analyzing the concept of this spiritual unity in its duplication presents us 
with the process of recognition. 
[14] For self-consciousness there is another self-consciousness [confronting it]; 
it has come out of itself. This has a twofold meaning: first, it has lost itself, 
since it finds itself to be an other entity; second, it has thereby negated the 
other, since it does not see the other as essential, but rather sees itselfin the 
other. 
[15] Self-consciousness must overcome its own otherness. This is the overcom­
ing of the first of its double meanings, and therefore is itself a second dou­
ble meaning: first, it must aim at negating the other independent entity, in 
order thereby to become certain of itself as essential; second, it thereby seeks 
to negate itself, since the other is itself 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 21 
[16] This two-sided [i.e., double-meaning] negation of its two-sided other­
ness is at the same time a two-sided return into itself first, because in the 
negation it gets its own self back (since in negating its own otherness it 
once again becomes equal to itself); second, however, the other self-con­
sciousness equally restores it to itself (since it saw itself in its other and 
negated its own being in the other, thereby setting the other free once 
more). 
[17] This movement of self-consciousness in relation to another self-con­
sciousness has been presented, however, as the action of the one. Yet this 
action of one has itself the double meaning of being both its own action 
and the action of the other-since the other is equally independent, deter­
mined in itself, and there is nothing in it that is not there through its own 
means. The first does not have its object before it (as merely in the case of 
desire, primarily), but rather has an object that is independent and for 
itself, in which there is nothing there for it if the object does not do for 
itself what the first does to it. 
The movement is therefore simply the duplication of both self-con­
sciousnesses. Each sees the other do the same as it itself does. Each itself 
does what it demands of the other, and therefore does what it does only 
because the other does the same. The one-sided action would be useless, 
because what is to occur can only come about through the action of both. 
[18] The action therefore has a double meaning, not only in that it is as much 
an action towards itself as towards the other, but also in that it is indivisibly 
the action of the one as well as the action of the other. 
[1 9] In this movement we see the process repeating itself that had presented 
itself earlier as the play of forces, but repeated now in the sphere of con­
sciousness. What was there for us in that earlier process is now there for 
the two poles. The middle-term is self-consciousness, which separates into 
the extremes. And each extreme is this exchange of its determinacy, and 
the absolute transition into its opposite. Although it does indeed come out 
of itself as consciousness, it is in its emergence retained in itself, for itself, 
and what is external is something for it. It is aware that it is and is not 
immediately another consciousness. And likewise it is aware that this other 
is only for itself in that it negates itself as something existing for itself, and 
is for itself only in the being-for-itself of the other. Each is the middle­
term of the other, through which each mediates itself with itself and com-

22 • Leo Rauch 
hines with itsel£ And each is for itself and for the other an immediate enti­
ty existing for itself, which is at the same time for itself only through this 
mediation. They recognize themselves as mutually recognizing one another. 
[20] This pure concept of recognition, of the duplication of self-consciousness 
in its unity, is now to be considered: i.e., how the process of recognition 
appears to self-consciousness. At first it will show the inequality of the two 
parties, the extension of the middle-term into the extremes-which, as 
extremes, are opposed to one another-so that the one is only recognized, 
the other only recognizing. 
[21] To begin with, self-consciousness is simple being-for-self, self-identical 
through the exclusion .from itself of everything other than itsel£ For it, its 
essence and absolute object is "I." And in this immediacy, in this being of 
its being-for-self, it is an individual. Everything other is unessential for it, 
an object characterized as the negative. 
Yet the other is also a self-consciousness; one individual confronts 
another individual. In the immediacy of this confrontation, they are for one 
another as common objects, independent forms, consciousness immersed in 
the being of life (since the existent object has here determined itself as life). 
They have not yet achieved for one another the movement of absolute 
abstraction, suppressing all immediacy and existing only as the purely neg­
ative self-identical consciousness. They have not yet shown themselves to 
one another as pure being-for-self, i.e., as self-consciousnesses. 
Each is indeed certain of his own self but not of the other, and there­
fore his own self-certainty has as yet no truth. It would have this truth only 
if his own being-for-self were shown to him as an independent object, or 
if the object had shown itself as this pure self-certainty (which is the same 
thing). According to the concept of recognition, however, this is not pos­
sible unless: as the other is for him, so he is for the other-each only ful­
fills this pure abstraction of being-for-self through his own action and 
again through the action of the other. 
[22] The presentation of itself as the pure abstraction of self-consciousness, 
however, consists in showing itself as the pure negation of its objective 
aspect, i.e., to show itself to be connected to no specific existence-not at 
all to the general particularity of existence as such, nor to life itself. This 
presentation is the twofold action-action of the other and action of one's 
own. Insofar as it is action of the other, each aims at the death of the other. 

The Truth ofSelfCertainty • 23 
Yet in this there is also the second aspect, action of one's own, since the for­
mer includes the staking of one's own life. Thus the relation between the 
two self-consciousnesses is such that they prove themselves in a life-and­
death struggle. 
They must engage in this struggle, since each must have his self-cer­
tainty, his being-for-self raised to the level of truth-for the other as well 
as for himself. And it is only in staking one's life that one's freedom is 
established, and it is proven that for self-consciousness it is not mere being 
that is the essence-not the immediate aspect as it appears, nor one's sub­
mersion in the expanse oflife. Rather, one proves thereby that as far as self­
consciousness is concerned there is nothing in life that is not a thing of a 
passing moment, that life is nothing but pure being-for-self 
The individual who has not risked his life may well be recognized as 
a person. Yet he has not arrived at the truth of this recognition as that of 
an independent self-consciousness. Similarly, each must seek the death of 
the other as he stakes his own life-since the other counts no more for 
him than he himself does. His essence presents itself to him as something 
other, external, and he must overcome his existence in the external. The 
other is an existent consciousness, multifariously involved. It must see its 
otherness as pure being-for-self, as absolute negation [of everything other 
than itself]. 
[23] Yet this trial by death thereby negates the truth that was to have emerged, 
as well as the self-certainty in general. For just as life is the natural asser­
tion of consciousness, the independence without absolute negativity, so 
death is the natural negation of consciousness (the negation without inde­
pendence), which thus remains without the required significance of 
recognition. In death there is indeed the certainty that both have risked 
their lives, that each held life in contempt, his own as well as that of the 
other. But this is not so for those who have survived the struggle. They ter­
minate their awareness placed in this alien reality that is the natural exis­
tence; they negate themselves, and are negated as extremes wishing to be 
for themselves. 
Yet thereby the essential element disappears from this interplay, that 
of splitting apart into extremes of opposed characteristics. The middle­
term collapses into a dead unity which splits into dead, merely existing but 
unopposed extremes. And the two do not mutually give and receive one 
another once again by way of consciousness. Rather, they leave one anoth­
er free, indifferently, as mere things. Their act is the abstract negation, not 

24 • Leo Rauch 
the negation by way of consciousness-which negates in such a way that it 
retains and maintains that which is negated, and thus overcomes its own 
negatedness. 
[24] In this experience, self-consciousness becomes aware that life is as essential 
to it as is pure self-consciousness. In the immediate self-consciousness, the 
simple "I" is the absolute object. Whether for us or in itself, this is the 
absolute mediation, and its essential element is its continued independ­
ence. The dissolution of that simple unity is the result of the first experi­
ence. Through this, a pure self-consciousness is posited, and a 
consciousness that is not purely for itself but for another, i.e., as existent 
consciousness, or consciousness in the form of thinghood. Both elements 
are essential. Since they are, to begin with, unequal and in opposition, and 
their reflection has not yet given way to unity, they exist as two opposed 
forms of consciousness: the one is independent consciousness, whose 
essence is being-for-self; the other is the dependent consciousness, for 
whom the essential thing is to live or to exist for another. The former is 
the master, the latter the slave. 
[25] The master is consciousness existing for itself
-but no longer the mere 
concept of consciousness. Rather, it is a consciousness existing for itself, 
mediated with itself through another consciousness, namely through a 
consciousness whose nature it is to be connected to independently existent 
things or thinghood as such. The master relates to both these elements: to 
a thing as such, to the object of desire; and to the consciousness for which 
the thinghood is what is essential. And since (a) as the concept of self-con­
sciousness, the master is the immediate relation of being-for-self, yet (b) at 
the same time, as mediation or being-for-self which is for itself only 
through another, he relates (a) to both, immediately, and (b) mediately to 
each through the other. 
The master relates to the slave mediately [i.e., indirectly] through the 
independently existing thinbfor it is this by which the slave is held. This 
is his chain, from which he could not abstract away in the struggle. And 
therefore this is what shows him to be not independent, and shows that 
he has his "independence" in thinghood. 
The master, however, is the power over this thing-since he demon­
strated, in the struggle, that it counts as no more than something negative. 
Since the master is the power over this thing, and the thing is the power 
over the slave, it follows that the master has thereby subjugated the slave. 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 25 
Equally, the master relates to the thing indirectly, through the mediation of 
the slave. The slave, as consciousness in general, also relates to the thing 
negatively and overcomes it. Yet the thing is at the same time independ­
ent as far as he is concerned. For this reason, his negating activity does not 
permit him to dispose of it to the point of destroying it-which means 
that he merely works on it. 
For the master, on the other hand, the immediate relation becomes 
(through the slave's mediation) the sheer negation of the thing, the enjoy­
ment of it. What he could not attain in desire, the master now achieves: to 
dispose of the thing so as to satisfy himself in the enjoyment of it. Desire 
could not attain this, due to the independence of the thing. Yet since the 
master has placed the slave between the thing and himself, he is connected 
only to the non-independent aspect of the thing, and enjoys it purely. The 
independent aspect of the thing he leaves to the slave, who works on it. 
[26] In both these elements the master gets his recognition through another 
consciousness. This consciousness is expressed (in these elements) as 
unessential-both in the working on the thing and in the dependence on 
a specific entity. In neither of these can consciousness achieve mastery over 
[contingent] being and arrive at an absolute negation of it. 
Thus, there is the element of recognition, here, whereby the other 
consciousness annuls itself as being-for-self, and thereby does what the 
other does to it. The same is true for the other element, so that the action 
of the second party is the first's own action toward itsel£ What the slave 
does is actually the master's doing. 
For the master, what is essential is only his being-for-sdf. He is sheer 
negative power, for which the thing is as nothing. Thus, his is the pure 
essential action in this relation. The slave's action, on the other hand, is 
not a pure action, but an unessential action. For recognition proper, how­
ever, the element is lacking whereby what the master does to the slave he 
also does to himself, and what the slave does to himself he also ought to 
do to the master. This therefore leads to a one-sided and unequal recogni­
tion. 
[27] The unessential consciousness [of the slave] is here the object for the mas­
ter, constituting the truth of the master's self-certainty. It is clear, however, 
that this object (i.e., the slave's recognition] does not match the master's 
concept [of himself], but rather that the object wherein the master 
achieved his mastery has become something altogether different from an 

26 • Leo Rauch 
independent consciousness. It is not an independent consciousness that is 
there for him, but rather a dependent consciousness, not a being-for-self 
certain of its truth. On the contrary, his truth is rather the unessential con­
sciousness and its unessential activity. 
(28] The truth of the independent consciousness is, accordingly, the slave con­
sciousness. This indeed appears outside itself to begin with, and not as the 
truth of self-consciousness. Yet just as mastery showed that its essence is 
the opposite of what it wants to be, so slavery, in its culmination, becomes 
the opposite of what it is immediately: as a consciousness repressed into 
itself, it will retreat into itself and will turn to true independence. 
(29] We have seen what slavery is, but only in relation to mastery. Yet it is self­
consciousness, and we must now consider, accordingly, what slavery is in 
and for itself To begin with, the master is the essential reality for the slave. 
Thus the truth (for the slave) is the independent consciousness existing for 
itself But it is a truth that the slave has not yet grasped explicitly, although 
it is implicitly there for him. Slavery possesses within itself this truth of 
pure negativity and being-for-self
-since slavery has this as part of its expe­
rtence. 
Thus, the slave consciousness has known fear, not for this cause or 
that, nor for this moment or another, merely. Rather, the slave has feared 
for his entire being-because he has known the fear of death, which is the 
absolute master. In that fear, the slave consciousness was dissolved inter­
nally: he trembled in every fiber of his being, and everything stable was 
shaken. 
Now, this pure general movement, the absolute dissolution of every­
thing that is permanent and solid-this is precisely the simple essence of 
self-consciousness, absolute negativity, the pure being-for-self, which is here 
implicit in this consciousness. This element (of pure being-for-self) is also 
explicit for the slave consciousness; to the master it is his object. Moreover, 
it is not merely this general dissolution as such; rather, in servitude it is 
brought about in actuality. That is, the slave consciousness, in its servi­
tude, negates all attachment to natural existence in all its particular 
aspects, and he dismisses it by working on it. 
[30] The feeling of absolute power, however, both in general and in the partic­
ular aspect of servitude, is only this dissolution in itself [i.e., implicitly]. 
And although "the fear of the lord is the beginni?g of wisdom," con-

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 27 
sciousness is not thereby aware for itself that it is being-for-self Yet in work 
it comes to itself In the element that corresponds to desire in the master's 
consciousness, it did seem that the slave's lot was the unessential relation to 
the thing, since the thing retains its independence [as the slave works on 
it]. Desire has retained for itself the pure negating of the object and there­
by the unmixed feeling of self For this reason, however, this satisfaction is 
itself merely evanescent, since it lacks the objective aspect, permanence. 
Work, on the other hand, is desire that is limited, evanescence 
restrained, in that it gives shape to things. The negative relation to the 
object becomes the form of the object and something permanent, since for 
the worker the object has independence. This negative middle-term, the 
formative activity, is at the same time the individuality, the pure being-for­
self of consciousness-which, only in work, steps out of itself into the 
element of permanence. Thus, the working consciousness thereby comes 
to the view of independent being as its own independence. 
[31] The formative activity does not only have this positive significance, how­
ever, namely that the servile consciousness therein comes to see itself as 
being pure being-for-self There is also the negative element of fear. For in 
giving form to things, the slave consciousness becomes aware of its own 
negativity, that its being-for-self becomes objective only insofar as it over­
comes the existent form that stands opposed to it. Yet this objective nega­
tivity, is precisely that alien entity before which it had trembled. Now, 
however, the slave consciousness destroys this alien negativity and posits 
itself as such a negativity in the element of permanence-and thereby 
becomes for itself something existing for itself 
The slave consciousness sees the master's being-for-self as something 
other, something there only for him (the master). But in the slave's fear, the 
element of being-for-self becomes his own. And in the slave's formative 
activity [as well], the element of being-for-self becomes his own. He 
becomes conscious that he exists in and for himself The form he gives to 
things in working, being externalized by him, is not something other than 
himself-for this form, too, is his pure being-for-self, which (as external­
ized) thereby becomes the truth for him. This rediscovery of himself 
becomes his own seme of self precisely in work-where that sense of self 
had heretofore appeared as foreign to him. 
Both these elements-fear and service as such (along with the forma­
tive activity)-are needed for this reflection, and both of them in a univer­
sal sense. Without the discipline of service and obedience, fear remains 

28 • Leo Riluch 
merely formal and is not extended over conscious reality; without the form­
ative activity of work, fear remains internal and mute, and consciousness 
does become self-consciousness. If consciousness is involved in formative 
activity without the initial element of absolute fear, then it is nothing more 
than an idle self-centeredness-since its form or negativity is not negativi­
ty in itself, and the slave's formative activity therefore cannot give him a 
consciousness of himself as essential being. If consciousness has not experi­
enced absolute fear but only some moments of anxiety, then the negative 
element has remained external, and consciousness has not had its very sub­
stance touched by it, through and through. If not all the contents of the 
slave's natural consciousness have been shaken up, then that consciousness 
in itself remains in the realm of determinate existence [i.e., conditioned by 
external factors and thus not free]. The sense of self is thus a self-will, a free­
dom which nevertheless remains within the bounds of enslavement. To the 
extent that the pure form cannot become an essence for such conscious­
ness, to that extent it is not a universal formation, an absolute concept 
(considered as something to be extended over the world of particulars)­
rather, it remains nothing more than a skill that dominates some limited 
areas, not the universal power and the entire objective realm. 
B. Freedom of Self-Consciousness: 
Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness 
[32] For the independent self-consciousness, it is (on one hand) only the pure 
abstraction of the "f' that is its essence. And (on the other hand) when 
this abstraction is developed and finds differences in itself, this differenti­
ation does not become an objective and intrinsic essence to it. 
Accordingly, this self-consciousness does not become an "I" that truly dif­
ferentiates itself in its simplicity or remains identical to itself in its absolute 
differentiation. On the contrary, the consciousness that has been forced 
back into itself becomes an object to itself in seeing its own formative 
activity, as the form of the thing to which it gives shape-and at the same 
time, it sees the master's being-for-self as consciousness [i.e., sees in the 
master's consciousness his being-for-self]. For the servile consciousness as 
such, however, these two elements fall asunder-pamely, the slave's own 
consciousness of itself as an independent object, and its consciousness of 
this object as being that of a consciousness (and this as its own essence). 
Yet since for us (or in itselfi the form given to the thing and the being-

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 29 
for-self {Fursichsein) are the same-and in the concept of the independent 
consciousness the intrinsic being-in-itself(Ansichsein) is consciousness-it 
follows that the aspect of intrimicality (Ansichsein) or of thinghood (which 
acquires form through work) has no other substantiality than conscious­
ness; and thus we have arrived at a new form of self-consciousness. That 
is, we have arrived at a consciousness that sees its essence as infinitude, or 
the pure movement of consciousness, which thinks or is free self-con­
sciousness. For what we mean by thinking is not the abstract "!," but rather 
the "I" that also has the significance of being intrimically what it is 
(Amichsein) as its own object, relating to its objective essence in such a way 
that it has the significance of the being-for-self {Fursichsein) of conscious­
ness existing for consciousness. 
For in thinking, the object does not move in [visualized] representa­
tions or shapes, but in concepts-that is, in a differentiated intrinsicality 
(Ansichsein) which is immediately there to consciousness and is not differ­
entiated from it. That which is represented, or given shape, existent as such, 
has the form of being something other than consciousness. A concept, 
however, is at the same time something existing (Seiendes)-and this dif­
ference, insofar as it is in the concept itself, is its determinate content. Yet 
in this fact, that this content is at the same time conceptual, consciousness 
remains immediately aware of its unity with this determinate and differen­
tiated entity-not as in the case of representation, where consciousness 
has to be reminded that this is its representation. Rather, the concept is for 
me immediately my concept. In thinking, I am free, that I am not part of 
another. On the contrary, I am straightforwardly with myself, and the 
object which is the essence for me is my being-for-self in undivided unity. 
And my conceptual movement is a movement in myself. 
In determining this form of self-consciousness, however, it is essential 
to keep this in mind, namely that this is a thinking consciousness above all, 
that its object is an immediate unity of being-in-itself (Ansichsein) and 
being-for-itself(Fursichsein). The very same consciousness that repels itself 
from itself becomes for itself an intrinsically existing (ansichseiendes) ele­
ment. But it first is this element for itself only as a general entity as such, 
not as this objective entity in the development and movement of its man­
ifold being. 
[33] As we know, this freedom of self-consciousness was called Stoicism when 
it first made its appearance in the history of spirit. The principle of 
Stoicism is that consciousness is a thinking entity, and that something has 

30 • Leo Rauch 
reality for consciousness (or is true for it or good for it) only insofar as 
consciousness relates itself to it in thinking. 
[34] Desire and work are directed at life, in its many-sided and self-differenti­
ated extent, its detail and complexity. This multifarious activity has now 
drawn itself together into simple distinctions which are the pure move­
ment of thought. What is most essential now is not the distinction that 
sees itself as a determinate thing, or as a consciousness on the part of a deter­
minate natural entity-e.g., as a feeling, a desire and its goal (whether 
posited by one's own or an alien comciousness). Rather, the only distinction 
that is essential now is the one that is thought of, and as such is not differ­
entiated from myself, the thinker. 
This consciousness is therefore negative with regard to the relation of 
master and slave. The activity [of the Stoic consciousness] in the master is 
aimed at not having his truth in a life that is slave-like; and in the slave, 
the aim is not to find its truth in the will of the master and in his service. 
Rather, whether the thinker be on a throne or in chains, the aim of his 
thinking is to be free of all dependence on his individual existence, and to 
maintain himself in a lifeless withdrawal from the movement of life, from 
activity as from passivity, into the simple essentiality of thought. 
Self-will is [seen as] the freedom that attaches itself to a particularity 
and remains within the bounds of slavery. Stoicism, however, is the free­
dom that always steps directly out of particularity and returns to the pure 
universality of thought. As a universal form of the world-spirit, Stoicism 
could appear not only in a time of universal fear and slavery, but also in 
a time of general culture that had risen to the level of thought. 
[35] Now for this self-consciousness, the essence is not in something other 
than self-consciousness, nor is it in the pure abstraction of the "1," but 
rather in the "I" that has its otherness within itself (but as a difference 
that is thought of), so that in its otherness it has directly turned back to 
itself. Yet despite all this, its essence is at the same time merely an abstract 
essence. 
The freedom of self-consciousness is indiferent to natural existence, 
and therefore has equally let this go free. The reflection is twofold. Freedom 
in thought has nothing but pure thought as its truth, a truth that lacks the 
concrete fullness of life. This freedom is therefore the mere concept of 
freedom, not its living reality-since for this freedom, it is only the think­
ing in general that is the essence, the form as such, which has retreated 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 31 
from the independence of things to go back into itself. But since the aim 
had been to show that in the realm of action individuality is really alive, 
and in the realm of thought to grasp the living world as a system of 
thought-so it had to be in thought itself that the extension had to be 
found that could provide the content of good (as applying to action) and 
the true (as applying to thought). This was so that throughout what is pres­
ent to consciousness, there would be no other ingredient but the concept, 
which is the essence. And yet since the concept, as abstraction, retreats 
from the multiplicity of things, it has no content of its own but only a con­
tent that is given to it. Consciousness indeed destroys the content as an 
alien entity, by thinking it. Yet the concept is a determinate concept, and 
this determinacy is what is alien to it. 
Stoicism was therefore faced with an embarrassment when asked for 
what was called the criterion of truth as such, i.e., actually the content of 
thought itself To the question of what is good and true, Stoicism's answer 
was again a contentless thought: The true and the good are to consist in rea­
sonableness. Yet this [tautological] self-identity of thought is once again 
merely the pure form in which there is nothing determinate. The true, the 
good, wisdom, virtue-which are the general terms Stoicism is left with­
are therefore generally uplifting, to be sure; but since they cannot actual­
ly lead to an extension of content, they soon become tedious. 
[36] This thinking consciousness-having determined itself as abstract free­
dom-is thus merely the incomplete negation of otherness. Having with­
drawn from existence to go back into itself alone, it has not thereby 
achieved for itself the absolute negation of that existence. The content 
does indeed count for it as mere thought, but it also is determinate thought 
and therefore it is also determinacy as such. 
[37] Skepticism is the actual realization of that of which Stoicism was only the 
concept. It is the actual experience of what the freedom of thought con­
sists in. This freedom is in itself negativity, and it must present itself as 
such. With the reflection of self-consciousness into simple thought about 
itself, we find that the realm of independent existence-the sustained 
determinacy that had stood over against that reflection-now in fact falls 
entirely outside the infinitude [of thought]. In Skepticism, what is now 
there, for consciousness, is the total unessentiality and non-independence of 
this "other." Thought now becomes the complete process of annihilating 
the existence of the world in its many-sided determinacy. And the negativ-

32 • Leo Rauch 
ity of free self-consciousness becomes, for itself, a real negativity toward 
this manifold configuration of life. 
It becomes clear that just as Stoicism corresponds to the concept of the 
independent consciousness (which appeared in the master-slave relation), 
so Skepticism corresponds to the actual realization of that consciousness as 
the negative bearing to otherness, to desire and work. But although desire 
and work could not achieve the negation on behalf of self-consciousness, 
the polemical bearing toward the many-sided independence of things will 
nevertheless succeed, because it is as a self-consciousness already complete 
in itself that it turns against those things. More precisely, it will succeed 
because it is thinking, it is infinitude in itself, and for it the independent 
entities and their differentiations are nothing but evanescent quantities. 
The distinctions which, in the pure thought directed at itself, are nothing 
more than the abstraction of distinctions, here become the totality of dis­
tinctions-and all differentiated reality becomes a differentiation of self­
conscwusness. 
[38] In this way, the activity in general of Skepticism and its modes have been 
delineated. It reveals the dialectical movement which is sense-certainty, per­
ception, and understanding-as well as what is unessential in the relation 
of mastery and servitude, and what counts as determinate for abstract 
thinking itself. That relation comprises a determinate mode, in which 
moral laws are presented as commandments. The determinations in 
abstract thought, however, are scientific concepts wherein contendess 
thought is extended, appending the concept (actually in a merely external 
manner) to an independent reality comprising its content, and for which 
only determinate concepts count, even if they are pure abstractions. 
[39] The dialectical as a negative process, as it immediately is, at first appears 
to consciousness as something that has consciousness at its mercy, as 
though it did not exist through consciousness itself As Skepticism, on the 
other hand, that negative process is an element of self-consciousness, to 
which it does not merely happen that the true and the real vanish with­
out its knowing how. Rather, the skeptical self-consciousness is in full 
certainty of its freedom when it allows that "other" to vanish, although it 
presents itself as real. Thus, the skeptical self-consciousness does away not 
only with the objective world as such, but also with its relation to it, since 
it is in that relation that the world counts as objective and is made objec­
tive. And therefore it does away with its own perceiving, as well as its 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 33 
securing of what it is in danger of losing and the truth that it itself deter­
mined and established-i.e., when it indulges in sophistry. Through this 
self-conscious negation it secures for itself the certainty of its own freedom; 
it produces the experience of that freedom and thereby raises it to the 
level of truth. 
What vanishes is the determinacy, the differentiation, which, whatev­
er its manner or source, sets itself up as fixed and immutable. It has noth­
ing permanent in it, and must vanish before thought-since for something 
to be differentiated means that it does not have its reality in itselfbut in 
another thing. Thinking, however, is the insight into the nature of the dif­
ferentiated; it is the negating function, in its simplicity. 
[ 40] In the mutability of everything that would seek to stand secure before it, 
the skeptical self-consciousness thus experiences its own freedom-as self­
given and self-maintained. For itself, self-consciousness is this ataraxia, the 
skeptical impassivity of self-thinking thought, the unchangeable and gen­
uine certainty of itself This self-certainty does not emerge from something 
alien whose complex development was stored up within itself and is a 
result of having that process of emergence behind it. On the contrary, con­
sciousness itself is the absolute dialectical unrest, this mixture of sensuous 
and intellectual representations whose differences coalesce as their identi­
ty is again dissolved-for this identity is itself the determinacy in opposi­
tion to the non-identical. 
Yet in all this, the fact is that this consciousness, instead of being self­
identical, is nothing but a simply fortuitous disarray, the vertigo of an 
ever-self-generating disorder. Indeed, this is how it sees itself, for it itself 
produces and maintains this self-propelling confusion. Hence it also 
admits to this, to being an altogether fortuitous, individual conscious­
ness-a consciousness that is empirical, directed by what has no reality for 
it, giving obedience to what has no essentiality for it, doing and bringing 
to realization what has no truth for it. 
Yet all the same, while it takes itself in this way to be individual, for­
tuitous, and in fact an animal life and a lost self-consciousness, it also con­
verts itself once again to a consciousness that is universal, 
self-identical-since it is the negativity that is the negation of all individu­
ality and all difference. From this self-identity, or rather within itself, it 
falls back again into fortuitousness and confusion-since this same spon­
taneous negativity has to do solely with what is individual, and is occupied 
with what is fortuitous. 

34 • Leo Rauch 
The skeptical consciousness is therefore this mindless oscillation, 
swinging from the one extreme of self-identical self-consciousness to the 
other extreme of the fortuitous, confused, and confusing consciousness. 
It itself does not unite these two thoughts about itself. At one time, it 
apprehends its freedom in rising above all confusion and all fortuitous­
ness of existence; at another time, it equally admits again to falling back 
into the unessential and occupying itself with it. The skeptical self-con­
sciousness allows the unessential content of its thinking to disappear, but 
in doing so it is the consciousness of something unessential. It affirms the 
absolute disappearance of the unessential, yet the affirmation is there, and 
this consciousness is the affirmed disappearance. It affirms the nothing­
ness in seeing, hearing, etc.-and it itself sees, hears, etc. It affirms the 
nothingness of moral realities, yet makes them the power over its own 
conduct. 
Its actions are always being contradi-:ted by its words, and equally it 
itself has the twofold contradictory consciousness of its immutability and 
identity, yet of utter fortuitousness and of its non-identity with itsel£ Yet 
it keeps the poles of this self-contradiction about itself apart, and relates 
to the contradiction as it does in its purely negative movement in general. 
If the identity of the poles is pointed out to it, it will point to the non-iden­
tity, and if it is confronted by what it has just said, it will go back to affirm­
ing the identity. Its talk is actually like the squabbling of stubborn 
children, one of whom says A if the other says B, and then says B if the 
other says A, and who gain pleasure by contradicting one another but at 
the cost of contradicting themselves. 
[41] In Skepticism, consciousness truly experiences itself as internally self-con­
tradictory. Out of this experience there emerges a new form of conscious­
ness, which unites the two thoughts Skepticism had kept apart. The 
thoughtlessness (on the part of the skeptical consciousness about itself) 
must vanish, since it is actually one consciousness having these two modes 
to it. This new form is thereby a consciousness that knows for itself the 
twofold consciousness of itself as self-liberating, immutable, and self-iden­
tical, yet absolutely self-confusing and misleading-and in this it is the 
consciousness of its own contradiction. 
In Stoicism, self-consciousness is the simple freedom of itsel£ In 
Skepticism, this freedom is realized: it negates the other side of determi­
nate existence, yet rather duplicates itself and is now for itself something 
two-sided. Accordingly, the duality which had earlier divided two indi-

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 35 
viduals-the master and the slave-is now found within one conscious­
ness. The duality of self-consciousness in itself, which is essential to the 
concept of mind, is thus present-but not yet its unity. And the Unhappy 
Consciousness is the consciousness of itself as dual, a merely contradicto­
ry being. 
[42] This Unhappy Consciousness-divided against itself
-must, in that one 
consciousness, therefore have the other as well-since its own contradic­
tory essence is for it the content of the one consciousness. And thus it must 
immediately be driven out of each, while it imagines that it has succeed­
ed in coming to a peaceful union with it. Yet its true return into itself, or 
its reconciliation with itself, will present the concept of a spirit which has 
come to life and entered into existence-because as one undivided con­
sciousness it is already dual. That is, the Unhappy Consciousness itself is 
the seeing of one self-consciousness in another. It itself is both, and the 
unity of both is for it the essence of consciousness as well. Yet it does not 
grasp this explicitly, namely, that its essence is to be the unity of both. 
[43] Since, at first, the Unhappy Consciousness is merely the immediate unity 
of both, yet regards the two as opposites, not as the same, it takes only one 
of them (i.e., the simple and changeless consciousness) as the essence; while 
it sees the other (i.e., the many-sided and changeable consciousness) as the 
unessential. From its viewpoint, the two are alien to one another. And 
because the Unhappy Consciousness is itself the consciousness of this con­
tradiction, it sees itself on the side of the changeable consciousness and 
therefore sees itself as unessential. Yet as conscious of the changeless, or of 
simple essential being, it must likewise aim to free itself of the unessen­
tial-which means that it must free itself from itsel£ 
For although it certainly sees itself as only changeable, and the 
changeless as alien to it, it itselfis simple and is therefore changeless con­
sciousness-which it is therefore aware of as its own essence, although in 
such a way that it itself does not see itself as being this essence. The posi­
tion it assigns to both cannot therefore be that of mutual indifference­
that is, it cannot itself be indifferent to the changeless. Rather, it itself is 
both of them, directly. And for the Unhappy Consciousness the relation 
between the two is a relation of the essential to the unessential, so that the 
latter is to be negated. But inasmuch as the two are equally essential to the 
Unhappy Consciousness and are mutually contradictory, that conscious­
ness is merely the contradictory movement in which the opposite does not 

36 • Leo Rauch 
come to rest in its opposite, but only generates itself anew in it as an oppo­
site. 
[44] With this there is a struggle against an [inner] enemy, against whom any 
victory is a defeat, since what the one consciousness gains it loses in its 
opposite. The consciousness oflife, of one's existence and activity, is mere­
ly the painful awareness of that existence and activity-since it is a con­
sciousness of the opposite as the essence, a consciousness of one's own 
nothingness. 
In raising itself out of this, it becomes a consciousness of the change­
less. But this elevation is itself this consciousness [of the changeless, while 
undergoing change itself] and it is therefore the immediate consciousness 
of the opposite, namely of itself as a [changeable] individual. The element 
of the changeless, which enters into consciousness, is thereby touched by 
individuality, and is present only when it too is there. Thus, instead of 
individuality having been suppressed in the awareness of what is change­
less, it comes forward in that awareness all the more. 
[45] In this process, however, consciousness has the experience of just this 
emergence of individuality in the changeless, and of the changeless in indi­
viduals [i.e., of the particular in the universal, and vice versa] . 
Consciousness becomes aware of individuality as such, in the changeless 
essence-and at the same time it sees its own individuality in it. This is 
because the truth of this process is just the unity (Einssein) of this dual con­
sciousness. Above all, however, this unity becomes for consciousness such that 
the diference between the two consciousnesses is the predominant ele­
ment. 
For consciousness, therefore, there are three ways in which the element 
of individuality is linked to the changeless: One way is for individual con­
sciousness to come forward once again as opposed to the changeless 
essence, and it is thus thrown back to the beginning of the struggle, which 
remains the basic element of the entire relation. At another time, however, 
the changeless itself has the element of individuality attached to it (for con­
sciousness), so that all individuality becomes a form of the changeless, and 
the totality of existence goes over into it. Finally, consciousness finds itself 
as this individual in the element of the changeless. 
In the first instance, the changeless is (for consciousness) nothing but 
the alien entity that judges the individual. Since, in the second case, the 
changeless is a form of individuality itself, consciousness becomes, in the 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 37 
third case, Spirit, in which it has the joy of finding itself and becomes 
aware of itself-its individuality now reconciled with the universal. 
[ 46] What is presented here as the mode and relation of the changeless ele­
ment, was given as the experience of the divided self-consciousness in its 
unhappiness. Certainly, this experience is not a one-sided process of its 
own, since it itself is changeless consciousness and therefore is an individ­
ual consciousness at the same time. The process is just as well a movement 
of the changeless consciousness, which appears as much in that movement 
as in the individual consciousness. That is because the process passes 
through these moments: one, the Changeless [God] is opposed to the 
individual consciousness in general; then, qua individual, the changeless is 
opposed to another individual consciousness; and finally, it is one with it. 
Yet this consideration, insofar as it is ours, is out of place here­
because until now we have had before us only the changeless element as 
the changelessness of consciousness. For that reason it was not the genuine 
changelessness, but was still burdened with an antithesis. That is, it was 
not the changeless, in and for itself, and therefore we do not know how 
that would conduct itsel£ All we know is that for the purposes of con­
sciousness {which is our object here) the indicated determinations appear 
to the changeless consciousness. 
[47] For this reason as well, the changeless consciousness in its very form retains 
the character and basis of dividedness and being-for-self, as against the 
individual consciousness [which is united]. Accordingly, it is for the indi­
vidual consciousness a [contingent] happening, that the element of the 
changeless takes on the form of individuality-just as it also merely hap­
pens to find itself opposed to it, and thus had this relation through its own 
nature. Finally, that this individual consciousness does find itself in the 
changeless-this seems to it as due in part to its own efforts because it 
itself is individual. Yet a part of this unity, in its origin and existence, seems 
due to the changeless-and the antithesis remains in the unity itsel£ 
In fact, it is because the changeless has taken on a definite form that 
the element of the beyond not only remains but is more firmly secured. 
This is because, on the one hand, if the beyond seems indeed to have been 
brought nearer to the individual consciousness through the form of an 
individualized reality, it is, on the other hand, as an opaque sensuous One 
that it henceforth stands against that consciousness with all the stubborn­
ness of something actual. 

38 • Leo Rauch 
The hope of becoming one with this One must remain a hope, with­
out fulfillment or present reality-for between the hope and the fulfill­
ment there stands absolute contingency, fortuitousness, immobile 
indifference, and this lies in the definite form itself, the basis of hope. 
Through the nature of the existing One, through the actuality it has 
acquired, it necessarily happens that it has vanished in time, and having 
been remote in space it simply remains remote. 
[48] If at first the bare concept of the divided consciousness was marked by the 
aim of overcoming its particularity and becoming the changeless con­
sciousness, it henceforth strives to nullify its relation to the purely formless 
element of the changeless and to relate only to the Changeless as formed. 
Thus the being-one (Einssein) of the individual and the Changeless is from 
now on the essence and the object for this consciousness-just as in the bare 
concept it was only the formless, the abstract changeless that was the 
essential object. And the relation of this absolute division of the concept 
is what it must now avoid. However, the initially external relation to the 
formed Changeless as an alien reality it must now elevate to the absolute 
becoming-one (Einswerden). 
[49] The process in which the unessential consciousness strives to achieve this 
oneness is itself threefold, according to the threefold relation that it will 
have to its informed Beyond: once as pure consciousness; another time as a 
particular individual relating to the actual world in desire and work; and 
finally as consciousness of its own being-for-self We must now see how these 
three modes of its being are present and determined in that general rela­
tion. 
[50] To begin, then, by regarding it as pure consciousness: the formed Changeless 
seems to pure consciousness to be what it is, in and for itself-although 
as such it has not yet come into existence, as we said. In order that it 
appear to consciousness for what it is, in and for itself, the effort must 
rather come from it than from consciousness. Thus, however, its presence 
is only one-sidedly due to consciousness, and for this reason-it is not 
perfect and genuine but rather remains burdened with imperfection, i.e., 
an antithesis. 
[51] Yet although the Unhappy Consciousness is thus not in full possession of 
this presence, it has at the same time gone beyond pure thinking-insofar 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 39 
as this is either the abstract thinking of Stoicism (which ignores individu­
ality as such) or the merely restless thinking of Scepticism (which is in fact 
mere individuality in the form of unrealized contradiction and its restless 
movement). The Unhappy Consciousness has gone beyond both these. It 
unites pure thought and individuality, and keeps them united. But it has 
not yet risen to that level of thought for which the individual conscious­
ness is reconciled with pure thought itself Rather, it stands at the middle 
point where the abstract thought makes contact with the individual con­
sciousness as individuality. 
The Unhappy Consciousness is this contact, the unity of pure 
thought and individuality. And this thinking individuality or pure 
thought is also there for that consciousness-and the Changeless itself is 
in essence individuality. Yet the Unhappy Consciousness is not aware that 
this its object (the Changeless, which essentially has the form of individu­
ality for that consciousness) is its own self, that it itself is the individuality 
of consciousness. 
[52] In this first mode, therefore, wherein we regard it as pure consciousness, the 
Unhappy Consciousness does not relate itself as a thinking consciousness 
to its object. Rather, since it itself is in itself pure thinking individuality, and 
its object is this pure thinking (although their interrelation itselfis not pure 
thought), it merely goes toward that thinking and thus it is devotion. Its 
thinking as such remains the discordant jangle of bells or a warm fog of 
incense-a musical form of thinking that does not get as far as the con­
cept, the only immanent and objective mode of thought. This infinite 
pure inner feeling certainly does come to have its object, yet it is not 
grasped conceptually and therefore appears as something alien. 
What we have, therefore, is the inner movement of pure heart, which 
feels itself, but as painfully divided. It is the movement of an infinite yearn­
ing, having the certainty that its essence is such pure heart, a pure think­
ing which thinks of itself as individuality-in the certainty that it will be 
known and recognized by this object precisely because the object thinks of 
itself as individuality. At the same time, however, this essence is the unat­
tainable Beyond-elusive just as it is being grasped, or is already gone. It is 
already gone because it is in part the Changeless, which thinks of itself as 
individuality-and in it, consciousness thereby arrives directly at its own 
self: that is, at its own self but as the opposite to the Changeless. Instead of 
grasping the essence, it merely feels, and falls back into itself Since, in 
attaining itself, consciousness cannot keep at a distance from itself, it has 

40 • Leo Rauch 
grasped nothing more than the unessential (rather than the essence). Just 
as, on one hand, it grasps only its own divided existence while striving 
toward itself in the essence, so, on the other hand, it cannot grasp the 
"other" as individual or as actual. Wherever the "other" is sought it is not 
to be found, since it is meant to be a Beyond which cannot be found. 
When it is sought as an individual it is not a universal individuality that 
can be grasped in thought, not a concept, but rather as an individual 
which is there as an object, as actual. It is an object grasped in immediate 
sense-certainty, and for that very reason it is merely something that has 
already vanished. 
Accordingly, consciousness can come only to the grave of its life, as its 
present reality. Yet since this grave is itself something actual, and nothing 
actual can be possessed permanently, the presence of this grave signifies a 
struggle which must be lost. Since experience shows consciousness that the 
grave of its actual changeless essence has no actuality-that the vanished 
individuality is no true individuality because it has vanished-conscious­
ness will give up the search for the changeless individuality as something 
actual, or give up the attempt to hold to what has vanished, and only then 
is it capable of finding individuality as something genuine or universal. 
[53] Above all, the return of the feeling heart to itselfis to be taken to mean that, 
as an individual, it has actuality. It is the pure heart which-whether for us 
or in itself
-has found itself and is inwardly satisfied. For although, as far 
as that feeling is concerned, its essential being is separated from it in its 
feeling, this feeling is, in itself, a feeling of self, having felt the object of its 
pure feeling-and this object is the feeling itself. It therefore presents itself 
here as self-feeling, as independently existing actuality. 
In this return into itself its second relation appears to us, that of desire 
and work, which confirms for consciousness its inner certainty of itself, 
the certainty that it has attained for us by overcoming and enjoying an 
alien thing existing independently. Yet the Unhappy Consciousness finds 
itself to be merely desiring and working. It is not aware that what under­
lies this is its inner self-certainty, and that its feeling of the alien thing is 
this self-feeling. Since it does not have this inner self-certainty for itself, its 
inner life remains the fragmented certainty of itself. The self-confirmation 
it would have received through work and enjoyment is therefore equally 
fragmentary. Thus the Unhappy Consciousness must itself nullify this self­
confirmation, in order that it may thereby find the confirmation of its 
own dividedness. 

The Truth ofSelfCertainty • 41 
[54] The actuality to which desire and work are directed is no longer a noth­
ingness in itselffor this consciousness, to be overcome and consumed by it. 
Like that consciousness itself, it is an actuality broken in two: From one 
standpoint it is in itself nothing. Yet from another standpoint it is also a 
sanctified world-the form of the changeless, since it has retained indi­
viduality in itself; and since as the changeless it is universal, its individual­
ity has in general the significance of all actuality. 
[55] If consciousness were aware of itself as an independent consciousness, and 
the actual world were nothing in and for itself as far as that consciousness 
were concerned, then it would achieve a feeling of its own independence 
in work and enjoyment by virtue of the fact that it itself had nullified the 
actual world. But since this actual world has the form of the changeless as 
far as consciousness is concerned, it is unable to nullify it on its own. On 
the contrary, since consciousness gets as far as negating the actual world 
and enjoying it, this occurs for it essentially because the changeless itself 
has surrendered its [embodied] form and leaves it to consciousness to enjoy. 
Similarly, consciousness on its part appears here as an actuality, but 
equally as internally fragmented. And this division presents itself in its 
work and enjoyment as divided between a relation to actuality or being-for­
self, and a being-in-itself. That relation to actuality consists in the changing 
of it or the working on it, the being-for-self belonging to the individual 
consciousness as such. Yet in this relation it is also in itself this aspect of 
intrinsicality belongs to the changeless Beyond, although in consciousness 
it comprises abilities and powers as gifts from an alien source, which the 
changeless likewise leave to consciousness to utilize. 
[56] Accordingly, consciousness in its activity involves a primary relation of 
two extremes: On one side it is actively here, confronted on the other side 
by a passive reality. The two are related to one another, although both have 
gone back into the changeless essence and thus stay what they are. From 
either side, only a superficial element is let loose to enter the interplay of 
motion between them. 
The extreme of a [passive] reality is overcome by the active extreme. 
On its side, the [passive] reality can be overcome only because its own 
changeless essence negates it, repelling it from itself, and surrendering it to 
activity. The active force appears as the power wherein the [passive] reality 
is dissolved. For that reason, however, as far as this consciousness is con­
cerned (for which the intrinsic, the essence, is something "other," its 

42 • Leo Rauch 
object), this power-making its appearance in the sphere of activity-is 
the Beyond of itself. 
Thus instead of returning from its activity back into itself with the 
confirmation of itself, consciousness really reflects this movement of activ­
ity back into the other extreme, which is thereby presented as the pure 
universal, as the absolute power, from which the movement emanated in 
all directions-and which is the essence of the self-dividing extremes as 
they first appeared, as well as of their interchange itself. 
[57] In that the changeless consciousness renounces its [embodied] form and 
surrenders it, while the individual consciousness gives thanks for it-i.e., 
denying itself the satisfaction of being conscious of irs own independence, 
and assigning the essence of its activity to the Beyond rather than to 
itself-through these two elements of reciprocal self-surrender on the part 
of both, consciousness is certainly aware of its unity with the changeless. 
Yet at the same time this unity is affected by the division, again fragment­
ed in itself, and from it there emerges once more the antithesis of the uni­
versal and the particular. 
For indeed consciousness does renounce the appearance of satisfying 
its self-feeling, yet it does achieve the actual satisfaction of it-since it was 
desire, work, and enjoyment, because as consciousness it willed, acted, and 
enjoyed. Equally, its act of giving thanks (in which it acknowledges the 
other extreme as the essence and negates its own self) is its own act, which 
counterbalances the other extreme by meeting the other's self-sacrificing 
good deed with an equal act of its own. If the other offers only its surface 
[i.e., the outer side of its reality], this consciousness still gives thanks, by 
surrendering its action, i.e., its essence-and thereby it actually does more 
than the other, which merely sheds a superficial aspect of itself. 
Thus the entire movement is reflected not only in the actual desiring, 
in the working and enjoying, but even in the giving of thanks, wherein the 
opposite seems to occur, in the extreme of individuality. Consciousness 
therein feels itself as this particular individual, and is not taken in by its 
own seeming renunciation-for the truth of the matter is that it has not 
really given itself up. What has come about is only the twofold reflection 
into the two extremes-and the result is the repeated division into the 
consciousness of the changeless and the opposed consciousness of willing, 
achieving, enjoying, and self-renunciation itself, i.e., the independent indi­
viduality in general. 

The Truth of Self-Certainty • 43 
[58] With this there has appeared the third relation of the movement of this 
consciousness. This proceeds from the second in such a way that it has 
genuinely proven itself independent through its willing and its accom­
plishment. In the first relation there was merely the concept of actual 
consciousness, or the inner feeling, which is not yet actual in its action and 
enjoyment. The second relation is this actualization as external action 
and enjoyment. Returned from this activity into itself, however, it is a 
consciousness that has experienced itself as actual and effective-a con­
sciousness aware that its own being, in and for itself, is its truth. 
Yet in this the enemy is revealed in his truest form. In the struggle of 
the emotions, the individual consciousness is nothing more than an 
abstract musical element. In work and enjoyment {where this unessential 
being is made real), this consciousness can directly forget itself-and its 
own individual role in this realization is suppressed by thankful recogni­
tion. Yet this suppression [of the individual role] is really a return of con­
sciousness into itself, and indeed as the genuine reality for it. 
[59] This third relation, in which this genuine reality is one pole, is the relation 
of that reality {as a nothingness) to a universal essence. The movement of 
this relation is yet to be considered. 
[60] Let us begin with the relation of consciousness in its opposition, wherein 
it regards its immediate reality as a nothingness: What that consciousness 
does is a doing of nothing, and its enjoyment becomes a feeling of its mis­
fortune. In this, the doing and the enjoyment lose all universal content and 
significance-for if there were such, they would have a being in and for 
themselves. Both retreat into the particularity to which consciousness is 
directed in order to negate them. Consciousness is aware of itself as this 
actual individual in its animal functions. These are no longer a matter of 
indifference, as nothing in and for themselves, performed without any 
special importance or essential significance for the spirit. Rather, since it 
is in them that the enemy shows himself in his characteristic form, they 
are really the object of earnest effort and they take on the greatest impor­
tance. 
The enemy thrives on his defeat, however. And consciousness, in 
focusing on him, sees itself as permanently defiled, so that it remains 
involved with him instead of freeing itself from him. At the same time, it 
sees this content of its effort as the lowest instead of as something essen-

44 • Leo Rauch 
tial. It sees itself as the most peculiarly individual being, instead of as the 
universal-limited to itself and its small activity, brooding on itself, so that 
what we see is a miserable and impoverished personality. 
[61] Yet to both these elements-the feeling of one's misery and the poverty of 
one's actions-there is equally linked the consciousness of one's unity with 
the changeless. Thus the attempt at the direct negation of one's own actu­
al being is mediated by the thought of the changeless, and it occurs in this 
relation [to it]. The mediated relation comprises the essence of the negative 
process in which consciousness is directed against its own individuality­
although as a relation it is equally positive in itself and will make con­
sciousness itself aware of this unity with the changeless. 
[62] This mediated relation is thus a syllogism, in which this individuality-at 
first fixed in its opposition to the in-itself-is connected to this other pole 
only through a third term. By means of this middle term, the pole of this 
unchangeable consciousness [i.e., God] becomes present to the unessential 
consciousness [i.e., man], just as the latter relates to the former only 
through this middle term [i.e., the church]. That is, the middle term pres­
ents these two to one another, serving each [i.e., ministering to each] as it 
relates to the other. The middle term is itself a conscious entity, for it 
involves activity which mediates consciousness as such. The content of 
this activity is the suppression of individuality, undertaken by conscious­
ness. 
[63] In this mediating element, therefore, consciousness frees itself from its 
activity and enjoyment, heretofore considered as its own. As one of the 
extreme poles existing for itself, consciousness rejects the essence of its 
will-and it throws upon the mediating element or its servant [i.e., priest] 
the role and freedom of decision, along with the respomibility for action. 
This mediator-who is considered to have a direct connection to the 
Changeless Being-serves by advising of right [so far as doing or willing 
are concerned]. One's action, with respect to one's doing or willing, ceas­
es to be one's own, since it follows from the decision of another. 
There still remains the objective aspect of action, for the unessential 
consciousness, namely the fruit of its labor and the enjoyment of it. These 
are equally rejected by consciousness-and as it renounced its own will, so 
it renounces the reality it has won in its work and enjoyment. That is, it 
renounces them, partly on the basis of the truth that it has gained of its 

The Truth ofSelfCertainty • 45 
own self-conscious independence (to the extent that what moves here is 
something utterly strange, speaking and representing what is senseless to 
it), partly as external property (in giving up something of the possession 
acquired through work), and partly as the enjoyment it has had (in deny­
ing itself that enjoyment through its fasting and mortification). 
[64] Through these elements of surrender-first, of its own right of decision, 
then of property and enjoyment, and finally through the positive element 
of carrying on what it does not understand-it truly and completely 
denies itself the consciousness of inner and outer freedom, of reality as its 
own being-for-self Consciousness has the certainty of having truly alienat­
ed its own "1," and of having made its immediate self-consciousness into 
a thing, an objective entity. 
The self-renunciation could be demonstrated only through this actu­
al sacrifice. For only in this way does the deception vanish that rests on the 
inner acknowledgment of gratitude through heart, sentiment and word. 
This is an acknowledgment that indeed disavows for itself all the power of 
an independent existence and ascribes it to a gift from above. Yet in this 
disavowal itself, it nevertheless retains for itself its outer identity in the pos­
sessions that it does not give up, its inner identity in the awareness of the 
decision that it itself has made-and in the awareness of its own content, 
which it itself has determined, which it has not exchanged for something 
foreign to it, which would be meaningless for it. 
[65] Yet in this sacrifice actually achieved, consciousness has nullified its action 
as its own and has thereby achieved, in principle (an sich), the remission 
from its unhappiness. That this remission has happened [only] in principle 
is due to the action of the other pole of the syllogism, the self-existing 
Being (ansichseiende Wesen). Yet that sacrifice on the part of the unessen­
tial pole was at the same time not a one-sided action, but rather contained 
within itself the action of the other pole. Thus the surrender of one's own 
will is negative from only one aspect: According to its concept or in itself, 
it is at the same time positive-namely in positing one's own will as the 
will of the other, and decidedly of a will that is not individual but rather 
universal. 
From the standpoint of this consciousness, the positive significance of 
the negatively posited individual will is the will of the other pole-which, 
precisely because it is "other" for it, becomes present to the Unhappy 
Consciousness not through itself but through the action of the mediator 

46 • Leo Rauch 
in the role of counselor. For comciousness, accordingly, its will certainly 
becomes a universal will, existing in itself-yet it itself does not regard itself 
as this in-itse/f(aber es selbst ist sich nicht dies Amich). The surrender of its 
own will, as individual, is not in line with its concept of what is positive 
in the universal will. Similarly, its surrender of possession and enjoyment 
has merely the same negative significance-and the universality which 
thereby becomes present to consciousness is not regarded as its own doing. 
This unity of objectivity and being-for-self lies in the very concept of 
action [although it is not that concept itself], and it thereby becomes for 
consciousness the essence and object. Just as, for consciousness, this unity 
is not the [whole] concept of its action, so this unity does not actually 
become an object for consciousness directly through its own effort. 
Rather, it permits the mediating minister to express this fragmented cer­
tainty: that only implicitly, or in principle only, is its unhappiness the 
opposite (i.e., its activity a self-satisfying activity or blissful enjoyment); 
that likewise its impoverished action is only implicitly its opposite (i.e., an 
absolute action); and that according to the concept of action, it is only 
individual action that is action at all. 
For consciousness itself, however, its own actual activity and activity as 
such remain impoverished, its enjoyment remains pain-and the over­
coming of these is [already] a Beyond in a positive sense. Yet in this 
object-wherein its activity and being (as belonging to this individual 
consciousness) are being and activity in themselves--consciousness has 
become aware of reason, of the certainty that in its individuality it is 
absolute in itself, it is all reality. 

2 
HEGEL'S SUMMARY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
FROM THE "PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT" 
IN THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROPAEDEUTIC 
(1809) 
Translator's Note: In preparing this translation, I have consulted the 1841 edi­
tion. The paragraph numbers are of that edition. 
[22] As self-consciousness, the I regards itself; and the pure expression of this is 
"I = 1," or: "I am 1." 
[23] This statement of self-consciousness is without any content. The motive 
of self-consciousness is to realize its concept, and in all things to give itself 
a consciousness of itself. Accordingly, it is active: a) in overcoming the oth­
erness of objects and equating them with itself; b) in externalizing itself 
from itself, thereby giving itself objectivity and existence. The two are one 
and the same activity. The becoming determined of self-consciousness is 
at the same time a self-determination, and vice versa. It brings itself for­
ward as object. 
[24] In its development or movement, self-consciousness has three stages: a) 
Desire, insofar as it is directed at things other than itself; b) the relation of 
mastery and slavery, insofar as this self-consciousness is directed at anoth­
er self-consciousness that is unequal to itself; c) the universal self-con­
sciousness, which recognizes itself in another self-consciousness and 
indeed as its equal, just as that other self-consciousness recognizes the first 
as equal to itself. 
47 

48 • Leo Rauch 
Desire 
[25] Both aspects of self-consciousness-the positing and the negating-are 
thus immediately united with one another. The self-consciousness 
asserts itself through the negation of otherness and is practical conscious­
ness. Thus, if in the actual consciousness-which is also called the theo­
retical-the determinations of itself and of the object were to be altered 
in themselves, this now occurs through the activity of consciousness itself 
and is there for consciousness. Consciousness is now aware that this 
negating activity belongs to it. In the concept of self-consciousness there 
lies the determination of the as yet unrealized difference. Insofar as this 
difference puts itself forward at all in it, self-consciousness has the feel­
ing of an otherness within itself, a negation of itself-or, the feeling of 
lack, a need. 
[26] This feeling of its otherness contradicts its identity with itself. The felt 
necessity to overcome this antithesis is the drive. The negation or the oth­
erness presents itself to it as consciousness, as something external to it, dif­
ferent from it-yet as something that is determined through 
self-consciousness: a) as commensurate with the drive, and b) as something 
negative in itself whose subsistence is to be posited as negated by the self 
and as identical with it. 
[27] The activity of desire thus transcends the object's otherness in its subsis­
tence, and unites it with the subject, whereby the desire is satisfied. 
Accordingly, the desire is conditioned as follows: a) through an external 
object, indifferently juxtaposed to it, or through consciousness; b) its 
activity achieves its satisfaction only through the nullification of the 
object. Self-consciousness thereby arrives only at its self-feeling. 
[28] In desire, self-consciousness relates to itself as individual. It relates itself to 
a selfless object that is, in and for itself, something other than self-con­
sciousness. This self-consciousness thereby arrives at its identity with itself 
in respect to the object, only through the nullification of the object. As 
such the desire is: a) destructive; b) in its satisfaction it therefore arrives at 
nothing more than the self-feeling of the subject's being-for-itself as indi­
vidual-at the indeterminate concept of the subject in its connection to 
objectivity. 

Hegel's Summary of Self-Consciousness • 49 
Mastery and Slavery 
[29] The concept of self-consciousness as that of a subject that is at the same 
time objective, implies the relation whereby there is, for self-conscious­
ness, another self-consciousness. 
[30] A self-consciousness that exists for another is not there as mere object for 
the other, but as its other self The I is no merely abstract universality, in 
which (as such) there is no differentiation or determination. Thus, inas­
much as the I is object for the I, it is (according to this aspect) the same 
as what it itself is. In the other it sees itself. 
[31] This self-regard of the one in the other is a) the abstract element of self­
identity (Diesselbigkeit); b) yet each one also has the characteristic of 
appearing to the other as an external object-and to that extent as an 
immediate, sensual, and concrete existent; c) for itself, each is absolute and 
individual toward the other, and also demands of the other (as absolute 
and individual) that it be such and count as such for the other, so that each 
can see in the other its own freedom as that of an independent being­
i.e., to be recognized by the other. 
[32] In order to make itself count as free and to become recognized as such, the 
self-consciousness must present itself to the other as free of natural existence 
[i.e., independent of its life]. This element is as necessary as that of the 
freedom of the self-consciousness in itself. The absolute identity of the I 
with itself is in essence not something immediate, but rather something 
that makes itself such through the nullification of its sensual immediacy, 
and thereby presents itself to an other I as free and independent of the sen­
sual world. It thereby shows itself to be equal to its concept and it must be 
recognized because it gives reality to the I. 
[33] Yet independence is not so much the freedom from (and external to) the 
sensual, immediate existence, but rather a freedom in that existence. The 
one element is as necessary as the other, although they are not of the same 
value. To the extent that the element of inequality enters (so that for one 
of them what counts as essential is freedom vis-a-vis sensual existence, 
while what counts as essential for the other is that sensual existence rather 
than freedom), what enters into the determinate reality, along with the 
shared desire for recognition, is the relation of mastery and slavery between 

50 • Leo Rauch 
the two-or that of service and obedience, to the extent that this difference 
in independence prevails through the immediate relation of nature. 
[34] Inasmuch as, in two juxtaposed self-consciousnesses each must strive to 
show himself toward and for the other as an absolute being-for-self-the 
one who enters into slavery is the one who places life over freedom and 
thereby demonstrates that he is not capable, on his own, of abstracting 
from his sensual existence in favor of his independence. 
[35] This purely negative freedom, which consists in the abstraction from nat­
ural existence, does not correspond to the concept of freedom-for this is 
self-identity in otherness, partly of the intuition of oneself in the other self, 
partly of freedom, not from existence but in existence as such, a freedom 
that itself has existence. The one who serves is selfless and his selfhood is in 
an other self, so that he alienates himself in the master as an individual I, 
and is nullified and sees his essential self as an other. The master, on the 
other hand, sees in the servant the other I as nullified, and sees his own indi­
vidual will as maintained. (See the story of Robinson Crusoe and Friday.) 
[36] The servant's own individual will, regarded more closely, dissolves itself 
however in the fear of the master, in the inner feeling of his negativity. His 
work in the service of an other is an alienation of his will: Partly it is so in 
itself; and partly it is (along with the negation of his own desire) the pos­
itive forming of external things through work, by means of which the self 
converts its own characteristics into the form of things and regards itself 
as objectified in its work. The alienation of unessential caprice constitutes 
the element of true obedience. (Pisistratus taught the Athenians obedi­
ence, thereby introducing the laws of Solon into reality; and after the 
Athenians had learned this, a master was superfluous for them.) 
[37] This alienation of individuality as self is the element whereby self-con­
sciousness makes the transition to the universal will-the transition to 
positive freedom. 
The Universality of Self Consciousness 
[38] The universal self-consciousness is in the regard of itself as not something 
particular, differentiated from that of another, but rather as the self-exis-

Hegel's Summary of Self-Consciousness • 51 
tent universal self In this way it recognizes itself and the other self-con­
sciousnesses in itself, and is recognized by them. 
[39] In accordance with this its essential universality, the self-consciousness is 
real for itself only insofar as it knows its reflection in the other (I know 
that others know me as themselves)-and knows itself as essential self, as 
the pure spiritual universality of belonging to one's family, one's home­
land, etc. (This self-consciousness is the foundation of all virtues, of love, 
honor, friendship, courage, all self-sacrifice, all fame, etc.) 


PART II 
A DISCUSSION 
OF THE TEXT 
by 
LEO RAUCH 


3 
WHAT IS "SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS"?: 
AN OVERVIEW 
How do we arrive at self-consciousness? What is its peculiar content? Why 
is self-consciousness necessarily conflicted? We might try to answer these 
questions from the standpoint of psychology (in terms of one of its ortho­
doxies or another)-but that would lead us away from the direct experi­
ence of self-consciousness itsel£ In order to grasp that experience, our 
approach must be phenomenological rather than psychological. That is to 
say, in addressing ourselves to these questions in psychological terms, we 
would be considering one or more causal factors external to self-con­
sciousness-e.g., stimuli producing certain attitudinal responses; the 
action of the superego, etc.-and while such factors might or might not 
"explain" self-consciousness satisfactorily, we would still be far from hav­
ing grasped it in descriptive terms, as lived. To do this, we must direct our 
attention to the structure of self-consciousness, as experienced; and in 
illuminating our experience in this way we would be revealing its univer­
sal features. 
Hegel speaks of phenomenology as a "science of the experience of 
consciousness." In phenomenological terms, what would turn us to self 
consciousness would have to be something internal to consciousness, some 
problematic aspect of experience that would lead us to think about our 
thinking, to be conscious of our consciousness itsel£ This is rather out of 
the ordinary, almost an anomaly in the natural order. For if it is natural for 
consciousness to be directed "outward," at anything but itself, then there 
55 

56 • Leo Rauch 
would have to be something disturbing indeed to get us to direct our gaze 
inward, at ourselves. 
For Hegel, what leads us to thinking about ourselves is that we are 
puzzled by our immediate experience, especially in trying to delineate the 
reference to the words this, here, and now. These index-words (the term is 
Gilbert Ryle's) are peculiar because they are reflexive: this refers to what­
ever I am pointing to when I utter the word this; here refers to whatever 
place I am at or in when I utter the word here; now refers to the moment 
at which I utter the word now, and so on. We can see that "I" plays a cru­
cial role in all this; and indeed, "I" is itself an index-word, referring to 
whoever happens to be uttering the word 1 That self-reflecting function 
is the key to the problematicity of "I" -as well as of self-consciousness in 
general. For here it is "I," the knower, who am the known. 
In phenomenological terms, therefore, our initial puzzlement about 
our immediate experience leads us to turn inward to question ourselves. 
And then, having embarked upon this self-consciousness, the problemat­
ic feature is that the thinking subject is also the object of our thinking. One 
can almost feel, here, the tension between the freedom of the subject and 
the fixity it tries to impose upon the object that is itself, in trying to know 
it. And yet the "I" is neither of these, neither subject nor object, in any 
fixed way, but oscillates between the one pole and the other. 
That is why Hegel speaks of consciousness as "the absolute dialectical 
unrest." It is therefore difficult to define-if definition is a way of putting 
an idea to rest. It is also difficult to define because of the dialectical aspect: 
Self-consciousness is not a static thing like a faculty, but rather a process, 
variable in content and form, and free to generate conflict, even contra­
diction. Indeed, it must generate them if it is fully active. A succession of 
thoughts that are self-aware must go that road. 
Self-consciousness is infinite, not only in its freedom but in its com­
plexity. How, then, is this infinitude to be defined? How is the unlimited 
to be given limits? Self-consciousness itself is ultimately also the resolution 
of contradiction. Such resolution should be one of the main functions dis­
tinguishing self-consciousness from consciousness in general. If so, this 
reveals a further dialectical aspect: Self-consciousness is the source of par­
adox, and it is also where such paradox makes its peace. Yet we shall see 
that such "resolution," although fervently aimed for, is not attainable by 
self-consciousness. 
In addition, self-consciousness is the basis of selfhood; it is where self­
hood is registered. This is problematic as well-which is why Kierkegaard 

"What Is "Self-Consciousness"?: An Overview • 57 
adopts the Hegelian locution to say, cryptically: "The self is a relation 
which relates itself to its own self." Cognition normally takes its object as 
something "other" than consciousness. How, then, can it turn back upon 
itself and know itself as not other? As we shall see, it is this very paradox 
that generates selfhood and civilization, in Hegel's view. 
Hegel says that such paradoxical self-return is emblematic, not only 
of self-consciousness but of all spiritual activity: The human spirit projects 
itself out into the world and returns to itself by way of thought, culture, 
and society. Spirit works its way through consciousness, self-conscious­
ness, various social forms, and art, religion, and philosophy (where it 
comes home to full self-awareness). Self-consciousness, in its going out 
and return, is therefore the microcosm of the entire cultural world. 
But let us go back to a more primordial stage: the "subject" beginning 
to see itself as "object." At one point, it will leave its inertness and become 
associated with the idea of Life. As Hegel says: "Through this reflection 
into itself, the object has become Life." With this, there will be introduced 
a dynamic, developmental aspect. That is, the mind's own concern with 
itself and with its processes will make this leap necessary. But there is a fur­
ther leap, when Hegel abruptly replaces the abstract "object" with a living 
object that is another conscious (and indeed self-conscious) subject! 
The reason for this second transition is entirely phenomenological: 
Self-conscious selfhood begins to see itself as the basis of its life. Since its 
experience is fluid, it tries to see itself as the stable center of life: i.e., that 
center as the self-conscious subject itself. But the self has not yet found its 
security in this. Its self-questioning is very disturbing. I therefore turn to 
another individual for aid and comfort, so that the "other" (as the ordi­
nary object of the knowing subject) now becomes an "Other" (as a rival 
consciousness, another self having its own sense of being the center of its 
experience). Yet there cannot be two selves, each of whom is the center of 
the experienced world. I therefore deny you the place of subjective cen­
trality of my world. 
Thus, I gain and enhance my sense of self through opposition to 
another self. Indeed, selfhood must be an adversary relation at this pri­
mordial stage. Here, Hegel presents a model of an interpersonal relation, 
and sees a pattern of culture emanating from it. The struggle for identity, 
through clash and combat, becomes the theme of all subsequent history. 
The interpersonal relation is marked by conflict because the selves 
involved are conflicted to begin with. But in addition, there is the very real 
struggle between the two-a struggle to the death. I am willing to risk my 
I 

58 • Leo Rauch 
life in order to achieve recognition for myself as person; you are ready to 
do the same. This is because my objectification of you is resisted by you. 
You see yourself from within, as subject, not as "object" (thing) for anoth­
er. Likewise, I will resist your objectification of me. This standoff is the 
aboriginal source of conflict, the struggle for freedom that is exemplified 
in history and is replicated at all levels. The aboriginal struggle is embod­
ied in the Master-Slave scenario. 
This microdrama can be seen as a retelling of a quasi-Hobbesian state­
of-nature story. But in phenomenological terms, it is the passage from 
innocence to experience. With its conclusion, the conflict over selfhood is 
internalized. Culture is the ultimate response to this inner conflict. This is 
a strange and provocative view of culture-and, as a phenomenological 
account, it is at variance with Hegel's quasi-metaphysical view of Spirit 
manifesting itself in the world. Rather, the microdrama of Master and 
Slave stems from a clash of egos, and as such it represents a necessary stage 
in the growth of self-awareness; and this depends on one's view of oneself 
as free Subject, while one sees the other as unfree Object. This occurs for 
no psychological reason, but solely for the phenomenological reason that 
one is, necessarily, the center of one's own relatedness to the world. I 
attempt to make that centrality independent of everything, even inde­
pendent of my life-and that is why I am ready to put my life at risk. One 
of us wins in this struggle; yet the loser cannot be killed, for then the vic­
tor would be denied the recognition he wanted. The victor therefore 
allows the loser to live, but enslaves him. 
The Slave now has no alternative but to internalize his sense of self: 
Nothing in the outer world offers any support for his ego. With this inter­
nalization, the ego curls inward, only to recoil outward in forms as varied 
as Stoicism, Skepticism, and that medieval Christian worldview Hegel 
calls the Unhappy Consciousness. Culture therefore proceeds by way of 
the Slave. 
What the two had struggled over was recognition-nothing more 
than a matter of ego. Yet this is a deadly serious thing, and the struggle had 
to be a struggle to the death since we achieve personhood only at the risk 
of life itself. Each one wanted to be recognized as person, and each one 
knew that his own personhood must crowd out the other's. Ego, selfhood, 
personhood, recognition-these, then, are the "materials" of all subse­
quent culture. 
The struggle to the death is resolved in favor of life. The fact that the 
victor lets the vanquished live, but enslaves him, is a symbolic reflection 

"What Is "Self-Consciousness"?: An Overview • 59 
of the fact that Life is the ultimate residual continuum. No matter what 
our struggles are, and death-bound though we are, the life-context that is 
culture survives us all. But that Life retains the elements of the struggle­
along with the persistent vectors toward liberation or enslavement. 
Our two aboriginals have come a long way: From abstract epistemo­
logical puzzles, they have begun the discovery of selfhood; they have gone 
into and out of a life-and-death combat, and into the formation of a pri­
mordial minisociety involving only the two of them. Moreover, these steps 
are shown to be the dialectically necessary stages in the evolution of con­
sciousness. Self-consciousness, then, is not a benign advance. On the con­
trary, it introduces an element of strife that we will never be free of. We 
have emerged out of Nature and have entered the realm of Spirit. The 
return to Nature (the inert, the "in-itself," without self-consciousness) is 
an enticing dream, but it is an impossibility. That humanization (via self­
consciousness), once attained, is irreversible. 
We said that culture proceeds by way of the Slave-because he 
embarks upon a series of internalizations that manifest themselves exter­
nally. First, he must tell himself that, despite everything, he is a free soul 
in his heart and mind. Since he finds no ego-support in the outer world, 
he must seek that support within. Again, this happens for phenomeno­
logical, rather than psychological, reasons: Since his earlier attempt at self­
hood has been thwarted, he is driven inward, to find selfhood there. The 
driving element is not some psychological force, but the press of logical 
necessity. Thus, the internalization and its contents are the dialectical out­
come of the ego struggle itself. 
Once the Slave has told himself that although he is enslaved he is nev­
ertheless free in heart and mind, this view is externalized as Stoicism: I 
now see all values as subjective creations, ego-relative. Recognition by 
another is now seen as an illusory goal. Now it is I who bestow person­
hood upon myself. The difference between being a master and being a 
slave is also seen as illusory, since I now see both of us as sharing in 
"mankind." Yet the Slave remains enslaved, and so his concepts of 
"mankind" and "inner freedom" remain abstract; the external circum­
stances of his life are never negated entirely. That is why the Slave (as an 
egological prototype) must proceed to a higher resolution, Skepticism. 
Here, the entire world-with all its social standards and political arrange­
ments, etc., along with the entire gamut of human possibilities-is reject­
ed as being unknowable, unreal, without value. Thus the knowing ego is 
• utterly detached from the world, and in that sense is free. Yet in rejecting 

60 • Leo Rauch 
the world as unreal and valueless, we render all our action in that world 
unreal and valueless as well. Thus, every gain is a loss: We have detached 
ourselves from the world, yet our selfhood is not any the more secure­
and in our hearts there is nothing left beating but doubt. 
Because all this is so unsatisfactory, the Slave goes over into 
Christianity. And yet these doubts go with him. Christianity is therefore 
as much a projection of these doubts as it is a "resolution" of them. That 
"resolution," as it turns out, is neither satisfying nor complete; for if it 
were, there would be no impetus toward the further spiritual progress that 
actually does take place after medieval Christianity has run its course. & 
it happens, the medieval worldview that Hegel calls the Unhappy 
Consciousness is such that its contradiction is irresolvable. This is because 
in essence that consciousness is divided against itself And that is because 
the earlier duality-externalized in the Master and Slave-is now inter­
nalized in the one Christian psyche. Yet it is more than this that produces 
the division. 
Consider this: Christianity is an attempt at reconciling that spiritual 
division through the mediation of a divine Spirit that has come into the 
world and has become human. Yet this produces the further division 
whereby the self-consciousness of the believer sees itself in the self­
consciousness of another (the God-become-man). This leaves the con­
sciousness of the believer feeling so much more inadequate and incom­
plete-and consequently unhappy. Therefore, the so-called "mediation'' 
leaves the believer as remote as ever from the desired fulfillment-and the 
gap between man and God is greater than ever. 
For example, if we try to characterize spirit as such, and we say that 
the very essence of spirit is its immutability-i.e., the unchanging realness 
that is the nature of God-then the human spirit sees only its own muta­
bility, the endless changes and variations that render its own life unessen­
tial and unreal. The same sort of inequity plagues this consciousness in 
countless other ways. Whatever is ascribed to God is denied to man-and 
we can feel, here, a foreshadowing of the Feuerbachian statement: "In 
order that God may be everything, man must be nothing." In this respect, 
the Christian self-consciousness undergoes an unending struggle in trying 
to assert itself while it negates itself Christianity is a "critical" religion­
in the literal sense of the Greek word krisis, which is judgment. The self­
judgment and self-struggle are intertwined. All this is an echo of the 
aboriginal struggle earlier on, except for the ironic reverberation in the fact 
that the previous struggle did end, while this one (involving two sides of 

"What Is "SeLf-Consciousness"?: An Overview • 61 
one psyche) cannot find a way out. In this combat of self-consciousness 
with itself, therefore, every victory is a defeat. 
The reason for all this is phenomenological, not theological. That is 
to ,say, the psychic division exemplified in Christian consciousness stems 
from the paradoxicality of self-consciousness itself: The fact that the ego 
has made itself the object of its own awareness-this is the source of the 
division and contradiction. As self-conscious subject-and-object it is free 
and yet determined, particular and also universal, mutable although eter­
nal, and so on. Indeed, this seems so inescapable a feature of human self­
consciousness that we now can see a phenomenological justification for 
positing a God: If it is inevitable that I am free and yet determined, muta­
ble although eternal, etc., then I will conceive of a God who is immutable 
and eternal, and so on-as a way for me to overcome, vicariously, the divi­
sion I see persisting within me. 
This self-division is as far as self-consciousness can go (short of mak­
ing way for a higher Reason). And this is why self-consciousness here, must 
be unhappy. It sees and feels its own problematicity mirrored everywhere 
around it-and it lacks the Reason that would allow it (self-consciousness) 
to construct its own resolution to the problem. For the time being (i.e., 
the medieval Christian era), self-consciousness is overcome by the 
Changeless God on one side, and by the undervalued and changing world 
on the other-and both are seen as diametrically opposed to the essence 
of self-consciousness itself. 
In time (and in the realm oflogical transition), the troubled stage that 
is self-consciousness will give way to Reason. The bipolar tension we saw, 
in the relation of self-consciousness to God (on one side) and to the world 
(on the other), now drops off-and then the individual consciousness is 
seen as in itself the Absolute Essence. It is then that Reason can enter, 
because with the focus on the individual consciousness we come to see 
how the psyche constitutes its world-and even God! Only then does man 
himself begin to be the supreme being, and man's reason begins to feel its 
dominion of the world. Only then will the human spirit begin to find 
itself reflected in the world, as it sets about making its world as rational 
and as real as spirit itself now is. (Hegel does not stop here. Reason will 
have a career all its own-and then it will give way to yet another stage, 
which Hegel calls Spirit; this will have even more complex and bizarre 
I 
configurations when Hegel takes it through phases such as the 
Enlightenment and the French Revolution.) 
The theme that unites the "Self-Consciousness" chapter is that of 

62 • Leo Rauch 
alienation. This underlies self-consciousness itself from beginning to end. 
To begin with, there is a marked ambivalence, for the Master and Slave, 
in regard to the thing: The Master appropriates what he does not himself 
produce; the Slave produces but does not possess the thing he works on. 
Hegel believes that the Slave's work is, in effect, a form of liberation-and 
I shall be discussing that point later on, to show that it is mistaken. In any 
case, the Slave is not free to reject the thing, and therefore his labor is an 
incomplete negation of it. On the other hand, the Master has separated 
himself from all meaningful work by putting the Slave between himself 
(the Master) and the natural world of things. This means that each one is 
alienated from the world in his peculiar way. 
As we have seen, the subsequent cultural forms-Stoicism, 
Skepticism, and Christianity-only extend that alienation. What they 
urge (in their various ways) is our separation from the world. But such 
separation can never be a conquest of the world. In one way or another, 
that conquest is what the ego has been aiming for. Yet to tell itself that it 
does not need the world, that the world is illusory, or that there is a God­
man who has transcended the world altogether if we cannot-all these are 
false "conquests." We can see, here, the negative roots of these cultural 
forms: they are ways of getting back at the world for what it has done to 
us (as Slaves). 
The idea that Christianity is the product of the Slave mentality is 
repeated by Nietzsche, with the idea that Christianity is the outcome of 
"the slave-revolt in morals." The difference is that Hegel foresees no 
Master mentality to supplant it (since the Master needs none of the brood­
ing sensitivity produced by internalization). Nietzsche, as we know, sees 
Christianity as the product of the slave's ressentiment: As his revenge upon 
the world of power, the slave makes the world tolerable by using 
Christianity to emasculate it. For Hegel, on the other hand, it is the Slave's 
Christianity that emasculates him, the result being "the feeling of one's 
misery and the poverty of one's actions." Despite their differences, how­
ever (as phenomenology vs. psychology), the views of Hegel and Nietzsche 
are remarkably close. What they share is the nineteenth-century preoccu­
pation with the theme that our creations (God, culture, political society, 
art) come to dominate us and to make creatures of us. We find this theme 
in Frankenstein. We find it in Goethe's Faust (line 7003): "Am Ende han­
gen wir doch ab von Kreaturen die wir machten" ("At the end, we are 
dependent upon the creatures we have made"). The idea is the same in 
Marx's discussion (in the 1 844 Paris manuscripts) of the alienation 

"What Is "Self-Consciousness"?: An Overview • 63 
involved in the work process. For Hegel, the only resolution of this bizarre 
fact is in the advent of Reason. Only when we are shown to be fully 
responsible for our world can we see ourselves as being free to change it. 
The fact that the more recent changes the world has undergone have been 
depraved, even pathological, should indicate that the world and our egos 
still have some distance to go before the Rational becomes the fully Real. 


4 
ON HEGEL'S AIMS AND METHODS 
There are two places in his book where Hegel gives us a capsule-statement 
of what he takes the phrase "phenomenology of spirit" to mean: In his 
Introduction, it is the "science of the experience of consciousness" 
( Wissenschaft der Erfohrung des Bewusstseyns). On the last page of the book, 
he speaks of phenomenology as "the science of knowing [in the sphere of] 
appearance" (die Wissenschaft des erscheinenden Wissens). Now, a science 
aims at certainty; yet experiences and appearances are contingent, any­
thing but certain. The crucial issue, then, is the questionable certainty of 
that science vis-a-vis the contingency of experience, i.e., appearance. 
This is a question Hegel comes to grips with in his Preface and 
Introduction. Directly and indirectly, he raises the question concerning 
the extent to which our knowledge can achieve a grasp of the absolute. It 
seems that the psyche is more elusive the closer we get to it. In one sense, 
the challenge is to find a Ding-an-sich that is not unknowable. For Hegel, 
this challenge is met-in the view that phenomenology is precisely the sci­
ence wherein we come to know the mind in itself through the study of its 
outer manifestations. These "outer Manifestations" are thought patterns, 
interpersonal relations, cultural configurations, and other expressions of 
the human spirit-here studied in the ways they follow from one another 
in their logic, as essences. Phenomenology is, in other words, the study of 
the noumenon which is penetrable, nothing less than the noumenon as 
phenomenal! 
65 

66 • Leo Rauch 
We are being asked to see phenomenologically, and this begins with 
an element of doubt regarding our ordinary mode of cognition. 
Ordinarily, we presuppose that there is a "distance" between the knower 
and the known. Here, that presupposition is placed in abeyance, since the 
knower is the known, the subject is the object of his own knowing. 
Yet in order to arrive at this stage, i.e., self-consciousness, we must 
detach our "object" from our latent presuppositions concerning "dis­
tance." We must also detach it from what we usually take as "explana­
tion"-i.e., an account that is given in terms that are causal, deterministic. 
Thus, we must suspend our reliance on the "evidence" presented in such 
terms. As phenomenologists, therefore, we begin with a skepticism toward 
the entire range of phenomenal experience as usually understood. It is this 
skepticism that sets us to examining our experience for its truth. Yet this 
means that phenomenology is beset by the unavoidable difficulty of hav­
ing to reject phenomenal knowledge (qua knowledge), while taking its 
experiential content very seriously indeed. 
In Hegel's phenomenological approach, then, both the "external" 
world and our knowledge of it fall within the sphere of consciousness. 
Instead of conceiving of an "independent" world to which our conscious­
ness must conform in its knowing, we now see that it is consciousness 
itself, in its self-subsistence, to which both our consciousness and our 
world must conform. Thus, consciousness itself becomes the standard by 
which it measures that which it knows. 
Even if we try to think of an object as independent of consciousness, 
as it is in itself, that "in-itself" is already there for consciousness. The true, 
then, for Hegel, is the being-for-consciousness of the in-itself This seems 
to be an equivocation, as though we are speaking (epistemologically) of 
the actual subjectivity of what we mistakenly think of as objective. Yet 
Hegel is not a Humean phenomenalist. From the fact that the transcen­
dent world (i.e., transcendent of the stream of consciousness) is posited in 
an act that is immanent to consciousness, it does not follow that the tran­
scendence itself is dependent upon that immanent act. Rather, if the true 
is the being-for-consciousness of the in-itself, then the result is an object 
of a new sort, one that excludes from our consideration all reference to the 
in-itself status of the object, so that we may then see how our experience 
has modified the object (which is unquestionably there). As Hegel says, "It 
is what experience has made of it." 
Hegel is not out to replace earlier philosophies as though this were to 
replace error with truth. Rather, he thinks of himself as standing at the end 

On Hegel's Aims and Methods • 67 
of a development in which each previous philosophical standpoint is a 
moment of the whole. As a new science, however, phenomenology can 
lead to one or another extreme, an overemphasis of form or of content­
and he sees a danger in the fact that the one extreme can exist without the 
other. Such polarization could lead to a formalism that remains unful­
filled, or a contextualism which remains formally unfounded. Without the 
completion of the formal foundation, he says, the various contexts 
amount to little more than repetitions of bald formulae-so that the 
unfounded contextualism is a formalism of sorts, a mass of data in a 
"monochromatic formalism." 
Hegel claims that his approach achieves a synthesis in which the true 
is seen not only as Substanz but also as Subjekt. We might ask whether this 
is at all a phenomenological (as distinct from a metaphysical) synthesis. 
Substanz embraces the immediacy of knowledge as well as being for 
knowledge. In this, he addresses the great mystery of how the ego acts to 
posit and project a world as something other than itself. He suggests this 
in the concept of self-alienation-"the mediation of self-othering with 
itself" (die Vermittlung des Sichanderswerdem mit sich selbst). This is but 
one half of the total process Hegel has in mind, however, for he asks that 
we show how the self returns to itself by negating the otherness of the con­
stituted world. The circular movement of self-alienation and its negation, 
along with the completion of formal by means of contextual syntheses­
all this is epitomized by him in the principle that "the true is the whole" 
(which is an attempt at combining the phenomenological with the meta­
physical). 
What Hegel offers, therefore, is the systematic knowledge of how the 
world can be the creation of the human spirit. We begin by abandoning 
the idea of the simple thereness of the world (as independently existing), 
along with the attitude that sees it as devoid of spirit. Rather, science is to 
provide us with the means by which we may see spirit as world-constitut­
ing. Yet first we are shown a series of configurations that consciousness 
must go through as the detailed history of the education of consciousness, 
now brought to the standpoint of science. 
This is not a mere refinement, to be added casually onto the body of 
scientific knowledge. We can see the importance of this point if we con­
sider the relation inhering in the traditional dichotomies of world vs. 
thought and nature vs. spirit: In this outlook, ideas and thoughts are not 
a part of the natural order. In looking at things and thinking about them, 
we take them out of their immanent environment. Thinking is an intru-

68 • Leo Rauch 
sion, an interruption of the natural context. Hegel says thought is the 
power of the negative, of the pure "1." It is understanding wrenched out 
of its ordinary connection to the world, undergoing a death, yet thereby 
attaining Truth. 
In the modern era, we have no trouble in coming up with abstract 
thoughts, as Hegel points out. We find abstractions everywhere around us. 
They are fixed and solid, and they can be volatilized only when we relate 
them to the ego that posits them-so that the abstractions are thereby 
made to take on the unconditioned character of the ego itself. Thus, the 
notion of the ego is what our universal science must take account of, and 
what makes such a science complete. 
Our relatedness to the "outer" world occurs "within" the ego, by 
means of an "internal" act that posits its object as "other" than itself. Hegel 
sees this as an antithesis, especially in the fact that the elements of that 
antithesis are themselves the shapes of consciousness. Not only is the so­
called objective world to be seen as the work of the constitutive ego, the 
ego is itself to be made the object of its own observation. The ego thereby 
becomes an "other" to itself. Yet it suspends that otherness-just as, in 
reverse, we live in a world of objects whose otherness we begin with, take 
as given, and must neutralize, so that we may thereby return to the ego 
that constitutes them. (I have used, here, the terminology of twentieth­
century phenomenology; yet I do not regard Hegel's phenomenology as 
very far removed, in aim, from the phenomenology of more recent 
times.) 1 
We can say, therefore, that for Hegel the phenomenological problem 
is impelled by the metaphysical dichotomy between ego and world. This 
dichotomy (like all others) is to be overcome. The path of elucidation is 
to show how the ego fashions its world. The same holds true for the 
dichotomy between essence and existence. The essential is the actual, and 
thus contains existence within its concept. This is human consciousness in 
contact with itself-and here, fulfillment involves essence qua existing. 
Here, then, is where philosophy and phenomenology can be seen to 
coalesce for Hegel-namely in the characterization of philosophy as a 
process that both begets and surpasses its productions, and comes to see 
them as moments in the movement towards ultimate truth. The half­
truths are, in Hegel's view, necessary and essential elements of the truth. 
His conception of philosophy requires this, and in his view phenomenol­
ogy is to display this in actuality. We have, then, the philosophic truth as 
the goal as well as the partial truth on the way to it-which he so vividly 

On Hegel's Aims and Methods • 69 
characterizes as a bacchanale. Accordingly, Hegel's program (as presented 
in the Preface) can be seen as philosophic in its remote and final links, but 
phenomenological in the means to that end. 
Any phenomenological discussion must eschew two poles: meta­
physics and psychology. Hegel does not entirely succeed in avoiding them. 
The proposed aim of seeing Substance as Subject can fal prey to either of 
these extremes. Indeed, we can say that in Hegel it is the tension exerted 
by these two that acts as an antidote to both-and keeps his discussion in 
the middle area, which is phenomenology. We avoid the extremes when 
we return to the knowing self as the true self-identity in otherness. 
Hegel embraces the metaphysical idea that the self-identity of a thing 
is in the fact that its being is in its concept (in seinem Sein sein Begrif zu 
sein), and to see in this the logical necessity of it. Yet this is the material of 
speculative philosophy, and he admits that this carries only an anticipato­
ry, not a complete, assurance. The suggestion is that we can avoid meta­
physics and psychology, and that the only assured path is in 
phenomenological exposition and the display of concepts in their concrete 
evolution-as "the detailed history of the education of consciousness . . .  " 
(die ausfohrliche Geschichte der Bildung des Bewusstseins}. 
We thereby use the self as a hothouse of ideas, a microcosm of culture 
wherein we allow ideas to develop in their essential and implicit ways­
without editing or interfering with them, but only observing their careers 
in nonhistorical time. Such self-restraint is part of the concept itself, he 
says, and the conceptual content of truly dialectical thinking consists in 
the return to the subject. All this is phenomenological in tone and 
method-the philosopher's ego serving as the proving ground of human­
ity in its self-education. 


5 
BEFORE "SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS" 
In focusing our attention on the fourth chapter alone of Hegel's 
Phenomenology we are doing something un-Hegelian. If "the True is the 
whole," then it can hardly be correct for us to extract one chapter from its 
wider context, especially as that context is important and revealing on its 
own account. 
Each of the chapters concerns a stage of human awareness. As such 
they are interconnected, each one emerging from the one before and lead­
ing to the one after. Even more to the point, each stage presents a distinct 
conflict in awareness, and every such conflict is resolved in the stage that 
follows. Thus, our chapter IV is to be seen as the resolution to the prob­
lem posed in chapter III, and as presenting the problem to be resolved in 
chapter V. 
For any one part of the Phenomenology to be treated adequately, then, 
we would have to have a book discussing all of the Phenomenology. But I 
suppose we could extend that principle and say that the Phenomenology 
itself ought to be discussed only in the context of Hegel's entire body of 
works-if we are aiming at any measure of adequacy in our discussion. 
However that may be, we shall be discussing chapter IV alone, and we 
shall try to make up for the missing context by considering some ideas 
leading up to, and following from, that chapter. 
The first two chapters-which are included under the general head­
ing of "Consciousness"-display the problematic nature, the conflicted 
71 

72 • Leo Rauch 
character, of ordinary "sense-certainty" and perception. Thus, for exam­
ple, I perceive this table, yet that perception has that meaning only 
because I perceive the table as being a member of a class called "table." 
Every noun (other than a proper noun) refers to a class of objects. How, 
then, can the specific aspect, the "thisness" of the table be expressed in 
language, if the only terms available express such generality? One way of 
answering this question is to say that the term "table" refers to a univer­
sal form. This is of little help, however, since the universal is uncondi­
tioned. Nor do we usually see the part we ourselves play in conditioning 
it. As Hegel says, consciousness does not yet recognize itselfin its intel­
lectual object. 
Only when we look upon all this from a higher viewpoint do we 
become aware that our consciousness is involved in the development of its 
intellectual object. This is not grasped at the level of ordinary perception, 
the level at which we are immersed in the immediacy of experience. Nor, 
we might add, is it grasped at the level of philosophical perception if the 
philosopher seeks to give the universal an objectivity such that his own 
consciousness plays no part in creating it (Plato). For Hegel, this is "con­
sciousness still retreating from what has emerged, so that this is the essence 
for it as objective." The content of thinking, here, is the objective essence, 
not consciousness as such. We are still at the level at which we assume that 
there is an insuperable dichotomy between the knower and the known, 
between subject and object. We do not as yet recognize the world as the 
product of our own thinking and making. That is, we do not yet see that 
the selfis the truth of everything, as Hegel declares. 
Ordinary consciousness may well have arrived at an intellectual 
understanding of the world, but it is not yet the understanding in which 
consciousness actually sees itself participating. It stands aside and watches 
itself, as a thing apart but not in the light of its creative activity. We may 
have got so far as to posit the difference between form and content, or 
between a unifying whole and a many-sided multiplicity. Yet one side of 
every such distinction merges easily into the other and back again-and 
this is the sort of fluctuation that marks thinking that is merely abstract. 
Throughout this process the two sides (of any distinction you may wish to 
think of) are distinct yet identical. All this is the display of an underlying 
force, or perhaps an inner being of things, but it is not yet an objective 
opposition. We therefore see that such abstract intellectual distinctions do 
not succeed in establishing the reality of what it is they distinguish; on the 
contrary, they introduce an element of unreality into the world. 

Before "Self-Consciousness" • 73 
For related reasons, the independence we ascribe to universals (in our 
abstract way of looking at them) is a spurious independence. The univer­
sal ought first to be seen as a human creation, and only then as independ­
ent, i.e., with the personal aspect having been overcome. So long as this 
difficult step has not been taken, what we see is merely a multiplicity of 
universals, nominally independent of one another but not objectively 
independent of our thinking. We see their multiplicity, but we also see 
them as part of a domain of universality. That is, we see them as diverse 
but also as unified-so that we undergo an incessant to-and-fro motion in 
our thinking, from diversity to unity, and back. 
In our becoming aware of this motion, we are led to posit a psycho­
logical "force" (another abstract concept), which seems to govern the intel­
lectual movement from diversity to unity and back. That force is seen as 
expressing itself by going outside itself and yet remaining self-enclosed. 
We see the difference in the movements, yet we see one force persisting 
behind them all. Force, then, is another unconditioned universal, and we 
can give it almost any content we please: It is difference and identity, it is 
being-for-another and being-in-itself (This is why the concept of Force 
fails to serve our needs, and why we must eventually reject it.) What we 
have to see, first, is the independent self-identity of that force, and only 
then can we see it as self-differentiating. Only then do we see the two 
movements as aspects of one force, coming out of itself and going back 
into itself at the same time (as in, e.g., consciousness expressing itself and 
returning to itself in its self-expression)-i.e., these are movements inde­
pendent of one another, yet overcoming the difference between them to 
achieve unity. 
What all this signifies is the objectification of subjective activity. And 
what is problematic in this, as Hegel sees it, is that the subject and the 
object, or the perceiver and the perceived, are a unity and yet are distinct. 
We may see them united as aspects of one force, and yet the force itself is 
disunited by extending itself into these two poles. The result is that we see 
the movement between them as not genuinely objectified, but merely as 
the inner aspect of things (and this marks a failure to resolve the problem). 
The objectification of subjectivity is what our chapter IV is all about. 
In chapter III, Hegel reflected on some inadequate attempts to do just 
that, as with the concept of a Force, conceptualized as expressing itself, yet 
as self-contained. The point is, however, that this division is itself a part of 
the Force. In the same way, the materiality upon which it acts is suppos­
edly outside it, and yet this too is part of Force, the unconditioned uni-

7 4 • Leo Rauch 
versa!. These distinctions oscillate in this way because they are abstract. 
Ultimately, they will be made concrete in something as real as an inter­
personal relation-and this we see in chapter IV 
So long as these different and conflicting aspects are all of them a part 
of the one Force, the concept has not yet emerged from its purely con­
ceptual form. Moreover, since the concept splits so easily into opposed 
aspects, we see that as a concept this Force is not the unifying entity we 
might have thought it to be. Thus, there is an element that "solicits" Force, 
and there is the Force being solicited (sollizitiert)-both, again, aspects of 
the supposedly unifying Force. These two disparate aspects are mutually 
determining and yet opposed. They seem to be mutually independent, yet 
they turn out to depend upon one another. Each is other to the other, yet 
each is its own self and is Force itself Here we have the epitome of the 
Hegelian dialectic: two entities opposed to one another, yet identical to 
one and the same thing. This appears to violate the Law of Contradiction, 
and Hegel's critics have made much of this. Yet when Hegel says that A is 
both A and not-A, he is not giving the same denotation to the two />ls, and 
thus there is no contradiction here; the seemingly opposed terms are not 
actually opposed. Each is what it is through the other, so that each is not 
what it appears to be in itself. The differences collapse into a unity-but 
this unity is nothing more than a concept, and moreover a concept that 
(since it is inadequate) is there to be superseded. 
In the light of these apparent contradictions (and others that are real), 
we are driven back into ourselves. We try to see the contradiction as there, 
but we also come to see it as the mere appearance of things, something on 
the surface. What we must decide is whether we will take the appearance 
as all there is. On the level of appearance, we see things becoming their 
opposites. But this leads us to consider consciousness itself as the mover 
and shaper of the antithesis-and here we approach being-for-self We do 
not as yet arrive at that being-for-self, however, since we have not yet 
grasped that concept. 
In turning to ourselves, we conceive of a real world beyond the 
appearances, a world of permanence beyond change-and this is taken to 
be the essential nature of things. Yet in conceptualizing such a realm, we 
have a concept that is empty of content because (as Hegel says) con­
sciousness does not yet find itself in it. Since such a "realm" is beyond the 
concrete world, it is also beyond consciousness. It is the empty void of the 
mystics, a supersensible Beyond, a spiritual vacuum that could be filled by 
anything we like. Yet that supersensible Beyond is now supposed to have 

Before "Self-Consciousness" • 75 
come into being, and although it is posited as being beyond appearance its 
content is precisely that appearance. Hegel emphasizes the point that this 
is not a grasp of the concrete empirical world, but rather the supersession 
of that world in favor of an "inner" world. How concrete is it? It too is 
empty, in-itself, universal-at least for the time being. Here again we have 
an incessant oscillation of contraries-a tennis game without a net, ball, 
rackets, or players, yet with spectators turning their heads back and forth! 
All determinations become their opposites, and we shuttle from one side 
to the other. What we have is mere difference and flux without content. 
Opposed to this flux there is the concept of scientific or philosophic law, 
as "the stable image of unstable appearance" (dem bestiindigen Bilde der 
unsteten Erscheinung). In this light, the supersensible world is "a tranquil 
realm oflaws" (ein ruhiges Reich von Gesetzen) that is beyond the perceived 
world as well as present in it. 
To some degree all laws are indeterminate-which is why there must 
be an indeterminate number of them to cover the full diversity of appear­
ances. This multiplicity of laws thwarts the unity that our understanding 
seeks in setting up a system of laws. There is a tendency toward economy: 
one law is to cover the greatest number of phenomena. But what such a 
law gains in generality it loses in specificity, until the law is so general that 
it becomes identical to the concept of law itself. Thus laws have opposed 
tendencies toward unity and diversity. This can lead to a polarization such 
that the two extremes are indifferent to one another. What unites them is 
the understanding, which embraces the differences. But in this, the under­
standing introduces the element of necessity, which we might be tempted 
to see as a subjective product, or something merely verbal. Thus, we tend 
to reduce all phenomena to these "subjective" principles in what is taken 
as explanation. But since this is nothing more than the understanding 
feeding upon itself, as it were, the explanation is tautological and empty. 
From another point of view (shared by Hegel) this can be seen in a 
positive light: Since, as it turns out, self is the truth of everything, all 
explanation involves (at least implicitly) the self-consciousness that con­
structs both the explanandum and the explanans. As Hegel says, explana­
tion is consciousness communing with itself, enjoying itself-and 
although it seems to be concerned with an "object" it is in fact occupied 
only with itself! 
For both these reasons (the negative and the positive), the so-called 
objectivity we are after is a spurious objectivity after all. We are still 
enmeshed in subjectivity at this stage (i.e., prior to Self-Consciousness), 

76 • Leo Rauch 
primarily because we are not as yet aware of the part played by subjectiv­
ity. The element of self-consciousness (better: the stance of self-conscious­
ness) has not yet fully emerged. That is, we do not as yet know how to 
account for the role of subjectivity in the formation of our "objective" view 
of the world. We have not as yet achieved the reconciliation of objectivity 
as such with objectivity as "ours." For this reason, the distinctions fash­
ioned by the theoretical understanding are spurious distinctions. Because 
the understanding is merely partial rather than all-embracing, its distinc­
tions are artificial, false. As Hegel says, "differences arise which are no dif­
ferences." Once again we see the mark of such artificiality in its oscillation: 
"like becomes unlike and unlike becomes like," and supposed differences 
cancel each other. 
To all this, there is another possible response. It is the view that 
besides the all-inclusive tranquil realm of laws there is yet another realm­
an intelligible realm containing the distinctions set up by the understand­
ing. Since the first realm is inadequate to contain all there is in the 
phenomenal world (in all diversity and unity), we must posit another 
realm, which is the opposite to the first. Yet in opposing the first, this sec­
ond realm is an "inverted world." The first realm had no place for change 
and alteration; the second makes a place for it, but in inverted form (i.e., 
so that what is permanent in the one is impermanent in the other, what is 
real in the one is illusory in the other , etc.). 
The theme of the "inverted world" is discussed at length and much 
illuminated by Gadamer. 1 The general problem Hegel addresses is to show 
how consciousness becomes self-consciousness-and this is where such 
"invertedness" comes in. Hegel shows that we cannot merely begin with 
our consciousness of the objective world, expect that consciousness to sat­
isfY our explanatory needs, and then expect that consciousness to turn its 
attention automatically to self-consciousness and become self-conscious­
ness. This is because consciousness is individual and subjective, and what 
we must find is a way of overcoming both the individuality and the sub­
jectivity if we are to arrive at a genuine objectivity. That is, we are to show 
why consciousness must lead to self-consciousness-but that "must" is log­
ical, not psychological (i.e., deterministic). Because consciousness is 
intrinsically problematic, its problematic character can be resolved (logi­
cally) only in self-consciousness, in a logical supersession of consciousness 
as a level at which we function. 
Hegel's itinerary, then, begins with the ordinary sense-certainty we 
enjoy with regard to physical objects, to show such "certainty" to be rid-

Before "Self-Consciousness" • 77 
died with conflicts. The conflicts are not merely implicit, immanent, but 
manifest themselves, so that we become aware of them and we are led to 
try to overcome them. We therefore go from sense-certainty to a consid­
eration of perception, only to encounter further conflicts. This leads us to 
a consideration of the Understanding. It is in this third stage that we posit 
a theoretical entity such as Force, but this too is conflicted (as we saw). 
What we must do, then, is to return to the world of appearance, but 
to see it as appearance, not as the epiphenomenon of a deeper force. Nor 
is it to be seen as appearance as opposed to reality, but appearance is seen 
as real. From the world of appearances we extract the concept of law. If 
such law is "the stable image of unstable appearance," opposed to appear­
ance, then it is inadequate to encompass it-since, as stable, it cannot 
account for change. Where Plato finds the phenomenal world inadequate 
in approximating the pure forms, Hegel finds the forms (laws) inadequate 
to embrace the phenomenal world. This is why we need an inversion of 
the formal realm of laws, i.e., a world in which change and development 
are now realities. That inverted supersensible world now contains the phe­
nomenal world, but inverts it as well. That is, the phenomenal world is 
inverted (or perverted: verkehrt has both meanings) because no instance is 
a pure case of a law, as Gadamer reminds us. Indeed, the vital reality of an 
instance, or phenomenon, consists precisely in the perversion of law. But 
in its perverse character, the phenomenon turns to itself, back into itself­
and this (in my view) is the turn that is executed by consciousness in its 
becoming self-consciousness. The inversion is ontological, but it is also the 
key to a process that is epistemological. 
As Gadamer points out, Hegel does not intend "inversion" to be con­
strued as "wrongness." What he means by inversion is the dialectical rever­
sal, so that the true world is not the tranquil realm of laws but precisely 
the reverse, the untranquil sensible world of change. And from that rever­
sal we go back to say that the supenoensible world, too, is precisely that 
mutable world! 
Thus, the Platonic division between the intelligible and the sensible 
worlds no longer obtains. We have one supersensible world driven back 
upon itself-as both the law and its "perversion" in concrete instances. It 
is that inverted world that exists "above" the appearing world-as a theo­
retical construct adequate to contain the phenomenal. But that is not the 
end of the matter. The Platonic division between the intelligible and the 
sensible worlds leads directly to the Platonic dichotomy between the uni­
versal and the particular. According to Plato, the particular entity "partie-

78 • Leo Rauch 
ipates" in the universal, yet the line between the two realms is decidedly a 
division: the one is real, the other illusory. For Hegel, that division is itself 
illusory, the product of mere theoretical Understanding; higher Reason 
will overcome these distinctions, so that we see the universal in the partic­
ular, the particular in the universal. Christianity has embodied this in sym­
bolic terms: God becomes this particular Man. In this, the dichotomy is 
in some ways overcome, but not in terms that fully satisfy reason. What 
philosophy must do (by way of phenomenology) is to see the dichotomy 
overcome entirely, and in terms expressive of the higher insight of Reason, 
so that the universal is the particular, and the particular is grasped as uni­
versal. 
Self-consciousness is the arena in which that overcoming takes place: 
here we achieve the reinversion of the inversion, and with this we over­
come all other dichotomies. It is on these grounds-i.e., in view of the 
operation of self-consciousness-that Hegel rejects the Platonic juxtaposi­
tion of the intelligible and the sensible. As Hegel says, the true supersen­
sible world contains both the intelligible and the sensible, and by its 
dividing itself into this opposition it relates itself back to itself-and yet 
(or thus) is one. The inverted world is the real world, relating itself to itself 
and differentiating itself from itself-which is precisely the characteristic 
activity of self-consciousness! 

6 
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CERTAINTY 
(Para. 1-12) 
Self-consciousness carries with it a set of problems (even contradictions) 
all its own. On one hand, it would seem that in being conscious of myself 
I have the opportunity of knowing what no one else can know, or know 
as well. Thus, consciousness of consciousness would seem to guarantee a 
degree of certainty achieved in no other form of awareness. On the other 
hand, it is precisely the element of self-reference that introduces the factor 
of uncertainty: in self-consciousness, the object is identical to the subject, 
yet is distinct from it. The self is (paradoxically) the relation to the self; but 
(even more paradoxically) it is the negation of the self. fu Hegel says, "The 
ego determines itself insofar as it is the relating of negativity to itself."1 
How, then, can we argue for any sort of certainty in connection with 
self-consciousness? It will not do to say that self-consciousness has a degree 
of certainty relative to consciousness in general, and a greater uncertainty 
with respect to pure reason. We must not think the answer comes in say­
ing that we now have a "greater" certainty in comparison to what has gone 
before, but that we have not as yet attained the degree of certainty that 
characterizes what lies ahead-as though there were an uninterrupted and 
graduated continuum. On the contrary, what Hegel aims to show is that 
there is a quite determinate certainty attached to self-consciousness in 
itself-despite the problematicity that must lead us to subsequent {i.e., 
higher) stages of consciousness. 
In the Phenomenology the broad heading of "Self-Consciousness" 
79 

80 • Leo Rauch 
comprises only the fourth chapter: "The Truth of Self-Certainty." The two 
titles have the same reference (i.e., the same set of pages), but do they also 
have the same meaning? What sort of certainty is involved here? 
There are numerous ways in which self-consciousness differs from 
consciousness in general. For one thing, consciousness in general involves 
an object that consciousness relates to as something other than conscious­
ness, and such objectivity is to that extent impersonal; self-consciousness, 
on the other hand, not only has consciousness itself as its object, but that 
consciousness is its own. It is in that consciousness of itself that it grasps 
its personhood. Moreover, the so-called sense-certainty about ordinary 
objects is problematic, conflict-ridden and not certain at all; self-certainty, 
on the other hand, seems secure because consciousness has directed itself 
to its own activity. Turned outward to the world, consciousness cannot 
find its footing; turned inward, it has certainty since it knows itself as 
nothing else-and as it can know nothing else! 
When we direct our attention to external objects and are "certain" of 
them, we take them to be what they are in themselves. Yet this "taking" 
(the German word for "perceiving" is ᅏhrnehmen-literally, "taking [for] 
true") is a mistaking: the supposed object in itself is only what it is for 
another, the Perceiver. The erstwhile "certainty" must therefore give way 
to truth. Hegel has expressed this in the formula: "Self-consciousness is 
the truth of consciousness."2 Not only does this mean that the contradic­
tions of ordinary consciousness are here overcome; it also means that the 
"certainty" of ordinary consciousness is here shown up as a false certainty. 
(This is another feature of the "inverted world.") 
In self-consciousness, however, certainty is identical to truth. This 
certainty itself is now its own object, thereby providing its own truth. 
Here the known object corresponds to the concept by which it is known: 
consciousness qua object (i.e., for another, for the consciousness that 
knows it) is identical to what it is in itsel£ The knowing "I" is the know­
er and the known. 
If all this seems paradoxical, it is nothing less than the paradoxicality 
inherent in all self-consciousness per se. As we saw, the self is nothing but 
the relation to the self (a thought echoed by Kierkegaard at the beginning 
of Sickness Unto Death). That is, the self is self-awareness. Of course, the 
- self will seek to overcome this paradoxicality about itself by trying to base 
its selfhood on recognition by another, so that the other person bestows 
my selfhood upon me. Thus, the two sides of the individual have become 
two individuals (a leap that Hegel makes no attempt to justify). Yet this 

Self-Consciousness and Self-Certainty • 81 
means that the self is not merely a self-relation but an adversary-relation: 
the recognition of oneself requires the recognition of others; my recogni­
tion of another involves the recognition of difference; the recognition of 
difference leads to the question of who is superior, who will dominate; and 
this leads to a test by open conflict, a life-and-death struggle.3 In theory, 
then, self-consciousness is complete in itself. In practice, it looks for sup­
port elsewhere, and in seeking support it finds strife. 
There are further elements of paradox. As we saw, the ordinary per­
ception of objects involves both the particularity and the universality of 
the object. (This table is a table, i.e., an instance of a type.) There is also 
"the empty inner" (das leere lnnere) of the understanding, whereby its con­
tent entails vacuity, at least the vacuity of passive receptivity as an aspect 
of its activity. Moreover, as we saw, its positing is a negating. All these ele­
ments of ordinary consciousness, problematic as they are, are carried over 
into self-consciousness and become even more problematic there. (Thus, 
what happens if I say that this consciousness of mine is a consciousness? 
Can I experience it as an instance of a type? And can I genuinely speak of 
an empty inner, here?) Hegel sees these distinctions as abstractions that 
have no reality for consciousness itself, but he does see them as persisting 
into self-consciousness as residues, and (moreover) as residues that have 
become formidably substantial. 
His way out is to see self-consciousness as a process whereby we return 
to ourselves from the experience of otherness-otherness being supersed­
ed in the tautology, "I am I." Yet that tautology is itself to be superseded 
because of its abstractness. It is superseded by the concreteness of the life­
process, which embraces consciousness and the world, subject and object 
as one. 4 In the ordinary mode of consciousness, the object is otherness; 
here it is unity (the subject is object). And now the former difference 
between knower and known is no difference; the unity becomes explicit. 
Yet in that unity there is duality, since self-consciousness also has the 
world as object while it has itself as object. But just as consciousness has 
turned back to itself, the world too has turned to itself-at least in our 
eyes. We ascribe to it that same autonomy we accord to ourselves, when 
we think of the world as ongoing life. Life therefore stands opposed to 
oneself and to one's self-consciousness. The growth of self-consciousness 
therefore entails a heightening of this opposition. Life looms in one's 
awareness as one becomes more self-aware. One sees one's own independ­
ence-but one also sees it increasingly limited by the independence of 
everything and everyone else. Yet in my own independence, stemming 

82 • Leo Rauch 
from my return to myself, I achieve a self-reflection that amounts to 
infinitude. 
This infinitude is the motionless center of all else revolving around it. 
As such it overcomes all differences-even though the components of 
those differences persist as entities independent of consciousness! Indeed, 
it is their independence that lends to self-consciousness an independence 
of its own as a self-contained movement. Juxtaposed to this, there is the 
constant movement of life, taking one shape after another and presenting 
the material upon which consciousness is to act. Life is an incessant 
process of expression, of differentiation and consumption, of fragmenta­
tion and coalescence, of inertness and formative activity-a process of self­
maintenance in its own dissolution. In proceeding from its simple unity 
to its differentiation and back to unity, life points to consciousness, since 
this is the process that consciousness itself undergoes. Consciousness thus 
turns its attention to life, to observe it. The observation is as yet abstract, 
and it has to be enriched; but in turning to life as its object, consciousness 
approaches the concept of "I." In thinking oflife, consciousness thinks of 
itself and therefore of the self. 
In this way we have arrived at the concept of selfhood. In essence it is 
a simple universal. As such it seeks to overcome difference, primarily the 
difference between itself and its other. Juxtaposed to it there stands a mul­
titude of independent entities, and the ego truly becomes aware of itself 
by superseding its "other." Not only is the ego opposed to the other, it is 
also opposed to the other's independence and seeks to overcome it. This is 
why Hegel can say, quite simply, that consciousness is desire. The aim of 
desire is to overcome the otherness, the independence of that other. 
Remember that the positing is a negating, the ego's self-assertion is at the 
same time a denial of the other. By negating or destroying (vernichten) the 
other, the ego bestows certainty upon itself, a self-certainty that is now 
explicit. 
Yet as much as it seeks to negate the other, it needs the other-if only 
in order to have something to negate. (There is much that is akin to the 
character of Don Juan in all this, as Kierkegaard describes him in 
Either/Or.) But I also need the other to give me my human identity, to rec­
ognize me as person. (If this seems unreal, think of it as it is reflected in 
the problem of private language and in the problem of solipsism. I cannot 
emerge from my egocentric predicament by my own effort. Descartes 
needs God to help him out; Hegel's man needs another person.) Thus, the 
ego needs this negating activity in order to become aware of itself as ego, 

Self-Consciousness and Self-Certainty • 83 
and this means that the other must be there for it (and be there for it as 
ego)-to be negated, yet not negated! Because the other cannot be negat­
ed (not finally), it remains, and desire persists. Self-consciousness thus 
comes to realize that there is more in desire than self-consciousness 
alone-much as it continues in that desire. 
The way out of this impasse is for the ego's object to cease to be an 
object, to negate itself as mere object. This seems rather strange-namely, 
that it is up to the object to do this to itself-but since the ego is incapable 
of achieving the negation (in any ultimate sense), only the object itself can 
achieve this. It does not annihilate itself but negates its status as object. 
That is, it ceases to be the mere object it has been, and now it asserts itself 
as independent-and then it is recognized as a consciousness and a self­
consciousness. The outcome is that the self-consciousness achieves its sat­
isfaction only in another self-consciousness. The ego becomes an ego only 
by recognizing the egohood of another. 
Here we have the bridge to all that follows in the Phenomenology. It 
seems a constructive basis for an interpersonal relation. Yet this stage, nec­
essary though it is, is fraught with conflict, even a struggle to the death. 
Let us bear in mind the point noted earlier, that the self-relation is an 
adversary-relation. This becomes even more apparent in the relation 
between two egos. 
The main point is that the relation between egos, or between the ego 
and its object, is that of negation. My own independence is (for me) 
equivalent to the negation of the other's independence, of the other's oth­
erness. We now know why this cannot succeed (i.e., I need him there to 
give me my selfhood), and thus why it is that the attempt at achieving a 
complete (i.e., independent, solipsistic) self-consciousness cannot succeed 
at this stage. I cannot realize myself as an ego if I see you as nothing more 
than an illusion or dream of mine, or (worse) as something inanimate, 
inert, impersonal. The solipsist cannot exist as a person. 
We have made the transition, here, not only from consciousness to 
self-consciousness, but from consciousness to society. In my self-con­
sciousness, the object of my consciousness (myself as well as the other) 
becomes ego through that consciousness. The "I" becomes "We" -and this 
is where the realm of human spirituality begins. The next step is to see 
what it is for the "I" to experience the "We." 
Before we go on to discuss the passage on Mastery and Slavery, there 
is much to be commented upon in the passage discussed so far (and we 
can here take up only a few of the main points). To begin with, we ought 

84 • Leo Rauch 
to bear in mind that what Hegel is giving us is not metaphysics but phe­
nomenology. That is, he is not concerned (here in chapter IV) to expound 
a metaphysics of absolute idealism, which purports to demonstrate the 
career of reason in the world, as it makes its way through Nature and 
Spirit. Rather, he is concerned here with the experience of consciousness, 
and with its problematic character as it is experienced. The divisions a 
metaphysics might offer do not present themselves to experience as divi­
sions, and therefore they are not the subject matter of phenomenology. 
From the standpoint of most metaphysical systems, there is no special 
ontological status to be accorded to self-consciousness (as distinct from 
consciousness as such)-so long as there are vestigial divisions such as sub­
ject/object, knower/known, etc. For Kant, the transcendental unity of 
apperception is a function of self-consciousness, but only insofar as it 
makes possible our consciousness of an object as something other than 
consciousness. 5 This is diametrically opposed to Hegel's view, which holds 
not only that consciousness of a thing is possible only for self-conscious­
ness, but that self-consciousness alone is the truth of the various shapes 
that consciousness takes on. 
Because self-consciousness occupies no special ontological status in 
most metaphysical systems, and yet the subject/object distinction prevails 
in one form or another, the concept of truth continues to pose an almost 
insoluble problem. It seems that there is no "place" for truth in the world­
inventory (which is perhaps why, in medieval philosophy, truth had to be 
accorded the status of a "transcendental" category). Hegel nevertheless can 
and does declare that self-consciousness is truth's own territory. Truth is no 
longer an area foreign to consciousness, hopefully to be penetrated under 
favorable conditions, i.e., when the mind conforms to reality, or the sub­
ject conforms to the "independently existing" object. On the contrary, 
since the object is the subject (in self-consciousness), the objective truth 
apprehended by consciousness is identical to subjectivity as well. 
Phenomenology, as the study of the experience of consciousness, therefore 
examines the area in which truth is manifested and is self-consciously 
grasped. 
A further point: The Phenomenology has presented a rather dry expo­
sition so far-altogether theoretical and more often than not obscure. Yet 
with the phenomenological concern with self-consciousness, along with 
the attention given to life and desire, it is inevitable that the theoretical 
exposition should lead into a scenario, a script in which these complex ele­
ments are given concrete embodiment. We have gone from the formal to 

Self-Consciousness and Self-Certainty • 85 
the contextual; from philosophy to something like drama, as its fulfill­
ment. (Hyppolite speaks of the Phenomenology as a philosophical novel.)6 
Now, quite apart from the dramatic value of the master-slave episode, 
we may well wonder to what extent it is consistent with what has gone 
before, and is a necessary development of the foregoing. In discussing the 
special nature of self-consciousness, along with the problems it generates, 
we may well ask whether that discussion is at all illuminated by the 
"dramatization." AB we saw, Hegel goes from a division within the indi­
vidual to an opposition between individuals (i.e., the psychological 
"other" becomes the "other" person). What makes for consistency between 
the exposition and the dramatization is the fact that there are the parallels 
we have discussed: life extending itself and returning to itself, as con­
sciousness does; consciousness itself going-characteristically-from 
abstraction to concreteness; and consciousness going from itself to a con­
sciousness ofitself, then to self, and then to another self. What is central, 
however, is that Hegel ceases discussing the ego in isolation. To discuss it 
as functioning at all is to discuss its relation to its object; but this must lead 
to further discussion of it in relation to another ego as object. Thus, there 
seems to be an epistemological necessity in what Hegel is doing. The 
implication is that any attempt at a discussion of the isolated ego must 
lead to solipsism, which is as untenable as a theory as it is in reality. It 
therefore follows that a confrontation of egos is the next inevitable step in 
the discussion. 
We saw that a self-consciousness relates (properly speaking) only to 
another self-consciousness. This is where the paradoxicalness of its self­
relatedness is overcome. The ego, in its autonomy, would no doubt prefer 
solipsisim. We have seen why solipsism is impossible. It is impossible not 
only because the ego's view of itself leads nowhere if merely directed 
inward, but because all self-consciousness is simultaneously directed out­
ward as a way of returning to itself and its own selfhood. Only another ego 
grants me my selfhood-by reflecting mine. What follows this insight of 
Hegel's is the dialectical playing-out of the tension between the ego's 
autonomy and its dependence. 
A further question can be asked: What relation is there between the 
philosophical concept of self-consciousness and a social relation?7 The 
question points to the problematic relation between subjectivity and inter­
subjectivity. A possible answer is forthcoming if we take note of the argu­
ments against social solipsism (and its ramifications, as in the private 
language problem). Ego expresses itself in desire, and desire subsists in 

86 • Leo Rauch 
mutual recognition. Thus, all having to do with the ego involves other 
egos, just as all social interaction involves self-consciousness (qua ego). 
Being-for-self is being-for-another, and vice versa. The in-itself is that for 
which another is in-itsel£ This too is paradoxical, for how can another per­
son's identity in itself depend upon its being there for another? This is the 
overarching paradox that is posed by the notion of self-consciousness, and 
which the master-slave episode is intended to resolve. 

7 
MASTERY AND SLAVERY 
(Para. 13-31) 
This section begins with a paradoxical statement that sums up what has 
gone before: "Self-consciousness exists in and for itselfby virtue of the fact 
that it is in and for itself for another." (Das Selbstbewusstsein ist an und for 
sich, indem und dadurch, dass es fur ein anderes an und fur sich ist.) Self-con­
sciousness exists only in being recognized-i.e., recognized as the expres­
sion of personhood. But the recognition of my personhood is forthcoming 
from another. The other, who is to bestow personhood upon me, must be 
an independent person himself-yet he cannot be independent because he 
looks to me to accord personhood upon him. (One way out of this 
impasse, I suppose, is to conceive of God as altogether independent and 
needing no prior recognition in order to bestow personhood upon us all.) 
Among human beings, then, personhood must be what it cannot be. This 
is its special ontological status: the only independent self-existence the ego 
can have is precisely in its dependence on another ego! 
Independence and dependence are what this section is about, its full 
title being "Independence and Dependence of Self-Consciousness: 
Mastery and Slavery." (I use the terms master and slave rather than lord and 
bondsman, because the latter terms carry a feudal connotation, which plays 
no part in Hegel's discussion.)' 
We have arrived at the peculiar concept known as recognition. 
Although its application appears altogether individual and subjective, it 
provides the objective basis for social existence. The status bestowed 
87 

88 • Leo Rauch 
involves no more than a spiritual predicate, yet that status is more bind­
ing than any natural property or physical predicate could be. The recog­
nition is as person, and Hegel builds his view of culture on that concept. 
We may therefore feel that there are two linked questions to be asked: 
First, how can mere self-consciousness lead to recognition as person (i.e., 
how can form produce content)? Second, how can the individual concept 
of person lead to the collective concept of culture? The answer to the sec­
ond question is presented in the discussion of Stoicism, Skepticism, and 
the Unhappy Consciousness, where we are made to see that what charac­
terizes these cultural expressions is their emergent views of the individual. 
In answer to the first question, Hegel gives us a scenario wherein recogni­
tion emanates from the clash of egos, and that dash involves a competi­
tive struggle for selfhood. 
As to the link between the two questions, we may well appreciate the 
insight of George Armstrong Kelly, to the effect that the master-slave 
episode is essentially Platonic, because what is involved here is the primal 
cleavage in the history of society and the history of the ego.2 That is, 
Plato's approach to the state and the soul as parallel-i.e., the state as "the 
soul writ large" -is here reflected in the master-slave episode taken as a 
microcosm of society. Thus there is one struggle operating on two 
planes-which is why that struggle must be seen in broader than psycho­
logical terms. The recognition does not emerge as the effect of psycholog­
ical causes alone; rather, it is seen to emerge in a phenomenological 
framework, wherein that concept arises in the experience of self-conscious­
ness and in the dash of such experiences. Once the psychological fence has 
been breached, we can see the episode as the bridge to a human history. 
What Hegel is presenting here is a microsociety composed of two 
members. The only basis for their interrelation is the desire for individual 
recognition-the desire on the part of each for the acknowledged status as 
person-and, as we saw, this leads to mortal combat between them. Not 
only is this status the issue being fought over, it is the one and only value 
to be assigned. Thus, we are not dealing with a merely aggressive creature 
(as in Hobbes), nor with a naturally acquisitive creature (as in Locke), and 
certainly not with a primordially solitary creature (as in Rousseau). In and 
of themselves, none of these models would necessarily produce a human­
ized individual through combat. For Hegel, however, it is precisely that 
status of humanness that is at issue in the primal struggle. From this (in 
Hegel's view), all other social values and devices will follow. Everything 
stems, originally, from desire. But it is a desire aiming not merely at the 

Mastery and Slavery • 89 
acquisition of some inert object.3 Rather, what it is aiming at is the union 
of the "I" with itself. And in desiring its own selfhood, self-consciousness 
is thus providing a basis for an interpersonal relation and eventual social 
life. 
In the ego's initial confrontation with another ego (such that its inde­
pendence is precisely in its dependence), the ego has come out of itself and 
has thereby lost itself (i.e., lost its self-enclosure), but it now sees itself 
reflected in the other. Now, in this twofold identification (i.e., for itself 
and for another), the self-conscious ego wants to eliminate the other in 
order to establish its own independence. But if it succeeds in this it will be 
eliminating itself, because the other is itself (i.e., the source of its self­
hood). As a result, the ego returns to itself-but then the other withdraws 
and returns to itself. 
All this is further complicated by the fact that what we have just seen 
is not a unilateral action of one ego with respect to another. Rather, it is 
an action of total reciprocity, so that each of the two is seen as acting in 
the same way toward his other. Each must be understood to be totally 
unhindered in his actions at this point-otherwise, what happens next 
could not take place. I say "unhindered," not "free," since neither one is 
genuinely free at this point; if he were, he could provide his own recogni­
tion. The two egos are "unhindered," even though they are entirely locked 
into the scenario that is being played out. 
Another complication is that each one's action is as much directed at 
himself as it is directed at the other-so that what we have is a manifold 
duplication and reduplication of stances: Each one is unhindered, yet is 
determined by the other (since each one is dependent upon the other). 
Each is what he is, yet becomes the other (since the action of each is dupli­
cated by the other). Each ego comes out of itself, yet it is in itself because 
it is for itself (since each is autonomous in its desire, and is to that extent 
self-enclosed). Each is for itself, yet it is for the other (since each is self­
aware in its desire, yet looks to the other to satisfY it). Each is for itself pre­
cisely in the other's being-for-itself (since its own autonomy is reflected in 
the autonomy of the other). Each is a being immersed in the immediacy 
of its existence, yet is mediated (since in the immediacy of each there is a 
self-mediation in which the other is the middle term). 
Thus, each sees that he is and is not the other! As Hegel says, "They 
recognize themselves as mutually recognizing one another." (Sie anerkennen 
sich, als gegenseitig sich anerkennend.) We could add to this, that they rec­
ognize themselves in mutually recognizing one another. It is a toccata and 

90 • Leo Rauch 
fugue-in which each theme is echoed in stretto and then a fifth lower, 
and so on and on, except that the counterpoint is the harmony, and vice 
versa. Through it all, there is the figured bass of the growing self-con­
sciousness; and the resounding diapason is the emergence of man as 
human. (The analogy to art is too tempting to resist. As we saw, Hyppolite 
speaks of the Phenomenology as a philosophical novel; Kelly sees the mas­
ter-slave scenario as a Bildungrroman.) 
One would like to imagine that the conflict could be avoided if one 
party were to begin by unilaterally recognizing the other-since, in any 
case, they could not simultaneously become mutually aware. But in the 
struggle for recognition, no recognition has as yet been accorded by either 
one. To that extent, they are equals before the struggle commences. 
Afterward, the positions are not at all comparable. There can be no uni­
lateral recognition before the struggle takes place, however, because each 
self-consciousness is absorbed in itself and thereby excludes all else. Each 
is the individual "I" who is not yet "We." All else (the world of objectivi­
ty, as other) stands to the ego in a negative relation, as that which is "not 
I." Yet what happens when the realm of the "other" includes not merely 
the external object but another self-consciousness making its own claim to 
selfhood? It must reject me as "other" as I reject it, and in this we have the 
seed of the eventual confrontation. 
To begin with, they seem to one another as "common objects, inde­
pendent forms," each immersed in the concerns of its own life. They do 
not as yet appear to one another as self-consciousnesses having the power 
to negate. Neither ego has as yet expressed itself as a being-for-itself Each 
is certain of itself, but since neither one has as yet recognized a similar self­
certainty in the other its own self-certainty is ungenuine. As yet, neither 
one is for the other what the other is for itself To this extent, therefore, 
they are not equal, and neither one sees himself as such. The genuine self­
certainty has not yet been grasped-and only if it were, could they see 
themselves as equal, i.e., as equally human. 
We have come to another impasse. What would be needed in order 
for us to escape it? How can self-consciousness develop on its own so that 
it could then enter into the relation that would develop it further? Since 
desire is identical to self-consciousness itself-and in self-consciousness 
one rises above one's day-to-day existence-we are eventually able to get a 
perspective on life, as such, and thus to set it up as a concept. We then are 
able to see Life as a composite entity-and thus detach ourselves from it, 
even negate it.4 But self-consciousness has not as yet developed the abili-

Mastery and Slavery • 91 
ty to operate in conceptual terms {since this requires intellectual interac­
tion, which is impossible for the isolated ego). All is as yet immanent. 
Instead of operating in conceptual terms, the ego can only procure its self­
hood by means of its activity and the mediating activity of others. Since 
such cooperation is not forthcoming, the only sort of interrelation that 
remains is that of combat. 
Jfthe ego were sufficiently developed before the combat took place, it 
might have enough of the element of negation in it to reject its depend­
ence on objective circumstances as particulars. It would thus see itself as 
an autonomous universal. Then it would show that it is not at all attached 
to its own particular life. (We can see here the germ of the Stoic/Christian 
idea, but it is even more interesting to see in this the germ of an adversary­
relation between man and God, with man negating the life given him by 
God.) Let us say that each has caught a glimpse of what its own immor­
tality would mean-shall we call it a paleolithic Bushido? Yet this is by no 
means something that could be conceptualized at this point. 
Thus, each is ready to stake his own life for the sake of his person­
hood. The point, however, is that in glimpsing one's own selfhood as inde­
pendent of one's immediate life, and thereby staking one's life, one does 
not intend to procure one's own death. On the contrary, one seeks the 
death of the other in one's own willingness to stake one's life! The result is 
that each one seeks to prove himself in a life-and-death struggle. 
At this point there occurs a quantum leap; the two egos go into over­
drive. The change is from the implicit self-consciousness, and the poten­
tial standoff, to an express self-assertion and overt clash. This is bec«use 
the two must intensifY their quest for self-certainty. As Hegel says, each 
must raise his self-certainty to truth-each one having that truth as some­
thing that is both a truth for the other and a truth for himself. What is at 
stake is nothing less than full freedom (not yet achieved) and ultimately 
the full realization of one's personhood. And since this is the ultimate of 
personal goals, it involves an act that must have everything riding on it, 
i.e., life itself. Man is not free by nature; rather, he must become free by 
his own act. 5 Yet this is not achieved through a unilateral act of inde­
pendence, since it requires recognition. Independence without recogni­
tion is empty; recognition without the contextual element of superiority is 
blind; and superiority that is not gained at the risk of life is meaningless. 
This freedom, then-i.e., independence, self-realization, autono­
my-is achieved only by staking one's life for it, and only in confrontation 
with another who is staking his life for a similar goal. One is to take that 

92 • Leo Rauch 
freedom by force-wrenching one's selfhood and self-awareness out of the 
mundane life in which these had been buried all along, and then con­
fronting that selfhood directly. There is much that is erotic, certainly, in 
the idea of the forceful taking of life, freedom, and selfhood. In Hegel, it 
reflects the prevailing cultural attitude of Sturm und Drang, foreshadow­
ing the view later expressed by Goethe at the very end of Faust II: "He 
alone deserves freedom, and life, who each day must conquer them 
anew"-and these words are pronounced by Faust, at the end of a long 
and second life, as "wisdom's ultimate conclusion" (der Weisheit letzter 
Schluss) . 
Those of us with a sound grasp of ourselves may not much sympa­
thize with this outlook, and perhaps even dismiss it as excessively roman­
tisch. Yet there are those of us who-so immersed in the details of life as 
to have lost all mastery over it-know what it is to want a way out of that 
immersion, in order to find one's individual identity and freedom. The lit­
erature of all eras is filled with this theme. And the language of struggle is 
not at all inappropriate here. 
What Hegel is saying goes beyond this, however. He says not only 
that our individuality is attained through struggle (since this could be a 
struggle against oneself or against one's circumstances). Rather, our indi­
viduality is genuinely achieved only by combat-and that this must be a 
combat with another ego also seeking individuality. It may well be, he 
admits, that the individual who has not risked his life may nonetheless be 
recognized as a person-but such recognition is not genuine, since the 
individual has not arrived at the truth of it as an independent self-con­
sciousness. We may go further and admit that individuals may arrive at 
their individuality in many ways-for example, asserting individuality in 
the face of danger, where danger is presented by the horn of a bull, or the 
mountain that must be scaled because it is there, and so on. But although 
one may have an altogether worthwhile opponent in one's own self (as the 
matador and the alpinist do), the most intense struggle is presented by the 
confrontation with another ego-precisely because the other seeks what 
you seek, and in its seeking it you are being limited, even set upon. 
Here we might ask: Why can't there be a compromise? Why can't two 
individuals achieve individuality and realize themselves in a symbiosis? 
The answer is that a compromise, a concession, means giving something 
up: I must make room for you, not only in my space but in my awareness 
as well, and then I am not altogether independent of you. Accordingly, my 
individuation entails your restriction; the assertion of my individuality 

Mastery and Slavery • 93 
means the negation of yours. This is why my self-assertion requires me to 
stake my life. 
Hegel goes even beyond this, however, to an even more remote and 
stark point. Just as each must stake his own life, so each must seek the 
other's death. This is because the self is restricted in the other, and the mir­
ror image to the concept of asserting one's own self is the concept of negat­
ing the other's self-that is, in eliminating the otherness of the other, since 
the other's selfhood is in turn the negation of oneself 
This certainly seems a specious argument, as argument. There is in it 
something like Spinoza's conflation of two different senses of infinitude: 
since God is infinite, he is the subject of an infinitude of predicates, and 
then there is nothing that is not an aspect of God and nothing that is not 
God. This is an equivocation in the meaning of "infinite," which is taken 
from a qualitative to a quantitative sense. In a similar vein, Hegel is say­
ing (1) that the self is "infinite" in its self-reflection, and that therefore (2) 
the self is "infinite" in its aim of asserting and extending itself, and that 
therefore (3) the self aims at the infinitude of its extension-so that, pre­
sumably, there is nothing that is not ego, and nothing that is not my ego. 6 
This means that (for me) every other ego is a limitation of my infinitude. 
But as soon as we see the equivocation in the qualitative and quantitative 
senses of the terms infinite and infinitude, the ego's demand for exclusivi­
ty no longer has a basis. 
A further difficulty in this equivocation stems from the fact that (for 
Hegel) the ego is infinite, yet seeks infinitude. In its search for infinitude 
(as though it did not have it), we see the roots of the ego's essential incli­
nation toward solitude: it can bear no otherness, and cannot bear being 
other for another, because it wants to be infinite or nothing-and this is 
not a function of individual psychological peculiarity but is rather the 
essence of selfhood. (Perhaps this is why men have conceived of God as a 
person who is altogether alone.) 
If every other ego is a limitation of my own, why can't I resign myself 
to that? Is it not reasonable to accept the fact of our coexistence, limiting 
though it is? Yet we must realize that here we are not speaking of the ego 
as rational, but rather of the ego in the "infancy" of its human career, prior 
to the evolution of social values such as accommodation and moderation. 
Yet we ought not to take the term infancy in a temporal sense, as though 
we were pointing to a time in the historical past. We are speaking, rather, 
of the ego in its essence-stripped of all sociocultural accretions. Take away 
(theoretically) all that has been acquired and transmitted by way of social 

94 • Leo Rauch 
experience, and you have an ego that is solitary and "infinite." And there 
cannot be two "infinite" egos-if, that is, we go along with the equivoca­
tion we spoke of (just as, for Spinoza, there cannot be two infinite entities 
in any sense). What this means is that this world just isn't big enough for 
the two of us-and therefore combat is inevitable. 
This, then, serves to explain (specious though the explanation may 
be) why each ego must-in the light of its essence-be pitted against its 
other. Another way of putting this is to say (with Hobbes) that without 
the restraints imposed by a social order, men would give vent to their nat­
ural hostility. But such a statement involves causal assumptions (psycho­
logical and other) that are beyond the purview of phenomenology. Thus, 
Hegel is not saying that presocial man is naturally aggressive; what he says 
is that a presocial ego would be (per impossibile) limited by nothing, and 
would fill out its world completely, infinitely. A confrontation (again, per 
impossibile) between such an ego and another one just like it would nec­
essarily involve encroachment, the limitation of the infinite. This is why 
there must be this mortal combat between them. We have seen why the 
aim must be death. Yet the death of either party would thwart the aims of 
both. With the death of either, neither one achieves recognition. The lone 
survivor has no one to accord him the recognition of his superiority. If he 
were capable of bestowing that recognition on himself, and if such a 
bestowal were genuine, then he would not have had to fight the other in 
the first place. 
Recognition involves a negation wherein independence is achieved. 
But this requires consciousness, and death is therefore a negation without 
such independence being achieved. In the eyes of the survivor, it is not 
enough for him to have staked his life; he also wants this acknowledged 
(by the other), so that he may then become (supposedly) a fully inde­
pendent being-for-himself. But that acknowledgment could not be forth­
coming if the vanquished were to die. Recognition demands conflict, and 
this is a form of contact. And if death puts an end to that conflict, it also 
puts an end to the contact and subsequent recognition. In death, the par­
ties are unopposed, but there is no mutuality either. Whatever negation 
there is in death, it is not the conscious negation such that the clash would 
be genuinely superseded and the supersession would be retained in the 
memory of both parties. 
Thus, each one, in seeking the other's death, is implicitly seeking to 
frustrate his own aim: to be recognized as individual, as person. The search 
for personhood itself thus seems to rule out its realization. We may ask, 

Mastery and Slavery • 95 
therefore: Is the goal itself self-contradictory? If it were, then social life 
would be pointless. Yet social life does have as its implicit aim the resolu­
tion of that "contradiction." 
Since death provides no solution in this life-and-death struggle, the 
victor will have to allow the vanquished to live. As Hegel says, "self-con­
sciousness becomes aware that life is as essential to it as is pure self-con­
sciousness." The reasons are obvious. But the loser cannot simply be set 
free, for then no recognition could be demanded or expected. He must 
therefore be enslaved, to be left alive and yet not be free, and the victor 
will be his master. 
Both have made a choice in favor of life: the victor has granted life to 
the vanquished because the victor needs the consciousness of the van­
quished; the vanquished has chosen to live in defeat rather than die, and 
that choice is part of his defeat. The crucial question now arises as to what 
sort of recognition the victor can get from the vanquished. 
Prior to the struggle it was possible to speak of a unified conscious­
ness, unified in the fact that its being in itself is its being for another. In 
our primary experience, however, that unity is shattered, and we become 
aware that the consciousness in itself is not the consciousness for another. 
That is, I now see the difference between my inner and my outer life, 
between my inner and my outer identity. But as soon as there is an outer 
identity it can become an object for the other person. He can regard it as 
a thing, and thereby make a thing of it (and of me). Thus, the situation of 
consciousness now is that of disunity, fragmentation-with one side of me 
as in itself and independent, while the other side is for another and 
dependent. 
These are mere aspects of one consciousness. Yet the two aspects also 
are (and reflect) the status of the master and the slave, respectively. They 
are the embodiments of consciousness, as though these two individuals 
were sides of one consciousness that is divided against itself.? The argu­
mentative weakness here is that Hegel is speaking on two levels at once­
the literal and the metaphoric-i.e., of aspects of consciousness and of 
masters and slaves. He exploits this ambiguity: the situation is as 
described, but it also stands for something else. But in addition to these 
two distinct levels, Hegel also speaks as though these two are identical. 
Thus, the master is consciousness existing for itself, as well as being the fig­
urative embodiment of such consciousness. But that consciousness is for 
itself in and despite the fact that it is mediated through the consciousness 
of the slave. Thus, it is for itself by means of that otherness. And that 

96 • Leo Rauch 
otherness (the slave) now is a consciousness whose nature it is to be con­
nected to thinghood, to independent objects, the things it will be work­
ing on. The master now has the things he wants, procured for him by the 
consciousness and activity of the slave. Thus, the master is a being-for-self, 
but he is also a being-for-self whose being is mediated through another. 
Again we find a duplication and reduplication: In regarding the mas­
ter's selfhood and otherness (or independence and dependence), we see 
that he himself is related to both these extremes immediately (i.e., direct­
ly) and mediately (through the activity of the slave). The master relates to 
the slave mediately (holding him enslaved through, say, the use of an 
object such as a chain, or through other means such as threats). The mas­
ter also relates to objects (e.g., his food) in this way, through the slave's 
mediating activity. 
The slave, on the other hand, relates to the thing that is independent 
of him, and whose independence he wishes to negate; yet he cannot negate 
it altogether, cannot surmount it, cannot make it entirely his own, since 
he merely works on it and does not consume it. Through the slave's medi­
ating activity, the master's relation to a thing is in the fact that he enjoys 
the use of it and negates it. When we desire a thing, it is because it resists 
us, is independent of us. This is now a problem that is overcome as far as 
the master is concerned: the slave is interposed between the master and the 
thing desired; the slave obtains it for him, and the master now enjoys it; 
whatever independent aspect there remains to the thing, this is a problem 
for the slave to handle in his work on it. 
Hegel's aim, in all this intricate dialectic, is to lead back to the ques­
tion of just what recognition the master can get. The answer can be seen 
in (a) the respective relations of the master and the slave to the material 
thing, and (b) the reification of the slave, his suppression to the status of 
thing. (These factors do not, however, determine that recognition.) 
The slave, in working on the thing, does not negate it entirely (since 
he does not both produce and consume it). The slave's negating activity is 
therefore incomplete, and with this there is an incompleteness to his self­
hood. He cannot look upon himself as man-the-maker-and-consumer, 
one who depends on nothing but his own effort and ingenuity. This lack 
suggests that he must give up some essential piece of the self-image he may 
have been hoping for. On the contrary, he sees himself as not in control of 
his surroundings or of his destiny. He is not his own being-for-self. But 
that is just how the master saw him, to begin with. Thus, as the slave abro­
gates his own being-for-self, he does to himself just what the master had 

Mastery and Slavery • 97 
done to him earlier: seeing him as less than a man. The slave cannot even 
regard his actions as his own; his actions are the master's. 
The master, as being-for-self, negates the thing. In negating it and 
being independent of it, he is what consciousness itself is in its essence: 
free of objects and of the objective world. Hegel regards this relation as 
pure and essential (and, by contrast, the slave's relation to objects as 
impure and unessential). This hinges, once again, on the idea that the ego's 
essential relation to the environing world is that of negation. 
This view is disputable, surely, and we see in due course that Hegel 
himself does not accept the matter so simply and without further ado. 
That is, the man-thing relation-in the case of the master and of the 
slave-need not necessarily be taken only in emblematic terms. Nor need 
we regard negation as the characteristic function of consciousness, to the 
exclusion of all others, such that the mastery and the enslavement are 
measured thereby. Certainly, there is considerable ambiguity attached to 
the term negation. Moreover, there are all sorts of ways (destructive, con­
structive, etc.) of saying that the world is nothing to me: e.g., the way of 
the mystic, the detached cynic, the committed revolutionary, the jaded 
epicure, the phenomenological observer, etc.-and we would be hard put 
to say that one of these is the essential relation (and the others unessential) 
merely because it involves negation. It certainly seems as though Hegel is 
using the term "negation" in an abstract way at this point-and the fact 
that he will be giving content to that term in the discussion of Stoicism, 
Skepticism, and Christianity does little to mitigate the emptiness of its use 
here. 
As to the content of recognition, Hegel suggests that genuine recog­
nition would mean that what the master does to the slave the latter does 
to himself, and what the slave does to himself he does to the master. But 
this manifold relation does not necessarily obtain. There is only the situa­
tion (as we saw) of the slave doing to himself what the master had already 
done to him. In the absence of that many-sided relation, there is only a 
partial and unequal recognition. 
Yet the relation is even more problematic than this. The struggle for 
recognition involved (at least) the tacit assumption that whoever won, the 
recognition of the victor's superiority would be forthcoming from the 
other party, and that that recognition would be freely given by a free and 
independent individual. How else is recognition to be of any value? The 
selfhood of the victor was going to be assured by just such recognition. Yet 
We now know that although the parties were unhindered prior to the 

98 • Leo Rauch 
struggle, they were by no means free; on the contrary, their respective free­
dom was as yet to be established by the struggle (demonstrating that each, 
in staking his life, is free of its particularity). The outcome, however, is 
anything but this-since a new interrelation is established now, linking 
the two in a mutual dependence that leaves them anything but free. 
A similar fate befalls their equality: Let us remember that the battle 
begins with the parties being equal, and each wishing to prove his superi­
ority (and thus his inequality) with respect to the other. And now, after the 
enslavement of the vanquished, the master finds that the recognition he is 
getting is not from an equal. Recognition from an equal is the only recog­
nition worth having, and he cannot have it, because he has made the slave 
his inferior. (Thus, the aims of proving superiority and of gaining recog­
nition are incompatible.) As a result, the victor's own sense of selfhood suf­
fers. Instead of the truth of self-certainty, he is aware that in receiving 
recognition from someone who is now his inferior, his own consciousness 
and action are now unessential and ungenuine. The victory is hollow. 8 
The master had thought of himself as independent. This was how he 
saw himself in his power of negation. That self-image now turns out to be 
a false one (which is why I pointed out that Hegel does not accept the 
equation of consciousness and negation without further ado). The master's 
"independent" consciousness now sees its truth in the dependent con­
sciousness of the slave. As dependent, it is not a genuinely free self-con­
sciousness. And to the extent that the slave's dependent self-consciousness 
is not genuine, the master's self-consciousness (which depends on the 
slave's for recognition) is doubly dependent and inauthentic. The master's 
nature has therefore turned out to be the reverse of what he aimed for: He 
wanted recognition from someone who is his equal. We have seen why the 
element of equality is ruled out. He also wanted the other's recognition as 
an outward recognition freely given; but the slave is free in only an inward 
sense-and as "free" in that special sense, no recognition can be demand­
ed of him from that inward source. 
The slave, in being suppressed, turns inward into himself and 
becomes independent in that way (i.e., in his thoughts). Up to a point, 
then, the independent master is the slave's reality, pervading what he 
thinks and does. But here the master's power is not infinite; the slave does 
have an inner area of independence. But then the slave grasps the idea that 
independence, per se, is the ultimate value, i.e., of being-for-self with the 
capacity of negation. The question now is whether he can apply this idea 
to himself. In any event, the slave does experience this independence when 

Mastery and Slavery • 99 
he is in danger of death: he has found himself in such fear and uncertain­
ty that nothing remains stable and sure for him; in the fact that his life is 
completely in the hands of the master, usable at the will of the master, the 
slave has become a mere "object" for the master; but then everything melts 
away in this terror and suppression, so that the slave is left with nothing 
but his own being-for-self and the power to negate-precisely the charac­
teristics of the master! 
In other words, the slave is driven to the point at which he has noth­
ing further to lose-and then he is free, he is the master of everything. He 
may or may not have arrived at an explicit grasp of his own being-for-self 
and his capacity co negate; yet they are implicitly there in his experience 
as slave. These facets are implicit, also, in all consciousness as such, inso­
far as it is free of all external circumstances, and finds its autonomy in 
negating all its ties to the environing world. 
Hegel says chat the slave negates his ties to the world through his 
work-thereby, in a sense, liberating himself from it (but only in a sense, 
since he cannot surmount the object's independence completely). 
Certainly, the slave has no ties to the world in the sense of owning any­
thing in it. Yet (in my view) neither of these forms of negation is in any 
way a liberation. What we have here is not, for example, the negation that 
is achieved by the prisoner in Plato's cave, in his spiritual/intellectual 
ascent to a higher reality. The difference between Plato's prisoner and 
Hegel's slave is that the negation attained by the former involves a freedom 
grasped in an all-embracing vision, while for the latter any "negation" of 
the world is merely piecemeal and only emphasizes his enslavement where­
in nothing of the world was his to begin with. The former rejects the real­
ity he has had; the latter never had anything to reject. To say, therefore, 
that the slave's work is his liberation, that it frees him or dignifies him, is 
(in my view) to speak more myth than truth. Labor frees and dignifies 
when it is free and dignified. 
There is another way of looking at this: When Hegel speaks of the lib­
erating effect of work, we might want to read him as speaking in the per­
son of the slave. Then the view expressed need not be taken as Hegel's own, 
but as a characterization of how the slave looks upon his own work. 
Presumably, the slave (not Hegel) would eventually come to see how false 
this view is-and this realization would explain his need to go on to 
Stoicism, Skepticism, and Christianity. This interpretation seems sensible, 
and it exonerates Hegel of the mistaken view that the slave's work, as such, 
is liberating. It is in any case very uncharacteristic of Hegel to adopt that 

100 • Leo Rauch 
view, since it is so formalistic. It ignores the contextual aspect of the pur­
pose of the work, the setting in which it is done, and so on. I have no way 
of assuring myself that the alternate interpretation (namely that we are 
hearing the slave's thoughts, not Hegel's) is a viable one. Certainly, there 
are other reasons why the slave goes on to Stoicism, etc. Yet if this inter­
pretation is cogent, then we could possibly excuse other apparent myths as 
myths held by the slave. 
A further myth is that the slave, in working on a thing, makes it his 
own because he has put "himself" into it. True, the slave gives shape to 
the thing by working on it, and this "shaping" is all the more permanent 
the more independent the thing. Further, it may well be true that the 
slave's praxis is tied up with his individuality. But this does not warrant 
the conclusion Hegel draws, namely that the slave thereby comes to see 
his own independence in the independe'lce of the object he works on. On 
the contrary, the object's independence ojbim (in a material and a socioe­
conomic sense) only emphasizes, once again, the slave's situation of 
enslavement. 
It is true that the master's relation to the thing is evanescent and that 
the slave's is more real since he has worked on it. But this in no way justi­
fies our belief that the thing is somehow his-any more than it would jus­
tify his belief to that effect. His enslavement drives him inward, and 
perhaps gives him a more intense awareness of himself-but this is also an 
awareness of his captivity. 
We are thereby led from the grotesque view tacitly embodied in the 
slogan, "Work makes free," to the even more grotesque implication that 
"Slavery makes free." Note that when we speak of work here, it is not the 
fulfilling work of the independent and creative craftsman; on the contrary, 
the work of the slave can be expected to be anything but the creative 
"shaping" Hegel speaks of, and rather the simple and repetitive work that 
is soul-destroying to the slave, and that only accentuates his enslavement 
(as I have_ argued). 
I suppose that the slave could derive some satisfaction from the fact 
that he can "manage" in a way the master perhaps cannot: that is, the slave 
knows how to light a fire and cook food, and in this regard the master is 
helpless without him. This might be seen as diminishing the enslavement 
by giving the slave a say in regard to what and how to cook, etc. Yet liber­
ation is two-valued: you are free or you are not-and being able to work 
with natural objects does not, in and of itself, confer freedom or make you 
a free agent in any respect. 

Mastery and Slavery • 101 
In Hegel's view, the slave arrives at an awareness (of his selfhood) that 
is altogether unique. His enslavement has made him conscious of what the 
terms freedom and dignity mean-and in an appreciation the master can­
not match. The slave knows these as the achievements of spirituality and 
inwardness, as the master never can know them. Further, the shaping the 
slave gives the thing is the expression of his own pure selfhood, while the 
master has never (presumably) experienced this relation to a thing. 
Moreover, the slave is the one who, by discovering what selfhood is, has 
discovered what spiritual freedom is. It is he, then, who can surmount his 
situation (i.e., in a spiritual sense) and create culture. It is he alone who 
can give shape to history, and surmount that as weli.9 
Hegel has given us a picture of man as self-creating, through work and 
praxis. Yet this is not, in Hegel's view, a process in one direction (outward) 
only. Rather, man is also seen as self-creating in directing himself inward. 
And if, paradoxically, the self is a relation that relates itself to its own self, 
then we become human by knowing that we are human. What is valuable 
and important in this section is the way Hegel has shown us the genesis of 
humanness. (We might do well to consider some of the parallels and con­
trasts between the slave and Adam: Adam has acquired a component of 
humanness: moral guilt; the slave has acquired humanness itself. Adam's 
acquisition is, of course, sinful, and is therefore mediated by the presence 
of God; the slave's achievement is entirely his own, not even mediated by 
the master, and as his own it is human all the more.) 
We are shown, also, that humanness is ephemeral, emanating from a 
very indeterminate recognition, as evanescent as spirit itself. Further, we 
are shown that recognition is the essential feature and bond in all social 
relatedness, and as such it is entirely dialectical. That is, it is self-contra­
dictory, arising in its conflict with itself and opposition to its aims, and 
thus pressing us toward a resolution at a higher level of awareness. Above 
all, recognition is shown to be not a merely mechanical nexus between 
automata, but rather the acknowledgment, between humans, of human­
ness. 
It is Hegel's achievement to have shown us how this must arise­
almost in spite of itself, yet with a logical necessity-out of the human 
social setting. The higher stage of that humanness is arrived at through 
inwardness, as the opening to freedom. 
We must now go on to consider the forms that process-the slave's 
internalization and liberation-can take. 


8 
STOICISM, SKEPTICISM, AND 
THE UNHAPPY CONSCIOUSNESS 
(Para. 32-65) 
The Phenomenology presents a "natural history of consciousness"-in the 
sense of recapitulating the essential stages it has passed through. 1 Of 
course, the term natural history is not at all to be taken in its convention­
al sense (e.g., a scientific depiction of man's transition from Paleolithic to 
Neolithic technology). Rather, we are given a phenomenological picture of 
the career of consciousness as it meets its contradictions and overcomes 
them. Thus, the picture is unified by the element of dialectic. The patterns 
of conflict and resolution, nascent in consciousness, are here made explic­
it. The structure of the ego's relation to the world, to another ego, and to 
itself are here exposed. 
That is why the master-slave passage is presented in the form of a sce­
nario: certain essential relations (and their consequences) are displayed 
and their inner logic is revealed. The picture shows its content, but shows 
it as a sequence whose steps are linked by necessity. Thus, we take some­
thing like the concept of desire, we see that this is implicit in all self-con­
sciousness as such, and then we present it in its explicit unfolding through 
a clash of personalities. These personalities are altogether removed from 
any particular sociocultural matrix: they are neither Apollonian nor 
Dionysian, neither ancient nor modern. 
The objection might be raised that there are no such isolated individ­
uals-since all men are members of one society or another. Yet that objec­
tion is not a telling one, once we realize that psychology (for example) 
103 

1 04 • Leo Rauch 
studies behavior as such-and it need not even be human behavior, let 
alone behavior in a particular social or cultural setting. What Hegel is 
doing, then, ought to be accepted as perfectly respectable, even from the 
standpoint of the social sciences of our own time. He is directing our 
attention to certain essential aspects of human consciousness and interac­
tion, quite apart from accidental details of culture, place, or time. 
Moreover, we are shown these essential aspects in the process of their log­
ical development (as I said). What the Phenomenology presents, then, is 
what I would call the "trajectory of essences." 
Perhaps the most important part of that "natural history of con­
sciousness" involves the evolution of the ego. In its essence, the ego evolves 
in the struggle of consciousness with itself-represented in the struggle of 
self-consciousness with its "other." fu we have seen, it is a moot point 
whether the two parties to the struggle are (for Hegel) two sides of one self­
consciousness or two individuals. The master-slave episode is the struggle 
between two egos and between subject and object within self-conscious­
ness itselfl 
The point we have reached is the subjugation of one of these parties 
by its other. We have seen that the victor does not achieve selfhood: the 
recognition he receives is unsatisfactory, yet he is not driven inward into 
his own psyche, to seek recognition there (since nothing external compels 
him inward). On the other hand, the slave has been forced into his own 
psyche {since he is oppressed by external factors). The master cannot 
accept the slave's recognition-not only because it comes from an inferi­
or, but also because the master senses that the slave has an inner side, and 
that whatever recognition is forthcoming will not be a genuine expression 
of the slave's feelings. Thus, recognition from the slave is unacceptable, 
and not merely because it isn't from the heart; it is unacceptable because 
there is a "heart," an inner life to which the master has no access. 
The slave's inner life is still rudimentary, however. His psychic struc­
ture stands somewhere between Freud's version of the ego and the super­
ego, i.e., between the reality principle and the subsequent internalization 
of the ego ideal. Thus, the slave has not yet arrived at full selfhood, 
although the materials are there. What matters is how the slave will syn­
thesize his selfhood out of these materials. What part of that material is 
conceptual? What part concrete? What part is rational? What part emo­
tional? 
Slave consciousness, with its weak grasp of its own selfhood, does not 
yet have a firm concept of the "1," such that it (his consciousness) would 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 105 
see its various aspects as those of one ego and see that ego expressing itself 
in a multiplicity of ways. What is missing in the slave, therefore, is a per­
spectival conception of his own ego in its unity and diversity. The con­
ception he does have is diffuse-and we may regard such world outlooks 
as Stoicism, Skepticism, and Christianity as attempts to respond to that 
problem: namely, how to focus the concept of the ego so that we see its 
many-sided aspects as expressions of one central consciousness. Eventually 
we will see self-consciousness in its full freedom, as it comes to take con­
cern with itself, seeks self-recognition within itself, and is not content with 
recognition from its erstwhile "other." 
Hegel deals with these world outlooks as held (theoretically) by any 
human being who has been driven inward to face his consciousness when 
his outer world gives no support to his selfhood. Selfhood includes inde­
pendence, and if slave consciousness needs any examples of what inde­
pendence means, it finds it reflected (albeit inadequately) in the artifact it 
has made. This object is inert, self-enclosed, in itself; it has an enviable 
durability and is impervious to pain. There is also the example of the mas­
ter-although the master's independence is not fully real. Both examples 
are merely partial ones: the object is self-enclosed, but is not self-con­
scious; the master is "superior," but he has not attained inwardness. The 
slave has not as yet come to unifY his own self with a notion of selfhood 
he could conceptualize; he does not as yet think of himself as something 
to be thought about. 
We, however, as phenomenological observers, know that the self and 
its thought of itself are coextensive. The slave must find a way of attach­
ing his selfhood to his thinking about himself. When the self thinks of 
itself, and is aware that that thought about itself is the essence of its self­
hood, then it has attained genuine infinitude and freedom. Formally, it is 
the subject becoming an object for itself, and being identical with itself, 
and seeing this as the essence of its identity. But it is not merely a formal 
relation. On the contrary, it is a concrete mode of self-relatedness: its con­
tent is the ego, which is there as knower, as known, and as knower know­
ing its own self-knowing, but in a way that bears on its activity in the 
world. This is why Hegel speaks of it as "a new form of self-consciousness" 
(eine neue Gestalt des Selbstbewusstseins). This is what must come about. 
Heretofore, the slave has lived the problem of self-consciousness-in 
terms of confrontation, struggle, and submission. From here onward, he 
is no longer only a living self-consciousness, but a thinking self-conscious­
ness.2 

This must be grasped in existential terms, however. We are not con­
cerned here with the abstract ego cogito and the epistemological claims it 
can pose. Rather, our concern is with self-consciousness directed at its own 
being-for-self, and in such a way that the self can grasp its own self-con­
sciousness and freedom as the essence of its being. Thus, the process of 
internalization is such that the slave is now aware of himself as a thinking 
being, and he sees this as the basis of his freedom. 
This is an evaluative concept, not a purely theoretical one. Even when 
we say (in purely formal terms) that the subject is its own object, we mean 
that it is immediately present to itself and that this presentness is its free­
dom. Thus, its formal self-presence provides a content for its thought about 
itself: I am human, and as such I am free. This unity-of subject and 
object-occurs first in thinking, where being-for-itself and being-in-itself 
are one (even if this unity is, to begin with, conceived only in broadly uni­
versal terms). 
What we are seeing is not only the ego's effort to break out of its 
servile consciousness; it is also the ego's first faltering attempt to concen­
trate itself and thus bring itself into being as a self-reflecting identity. One 
way to achieve that concentration is to isolate the ego from everything 
extraneous to it. Presumably, by stripping the ego of all its social accretions 
we are left with nothing but the ego itself-an onion-layer model, where 
the ultimate center is emptiness and freedom. 
a) When we spell this out in theoretical and moral terms, we find that 
it is precisely the outlook of Stoicism. In that view, consciousness is think­
ing, and as such it is free of all determinants and is a law unto itself. 
Nothing is good or bad, but thinking makes it so. There is no objective 
good or evil; all values stem from consciousness alone. Everything other 
than consciousness is regarded as unessential to consciousness. All social 
differences-especially the difference between master and slave-are reject­
ed as illusions. The one and only reality is the individual consciousness. 
The idea that one's selfhood is to depend upon recognition by someone else 
is now seen as a totally false idea, since every consciousness is autonomous. 
Underlying this outlook is the belief that there is a common human­
ity shared by all mankind, a human nature; and therefore everyone ought 
to act in accordance with that humanity and with nature. The idea of a 
shared humanness is one obvious way of transcending the difference 
between master and slave-and it is significant that in Stoicism's later peri­
od its two leading proponents were a freed slave (Epictetus) and an 
emperor (Marcus Aurelius). 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 107 
For Stoicism, the highest value is freedom (i.e., inner, psychological 
freedom)-and all men, master or slave, face the fundamental problem of 
how to attain it. Existentially, this freedom is manifested in the negation 
of all prior relations. 3 Conceptually, freedom is defined as indifference 
(apatheia), whereby we have overcome all concern with externals, so that 
the self can retreat into its own thought. Will and desire are marks of 
attachment to the world, a spiritual enslavement-and it is from this 
enslavement that Stoicism seeks to release us. 
Hegel points out that historic Stoicism could appear only at a time of 
"universal fear and slavery," but that this was also a time when thought was 
sophisticated enough to conceive of an answer in broadly philosophical 
terms. This historic expression of Stoicism is not the phenomenological 
stage he is here considering, i.e., the stage into which the slave is emerg­
ing in its slowly evolving grasp of human selfhood. Obviously, Hegel is 
not saying that historic Stoicism is in any sense the philosophy of primi­
tives trying to get their egos together, or that all slaves will necessarily 
come to adopt this philosophy as their characteristic attitude. We can even 
say that his argument does not depend upon the historical existence of the 
Stoic movement, since we are not speaking of history but of essences. 
Perhaps it is best to say that Stoicism happens to coincide with the devel­
opment of the ego so far-and that if there were no Stoicism there for it, 
it would have been necessary to invent it. In any case, Hegel does not pre­
sume to encapsulate the entire 500-year history of Stoicism-with its 
physics, logic, and ethics-as a phenomenon answering to the contingent 
needs of some developing persons. What is important is that the Stoic out­
look embodies the next essential stage in the itinerary of consciousness. 
The trouble with the Stoic outlook {as Hegel sees it) is that when it 
regards everything besides consciousness as irrelevant to it, the ego itself is 
regarded abstractly. It is what it is, no matter what. Recognition, on this 
account, is a false basis for a shared life, since it asks us to seek our self­
definition in a source other than ourselves. Stoicism errs in the opposite 
direction: nothing delineates the ego but the ego alone; the "otherness" is 
within the ego itself. Yet this is grasped in abstract terms only, withdrawn 
from one's immediate situation and from concrete life. 
For this reason, the freedom that Stoicism proposes is (in reality) only 
an abstract freedom, since it says that one's actual enslavement is irrele­
vant. The slave is told: You are free in your thoughts. But this is a freedom 
that is not fully materialized-since the slave remains a slave, and thus 
cannot truly be the originator of his own actions. The genuine freedom is 

J OB • Leo Rauch 
that of the free agent, who acts by no directives but his own-a luxury that 
no actual slave can attain. If (following Kant) what characterizes us as 
human is that we can give ourselves a moral law and then act upon it, then 
the slave has not yet realized his humanity. 
Stoicism could not provide a thought content for that theoretical free­
dom (apart from the thought that we are free). Its values were merely 
reduced to another abstract value: i.e., reasonableness. But this too is with­
out content. It is one of those wire armatures that have yet to have clay 
put on them, to be fleshed out, and this never happened in historic 
Stoicism. Its abstractness makes it tedious, Hegel says. Accordingly, 
Stoicism's "other" is (ultimately) the content that remains forever outside 
its own formalism. That otherness is the entire world, and it is never 
negated entirely, as the Stoics had wished. 
b) Skepticism is able to realize in a concrete way what Stoicism grasped 
only abstractly. Thus Stoicism spoke of freeing the mind of all attachment 
to externals, but Skepticism actually put this into practice, by showing 
that the mind can know nothing fixed or definite about the world. 
Stoicism preached an indifference (apatheia) that is emotive. Skepticism 
goes beyond this, to speak of an impassivity (ataraxia) that is cognitive. 
What Skepticism has arrived at, therefore, is a negative knowledge, know­
ing that it cannot know-and in this an even fuller freedom is attained. 
The thinking ego has thus withdrawn even farther into itself: the external 
world is now unknowable, in addition to being irrelevant. 
We can see a reciprocal relation here: the sense of selfhood is inverse­
ly proportional to one's attachment to the world; and if the detachment 
operates not only on evaluative but also on epistemic grounds, then the 
sense of selfhood is correspondingly intensified. Thought does not merely 
negate the world, it annihilates it (in Hegel's phrase) by seeing no possi­
bility for us to make affirmative contact with the world, let alone encom­
pass it. 
We can therefore say that Skepticism makes a twofold contribution to 
the development of self-consciousness: first, Skepticism emphasizes the 
ego's focus on itself by severing the ego's evaluative and epistemic connec­
tion to the world (i.e., nothing is objectively good or evil; nothing can be 
known definitely); and second, in its negation of those ties to the world, 
Skepticism echoes the negating capacity of consciousness itself. 
For Skepticism, then, there are no objective distinctions in knowledge 
or values; the only distinctions are those made by the thinking conscious­
ness. The freedom of self-consciousness is therefore all the greater. 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 109 
Thought is close to infinite here, since-by comparison-its "other" (the 
world) is minuscule in the light of what the ego can know of it. This is a 
peculiar and startling reversal of Platonic rationalism: instead of the mind 
being infinite because it encompasses all reality, it now is infinite because 
it is totally disconnected from reality. 
Surely, historic Skepticism never saw itself as the fulfillment of 
Stoicism. Yet Hegel treats Skepticism in this way because in essence it ful­
fills Stoicism by going farther (along the same path of negation) than 
Stoicism had gone. In each of the previous stages in the itinerary of con­
sciousness-beginning with our doubts about sense certainty and going 
up to the master-slave episode-Hegel has exposed the implicit contra­
dictions. What has served to connect the stages (as I have indicated) is the 
dialectical movement leading from the doubts of one stage to their reso­
lutions in the next. Each contradiction has led to a higher stage of aware­
ness, but each in turn has had its contradictions as well. It would seem, 
therefore, that a global skepticism would be the inevitable (and final) out­
come of all our thinking and experience. 
After Skepticism's conceptual annihilation of the world, self-con­
sciousness is left with nothing but its own freedom (as we saw)-even if 
this means the annihilation of what it itself knows with any determinacy. 
Ultimately, this would lead to a sophism such as: There is nothing we can 
know, not even that we cannot know. The sentence denies what it says. 
And if this is taken as the acme of knowledge, then all determinacy is at 
an end. One cannot therefore be a Skeptic successfully. 4 
Thus, there is a price to be paid for this extreme doubt: One falls prey 
not merely to the inconsistency embedded in it, but (in addition) one suf­
fers the inability to function in the world on the basis of one's beliefs about 
it. True, the ego may thereby have achieved a more intense self-concentra­
tion and freedom, but its doubts about the world leave the ego incapable 
of coping with it. Those doubts backfire-it is here that consciousness 
becomes what Hegel calls "the absolute dialectical unrest." Differences 
turn out to be identities, identities are differentiated-since nothing is 
what it is. As a result, the expected self-certainty of the self-centered self­
consciousness becomes a mind-emptying whirl. Worse, the ego knows 
that it is to blame for its chaos. It knows only that it is free-and that it is 
therefore moved by nothing it can take to be real, essential, or true! 
Thus, all I know is that I am a free-thinking but contingent individ­
ual with an animal life. These I cannot reconcile. I am what Hegel calls a 
"lost self-consciousness." Indeed, the dialecrical element of retaliation in 

110 • Leo Rauch 
all this (i.e., achieving freedom at the price of one's sanity) suggests some­
thing out of the Inferno-but Dante's "lost people" are individuals togeth­
er, while our Skeptic is entirely isolated and knows that it is his own doing. 
And yet there is a positive side: In this isolation, the ego returns to 
itself as universal and self-identical, thus seeing itself as the living opposite 
to all particularity and difference. This would seem to be the self-concen­
tration chat was sought. If we are doomed to suffer the madness of the 
"lost self-consciousness," then let us at least have the consolation of a 
Promethean solitude, the heroic seance of universality and self-identity. Yet 
once again the ego emerges from this and goes back into contingency and 
chaos, because its negating capacity is concerned precisely with contingent 
particulars (i.e., it is this sum of money, this impending honor, this bit of 
knowledge it rejects). The result is a dizzying swing (again, like something 
in the lnferno)-a vertiginous shuttling back and forth, between univer­
sality and contingency, between self-identity and chaotic diffusion of the 
ego, without a hope of getting itself together. Thus, the initial aim of 
securing one's selfhood is altogether frustrated. 
The ego sees that everything is in flux, and therefore it lacks the cer­
tainty within itself with which to say even this with any certainty. Thus, 
the ego is the master and slave of what it believes. It is an internalization­
with a vengeance! No unifYing synthesis cakes place: the ego denies what 
it asserts, and asserts what it denies. Hegel gives us the image, here, of chil­
dren squabbling endlessly, merely for the sake of squabbling, so that where 
one says day the other says night, and then the reverse. But what is worse, 
the squabble occurs inside onesel£ It is a self-consciousness that is perma­
nently self-divided instead of self-focused and self-certain. Whatever 
dichotomy is proposed-e.g., permanence vs. change, certainty vs. con­
tingency, reality vs. appearance-the ego now occupies both sides at once. 
Whatever metaphysical division there is, or that can be thought of, the 
dividing line runs right through the human soul! 
Yet (on the positive side) self-consciousness can now see its own self­
contradictoriness-and see that as the defining characteristic of self-con­
sciousness itself-even if it is incapable of overcoming it. It now knows 
itself as divided, in essence as well as concretely: instead of two distinct 
persons (master and slave), we now have one person "ᅎho is the two. This 
insurmountable division is the basis of the Unhappy Comciousness. 
c) When Andre Malraux speaks of El Greco's View of Toledo as "the 
first Christian landscape," we grasp more about Christianity in that 
remark than about the painter or the painting. The Christian outlook is 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 1 1 1  
in essence problematic, dialectical-i.e., in conflict with itself, as all self­
consciousness is, and seeking a synthesis at a higher level of knowing­
and the painting reflects this in its brooding sky warning of imminent 
judgment. Christianity is a critical religion, in the sense of the Greek word 
krisis (judgment). And although such judgment cannot be fully and con­
clusively forthcoming, because of the inner division in the Unhappy 
Consciousness, it is already there because that division is what evokes the 
judgment in the first place. 
In very general terms, we can say that a religion embodies the moral 
code of an era and sanctifies it into a rigid (at times even deathlike) per­
manence. Christianity, on the other hand, is timeless to the extent that it 
goes beyond a particular ethos and speaks in universal terms. In this light, 
we must see it not as representing the attitudes of one historic era, but as 
an outlook that goes beyond this or that time or place. 
In discussing the Unhappy Consciousness after Skepticism, Hegel is 
decidedly not saying that Skepticism is the sufficient condition for the 
emergence of Christianity (so that with the former as causal antecedent, 
the latter had to follow as the inevitable outcome); nor is he saying that 
Skepticism is its necessary condition (so that without it there would have 
been no Christianity). On the contrary, he is not speaking of a determin­
istic historical sequence at all. Rather, by directing our attention to the 
Unhappy Consciousness (qua consciousness), he shows that he is speaking 
of a frame of mind, quite apart from its embodiment in a particular cul­
tus. That frame of mind is seen as a transhistorical process. It is as though, 
in our attempt to understand it, we were to strip away all of its historic 
details-even the life and death of its founder! 
Thus, the Unhappy Consciousness is an inevitable stage in the itiner­
ary of consciousness, and Christianity is the inescapable expression of that 
unhappiness.5 As a mode of consciousness, then, the Christian outlook is 
a divided one, and it has that division constantly before it. It is therefore 
conscious of that divided consciousness, but it is conscious of that division 
in a unified way. Thus, it is divided and united. Yet as consciousness it can 
stay in neither mode-as it shuttles from that basic consciousness to the 
consciousness of that consciousness, and back. Hegel says, therefore, that 
as a unified consciousness it has a dual nature. This is essentially true of 
that consciousness, even if it does not itself see this in any given era. 
I would venture to say that the tendency of religion, in general, is 
toward simplicism and a unified consciousness. We want to feel safe and 
certain of ourselves. Yet religion misses its own essence to the degree that 

it overlooks or ignores its own contradictoriness. Let us keep that point 
clearly before us: the essence of all advanced religion is paradox, uncer­
tainty, insecurity. The acceptance of this may give discomfort to the ordi­
nary religionist, who may well try to turn his religion around to 
consistency (so that all is right with the world and his own soul is unified). 
But that is neither here nor there. To the degree that we evade that essen­
tial paradoxicality, to that degree the essence of religion has escaped us. 
As we see from Hegel's foregoing discussion, the root of the paradox 
is in the ego's reference to itself-the ego-subject placing its object (the ego 
itself) at a distance, yet being at one with it. Thus we seek self-division and 
self-identity at the same time. For Russell, it is semantic self-reference that 
is the source of paradox, so that all paradoxicality is a function of the 
structure of propositions. But however much that problem may have been 
resolved in the theory of types and the awareness of the levels of language, 
it remains unresolved (and insoluble) in regard to the levels of selfhood. 
For Hegel, therefore, paradox is a function of selfhood relating to itself­
so that self-consciousness is paradox, and is paradox by necessity. Now, 
what any consciousness might attempt to do, in the light of that paradox­
ical goal of simultaneous self-division and self-identity, is to seek unity 
with another soul: God, the Unchanging. What we cannot find in our­
selves, we seek beyond us. In that quest, however, consciousness must fail. 
Such union cannot be achieved. This brings us back to the element of 
division in the Unhappy Consciousness. 
That division is its unhappiness; and the irresolvability of that divi­
sion is the triumph as well as the tragic challenge of Christianity. But in 
the respect that the division represents all consciousness, as active and 
aware, all consciousness is unhappy, as Merleau-Ponty says.6 
Accordingly, in discussing the divided consciousness, Hegel is not 
directing our attention to Christianity in its contingent historical aspect, 
but rather to Christianity as the embodiment of all consciousness-to the 
degree that any consciousness is self-relating, dialectical, divided. In view 
of that division, consciousness posits for itself the difference between per­
manence and change-and sees its own essence to be in permanence, 
while it sees its own mutability as the unessential aspect of itself. Yet since 
it is conscious of the division in its own self, and sees itself as mutable and 
unessential, it also sees its essence as remaining forever beyond it-hence 
its unhappiness. There is no easy choice between one side or the other. 
The two are equally present and inescapable-and they are irreconcilable. 
Whatever is gained by one aspect of consciousness is lost by the other. And 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 1 13 
even if consciousness tries to align itself with the unchangeable, as the uni­
versal :hat is its essence, its ever-present particularity must frustrate the 
choice. 
Consciousness does, however, see its individuality as permanence, i.e., 
as an ongoing identity despite change. And yet, although consciousness 
may see its identity as a unity, it is aware of itself as a unity of differences: 
e.g., permanence versus change. It thereby shuttles between seeing itself as 
universal and as particular, and it finally comes to something like a syn­
thesis of the two by seeing its own individuality as this particularity in the 
universal. Here we have the classic triad-universal, particular, singular­
in which the antithesis of universal versus particular is overcome in a syn­
thesis whereby the individual sees his selfhood as one of a kind, a universal 
all its own, a class of one. This is the traditionally Christian idea that each 
individual is a microcosm, altogether unique. 
All this shuttling and variability in that consciousness is the mark of 
its profound unhappiness: it tries to grasp at this or that idea about itself, 
this or that characterization, but each of these is thwarted by its opposite. 
True, it is a consciousness undergoing change; equally true, it is a con­
sciousness with a permanent identity. Yet each time that this consciousness 
believes to have attained repose and to have rolled its stone up to the sum­
mit of unity, it is pushed back toward division and the abyss, as Jean Wahl 
says. 7 Further, it is both universal and particular; yet since these aspects 
appear to consciousness alone, what we have is not genuine universality or 
permanence. 
This is a consciousness that is uncertain, perturbed. By contrast, the 
Skeptic could at least hope to achieve a benign ataraxia. At least he knew 
that there is nothing to know. But the Unhappy Consciousness has gone 
beyond the spurious comfort of Skepticism, because it experiences in itself 
its own desperate shifts from doubt to affirmation and back. Thus it 
knows that it itself is nothing but what it is: limited, fallible, doomed. And 
yet it knows that it is more: spirit, and the locus of infinitude. On one 
hand it knows itself as utterly dependent, contingent on externals; on the 
other hand it knows that whatever it itself is, it is the result of its own 
nature. Unlike the Stoic, who feels that we ought to pursue and embrace 
our nature, the Christian feels that our nature is already there, and that it 
is there to be overcome. Unlike the Skeptic, who has found a way of avoid­
ing judgment, the Unhappy Consciousness judges itself constantly in its 
situation of krisis-but with no sure view of itself to base a judgment on! 
The self, in seeing and suffering its division, yearns for its resolution 

114 • Leo Rauch 
and overcoming, instead of a resolution. However, all it can hope for, so 
far, is a union of the divided aspects. One such union is expressed as God's 
incarnation as Christ. Yet here the division between universality and par­
ticularity is emphasized all the more, hardly reconciled. In taking on a 
material and contingent body, God's immaterial and timeless conscious­
ness becomes even more remote from the consciousness of the religionist. 
It is as though God, in having placed Christ between himself and man, has 
placed himself at a greater distance from man. For this reason (i.e., the 
remoteness of the Unchangeable), the religionist's consciousness must 
content itself with relating to the temporal embodiment (Christ) as the 
mere surrogate of the Unchangeable. Inasmuch as the individual con­
sciousness (the believer) gives up the idea of seeking union with the 
Unchangeable, and seeks union only with its incarnation, such conscious­
ness turns away (at least in part) from the idea of the division of con­
sciousness. The incarnate God therefore provides a solace to the failure 
that goes inevitably with any attempt to unite with the infinite. As Jean 
Wahl says,8 it is here alone, in connection with Christianity, that Hegel 
will not seek a synthesis (of being and non-being) but will rather empha­
size the juxtaposition, which is why the Unhappy Consciousness is a con­
sciousness in a state of becoming. 
Yet the individual consciousness can (at least) seek union with the 
Unchangeable in a number of ways, depending on how the Unchangeable 
is conceived of, and on how the individual consciousness thinks of itself. 
The two sides are interrelated. Thus, the individual consciousness will 
think of itself in one of a variety of ways; and it will then project one or 
more visions of God, according to its vision of itself. 
The various shapes of that self-thought are reflected in the trinity­
but the persons of the trinity are therefore seen by Hegel as aspects of con­
sciousness, not as self-existent aspects of the godhead. The father, son, and 
holy spirit are thus translated back into their psychic origins in the indi­
vidual consciousness. That is to say, the individual has a view of con­
sciousness, either as universal, particular or singular-and each of these 
views is expressed in objective terms as a mode of the deity, with which the 
individual consciousness seeks a relation: when consciousness considers 
itself as universal, the deity is seen as pure consciousness; when con­
sciousness considers itself as particular, the deity is seen as an incarnate 
individual, active in the world; the unifying singular is seen as a con­
sciousness aware of its own being-for-itself, i.e., the deity as spirit. 
There is more here than the different views of the deity, correspon-

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 1 15 
ding to the different views that consciousness has of itself. We also find­
and this is perhaps the strangest step of all in this bit of dialectical argu­
ment-that there is a series of developmental stages within consciousness 
itself that match the characterization of the trinity. Thus, when con­
sciousness is considered as universal, it itself (not God the father) is seen 
as pure consciousness; when consciousness is regarded as particular, it is 
seen as an actual individual that is active in the world; and when con­
sciousness is viewed as singular, as being-for-self, it is spirit. That means 
that we can actually look to a stage of pure consciousness, that this will be 
followed by its actualization in external action, and that this will then be 
followed by a consciousness that has returned to itself. The Christian trin­
ity, then, is an exemplification of an evolutionary process undergone by 
the Unhappy Consciousness. 
As pure consciousness, the deity is of a nature that has not yet entered 
actual existence. It exists as concept only, and consciousness cannot give it 
content. The Unhappy Consciousness does, however, provide the contact 
between the abstract conception of consciousness and consciousness as 
individuality-because it conceives of the deity as individual. Yet even if 
it sees the deity as individual, the Unhappy Consciousness does not know 
that the deity is the individuality of consciousness. 
Thus, the Unhappy Consciousness cannot really grasp the deity in 
thought; the best it can do is to offer its devotion, which is far removed 
from the conceptual. It can yearn-and it can conceive (in purely abstract 
terms) of the deity as individual. What the Unhappy Consciousness does 
know is that the deity is forever beyond-and the Unhappy 
Consciousness therefore sees itself as the deity's opposite. 
At this point it must return to itself, since itself is all it has. And then 
it visualizes the deity (instead of conceiving it) as a particular individual. 
But then, as visible, the deity itself has vanished. Since it has vanished as 
an individual, it is not genuine individuality, i.e., it is not the universal and 
the particular, as existing. We have the image of the Crusaders, battling 
their way to the Holy Sepulchre and opening it (with what expectation?), 
only to find it empty. The visible Christ must vanish to make way for the 
deity as universal. 
If the Unhappy Consciousness has not conceived the deity as self­
hood, it has at least felt its own self, although without certainty of itself. 
Its activity (in desire and work) gives it no sense of certainty. Just as it is 
divided, its work is divided also-e.g., between permanence and change, 
between the sacred and the profane, between its part in the other world 

116 • Leo Rauch 
and in this, etc. And because the Unhappy Consciousness is uncertain of 
itself, it regards nothing as its own achievement or the outcome of its own 
abilities. All is of God-which means that there is very little to one's own 
selfhood. And yet, although it could have accepted this if it were to have 
renounced itself entirely, it has not really done so (since it has acted in the 
world). And therefore the fact that it has not given up its selfhood entire­
ly, yet has very litde of it, is a further source of division and unhappiness. 
So far, in this bewildering dialectic, we have gone through two stages 
of the psychic "trinity" -first, that of a pure but unactualized conscious­
ness; and second, that of a consciousness actualized (though inadequate­
ly) in external activity. Since that actualization (in desire and work) is 
never fully satisfYing to the Unhappy Consciousness, it returns to itself 
once more. But now it sees itself as nothing when compared to the deity. 
Thus, the self-return (which is the usual key to the resolution of an 
antithesis as far as Hegel is concerned) must fail here. 
This is because the Unhappy Consciousness, in its return to itself, sees 
itself not only in a quantitative but also in an evaluative contrast to the 
deity: not only is the individual consciousness minuscule where the deity 
is infinitely great, the individual consciousness also sees itself as being in a 
state of sin where the deity is holy. The relation is almost necessarily recip­
rocal, so that the one loses where the other gains. (Indeed, the individual 
must accentuate the sense of his own sinfulness, as a precondition for 
approaching God.) This, so far, is a theoretical trajectory. In concrete 
terms we find a parallel process, as characterized by Jean Wahl:9 the 
process begins with religious desire, issues into work and communion in a 
sanctified world, and ends in desolation and the humiliation of the indi­
vidual. Life is therefore nothing but emptiness. All activity is weary, stale, 
flat, and unprofitable-along with all the uses of this world. 
The depth of its misery can be gauged by the fact that, for the 
Unhappy Consciousness, the awareness of its unity with the deity is linked 
to that misery and the sense of sin and emptiness. If it is only in the aware­
ness of one's own sinfulness that one can approach God, then how sad it 
all is! 
The gap (quantitative, evaluative, and other)-between the individ­
ual consciousness and the deity-is so vast that it needs a mediator, a 
priest, to serve as go-between. The individual surrenders his freedom of 
choice to the will of the priest. By giving up one's ego, one turns one's self­
consciousness into a thing-but one thereby has the conviction of having 
achieved unity with God. Nevertheless, the individual self-consciousness 

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 117 
has not genuinely achieved this, since the ego was surrendered, and a vacu­
ity cannot engage in a union. (Meister Eckhart will disagree precisely on 
this point, and insist that God can enter only the "empty" soul. But his 
"argument" is mystical and therefore counterrational in its fundamental 
assumptions and criteria.) The deity therefore remains as remote as ever. 
Yet in one's awareness of the action taken as one's own, there arises a view 
of one's own reason and selfhood-and this is now glimpsed as the ulti­
mately and absolutely real. 
Why should this elaborate transformation take place, and what can 
we gather from it? The discussion Hegel gives to these matters, in the pres­
ent section, is so complex and abstruse, operating on so many levels at 
once, as to cry out for interpretation. The answers to the question (above) 
are rooted in the division of consciousness itself-as is the difficulty of 
those answers. As we saw, consciousness knows itself divided as universal 
and as particular, as infinite and as finite, etc., etc. In any such division, 
we feel called upon to choose one side over the other. The choices between 
these alternatives cannot be simple, cannot be made once and for all time, 
and cannot be made on merely theoretical grounds-because such mere­
ly theoretical choices would be entirely abstract, and the abstract way of 
thinking is too remote and unsatisfying for the Unhappy Consciousness. 
For these reasons (and probably for others), the various elements of con­
sciousness work their way out as dimorphic imagery. The image that is 
"chosen" depends, once again, on whether we are thinking in terms of the 
universal, particular, or singular. 
What all this amounts to is the view that a cultural phenomenon such 
as religion (but by extension we could apply this view to other areas) is the 
outward projection of individual psychic elements. This sounds innocu­
ous enough when regarded in a deterministic psychological light. Yet we 
ought to remember that we are operating on a phenomenological (not 
psychological) plane. So when we say that a cultural phenomenon, such as 
religion, is the outward projection of individual psychic elements, what we 
mean is that we must regard culture as the epiphenomenon of conscious­
ness, in the dialectical clash between its component essences (not forces). 
Thus, certain essences are attached to certain aspects of psychic func­
tioning; these essences conflict and cannot be reconciled or pacified; the 
unresolved clash therefore comes out as religion (or another cultural 
mode). This is because the individual cannot choose between the alterna­
tives with any finality; he cannot decisively say what his essence is or ought 
to be. And because he cannot say what his own essence is, he decides on 

118 • Leo Rauch 
what God's essence is. Therefore, what the individual consciousness can­
not say about itself, it says about God. Unable to grasp itself in any con­
clusive manner, the Unhappy Consciousness finds a way of saying what it 
must on another plane-religion. 
We can say, therefore, that what Hegel is presenting (in describing the 
trajectory from Stoicism to Skepticism to the Unhappy Consciousness) is a 
mini-theory of culture. This is not stated as a theory, to be sure, but is rather 
displayed in terms of the three cultural models. He will go on to amplifY the 
"theory" in subsequent chapters, where it will take a different direction 
altogether. Here, however, we can restrict ourselves to that theory-tacitly 
presented in chapter IY. 
From what we are given here, we see that culture arises out of human 
dissatisfaction-but more basically out of the (always) frustrated search 
for selfhood. That search led to combat and enslavement. Yet what is sig­
nificant is not so much the situation of enslavement as the slave's continu­
ing desire to achieve recognition as human. The fact that this cannot be 
fulfilled in the circumstances is what leads to his dissatisfaction. It is this 
dissatisfaction that is at first internalized, then externalized as the epiphe­
nomenon that is culture. Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy 
Consciousness are mediated responses to that dissatisfaction--even if they 
also are responses to the more fundamental need to assert and define one's 
selfhood. 
The dissatisfaction expresses itself in the feeling that we are not at 
home in the world. The fact that the feeling exists in slave consciousness 
is therefore accidental (in my view). What we are relating to, as the most 
basic element, is not the enslavement but the desire to be recognized 
as human. The relevant point is that the individual consciousness feels 
alienated from its surroundings. With this as a basis, the individual con­
sciousness goes on to universalize that alienation: i.e., to regard it as char­
acteristic of the human situation in general. 
In that generalization two things (at least) are emphasized: first, the 
independence of the human consciousness from its surroundings, its free­
dom from all physical, social, and economic determination; second, the 
positing of a higher spirituality to which the human spirit bears kinship 
(near or remote), and to which it seeks a direct connection. What we are 
shown, therefore, is one path to the elevation of the human spirit. And, 
paradoxically, that elevation is the outcome of the negativity, isolation, 
and alienation of spirit. 
Obviously this is not the only path to that elevation. Hegel, in select-

Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness • 1 19 
ing these three outgrowths of the Hellenistic period as the path for the 
spirit to take in its development, is fully aware of the other paths, equally 
powerful and suggestive, yet far removed from these.10 To take only one 
example, the Athenian polis produced a culture of happiness and person­
al fulfillment (for adult-male-citizen-freemen) perhaps unequaled by any 
other. That culture, too, sought the elevation of human spirituality by way 
of self-consciousness ("Know thyself"), and Hegel will make much of this 
in his subsequent writings. Why, then, did he here choose to ignore 
Athenian culture as an extension of self-consciousness? 
The historical answer, of course, is that the Athenian polis, elitist as it 
was, could in no way be seen as serving the needs of slave-consciousness. 
That is why Socratic self-knowledge could not be presented in response to 
the slave's need for internalization. Socratic self-examination, verbalized 
and externalized, is not what the mute slave can use. I have said, however, 
that what is basic is the need for recognition, and that the situation of 
enslavement is irrelevant to this, so it would appear as though this "his­
torical answer" is not to the point. It is to the point, however-or would 
have been-if Hegel had been concerned to show the master's subsequent 
development. That is: given the fact that neither the master nor the slave 
get the recognition they want, perhaps Hegel should have struck two par­
allel paths at this point: the slave's evolution via Stoicism, Skepticism, and 
Christianity; and the master's evolution via Athenian culture, the Roman 
patriciate, etc. Yet in taking the single path of Stoicism, Skepticism, and 
Christianity, Hegel places greater emphasis on internalization as the medi­
ation of culture-as though self-consciousness must first coil inward in 
order to store up sufficient energy for its outward recoil. (Obviously, he is 
not aiming at a comprehensive view of the relation between self-con­
sciousness and culture; that is why the view he presents here can be called 
a mini-theory.) 
Perhaps the answer is that the effulgent self-consciousness of the 
polis-celebrated in Sophocles' marvelous paean to man's intelligence and 
creativity (in Antigone)-could only have led to a dead end. Perhaps no 
world culture could have emerged from it, no Christianity that would 
speak to man's universal situation of limitation, fallibility, and doom. The 
polis is a rare moment and a short one. For the emergence ofWestern self­
consciousness, the polis is essential, certainly-but only as an element, a 
memory, an ideal that could not be actualized more than once. 
Christianity, on the other hand, is Western self-consciousness. 
Christianity, then, is the product of slave-mentality-a fact seen by 

120 • uo Rauch 
Nietzsche in pejorative terms. For Hegel, on the contrary, only such a 
mentality could have yielded a sensitivity for the human condition in gen­
eral and thus have served as a basis for a world culture. Stoicism and 
Skepticism-had the development stopped with them-would have led 
to a dead end as well, because the values of indifference and unperturbed­
ness would not have given us the essential insight into man's permanent 
state. (What culture could have been built upon them?) 
A culture is a projection of a worldview, a vision of man in the world. 
No culture confined within one ethnic boundary-e.g., Judaic or 
Hellenic-could have provided that world-cultural basis. Christianity 
undoubtedly spoke to the spiritual depression prevailing in the world as a 
universal condition (not merely to that prevailing in the Hellenistic 
world). What Hegel shows is that it is by no means accidental that the 
most exalted vision of the godhead should have emerged in that spiritual 
depression, when man's grasp of his own selfhood was so shaky. On the 
contrary, we have seen that that connection is essential. In elevating God, 
however, man is elevated only by indirection, not in actuality-and so he 
must take to the road again, to seek yet another path to that end. 
Thus, the insight provided by Christianity is not the ultimate, and is 
to be surpassed by reason. As far as it goes, however, Christianity speaks to 
the finitude in which we all find ourselves, as human. For Hegel, its weak­
ness is that it speaks in imagery, not theory-which is why its theorizing 
(as in Scholasticism) is borrowed largely from Hellenic sources. 
After the Unhappy Consciousness, the challenge must be to achieve a 
broader view of man, universal in scope, in which we grasp the point, in 
concrete terms, that the rational is real, the real is rational {or ought to be). 
Only then can human life be fully rationalized and fulfilled. 

9 
AFTER "SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS" 
Self-consciousness cannot see beyond itself-this is its limitation. The 
Unhappy Consciousness, for example, takes its own being-in-itself as the 
absolute essence, as though this is how consciousness must be, per se. As 
Hegel says, it sees its being-in-itself (Ansichsein) as "its own beyond" (das 
jenseits seiner selbst). This is as far as it casts its net. 
In these circumstances, we might expect the Unhappy Consciousness 
to be satisfied with the notion of selfhood that it has put forward. Yet the 
ironic fact (so astutely observed by Hegel) is that the Unhappy 
Consciousness has posited a notion of selfhood that cannot be fulfilled­
not by anything human. Only God can fulfill its conception of selfhood, 
for only God is the complete self As a consequence of that viewpoint, the 
human self must forever see itself as incomplete. The individual ego may 
even get as far as considering itself at one with God. Yet in order to achieve 
this union with the universal (in its own eyes), it must negate its own par­
ticularity. Thus the individual renounces himself in God's favor, so to 
speak-although this has the effect of rendering himself and his own 
world less than real. 
Since (in this view) God is the only reality, one's own reality can be 
no better than abstract and illusory by comparison. This is why things 
cannot end at this point in the career of selfhood: the medieval Christian 
view of the self cannot be the final one; there must be progress beyond the 
1 2 1  

122 • Leo &uch 
Unhappy Consciousness, if only because a complete grasp of the self has 
not yet been achieved by self-consciousness at this stage. 
There still is a long way to go. Self-consciousness is not yet self­
knowledge. Nor is it reason-let alone a higher view of the operation of 
world reason. This is why there will be newer worldviews. The fact that 
these will be forthcoming indicates the inadequacies of the older views. 
Thus, in the Phenomenology, the stage called "Self-Consciousness" gives 
way to the stage called "Reason," and beyond this there is the stage 
describing "Spirit" at work in culture and morality, leading to the stages 
called "Religion" and "Absolute Knowing." (Here, I shall discuss only the 
"Reason" chapter, and in very compressed form.) 
At the stage of Self-Consciousness-particularly in Stoicism, 
Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness-we found the self and the 
world in an inverse relation to one another: the sense of self was strength­
ened only by minimizing the world's reality and importance. Further, a 
similar inverse relation held between man and God-except that it was 
one-sided, since man could not minimize God. God must come out ahead, 
and therefore man's selfhood must be diminished by comparison. Yet he 
still could bolster what sense of self he had by denying the world. Thus, 
man fortifies his ego by weakening his hold on the world; but then he 
must weaken himself once again vis-a-vis God. What the human psyche 
gains in one sphere it loses in the other. 
At the stage of Reason, on the other hand, that inverse relation gives 
way to a direct one: In modern thinking we find the gradually developing 
view that it is human consciousness that creates the world; that it grasps 
the world's structure and lawfulness, but that our consciousness imposes 
upon it a structure and lawfulness emanating from consciousness. This 
culminates in the absolute knowledge of "the Spirit knowing itself as 
Spirit" {der sich als Geist wissende Geist). Spirit knows itself as producing 
the world. Thus, consciousness is now at home in the world for the first 
time, because it sees the world as its own. Where self-consciousness had 
groped toward "the truth of self-certainty," reason now arrives at the cer­
tainty that consciousness is all reality, and that selfhood is the truth of 
everything. 
It is not at all surprising that this standpoint should emerge in the 
Renaissance attitude that led to the development of the sciences. We need 
only think of Leonardo's well-known drawing of the extended human fig­
ure standing within a concentric square and circle: there is the suggestion 
that man is now about to square the circle; there is also the more definite 

After "Self-Consciousness" • 123 
suggestion that in touching the points of intersection, man now reaches to 
the farthest limits of his world because he is its creator, the source of its 
meaning. 
Of course, the truth that human consciousness has created its 
world-this is a truth that must be made true. It must be given content by 
our reiterating the entire career of consciousness so far-from the earliest 
doubts about sense certainty on to the unsatisfYing end of the Unhappy 
Consciousness. That truth is also given content when reason finds itself 
reflected in the world. 
Reason thus observes particular things and events as instances of uni­
versals and laws-although the expected necessity is more characteristic of 
the "laws of thought" than of (say) the biological sphere. There is the 
attempt to reifY the human spirit so that we regard it as something inert 
{as in the pseudo-sciences of physiognomy and phrenology). The genuine 
view of spirit, however, grasps rational self-consciousness in its activity. 
In this light alone can we see the human spirit as projecting itself out 
into the world-that is, in the value systems and social configurations that 
it devises. When that devising becomes self-conscious, all systems are 
threatened, of course. Once we begin to think, there is no knowing how 
things will end. By comparison, what characterizes ordinary moral life is 
its uncritical immediacy. This is effectually challenged, weakened, or even 
destroyed when individuality becomes prominent and seeks to shape its 
own life by taking thought. It is then that we find the individual pitted 
against society, and seeking his own fulfillment in contradistinction to it. 
This self-centeredness can take the form of egoistic hedonism, or a ram­
pant romanticism which Hegel calls "the law of the heart," or even a rather 
exalted self-dedication to the pursuit of virtue. 
Egoistic hedonism is not a genuine fulfillment of self-consciousness: 
the exploitation of another person for one's own pleasure is self-destruc­
tive, since the ego is thereby reified and thus weakened, not strengthened. 
It is a driven individuality, and bases itself on a weak conception of the 
self: even if it appears to fortifY its selfhood in self-gratification at the 
expense of another, it has surrendered its selfhood to what seems (to it) a 
natural necessity. 
The romanticist-ostensibly ruled by "the law of the heart"-places 
himself in opposition to social conventions, and thereby seems to 
strengthen his individuality. Yet to the extent that what guides him has 
itself become a "law," he must oppose that as well. He therefore confounds 
what he lives by. Moreover, my heart's law might not coincide with the 

124 • Leo Rauch 
"law" of another romanticist. I am therefore driven by a "law" that I can­
not universalize as law. This can lead to the derangement of consciousness. 
Its only possibility for universalization is if everyone shares in the derange­
ment, a general madness (Wahnsinn im allgemein) and self-alienation. But 
this is obviously a false universalization: shared madness is not sanity. 
In contrast to all this, another spiritual dichotomy might be set up: 
that between individual moral activity and the autonomously functioning 
moral order of society. Individuals operate on the basis of personal inter­
ests, and these go to make up a disinterested moral structure of social 
values. Yet conscious moral virtue aims at a deliberate intervention in 
society's moral order, an intervention the self-propelling order resists. 
Paradoxically, the path to individual virtue stresses universalization and 
the surrender of individuality, while the collective moral order does allow 
for individuality. 
Moral individualism and self-legislation (a Ia Kant) now become the 
expression of self-consciousness: that is, individuality is now universalized, 
expected to conform to a generalized moral standard. Yet this involves a 
simplification of moral reality and moral choice, in contrast to the com­
plexity of individual character (on the basis of which our choices are 
made). The Kantian application of reason to that human complexity can 
only result in its stultification, in Hegel's view. We come up with univer­
sal maxims; but these fail in their application to particular individuals and 
events, because the maxims are too simple while the individuals or events 
are too complex. At best, the application of reason to morality can keep us 
clear of self-contradiction. Consistency alone, however, is not a sufficient 
basis for morality. 
Thus the conscious application of reason to moral life must fail-and 
this would become obvious if we tried to run an actual society on Kantian 
lines. In view of this inevitable failure, then, what we must rely on is the 
autonomous functioning of ethical life in society itself-where that func­
tioning is the direct expression of the spirit of a culture, and thus of the 
spirit of humanity in its endless variety. 

1 0 
EARLY-TWENTIETH-CENTURY 
EUROPEAN CRITICISM 
The chapter on Self-Consciousness is complex enough to have provoked 
a variety of interpretations-even seemingly conflicting ones. Thus, there 
have been tendencies to read this chapter in the light of a "Christian" 
Hegel (Wahl), a "Marxist" Hegel (Kojeve), and an "existential" Hegel 
(Hyppolite). Whatever the differences between these readings, it seems (to 
me) to be undeniable that Hegel is correct in emphasizing the centrality 
and fragility of the element of recognition in the formation of person­
hood. We are our own self-image. To some commentators (Sartre), what 
is unacceptable in that idea is the vulnerability of our self-image in its 
dependence on another party-especially in the way Hegel depicts the 
master and slave as depending on one another for recognition, so that the 
recognition by another is the truth of self-certainty. On the contrary, it is 
stressed that we make our self-image independently, regardless of whether 
it is deceptive or truthful, serviceable, or trivial. 
Perhaps that dependence (on another person) is unacceptable because 
it is damaging to our self-image of our self-image-making. Yet we all know 
to what extent our ego and dignity depend upon inanimate objects such 
as (say) food, clothing, shelter, soap, etc. In the light of this, our depend­
ence on a human factor, such as our being recognized as human by anoth­
er human, is that much more vital and critical. 
There are various objections we might raise to Hegel's presentation of 
his views in scenario form. One objection to the master-slave scenario is 
that it is not discursive or theoretical but descriptive-and not descriptive 
of an actual state of affairs but of a hypothetical situation. As such it can-
1 25 

126 • Leo Rauch 
not be verified or falsified-no more than any piece of fiction can be. This 
may seem to be a drawback but it is not. Fiction is meaningful, after all. 
One commentator (Hyppolite) sees the master-slave scenario as a "philo­
sophical novel"-and that remark may provide an answer to the objection. 
Thus, we readily accept a novel such as William Golding's Lord of the Flies, 
in its depiction of the return to savagery on the part of some English 
schoolboys. The author purports to show (not argue) that the civilizing 
layer is thin, and that savagery is our essential nature in the absence of the 
restraining forces of civilization. In reading the novel, that view is inferred 
(uncritically) by us. It is not stated as an empirical hypothesis, to be con­
firmed or disconfirmed. Its "truth" comes not from its correspondence to 
a body of experimental data, but rather from its internal coherence or else 
its coherence with a broader worldview. This coherence theory is Hegel's 
general approach to truth-viz., his statement in the Preface to the 
Phenomenology: "The True is the whole." (Das Φhre ist das Ganze). 
Yet the master-slave scenario is not to be relegated to the status of mere 
fiction. Rather, it is a phenomenological presentation in which we "sus­
pend" verifiability in order to arrive at an exposure of certain necessary and 
essential relations: e.g., why the two parties must come to mortal combat in 
the first place, why the victor must let the loser survive, and so on and on. 
With verifiability suspended, we see that there are no right or wrong 
interpretations, only good ones or bad ones; no truth or falsity in the strict 
sense, only insight or opacity. In the case of the interpretations we shall 
discuss here, there are only good or better ones, ranging from insight to 
brilliance. The difference is in the depth of meaning that each interpreta­
tion conveys. And since all these are at least good ones, they contribute to 
one another by providing shading or chiaroscuro. 
We, as well, must approach Hegel's master-slave scenario as nonem­
pirical. We thereby open ourselves to a wider range of interpretations than 
would otherwise be acceptable. Once we understand this, we see that the 
various views do not really come into conflict with one another, but sup­
plement one another and thus deepen our appreciation of Hegel's insight 
into the human animal. 
Kojeve 
The main intellectual effort in France during the middle part of this cen­
tury was spent in accommodating Existentialism to Marxism. And the pri-

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 121 
mary path along which this accommodation was sought involved the 
adaptation of Hegel to both, as their common ancestor. The effort 
involved not only Sartre and Merleau-Ponty but a host of others as well. 
All of them traced their inspiration to one preeminent power source: the 
lectures on Hegel's Phenomenology given by Alexandre Kojeve at the Ecole 
des Hautes Etudes from 1933 to 1939. It was not until 1947 that these 
were put together and published, 1 although the impact of the lectures was 
felt earlier, especially by writers such as Sartre and Merleau-Ponty. A whole 
generation of intellectuals was raised on the lectures, and the effects are 
still with us. If the Phenomenology has had the profound influence it did 
have in modern times, this is a tribute not only to the vitality of that book 
itself but as well to the creative interpretation given it by Kojeve. 
What he does in interpreting the master-slave passage is to emphasize 
the element of work as the humanizing factor for mankind. Of course, the 
slave is already humanized (to a degree) by the initial struggle and by the 
subsequent internalization of his consciousness; yet it is primarily the fact 
that he is put to work on a thing, the benefit of which he will not enjoy, 
that places him on the path to his eventual humanization. 
Following Hegel, Kojeve identifies the concept "man" with "self-con­
sciousness." Yet he gives this connection a rather simplistic Hobbesian 
base by deriving it from the concept of desire (which is an animal element, 
more than a specifically human one). According to Kojeve, it is conscious 
desire that leads one to say "I," and thus leads one to take one's own sub­
jectivity as one's object in self-consciousness. As he says: "The (human) I 
is the I of a Desire or of Desire" (p. 4). Now, Hegel does speak of desire as 
a basic element in self-consciousness; yet (in my view) he points to the 
negating capacity of consciousness as primary, and to desire (qua human) 
as an extension of the self-conscious ego. 2 Kojeve, on the other hand, sees 
human life based in its animal life, as its necessary (though not sufficient) 
condition. He therefore sees the negating capacity as a function or exten­
sion of desire (as in the desire to consume food and thus to negate it), 
rather than the other way around, as I believe it is for Hegel. 
On a number of occasions, Hegel does state that self-consciousness is 
desire. Yet I do not think he intends this statement to be taken as analyt­
ically true. He does not say we are self-conscious by virtue of our desiring 
something. Nor does he say (as Kojeve does) that we become self-conscious 
(and therefore human) by desiring something. On the contrary, it is in 
self-consciousness that we become aware of our desires as human desires 
(although these preexist as animal functions). That is, we first have to be 

128 • Leo Rauch 
human, and to regard ourselves as human, in order to recognize our (ani­
mal) desires as human ones. Thus, it is our self-recognition (involving the 
negating capacity of self-consciousness) that renders our desires human in 
our own eyes. From there we must take the further step of getting recog­
nition for ourselves as human. Yet we cannot achieve this for ourselves: as 
individuals, we cannot give ourselves that recognition. In my isolation, I 
cannot humanize myselfby my own efforts! 
Why is this so? Why should there be this unbridgeable abyss between 
the self and its grasp of itself? Is it because all consciousness sets its object 
at a distance from itself, and that this fact makes self-consciousness impos­
sible for the (as yet) primitive mentality? If that is the case, then we see 
how very great an advance toward humanness is achieved by self-con­
sciousness. 
In the same way, desire presupposes a distance between the ego and 
its object, so that the two are juxtaposed. Thus, the desired object exists to 
tell me that I am incomplete-that in becoming, I am not what I (now) 
am, and I am what I am not (i.e., not yet). This is why desire cannot give 
me my self-consciousness or my selfhood. If it could, then I would find 
my human fulfillment in my solitary desire and in solipsism. Thus, the 
fact that a confrontation ensues indicates the insufficiency of desire. 
It seems to me that the whole thrust of Hegel's view is that there is no 
"private language" of recognition; that our recognition requires a social sit­
uation. Now, if it were analytically true that self-consciousness is desire, 
then by virtue of my solitary desire I would be self-conscious, self-aware 
to the point of being self-recognizing-and then the social need would be 
altogether obviated. But this is not the case, and it is entirely out of line 
with what Hegel is saying. It would therefore appear that Kojeve is read­
ing into desire a social dimension that is not necessarily there, and that 
what we need is a phenomenological corrective to this approach of his, in 
order to bring us to the social confrontation.3 
Thus, my desire is not implicitly social, and must yet be directed out­
ward. When desire is directed to another desire (in another individual), 
socialization begins. Here is where the need for mutual recognition arises. 
(Kojeve accepts this; he merely fails to see that by making desire basic, he 
will not get to mutuality.) In this way, by recognizing one another's desires 
as human, desire itself becomes our object-and this leads Kojeve to pro­
claim the motto: "Human history is the history of desired Desires" (p. 6). 
Indeed, the mortal combat is directed to the desire of another's desire, 
from which the desired recognition is expected to emerge. In Kojeve's 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 129 
view, it is my need to keep the other person's desire alive that leads me to 
keep him alive. I need him alive not merely so that he may recognize me 
as human, but also so that he may recognize my desire as human. History 
arises, then, in the dialectic of master and slave, but with the added 
dimension wherein desire is now being accorded human recognition. 
The mortal combat ensues because although recognition must be 
reciprocal, neither party wants it to be more than unilateral. In other 
words, we resist our socialization and humanization-and this resistance 
must be overcome if there is to be humanization at all. Recognition must 
be reciprocal because even if a man seeks recognition for himself alone, he 
can get it only from another human-one whom he has already acknowl­
edged as human. The seeker must therefore accord humanity to the person 
from whom he seeks recognition, even while he denies it to that person 
and imposes his own demand for human status upon him. 
Yet couldn't this be seen as a possible start? Although this might be the 
basis (however inadequate) for a shared societal life, such life is not to 
come about in this context. This is because the one who can demand 
recognition denies himself recognition by denying prior recognition to the 
person from whom he demands it. He therefore gets a "recognition" that 
is no better than formal and one-sided, since it is not the recognition an 
acknowledged person would give. 
As one-sided as the "recognition" is, however, some human identifi­
cation is created. What is important is that this identification is a non-nat­
ural entity-an entirely novel element in the natural world and not a part 
of the natural inventory. Further, action (as distinguished from behavior) 
is created when it is recognized as human-and it is action aimed at mak­
ing the natural world hospitable to man. The first human action is the 
imposition of oneself on another person. Since this is the first human 
action, it reflects the human essence in its entirety-like a secular equiva­
lent to Original Sin. 
The introduction of recognition as this non-natural element points to 
a humanizing of nature itself-a transformation to be continued in the 
form of work, once the respective states of master and slave have been 
established. The master has already liberated himself from nature by risk­
ing his life for prestige-an action whose content is entirely human and 
non-natural. Yet as we saw, the action is incomplete because the recogni­
tion is demanded from one who is not recognized as human but is regard­
ed as no more than an animal or a thing. (A bit further on, we shall see 
how the slave liberates himself from nature as he humanizes it.) While the 

130 • Leo Rauch 
master cannot recognize the slave, the slave does "recognize" the master, 
sees the master's freedom and autonomy (fallaciously), and thus learns 
what these are. The master has no need to think about his freedom. The 
slave does think of it, internalizes that aim, and thereby becomes the 
source of all eventual human advance! 
The master, having risked his life to become what he is, is ready to be 
master forever. The incomplete recognition he has gained could be made 
complete if he could transcend his status as master and leave it behind 
him; but this is impossible for him since mastery is all. The slave, on the 
other hand, knows that slavery is not all, that there are other modes of 
human life-however unlikely it may be for him to achieve them. The 
slave is therefore open to change, yearning to be free. As Kojeve says, "He 
is historical becoming at his origin, in his essence, in his very existence" 
(p. 22). 
In being forced to work, the slave becomes the "master" of nature. He 
thereby frees himself from his own "nature" (whose instinct to self-preser­
vation is what made him a slave). And in being freed from his own nature, 
he is "free" of enslavement and thereby "free" of the master. By his work 
he transforms (and thus transcends) the immediate world. He thereby 
"overcomes" his enslavement, and eventually overcomes the master as well. 
Thus, if his enslavement is the necessary condition of historical progress, 
his work is its actualization. (And yet the reality of that actualization can 
be questioned, as I did in my discussion of the Hegel text, above. I have 
implicitly questioned it here as well: the relevant terms, which I have put 
in quotation-marks, are not used literally but figuratively.) 
It would seem that the opposite is the case: the slave is enslaved to 
nature, the master is master of nature. Yet the master creates nothing real 
in nature (however much he may be nominally "in charge" of a piece of 
it). He can never rise above the world. The slave, on the other hand, has 
the experience of giving shape to nature, imposing his effort upon it, and 
thereby "freeing" himself from it. In transforming a thing, he comes to 
know what it is to transform himself1 
The slave's work therefore "realizes" the slave, while he realizes him­
self as a human being. By doing something to nature he is above nature­
he is a supernatural being. (He is supernatural as well in the fact that in 
transcending the natural world he "realizes"-i.e., in two senses: coming 
to know and making real-his own spirituality and his tie to spirituality.) 
Kojeve expresses this in rather oracular terms: "By working, he is 'incar­
nated' Spirit, he is historical 'World,' he is 'objectivized' History" (p. 25). 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 131 
What the Hegelian view shares with the Marxist view (according to 
Kojeve) is the insight that culture is a superstructure, of which the sub­
structure is work and action: the complex of events whereby man makes 
himself what he is and thereby differentiates himself from nature. What 
distinguishes man, as agent and worker, is that he not only makes his 
world but also understands it as his, as non-natural and as novel. 
This is why, in Kojeve's view, the cogito is an inadequate springboard 
for our understanding of ourselves: "I think"-but what am !? The 
answer "I am a thinking thing" is inadequate because it is circular and 
leaves the ultimate question open. Thus, the existential focus must be on 
the /, not on the think. In this, man comes to reveal his being-and 
Being, as such. Man is not only the being who reveals Being, however. He 
is also the being who (in turning to himself) reveals the being who reveals 
Being. Thus he reveals, in self-consciousness, what his selfhood is. We can 
say, therefore, that the most striking innovation brought about by our 
supernatural existence-the innovation that amounts to an alien intru­
sion in the natural world-is the introduction of "I," and the subsequent 
grasp of this as filling the different meanings of subject and object in the 
statement "I am I." 
According to Kojeve, there is no direct transition from consciousness 
to self-consciousness. Mere contemplation of the object will leave us with 
the object; it will not automatically lead to self-consciousness. Rather, 
what serves to produce the break that turns us to the "I" and to reveal its 
being is desire. Here again I believe he misreads Hegel, and that what 
turns us in that direction is a function of consciousness (as desire itself 
is)-namely, the negating capacity of consciousness. We see that the con­
templation of the object does not lead us as far as we want to go, and so 
we negate the object and that line of thinking-and we turn to ourselves 
in self-consciousness. 
Kojeve says that man-in being impelled by desire-is impelled by 
the awareness of his emptiness, his nothingness and insufficiency. But 
beyond this, man finally realizes that he is to the extent that he negates (p. 
38). This means that we are only to the extent that we become-i.e., 
become what we are. This is the dimension of action, making, fighting, 
Working, and history. Instead of the cogito, therefore, what we have as irre­
ducible givens are: a) the capacity to reveal Being in speech; b) action that 
negates Being, i.e., action emanating from a desire that is directed toward 
another desire, a non-being; c) the existence of a multiplicity of desires (in 
a multiplicity of individuals); d) the possibility of a difference in the 

132 • Leo Rauch 
desires of individuals, and the survival of the individuals in any conflict 
resulting from the juxtaposition of those desires. 
This entire array cannot be fulfilled simultaneously. These are all ele­
ments in our attempt to rise above natural existence. And yet the slave, in 
choosing survival, surrenders to the demands of that natural existence. 
What he achieves thereafter is his slow climb out of that surrender by 
means of his internalization and his consequently broadened self-con­
sciousness. His is the final victory, therefore, and it is greater than he could 
have hoped for when the fight began. First, the recognition depended 
upon another person, and whether that recognition was justified or not 
was never raised as a question. He now ends by giving recognition to him­
self, and this time it is with a full awareness of its justification. Second, he 
began by wanting mere recognition as human. He now ends by having cre­
ated his own humanity! 
Although the master does not master nature, he does elude it, in the 
initial struggle, by placing his prestige above his biological survival. He 
further eludes nature by interposing the slave's work between nature and 
himself. The slave eludes nature by his work for the master. (If the slave 
were working to fulfill his own needs he would be within nature. Working 
for another is non-natural, and therefore humanizing.) And just as histo­
ry began in their combat, it ends when the status difference between them 
disappears, so that the master no longer has a slave, nor the slave a master. 
In Kojeve's view, Hegel saw history coming to an end in the battle ofJena, 
as the Phenomenology was being completed: the French Revolution and the 
Napoleonic War produced the citoyen of the universal state, and he is nei­
ther master nor slave. 
The master has sought a nonbiological end in seeking recognition. 
Although any explicit recognition the slave may give is inadequate from 
the master's point of view, the master's superiority is nevertheless materi­
alized in the slave's work. Yet the master wanted express recognition from 
an equal, and this he cannot have: anyone his equal would sooner die than 
be subjected, and recognition from anyone else is not worth having. For 
that reason, mastery is at an "existential impasse," as Kojeve says (p. 46). 
The slave, living in constant fear of death, and having been at the 
point of death when he lost the battle, comes up against his own vulnera­
bility, his own nothingness-as Kojeve calls it, "a nothingness maintained 
in being" (p. 48). Yet it is this nothingness that negates time, that acts, that 
understands man. Only the slave can become other than he is, and can 
thereby impel history. Having transformed nature, he knows that he can 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 133 
transform himself and his own situation. As we saw, it is by his work for 
another that the slave overcomes his own nature, and transforms nature 
itself in relation to a non-natural idea. All this, taken together, provides 
the reason why the slave alone can bring an end to history. 
The subsequent worldviews-Stoicism, Skepticism, and Christ­
ianity-are treated by Kojeve as ideologies (in somewhat of the Marxist 
sense of false consciousness). They are intended to get the slave to accept 
his enslavement. In Christianity, for example, the enslavement is magni­
fied into an enslavement to God, the supreme master. This gives me, the 
slave, the dubious consolation of regarding my earthly master as God's 
slave as well, and therefore as much a slave as I! Yet since this is not true, I 
must ignore a considerable area of reality in order to convince myself of its 
truth. In any case, this belief liberates neither of us. On the contrary, the 
distortion of truth enslaves us to further distortion. Thus, the slavish 
desire for life at any price now becomes the desire for eternal life. In the 
final analysis, Christianity comes from the slave's terror at having to face 
his own nothingness and death. To accept death and to accept its finali­
ty-this is to accept atheism. The true goal of Christian progress, Kojeve 
says, is the atheistic awareness of human finitude. In this way alone-i.e., 
by overcoming Christianity and its promise of life in another world-can 
man realize his freedom in this world. 
Hyppolite 
While Kojeve was giving his lectures (1933-39), no French translation 
was as yet available of the Phenomenology. The first French translation of 
the entire work was undertaken by Jean Hyppolite-who knew no 
German, and learned the language by reading the Phenomenology! The two 
volumes of his translation appeared in 1 939 and 1941 . 
Hyppolite did not come under the direct influence of Kojeve, and 
avoided his lectures "for fear of being influenced."4 At the time, the inter­
pretations of Hegel were polarized between Kojeve's Marxian approach 
(with the master-slave relation at its center) and Jean Wahl's Christian 
approach (placing the Unhappy Consciousness at the center of Hegel's 
thinking). Kojeve's aim was to politicize the study ofHegel. Thus, in 1946 
Kojeve declares that any interpretation of Hegel is a program of political 
struggle, and that the work of the Hegel interpreter is equivalent to a work 
of political propaganda (p. xv). Further: "It is possible that in reality the 

134 • Leo Rauch 
future of the world, and thus the meaning of the present and that of the 
past, depend, in the last analysis, on the way in which the Hegel writings 
are interpreted today" (p. xxviii). 
In this atmosphere of exaggeration and hyperbole, a level head was 
needed, and it was Hyppolite's. He saw Hegel and Marx as utterly distinct, 
even diametrically opposed-and he therefore resisted the temptation to 
interpret Hegel through a Marxist lens. Thus, the Marxian viewpoint­
e.g., that of Lulclcs-sees Hegel's concept of the alienation of spirit as 
equivalent to Marx's concept of objectification. Against this, Hyppolite 
suggests that the two concepts are different: Even in our understanding of 
man's objectification in culture, the more fundamental fact is that he 
remains alienated from himself, and that (quite apart from the determin­
istic effects of capitalist systems) this is a feature of human self-conscious­
ness and human existence. 5 
In addition to his massive work, Genesis and Structure, Hyppolite's 
existential interpretation of Hegel is reflected in three splendid essays in 
his Studies on Marx and Hegel: "The Concept of Life and Consciousness 
of Life in Hegel's Jena Philosophy," "The Concept of Existence in the 
Hegelian Phenomenology," and "The Human Situation in the Hegelian 
Phenomenology." (It is these essays that I shall be discussing here.) 
Directing himself to the concept of existence, he notes that this concept­
as an explicit formulation-is absent in Hegel. Yet this absence is perfect­
ly consistent with Kierkegaard's view that the concept of existence cannot 
be systematized, i.e., that an existential system is impossible (even though 
Kierkegaard accused Hegel of attempting to present such a system). There 
is, however, an existential outlook in Hegel, and Hyppolite therefore says 
that the Phenomenology reveals "a philosopher much closer to Kierkegaard 
than might seem credible" (p. 23). 
True, the existential aspect is in some ways obscured by the phenom­
enological emphasis, which seeks the underlying essences in various 
worldviews. Yet the existential impact is there in Hegel's realization that 
there is an unhappiness which is implicit in our consciousness of human 
life, since we place life over against us in order to see it, and then we 
become aware that our life includes our death and our nothingness.6 In 
essence, then, when consciousness stands juxtaposed to the life it contem­
plates, we see that consciousness as such actually is opposed to life. 
In natural existence, the relation is simple and one-sided: 
Consciousness is altogether immersed in existence; it is an untroubled 
consciousness, even a "truth" of sorts. The fact is, however, that we must 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 135 
step out of life (i.e., out of its immediacy) in order to see it, and then we 
find its truth outside it, in our consciousness of it. For this, the price we 
pay is that in seeing life as a totality we negate its particular aspects. A fur­
ther price is that although we lose our naivete in the process, we add to 
our anguish. We stand outside life and now see it as "existence" -and we 
thereby become aware of death in a new and intense way as we reflect on 
what it means to exist with the prospect of death before us. 
In Hegel's earlier writings, the contrast is drawn between Greek hap­
piness (in harmonizing thought and finite iife) and the Jews as the unhap­
PY people of history (the unhappiness exemplified in the departure of 
Abraham from his original homeland, his detachment from everything 
finite as though it had no value). Only outside finitude can we conceive 
the universal. In the Phenomenology, 7 Hegel explicitly sets up the contrast 
between self-consciousness and life: self-consciousness grasps the unity of 
differences, while life is that unity. 
The wedge between life and self-consciousness is the awareness of 
death. Organic life lacks that awareness, and thus lacks the element of exis­
tence (i.e., it does not know itself as existing). In man, therefore, the con­
sciousness of existence is bound up with the concept of his death-and it 
is in that awareness that man becomes for himself The price man pays for 
rising above animal life is this painful awareness. 
In man, the desire to live is the counterpart to the awareness of death, 
and this produces a division in his awareness of life: He sees life as identi­
cal to himself, yet as alien to himself; he is in it, yet is estranged from it. 
The resolution of this dichotomy is that he sees that desire as the unity of 
the universal life, which expresses itself in a multitude of particular forms. 
Yet life confronts him in the person of another self, and it is only in this 
confrontation of selves that we arrive at self-consciousness. The con­
frontation is actually a conflict between the concepts of being-for-self and 
being-for-another, or independence and dependence. Only in the death of 
the other being do I release myself from my dependence. My being-for­
another is an estranged mode of being: Because I am nothing but an Other 
for my opponent, I am not a Self. Otherness stands opposed to selthood, 
and therefore stands opposed to self-consciousness. 
My awareness of my own death (i.e., its imminence and its inevitabil­
ity) drives me to seek my selfhood by seeking the Other's death. I therefore 
stake my life in order to authenticate my consciousness oflife.8 At the same 
time I prove my independence oflife itself. I am ready to face death because 
then it is not merely a biological death, an inchoate death, but a death of 

136 • Leo Rauch 
which I am humanly aware. This human awareness of death is the founda­
tion of a humanized world, a historical world. Life and death are no longer 
absorbed in time; they are the poles of time itself. Thus, the awareness of 
death is the basis of my capacity to negate, and of my freedom. 
In turning to consider what Hyppolite calls "the human situation" as 
depicted in the Phenomenology as a whole, we must first try to character­
ize the Phenomenology in what it aims to do. That characterization would 
then show us what possibilities are open to it for grasping the human sit­
uation. Hyppolite begins by quoting Haym's remark about the 
Phenomenology: "It is a history distorted by transcendental psychology and 
a transcendental psychology distorted by history." Of course it is neither 
of these-as I hope I have made clear so far. There is an element of histo­
ry, as a parallel track onto which Hegel's presentation will emerge from 
time to time-as when he speaks of the Enlightenment or of the Terror. 
Thus the itinerary of consciousness is shown to have gone through certain 
points that were not only essential but historically actual. This is not a dis­
tortion, as Haym suggests it is-as though the Phenomenology were a 
palimpsest in which the layers of writing (psychological, anthropological, 
historical, etc.) make one another indistinct. The Phenomenology is 
authenticated by touching on history, but it is not a history. It does not 
include historical writing as part of its methodological apparatus (and the 
same can be said for its "transcendental psychology"). 
Hyppolite aims to show that chapter N is neither a history nor a tran­
scendental psychology. But he goes farther and says that it has even less to 
do with an analysis of essence. In other words, its aim is not so much phe­
nomenological as existential. In this vein, Hyppolite states: "Hegel want­
ed to analyze the very foundations of human action. He inquired into the 
general conditions of human existence that constitute the possibility of the 
human act as such" (p. 1 54). Thus there are in every historical situation 
certain general conditions, which are constant for every human action. 
The "analysis of essence" is rejected, since it suggests that there is a 
permanent human nature. According to Hyppolite, there is no unchang­
ing human nature for Hegel. What he is inquiring about is not this but 
(in the words ofHyppolite) "the conditions of self-consciousness or of the 
very existence of man" as a way of getting to the root of history. What we 
are to see is how man's consciousness becomes the condition of his exis­
tence, and how his consciousness creates (in Hyppolite's words) "almost a 
new dimension of being, generating a history in which conscious being 
makes and reveals a rational truth" (pp. 1 5  5-5 6). 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 137 
One aspect of that human situation (as opposed to a human nature) 
is the emergence of human consciousness out of universal life. In that 
emergence, self-consciousness sees itself confronting a universal life that is 
the life of consciousness as well-identical with itself, yet other than 
itself-so that the self-consciousness sees itself as both universal and par­
ticular. This nascent contradiction emerges in full force in the Unhappy 
Consciousness, and it is the permanent contradiction we are called upon 
(as humans) to resolve. That resolution is what history is all about. Thus 
(very strangely), self-consciousness negates life by reflecting upon it, and 
from this it generates new forms of being (e.g., desire, recognition, the "I" 
that is "We," etc.). One's desire is for the world, for life itself-but then 
life is seen as an object, external to desire. As a result, desire extends itself 
into the external world, to establish and to authenticate itself there. 
Consciousness exists in its interchange with the world, desire exists as 
externalized. Only then does desire discover its own self, mediated by the 
world. In the same way, the self discovers itself in resisting its negation by 
another self. Consciousness objectifies what it knows, and it therefore 
resists being objectified itself in being known by another. This is a demand 
for a new mode of consciousness. It is the basis of intersubjectivity, on 
which all human existence depends. I enter your sphere of experience and 
I ask you to look upon me in a way that is altogether different from the 
way you have been looking at everything else. In asking you to acknowl­
edge my consciousness, I am asking you to acknowledge my being, my 
being alive. The eventual struggle is followed by labor and one-sided 
recognition given by the slave-and these are then the very conditions of 
self-consciousness for the slave. As Hyppolite says about these conditions, 
"They ground history while making it possible" (p. 163). 
What we have, therefore, are three essential elements underlying 
human history: self-consciousness, the opposition presented by the other 
self-consciousness, and the independent background of universal life. The 
mediating tie between these elements is work, which humanizes nature 
and gives it the form of self-consciousness. Nature becomes infused with 
self-consciousness; it becomes self-consciousness. Work also enables man to 
discover himself, to free himself Finally, work gives human existence a 
coherence and universality. In it, we have another dimension of recogni­
tion, as the human species makes itself what it is through its work. 
In all this, history itself is given a meaning, in the fact that self-con­
sciousness is given an independent status and is seen as operating in his­
tory. It is the universal predicate that now becomes subject, as a 

138 • Leo Rauch 
self-created truth. Thus, the truth is humanly created, yet transcends its 
human creation! Hyppolite asks how this is possible, but Hegel presents 
no answer. Yet although there is no answer, the contribution of the 
Phenomenology is in having exposed the foundations of that creativity. 
Hyppolite, in his Preface to the English edition of Studies on Marx and 
Hegel, speaks of the Phenomenology as presenting "the saga of the human 
mind as a terrestrial repetition of Dante's Divine Comedj' (p. vi). In my 
view, the first four chapters of the Phenomenology could also be described 
as presenting a secular retelling of Genesis after Eden. The difference is that 
in Eden man comes to self-knowledge by way of moral judgment: his 
entrance into good and evil leads to a sense of sin and remorse. The ser­
pent's promise-that man would be like God-has the result of moralizing 
man's self-knowledge and thereby making him man. In Hegel's world, the 
slave comes to self-consciousness by a process beginning with aggressive 
self-assertion. Further progress is slow and painful: defeat, enslavement, 
fear, self-negation. He does not yet know himself. That is in the future, in 
the Unhappy Consciousness and after. But it is easy enough to adapt the 
serpent's words to this situation: You will be like God, knowing yourself. 
As we noted, Hyppolite's existential orientation leads him to see all 
this as a clash between life and self-consciousness. (This division, too, can 
be seen as the punishment for the initial transgression, and we can express 
the penalty in Kierkegaard's terms: Ye shall live your life forward and 
understand it backward.) Thus, the division between life and self-con­
sciousness involves an ontology.9 
As with every other Hegelian dichotomy, so with life and self-con­
sciousness: the poles must be kept apart, even while the division between 
them is being resolved! The totality of life is never given in life itself; it is 
imposed by self-consciousness, which is mediated by other self-conscious­
nesses in a historical context. Thus, the totality can only come to be, but 
never be. It never is what it is, and it always is what it is not. Life is self­
identity and self-difference, immediacy and self-consciousness. As we saw, 
Hegel speaks of life's essence as "the infinitude as the overcoming of all dif­
ferences, [like] the pure motion around an axis whose self-repose is an 
absolutely restless infinity . . .
. " 1 0  To this we must add the element of spir­
it, the ego, which is an intrusion into nature: it is the "nothingness" in 
contrast to the "being" that is the natural/material reality. 
In becoming self-conscious, the problem life faces is to give itself 
content, to overcome the abstractness of the tautology I = I. Desire does 
not stay with the pursuit of its object, but points beyond itself to the 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 139 
reunion of the self with itself. It is a narcissism that is immensely pro­
ductive, since it takes the indirect route, which generates social life and 
culture by the way, before it gets back to the self. What self-consciousness 
is seeking, by going through life as its medium, is self-consciousness itself. 
And yet self-consciousness signifies a break with life-and Hyppolite 
reminds us that the full tragedy of this will be experienced by the 
Unhappy Consciousness. 
In self-consciousness, the object has gone back into itself; and in this 
reflection it has taken on the significance of life (for us and in itself). But 
in this we divide what cannot be divided, unify what is self-repelling-so 
that, once again, we have the standoff between self-consciousness and life. 
For modern existentialism, the gulf is insurmountable. Hegel sees that 
division overcome-at the level of Absolute Knowledge. Since existential­
ism rejects all absolutes but its own, life and self-consciousness remain 
unreconciled for it. 
Sartre and Merleau-Ponty 
The influence of Hegel on subsequent thinkers is now recognized as 
immense. Merleau-Ponty acknowledged that influence in a sweeping 
statement: "All the great philosophical ideas of the past century-the 
philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existen­
tialism, and psychoanalysis-had their beginnings in Hegel." 1 1  
Obviously, so broad an impact cannot have stemmed from one idea 
or one contribution of Hegel's. Nor could we easily find a common doc­
trinal basis, shared by all these movements, that would be traceable to 
Hegel. Yet there is at least one attitude shared by Hegel's successors that is 
traceable to him: a sensitivity to paradox and dialectic. The world, con­
sciousness, society-all present themselves in a series of divisions that 
remain polarized just as they are being overcome and resolved into unity; 
the unities themselves are at the same time dualities. Indeed, a thought 
that does not display this or a similar many-sidedness lacks some essential 
truth element. 
Hegel thereby enables us to see the unresolved ambivalence that has 
left its mark on human existence. It is what makes possible, even neces­
sary, our speaking of anything that is characteristically human as not being 
what it is, and being what it is not. As I pointed out, the difference 
between Hegel and modern existentialism is that for Hegel there is a final 

140 • Leo l?Jzuch 
resolution of these paradoxes, but at the highest level: that which he calls 
Absolute Knowledge. At any level but the highest, therefore, life is incom­
mensurable with strict consistency. And from this we may return to the 
view-which we can now appreciate as the foundation of existentialism­
that life and self-consciousness remain not only distinct but juxtaposed, 
and not only juxtaposed but in an actual clash. 
Hegel enunciated this, as we saw, in the opening paragraphs of chap­
ter N. That division can be given any number of trite versions. The point, 
however, is not to opt for the one pole over the other, but to maintain the 
tension between them. That tension can be eased at any number of points; 
but the lower down in the cognitive scale the "resolution" is procured, the 
lesser the insight. Real wisdom keeps its paradoxes in full view-until the 
irresistible resolution is achieved at the highest level. 
The paradoxes of selfhood are precisely of this sort: i.e., we can take 
them as pointing to a yet higher level of insight where the paradoxicality 
would be fully resolved, or we can stay with them at the simplest level and 
see them there as the ultimate characterization of the sel£ 
Thus, it appears that Hegel and Sartre12 are in opposition regarding 
the essential nature of selfhood: Hegel says that my selfhood depends for 
its very existence upon its recognition by another self, while Sartre says 
that in this dependency my self-consciousness is inauthentic, and that 
whatever is marked by such dependence is the source of what is false. 
More specifically, although Hegel and Sartre both begin their analyses 
from the standpoint of the conflicts that underlie the master-slave 
encounter, Hegel moves beyond this toward an ultimate synthesis, while 
Sartre sees the conflicts that underlie the encounter as irreconcilable. 
Thus, it turns out that Sartre, when discussing self-consciousness, is not 
discussing merely the self-consciousness of the slave, whose selfhood is 
incomplete because it is dependent; rather, he is discussing consciousness 
as such, where the primary fact is the mutual exclusion which generates a 
plurality of consciousnesses. This is why the individualistic cogito cannot 
be the point of departure for philosophy: i.e., because selfhood is multi­
ple, and the ego emanates from a complex relation of mutual recognition 
and exclusion. 
In a nutshell, according to Sartre, we can state Hegel's view as follows: 
The statement "I am I" is a tautology, with all content drained out of it; 
but in actuality it is not a tautology at all: first, because the two occur­
rences of "I" have different meanings (as subject and as object), although 
their reference is the same; second, because the statement must involve the 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 141 
mediating intervention of another self, so that I arrive at my self-con­
sciousness via the self-consciousness of another. The paradox, however, is 
that although the other's mediation is needed, my selfhood is achieved 
through the exclusion of everything but the sel£ Thus, "I am I" needs the 
other, yet excludes the other-and it needs to exclude the other so that the 
statement can acquire content. (For Hegel, we at least attempt to resolve 
the standoff by struggling for mastery; for Sartre, this impasse is the per­
manent and irresolvable condition of selfhood.) The other, in the mean­
time, is in the same situation-that of interrelated dependence and 
autonomy. The proliferation of mutual awarenesses, dependencies, and 
exclusions (e.g., I know you knowing me, who knows you, etc.) leads to a 
multiple overlay of consciousnesses, an illegible palimpsest. & Sartre says, 
in characterizing Hegel, "Consciousnesses are directly supported by one 
another in a reciprocal imbrication of their being . . . .  The road of interi­
ority passes through the Other" (p. 236)-and "the other penetrates me 
to the heart" (p. 237). 
In Sartre's view, Hegel spells out the complex interrelation between 
self-consciousnesses in cognitive terms, while what ought to be emphasized 
is the existential aspect. Not only is the master the truth for the slave, the 
slave's own essential being depends upon the essential being of the master 
(as the Other). Thus (for Same), Hegel formulated the interrelation in 
terms of reciprocal knowledge, while it should have been formulated in 
terms of reciprocal being or reality. Presumably, it is knowledge that is the 
measure of being, for Hegel, while the reverse is actually the case. In 
Hegel's idealism, absolute being is identical to knowledge, and it is this 
identification that Sartre seeks to dethrone, so as to give primacy to being. 
This is, at best, a superficial reading of Hegel. A mark of that super­
ficiality is in the characteristic way existentialism (beginning with 
Kierkegaard) has accused Hegel of excessive rationalism-although it was 
Hegel who emphasized reason's inadequacy when removed from concrete 
reality. Another mark of that superficiality is in the way existentialism has 
so often ignored its debt to Hegel, so that its perennial problem has been 
how to criticize Hegel without endangering its dependence on him. That 
the problem of adapting Hegel to an existential viewpoint is a problem for 
existentialism , is another token of its superficiality. (Will this require 
standing Hegel on his head?) 
The important point, for Sartre, is that self-consciousness is not a 
form of knowing but a form of being. Thus, self-consciousness is not self­
knowledge but self-negation: I dissolve myself into myself as a self; and 

142 • Leo Rauch 
this is not at all a case of the ego referring to itself, but of being a being 
that is independent of whatever it knows, a consciousness that preexists 
whatever it knows-even (and especially) if what it knows is itsel£ 
In Sartre's view, Hegel can be charged with an unwarrantable "opti­
mism," and this has two sides: First there is an epistemological optimism 
that says that the truth of self-consciousness can be manifested in a recip­
rocal relation (even though the master-slave relation is not reciprocal but 
one-sided). In risking my life, it seems I can separate my life from my con­
sciousness-even though my life, as it turns out, is utterly inseparable 
from the other's consciousness, and my own consciousness is fundamen­
tally modified in being known by the other. It is as though, despite every­
thing, I am fixed, penetrated, and objectified by the other. 
Against this, Sartre says that the being of self-consciousness is such 
that its own being is in question, and this self-negation is what interiority 
is. Its being is that of "being what it is not and of not being what it is" (p. 
241). My selfhood is therefore independent of all otherness and all objec­
tivity. I am what I make myself, and this is not an object for me, nor is it 
the separable thing that Hegel suggests it is when he speaks of the self as 
object for the other. 
According to Sartre, therefore, Hegel says that my being is as an 
appearance for the other, although this is not what I take as I. In this way, 
Sartre seeks to reject Hegel's view of the interrelation between autonomy 
and dependence. For Sartre, autonomy is distinct from such dependence, 
since my temporal stream of consciousness is accessible to me alone, not 
to the other. This is why the other cannot know me, and why I cannot see 
myself objectively from the outside, as the other sees me. For me to see 
myself in the other, I would have to apprehend the other as subject, in his 
interiority-which I obviously cannot do. I cannot be him in the same 
subjective sense in which he says "I." For the same reason, I can only be a 
subject for me. 
For Hegel, the notion of self-consciousness includes my self-con­
sciousness and the other's consciousness of me. For Sartre, the two are not 
at all commensurable (but Hegel never said they were!), and they cannot 
be subsumed under the one heading of "Self-Consciousness." This is why 
(in Sartre's view) Hegel's epistemological optimism must fail: the subject 
(experienced by me as "I") and the object (experienced by me as Other) 
cannot be equated in their meaning. (Does Hegel seek to use their identi­
ty of reference as a basis for their identity of meaning? I think not. On the 
contrary, he keeps the two apart, and emphasizes their difference.) 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 143 
The other optimism of Hegel is an ontological optimism which says 
that the truth can be grasped as a whole by the philosophical spectator 
who stands outside both subject and object, so that the plurality is over­
come in the totality. Yet as Sartre sees it, Hegel holds to this view only 
because "he has forgotten his own consciousness" (p. 243) and he can 
therefore ignore the problem of the connection between his individual 
consciousness and that of the other, having abstracted from his own. "But 
ifHegel has forgotten himself, we can not forget Hegel" (p. 243). Our sep­
arate consciousnesses could be equated if they could be reduced to knowl­
edge as a common denominator. But this cannot be, as we saw, since the 
!-subject does not know himself as the Other-object knows him. This 
means that I cannot transcend my selfhood. 
It also means that we must go back to the interiority of the cogito after 
al-and that ultimately this is, for Sartre, the sole point of departure in 
philosophy-however much the other person may modify my interiority. 
The multiplicity of consciousnesses cannot be overcome. No totality can 
include my consciousness (experienced as mine) and the consciousnesses 
of others (as theirs). This is the scandal of philosophy, as Sartre sees it, and 
no optimism can overcome it. 
If Hegel had ever believed that this is possible, then it would be true 
to say of him that "he never grasped the nature of that particular dimen­
sion of being which is self-consciousness" (p. 244). Even if we could show 
the relation between the other's self-consciousness and my own, this 
would serve to overcome the intermonadal division. Does Hegel indeed 
aim at overcoming the monadic nature of self-consciousness? I do not 
think so. In my view, he presents the master-slave scenario as the response 
but not as the solution to the problem. However that may be, Sartre 
regards the separation (and conflict) as insuperable-while Hegel finds its 
resolution at the higher level that is Absolute Knowledge. 
Sartre accuses Hegel of having "forgotten consciousness" in having 
forgotten his own-as though it were the philosopher's task to put him­
self in the place of human experiences in their multiplicity, and to reca­
pitulate the career of human consciousness by reliving that generalized 
process in himself Yet Hegel, in his Introduction, had deliberately 
eschewed that path (rather than forgetting it, as though by an oversight). 
(erleau-Ponty refers to that point, made by Hegel. For Merleau-Ponty, it 
15 ΍ere that Hegel's existentialism truly begins: the connection (between 
philosophy and experience) is not in the philosopher's vicarious reiteration 
of (say) the path from Stoicism to the Unhappy Consciousness; rather, it 

144 • Leo Rauch 
is in his revelation of "the immanent logic of human experience in all its 
sectors," as Merleau-Ponty says (p. 65). Thus, the philosopher may weU be 
able to disclose what it means to be an Unhappy Consciousness, but his 
path to this revelation is cognitive and discursive. 
The philosopher's aim, as Merleau-Ponty indicates, is to see man in 
confrontation with the world and to show man's religion, culture, and 
mcial system emerging in that confrontation. Only in this way does "expe­
rience" take on that "tragic resonance" it has in ordinary language-when 
we speak of "experience" as something we live through and undergo as a 
trial. 
Hegel does not view man as a fully self-possessed consciousness, but 
rather as a life-entirely responsible for itself while trying to understand 
itsel£ This is what is existential in Hegel. As Merleau-Ponty says, "All of 
the Phlnomlnologie de !'esprit describes man's efforts to reappropriate him­
;elf" {p. 65). Man begins in the subjective "certainty" of his beliefs, and he 
<tcts in accordance with that certainty, only to find those bdiefs confuted 
by objective "truth." He then modifies that "certainty" to conform to that 
"truth," only to have that new "certainty" overthrown by yet another 
"truth." This is repeated, time and again, until subjectivity and objectivi­
ty coalesce, when (presumably) man attains spiritual maturity. Yet if he 
were to attain it, he would be like an animal completely at home in the 
world. On the contrary, what characterizes man (as Merleau-Ponty sees 
Hegel's existential view of man) is not the attainment but the movement 
toward it! 
This is what Marx did not see, of course. The sociopolitical revolu­
tion would bring about an end to history, but this would also signifY an 
ᅍnd to humanness, not its fulfillment (as Marx expected), because human­
tless is movement, not stasis. Only the inert object (or the animal in 
tlature) is what it is; man is what he is not. This is because man is mind 
and spirit, and his essence is negation. Human consciousness is the 
absolute dialectical unrest, seeking to return to itself-but without the 
self-limiting determinacy that such a return would mean, were it to lead 
to rest. 
Once again, we see the conflict between life and consciousness that 
marked the opening of chapter IV of the Phenomenology. It is also spelled 
out in Hegel's Introduction, where he says that self-consciousness is driv­
en beyond the "natural" in life and is therefore the death of that life. 
Consciousness goes beyond the limits of natural life-which means going 
beyond its own sel£ Consciousness thereby corrupts whatever temporary 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 14 5 
satisfaction it finds. It may well seek to avoid such truth and seek rest in 
an unthinking inertia. But it cannot find it: its own thought disturbs its 
desire to remain unthinking, as its own unrest disturbs its inertia. Thus, 
what characterizes man-in this clash between life and our consciousness 
of it-is man's capacity for negation, for not being what he is, for being (as 
Merleau-Ponty says) "an existence without an essence." 
With our consciousness of life a disturbance of life sets in-we 
become aware of death. "To be aware of death and to think or reason are 
one and the same thing," Merleau-Ponty says (p. 67), "since one thinks 
only by disregarding what is characteristic oflife [i.e., the natural and iner­
tial] and thus by conceiving death." In addition to living and reproducing, 
we are aware that we exist rather than merely live. (It is interesting how our 
common parlance reverses the order and value of "existing" and "living": 
one wants not merely to exist but to live.) For Merleau-Ponty human exis­
tence supervenes human life, and thus human life "can only be thought of 
as revealed to a consciousness of life which denies it." 
This denial of the natural life and our emergence into existence can­
not but be disturbing. It is the price man pays for his humanity-which 
is why Hegel says (in the Realphilosophie that precedes the Phenomenology 
by a year), "Man is a sick animal," i.e., sickened by being no longer in 
nature. Merleau-Ponty expresses this by saying: "All consciousness is there­
fore unhappy, since it knows it is a secondary form of life and misses the 
innocence from which it senses it came" (p. 67). It is this sense of separa­
tion that Judaism gave to the world-in contrast to the Hellenic "happi­
ness." (Merleau-Ponty recalls that Hyppolite told his students, during the 
war, that we are all Jews to the extent that we care about the universal, 
refuse to accept mere being, and want to exist.) 
Consciousness of the universal is consciousness of our death. Yet this 
must go beyond itself: In the negation of life is the affirmation of it, 
because in thinking of how death puts an end to life I assert life. This is 
why the slave's consciousness, having been closer to death, can grasp life 
more fully than the master can. This is only a step toward maturity, not its 
attainment-nor anything like a conceptual grasp of existence (which is 
another reason why Sartre is wrong in taking the master-slave relation as 
emblematic of the human relation as such). 
The slave has learned what death is-and it is here that Hegel ceases 
to be an existentialist, in Hyppolite's view, since the slave's awareness is not 
retained as the core but is transformed into cultural configurations (e.g. 
Stoicism). The contradiction between pour soi and pour les autres is not 

146 • Leo Rauch 
overcome, merely evaded. The dialectic does not go on but is truncated, as 
Merleau-Ponty says (p. 69). (It is as though the slave developed Stoicism 
instead of grasping his own existence, or as though Christianity stands in 
the way of his becoming fully conscious of it conceptually. What this 
means is that culture is a "false consciousness"-almost in a Marxian sense!) 
Hegel's phenomenological process may thus lead us to a philosophy of 
Church or Party [i.e., an ideology?] , but it is no longer (in Merleau-Ponty's 
view) the philosophy of the individual that is existentialism. 
That objection, however, is hardly to the point. Since Hegel is con­
cerned with the dialectic of culture as it emerges from the conflict of indi­
viduals, he cannot be expected to have stayed at that personal conflict. 
Once having shown personhood to be incomplete for both master and 
slave, there was nowhere to go but beyond these "individuals" and toward 
culture. That transition-from the personal to the cultural and historical­
is a necessary part of the human process. (As Heidegger shows us, in Being 
and Time, our grasp of our own existence, as individual, must lead to a 
grasp of history.) As Merleau-Ponty seems to indicate, the existentialism in 
Hegel is in the implications rather than in any explicit formulations: Thus, 
we see it in the awareness of the universality affirmed or implied by the 
mere fact of our being; and in the half-hidden sense that our conscious life 
has lost its innocence merely by having emerged from nature. 
From this point of view, Hegel and Merleau-Ponty share the view that 
(at a certain stage, at least) consciousness must be unhappy. There is this 
difference, however, in the two views of the Unhappy Consciousness: For 
Hegel, the Christian consciousness is unhappy because it is not God; for 
Merleau-Ponty, consciousness (in general) is unhappy because it is no 
longer Nature. Hegel's Unhappy Consciousness yearns for what it can 
never become; Merleau-Ponty's unhappy consciousness yearns for what it 
has been and has lost. 
Heidegger 
The Phenomenology does not aim at presenting a metaphysical world sys­
tem. Yet there are a number of problems in the Phenomenology chat could 
possibly be resolved by reference to Hegel's world system (as presented in 
his Encyclopaedia). This approach is warranted by the fact that the 
Phenomenology itself points co its completion in such a broader context: 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 147 
thus, the 1807 title page presents the Phenomenology of Spirit as Part One 
of a "System of Science"-presumably more comprehensive than the 
Phenomenology as it now stands. 
Let us now turn to one of the fundamental problems in the 
Phenomenology and see whether the reference to a broader science might 
help resolve it. Earlier, we noted Hegel's uncertain transition from the 
individual consciousnesses of the master and the slave to the sociocultural 
consciousness embodied in Stoicism, Skepticism, and Christianity. In this 
transition there is perhaps a more fundamental chasm than can easily be 
bridged . Hegel uses the term "consciousness" as though it can be applied 
as easily to the atomic individual as to molecular society, without further 
ado. What he does not show is how the "consciousness" that is expressed 
in a sociocultural configuration emerges (with logical necessity) out of the 
consciousness that expresses the individual's worldview. That is, he may 
have succeeded in showing why the slave comes to think about his world 
and himself in something like a Stoic or a Christian mode; what is not 
shown is why this should lead us to consider Stoicism or Christianity as 
the world outlook of an entire cultural era, which is the next inevitable 
step in the evolution of consciousness per se. 
What we are not given, then, is a picture of how societal conscious­
ness emerges (as a matter of logical necessity) out of the individual con­
sciousness. This lack is emblematic of a still more basic one: Hegel does 
not show us how consciousness and spirit emerge out of the natural set­
ting. The emergence of a cultural spirit out of individual consciousness 
would certainly be illuminated by the picture of the emergence of Spirit 
out of Nature. Hegel attempts to present such a continuum in the 
Encyclopaedia, but the attempt is by no means successful, in view of the 
difference between the two realms-a difference that he himself empha­
SIZes. 
Nature and Spirit are as different from one another, ontologically, as 
space is from time. Granting this difference, how does the individual go 
from the one to the other-leaving Nature behind him and approaching 
Spirit-and achieve his humanness in the process? It is an unresolved rid­
dle--and as such it is another philosophic scandal, animating the think­
ing of philosophers as different from one another as Hegel and Heidegger. 
The emergence of humanness-out of Nature and into Spirit, out of 
inert being and into self-conscious awareness-this is Heidegger's tacit 
theme, as it is Hegel's. Although neither of them takes up this them: in 
any great detail, what is common to the two is that the element of nme 

148 • Leo Rauch 
provides the connection between the two realms. Heidegger discusses this 
in a chapter of Being and Time. 13 
What we do not see (in Hegel) is how the connection is made. We 
know only that time is common to both-although the types of "time" in 
each realm differ as each realm differs from the other. Thus, if natural time 
differs from spiritual time (i.e., time as we are aware of it in our human 
experience) then we have not bridged the chasm between Nature and 
Spirit at all. What we do know is one side of that chasm: human time. 
We can almost say that our awareness of time is the necessary condi­
tion of our humanization: We come to a conscious grasp of ourselves as 
human when we realize that our conscious life is temporal in essence. It is 
this realization that gives our conscious life the dimension of spirit and 
lifts that life out of the merely natural. Heidegger characterizes Hegel as 
saying that the actualization of spirit involves its foll into time. Is it a "fall" 
in Merleau-Ponty's sense of a fall from innocence? Or is it a fall out of the 
immanence of natural life into self-consciousness? However that may be, 
man's entrance into human time is as fundamental and cataclysmic a "fall" 
as Adam's, and just as pregnant with meaning for man: it is the beginning 
of man's self-awareness as human; with that awareness he sees that his 
humanness is in his mortality! 
This is one feature we can point to as uniquely human in its ambiva­
lence: it is a realization that is negative in its content but positive in its 
effects. Indeed, we may say that the most positive aspects of our self­
awareness as human arise precisely in such negativity-the negativity 
inherent in consciousness itself. Consciousness is imbued with negativity 
in that it grasps its object (out there in the world) as not-I; and when con­
sciousness comes to grasp itself as creating its world, this is a negating of 
that negativity. That is, consciousness grasps itself as self-conscious and 
sees this as producing its world-and as a capacity belonging to spirit as 
such, not to this individual alone. It is a universal that is individual. 
At least two consequences flow from this self-reflection of conscious­
ness: its freedom (as revealed in its absolute restlessness) and its self-man­
ifestation (expressing itself in an infinitude of possibilities). Now, it is 
thoroughly typical of Hegel to speak of a social consciousness in terms that 
characterize the consciousness of the individual. (For example, since the 
individual consciousness is free and infinite, so is the sociocultural con­
sciousness-and in the same way! The characteristics of the one are ascrib­
able to the other. The ultimate extension of this parallelism is to be found 
in that historic "reason" that orchestrates the social self-consciousnesses of 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 149 
nation-states and is their final arbiter.) Thus, there is no difficulty, for 
Hegel, in making the connection. Indeed, he does it all too easily, and it 
is so unproblematic as to be merely assumed, never argued for and demon­
strated. The personal self-consciousness and the sociocultural self-con­
sciousness are reflections of the one realm of Spirit. Yet the hiatus remains. 
A similar hiatus obtains in chapter IV of the Phenomenology. As we 
noted, Hegel goes from the self-consciousness of the master and slave to 
the cultural self-consciousness expressed in Stoicism, etc.-as though 
there were nothing problematic abo ut the transition. Both levels involve 
the negation of the negation; both display freedom and infinitude. 
Heidegger seems to suggest that with a proper analysis of human time­
consciousness, the hiatus could be overcome. We need not belabor the cen­
trality of the temporal element in all this. It is enough to point out that (for 
Hegel) our thoughts follow one another in the concatenation of their log­
ical (nontemporal) connections, while the chain itself has a temporal 
dimension-as we see in the progression from Stoicism to Skepticism to 
Christianity. It is perhaps this temporal link that allows Hegel to go so eas­
ily from the personal level to the sociocultural. The logical connection 
(between premises and conclusion) is nontemporal; yet my own iteration 
of that connection occurs as the temporal process that is my thinking. In 
the same way, a cultural configuration has certain implications immanent 
within it; yet their actualization occurs in historical time. 
The bridge between the two self-consciousnesses (individual and 
social) is thus provided by certain metaphysical assumptions in regard to 
time. Time is the dimension in which the individual consciousness oper­
ates-as long as time itself is not annulled when self-consciousness grasps 
itself as being in time. Once the individual self-consciousness grasps itself 
in this way, as being in time, its grasp of time itself is an empty intuition­
an intuition that is nontemporal! This reveals the ontological chasm 
between the actual operation of consciousness in time and the nontempo­
ral self-awareness-so pithily expressed by Kierkegaard (in a Journal entry 
of 1843) with the remark that life is lived forward but is understood back­
ward. We might therefore say that the "fall" into the awareness of tempo­
rality is a "fall" out of temporality as lived. As Hegel puts it, time is the 
pure self when it is not grasped by the self; and to the extent that the self 
does grasp itself it annuls its temporal form (i.e., steps out of its temporal 
form as lived, forward). This supposedly illuminates the close connec­
tion-even a reciprocal relation-between time as such and the individ­
ual consciousness or spirit. 

150 • Leo Rauch 
That nascent connection is made manifest in world history, but it 
must be seen in contrast to the nonhuman environment (because it is pre­
cisely this contrast that unites the individual and the social as founded on 
human time): While nature is essentially spatial, spirit is essentially tem­
poral. "World history is the development of Spirit in time, just as Nature 
is the development of the Idea in space."14 Whatever may be the ambigu­
ity of "falling" into time for the individual consciousness, the historical 
consciousness (of a society) becomes what it is by overcoming its natural 
base and becoming aware of itself in its process. This may begin with the 
individual who regards his own being as a being-in-process, pointed 
toward death. He comes to see his individual aims as projects to be ful­
filled in society, by means of its goals. Yet these social goals must them­
selves be grasped as temporal-spirit itself must "fall" into time as a way 
of becoming actualized. Parallel, then, to what Hegel says about time and 
individual consciousness, there is his characterization of social time as the 
"fate and necessity" (das Schicksal und die Notwendigkeit), ! 5  besetting spir­
it in its incompleteness-that is, the necessity to enrich the role of self­
consciousness in conscious social life, to activate that social consciousness 
by taking it out of its immanence so that it is revealed and realized. 
Much of what I have said is an enlargement of Heidegger's com­
pressed discussion of Hegel's view of the connection between time and 
spirit. Heidegger is correct in pointing out that what Hegel omits is an 
examination of "whether the way in which spirit is essentially constituted 
as the negating of a negation, is possible in any other manner than on the 
basis of a primordial temporality" (pp. 485-86)-i.e., why and how tem­
porality enters into the very essence of spirit in the first place. 
This seems to point to the need for an existential rounding out of 
Hegel, which Heidegger claims to give. The question to be asked, there­
fore, is not whether it can be given an existential interpretation (which 
obviously can be given) but whether Hegel's outlook demands such an 
interpretation-as its logical fulfillment. 
Hegel's existential outlook manifests itself at a number of important 
and characteristic points: As we saw, the negating capacity and freedom in 
self-consciousness leave man's ultimate characterization entirely open. No 
man can choose, with any finality, what it is to be man-although he does 
and must choose all the time. Man is what he is not. Yet despite this exis­
tential outlook of Hegel's, it is apparently in regard to the question of tem­
porality that Heidegger sees the difference between himself and Hegel. 
Heidegger contrasts his existential analytic of Dasein with Hegel's 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 151 
analysis of human temporality: Heidegger says that his own analysis begins 
with the human situation of"thrownness" into time, while Hegel must yet 
arrive at that human temporal situation as the logical outcome of spirit's 
own phenomenology. Thus, Heidegger's analysis shows temporality to be 
the precondition of human existence qua human. For Hegel (in the view 
of Heidegger) spirit preexists and then "falls" into time; for Heidegger, 
spirit already exists as the primordial temporalizing of temporality itself. 
For Hegel, it is we who humanize time by becoming human ourselves 
and thereby authenticating time (i.e., making it authentic for us). Thus, 
time is the dimension of our self-realization. So far, Heidegger seems to 
agree with Hegel. For Heidegger, however, it is not Spirit that falls into 
time; rather, in our factical existence (i.e., our self-awareness in our con­
tingency, etc.), it is as if we had fallen away (verfollen} from some primor­
dial and supposedly authentic temporality. In this way, Heidegger avoids 
the metaphysical component that Hegel seems to be introducing here-a 
world spirit-and rather than speak of a fallen Spirit (cosmic or human), 
Heidegger would prefer to speak of a human "fallenness" as a feature of 
the human situation. 
Thus, as self-aware human beings, we now see ourselves as existing 
rather than as merely alive, i.e., in a self-awareness that goes beyond the 
biological. We have wrested the concept of our existence out of our imma­
nent lifo by becoming self-conscious. This opens us to unlimited existen­
tial possibilities as well as imposing definite limits we have become newly 
aware of; yet despite this richly dangerous humanization, the one-way 
transition from an unknowing and uncaring life to a self-concerned exis­
tence is like a transition from a primordial life (in which we feel no time) 
to an existence wherein we have entered a temporalized temporality. 
Yet I cannot agree with the contrast Heidegger draws between Hegel's 
fall of Spirit and his own human "fall." Since Hegel characterizes Spirit as 
temporal in its very essence, it is already temporal at the outset, before any 
"fal" can have (or need have) occurred. Temporality is spirit's essential 
dimension (for Hegel), and this includes human spirituality in a concrete 
sense. This suggests that Hegel's outlook does not require an existential 
completion-since it is already existential in its deepest fabric. 
The difference has to do with the conception of what the 
Phenomenology itself is. We have seen how a number of critics have char­
acterized the book in dynamic terms (as a universalized biography, as the 
itinerary of consciousness, as the experience of the species, etc.). Hegel 
himself speaks in this way in his Introduction, characterizing phenome-

152 • Leo Rauch 
nology as "the path of natural consciousness pressing forward to true 
knowledge, or as the way of the soul journeying through the succession of 
its own configurations," as though this path were ordained by its own 
nature (als durch ihre Natur). 16 In view of that dynamic approach, the 
Phenomenology must be seen as a continuum that is in the process of dis­
closing its own implicit content. And in the light of that continuum we 
can see that Hegel's view of the temporal character of spirit is implicitly 
and already existential. Heidegger does not see it that way. He explicitly 
rejects as misleading the idea that the Phenomenology is an itinerary, the 
description of a journey. 17 Such a view, he says, makes an implicit dis­
tinction between merely phenomenal knowledge and true knowledge as 
yet to be attained (as though its purpose were to lead us through a muse­
um of the shapes of consciousness, after which we go through a special 
door into Absolute Knowledge). Rather, what the book really intends is 
the presentation of phenomenal knowledge in its appearance. Yet 
Heidegger admits that there is a distance here, between natural conscious­
ness and absolute knowledge, and that the Phenomenology oscillates 
between them. 
If that is so, then it would seem possible that Hegel would see mod­
ern existential analysis (such as that of Heidegger) as itself an intermedi­
ary stage inside the museum, to be left behind eventually. Perhaps this 
implication is what Heidegger seeks to avoid, in order to accord to his 
analysis an absolute status of its own, beyond the door. 
Gada mer 
I now turn to two important essays by Gadamer. 18 The problems they 
address can be presented as follows: 
In our "objective" view of the world, we tend to slight or ignore the 
role of subjectivity in creating that world. When that happens, our "objec­
tivity" spawns the contradictions that will eventually shatter it. The solu­
tion is not simply a matter of striking a "balance" between them-as 
though we were to say that objectivity without subjectivity is blind, sub­
jectivity without objectivity is empty. That approach does not tell us how 
they actually are mediated by one another, and thus leaves them as far 
apart as ever. Rather, what must be revealed is the subjective shaping of the 
world's objectivity; only then do both "aspects" become genuine as one 
totality. 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 153 
To get beyond the falsely isolated "objectivity," we must begin by 
showing up that objectivity as spurious; this means suspending that 
objectivity, so that what was first seen as real is now seen as unreal. It 
is a twofold disillusionment: epistemic and evaluative. Not only is "real­
ity" overturned, but what was valued in the former world picture 
is disvalued in the new one. This is the dialectical path taken by all 
enlightenment. There is the temptation to stay with a simple division­
e.g., between the sensible and the intelligible world, or between the 
commonsense world as naively accepted and the world as scientifically 
understood.19 The real challenge, however, is to see how the two sides are 
one reality. 
What Hegel insists on is that the grasp of that unity must begin by 
casting the heretofore accepted world into doubt. Thus, in 1802, in writ­
ing the opening manifesto of the newly established Critical Journal of 
Philosophy (which he co-edited and co-authored with Schelling), Hegel 
says: "Philosophy is by its nature something esoteric . . .  it is philosophy 
only in that it is directly opposed to the understanding and moreover to 
sound common sense . . . .  In relation to this, the world of philosophy [i.e., 
the world as grasped by true philosophy] is in and for itself an inverted 
world."20 Is it an antiworld? 
What this statement omits is the point made by Hegel later on: that 
the inversion is overcome by means of a perspicuous return to subjectivity, 
and that such a return is provided by a phenomenology of spirit. The 
underlying problem in the Phenomenology is how that return is to be con­
ducted. We may go from the self-conscious study of consciousness to the 
study of self-consciousness itself-but only if we know what it is that 
impels that transition in the first place. 
Thus, the two themes-(a) the philosophically inverted world, and 
(b) the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness-complement 
one another. But that complementarity is one of shared problems as well 
as of shared solutions. In effect, the philosopher loses the world and gains 
his own soul, but in so doing he regains the world and sees it anew. 
As we saw, Hegel made the point that we cannot expect consciousness 
to turn to self-consciousness on its own, automatically. That is because 
consciousness is individual and subjective, and what we need is a way of 
overcoming the individuality in that subjectivity. When I discussed 
Hegel's chapter III, above ("Before 'Self-Consciousness"'), I spoke of the 
view that the dialectical reversal transforms (for us) the tranquilly lawful 
World into a dynamic world of change, so that what we have is a unified 

154 • Leo Rauch 
supersensible world driven back upon itself, as both the law and its inver­
sion-and that is now the real world. This world process of self-recursion 
runs parallel to the self-reflection on the part of consciousness. Yet the two 
must not be regarded as distinct or separable, for then we are still at the 
level of individuality and subjectivity. We must advance to self-conscious­
ness regarded as spirit in general. That is, we must go from ego cogito to 
spiritus cogitam. 
The transition proceeds dialectically, through contradiction and over­
coming. We surrender our self-contradictory aisthesis of a particular thing 
and go on to view its inner essence as universal, by means of pure think­
ing, noein. Through it, we arrive at "what remains in disappearance" (das 
Bleiben im Verschwinden). And as Gadamer points out, this does not refer 
to a Platonic supersensible world opposed to the world of evanescent 
appearances, but rather to the truth of the disappearing world itself: i.e., 
appearance seen as appearance, the phenomenal as law-what Hegel calls 
"the stable image of unstable appearance" (dem bestiindigen Bilde der 
unsteten Erscheinung). 2 1  
Yet Hegel does not stay with this, but regards it as a first step, still falling 
short of reality because it does not comprise all reality. It is still enmeshed in 
the network of impersonal "forces"-a view he seeks to overcome because it 
does not give full play to the creative nature of subjectivity. 
The perceived world has been seen against the background of the uni­
versal, but this renders the perceived world unreal. The philosophic world 
is still "inverted." Notice that Hegel does not set up a division between an 
illusory world of mere appearance as against a supersensible world of high­
er reality. (He brands such a division superficial.) The truth is more com­
plex: the true picture is of a supersensible world that includes both the 
supersensible and the sensible, so that the opposition is turned back on 
itsel£ This is the basis of the inversion. What makes it problematic is, as 
Hegel says, that the inverted world contains the world it inverts; it is its 
own inversion, itself and its opposite in a unity. The two are distinguish­
able because the existing world is never adequate to the world as theoreti­
cally conceived. For Hegel, however, the result is not that the existing world 
is rigidified as inadequate, but that in its inverted form it must be inverted 
once again, so that the world is reflected into itself, and so that its truth is 
no longer its opposite but is at one with it: the complete world is the the­
oretical (lawful) world and its imperfect instances, as Gadamer says (p. 47). 
How are these to be synthesized? One is tempted to say that the rein­
version of the inverted world is a "return to itself," which parallels the 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 155 
return of consciousness to itself in self-consciousness. We would then have 
an ontological reversion mirrored in an epistemological reversion-except 
that this neat parallel and distinction is just the sort of simplification 
Hegel would wish to overcome. The idea that reality has two tandem 
aspects can never present a final view of reality but only a challenging 
antithesis to be resolved. Just as he rejects the possibility of another world 
above and beyond the sensible-but rather insists that the realm of laws 
does not constitute a second realm, and that the existing world is itself the 
realm oflaws-so he ultimately rejects the idea of two independent rever­
sions, one in the world and another in consciousness. On the contrary, the 
world returns to itself by way of consciousness. As Gadamer says, it is 
Hegel's aim to show "nature as the real foundation of spirit's actualization 
of itself" (p. 55). But to this we should add that for Hegel this is the same 
as showing spirit as the basis for the career of nature! 
What Gadamer shows us is the Kantian element in Hegel's picture­
and the way he overcomes Kant. We need an understanding of Kant in 
order to understand Hegel; but Hegel himself shows us that there is more 
to what he says. The Kantian element comes out in Hegel's view that Force 
is not merely an objective aspect of the world, but that it is itself a func­
tion of the understanding, imposed by the understanding. This is why, in 
the ultimate inversion, differences are identities, and identities differences. 
The supposedly "objective" and independent world is entirely a creation 
and extension of mind. In the final analysis, therefore, our scientific pic­
ture of the world is nothing other than the understanding experiencing 
itself {sich selbst erfohrt), as Hegel says.22 
In view of this identity of the understanding and the world (rather 
than a parallelism between them), the transition from consciousness to 
self-consciousness is achieved. In truly grasping the process of the world 
we grasp our own shaping of it, and thus we grasp ourselves. Thus, we 
overcome the Kantian division between the thing as it is in itself and as it 
is for us. The world goes as mind goes, not because the one reflects the 
other, but because the two are one dialectical process. One and the same 
fabric underlies both. 
How is this demonstrated? "How is the certainty of consciousness 
that it is all reality . . .  demonstrated?" This is the question to which 
Gadamer addresses himself in his second essay. 
If the purpose of reason is to lay hold of reality, then it certainly 
Would seem a counterproductive policy to divide the two. The Platonic 
approach is to elevate both to a higher level at which alone they can meet; 

156 • Leo Rauch 
but this only attenuates the connection. The gap is in some way bridged 
in Hegel's idea that since the understanding has created its world, it is in 
contact with itself when it grasps and understands that world. (I say "in 
some way," because we must go on to show Reason in this role.) 
Chapter III of the Phenomenology shows how our understanding cre­
ates its world and gives it its badge of "objectivity." The Understanding 
can separate the world from itself only because that process of "alienation" 
is not itself understood by it. This leads us to construct false dichot­
omies-and we must remember that for Hegel the presence of a solidified 
dichotomy is always a sign of the failure (on the part of the 
Understanding) to achieve the needed resolution. In chapter IV, therefore, 
we are shown a consciousness symbolically attempting to nullifY its Other 
in combat. (Remember that Hegel speaks of the struggle as occurring 
between individuals as well as between mere aspects of consciousness.) For 
the victor, at the first moment of victory, there is nothing but himself­
just as for consciousness (were it completely "victorious") there would be 
nothing but itsel£ We are shown a consciousness now concerned with 
itself, and creating views of the world from that self-concern. (Even if the 
creating consciousness is not the initially "victorious" one, it becomes the 
"victorious" one in its internalization.) 
This should give us an indication of the next stop in the itinerary of 
consciousness. Self-consciousness is still divided because in its view of the 
world the Unhappy Consciousness has set up a God as the world's cre­
ator-instead of seeing itself in that role. So far, all it can see itself respon­
sible for is its own sinfulness and finitude. Only with the onset of Reason 
will consciousness see itself as creating the world, all and everything. Thus, 
Self-Consciousness (as a stage) begins to see itself as creative and world cre­
ating; it still sets its world apart as its Other (because the victory over it 
was only symbolic, after all). With the coming of Reason, we see that 
Other as identical to the self, not only as its product. Then life and con­
sciousness are no longer in opposition, and that existential impasse (too) 
is surmounted. 
Once they are seen as no longer in opposition, we have arrived at the 
realm of spirit-the sociocultural domain that is life and is consciousness, 
but is neither one of these alone. Further, as Gadamer points out (p. 63), 
spirit is not individual life or individual consciousness, but a "world." The 
fabric of that world is recognition (and we are by now acquainted with the 
dialectical interrelation recognition leads to, between the Self and its 
Other). What this process involves is the emergence of the self out of an 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 157 
unknowing lifo into self-conscious existence. The master and the slave, 
both, overcome their attachment to life by engaging in the struggle, and 
this is already a step toward selfhood and autonomy. The fact that neither 
one achieves full selfhood is a further aspect of the dialectical interrelation. 
This, too, is an inversion: the master dependent, the slave independent, 
etc. A similar reversal obtains in regard to the Self and its Other. This, 
then, is the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness. That is, 
the Self becomes its Other, and this other is itself-which is precisely the 
pattern of the subject-object relation in self-consciousness. 
The fact that whole complexes of society, culture, and history are built 
upon such ephemeral "material" as recognition and internalization-that 
is very much to the point. It is a human, mental world constructed of 
mental material. The material does not become more ephemeral or 
diaphanous in the process. It is not thinned out by being spread over soci­
ety. On the contrary, its socialization only makes that spiritual material 
more concrete, opaque, and resistant to individual manipulation. In other 
words, the spiritual superstructure that is society takes on a selfhood and 
autonomy of its own. 
As Gadamer implies (p. 70), each of these stages gives us "a phase in 
the genealogy of freedom." Those last three words might be added to our 
inventory of characterizations of the Phenomenology, along with "itinerary 
of consciousness," "universalized biography," etc. I think Gadamer's the 
most trenchant encapsulation-as, indeed, I find his analysis of chapter 
IV the most profound (among the critics we have discussed). Just as the 
individual "itinerary" is pointed to selfhood and autonomy, the implicit 
goal for society is the same: to make its selfhood and autonomy explicit, 
by bringing itself into accord with self-conscious Reason, which now sees 
itself as the creator of the world, all and everything. 
Wahl 
We have seen an attempt to interpret the master-slave episode in global 
terms, so that it is taken as Hegel's characterization of human relationships 
in general. (Of course, this is belied by the fact that Hegel goes on to fur­
ther stages of characterization, so that the master-slave episode must be 
seen as just that: an episode, to be surpassed.) One might also wish to take 
the Unhappy Consciousness passage in global terms-as Hegel's insight 
into religious consciousness as such (quite apart from its specific setting as 

158 • Leo Rauch 
early medieval Christian), and then as his insight into consciousness in 
general ("All consciousness is unhappy . . .  "). 
This brings us to the work of Jean Wahl, the earliest of the twentieth­
century commentators we have been discussing, whose book appeared in 
1 929.23 What is central to Hegel's phenomenological outlook is its dialec­
tical nature-and this is a dialectic that is not merely logical but also "his­
torique et affective" (p. 1 19). To understand that historical and affective 
(i.e., emotive) dialectic, we must see it based upon the fundamental ele­
ments of negation, mediation, and time, whereby consciousness has 
entered into dialogue with itself (p. 121). 
Consciousness itself involves duality (and I suppose that consciousness 
of consciousness is duality squared). In any case, that duality is symbolized 
(symbolisee) by the master and slave-the passage that follows describes the 
attempt to overcome the duality and reunite consciousness with itself. This 
leads to a new scenario, culminating in the Unhappy Consciousness­
unhappy because it looks to God to bring about that reunion for it, and 
with God as a mediating factor the attempt at reunion must fail. Perhaps 
this is because God's infinitude and absolute independence give him a sta­
tus beyond that of mere mediator in human consciousness, finite and 
dependent as it is. Thus, whatever unity is achieved is necessarily incom­
plete. The return of consciousness to itself, in the master and slave, is but a 
''foux retour," because that return is itself divided in the interiorization of 
consciousness-and this is characteristic of the Unhappy Consciousness. 
That is, instead of overcoming consciousness, we have come back to it all 
the more, and with this to an awareness of its division (p. 123). 
Consciousness says, simultaneously, "I am what is not," and "I am 
what I am." These two ideas, implicit in Skepticism and kept apart, are 
made explicit and brought together in Judaism-together, not in unity 
but in juxtaposition, so that they are constantly coming apart. "The 
prophet, at the very moment at which he celebrates God, is a prophet of 
unhappiness; the hymns change into lamentations" (p. 125). What is 
more, Jewish consciousness knows this contradiction. Thus the Hellenistic 
movements of Stoicism and Skepticism go over into Christianity through 
Judaism, for here their contradictory elements are made explicit, although 
without resolution. These elements, embedded in Stoicism and 
Skepticism, are the essential and the inessential, the universal and the par­
ticular. As metaphysical elements we might have kept them at a distance, 
so that we would remain undisturbed; but as elements within conscious­
ness, they give us an awareness of our own nothingness. 

Early-Twentieth-Century European Criticism • 159 
Christianity seeks to overcome this by searching for the Changeless 
One. In the fact that this One becomes incarnate, that the Father is the 
Son, we have a direct reflection of the attempt on the part of conscious­
ness to achieve the unity of the universal that is the particular. But when 
consciousness grasps this, it also grasps the fact that it itself is this opposi­
tion, as well as this contact between the two. On one hand, it sees the 
Father and the Son as objectively there; on the other hand, it sees them as 
perhaps nothing but it itself (i.e., consciousness). It may try to overcome 
this also, by speaking of God as present in man, man as present in God. 
But this only brings consciousness back to "square one," its own nothing­
ness. And then it feels that it is the Changeless and nothingness! It is Pascal 
as Christ on the Mount of Olives, Wahl says (p. 126), where the particu­
lar is touched by the changeless and vice versa-precisely the fundamen­
tal character of consciousness itself. 
What we must see, then, are two things: first, consciousness can never 
"forget" or "ignore" the conflicting elements within itself (i.e., it may try 
to do this but it cannot conclusively succeed, since these will come to 
haunt it); second, the "figures" we are dealing with (whether they be the 
master and slave, or the Father and Son) are themselves "elements" of con­
sciousness-and this follows from Hegel's phenomenological approach. 
As elements (i.e., particular aspects) of consciousness, they must come 
into opposition, even antagonism-which is why the Christian con­
sciousness is unhappy, unquiet, and cannot conceive of its repose but in a 
world beyond. And since this is the situation of consciousness in general, 
the longing for the beyond is also the tendency of all consciousness as 
such. Consciousness is forever dividing itself into the essential and the 
inessential, into the particular and the universal-and thus it is self-con­
tradictory, unhappy. In religion, likewise, consciousness sees its simulta­
neous grandeur and finitude; it is exalted and humiliated. 
This is why the Christian consciousness-divided between being and 
non-being-is always a consciousness in a state of becoming. It is precise­
ly the humiliated consciousness-negated, a nothingness, the opposite of 
God-that wants (for this very reason) to see itself as one with God. The 
conflict between the inessential and the essential is now played out as the 
conflict between the particular and the immutable. Thus, Christianity is 
man's simultaneous awareness of his own universality and particularity. In 
this way, the particular consciousness tests the idea that its God is it itself 
(and perhaps proves it to its own satisfaction, only to have to deny itself 
that satisfaction, once again). Its Christ is the particularity of conscious-

160 • Leo &luch 
ness attached to the universal. And because religion and consciousness in 
general have a parallel aim, Wahl can say that a phenomenological theory 
is the analogue of a theory of grace, that the revelation of the immutable 
is born out of the corresponding unhappiness, and that the entire phe­
nomenology is the history of that experience (p. 133). 
At one and the same time we can ask: How shall this conclude? What 
conclusions can we come to? This, the Unhappy Consciousness, does not 
end in any mode of self-satisfaction. As Wahl says, it is a ''sentiment tout 
subjectif devant que/que chose qui est tout transcendent" (p. 139). Thus, con­
sciousness can continue only as the movement of an unfulfilled and infi­
nite longing-"une Sehnsucht infinie" (as though only the German word 
will do in that French phrase, and thereby will have that sense of incom­
pleteness express itself concretely, like a piece of conceptual art). Thus, this 
consciousness will never arrive at a conclusive union of the universal and 
the particular; it will never succeed in grasping its own essence but can 
only grope its way toward it-because at the moment this consciousness 
believes it has grasped that essence it is thrown back upon itsel£ To grasp 
itself is to grasp its separation from the Changeless-and from itsel£ This 
is its paradox. This is why Christianity and Christian man can never ful­
fill themselves as they are, but must go on to Reason. 
This is why we, dealing with chapter IV, can come to no conclu­
sion-for its conclusion comprises chapters V to VIII. The Unhappy 
Consciousness should (and must) leave us with an ending that is open and 
incomplete, like the disturbingly unresolved chord at the very end of 
Bruckner's Ninth-pointing to all that has gone before it in history, 
retaining it, yet pointing to a time to come that will bring an end to all 
the harmonies we have become accustomed to. 

PART III 
THE DENIAL OF THE SELF: 
THE REPUDIATION OF HEGELIAN 
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS IN 
RECENT EUROPEAN THOUGHT 
by 
DAVID SHERMAN 


1 1  
OVERVIEW 
The early twentieth-century French figures that were just considered had 
a variety of perspectives on the "Self-Consciousness" chapter of Hegel's 
Phenomenology, but-in varying degrees-all understood themselves as 
working from within Hegel's problematic. Similarly, "first generation" 
members of the Frankfurt School in Germany, such as Theodor W 
Adorno, Herbert Marcuse, and Max Horkheimer, who were writing at the 
same time, accepted Hegel's notion of the subject, even as they strained 
against its limits. In contrast, the two German figures that were consid­
ered earlier, Heidegger and Gadamer, essentially rejected Hegel's concep­
tion of self-consciousness in favor of what they take to be a less 
metaphysical approach. Breaking with the humanistic implications that 
are inherent within Hegel's thought, they claimed that human subjectivi­
ty is essentially a function of language. Thus, according to Heidegger, 
"man acts as though he were the shaper or master of language, while in 
fact language remains the master of man."1 Heidegger, who had a signifi­
cant influence upon virtually all of the early twentieth-century French 
thinkers, but still failed to wrench them away from a humanistic reading 
of Hegel, as well as Nietzsche, who influenced Heidegger's work, are the 
two primary inspirations for the more recent move away from Hegel in 
France. In contrast, the second and third generation members of the 
Frankfurt School, who have also moved away from Hegel's notion of the 
suject on linguistic grounds, have drawn their inspiration from the ana­
lytical methods of the Anglo-American philosophical tradition. 
163 

164 • David Sherman 
The movement away from Hegel in France, which began in the 
1 950s, was precipitated by a number of factors, not the least of which was 
the changing historical landscape. Unlike earlier French thinkers, such as 
Kojeve and Sartre, who saw in Hegel's dialectic the possibility of using 
philosophy for the purpose of bringing about historical change (like the 
Left Hegelians of the past century), more recent French figures came of 
intellectual age during the Cold War and the failures of the New Lefi: dur­
ing the I 960s-both of which suggested the relative intractability of his­
tory. Accordingly, for more contemporary French thinkers, history is not 
an opportunity, but a burden; it is either to be escaped or theorized in its 
intractability (which amounts to the very same thing).2 Indeed, this is in 
keeping with the French poststructuralist attack upon self-consciousness, 
for if there is an efficacious subject, it would be (in Sartre's terms) "bad 
faith" to disclaim the ontological possibility of recreating society. The shift 
away from Hegel in Germany, in contrast, is the result of different factors. 
Unlike the French poststructuralists, who reject the Enlightenment con­
ception of reason that is intrinsic to Hegel's thought, recent German the­
orists view the Enlightenment as an unfinished project that must be 
brought to fruition. But part of this process involves the rejection of the 
subject-object paradigm, which is operative within the philosophies of 
Hegel and the earlier members of the Frankfurt School, albeit in a quali­
fied way. For these contemporary theorists, the Enlightenment's notion of 
the subject must be jettisoned in the name of reason and history-but jet­
tisoned nevertheless. 
There are a number of different approaches that French poststruc­
turalists have taken in their attempt to escape from Hegel's orbit, but for 
the sake of simplicity these might be reduced to two generic types, which 
are not mutually exclusive. On the one hand, there are those theorists 
who-ostensibly drawing upon the thought of Nietzsche-renounce the 
alleged pretensions of a systematizing reason and (hypostatized) subjectiv­
ity, which they argue are life-denying, in favor of a theory based upon the 
liberation of bodily drives. These theorists, such as Bataille and Deleuze, 
who will be considered below, either attempt to open up a space for the 
body within or alongside Hegel's dialectic of self-consciousness (Bataille) 
or seek to "deconstruct" this dialectic altogether (Deleuze and Foucault). 
On the other hand, there are those theorists who fundamentally draW 
their inspiration from Heidegger's linguistic and ontological analyses. 
These theorists, such as Lacan, who will be considered below, and Derrida, 
basically reformulate the connection between language and subjectivity by 

Overview • 1 65 
subordinating the latter to the former, all the while contending that this 
dynamic plays itself out within the shadow of death-a fact that Hegel 
glimpsed in the master-slave dialectic but then supposedly turned from in 
his desire to establish the historical subject. The approach that is taken by 
current German theorists has been more or less crafted by J tirgen 
Babermas, who, like Lacan, draws heavily upon Hegel, even as he rejects 
Hegel's view of subjectivity. (Even Hegel's most ardent opponents either 
self-consciously or unself-consciously draw upon his thought in the very 
process of trying to distance themselves from him). Indeed, like Lacan, 
Habermas sees the subject as formed within the crucible of language­
although, unlike Lacan, Habermas is profoundly critical of the irrational 
tendencies that are to be found in Heidegger's philosophy, as well as in the 
poststructuralist movement that he was so influential in spawning. 
Choosing which thinkers to examine in a study such as the present 
one is to some extent arbitrary. In choosing to examine Bataille, Deleuze, 
Lacan, Habermas, and Honneth (who is trying to incorporate aspects of 
Hegel's theory of recognition into Habermas's linguistic framework), I 
have left out a number of extremely influential theorists, most notably 
Derrida and Foucault. In making these choices, I was guided by the 
extent to which each thinker explicitly deals with Hegel's theory of self­
consciousness, and, more specifically, Hegel's exposition of the master­
slave encounter, which is the most influential part of the 
"Self-Consciousness" chapter. 


1 2  
GEORGES BATAILLE 
Alexandre Kojeve's reading of Hegel's master-slave parable, which was 
heavily influenced by Marx and Heidegger, had the effect of revivifying 
the Marxian subject in the face of "official" Marxism's mechanistic lean­
ings. The slave, an existential prototype of the Marxian proletariat, 
became the driving force within Kojeve's anthropocentric conception of 
history. Nevertheless, Georges Bataille, who had attended Kojeve's lec­
tures, and always considered himself to be very much under Kojeve's influ­
ence, 1 came to the conclusion that Hegel's notion of the subject took as 
much away from the possibility for genuine human experience as it 
offered. Bataille therefore turned to Nietzsche in order to counterbalance 
Hegel, and it was within the irreconcilable tension between Kojeve's 
Marxist interpretation of Hegel and his own particular interpretation of 
Nietzsche that Bataille fashioned his own thought, the centerpiece of 
which was his notion of "sovereignty." For Bataille, who, like Kojeve, 
believed that only the slave moves beyond the contradictions of the mas­
ter-slave problematic, the slave's increasing mastery can never shake its 
servile beginnings;2 indeed, Bataille understands the drive to mastery itself 
as a manifestation of a slavish mentality. It is only through a noncognitive 
flight from the entire master-slave dialectic that one can come to experi­
ence Bataille's reconstructed Nietzschean sovereignty, thus (provisionally) 
leaving behind the servile mentality that is inherent within Hegelian mas­
tery. 
167 

168 • David Sherman 
Before considering Bataille's perspective on Hegel's master-slave 
encounter, however, it is necessary to briefly consider Kojeve's position on 
Hegel's notion of'ᅌbsolute Knowing," which constitutes the endpoint of 
Hegel's phenomenological "highway of dispair." After moving through 
the numerous forms of self-consciousness that comprise the 
Phenomenology of Spirit, all of which are superseded as a result of the con­
tradictions that arise within them, the human mind reaches the moment 
at which it realizes that neither the natural world, which has been domes­
ticated by human labor, nor other human beings, who recognize one 
another within the context of a homogenous and universal State, stand 
over and against its projects. In the vernacular, there is an identity of sub­
ject and object, an overcoming of alienation. This state of affairs, in ' 
which reason has realized itself within history, signals the end of histo­
ry-a condition that Kojeve maintains has actually obtained since the 
introduction of the Napoleonic Code. Experientially, however, this con­
dition of human reconciliation, which precludes the possibility of further 
meaningful action, is marked by a passionless satisfaction. Kojeve's "end 
of history" thesis is, of course, controversial (although it has recently been 
recycled)3; nevertheless, for our purposes, what matters is that Bataille 
took it seriously. Thus, in a 1937 letter to Kojeve, an "unreconciled" 
Bataille writes: "I imagine that my life-or its abortion, better still the 
open wound that is my life-by itself constitutes the refutation of Hegel's 
closed system."4 And, with respect to the ontological consequences of 
there being no grounds for meaningful action in a posthistorical frame­
work, he writes: "If action ('doing') is-like Hegel says-negativity, the 
question then arises of knowing if the negativity of one who 'no longer 
has anything to do' disappears or subsists in the state of 'negativity with­
out employ.'"5 (According to Hegel, "negativity" means being "other 
than," and it is particular to human beings, who, unlike animals, are 
other than their objects. As that which enables us to unify our experience 
by overcoming deficient ways of seeing the world, it is the ontological 
foundation of our freedom.) For Bataille, it is the posthistorical status of 
human negativity, which has come full circle from its birth during the 
master-slave struggle, that presents humankind with its most pressing 
existential problems. And, to properly deal with these problems, one 
must grasp the master-slave dynamic: "no one knows anything of himself 
if he has not understood this movement which determines and limits 
man's successive possibilities" (IE, p. 109).6 
According to Bataille, there are three successive "negations" that bring 

Georges Bataille • 169 
about the human animal's transition from animality to humanity (HoE, 
P· 53)/ but Hegel only discussed the first and the third within the con­
text of the master-slave encounter. The first negation, Bataille asserts, is 
the one by way of which the slave negates the natural world through his 
labor. But, contrary to Hegel and (especially) Kojeve, who extol the slave's 
labor because it makes him conscious of what he truly is, 8 Bataille accen­
tuates the fact that the slave's labor, which is responsible for creating the 
whole of concrete reality, is still, ultimately, "the action of the man who, 
rather than die free, chose to live in servitude" (Sov., p. 283). Bataille 
underscores the servility oflabor's first moment because he believes that it 
was not merely a contingent matter, but, rather, reflected the essentially 
servile nature of all human labor. Because labor is oriented toward the 
future, the "first moment of labor" condemns humanity to servility long 
after the moment at which the slave outlasts the master. It is a process that 
necessitates ceaseless deferral in the service of its own dynamic: "From the 
start, the introduction of labor into the world replaced intimacy, the depth 
of desire and its free outbreaks, with rational progression, where what mat­
ters is no longer the truth of the present moment, but, rather, the subse­
quent results of operations. The first labor established the world of 
things . .. (and then] man himself became one of the things of this world" 
(GE, p. 57). Indeed, according to Bataille, this dynamic manifests noth­
ing less than the "essential movement of the Phenomenology of Spirit': "the 
slave frees himself from the master through work . . .  but the product of 
his work becomes his master" (IE, p. 129). 
The third negation, Bataille tells us, is that of the awareness of death. 
While the "problem" of death would appear to be applicable to all living 
things, it is actually only a human problem, for, as the master-slave dialec­
tic teaches, it is only through the apprehension of his own death that the 
human animal turns into a self-conscious being. It is only by risking every­
thing in the "fight to the death" that human anguish is experienced, and 
this anguish, which leads to the realization that the human being can be 
separated from his natural environment-that he is other than the "posi­
tivity" of what just exists-is the distinctive mark of humanity. Indeed, 
what anguish reveals is that the human being is essentially a 
"Nothingness"-or, in Heideggerian terms, a "being-unto-death"-that 
manifests itself in the world as "negating" action: "man is death living a 
human life" (HD&S, p. 10).9 But, once again, Bataille will remind us of 
the slave's response to this moment in which he first grasps his own fini­
tude: he shrinks from it, and, in submitting to his nemesis, he postpones 

1 70 • David Sherman 
the moment of his death at the price of postponing the time in which he 
can live in the moment. In postponing the "moment of death," however, 
the slave does not merely forget about death, for the continuing fear of 
death is the impetus for a self-effacement that continually reinserts him as 
a thing back into "the order of things"; rather, after that initial moment in 
which the slave stares death in the face, death itself becomes an increas­
ingly abstract representation. For Bataille, this reflects a fundamental con­
tradiction: 
The privileged manifestation of Negativity is death, but death, in fact, 
reveals nothing. In theory, it is his natural, animal being whose death 
reveals man to himself, but the revelation never takes place. For when 
the animal being supporting him dies, the human being himself ceases 
to be. In order for Man to reveal himself ultimately to himself, he would 
have to die, but he would have to do it while living -watching himself 
ceasing to be. In other words, death itself would have to become (self-) 
conscious at the very moment that it annihilates the conscious being. 
(HD&S, p. 19) 
Death, which does not neatly fit into the "order of things," is there­
fore, paradoxically, a transcendent moment. Moreover, as this quotation 
shows, it refers us back to our own animality, which, in turn, suggests the 
"second negation" in the transition from animality to humanity. This 
negation, which Hegel "shuns" (HoE, p. 53), is the one through which the 
human animal denies its own animal nature to distinguish itself from an 
animal. Along these lines, Bataille maintains that by sacrificing certain of 
his animalistic prerogatives through the institution of various universal 
prohibitions (on, for example, incest, necrophilia, the putrefaction of the 
corpse, menstrual blood, excrement, and nudity), the human animal 
brings about a negation "so radically negative that it is not even spoken 
of" (ibid.). And, according to Bataille, it is ultimately the observance of 
these "radically negative" prohibitions, not philosophy's vaunted reason, 
that gives human beings the feeling that they are not animals (c£ Sov., P· 
339). But despite the "unspeakable" nature of that which is proscribed by 
the prohibition, the prohibition gets its vehemence from the fact that on 
infrequent occasions it is transgressed, just as the transgression gets its 
extraordinary intensity from the fact that the prohibition generally 
induces compliance. Indeed, because transgressions of the various univer­
sal prohibitions are no more assimilable by the "order of things" than is 

Georges Bataille • 171 
death, they, too, provide the grounds for a transcendent moment, but are 
not otherwise subject to the paradoxes that exist with respect to death. 
However, since Hegel does not acknowledge this "second negation," and 
therefore unreflectively submits to the universal prohibitions, the grounds 
for this transcendent moment do not exist within his "system." Bataille 
argues, in fact, that there is no transcendent moment within Hegel's phi­
losophy. 
"Absolute Knowing," which is the culmination of the movement of 
self-consciousness, is viewed by Bataille not as the moment of human 
transcendence, but, rather, as the potential death knell for the human spir­
it. Drawing upon Nietzsche's characterization of"the last man," who is the 
quintessential utilitarian, Bataille regards the consciousness that would 
"absolutely know" as one that is inextricably caught up in "the order of 
things"; all that it does is inevitably geared toward some "useful" purpose. 
But it is precisely action that is "geared toward some useful purpose" that 
is anathema to Bataille, who then projects this outlook onto Nietzsche: 
"the refusal to serve (to be useful) is the principle of Nietzsche's thought, 
as it is of his work" (Sov., p. 368). Knowledge "in itself," Bataille main­
tains, as well as discourse, which is the medium through which knowledge 
develops, points back to that first moment when the slave, stepping back 
from the abyss of death, opted to conserve himself by subordinating that 
moment, and, unknowingly, the overwhelming majority of all moments 
that were to follow, to the dynamic of useful labor: 
Hegel saw very well that, were it acquired in a thorough and definitive 
way, knowledge is never given to us except by unfolding in time. It is 
not given in a sudden illumination of the mind but in discourse, which 
is necessarily deployed in duration. Knowledge, and the most profound 
knowledge, never appears to us in full except, finally, as the result of a 
calculated effort, an operation useful to some end. Knowledge can't in 
any way be confused with the last moment or the end of the operation; 
it is the entire operation .... To know is always to strive, to work; it is 
always a servile operarion, indefinitely resumed, indefinitely repeated. 
Knowledge is never sovereign . . . .  (Sov., p. 202) 
Thus, from Bataille's perspective, what is "absolute" about "Absolute 
Knowledge" is not the idea that all knowledge has been acquired, nor even 
Kojeve's idea that that there is no longer any basis for meaningful action; 
rather, knowledge is in some sense "absolute" when the underlying servil-

172 • David Sherman 
ity that characterizes it constitutes humanity's very self-conception. It 
occurs when sovereignty, which is Bataille's transcendent moment, is no 
longer a possibility. 
Although he is an avowed atheist, Bataille thinks that Hegel's philos­
ophy denies humanity transcendence because the notion of transcendence 
has been dragged into the finitude of history: "Before Hegel's 'absolute 
knowledge' the Christian myth was already based precisely on the fact that 
nothing divine is possible (in the pre-Christian sense of sacred) which is 
finite" (HD&S, p. 13). In other words, because Hegelian "transcendence" 
emanates from the stuff of history, which is servile at its base, "absolute 
knowledge," which is nothing more than the totality of the moments that 
have comprised history, must be servile as well. ("But what if knowledge, " 
at least the first impulse of knowledge, were servile"? [Sov., p. 225] .) It is 
for this reason that Bataille emphasizes humanity's inherent animality 
("the second negation"), which is not given its due within either the mas­
ter-slave encounter or any of the subsequent forms of self-consciousness 
that lead to "absolute knowing." Bataille, who thinks that Hegel's philos­
ophy is a "closed system" that is cut off from the material basis of life, sees 
in our animality the very notion of "the sacred"-a notion that his athe­
ism would otherwise seem to deny. Drawing upon the work of Emile 
Durkheim, who stresses the importance of the sacred as a unifying force 
within the context of social life, the materialistic Bataille apprehends "the 
sacred" in those moments in which the impetus of animality leads to the 
transgression of prohibitions: "What is sacred is precisely what is prohib­
ited. But if the sacred, the prohibited, is cast out of the sphere of profane 
life (inasmuch as it denotes a disruption of that life), it nevertheless has a 
greater value than this profane that excludes it. It is no longer the despised 
bestiality; often it has retained an animal form, but the latter has become 
divine" (HoE, p. 92). The transcendent moment for Bataille is therefore 
the one in which the human animal (in some sense) pays homage to the 
material world of which it is inextricably a part. 
Indeed, for Bataille, who in an inverted way is no less a dualist than 
Kant, there are two worlds, or, to use his terminology, "economies," that 
the human animal problematically straddles. The "General Economy," 
which is simply another name for the material world, is characterized by 
an ever-expanding, albeit pointless, expenditure of energy. Using the sun 
as an archetype, Bataille says that this energy "must necessarily be lost 
without a profit" (GE, p. 21). Of course, this is not to suggest that ele­
ments of the general economy cannot suffer from a lack of energy (or 

Georges Bataille • 113 
resources); rather, his point is that scarcity exists only from the particular 
perspective. The general perspective is always marked by a superabun­
dance. In contrast, there is the "Restricted Economy," whose operating 
principle is that of scarcity. This economy-the economy of the human 
world-which encompasses but is not limited to the "dismal science" 
(economics), is typified by the accumulation of allegedly scarce resources, 
as opposed to their useless expenditure {consumption) and, above all, the 
drive to realize a profit. And it manifests itself not only in the hoarding of 
wealth, which is anathema to the proper functioning of "the economy," 
conventionally understood, but by a sort of conceptual hoarding as well, 
which Bataille believes is exemplified by the drive for mastery within 
Hegel's dialectic. (Fittingly enough, from the standpoint of someone like 
Bataille, Hegel himself refers to this process as "the labor of the concept.") 
Indeed, according to Bataille, by conceptually appropriating everything 
that it encounters (including, and perhaps especially, the notion of the 
sacred) in order to first bestow meaning and then limit its play, as well as 
by reappropriating all of its prior moments (by being aufgehoben), Hegel's 
dialectic is the model of the restrictive economy. Contrarily, sovereignty, 
which constitutes the transcendent moment for Bataille, occurs only when 
the human animal, having transgressed the limiting prohibitions of the 
restrictive economy, acts in accord with the material laws of the general 
economy by dissolutely consuming his accumulated resources. The 
human being acting sovereignly is no longer just a thing intertwined in the 
"order of things." For the human being acting sovereignly, knowledge, 
meaning, discourse, utility, and the future-and thus Hegel's dialectic­
do not exist.10 
The relationship between the general economy and the restrictive 
economy, the sacred and the profane, and, ultimately, Bataille's sovereignty 
and Hegel's mastery is exceedingly thorny. On the one hand, Bataille views 
the general economy as the substrate upon which Hegel's restrictive econ­
omy functions, and he believes that humanity's failure to acknowledge this 
fact is what leads to catastrophic consequences: "Man's disregard for the 
material basis of his life still causes him to err in a serious way . . . .  Beyond 
our immediate ends, man's activity in fact pursues the useless and infinite 
fulfillment of the universe . . . .  No doubt these ends and this movement 
rnay not be entirely irreconcilable; but if these two terms are to be recon­
ciled we must cease to ignore one of them; otherwise our works quickly 
turn to catastrophe" (GE, p. 21). So, too, with respect to the relation 
between the sacred and the profane he says: "The object of the prohibition 

17 4 • David Sherman 
was first marked out for coveting by the prohibition itself . . . [Erotic life] 
was given rules, but these rules could only assign it a domain outside the 
rules . . . . It is quite clear, then, that man's sexual life cannot be considered 
as a simple datum, but rather as history" (HoE, pp. 48-49; emphasis 
added). Comprehended in this way, there is a dialectical relationship 
between the general and restrictive economies, the sacred and the profane, 
and if humankind faces a "catastrophe," it is not because it has approached 
the world dialectically, but, rather, because it has broken off the dialectic. 
Yet, on the other hand, Bataille is determined to disconnect his idea of sov­
ereignty from the dialectic altogether. Along these lines, sovereignty is not 
even the result of a "break out" from the dialectic; to the contrary, it is 
always-already beyond its pale. Accordingly, Bataille contends that "there 
ought not exist any means by which man might become sovereign: it is bet­
ter for him to be sovereign" (Sov., p. 226). 
This irreconcilable tension is manifested in Bataille's discussion of the 
"potlatch," the American Indian festival in which surplus resources are 
expended through profligate gift giving and consumption. For Bataille, 
potlatch, in which a chief offers to his rival considerable riches "for the 
purpose of humiliating, challenging, and obligating him" (GE, p. 67), 
complements the movement of the general economy. But can it truly be 
said that potlatch constitutes an expenditure without reserve, especially 
when its aim is to obligate? Bataille himself recognizes this paradox: inas­
much as potlatch inures to the benefit of the one who gives-he is repaid 
with a larger stock of goods by the one whom he has obligated and with 
an enhanced ranking by his social group-"it places the value, the prestige 
and the truth of life in the negation of the servile use of possessions, but 
at the same time it makes a servile use of this negation" (GE, p. 73). 
Nevertheless, Bataille equivocates by refusing to see potlatch as merely one 
more phenomenon within the profane world. First, he argues that "rank," 
as an initial matter, is essentially sacred, and that it is only afterward that 
it is turned into a useable thing to make a profit. Second, he claims that 
even if potlatch is not actually sacrificial, it still withdraws wealth from 
productive consumption. At this point, however, we must ask: How is sov­
ereignty, at least as it plays out within the context of the Indian potlatch, 
any different than the drive for mastery within the context of the master­
slave encounter? Is the Indian chief's desire to attain a higher rank any dif­
ferent than the master's desire to be recognized? Moreover, since the 
master no more labors nor seeks to accumulate in order to realize a profit 
than the Indian chief-indeed, the master virtually remains at the level of 

Georges Bataille • 175 
animality-how can it be said that the master-slave encounter initiates the 
restrictive economy, while the Indian chief is deemed to still partake in the 
movement of the general economy? The Indian chief would appear to be 
caught up in the historical movement of Hegel's dialectic, and the other­
ness of sovereignty would appear to be ontologically out of reach. It would 
thus seem that not only can one not become sovereign, but one cannot be 
sovereign either. 
It is for this reason that Bataille's revolt is not just against capitalist 
society-although from the perspective of his theory of sovereignty, it is 
the most troubling social form since its underlying principle is one of 
unremitting accumulation and productive consumption. (Even feudalism, 
which was aptly coming to an end in Germany as Hegel dashed off the last 
lines of the Phenomenology, consumed some of its wealth nonproductive­
ly.) Instead, Bataille's revolt is against nothing less than history itself. To be 
sure, unlike Hegel, for whom the movement ofhistory brings about social 
forms that have steadily increasing mastery, Bataille sees in the movement 
of history an ever diminishing chance for sovereignty: "Every day the sov­
ereignty of the moment is more foreign to the language in which we 
express ourselves, which draws value back to utility" (Sov., p. 380).1 1  
Nevertheless, as the paradox of potlatch shows, in his search for that 
moment of pure sovereignty in which there is no socially conditioned 
(utilitarian) expectation of a return on one's expenditure, Bataille must 
ultimately go behind history; he must analyze what he sees as that 
moment of (self-)consciousness gone awry that precedes all social forms­
viz., the master-slave encounter-and then reinscribe the fabled con­
sciousness that exists just prior to that moment back into the modern 
problematic by holding it out as a transcendent moment in which the 
individual breaks with history itself. And, indeed, this is what Bataille 
attempts to do in Inner Experience, in which he seeks to "recommence and 
undo Hegel's Phenomenology" (IE, p. 80). As one commentator correctly 
puts it: "The writing of L'Experience interieure objectifies Bataille's doubt 
that anyone but an individual can achieve the sovereign experience 
.
.
.
. " 12 
As Jacques Derrida indicates in his influential essay "From Restricted 
to General Economy: A Hegelianism without Reserve," "taken one by one 
and immobilized outside their syntax, all of Bataille's concepts are 
Hegelian,"13 and nowhere is this more evident than in Inner Experience. In 
this work, Bataille talks in terms of concepts such as subject and object, 
immediacy and mediacy, recognition, and negativity, all of which are, of 
course, essential in the master-slave dynamic. But in each case, Bataille 

176 • David Sherman 
reverses the direction of the movement. Whereas the master-slave 
encounter undermines the self-certain immediacy of each participant with 
respect to his environment and his "Self," and thus provides the impetus 
for the recognition that all things stand in a mediated relation, Bataille 
stresses the ultimacy of immediacy: "Experience leading to the extreme 
limit is accessible to the extent that existence successively strips itself of its 
middle terms" (IE, p. 1 16). Whereas the master-slave encounter is under­
stood in terms of the binary relationship between subject and object (ego 
and alter-ego, humanity and nature), Bataille dispels the tension that 
holds the terms together, which causes him to alternately describe the rela­
tionship between them as "dissolved" or "fused": "There is no longer sub­
ject-object, but a yawning gap between the one and the other and, in the 
gap, the subject, the object, are dissolved" (IE, p. 59). Or, alternatively, 
"experience attains in the end the fusion of subject and object . . . " (IE, p. 
9). Whereas the master-slave encounter initiates the entangled "problems" 
of recognition and selfhood, and the movement to "absolute knowledge" 
is a movement towards greater degrees of reciprocal recognition and more 
secure self-conceptions, Bataille contends that "if one proceeds right to the 
end, one must efface oneself, undergo solitude, suffer severely from it, 
renounce being recognized' (IE, p. 155). And, whereas the master-slave 
encounter initiates the outward movement in which the human being 
objectifies his existence in the world (through work), which is a necessary 
condition for knowledge, Bataille would initiate an inward movement 
toward "inner experience," which he takes to be the necessary condition 
for the intuition of "non-knowledge." According to Bataille, non-knowl­
edge is beyond the extreme limits of absolute knowledge, and destabilizes 
it (c£ IE, p.52). 
The only concept emanating from the master-slave parable that 
Bataille ostensibly embraces is that of "negativity." But, technically, even 
this is not the case. With the exception of "pure and simple negativity," 
which is an indeterminate, abstract, formless otherness that is what it is 
only in virtue of being other than all its objects (like Kant's transcenden­
tal ego, to which it tacitly refers), Hegel fundamentally views "negativity" 
in a determinate or concrete fashion. In other words, the "negativity" that 
is the human being stands in a relational way to its objects, such that even 
when we negate or reject certain ways of viewing or relating to these 
objects, as we perpetually do, we then embrace other ways of viewing or 
relating to them-ways that ostensibly get us closer to apprehending the 
truth. For Bataille, on the other hand, the only negativity worthy of the 

Georges Bataille • 177 
name is pure, "unemployed" negativity. In contrast with the subject in the 
mode of a servile "I," which employs its negativity to simultaneously accu­
mulate knowledge and project it(s)-self into the world (thereby, according 
to Bataille, capitulating to "positivity"), Bataille offers the subject in the 
mode of "wild ipse," which rarefies itself by negating its relationship to all 
objects, especially it(s)-self. Indeed, so stringently "negative" is this wild 
ipse that even a fellow traveler such as Nietzsche, who "knew barely more 
of Hegel than a standard popularization" (IE, p. 1 09n), runs afoul of it. 
Thus, ostensibly referring to Nietzsche, Bataille asserts that the "pure will 
to power (to growth for its own sake) . . .  [while] outwardly contrary to 
the servile spirit, is basically only its complement" (GE, p. 137). In its par­
ticularity, the Nietzschean subject projects itself into the world, but there­
by gives up on the totality, which is ultimately the aim of the self-effacing, 
wild ipse: 
As long as ipse perseveres in its will to know and be ipse, anguish lasts, 
but if ipse abandons itself and knowledge with it, if it gives itself up to 
non-knowledge in this abandon, then rapture begins. In rapture, my 
existence finds a sense once again, but the sense is referred immediately 
to ipse; it becomes my rapture, a rapture which I ipse possess, giving sat­
isfaction to my will to be everything. (IE, p. 53) 
This moment, in which the subject extricates itself from the "order of 
things" by abstractly negating everything-including (especially) it(s)-self 
(as object)-in order to fuse with everything and thereby have immediate, 
"inner" experience, is the moment of"sovereignty." The notion of this phe­
nomenon, however, is extremely problematic, even for those thinkers such 
as Derrida who are otherwise sympathetic to Bataille's (non-)philosophi­
cal commitments. Like Bataille, Derrida is preoccupied with the split 
between living a mediated existence within Hegel's dialectic (within the 
limits of knowledge, meaning, and language) and living immediately, or, 
as Derrida articulates it, with "self-presence." For Derrida, however, there 
is ultimately no escape from Hegel's dialectic; it represents the limits of 
our horizon. Of Bataille's notion of sovereignty, he therefore asserts: "All 
the attributes ascribed to sovereignty are borrowed from the (Hegelian) 
logic of'lordship' . . . .  The sign 'sovereignty' itself, in its opposition to ser­
vility, was issued from the same stock as that of 'lordship."'14 But Derrida 
does believe that Hegel's "theory of the subject" can be left behind, for 
Derrida sees no self-determining subject at the end of the dialectical 

178 • David Sherman 
road-just the recognition that subjectivities are produced within the lin­
guistically overdetermining dialectic. Therefore, in virtue of Bataille's pre­
occupation with the subject, Derrida thinks that he ultimately falls back 
into the trap of classical thought: "One could even abstract from Bataille's 
text an entire zone throughout which sovereignty remains inside a classi­
cal philosophy of the subject . . .  which Heidegger has shown still to be 
confused, in Hegel and Nietzsche, with the essence of metaphysics."15 
We need not agree with this Heidegger-cum-Derrida conclusion that 
Hegel and Nietzsche had confused notions of the subject in order to con­
clude that Bataille did. But, for our purposes, Bataille's confusions are par­
ticularly instructive in that they evidence a key transition point in the 
twentieth-century reception of Hegel's master-slave encounter (which, 
after all, engenders the very notion of the subject that postmodernists rail 
against). While he still operates with one foot in the dialectical framework 
initiated by the master-slave encounter, Bataille's other foot is already in 
the postmodern. Thus, when he says that "the object of [his] research can­
not be distinguished from the subject at its boiling point" (GE, p. 1 0), it 
is only a short step in one of two directions, both of which find no distil­
lates in the wake of Bataille's project. One can either move farther away 
from history toward a materialism that is even more thoroughgoing than 
Bataille's (Deleuze), or move wholly into history, thus rejecting the idea 
that a subject can exist as anything other than a "thing" enmeshed in "the 
order of things" (Foucault, Derrida). As for Bataille, who sought to do jus­
tice to the misguided idea that what is essentially "human" is pure, inde­
terminate negativity, we would do well to recall Hegel's observation (with 
respect to the French Terror) that "the unfilled negativity of the self 
changes round in its inner Notion into absolute positivity," 16 for this is 
really the condition of Bataille's subject in its transcendent moment. 
Collapsing the "positivistic" animal that precedes the master-slave 
encounter and the positivistic "sovereign" human that stands on the other 
side of absolute knowing (and thus above history) into the "transcendent 
moment," Bataille, in rejecting the determinacy of the Hegelian aujhe­
bung, leaves the subject in history just as he finds him. 

1 3  
GILLES DELEUZE 
Although much of Bataille's thought was geared toward rupturing 
Hegel's master-slave dialectic, which he believed had accreted the very 
notion of human transcendence to servile labor, Bataille never doubted 
that it accurately delineated the nature of human self-consciousness. 
Indeed, his doubts were more concerned with the possibility of ever 
effectuating such a rupture, for, in many respects, Bataille took the mas­
ter-slave dialectic to be inexorable. Furthermore, although Bataille 
refashioned particular aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy for the purpose 
of bringing about those transcendent (sovereign) moments that would 
(at least temporarily) break out of the constricting contours of the mas­
ter-slave dialectic, he was not of the opinion that Nietzsche himself had 
actually understood Hegel's thought. Bataille thus asserts in Inner 
Experience that 
Nietzsche knew barely more of Hegel than a standard popularization. 
The Genealogy of Morals is the singular proof of the ignorance in which 
the dialectic of the master and the slave has been held and remains to be 
held, of which the clarity is dazzling (it is the decisive moment in the 
history of the consciousness of self and . . .  to the extent that we have to 
distinguish between each thing that afects us, no one knows anything 
of himself if he has not understood this movement which determines 
and limits man's successive possibilities). (IE, p. 1 09) 
179 

180 • David Sherman 
While many poststructuralist thinkers, such as Jacques Derrida and 
Jacques Lacan, share this kind of ambivalence with respect to Hegel, Gilles 
Deleuze is not one of them. According to Deleuze, Hegel's master-slave 
dialectic constitutes nothing less than the quintessential wrong turn in the 
history of philosophy, and it would not be an exaggeration to say that even 
though he rarely focuses upon Hegel directly, Deleuze's entire oeuvre is 
motivated by a virulently anti-Hegelian bent. Indeed, in his extremely 
influential Nietzsche and Philosophy, which comprises Deleuze's most sus­
tained encounter with Hegel's thought, he does nothing less than project 
this very outlook onto Nietzsche himself Ostensibly referring to Bataille, 
Deleuze states that "it has been said that Nietzsche did not know his 
Hegel. In the sense that one does not know one's opponent well" (N &P, 
p. 8).1 Indeed, he contends that one cannot even begin to understand 
Nietzsche's thought without referring back to Hegel: "We will misunder­
stand the whole of Nietzsche's work if we do not see 'against whom' its 
principle concepts are directed. Hegelian themes are present in this work 
as the enemy against which it fights" (N&P, p. 162). Moreover, in contrast 
with Bataille, Deleuze heavily relies upon Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morals, 
as well as his conceptions of the "will to power" and "eternal recurrence," 
in order to construct an alternative theory of both the initiation of the 
master-slave dynamic and the history that unfolds from it. Thus, although 
it was Bataille who set himself to the task of "recommenc[ing] and 
undo[ing] Hegel's Phenomenology" (IE, p. 80), it is actually Deleuze who 
more radically attempts to bring the job to fruition. 
Deleuze attacks Hegel's rendition of the master-slave dialectic by 
embracing an even more thoroughgoing materialism than Bataille-one 
that fundamentally rejects not only such Hegelian notions as recognition, 
mediation, knowledge, and negativity (both determinate and indetermi­
nate), but also rejects the very notion of selfhood. There is no (purely neg­
ative) self to be given its due on Deleuze's account; rather, human beings 
are basically a "play of bodily forces." Thus, Deleuze claims, there are two 
criteria by which our bodily forces can be identified: the degree to which 
they are active (noble) or reactive (slavish), and the degree to which they 
are affirmative or negative. The difference between these two pairs is that 
"active and reactive designate the original qualities of force but affirmative 
and negative designate the primordial qualities of the will to power" 
(N&P, pp. 53-54). In other words, given the ultimate balance of inter­
nally conflicting forces, a given person is either active (that is, a master, 
who ratifies his own existence by evaluating in accordance with his own 

Gilles Deleuze • 181 
strengths, i.e, "I am good, and therefore you are bad" or "I shall do . . .  ") 
or reactive (that is, a slave, whose life-denying morality emanates from his 
weakness in regard to the master, i.e., "You are evil, and therefore I am 
good" or "Thou shalt not do . . .  "), bur it is only when a person actually 
acts on these qualities that he can be described as either affirmative 
("becoming active") or negative ("becoming reactive"). Clearly, active and 
affirmation have "deep affinities," as do reactive and negative, but, accord­
ing to Deleuze, these couplings are not exclusive, and herein lies the prob­
lem. In section 1 0  of the first essay in the Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche 
says that "the slave revolt in morality begins when ressentiment itself 
becomes creative and gives birth to values"2 (in Deleuze's terminology, this 
is when reaction [the slave] becomes affirmative), and this leads to a situ­
ation in which reaction (the slave) can turn the tables on action (the mas­
ter): "an active force becomes reactive (in a new sense) when reactive forces 
(in the first sense) separate it from what it can do" (N &P, p. 57). Thus, 
when the slave's resentment becomes creative, two new predominant cou­
plings emerge: reactive-affirmative (the slave acting upon his resentment 
to create a new set of values that limit the ability of the superior master to 
imperiously act) and active-negative (the master succumbing to the slave's 
new set of action-limiting values). 
According to Deleuze, this is not the end of the story, however. Just 
as Hegel's notion of determinate negativity provides the impetus for a 
process in which self-consciousness successively enriches itself on the path 
from the master-slave encounter to "absolute knowing" (at which time 
human beings become "reconciled"), Deleuze's Nietzsche depends upon 
the notion of the "eternal recurrence" to provide the impetus for a process 
in which active force (the master) successively purges itself of the slavish 
"becoming negative" within it on the path to the Overman (at which time 
negativity disappears altogether in the face of an uncontaminated "becom­
ing active"). Eternal recurrence "is [therefore] an answer to the problem of 
passage [to the Overman]" (N&P, p. 48). However, unlike the historical 
Nietzsche, whose speculations on eternal recurrence alternately took "cos­
mological" and "psychological" forms-the former implies that all occur­
rences actually have happened and will happen an infinite number of 
times in exactly the same way throughout eternity, while the latter simply 
views eternal recurrence as a litmus test for determining whether what one 
Would will is truly desired-this "ontological" version of Deleuze's 
Nietzsche incorporates both and augments them with the "will to power." 
Accordingly, Deleuze, who attributes to Nietzsche the notion that the 

182 • David Sherman 
world's "being" is nothing other than the flux of a "pure becoming," 
argues that: 1) it is only "the difference" innate to becoming that can actu­
ally recur (cosmological thesis); 2) it is only the master who has the kind 
of fertile will that can will this difference (psychological thesis); and there­
fore 3) it is only the master who can overcome himself through his will­
ing. Or as Deleuze puts it, the eternal recurrence "is the moment or the 
eternity of becoming which eliminates all that resists it. It releases, indeed 
it creates, the purely active and pure affirmation. And this is the sole con­
tent of the Overman; he is the joint power of the will to power and the 
eternal return . . . .  " (N&P, p. xii). 
As an initial matter, what is striking about Deleuze's metaphysical ren­
dition of Nietzsche's thought is its form, which shares more in common 
with certain caricatures of Hegel's "system" than it does with the philoso­
phies of either Hegel or Nietzsche. While Hegel's historical dialectic is 
teleological, the goal of"absolute knowing" is by no means a logical neces­
sity; to the contrary, its realization depends upon contingent historical cir­
cumstances, which give rise to structures of self-consciousness that could 
have always been otherwise. With Deleuze's self-styled "selective ontol­
ogy," however, it is necessarily the case that only the active can return, 
which is a teleological thesis that is not only logically "harder" than 
Hegel's, but which also runs completely contrary to Nietzsche's own per­
spective. Indeed, for Nietzsche, the allure of the notion of eternal recur­
rence is that its circular view of history cannot be reconciled with a 
teleological viewpoint, Christian or otherwise. Thus, even a relatively sym­
pathetic critic such as Jean Wahl, from whom Deleuze took the view that 
Hegelian self-consciousness is typified by "the unhappy consciousness" (cf. 
N &P, p. 196), is constrained to point out that Deleuze's interpretation of 
Nietzsche is "essentially abstract and formal."3 But, unlike Nietzsche him­
self, Deleuze's Nietzsche (as Wahl again correctly points out) is "resentful" 
of Hegel's philosophy,4 and if Hegel's so-called "anthropologism" is viewed 
as culminating in a form of human reconciliation, then Deleuze's ontol­
ogy, which rejects the Hegelian conception of selfhood, must do the same 
on its own anti-Hegelian terms (even as it resists being viewed as the 
antithesis of Hegel's thought, and thus amenable to being sublated by his 
"system"). Thus, whereas Hegel's thought culminates in more profound 
forms of recognition and negativity-that is, in a more profound form of 
self-consciousness in which human beings realize that they are both col­
lectively and individually free, self-determining beings-it is necessary for 
Deleuze's anti-humanistic ontology to be objectively "selective" so as to 

Gilles Deleuze • 183 
make good its own commitment, which is to the destruction of these 
Hegelian concepts in favor of the affirmation of pure unconceptualized 
difference. Accordingly, "in and through the eternal return, negation as a 
quality of the will to power transmutes itself into affirmation, it becomes 
an afirmation of negation itself, it becomes a power of affirming, an affir­
mative power," and, in this manner, "affirmation changes nuance and 
becomes more and more profound" (N&P, pp. 71-72). Notwithstanding 
Deleuze's claim that "the concept of the Overman is directed against the 
dialectical conception of man" (N&P, p. 9), can it possibly be said that this 
process is not dialectical in its own way? 
If, in certain formal respects, Deleuze's teleological approach superfi­
cially parallels Hegel's while it simultaneously embraces a content that is 
diametrically opposed to it, the same can be said of his alternative rendi­
tion of the master-slave dynamic. Both renditions portray circumstances 
in which subjectivity becomes alienated from itself, and in which each 
party comes to see itself in a mediated way through the eyes of the other. 
Deleuze's mixed couplings of the reactive-affirmative (slave) and the 
active-negative (master) thus have the same kinds of existential predica­
ments that exist with Hegel's master and slave. The Deleuzian master, who 
becomes the slave of the slave in virtue of the latter's transvaluation of val­
ues, is like the Hegelian slave in that he seeks recognition on the other's 
terms. Conversely, the Deleuzian slave, who becomes the master of the 
master in virtue of his transvaluation of values, is like the Hegelian master 
in that he is disconnected from the performance of deeds: the Deleuzian 
slave is incapable of doing the deeds that the master (active force) can do, 
and thus defines himself in a mediated way in relation to them (in the 
sense that he self-righteously defines himself as the person who does not 
do these deeds), just as the Hegelian master, who chooses not to labor 
(because it is a slave's work), defines himself in a mediated way in relation 
to the slave's work product. 
More importantly, however, these differing renditions have neither 
the same ontological nor ethical significance for each thinker. As an initial 
matter, in Hegel's parable the fight that culminates in master and slave 
egan as a struggle between two beings of exactly the same "type," and it 
IS only the outcome of the fight that leads to each combatant's change in 
Status. Moreover, according to Hegel, the master-slave encounter is a nec­
esary occurrence, and while in the short term it leads to the alienation of 
each combatant from his "self," in the sense that each no longer has the 
primitive, immediate, tautological self-certainty of I 
= I, it engenders 

184 • David Sherman 
nothing less than human selfhood, and is thus an indispensable moment 
on the road to human self-realization. Conversely, according to Deleuze 
the categories of master and slave not only precede the moment of th; 
slave's transvaluation of values within his own account, which is readily 
apparent, but-and this is his fundamental point-they also tacitly pre­
cede the moment that constitutes the master-slave struggle within Hegel's 
account. What Hegel erroneously takes to be the moment in which the 
categories of master and slave are generated, Deleuze claims, is actually 
only the moment in which the slave has effectively gotten the upper hand, 
for, as we have seen, the materialist categories of active and reactive force 
(master and slave) are irreducible types (cf. N&P, p. 55), not social con­
structions. Moreover, for Deleuze, such concepts as negativity, recogni­
tion, mediation, and selfhood, are not ontological-or, at least, not 
ontological in the sense that Hegel refers to them-since on Hegel's 
account they refer to what is essentially human. Instead, negativity, recog­
nition, mediation, and selfhood are concepts that are basic only to reactive 
force (the slave), although even here the matter is somewhat more com­
plicated.5 By and large, however, what is pivotal for Deleuze is that these 
concepts carry "negative" ethical implications, and in two senses. Initially, 
as Judith Butler points out with respect to negativity, Deleuze views these 
concepts as ideological: they introduce a "lack" into the social context in 
order to morally justify an oppressive sameness that is designed to check 
more masterly drives, which would otherwise found society upon hierar­
chical orderings.6 More broadly, however, these concepts, which are part 
and parcel of "slave morality" (of which Hegel's thought is taken to be the 
prime example), are actually the foundation of morality as such, which is 
intrinsically life-denying. 
Of all the Hegelian concepts, Deleuze most fiercely attacks the con­
cept of "the negative," which reflects a fundamentally conceptual relation­
ship toward the world in which the concrete differences that exist among 
living forces are grasped in only an abstract fashion. In contrast with the 
"positivity" of being, the negativity of the dialectic "manufacture[s] 
· 
· 
· 
thought being, pure and empty, which affirms itself by passing into its 
own opposite" (N&P, p. 183). And, in contrast with Nietzsche, for whom 
"the essential relation of one force to another is never conceived of as a 
negative element in the essence" (N&P, p. 8), since active force simpl! 
affirms its own difference without feeling the need to negate that which It 
is not, Hegel's dialectic is no more than a reflection on difference th9t 
inverts its image. Thus, "for the affirmation of difference as such it substl-

Gilles Deleuze • 185 
tutes the negation of that which differs; for the affirmation of self it sub­
stitutes the negation of the other, and for the affirmation of affirmation it 
substitutes the famous negation of negation. But this inversion would be 
meaningless if it were not in fact animated by forces with an 'interest' in 
doing so" (N &P, p. 196). The type of forces that have such an interest are, 
of course, the negative, No-saying slaves. And inasmuch as they cannot 
afirm themselves without placing themselves in a negative relationship to 
the other, it is only the slaves who seek to be "recognized": 
[T]he famous dialectical aspect of the master-slave relationship depends 
on the fact that power is conceived not as will to power but as repre­
sentation of power, representation of superiority, recognition by "the 
one" of the superiority of "the other." What the wills in Hegel want is 
to have their power recognised, to represent their power. According to 
Nietzsche we have here a wholly erroneous conception of the will to 
power. This is the slave's conception, it is the image that the man of 
ressentiment has of power .
.
.
.
 Underneath the Hegelian image of the mas­
ter we always find the slave.(N&P, p. lO)(italics added) 
What is important to recognize here is that in rejecting Hegel's 
notions of negativity and recognition, Deleuze is not offering an alterna­
tive version of selfhood; rather, what he is doing is far more radical. When 
he tells us that "in Hegel, consciousness wants to be recognized by anoth­
er and represented as self-consciousness" (N&P, p. 80), or, more directly, 
when he says that "[self]-consciousness is essentially reactive" (N&P, p. 
41), Deleuze is taking issue with the very notion of selfhood. The looping 
back of consciousness onto itself, which "interiorizes" the human being 
and therefore first creates and then thickens the "identity" of the self, is 
not an active project, but a reactive one; it is the project of a force that can­
not otherwise manifest itself outwardly in the world. Active force, to the 
contrary, can spend itself in the world-it can "exteriorize" itself-and 
thus it has no need to turn inward. And by profusely spending itself in the 
World, active force does not acquire a "self-identity"; instead, it is con­
stantly chauging, or, better yet, "overcoming" its "self." (This is the return 
of difference that is vouchsafed by eternal recurrence.) Thus, Deleuze 
maintains, "underneath the Hegelian image of the master we always find 
the slave" because the Hegelian master is no longer disseminating himself 
in the world; rather, because he has been infected by the "becoming reac­
tive" negativity of the slave, his thin self-consciousness seeks recognition 

in order to enable him to forge a thicker "self" identity, and this self-iden­
tity is anathema to the play of pure difference, which is the Deleuzian 
ideal. 
Although Deleuze seems to reject all conceptions of self-conscious­
ness and selfhood here, matters are far more complicated, for, as we have 
observed, in opposition to the slave's "negation of the other," he has prof­
fered the master's "affirmation of self," which refers to a phenomenon in 
which the (affirmative) value-positing subject has just itself as its object: 
"Afirmation has no object other than itself. To be precise it is being inso­
far as it is its own object to itself" (N&P, p. 1 86). How does affirmation 
make an object of itself? Deleuze explains: 
Afirmation is posited for the first time as multiplicity, becoming and 
chance . . . .  Afirmation is then divided in two, difference is reflected in 
the affirmation of affirmation: the moment of reflection where a second 
afirmation takes the first as its object. But in this way affirmation is 
redoubled: as object of the second affirmation it is affirmation itself 
affirmed, redoubled affirmation, difference raised to its highest power 
. . . .  The will to power as the differential element that produces and 
develops difference in affirmation, that reflects difference in the affir­
mation of affirmation and makes it return in the afirmation which is 
itself affirmed. (N&P, p. 1 89) 
In this fashion, Deleuze rejects the mediacy that is intrinsic to Hegelian 
self-determination in favor of an immediacy that would seem to be bought 
at the expense of the external object. This presents problems for Deleuze, 
however. He accuses the negativity of the dialectic (or the "negation of 
negation") of manufacturing a reductive "thought being, pure and empty," 
as opposed to his own "affirmation of affirmation," which knows and 
affirms difference in its multifariousness. But if the master's "affirmation 
of self" involves no object other than himself, in what way does Deleuze 
seek to give difference its due? What is the relationship between this "affir­
mation of self," which has no object other than itself, and the affirmation 
of difference, which-at least nominally-does not "negate" the other, 
but, rather, fosters its particularity? 
1 
To grasp the consequences of Deleuze's anti-Hegelian ontology, it is 
necessary to revisit Hegel's conceptions of "negativity" and "recognition," 
for in attacking these ontological concepts by giving them an unjustifiably 
psychological interpretation, Deleuze has unwittingly projected the ten-

Gilles Deleuze • 187 
dencies of his own philosophy onto Hegel's dialectical thought. Thus, 
Hegelian "negativity" means that the human subject is other than (or 
stands in a "negative" relationship to) that which is its object. To claim 
that the external world is not the human subject, however, is not tanta­
mount to claiming that the human subject says "No" to the external world 
(as does the Nietzschean slave in section I-10 of the Genealogy of Morals). 
To the contrary, (Nietzsche's) psychological affirmation presupposes onto­
logical negativity. Historical personages that Nietzsche admired (masterly 
sorts who were not driven by ressentiment) attempted to "conquer" the 
world around them by placing their own imprimatur upon it. (This goes 
for a Goethe no less than a Caesar.) For Nietzsche, thΌ is the highest act 
of affirmation. But in Hegelian terms this must be understood as the "neg­
ativity" of a self-consciousness striving to assimilate an alienated objectiv­
ity in order to reconstitute it into an ever-expanding subjectivity. In other 
words, the will to act so as to make the objective world one's own (psy­
chological affirmation) is given impetus by the fact that before acting the 
world is not one's own: the self-affirming subject acts precisely because he 
stands in a negative relation to the objective world (ontological negativi­
ty). Indeed, it is in this process of conceptually mediating his relationship 
to the objective world that the subject gives himself a determinate content, 
i.e., this is how he makes himself who he actually is. And this notion 
stands in absolute contrast with those "slave moralities" that deny the 
determinacy that the nature of our phenomenal existences impose by 
positing another realm (the afterworld) that is completely beyond the pale 
of such particularistic, self-determining mediations. 
Conversely, if we regard Nietzsche's "last man," we see the embodi­
ment of psychological negativity. But the last man is not psychologically 
negative because he is ontologically negative; to the contrary, while he 
must be ontologically negative because this is what human beings basical­
ly are, he refuses to comprehend himself in these terms for psychological 
reasons. Cons.;quendy, the last man does not embrace a philosophy of 
negativity, which would require him to continuously engage with the 
world, and thus perpetually remake both it and himself in the process; 
instead, he embraces its precise opposite, namely, a philosophy of positiv­
ity or "positivism." And, Deleuze's wholesale attacks upon Hegelian nega­
tivity notwithstanding, in the final analysis it is positivism that Nietzsche 
himself railed against, and that the last man embraces. According to 
Nietzsche, it is the positivist who simply accepts both himself and the 
world as it is. 7 In short, therefore, from a psychological perspective, what 

188 • David Sherman 
Deleuze refers to as "the dialectical man" (N&P, p. 163) is neither the 
purely negativistic, No-saying slave nor the positivistic last man-that is, 
he neither categorically denies nor affirms what is. 
' 
In much the same way that Deleuze fails to differentiate ontological 
and psychological negativity, he fails to differentiate ontological and psy­
chological recognition. When Hegel speaks to the issue of recognition 
within the context of the master-slave encounter, he is not maintaining 
that people psychologically need others to recognize them (although, 
undoubtedly, this is the case). Far more radically, he is maintaining that 
there cannot even be a notion of the self in the absence of recognition, for, 
ontologically, a person can only have a reflective sense of self in response 
to his interaction with other selves (as opposed to a reflective sense of self 
wholly in response to his own self, as is the case with Deleuze). This fun­
damental point pertains only to the necessary conditions for the self, not 
to its psychological constitution. Nevertheless, it is to the psychological 
make-up of the self that Deleuze implicitly refers when he speaks of the 
slavish requirement for recognition: "the slave only conceives of power as 
the object of recognition, the content of a representation, the stake in a 
competition, and therefore makes it depend, at the end of a fight, on a 
simple attribution of established values" (N&P, p. 10). Deleuze fails to see 
that to conceive of power as the object of recognition or the content of a 
representation, as well as to attribute established values, the one who so 
conceives and attributes must already have a notion of self, a notion that, 
according to Hegel, can only arise within the framework of others. In 
other words, he has misrepresented the point of the master-slave 
encounter. Our question, of course, is how Deleuze's own second-order 
conception of a reflective self, which has no object other than the first­
order affirming "self" that it affirms, arises within his own ontological 
framework. And to this question, Deleuze can give no answer. In the 
absence of another person that would decenter the first-order "self," who, 
from the Hegelian standpoint, is akin to the primitively self-certain con­
sciousness in which I = I, there is no impetus for consciousness to loop 
back onto itself Indeed, to be able to revel in your difference already pre­
supposes the interiorization of the other, which is exactly what Deleuze 
forecloses by taking this phenomenon to be simply the hallmark of the 
slave. 
In the final analysis, by simultaneously valorizing an "ontology of dif­
ference" and making an immediate, presocial idea of self the wellspring of 
all life-affirming value, Deleuze alternately, albeit unintentionally, 

Gilles Deleuze • 189 
embraces what he incorrectly takes to be the life-denying pillars of Hegel's 
philosophy, namely, an uncritical acceptance of what is (positivism) and 
an idealistically contrived unity that represses difference (anti-pluralism). 
In fact, both of these tendencies flow from both his strategic operation for 
facilitating human overcoming and his own ideal. Accordingly, on the one 
hand, Deleuze's thought tends to uncritically accept what is because it 
would dispense with universality in the name of particularity without 
identifying particularity's universally preformed nature. In other words, as 
Hegel would maintain, all particulars subsist in a mediated relationship 
with culturally generated concepts and values, and to the degree that one 
purports to dispense with the given cultural context, one just inadvertent­
ly reaffirms the existing particulars in precisely the way that they have been 
culturally impacted. Consequently, despite Deleuze's antipathy toward 
culture, which he takes to have been slavish at its inception (N&P, p. 138), 
the attempt to give difference its due must (self-consciously) take place 
within the context of culture itself, regardless of the degree to which the 
culture deviates from the norm. Furthermore, from the standpoint of the 
"first moment" of his archetype-the first-order affirming self-Deleuze 
would uncritically accept what is because in wholly exteriorizing himself, 
the first order self has no critical standpoint from which to interpret the 
world, though Deleuze (following Nietzsche, who does not entangle him­
self in an ontology) still hollowly claims that interpretation is "philoso­
phy's highest art" (N&P, p. 4). Deleuze's first-order subject is wholly at 
one with the world, and whatever social institutions may exist exercise an 
unperceived but absolute influence upon the way that he wills within it.8 
On the other hand, Deleuze's ontology actually represses difference. 
From the "strategic" standpoint, although Deleuze would negate this 
world in favor of the world of difference, he is still much like Nietzsche's 
allegedly dialectical No-saying slave, who conceptually negates this world 
in favor of the one beyond.9 Both yearn for a world that historically has 
never existed, and both have an ontology that cooks the outcome. And, 
while Deleuze claims that the "immense" negation in his system "has bro­
ken its alliance with reactive forces" and is, therefore, "under the sway of 
affirmation" (cf. N&P, pp. 177-79), isn't it the case that from the vantage 
point of both Hegel and Nietzsche, Deleuze's selective ontology falls in 
line with Platonism, Christianity, and Kantianism in terms of its dis­
counting of the particularities of this world? Or, as Deleuze says of Hegel, 
hasn't Deleuze just manufactured this ontology with his own brand of 
dialectic, which is a product of the negative, and isn't the "becoming" 

190 • David Sherman 
intrinsic to his ontology only a flattening "thought" becoming, pure and 
empty? (cf. N&P, p. 183). Moreover, as we have already seen, ᅋn his "sec­
ond moment," Deleuze's archetype is a virtually self-identical being. 
Because this second-order self-affirming "reflective" subject who takes 
only himself as an object is not "infected" with the negative-on Hegel's 
account, the negative is the ontological ground upon which the subject 
fluidly makes itself determinate in the world-he is unable to generate a 
concrete relationship with that which he is not. Thus, for all purposes, 
other persons and things share the second-order subject's life world in only 
the most attenuated sense; they are merely abstract entities, the furniture 
on the stage upon which Deleuze's masterly forces affirm themselves in 
any way that they deem fit. 
In his two moments, therefore, the ideal Deleuzian subject careens 
from pillar to post, from positivism to antipluralism. The first-order sub­
ject is completely at one with the world, while the second-order subject, 
who has only himself for an object, is completely at one with himself. 
There is no mediation of these two existential moments, however, just as 
there is no mediation anywhere else within Deleuze's ontology. And while 
this is in keeping with Deleuze's anti-Hegelian agenda, it only reveals the 
untenable extremes that inhere within his notion of selfhood. The master 
and the slave in Hegel's master-slave parable are able to move forward 
because neither affirmation nor negation are hypostatized within Hegel's 
dialectic; there is neither the static affirmation of what is nor a negation 
induced nothingness, as Deleuze alternately alleges. To the contrary, by 
dint of the aujhebung, which is at the heart of the dialectic, what exists is 
both negated and preserved (in the sense of raised up), thus allowing sub­
jectivity to overcome its own contradictions through fluid self-movement. 
Because affirmation and negation are not permitted to share the same 
world on Deleuze's account, however, the Deleuzian subject goes to the 
extremes. 

14 
JACQUES LACAN 
Although first and foremost a psychoanalyst whose self-styled mission was 
to facilitate a "return to Freud," Jacques Lacan's psychoanalytic theory, 
which draws heavily upon Hegel's thought, has had enormous philosoph­
ical implications. 1 As an initial matter, Lacan's vaunted "return to Freud" 
was motivated, in no small part, by his disdain for "ego psychology," 
which was particularly (but by no means exclusively) prevalent in the 
United States. According to Lacan, Freud's thought was revolutionary 
because it showed-in opposition to classical psychology-that the ego 
was not the seat of an autonomous self, but, rather, was governed by the 
unconscious, which was perretually subverting it. The ego psychologists 
had not grasped this crucial lesson, however, and by failing to see that the 
ego was irremediably "decentered," they had misinterpreted "the metapsy­
chological work of Freud after 1920," thereby prompting Lacan to con­
temptuously declare that "our nice little ego is back again . . . .  We're now 
back on the well-beaten paths of general psychology."2 But in seeking to 
revivifY the revolutionary implications of Freud's work in the face of those 
who would domesticate it in accordance with the tenets of classical psy­
chology, Lacan does not categorically embrace the underlying premises of 
Freud's thought either. Indeed, Lacan dissents from what is unquestion­
ably one of the most important aspects of Freud's work-namely, his view 
that the ego is largely informed by the biologically rooted drives of the 
libido. Thus, while Freud's thought is grounded in the biological sciences, 
191 

192 • David Sherman 
Lacan's thought is vehemently antibiological in nature, and is grounded, 
instead, in a more hermeneutical approach. And, in effectuating this move 
away from Freud's more naturalistic views, Lacan latches onto Hegel's 
writings. But Hegel is more than just a counterbalance to Freud, for, in the 
final analysis, it would only be a slight overstatement to say that a good 
deal ofLacan's elaborate and varied corpus, which also owes an enormous 
debt to the anthropological theories of Claude Levi-Strauss and the lin­
guistic theories of Ferdinand Saussure, revolves around subtle reworkings 
of the concepts contained in chapter IV of the Phenomenology. 
Like Bataille, Lacan attended Kojeve's lectures on the Phenomenology, 
and, like Bataille, he was heavily influenced by them. According to Mikkel 
Borch-Jacobsen, who does an excellent job of tracing the theoretical 
underpinnings ofLacan's positions to Kojeve's Heideggerian inspired read­
ing of the Phenomenology, there is a fundamental ambiguity that exists in 
Kojeve's rendition: "Kojeve proposed a 'humanist' and 'anthropological' 
interpretation of Hegel in his course, and that was how he ended up stum­
bling onto the problem of death and finitude, dragging his most eminent 
listeners into a sort of strange Hegelianism of pure negativity, which rather 
quickly swerved into a virulent anti-Hegelianism (and anti-humanism)."3 
At the heart ofKojeve's interpretation of Hegel, in other words, there was 
an irreconcilable conflict. On the one hand, Hegel could be interpreted 
along strictly humanistic lines, which means that Hegel's Absolute is iden­
tical to humankind, and that in sublating "the Other" in its movement 
toward Absolute Knowledge, humankind is basically reappropriating its 
own essence. This interpretation, Borch-Jacobsen points out, finds expres­
sion in Sartre's claim that "existentialism is a humanism" (though Sartre 
would clearly deny that human beings can ever wholly reappropriate 
themselves). On the other hand, humankind is characterized by death and 
finitude, and the "being" of humans (individually or collectively) is not 
tantamount to transcendent "Being," of which humans constitute only a 
part. On this antihumanist view, which finds expression in Heidegger's 
"Letter on Humanism," human beings cannot reappropriate their own 
Being, and, indeed, living "authentically" depends upon nothing more 
than the recognition that we are essentially "Beings-unto-Death" -an idea 
that implies that our so-called possibilities are actually endlessly deferred. 
Moreover, this ambiguity manifests itself in Kojeve's discussion of"Desire" 
at the beginning of chapter IV of the Phenomenology. The negativity of 
desire can be comprehended as desiring itself through the other, as Hegel 
maintains, or "by contrast, if desire is defined, in para-Heideggerian 

jacques Lacan • 193 
terms, as transcendence toward nothing, it is none the less clear that it will 
desire 'itself' only as nothingness-in other words, as pure negativity and 
absolute alterity: that Desire (capital D) will desire 'itself' as Other (capi­
tal 0), beyond itself and every 'ego'."4 This suggests that humankind is, in 
some sense, always beyond its own reach, which is the red thread that runs 
through the numerous theoretical twists and turns that comprise Lacan's 
five decade long career. In what follows, I shall consider the various stages 
of Lacan's thought, paying particular attention to the Hegelian implica­
tions each step along the way. 
The first phase of Lacan's thought, which basically spans from his 
inaugural presentation to the International Psychoanalytic Association in 
1 936 to his so-called "Rome Discourse" in 1953, is, more than any other, 
preoccupied with Hegel's description of self-consciousness. This phase 
revolves around Lacan's theory of the "mirror stage," which derives from­
but takes in an entirely different direction-Freud's theory of biological 
immaturity. According to Lacan, when a young child between the ages of 
six and eighteen months looks into the mirror, the image that stares back 
leads him to jubilantly test the correspondence between his own bodily 
movements and the movements of his image in the mirror, as well as the 
relationship between his specular image and those aspects of his sur­
rounding environment that are also captured in the mirror's reflection. 
But the specular image actually misrepresents to the young child the 
nature of his own reality, for while his motor skills are largely undevel­
oped, the specular image appears to him as an integrated whole. As a 
result, the young child sees himself in an idealized way, and, moreover, 
comes to anticipate a future in which his current lack of coordination will 
have been completely overcome. :Sor Lacan, however, the crucial point is 
not that the young child's apprehension of its future (or even present) 
physical coordination is mistaken, but that the specular image with which 
he identifies suggests an underlying, unified/unifying ego structure, which 
the young child will then immediately internalize as an ideal. And it is in 
moving toward this unifying ideal, Lacan will tell us, that the developing 
child is mistaken: 
The mirror stage is a drama whose internal thrust is precipitated from 
insufficiency to anticipation-and which manufactures for the subject, 
caught up in the lure of spatial identification, the succession of phan­
tasies that extends from a fragmented body image to a form of its total­
ity that I shall call orthopaedic-and, lastly, to the assumption of the 

194 • David Sherman 
armour of an alienating identity, which will mark with its rigid structure 
the subject's entire mental development. (E, p. 4)5 
The "alienating identity" to which Lacan refers here is none other 
than the subject's notion of his own autonomously derived self-identity, 
and Lacan's point is that-in spite of the ultimate maturation of his pow­
ers-the child will never feel truly "unified." At this juncture, we have not 
moved all that far from Freud, who himself recognized the high psychic 
price that we pay for the development of the ego, which is, as it were, an 
"alienating identity" that is under relentless attack from our unconscious 
drives. (Along these lines, Freud speaks in Civilization and its Discontents 
of the feeling of oneness with the external world that a baby has at its 
mother's breast, an "oceanic feeling" that is irretrievably lost with the ego's 
development.) Freud also claimed, however, that this developmental 
process was absolutely necessary in order to bring the individual into a 
closer conformity with the requirements of the external world; in Freud's 
terminology, there needs to be a progressive substitution of the "reality 
principle" for the "pleasure principle." In contrast, although there are cer­
tain ambivalences in this earliest phase of his thought, Lacan maintains 
(or, at the very least, will come to maintain) that this process of ego devel­
opment does not propel us any closer to "reality"-or, as Lacan will later 
come to name it, "the real"-but, rather, moves us farther away from it. 
From the viewpoint ofLacan's "mirror stage" thesis, the "important point" 
is that the ego, which ostensibly performs a synthesizing function, is noth­
ing more than an "Ideal-I" that "situates the agency of the ego, before its 
social determination, in a fictional direction, which will always remain 
irreducible for the individual alone . . .  whatever the success of the dialec­
tical syntheses by which he must resolve as /his discordance with his own 
reality" (E, p.2). In other words, unlike Freud, for whom the ego "realisti­
cally'' mediated the relationship between the unconscious and the external 
world, for Lacan, it would appear, the ego is a pernicious fiction. 
Indeed, Lacan even points out that when a monkey is put before the 
mirror, it will "master" its specular image and find it "empty" (E, p. 1), 
which has led some commentators to contend that Lacan has a "derisory" 
view of the child, who simply has a "perverse will to remain deluded."6 It 
seems to me, however, that this misses the point. To be sure, Lacan, as we 
shall see, believes that this "fiction" should be put aside, and this is actu­
ally one of his basic objectives in psychoanalysis. But this initial moment 
of ego formation may well be a necessary stage that must be surmounted, 

jacques Lacan • 195 
just as the initial moment of ego formation in the Phenomenology, which 
splinters into master and slave, is an indispensable stage that must be sur­
mounted. Indeed, there is every reason to believe that Hegel's master-slave 
dialectic was the model from which Lacan formulated his "mirror stage" 
thesis. For example, Lacan contends that "this development is experienced 
as a temporal dialectic that decisively projects the formation of the indi­
vidual into history" (E, p. 4)-a characterization that could be applied to 
the master-slave parable without changing a word. So, too, Lacan talks in 
terms of "recognition," or, to be more exact, "misrecognition": "the func­
tion of mlconnaissance .
.
.
 characterizes the ego in all its structures" (E, p. 
6). And, finally, in his 1948 paper ''Aggressivity in Psychoanalysis," Lacan 
plainly states that Hegel's developmental theory was the "ultimate" one: 
"From the conflict of Master and Slave, he deduced the entire subjective 
and objective progress of our history" (E, p. 26). In short, then, the mir­
ror stage is Lacan's psychoanalytic analogue to the master-slave encounter, 
and like the master-slave encounter, which also "projects the formation of 
the individual into history," it is not viewed pejoratively, but merely as an 
initial step that must be gotten past. Indeed, as we saw, Lacan has even 
called the petrified specular image "orthopaedic." 
But even in this initial phase of this thought, as was suggested above, 
Lacan was far from optimistic about the prospects for any kind of recon­
ciliation between the ego and the outside world, and, in any event, cer­
tainly far less optimistic than Hegel. Nevertheless, prefiguring his 
"linguistic turn," Lacan characterizes the "Ideal-1" as a "primordial form" 
that exists "before it ᅉs objectified in the dialectic of identification with the 
other, and before language restores to it, in the universal, its function as 
subject" (E, p. 2). Language would thus appear to be the key because it is 
essentially intersubjective in nature, which is more or less in keeping with 
Hegel's attack on the autonomous, "self-identical" self. The reconciliation 
afforded by language is imperfect at best, however, for it would seem that 
any self-identity forged by the mediations of language would necessarily 
pale in comparison with the virtual omnipotence that the young child had 
prognosticated for himself when initially apprehending his specular 
image. It is from the viewpoint of this early and persisting ideal that 
mlconnaissance "characterizes the ego in all its structures." 
In any event, it seems relatively clear that in this first phase of his 
thought, Lacan's attack on the ego is less an attack on all conceptions of the 
ego than it is on one in particular-namely, the Cartesian one. Thus, in 
"The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I as Revealed in 

196 • David Sherman 
Psychoanalytic Experience," he emphasizes in the very first paragraph that 
it is to "any philosophy directly issuing from the Cogito" that he is 
"oppose[d]" (E, p. 1). And, in the penultimate page of the paper, he attacks 
Sartre, who distinguishes between the free "I" of consciousness and the ego 
("Me"), which is an object in the world: "that philosophy grasps negativity 
only within the limits of a self-sufficiency of consciousness, which, as one 
of its premises, links to the meconnaissances that constitute the ego, the illu­
sion of autonomy" (E, p. 6). Lacan has clearly retained-in some ambigu­
ous form-the idea of an unreified subject, who can only be 
intersubjectively constituted. Nevertheless, it is also clear that he will have 
no truck with the more teleological aspects of Hegel's thought for the pur­
pose of effectuating this reconciliation. For while the master-slave dialectic 
is paradigmatic in these early works, Lacan has already made apparent that 
he sees knowledge (and certainly the drive toward ''Absolute Knowledge") 
as essentially "paranoid." According to Lacan, "the most general structure 
of human knowledge" entails a "formal stagnation ... which constitutes the 
ego and its objects with attributes of permanence, identity, and substan­
tiality," and this "formal fixation," which "ruptures" the "shifting field" of 
animal desire, is a "defensive armour" that the ego dons in order to solidi­
fY itself (E, p. 17). In other words, from the vantage point of Lacan's 
Heraclitean "ego/object dialectic," the drive to know is just the underside 
of the ego's drive to unifY itself, which calls into question the possibility of 
any reconciliation. At any rate, as he shifts into the second phase of his 
thought, Lacan will address both sides of this dialectic in the same fashion: 
he will move beyond his attack on the Cartesian subject to reject even a 
Hegelian subject, and he will reject any correspondence between the so­
called "subject," who is now formed in the force field oflanguage, and the 
objects of the external world that he would purport to know. 
The beginnings of Lacan's mature "system" are evidenced in two sig­
nificant papers from the mid-1950s-namely, "The Function and Field of 
Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis" (otherwise known as "the Rome 
Discourse") and "The Agency of the Letter in the Unconscious or Reason 
Since Freud." In these papers, Lacan ardently embraces a structural analy­
sis in which all humanistic assumptions that might have remained in his 
thought up to that time are eradicated. In "The Function and Field of 
Speech," he stresses the importance of the anthropological theories of 
Levi-Strauss, who, "in suggesting the implication of the structures of lan­
guage with that part of the social laws that regulate marriage ties and kin­
ship, is already conquering the very terrain in which Freud situates the 

Jacques Lacan • 197 
unconscious. From now on, it is impossible not to make a general theory 
of the symbol the axis of a new classification of the sciences where the sci­
ences of man will once more take up their central position as sciences of 
subjectivity" (E, p. 73). By collapsing "the symbol" into Freud's uncon­
scious and making it the centerpiece of a new theory of "the sciences of 
man" to boot, Lacan's Levi-Strauss largely settles whatever ambiguities had 
remained for Lacan concerning the goal of subjectivity. It is no longer a 
question of overcoming the vagaries of misrecognition in order to some­
how realize an intersubjective ego ideal because the subject itself is noth­
ing more than a function of the overarching linguistic structures: "Man 
speaks, then, but it is because the symbol has made him a man" (E, p. 65). 
From an explicitly psychoanalytic vantage point, moreover, this move to 
language only deepens Lacan's antibiological stance. Thus, language is no 
longer just a tool for uncovering the nature of the unconconscious drives 
that give rise to the patient's symptom; to the contrary, now, Lacan tells 
us, "the unconscious is structured like a language,"7 and even a patient's 
symptom will "resolve itself entirely in an analysis oflanguage, because the 
symptom is itself structured like a language" (E, p. 59). 
Despite subsuming the subject within the deep structures oflanguage, 
Lacan's "technique" is still, nevertheless, informed by "the structuring 
moments of the Hegelian phenomenology [and,] in the first place, the 
master-slave dialectic .
.
. . " (E, p. 80): 
These principles are simply the dialectic of the consciousness-of-self, as 
realized from Socrates to Hegel, from the ironic presupposition that all 
that is rational is real to its culmination in the scientific view that all that 
is real is rational. But Freud's discovery was to demonstrate that this ver­
ifying process authentically attains the subject only by decentering him 
from the consciousness-of-self, in the axis of which the Hegelian recon­
struction of the phenomenology of mind, maintained it: that is, that 
this discovery renders even more decrepit any pursuit of the prise de con­
science which, beyond its status as a psychological phenomenon, cannot 
be inscribed within the conjuncture of the particular moment that alone 
embodies the universal and in default of which it vanishes into general­
ity . . . .  But if there still remains something prophetic in Hegel's insis­
tence on the fundamental identity of the particular and the universal, an 
insistence that reveals the measure of his genius, it is certainly psycho­
analysis that provides it with its paradigm by revealing the structure in 
which that identity is realized as disjunctive of the subject, and without 
appeal to any tomorrow. (E, pp. 79-80) 

198 • David Sherman 
For Lacan, like Hegel, there is still the drive for recognition-"the 
first object of desire is [still) to be recognized by the other (E, p. 58)­
although for Lacan this drive is now understood as one that takes place 
completely within the boundaries of speech. Accordingly, "what consti­
tutes me as subject is my question," and what "I seek in speech is the 
response of the other" (E, p. 86). (For the slave in Hegel's master-slave 
dynamic, of course, this response does not come-or at least does not 
come to him qua slave.) But where Lacan moves even farther away from 
Hegel, as this lengthy passage suggests, is in the idea that there can be an 
ultimate reconciliation between the individual and the collective. Even in 
the early Lacan, as we observed, there will be no movement toward 
"Absolute Knowledge," which, for Hegel, is the speculative juncture at 
which there is an identity of "I" and "We," the subject and the objects of 
its knowledge. This identity, Lacan says, is "disjunctive of the subject" not 
just because the individual will not be unified in the interpersonal realm, 
but because the individual himsel£ as Freud discovered, is essentially 
"decenter[ed] ... from the consciousness-of-sel£" But if the individual can 
be intersubjectively recognized in speech, in what sense has Lacan done 
away with Hegel's prise de conscience? The answer, as the passage above sug­
gests, is that he has shifted it to a dialectic that is no longer Hegelian. 8 In 
the beginning of"The Function and Field of Speech," Lacan remarks that 
in analysis there are certain times that "the subject seems to be talking in 
vain about someone who, even if he were his spitting image, can never 
become one with the assumption of his desire" (E, p. 45). Or, to put it in 
terms of the mirror stage, even if the person looking into the mirror has, 
in fact, realized his ego ideal, which stares back at him, there still will be 
no satisfaction for self-consciousness, for the person's desire will always 
outstrip his ego ideal. 
It would appear, strangely enough, that while the initial moment 
before the mirror for the young child is much like the initial moment for 
each of the two self-consciousnesses that confront one another in the 
"state-of-nature" in that a minimal "self" misrecognizes an objectification 
of itself before it, Lacan will part company with Hegel by travelling, if you 
will, in the opposite direction. The master and slave, both of whom have 
lost their self-certainty as a result of their confrontation, will embark upon 
a path on which each will recover his self-certainty at a higher (intersub­
jective) level. In contrast, the young child, who begins with only a frag­
mented body, can never reach his ego ideal and would not identifY with it 
even if he could; he will become mired in the insatiability of his own 

jacques Lacan • 199 
desire. In other words, while Hegel's dialectic moves forward through a 
continuous process in which otherness is steadily reappropriated by the 
subject-a process (as Lacan says of Freud's work) that culminates in 
"reintegration and harmony, I could even say of reconciliation" (E, p. 
171)-Lacan's symbol-driven "dialectic," as will become clear, moves 
backward toward the ontological root of an absolute Otherness, which is 
what the subject really desires, but, because of its unobtainability, disap­
propriates him at every turn. 
The young child, therefore, would do better to seek his recognition in 
the symbolic realm, not the realm of images, which includes within it 
baneful ideals such as the unified ego structure, for symbols "envelop the 
life of man in a network so total that they join together, before he comes 
into the world those who are going to engender him by 'flesh and blood'; 
so total that they bring to his birth . . .  the shape of his destiny .
.
.
 unless 
he attaim the subjective bringing to realization of being-for-death" (E, p. 68; 
emphasis added). With this last clause, we can see the inspiration for 
Lacan's "dialectic," which, as Borch-Jacobsen correctly points out, is noth­
ing other than Kojeve's dialectic "intrerpreted from over Heidegger's 
shoulder."9 As we shall see shortly, with his move towards structuralism, 
Lacan has embraced an ontology that is Heideggerian at its core. But at 
this point, it is important to emphasize that in now unequivocally reject­
ing a Hegelian conception of selfhood, Lacan is also rejecting a Hegelian 
conception of knowledge-that is, he is rejecting the notion that a subject 
can ever actually know the nature of the objects that he apprehends. This 
"epistemological break," which extends his earlier views on the paranoiac 
nature of knowledge (in a fashion that, predictably, is parallel to the exten­
sion of his views on the nature of the subject), is detailed in "The Agency 
of the Letter," and the theoretical medium through which he brings it 
about is a reworked Saussurian linguistic theory. 
If "the unconscious is structured like a language," and the subject is 
ultimately "the slave of language" (E, p. 148), then a correctly articulated 
linguistic theory is a necessary psychoanalytic tool, and this is precisely 
what Lacan purports to give us. Lacan begins with Saussure's linguistic 
theory, but fundamentally transfigures it by attacking his concept of the 
"sign." Thus, according to Saussure, the linguistic sign is itself arbitrary­
that is, any term could have been used to designate the actual thing to 
which it refers. But once a particular term is selected, the tie between sig­
nifier and signified is instituted, and the sign becomes tethered within an 
elaborate system of signs, each of which has its own meaning within the 

200 • David Sherman 
specific language. In other words, each sign within a language binds 
together within it both signifier and signified. According to Lacan, how­
ever, the signifier does not truly have any relationship to the signified, a 
point that he graphically brings out with the following "algorithm": Sis. 
Capital "S" designates the signifier, small "s" designates the signified, and 
the bar between them suggests that there is actually no relationship 
between the two. Rather, "the signifier, as such, signifies nothing."10 And 
once signification falls out of the picture, we are left with only a chain of 
signifiers-or what Lacan refers to as a "signifying chain" akin to the rings 
of a necklace (E, p. 153)-which is basically a "prison house" of signifiers 
that bears no relationship to the way things "really are." This signifying 
chain, in which meaning is condemned to slide from word to word­
Lacan also refers to the signifying chain as a "metonymical chain"­
implies not only that we lose all access to the referent, that is, the "real" 
objects of our knowledge, but also that our desires, as subjects born and 
inextricably bound within this interminably sliding chain, can never be 
satisfied: desire is "caught in the rails-eternally stretching forth towards 
the desire for something else--of metonymy" (E, pp. 166-67). This, accord­
ing to Lacan, is "the chain of dead desire" (E, p. 167). 
I shall elaborate upon Lacan's notion of desire shortly, but first it must 
be emphasized that he does not just conceive of the human world in terms 
of this one (symbolic) dimension. Instead, Lacan articulates the existence 
of three realms-namely, the Symbolic, the Imaginary and the Real. As we 
just saw, the Symbolic, which was inspired by the works of Levi-Strauss 
and Saussure, is the linguistic realm to which we are ontologically con­
demned. In contrast, the Imaginary, which is what Lacan's thought has 
railed against from the beginning, is the realm of images with which we 
are ostensibly driven to identify-for example, the Cartesian and (now) 
Hegelian ego ideals that we espy in the mirror, and the certainty of knowl­
edge which supposedly flows from them. So far, of course, we have mere­
ly retraced old ground. But with the introduction of his idea of the Real, 
Lacan moves into the orbit of an ontology whose parameters are circum­
scribed by the ontology of Heidegger-cum-Kojeve. Thus, according to 
Lacan, the Real falls outside the signifying dimension altogether. And 
while the signifying dimension is characterized by absence, the Real, 
which itself cannot be signified, is the veiled presence that stands behind 
it: "There is no absence in the ReaJ. "l l For Lacan, to get to the heart of 
the matter, the Real is closely linked with Heidegger's conception of 
Being, and, indeed, we already see the foreshadowings of this relationship 

jacques Lacan • 201 
in "The Agency of the Letter." He speaks of the human subject's "lack of 
being" (E, p. 166), and, in the closing paragraph, repudiates "centuries of 
philosophical bravado," which were carried out in the name of "humanis­
tic man," in favor of his own project, which he says is defined by "the 
question ofbeing" (E, p. 175). 
According to Heidegger, "the question of being" has been obscured by 
the epistemological questions of the metaphysical tradition, which began 
with the ancient Greeks, but came to fruition with Descartes. In this 
sense, human beings, on Heidegger's account, are essentially fallen-that 
is, their understanding of the world tends to conform to the understand­
ing of the broader collective (das Man), which tends to submerge the 
"question of being" under the commonplace. Heidegger actually equivo­
cates on this notion of "fallenness," however, for he stresses that falling 
reveals an essential ontological structure of "Dasein" (human beings), 
although he also distinguishes between an "authentic" and "inauthentic" 
comportment toward the world. The individual who recognizes that he is 
essentially a "being-unto-dᅊath" (a phrase that we have already seen Lacan 
use) is the one who will be able to comport himself more authentically. 
But, under any circumstance, Heidegger argues, being never just reveals 
itself as such. Instead, it veils and unveils itself, for it is simply not some­
thing to be grasped in the manner of the Cartesian tradition. Lacan's 
approach is more or less analogous. According to Lacan, we are unalter­
ably a part of the fallen Symbolic realm, but the Real both undergirds this 
realm and has ripple effects within it. And it is only by not attempting to 
linguistically grasp this ineffable, self-identical realm that we might come 
to have some fleeting intuition of it: 
Without going to the heart of the issue of the relationship between the 
signifier, qua signifier of language, and something that without it would 
never be named, it's noticeable that the less we express it, the less we 
speak, the more it speaks to us. The more foreign we are to what is at 
issue in this being, the more it has a tendency to present itself to us, 
accompanied by this pacifying expression ["the peace of the evening"] 
that presents itself as indeterminate, lying on the border between the 
field of our motor autonomy and this something that is said to us from 
outside, this something through which the world borders on speaking 
to us . . . .  We have now come to the limit at which discourse, if it opens 
onto anything beyond meaning, opens onto the signifier in the real . . .  
which organizes all these phenomena. 12 

202 • David Sherman 
Practically speaking, however, as is the case with Heidegger's fundamental 
ontology, in which human beings can have no real access to Being, Lacan's 
subject can have no real (linguistic) access to the Real. The Real is wholly 
Other, which means that the "metonymical chain" in the Symbolic realm 
remains just that-namely, a ceaseless movement toward an unattainable 
Otherness. This Otherness, moreover, is the place in which the linguisti­
cally structured unconscious is found, and it is here that Hegel's problem­
atic is reinscribed within Lacan's essentially Heideggerian ontology: "If I 
have said that the unconscious is the discourse of the Other (with a capi­
tal 0) it is in order to indicate the beyond in which the recognition of 
desire is bound up with the desire for recognition" (E, p. 172). Indeed, as 
Lacan shifts into the third phase of his thought, he reformulates the basic 
Hegelian terms from chapter IV of the Phenomenology so as to harmonize 
them with a framework that is both Heideggerian and Freudian: the 
"recognition of desire" will bring about the realization that the "desire for 
recognition" will never be satisfied. 
Lacan's third phase, which begins in the late 1950s and lasts through 
the mid-1 970s, is marked, in some sense, by a return to the issue of sexu­
ality in psychoanalysis, and, consequently, a return to certain Freudian sta­
ples, such as the castration complex. (This complex, Freud asserts, is based 
upon the establishment of the primordial law, which contains within it the 
punishment of castration for acts of incest.) In returning to the issue of 
sexuality, however, Lacan is not rejecting the anti-biologism that has ani­
mated his thought; to the contrary, he is only reinterpreting Freudian doc­
trine into the language of his linguistically driven brand of psychoanalytic 
theory. Accordingly, in "The Signification of the Phallus," Lacan contends 
that Freud anticipated the emphasis upon the signifier in modern linguis­
tic analysis, but could not fully explicate this insight because it postdated 
him (which means that neo-Freudians who have maintained that the phal­
lus is nothing more than the penis or clitoris have missed Freud's point). 
And, in accordance with Freud's "anticipation" of linguistic analysis, Lacan 
maintains, the phallus is the ultimate signifier: "the signifier intended to 
designate as a whole the effects of the signified, in that the signifier con­
ditions them by its presence as a signifier" (E, p. 285). What is the con­
cluding effect of this privileged signifier, "in which the role of the logos is 
joined with the advent of desire"? (E, p. 287). It is an alienation engen­
dered by an unrequited desire for recognition that is ontologically insur­
mountable. 
Lacan's formulation of desire in "The Signification of the Phallus," in 

jacques Lacan • 203 
which he juxtaposes desire to needs and demands, is essentially at odds 
with Hegel's own formulation at the beginning of chapter IV of the 
Phenomenology. For Hegel, it will be recalled, the desire of the Fichtean "I" 
is insatiable: it perpetually negates its other without ever achieving satis­
faction. And the reason for this inability, of course, is that ultimately "self­
consciousness attains its satisfaction only in another self-consciousness" 
(para. 1 0). Thus, when the desire for recognition from the other is grati­
fied, so is individual satisfaction. In contrast, for Lacan, the insatiability of 
the Fichtean "I"-to stretch the analogy-is never overcome. Of course, 
Lacan does not begin with the self-certain "I" in his articulation of desire, 
just as he did not begin with two encountering self-consciousnesses in his 
articulation of the mirror stage. Rather, he starts with the infant who cries 
when its physical needs are not met. But as the infant matures, it acquires 
language, and therefore the ability to formulate demands, which are of a 
qualitatively different nature. According to Lacan, while the child's never­
ending flow of demands are ostensibly for particular things, "demand in 
itself bears on something other than the satisfactions it calls for. It is a 
demand of a presence or of an absence-which is what is manifested in 
the primordial relation to the mother, pregnant with the Other to be sit­
uated within the needs that it can satisfy" (E, p. 286). In other words, 
what the child is seeking through its demands is an unconditional recog­
nition from its mother, who-inhabiting the existential place of the unat­
tainable Other-is clearly in no position to meet them all. Or to put the 
matter somewhat differently, the mother does not possess a phallus, the 
ultimate signifier which alone could meet all the child's demands (cf. E, p. 
289). Consequently, "demand annuls the particularity of everything that 
can be granted by transmuting it into a proof of love, and the very satis­
factions that it obtains for need are reduced to the level of being no more 
than the crushing demand for love" (E, p. 286). And what of desire? 
Desire, Lacan tells us, is the "difference that results from the subtraction 
of the first from the second" (E, p. 287). It pertains to those demands that 
exceed the physical needs that can be met-or, conversely, in pertaining to 
those demands that cannot be met, it reflects the recognition that cannot 
be given. Indeed, Lacan says, the desire of the one who demands "remains 
all the more deprived to the extent that the need articulated in the demand 
is satisfied" (E, p. 263)-a notion that hearkens back to Lacan's earlier 
contention that desire would outstrip the individual's satisfaction even if 
he could become the "spitting image" of his specular ideal. The "recogni­
tion of desire," in short, entails the recognition of desire's ultimate unat-

204 • David Sherman 
tainability: the person from whom recognition is sought also "lacks being" 
and is thus also "caught in the rails-eternally stretching forth towards the 
desire for something else-of metonymy." 
In the final analysis, then, what we see throughout Lacan's corpus is 
Hegel's dialectic in reverse: rather than move toward more inclusive syn­
theses, in which mutual recognition becomes increasingly comprehensive 
and determinate, Lacan's "dialectic" moves toward the indeterminate van­
ishing point of desire, which, for both Hegel (in his discussion of the 
French Revolution) and Heidegger, is tantamount to death. Indeed, even 
when Lacan gets around to theorizing about the particular objects that 
subjects desire, he still will not speak of them as particular objects, but will 
only speak of them generically-namely, as objet a, which are those phan­
tasy objects that stand in for the missing phallus. For Lacan, therefore, all 
objects are death-like specters, as are, ultimately, all subjectivities. For 
Hegel, of course, history begins with the slave's whiff of death, but Hegel 
does not fetishize death, even if history is built upon its sublimation; 
rather, he moves into history, which will include its own satisfactions. In 
contrast, Lacan, who fetishizes death in every one of his theoretical con­
structs, will have no truck with history whatsoever; in moving backward 
from the master-slave encounter, he seeks to avoid the particularity of his­
tory in the barely concealed name of Heidegger's fundamental ontology. 
What is ironic, however, is that Lacan seems to end up in the very place 
that he sought to avoid. From the mirror stage onward, he seeks to avoid 
the self-identical subject, but in embracing the pure negativity of an ontol­
ogy of death, which flattens all possible experience, he has arrived at it 
through the back door. 

1 5  
JURGEN HABERMAS AND 
AXEL HONNETH 
Before writing the Phenomenology of Spirit, Hegel had produced other 
works within which the themes that are taken up in the master-slave para­
ble were considered. These works, System of Ethical Life (1802-1803), 
First Philosophy of Spirit (1 803-1 804), and Philosophy of Spirit 
(1805-1 806), which were written for lectures that he gave in the German 
city of Jena, as well as earlier essays on natural law and Christianity, place 
concepts such as lordship and bondage, recognition, and labor in varying 
frameworks that all differ from the one that is present in the 
Phenomenology. Jtirgen Habermas, who has been the single most impor­
tant philosophical figure in Germany since the death of his teacher, 
Theodor W. Adorno, in 1969, and Axel Honneth, who was a student of 
Habermas's and is presently Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Frankfurt, believe that these earlier writings contain ground-breaking 
insights into the nature of human sociality that Hegel should have pur­
sued. Hegel discarded these insights in the Phenomenology, however, and 
instead reverted to what Habermas and Honneth alternatively refer to as 
a "philosophy of consciousness" and a "philosophy of the subject," which 
is based upon what they take to be the metaphysically-laden "subject­
object paradigm." This reversion, they maintain, evidences a missed 
opportunity that constitutes one of the defining moments in the history 
of modern philosophy. Habermas and Honneth therefore seek to go back 
to the intuitions that are at play in the Jena writings in order to draw sus-
205 

206 • David Sherman 
tenance for their own projects. In the case of Habermas, whose seminal 
essay "Labor and Interaction: Remarks on Hegel's Jena Philosophy of 
Mind>! gave rise to numerous studies on these writings, 2 this means draw­
ing upon Hegel's earlier insights for the purpose of articulating a theory of 
communicative action in which the operative paradigm is not one of a 
subject and object, but, rather, of an ego and alter ego who are always 
already embedded within a social context and communicatively seek to 
realize an uncoerced consensus through the force of reason. Habermas 
contends that this "option of explicating the ethical totality as a commu­
nicative reason embodied in intersubjective life contexts" was still viable 
under the Jena writings.3 In the case of Honneth, who largely embraces 
Habermas's ego-alter ego paradigm, but seeks to move past Habermas's 
formal linguistic model toward a more robust notion of individual sub­
jectivity, this means revisiting the conceptions of recognition that existed 
in the Jena writings in order to bring them up to date with the aid of the 
modern social sciences. This is what he seeks to do in The Struggle for 
Recognition: The Moral Grammar of Social Conflicts, a work that was first 
published in Germany in 1 992.4 
In "Labor and Interaction," Habermas intends to show that between 
the Jena writings and the Phenomenology, Hegel inverted his view of the 
relationship that exists between various human characteristics and Spirit. 
As opposed to the Jena writings, in which Hegel "offered a distinctive, 
systematic basis for the formative process of the spirit" (L&I, p. 142)­
that is, he conceptualized Spirit as a function of the dialectical intercon­
nections between language, 
labor, 
and interaction-in the 
Phenomenology, he sees language, labor, and interaction as just a function 
of Spirit's reflection upon its own self-movement (cf. L&l, p. 143). To 
make his point, Habermas starts by discussing Hegel's view of Kant's syn­
thetic unity of apperception, as well as Fichte's attempt to surmount the 
theoretical difficulties that it poses. For our purposes, the nuances of this 
discussion, in which the evolution of the notion of the ego is explicated 
from Kant through Fichte to Hegel, are not relevant. Habermas's gener­
al point, however, is that unlike Kant's epistemologically driven tran­
scendental unity of apperception, which is a contentless "I" that 
self-referentially stands behind all experience and makes it possible, and 
Fichte's abstract idea of the self, which takes itself to be the ground on 
which all practical relations to others in the world are posited, Hegel's ini­
tial idea of the self is one that is based upon an initial reciprocity between 
subjects: "Hegel's dialectic of self-consciousness passes over the relation of 

]iirgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 207 
solitary reflection in favor of the complementary relationship between 
individuals who know each other. The experience of self-consciousness is 
no longer considered the original one. Rather, for Hegel, it results from 
the experience of interaction, in which I see myself through the eyes of 
other subjects" (L&I, pp. 144-45). For the Hegel of the Jena period, 
according to Habermas, spirit is not simply the universal medium in 
which non-identical subjects are united, though, as far as it goes, this is 
correct. More importantly, it is the very context within which individu­
ality is produced as an initial matter. 
Although Habermas's essay does not make the point very clearly, 
Hegel's conception of spirit is continually changing from his earliest writ­
ings through the last work of the Jena period, Philosophy of Spirit, which, 
predictably, evidences the closest affinity to the model that he relies upon 
in the Phenomenology. And as his notion of spirit evolves in these works, 
so does his view of the nature of the struggle for recognition, the relation­
ship of domination and subordination that follows in its wake, and labor. 
Unlike the master-slave parable in the Phenomenology, in which two 
human consciousnesses are sparked to self-consciousness by coming across 
one another in a minimalist, "state of nature" type setting, in Hegel's ear­
lier works a fully formed social framework is presupposed. And, unlike the 
basic movement in the Phenomenology, in which individual self-con­
sciousness is ever impelled toward more socially elaborate forms of recog­
nition, in Hegel's earliest works the movement is one in which already 
existing societies are impelled toward more socially elaborate forms of 
recognition by breaches in the previously existing forms of recognition. 
Thus, in a fragment from Hegel's Spirit of Christianity, an early work that 
Habermas discusses, we are presented with the relationship between the 
criminal and the ethical totality that he sunders by his acts. According to 
Hegel, Habermas tells us, the criminal "revokes the moral basis, namely 
the complementary interchange of noncompulsory communication and 
the mutual satisfaction of interests, by putting himself as an individual in 
the place of the totality" (L&I, p. 148). This leads to the criminal's alien­
ation not only from the rest of society, but also from his own "deficient 
life." With time, however, there is a reconciliation, for when both par,:ᅈ3 
see that their separation is the outcome of an "abstraction from the com­
mon interconnection of their lives-and within this, in the dialogic rela­
tionship of recognizing oneself in the other, they experience the common 
basis of their existence"(L&I, p. 148). Society therefore generates more 
complex forms of recognition which, ostensibly, obviate the need for crim-

208 • David Sherman 
inal acts of the type committed, for the underlying deficiency in recogni­
tion that had precipitated the crime has been addressed. 
In the Jena writings, Habermas points out, the struggle for recognition 
is removed from the framework of criminal activity, and is instead placed 
within the context of a life and death struggle to preserve one's honor. But 
unlike the struggle for recognition in the master-slave parable, which only 
first gives rise to the issue of labor, which, in turn, plays a role in enabling 
the slave to gain self-consciousness through objectifying himself in his work 
product, the struggle for recognition in the Jena writings stems from anoth­
er's threat to one's already existing work product-or, to be more precise, 
the already existing work product of the family that one both heads and 
symbolizes in one's singularity. Having labored to gain these possessions, 
the victimized party views them as an extension of himself Thus, an attack 
on any minute thing that this person takes to be his own is taken to be an 
attack on the totality of his person. Or, as Hegel states it in the First 
Philosophy of Spirit, "the single [family head] is one consciousness, only in 
as much as every singular aspect of his possessions, and of his being, appears 
bound up with his whole essence, it is taken up into [himself] . 
. . . The injuring of any one of his single aspects is therefore infinite, it is 
an absolute offense, an offense against his integrity, an offense to his honor; 
and the collision about any single point is a struggle for the whole."5 
Indeed, in an earlier version of this work, Hegel contends that 
this injury must occur, for consciousness must advance to this recogni­
tion, the single must injure one another, in order to recognize that they 
are rational; for consciousness is essentially of this sort, that the totality 
of the single is opposed to him, and in this othering process is yet the 
same as he, that the totality of the one is in another consciousness, and 
is the consciousness of the other, and even this absolute subsistence that 
it has for itself. is in this other consciousness. In other words it gets 
recognition from the other.6 
According to Habermas, this early model of recognition (as opposed 
to the one presented in the Phenomenology), in which the concept of the 
"I" derives "not from the experiential domain of theoretical consciousness, 
but from that of the practical" (L&I, p. 1 50), sharply contrasts not only 
with Kant's synthetic unity of apperception, which is the "I" of Kant's the­
oretical philosophy, but also with the 'T' of Kant's practical philosophy, 
the equally abstract autonomous will. For Kant, the autonomous will 

Jurgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 209 
must abstract from the concrete particulars of one's existence in order to 
act upon the moral law, which is legislated by the individual himself 
Thus, at least with respect to what Kant calls "perfect duties," if a person 
determines that the basic principle (maxim) governing a possible action 
with moral implications cannot be universalized without the general prin­
ciple itself becoming logically impossible, then the action ought not be 
done, regardless of the consequenses for either the person making the 
determination or anyone who might be affected by it. For Kant, the 
advantage of this decision-making process, which gives rise to categorical 
imperatives, is that the morality of an action is ostensibly determined by 
reason itself But by making the individual's determination of the coher­
ence of an action the test of its morality, Habermas complains, Kant has 
taken it out of the dialogic realm: "The intersubjectivity of the recognition 
of moral laws accounted for a priori by practical reason permits the reduc­
tion of moral action to the monologic domain. The positive relation of the 
will to the will of others is withdrawn from possible communication . . .  " 
(T&I, p. 1 5 1). 
In contrast with the abstractness of the foundational "I" in both 
Kant's theoretical and practical philosophies, Hegel introduces a set of 
foundational categories in the First Philosophy of Spirit that provide a con­
crete foundation for the formation of human self-consciousness. The three 
categories that he proffers-namely, language, labor, and interaction 
(which initially occurs within the framework of the family)-are both 
originary and irreducible. Thus, according to Habermas, "spirit is an 
organization of equally original media . . . .  These fundamental dialectical 
patterns are heterogenous; as media of the spirit, language and labor can­
not be traced back to the experiences of interaction and mutual recogni­
tion" (L&I, p. 1 52). As we will see momentarily, the distinctiveness of 
these categories, which Habermas sees as fundamental to Hegel's early 
project, is, more to the point, fundamental to his own project. Moreover, 
it should be grasped that Habermas is favorably contrasting the relation­
ship between these categories in the First Philosophy of Spirit with their 
interrelationship in the Phenomenology, as well as the works that came after 
it. Beginning with the master-slave parable, Habermas laments, Hegel's 
thought increasingly tends to view interaction as primary, and labor and 
language as simply a function of it: 
[T]he [initial] relationship of the one-sided recognition of the master by 
the servant is overturned by the servant's power of disposition over 

210 • David Sherman 
nature, just as one-sidedly acquired by labor .... [Thus] already in the 
Phenomenology the distinctive dialectic oflabor and interaction has been 
deprived of the specific role which was still attributed to it within 
the system in the Jena lectures . . . .  [And] in the Encyclopedia, language 
and labor, once models of construction for dialectical movement, are 
now themselves constructed as subordinate real conditions. (L&I, pp. 
1 61-62) 
Moreover, if Hegel subordinates language and labor to interaction, 
Habermas asserts, Marx, who had initially rediscovered the connections 
between labor and interaction, ultimately subordinates language and 
interaction to labor in his materialist reconstruction of Hegel's dialectic. 
Or, to put it in Habermas's terms, Marx ends up reducing "communica­
tive action" to "instrumental action" (cf. L&l, pp. 168-69). This will ulti­
mately prompt Habermas, ironically enough, to return to Kant for 
theoretical inspiration. Thus, while Habermas uses Hegel to get past 
Kant's abstract "1," and Marx to get past the subordination of labor to 
interaction in Hegel, in The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, he will 
rely upon Kant for the purpose of justifying the integrity of different the­
oretical realms, which he takes to be one of the hallmarks of the 
Enlightenment. Of course, for Habermas, theoretical inquiries into these 
discrete realms are not made by Kant's epistemologically inspired tran­
scendental ego, but by the social subject who is formed within the crucible 
of language, labor, and interaction. 
In any case, although it would appear that Habermas is intent upon 
maintaining the relative sovereignty of these three originary (albeit dialec­
tically interconnected) categories, as "Labor and Interaction" proceeds it 
becomes increasingly clear that he is interested in privileging language over 
labor and interaction, and that he understands this to be the early Hegel's 
position as well. In the First Philosophy of Spirit, in which for the first time 
Hegel hints at a developmental model within which consciousness 
becomes self-reflective prior to its embeddedness within a fully formed 
social framework, language and labor are initially considered at an indi­
vidual level, with language taking precedence; it is only later that interac­
tion comes into play. Thus, at the individual level, Habermas says that (for 
Hegel) language reflects the "employment of symbols by the solitary indi­
vidual who confronts nature and gives names to things," a process that 
causes consciousness to split itself off from nature. "Only with the appear­
ance of language, and within language, do consciousness and the being of 

jurgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 21 1 
nature begin to separate for consciousness . . . .  Thus language is the first 
category in which spirit is not conceived as something internal" (L&l, p. 
153). Individual labor also brings about a separation from nature, accord­
ing to Habermas, for it requires deferring the satisfaction of the subject's 
animalistic drives. But while the symbols of language, which are utilized 
by "name giving consciousness," "penetrate and dominate the perceiving 
and thinking consciousness . . .  the [cunning] consciousness [of labor] 
[merely] controls the processes of nature by means of its tools" (L&I, p. 
1 55). In other words, although the symbols of the "name giving con­
sciousness" and the tools of "cunning consciousness" both subjugate 
nature, the name giving consciousness, which orders the impressions that 
it receives from nature, manufactures the conceptual framework that is 
needed for the tasks of cunning consciousness to be articulated as an ini­
tial matter. Without the distance that naming opens up between subject 
and object, there would be no basis for moderating the natural drives, 
which is a precondition for labor (cf. L&I, p.1 59). Furthermore, even after 
he proceeds to the cultural level, in which interaction enters into the pic­
ture through the "recognizing consciousness," Habermas reiterates the pri­
macy of language: 
Under the title language Hegel rightly introduces the employment 
of representational symbols as the first determination of abstract spirit. 
For the two subsequent determinations necessarily presuppose this. In 
the dimension of actual spirit, language attains existence as the system 
of a specific cultural tradition .
.
.
.
 As cultural tradition, language enters 
into communicative action; for only the inter-subjectively valid and 
constant meanings which are drawn from tradition permit the orienta­
tion toward reciprocity, that is, complementary expectations of behav­
ior. Thus interaction is dependent upon language communication 
which has established itself as a part of life. However, instrumental 
action, as soon as it comes under the category of actual spirit, as social 
labor, is also embedded within a network of interactions, and therefore 
dependent on the communicative boundary conditions that underlie 
every possible cooperation. (L&I, p. 1 59) 
Habermas's interpretation of the First Philosophy of Spirit is problem­
atical. Although he acknowledges that Hegel intends to give equal weight 
to language, labor, and interaction in terms of the role they play in con­
sciousness formation, Habermas is also intent upon making language the 
first among equals, which significantly changes the implications of Hegel's 

212 • David Sherman 
model. And while First Philosophy of Spirit does contain some textual sup­
port for Habermas's claim that language precedes labor and interaction, it 
can also be interpreted as suggesting that language and labor first take 
place within the framework of the natural family. In the introduction to 
his translation of First Philosophy of Spirit, for example, H. S. Harris states 
that "the development of language and labor begins in the context of a 
kinship organization-the family."7 Moreover, interpretive questions 
aside, it must be emphasized that Hegel quickly abandoned the model set 
forth in this work, which is fraught with problems. (Indeed, Habermas 
actually relies less upon the Jena writings as a whole than upon this par­
ticular work.) Habermas's reliance upon it, therefore, may well reproduce 
the very problems that Hegel sought to surmount. For example, First 
Philosophy of Spirit straddles the Aristotelian inspired naturalism of System 
of Ethical Life, in which spirit matures within the framework of an always 
already existing "natural ethical life," and Philosophy of Spirit, in which 
consciousness begins in a "state of nature" type setting and moves through 
different sociopolitical forms as it incrementally develops, but the two 
positions are not especially compatible. The former is a classical position; 
the latter, which embraces what Habermas refers to as the "philosophy of 
the subject," is inspired by the norms of the Enlightenment. 
After articulating the primacy of language with respect to interaction 
and labor, Habermas contends that "more interesting and by no means as 
obvious as the relation of the employment of symbols to interaction and 
labor . . .  is the interrelation of!abor and interaction" (L&I, p. 1 59). And 
this relation, according to Habermas, truly is one in which neither term 
can simply be reduced to the other: "A reduction of interaction to labor or 
derivation of labor from interaction is not possible" (L&I, p. 159). 
Contrary to Hegel's conception of the relationship between interaction 
and labor in the Phenomenology, in which the master-slave parable sets the 
tone for interaction's primacy-the conditions of the slave's labor derive 
from the terms of the breakdown in interaction between what should have 
ideally been two recognizing consciousnesses-Habermas contends that 
the technical rules that govern the subjugation of nature have nothing to 
do with the communicative rules of interaction, and that it is actually 
within the legal context that the two paradigms meet. Within the frame­
work of legal recognition, Habermas says, "recognition does not refer 
directly to the identity of the other, but to the things that are subject to 
his powers of disposition" (L&I, p. 1 59), namely, to the products of his 
labor. And what mediates the exchange of the products of the labor 

jurgen Habermas and AxeL Honneth • 213 
process between two legally recognized persons is the contract, which 
reflects the culmination of a process in which language is given normative 
force. In this way, Hegel's notion of mutual recognition is brought within 
an institutionalized framework in which self-consciousness can be com­
prehended as the result of a linguistically mediated process that includes 
both the struggle for recognition and labor. Indeed, as becomes increas­
ingly clear in Habermas's subsequent works, language does not just medi­
ate this process. Rather, inasmuch as the deep structures of language 
contain within them normative standards that presuppose mutual recog­
nition between parties engaged in speech, who should be swayed only by 
the force of the better reasoned argument, language essentially becomes 
for Habermas the transcendental ground upon which more rational forms 
of interaction and labor can come to fruition. It is for this reason that he 
is so resistant to what he takes to be the Hegelian and Marxian models. If 
either the prevailing socioethical (interaction) or technical (labor) forms 
are primary, language would lose its liberating potential; it would merely 
be a debauched vehicle for transmitting the values of the one or the other. 8 
To preserve his theory of communicative rationality, therefore, 
Habermas returns to Kant, who also had a model that was based upon a 
division of reason into three differentiated spheres, each of which is gov­
erned by its own logic. And although Habermas would resist the compar­
ison, for he understands his theory of communicative action to be 
"postmetaphysical," in many respects Habermas's valorization oflanguage 
in his ego-alter ego model corresponds to Kant's autonomous will in that 
both provide the transcendental grounds upon which reason can be prac­
tically realized. To be sure, unlike Habermas's linguistically embedded 
community, in which individual subjects are formed within the frame­
work of their communicative relations with others, Kant's autonomous 
will is disembodied and individualistic (although even here it might be 
argued that the autonomous will that acts upon its imperfect duties to 
bring about the "kingdom of ends" is more of a communal being than lib­
erals usually acknowledge). In the final analysis, however, both Habermas's 
claim that there is an ever-present possibility for reaching an uncoerced 
communicative consensus (which is allegedly presupposed in the struc­
tures of ordinary discourse) and Kant's claim that there is an ever-present 
possibility for acting upon maxims that oblige us to wholly abstract from 
our material interests (which is presupposed in our understanding of our­
selves as free, self-determining beings) are starkly ahistorical. But, as Hegel 
would point out, the transcendental grounds that both posit are them-

214 • David Sherman 
selves historically produced, despite the fact that they purport to get out­
side mere historical contingency. Furthermore, the differentiation of 
spheres of competencies insinuates a fragmented subject. For Kant, who 
explicitly recognized this phenomenon, human beings are, in one sense, 
completely determined, and yet, in another sense, absolutely free. For 
Habermas, however, who rejects Kant's dualistic metaphysics, commu­
nicative relations ostensibly mediate the relationship between the techni­
cal and socioethical spheres, each of which has its own language. But what 
reason is there to think that laborers who are exploited in the technical 
realm will be either permitted or able to change "language hats" to fully 
interact in the socioethical realm, or, alternatively, that the refusal to rec­
ognize others will not manifest itself in the structuring of the technical 
sphere, as is the case in the master-slave parable? Referring to the first phe­
nomenon, which he does take to be a problem, Habermas contends that 
it is simply a matter of exposing the ways in which the reasoning of the 
technical sphere "colonizes" the socioethical sphere, but such a position 
implies that in some deep way both the person being addressed and the 
language that is utilized to convey the message have not themselves been 
"colonized," which is highly doubtful. Thus, while Habermas correctly 
points out that technical mastery does not guarantee uncoerced interac­
tion any more than uncoerced interaction guarantees technical mastery 
(c£ L&I, p. 169)-in this sense interaction and labor are discrete realms­
it is likely that substantial breakdowns in either realm will have an impact 
upon the other. Indeed, it is only a metaphysical view of both the human 
subject and language itself that would hold otherwise. 
Nevertheless, Habermas argues that it is Hegel who takes shelter in 
metaphysics when he shifts from the model that he uses in the First 
Philosophy of Spirit, in which individuals rooted within concrete social 
contexts perpetually breach and reconfigure existing patterns of recogni­
tion, to the model that supplants it in the Phenomenology of Spirit, which 
Habermas depicts as one in which the self-reflective movement of 
Absolute Spirit predominates. Indeed, Habermas claims that the Jena lec­
tures themselves contain within them the seeds of this new model, for they 
presume the identity of spirit with nature-i.e., that nature is spirit 
because its essence is realized only through humanity's confrontation with 
it and spirit is nature because it is where spirit completely objectifies itsel£ 
If "subjectivity can always be found in what has been objectivized," 
Habermas says, "then the relationship of the name giving and the work­
ing subject to nature can also be brought within the configuration of 

]iirgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 215 
reciprocal recognition" (L&I, p.163). However, the shift in models is not 
simply the result oflanguage and labor being subsumed under interaction: 
"Nature in its totality is [also] elevated to an antagonist of the united sub­
jects" (L&I, p. 164), and the relationship between spirit and nature is 
made primary. The intersubjective orientation of Hegel's earlier writings, 
which is characterized by a "dialogical" process, is therefore replaced by the 
intrasubjective orientation of a solitary Absolute Spirit, which is charac­
terized by a "monological" process of self-reflection (L&I, p. 164). In 
other words, from the processes of alienation and reconciliation, which 
concern the relationship between subjects, Hegel moves to the processes 
of externalization and appropriation, which concern a "macrosubject" and 
its reflection upon the way in which it has objectified itself in nature. 
Nevertheless, Habermas asserts, since both sets of processes presume the 
philosophy of identity, "the processes of externalization and appropriation 
formally match those of alienation and reconciliation" (L&I, p. 164). 
In The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, Habermas revisits Hegel's 
"metaphysical" turn, as well as some of the other matters that are raised in 
"Labor and Interaction." As an initial matter, he acknowledges, as was pre­
viously suggested, that Hegel's earlier writings evidence "the idea of an eth­
ical totality along the guidelines of a popular religion in which 
communicative reason assumed the idealized form of historical communi­
ties, such as the primitive Christian community and the Greek polis."9 
Inasmuch as Hegel was concerned with grounding enlightenment reason, 
however, he recognized that this classical model, in which "communicative 
reason" collapses into unreflective premodern forms, would not work. 
Given the trajectory of his thinking in the Jena writings, Habermas con­
tends, Hegel might have availed himself of a "communication-theoretic 
retrieval and transformation of the reflective concept of reason," 10 which 
would have done nothing less than set philosophy upon the right path. 
Instead, Hegel sought reconciling reason in his idea of Absolute Spirit, 
which "overpowers every absolutization and retains as unconditional only 
the infinite processing of the relation-to-self that swallows up everything 
finite within itself."11 In The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, howev­
er, the positing of Absolute Spirit is no longer taken to be the conceptual 
core of Hegel's "wrong turn." It is merely taken to be symptomatic of a 
larger mistake in Hegel's thought-namely, his turn to a "philosophy of 
the subject" or "philosophy of consciousness." On Habermas's new view, 
it is the subject-object paradigm itself that is flawed: the "act of tearing 
loose from an intersubjectively shared lifeworld is what first generates a 

216 • David Sherman 
subject-object relationship. It is introduced as an alien element, or at least 
subsequently, into relationships that by nature follow the structure of 
mutual understanding among subjects-and not the logic of an objectifi­
cation by a subject."12 For Habermas, this analysis holds whether we are 
speaking of an individual consciousness or Absolute Spirit. 
Just as Habermas's neo-Kantian resort to differentiated spheres of 
knowledge suggests a fragmented subjectivity, his resort to a neo-Kantian 
theory of communicative rationality suggests an impoverished one. In 
attempting to ground enlightenment reason in the structures oflanguage, 
which supposedly provide the regulative notion of an "ideal speech com­
munity," Habermas gives short shrift to the phenomenological compo­
nent within Hegel's thought. For despite Habermas's emphasis upon 
Absolute Spirit, it is actually our conscious experience of the world that 
propels Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, and Habermas's abstract model is 
simply not up to the task of accounting for its richness. Honneth, who 
otherwise buys into both Habermas's interpretation of Hegel's Absolute 
Spirit and his rejection of the "philosophy of the subject," basically agrees 
with this appraisal. Instead of seeking to ground social theory in the nor­
mative demands that allegedly inhere within discourse, therefore, 
Honneth attempts to ground it "by referring to the normative demands 
that are, structurally speaking, internal to the relationship of mutual 
recognition" (SR, p. 92), and the model of mutual recognition that he 
finds most auspicious for these purposes is the one presented by Hegel in 
the early Jena writings. Accordingly, Honneth begins The Struggle for 
Recognition with a detailed analysis of these works, but ultimately finds 
that System of Ethical Lifo is too sketchy with respect to the motivations 
that would initiate struggles for recognition, and that First Philosophy of 
Spirit and Philosophy of Spirit redress this problem only by recourse to the 
metaphysical notion of Absolute Spirit. Thus, in the remainder of the 
book, Honneth attempts to supplement Hegel's essential notion of mutu­
al recognition with a schema for subjectivity formation that is based in the 
social sciences. In this way, he intends to both flesh out Hegel's basic 
insight and dissociate it from the metaphysical assumptions that allegedly 
underlie it. Unfortunately, the particulars of this reconstructive work can­
not be explored here. Instead, after a cursory outline, I shall confine myself 
to a consideration ofHonneth's understanding of the relationship between 
the Jena writings and the master-slave parable, as well as the way in which 
this understanding relates to Habermas's position. 
Honneth begins his "postmetaphysica\" reconstruction of Hegel's 

]urgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 217 
conception of mutual recognition by attempting to reconfigure it in terms 
of George Herbert Mead's naturalistic social psychology. He then main­
tains that both Hegel and Mead (at least implicitly) distinguish between 
three escalating forms of reciprocal recognition-namely, love and friend­
ship (primary relations), rights (legal relations), and solidarity (a commu­
nally shared value horizon)-and that these three forms of recognition 
correspond, in turn, to self-confidence, self-respect, and self-esteem, 
which constitute the three forms of one's "practical relation-to-self." (In 
the case of Hegel, these forms of recognition do roughly correspond to the 
three-part division of System of Ethical Life into "Ethical Life on the Basis 
of Relation," "The Negative or Freedom or Transgression," and "Ethical 
Life." Mead's adherence to this tripartite model is less clear.) In a wide­
ranging discussion that stretches from Donald Winicott's psychoanalytic 
object relations theory to legal rights theorists such as Joel Feinberg, 
Honneth attempts to adduce empirical support for his claim that each 
"practical relation-to-self" is determined by one's intersubjective relations. 
In other words, escalating levels of respect engender increasingly undis­
torted self-conceptions. Conversely, "being disrespected," which, depend­
ing upon the forms of recognition that obtain in a given context, 
manifests itself in physical abuse, a denial of rights, or the denigration of 
a way of life, "can become the motivational impetus for a struggle for 
recognition" (SR, p. 138). And the cognitive nexus between the experience 
of disrespect and social engagement-which Honneth claims Hegel and 
Mead crucially omitted-are "negative emotional reactions, such as being 
ashamed or enraged, feeling hurt or indignant. These comprise the psy­
chological symptoms on the basis of which one can come to realize that 
one is being illegitimately denied social recognition" (SR, p. 136). 
Honneth argues that these feelings of being disrespected are the core of 
moral experience-as the book's subtitle suggests, they are the moral gram­
mar of social conflicts-and that modern social theory has obscured this 
essential point by viewing social conflicts primarily in terms of pre-given 
interests. Casting Marx (as well as all others who see economic interests as 
the primary motivation behind social struggle) as a utilitarian (cf. SR, p. 
148f.), Honneth maintains that "the moral force within social reality that 
is responsible for development and progress is a struggle for recognition" 
(SR, p. 143), and that the interests that seem to propel social conflicts 
should not be seen as "ultimate or original" but rather as constituted with­
in a larger framework within which there is a denial of recognition (cf. SR, 
p. 166). In sum, like Habermas, Honneth proffers "a formal conception 

218 • David Sherman 
of ethical life" (SR, p. 175), the difference being that recognition stands in 
for communication as the regulative ideal. In Habermasian terms, 
Honneth declares, "the goal [is] undistorted and unrestricted recognition" 
(SR, p. 171). 
Honneth's attempt to steer a course between Hegel and Habermas 
reverberates in his interpretation of the struggle for recognition in both 
the Jena writings and the master-slave parable. As an initial matter, while 
Honneth largely agrees with Habermas's contention that the early Jena 
writings reflected a "communication-theoretical alternative" that is subse­
quently abandoned in favor of a "philosophy of consciousness" that comes 
to fruition in the Phenomenology (SR, p. 30), he disagrees with Habermas's 
conclusion that this theoretical shift brings labor and language "within the 
configuration of reciprocal recognition" (L&I, p. 1 63). To the contrary, 
Honneth asserts that "already in the Phenomenology of Spirit . . . the con­
ceptual model of a 'struggle for recognition' had lost its central position 
within Hegel's theory" (SR, p. 5). Accordingly, while Habermas believes 
that Marx rediscovered the appropriate interconnection between labor and 
interaction by stressing the importance of social labor as interaction's equal 
in spirit's formation-that is, until he ends up privileging labor over inter­
action-Honneth contends that the master-slave parable itself already 
reflects a bias towards labor: 
The Phenomenology ofSpirit allots to the struggle for recognition-once 
the moral force that drove the process of Spirit's socialization through 
each of its stages-the sole function of the formation of consciousness. 
Thus reduced to the single meaning represented in the dialectic of lord­
ship and bondage, the struggle between subjects fighting for recognition 
then comes to be linked so closely to the experience of the practical 
acknowledgement of one's labour that its own particular logic disappears 
almost entirely from view .
.
. . As a result, the possibility of returning to 
the most compelling of his earlier intuitions, the still incomplete model 
of the "struggle for recognition," is blocked. (SR, pp. 62-63) 
This difference between Habermas and Honneth springs from their 
differing theoretical commitments, which lead them to consider the 
"communication-theoretical alternative" that the Jena works supposedly 
opened up in slightly different ways. For Habermas, who embraces a tri­
partite schema, this notion pertains to the primacy of language, which 
not only mediates the relationship between libor and interaction, but 

Jurgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 219 
provides the transcendental grounds for a normative critique as well. For 
Honneth, on the other hand, this notion refers to the always already 
embeddedness of social actors in a communicative (i.e., intersubjectivist) 
context in which struggles for recognition take place against a backdrop 
of prior recognitive understandings, and move these understandings to 
more complex levels of mutual recognition. Language does not operate 
transcendentally on this account, however, for, in Honneth's two-part 
schema, it is the normative ideal of complete mutual recognition that 
informs his "formal conception of ethical life." In contrast with 
Habermas, then, Honneth does not see interaction and labor as het­
erogenous; rather, he sees interaction as primary, and then understands 
relations within the instrumental realm of labor as a function of the rela­
tions of recognition. 
Nevertheless, this difference between Habermas and Honneth is over-
. shadowed by the similarities in their respective approaches. As an initial 
matter, although Habermas does nominally argue that recognition 
becomes primary in the master-slave parable because of Hegel's embrace 
of a philosophy of identity (c£ L&I, p. 164), Habermas also claims that 
Hegel introduces the idea of a self-relating, solitary Absolute Spirit here, 
which effectively undermines this argument. In other words, inasmuch as 
Habermas takes the position that "absolute spirit is absolute morality" 
(L&I, p. 165), interaction, which for Habermas is the realm of morality, 
does appear to assume primacy. But because he also views Spirit as solitary 
and self-relating, Habermas's model, like Honneth's, finally commits him 
to the view that "the 'struggle for recognition' [between concrete individ­
uals] is blocked." On this score, therefore, the only difference between the 
two is that the "demise" of the model of the "struggle for recognition" is 
overdetermined for Honneth-that is, the logic of the struggle for recog­
nition is supplanted by both the introduction of self-relating, solitary 
Absolute Spirit and its linkage with the dynamic of labor. Indeed, 
although Habermas also emphasizes the need to keep interaction and 
labor "rigorously separated" (L&I, p. 169), the reason that Honneth 
stresses the dynamic of labor in the master-slave parable in a way that 
Habermas does not stems from another similarity between the two. Both 
have formal models that depend upon maintaining the integrity of a priv­
ileged category that would vouchsafe the possibility of transcendence, and 
since the realm of interaction is this category for Honneth, he must take 
greater care in separating it out from the start. Honneth's model thus 
depends upon a separation of labor and interaction that is even more 

220 • David Sherman 
inflexible than Habermas's, for he does not have normative recourse to the 
structures of language. 
In terms of the master-slave parable, then, Habermas and Honneth 
are more alike than not. Although Honneth takes Habermas's theory of 
communicative rationality to be overly formal, it is not clear that his own 
theory of recognition is significantly less so. While, for Hegel, recognition 
is clearly the first moment in the master-slave parable, and, as such, is the 
progenitor of selfhood, his treatment of labor correctly belies the notion 
that self-identity should be understood within the framework of a pure 
struggle for recognition in which "mere interest categories" (SR, p. 163) 
are simply to be abstracted from. Our so-called "interests" are not as sev­
erable from our self-identities as Honneth's model seems to suggest. To the 
contrary, Hegel correctly saw that our accumulated interests thicken our 
notions of self, and cannot be conceptually filtered out in subsequent 
struggles for recognition (or, for that matter, in the language that we come 
to use in subsequent attempts to effectuate an "uncoerced" consensus). In 
fact, even the escalating struggles for recognition in the vaunted Jena 
works bear this out, for, as we saw, these struggles arose from the failure of 
others to properly recognize an individual's property. Much like Habermas 
before him, then, Honneth has an unmediated conception of subjectivity 
that contrasts poorly with Hegel's richer dialectical version. And, lastly, 
without sufficiently explaining the distinction, both Habermas and 
Honneth alternately accuse Hegel of positing a "monological" Absolute 
Spirit, and, more broadly, of being a "philosopher of the subject." I shall 
conclude by briefly considering these criticisms in turn. 
As we previously saw, Habermas contends in the Philosophical 
Discourse of Modernity that Hegel's Absolute Spirit "overpowers every 
absolutization and retains as unconditional only the infinite processing of 
the relation-to-self that swallows up everything finite within itsel£"13 And, 
in The Struggle for Recognition, Honneth basically reiterates this view when 
he alleges that Hegel "views the ethical sphere on the whole as a form of 
objectivation of Spirit's self-reflection, so that the place of intersubjective 
relations has to be taken throughout by relationships between a subject 
and its moments of externalization. Ethical life has become, in short, a 
form of monologically self-developing Spirit, and no longer constitutes a 
particularly demanding form of intersubjectivity" (SR, p. 61). On what 
basis do Habermas and Honneth reach these conclusions? In what sense 
does Hegel leave the intersubjectivist approach of the Jena works behind 
in the Phenomenology in favor of an all-encompassing, universal Spirit that 

jurgen Habermas and Axel Honneth • 221 
"swallows up" the particular human beings that comprise it without being 
affected by them in turn? I think that Habermas and Honneth are wrong 
to conclude that Hegel gives up his intersubjectivist approach in virtue of 
the shift that takes place between the Jena writings and the 
Phenomenology. Indeed, from an intersubjectivist standpoint, Hegel has 
become far more ambitious in the Phenomenology in the sense that he does 
not merely content himself with positing an always already existing social 
framework, but, rather, seeks to show through the master-slave encounter 
that self-consciousness is essentially intersubjective in nature: "A self-con­
sciousness exists for a self-consciousness." 14 Furthermore, Spirit is not 
some ontologically discrete entity that orchestrated this encounter so that 
it might realize itself through human fodder. To the contrary, Spirit itself 
is engendered by this initial human encounter: "With this [encounter] we 
have arrived at the concept of spirit."15 In other words, human beings are 
not just _along for Spirit's "monological" ride, for Spirit is itself nothing 
more than the result of human perspectives and activities. And, in turn, 
the way in which Spirit comes to circumscribe our ways of looking at the 
world and, therefore, the actions that we undertake-that is, the way in 
which it comes to condition the possible experiences that we can have at 
any point in time-simply reflects the logic inherent in our own prior atti­
tudes and actions. 
Finally, when Habermas and Honneth contend that Hegel's philoso­
phy is a "philosophy of consciousness" or a "philosophy of the subject," 
they are contending that it is rooted in the subject-object paradigm, which 
suggests, among other things, that self-consciousness can come to ground 
its own knowledge of objects-including itself as an object of knowledge. 
And this perspective, they maintain, pales in comparison with the one that 
is embraced in the Jena works, for it is first generated by erroneously "tear­
ing loose [the subject] from an intersubjectively shared lifeworld."16 This 
reproach, which cannot be given its due here, is a complicated one, for 
Hegel does, in some limited sense, subscribe to the subject-object para­
digm; nevertheless, it is by no means clear that he does so in a fashion that 
makes him guilty of this charge. As we just saw, the "subject" to whom 
Habermas and Honneth refer cannot merely be Spirit as some "monolog­
ical" macro-subject, for this is not a view that Hegel embraced. And if the 
relevant "subject" is merely the individual, this, too, cannot be right, for 
the chapters of the Phenomenology leading up to the master-slave parable 
are designed to show that the individual cannot truly come to know either 
himself or objects in the world on his own; indeed, the master-slave para-

222 • David Sherman 
ble and what follows is revolutionary precisely in virtue of the fact that it 
does take the acquisition of knowledge to be an essentially intersubjectivist 
endeavor. Furthermore, unlike his philosophical predecessors, Hegel was 
interested in breaking down the subject-object dichotomy, for subjtct and 
object, self and other, necessarily stand in a mediated relation. 
The limited sense in which Hegel does subscribe to the subject-object 
paradigm, however, is in his concern with the reconciliation of the indi­
vidual with his society, but in closing I would like to suggest that within 
this setting the paradigm is actually a strength, not a weakness. Unlike 
Habermas's ego-alter ego reconciliation, which is based upon dialogic 
agreements that are reached in an intersubjectively shared life world­
agreements, given language's historically sedimented state, that may be less 
coercive in form than substance-Hegel's individual can only be recon­
ciled within a rational social context. And this suggests, contrary to the 
more vulgar readings of Hegel, which see him as a totalitarian, that there 
is a hardier impetus toward individual freedom within Hegel's thought 
than those reconciliations that are linguistically based. 

NOTES 
INTRODUCTION 
1 .  The reference to "(para. 12)" and similar citations elsewhere refer to the 
enumerated paragraphs of the Self-Consciousness chapter translated by Leo 
Rauch in this book. 
2. Hegel published a large number of works after the Phenomenology, the most 
significant of which are usually taken to be the Science of Logic, the Encyclopedia of 
the Philosophical Sciences (which consists of three volumes dealing with his system­
atized views on logic, nature, and mind), and the Philosophy of Right, which has 
proven to be a highly important and influential political work. In addition, notes 
from Hegel's university lectures are published in the Philosophy of History, whose 
introductory section is often viewed as a good point of ingress into Hegel's works, 
and the History of Philosophy. Hegel also published works in both aesthetics and 
religion, which have had their impact. And, finally, as we shall see, his early (pre­
Phenomenology) writings have recently received a great deal of attention. 
3. Karl Marx, The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, ed. Dirk J. 
Struik, tr. Martin Milligan (New York: International Publishers, 1 964), p. 1 77. 
4. Karl Marx, Capital: Volume 1, tr. Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin Books, 
1 990), pp. 102-103 (Marx's Preface to the Second Edition). 
CHAPTER FOUR 
1 .  I have discussed this in an article, "Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit as a 
Phenomenological Project, " Thought LVI-Hegel Commemorative Issue 
(Fordham University, September, 1981 ) . 
223 

224 • Notes to chapters 5, 6, 7 
CHAPTER FIVE 
I .  Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Hegel's 'Inverted World,"' in Hegel's Dialectic 
(New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1 976). 
CHAPTER SIX 
I .  Hegel, The Philosophy of Right, tr. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1 967), para.?. 
2. Hegel, Encyclopaedia, III, published as Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, tr. W 
Wallace (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1 976), para. 424. 
3. For some of the political ramifications of this, see my book, The Political 
Animal (Amherst: The University of Massachusetts Press, 1981), chapter on 
Hegel. 
4. Quentin Lauer, A Reading of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 1 976), p. 97. 
5. Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Hegel's Dialectic of Self-Consciousness," in 
Hegel's Dialectic (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1 976), p. 54. 
6. Jean Hyppolite, "The Human Situation in the Hegelian Phenomenology" 
in Studies on Marx and Hegel (New York and London: Basic Books, 1 969), 
p. 1 54. 
7. The question is asked by Werner Becker, Idealistische und Materialistische 
Dialektik (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag, 1970), p. 28. 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
I .  See the Oxford English Dictionary entries for "Lordship" and "Bondage." 
2. George Armstrong Kelly, "Notes on Hegel's 'Lordship and Bondage,"' in 
Alasdair Macintyre, ed., Hegel-A Collection of Critical Essays (New York: 
Doubleday, 1972), p. 199 f. 
3. Jean Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1 974), p. 160. 
4. Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure, p. 170. 
5. Quentin Lauer, A Reading of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 1 976), p. 1 02. 
6. Hegel, Philosophy of Mind, para. 424. Zusatz 
7. The outcry of Faust: ''Ah, two souls inhabit my breast!" ('Zwei See/en 
wohnen, ach, in meiner Brust!'?. 
I 
8. Alexandre Kojeve, Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (New York and 
London: Basic Books, 1 969), p. 1 9  ff. 
9. Kojeve, Introduction to the Reading of Hegel, p. 29. 

Notes to chapters 8 and I 0 • 225 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
1 .  For Lukacs, the Phenomenology concerns "the acquisition by the individual 
of the experience of the species." Findlay speaks of it as a "universalized biogra­
phy." For Hyppolite, it describes "the itinerary of consciousness." See Georg 
Luk:ics, The Young Hegel (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1 976), p. 470; J. N. Findlay, 
Hegel: A Re-examination (New York: Macmillan, 1 958), p. 85; and Jean 
Hyppolite, Studies on Marx and Hegel (New York: Basic Books, 1969), p. 23. 
2. Jean Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1974), p. 179. 
3. Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure, p. 1 82. 
4. See Quentin Lauer, A Reading of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit (New 
York: Fordham University Press, 1 976), p. 1 16. 
5. Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure, p. 1 90 ff., makes the point that the 
unhappiness is the result of the development of self-consciousness itself. 
6. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, "Hegel's Existentialism" in Sense and Non-Sense 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), p. 67. 
7. Jean Wahl, Le Malheur de Ia Conscience dans Ia Philosophie de Hegel (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires, 1951), p. 124. 
8. Wahl, Le Malheur de Ia Conscience, p. 128. 
9. Wahl, Le Malheur de Ia Conscience, p. 146. 
1 0. See Hegel, Early Theological Writings, tr. T. M. Knox (New York: Harper 
& Row, 196 1). 
CHAPTER TEN 
1 .  Alexandre Kojeve, Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (New York and 
London: Basic Books, 1969). In the remaining discussion, page numbers refer to 
cited English translations. 
2. See Hegel, Philosophy of Mind, paras. 426-29 (with Zusiitzel 
3. For some further criticisms along these lines, see George Armstrong Kelly, 
"Notes on Hegel's 'Lordship and Bondage,"' in Alasdair Macintyre, ed., Hegel­
A Collection of Critical Essays (New York: Doubleday, 1 972), pp. 1 9 1 -95. 
4. Jean Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1 97 4), Introduction by John 
Heckman, p. xxvi. 
5. Jean Hyppolite, "Alienation and Objectification: Commentary on G. 
Luk:ics' The Young Hegel," in Studies on Marx and Hegel (New York and London: 
Basic Books, 1 969), pp. 86-87. 
6. See the Hegel text above, para. 44. 
7. See the Hegel text above, para. 3. 

226 • Notes to chapters 1 1  and 12 
8. See the Hegel text above, para. 22. 
9. Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure, pp. 1 46-77. 
10. See the Hegel text above, para. 4. 
1 1 . Maurice Merleau-Ponty, "Hegel's Existentialism," in Sense and Non-Sense 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), p. 63. 
1 2. Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness, tr. Hazel Barnes (New York: 
Philosophical Library, 1956), pp. 235-45. 
13. Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, tr. John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson (New York: Harper & Row, 1 962), pp. 484-86. 
14. Hegel, Philosophy of History, tr. J. Sibree (New York: Dover Publications, 
1 956), p. 72. 
1 5. Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1 952), 
p. 558. 
1 6. Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes, p. 67. 
17. Martin Heidegger, Hegel's Concept of Experience (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1970), pp. 5 1-53. 
1 8. Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Hegel's 'Inverted World'" and "Hegel's Dialectic 
of Self-Consciousness," in Hegel's Dialectic (New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press, 1976), pp. 35-53 and 54-74. 
1 9. "Naive realism leads to physics, and physics, if true, shows that naive real­
ism is false. Therefore naive realism, if true, is false; therefore it is false." Bertrand 
Russell, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1962), p. 
13. 
20. Hegel, Gesammelte Ulerke, Band 4: Jenaer Kritische Schriften (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner V͖rlag, 1968), pp. 1 24-25. 
2 1 .  Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes, pp. 1 14-1 5. 
22. Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes, p. 128. 
23. Jean Wahl, Le Malheur de Ia Conscience dans Ia Philosophie de Hegel (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1951). 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
1 .  Martin Heidegger, Poetry Language Thought, tr. Albert Hofstadter (New 
York: Harper and Row, 1 971), p. 146. 
2. These general points are made by Michael S. Roth in Knowing and History: 
Appropriations of Hegel in Twentieth-Century France\ (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 
University Press, 1 988), pp. 189-9 1 .  
CHAPTER TWELVE 
1 .  See Lionel Abel, The Intellectual Follies: A Memoir of the Literary Venture in 
New York and Paris (New York: W W Norton, 1 984), p. 17 4. 

Notes to chapter 12 • 227 
2. The notion that the master simply drops out of the picture, and that it is 
only the slave that moves onto Stoicism is highly problematical. It is at odds with 
Hegel's all-encompassing idea of Spirit. In addition, at the end of the master-slave 
discussion, the master's sense of his own autonomy is as compromised as his 
slave's, which suggests that he is equally in need of Stoicism's consolations. And 
finally, from a historical standpoint, Stoicism was also embraced by the master 
"class"-for example, Marcus Aurelius, the emperor of Rome. 
3. See Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: 
The Free Press, 1 992). 
4. Georges Bataille, "Lettre a X., charge d'un cours sur Hegel," Oeuvres com­
pletes de G. Bataille, p. 369. 
5. Ibid. 
6. References to Georges Bataille, Inner Experience, tr. Leslie Anne Boldt 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1 988) will be contained in the form 
"IE." 
7. "The History of Eroticism" is the second volume of The Accursed Share, 
which constitutes the most sustained exposition of Bataille's philosophical 
thought. The three volumes that make up The Accursed Share comprise rwo books: 
The Accursed Share: Volume I (New York: Zone Books, 1 988), which contains "An 
Essay on General Economy," and The Accursed Share: Volumes II & III (New York: 
Zone Books, 1 99 1 ), which contains "The History of Eroticism" and 
"Sovereignty." All references to these works will be contained in the text in the 
form "GE," "HoE," and "Sov," respectively. 
8. See, e.g., G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenology ofSpirit, tr. A. V. Miller (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1 977), p. 1 1 8 and Alexandre Kojeve, Introduction to the 
Reading of Hegel, tr. J. H. Nichols (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1 969), p. 
23-25. 
9. Georges Bataille, "Hegel, Death, and Sacrifice," Yale French Studies 78 
( 1990), p. 9. References to this article will be contained in the text in the form 
"HD&S." 
1 0. At this point it should be apparent that while Bataille adheres to Kojeve's 
notion that it is only the slave that moves beyond the master-slave problematic, 
his perspective on the subject that emerges from the struggle does not depend on 
retaining this view. After all, while in one sense the master lives an animal-like 
existence, in that all he need do is consume, his very conception of self, which is 
ultimately no more secure than that of the slave whom he refuses to recognize, is 
tied up with the "economy of meaning." The master wants to be "recognized," 
"acknowledged," and it is the paradox of receiving this "servile" need for recogni­
tion from the slave that causes him to go under. 
1 1 . Strictly speaking, this is not quite correct. In Stalinism, Bataille saw the 
possibility for a realization of sovereign values. He acknowledged that the driving 
force within Stalinism is to flatten difference, which is the basis for sovereignty, 

228 • Notes to chapter 13 
but contends that this "does not just have the negative meaning of an abolition of 
sovereign values." According to Bataille, it also "cannot help but have a corre­
sponding positive meaning. If every man is destined for complete nondifferentia­
tion, he abolishes all alienation in himself . . . .  He attains thinghood so fully that 
he is no longer a thing" (Sov, p. 301-302). Nevertheless, we need not dwell on 
this remarkable transvaluation very long. Besides the fact that, historically, 
Stalinism is a dead letter, it seems to me that this thesis is undermined by Bataille's 
more radical revolt against history itself. 
12. Michele Richman, Reading Georges Bataille: Beyond the Gift (Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982), p. 77. 
13. Jacques Derrida, Writing and Diference, tr. Allen Bass (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1978), p. 253. 
14. Ibid., p. 267. 
1 5. Ibid. 
1 6. G. W F. Hegel, Phenomenology ofSpirit, p. 362. 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
1 .  References to Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, tr. Hugh 
Tomlinson (New York: Columbia University Press, 1 983), will be contained in the 
text in the form "N &P." 
2. Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, tr. Walter Kaufman and 
R. J. Hollingdale (New York: Random House, 1967), pp. 36-37. 
3. Jean Wahl, "Nietzsche et Ia philosophie, " Revue de Metaphysique et de 
Morale 68, no. 3 (1 963): pp. 352, 379. 
4. Ibid., p. 253. 
5. In a subsection toward the end of Nietzsche and Philosophy entitled "Is 
Man Essentially 'Reactive'?" Deleuze refers to Nietzsche's ambivalence with 
respect to this question: On the one hand, "Nietzsche presents the triumph of 
reactive forces as something essential to man and history. Ressentiment and bad 
conscience are constitutive of the humanity of man, nihilism is the a priori con­
cept of universal history" (N&P, p. 1 66). Nevertheless, on the other hand, 
"Nietzsche speaks of the masters as a type of human being that the slave has mere­
ly conquered, of culture as a human species activity that r\active forces have sim­
ply diverted from its course, of the free and sovereign individual as the human 
product of this activity that the reactive man has only deformed" (N&P, p. 167). 
In some sense, Deleuze splits the difference. He views active and reactive forces as 
irreducible, but, with respect to the affirmation-negation dichotomy, claims that 
not only reactive force, but active force as well, is "becoming-reactive" (i.e., nega­
tive): "Man's essence is the becoming-reactive of forces" (N &P, p. 169). 
Ostensibly, this is what makes active force (the master) susceptible to reactive 
force's (the slave's) transvaluation of values. 

Notes to chapter 14 • 229 
6. See Judith P. Butler, Subjects of Desire: Hegelian Reflections in Twentieth­
Century France (New York: Columbia University, 1 987), pp. 205-206. But when 
Butler claims that Deleuze simply "historicizes the negative formulation of 
desire," and that "Deleuze's notion of slave morality has no historical necessity," 
she overstates her case for the reasons discussed in note 5. 
7. In Beyond Good and Evil, for example, Nietzsche states that "(The] hodge-
podge philosophers who call themselves 'philosophers of reality' or 'positivists' . .  . 
are all losers who have been brought back under the hegemony of science . . .  . 
Philosophy reduced to 'theory of knowledge,' in fact no more than a timid 
epochism and doctrine of abstinence-a philosophy that never gets beyond the 
threshold and takes pains to deny itself the right to enter." Friedrich Nietzsche, 
Beyond Good and Evil, tr. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1 966), 
section 204. Similarly, in the Will to Power Nietzsche declares that "brutal posi­
tivism reigns, recognizing facts without becoming excited." Friedrich Nietzsche, 
The Will to Power, tr. and ed. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1 968), 
section 120. For a portrait of the last man, see Thus Spake Zarathustra. 
8. In response to Deleuze's Anti-Oedipus, a book in which Deleuze continues 
to pursue both the logic of his notion of the subject in Nietzsche and Philosophy 
and his attack upon existing social structures, Francois Lyotard wrote Libidinal 
Economy, which brought to light the quietistic perspective that is implicit within 
Deleuze's position. According to Lyotard, you cannot hang onto both the idea of 
truth (with the attendant standpoint of critique that this idea implies) and extol 
the play of libidinal forces, which is what Deleuze attempts to do. As a result, 
Lyotard basically recommends a "high energy" embracement of the world exactly 
as we find it, which, I believe, simply clarifies the underlying tendencies of 
Deleuze's own position. 
9. Throughout Nietzsche and Philosophy, Deleuze adverts to Nietzsche's oeu­
vre for the purpose of attacking Hegel's dialectic, but frequently the dialectic that 
Nietzsche is actually attacking is Socrates'. On page 10, for example, he is attack­
ing Hegel's dialectic for representing the speculation of the pleb, but the endnote 
is to the section of Nietzsche's Twilight of the Idols entitled "The Problem of 
Socrates." 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
1 .  See, for example, Jean-Luc Nancy and Phillipe Lacoue-Labarthe, The Title 
of the Letter: A Reading ofLacan, tr. Francois Rafoul and David Pettigrew (Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1 992), p. xxviii, who argue that Lacan's psy­
choanalytic theory has actually "sublat[ ed] philosophical discourse." 
2. Jacques Lacan, The Seminar ofjacques Lacan: Book !!-The Ego in Freud's 
Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis, tr. Sylvana Tomaselli (New York: W. 
W. Norton, 1 988), pp. 1 0-1 1 .  

230 • Notes to chapter 15 
3. Mikkel Borch-Jacobsen, Lacan: The Absolute Master, tr. Douglas Brick 
(Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1 991), p. 1 2. 
4. Ibid., p. 1 9. 
5. This quote is from "The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the 
I as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience," which appears in Jacques Lacan, 
Ecrits: A Selection, tr. Alan Sheridan (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1 977). 
References to Ecrits will appear in the text in the form "E." 
6. See Malcolm Bowie, Lacan (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1 99 1 ), 
p. 23. 
7. Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, tr. Alan 
Sheridan (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1 981), p. 20. 
8. I am indebted to Borch-Jacobsen for this insight. See Mikkel Borch­
Jacobsen, Lacan: The Absolute Master, pp. 85-87. 
9. Ibid., p. 87. 
1 0. Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of jacques Lacan: Book III-The Psychoses, tr. 
Russell Grigg (New York: W. W. Norton, 1 993). This is the title of chapter XIV. 
1 1 . Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of jacques Lacan: Book !!-The Ego in Freud's 
Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis, p. 3 1 3. 
12. Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of jacques Lacan: Book III-The Psychoses, 
pp. 138-39. 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
1 .  "Labor and Interaction" appears in Ji.irgen Habermas, Theory and Practice, 
tr. John Viertel (Boston: Beacon Press, 1 973), pp. 142--69. References to "Labor 
and Interaction" will be contained in the text in the form "L&I." 
2. See, e.g., Andreas Wildt, Autonomie und Anerkennung: Hegel's 
Moralitatskritik im Lichte seiner Fichte Rezeption (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1 982). 
3. Ji.irgen Habermas, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, tr. Frederick 
G. Lawrence (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1 987) ,  p. 40. 
4. Axel Honneth, The Struggle for Recognition: The Mf{ral Grammar of Social 
Conflicts, tr. Joel Anderson (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1 996). References to this 
work will be contained in the text in the form "SR." 
5. G. W. F. Hegel, System of Ethical Life and First Philosophy of Spirit, tr. H. 
S. Harris and T. M. Knox (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1 979), 
p. 236. 
6. Ibid., p. 237. 
7. Ibid., p. 1 95. 
8. In Dialectic of Enlightenment, for example, Habermas's teachers, Adorno 
and Horkheimer, assert that "there is no longer any available form of linguistic 
expression which has not tended toward accomodation to dominant currents of 
thought; and what a devalued language does not do automatically is proficiently 

Notes to chapter 15 • 231 
executed by societal mechanisms." See Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, 
Dialectic of Enlightenment, tr. John Cummings (New York: Continuum, 199 1  ), 
p. 5. 
9. JUrgen Habermas, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, p. 30. 
1 0. Ibid. 
1 1 . Ibid., p. 36. 
12. Ibid., p. 29. 
13. See page 21 1 .  
14. See the translation above, para. 12. 
1 5. Ibid. 
16. Jlirgen Habermas, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, p. 29. 


INDEX 
Emboldened page references pertain to the translated portions of Hegel's Phmom­
enology and the Propaedeutic contained herein. 
Abraham, 9, 1 3 5  
Absolute Knowing, 2-3, 1 22, 1 68, 
1 7 1 - 1 72 
Adorno, Theodor, 1 63, 205 
Alienation, 7; and self-consciousness, 
6 1-63 
Antigone, 1 1 9 
Bataille, Georges, 1 64, 1 65, 1 67-78, 
1 79-80, 1 92; on Absolute Knowing, 
171-72; on death, 1 69, 1 70; Derrida 
on, 175, 1 77-78; on "General 
Economy," 1 72-73, 1 74; on human 
animality, 170, 1 72; on ipse, 1 77; on 
labor, 1 69; on the natural world, 1 69; 
on negativity, 1 68, 1 76-77; on 
Nietzsche, 1 79; on non-knowledge, 
1 76; and the postmodern, 1 78; on 
potlach, 1 74-75; on "Restricted 
Economy," 1 73, 1 74; on the sacred, 
1 72; on sovereignty, 1 67, 1 73, 1 74, 
1 77 
Being and Time (Heidegger), 1 46, 1 48  
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel, 1 92, 1 99 
Buder, Judith, 1 84 
Caesar, Julius, 1 87 
Christ, 1 1 4 
Christianity, 60-6 1 ;  Hegel and 
Nietzsche compared on, 62; as prod­
uct of slave consciousness, 1 1 9-20; 
and Unhappy Consciousness, 60, 
1 1 1- 12; and universal, I l l  
Civilization and its Discontents (Freud), 
1 94 
Dante, 1 1 0, 1 38 
Death, 22-23, 94-95; and self­
certainty, 23 
Deleuze, Gilles, 1 64, 1 65, 1 78, 1 79-90; 
anti-Hegelianism of. 1 80; and differ­
ence, 1 89; on eternal recurrence, 
1 8 1-82; contrasted with Hegel, 
1 83-84; on master and slave, 
1 8 3-84; materialism of, 1 80-8 1 ;  on 
negativity, 1 84-86; on Nietzsche, 
1 80-82; on the overman, 1 8 1-82; as 
positivist, 1 89; on recognition, 1 85, 
1 88; selective ontology of, 1 82-83; 
Wahl on, 1 82; on will to power, 
1 8 1-82 
233 

234 • Index 
Derrida, Jacques, 1 64, 1 65, 1 80; on 
Bataille, 175, 1 77-78 
Descartes, Rene, 82, 20 1 
Desire, 18-19, 48; and self-certainty, 
1 8-19; satisfaction of. 1 9  
Dialectic (Hegel's), described, 2 
Don Juan, 82 
Durkheim, Emile, 1 72 
Eckhart, Meister, 1 1 7 
Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 
1844 (Marx), 8, 62 
Ego, 9 1 ,  93-94, 1 03-6 
Either/Or (Kierkegaard), 9, 82 
Engels, Friedrich, 9 
Epicterus, 1 06 
Epistemology, Hegel and, 3, 1 26 
Faust (Goethe), 62 
Feinberg, Joel, 2 1 7  
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 8, 60 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 6-7, 203, 206; 
Hegel's criticism of, 6-7 
First Philosophy of Spirit (Hegel), 205, 
209, 2 1 0- 1 2, 2 1 4, 2 1 6  
Force, 73-74 
"Force and the Understanding", 5 
"Forms of Consciousness", 2 
Foucault, Michel, 1 64, 1 65, 1 78 
Freud, Sigmund, 1 04, 1 9 1 ,  1 93-94, 
1 96-97, 1 98, 1 99, 202; on "Pleasure 
Principle," 1 94; on "Reality 
Principle," 1 04, 1 94 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 76, 77, 1 52-57, 
1 63; on inverted world, 1 53-55; on 
objectivity, 1 52- 1 53, 1 56 
Genealogy of Morals (Nietzsche), 10, 
1 80-8 1 ,  1 87 
Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Pheno­
menology of Spirit (Hyppolite), 1 34 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 62, 92, 
1 87 
Golding, William, 1 26 
Habermas, Ji.irgen, 1 65, 205-22; on 
Absolute Spirit, 2 1 5- 1 6, 2 1 9, 
220-2 1 ;  theory of communicative 
action, 206; and differentiation of 
spheres, 2 1 4; on First Philosophy 
of Spirit, 2 1 1-12; on Hegel as meta­
physician, 2 1 4-1 5; contrasted with 
Honneth, 2 1 8-20; on interaction, 
206-7, 209- 1 2, 2 1 5, 2 1 9; compared 
with Kant, 2 1 3- 1 4; on legal recogni­
tion, 2 1 2- 1 3; on Marx, 2 1 0; on 
subject-object paradigm, 2 1 5- 1 6, 
22 1-22 
Harris, H. S., 2 1 2  
Heidegger, Martin, 1 46-52, 1 63, 1 64, 
1 65, 1 67, 1 69, 1 78, 1 99, 200-20 1 ,  
202; on authenticity, 20 1 ;  on das 
Man, 20 1 ;  on "fallenness", 20 1 ;  
"Letter on Humanism," 1 92; con­
trasted with Hegel, 147-48, 1 50-52; 
on Hegel and time, 1 48-5 1 
Hobbes, John, 58, 88, 94 
Honneth, Axel, 1 65, 205-6, 21 6-22; 
on Absolute Spirit, 220-2 1 ;  
contrasted with Habermas, 2 1 8-20 
on interaction, 2 1 9; on Marx, 2 1 7; 
post-metaphysical reconstruction of 
Hegel, 2 1 6- 1 8 ;  on subject-object 
paradigm, 22 1-22 
Horkheimer, Max, 1 63 
Hume, David, 5, 66 
Hyppolite, Jean, 85, 90, 1 25, 1 26, 
1 33-39; on Hegel's anti-essentialism, 
1 36; on existential component in 
Hegel, 1 34, 1 36; on life, 1 37, 
138-39; on work, 1 37 
Inner Experience (Bataille), 1 75, 
1 79 
Inverted World (Hegel), 6, 76, 77, 78, 
1 53-5 5 

Kant, Immanuel, 4, 5-6, 84, 1 08, 1 24, 
1 5 5, 1 72, 1 76, 206, 208- 10, 2 1 3-14; 
and autonomous will, 208-9; and 
transcendental unity of apperception, 
84, 206 
Kelly, George Armstrong, 88, 90 
Kierkegaard, S0ren, 9, 56-57, 80, 82, 
1 34, 1 38,  1 4 1 ,  1 49; and leap of 
faith, 9 
Kojeve, Alexandre, 3, 1 25, 1 26-33, 1 64, 
1 67, 1 68, 1 69, 1 92, 1 99, 200; on 
Absolute Knowing, 1 68; on the cogi­
to, 1 3 1 ;  and death, 1 3 5-36; on 
desire, 1 27-28; on the "end of 
history," 1 32, 1 68; and politicization 
of Hegel, 1 33-34; on recognition, 
1 29; on the slave's superiority, 1 30, 
1 32-33; on work, 1 27 
Lacan, Jacques, 1 64, 1 65, 1 80, 
1 9 1 -204; anti-Cartesianism of, 
1 95-96; on desire, 200, 203-4; on 
ego as fiction, 1 94; on ego psycho­
logy, 1 9 1 ;  contrasted with Freud, 
1 9 1 -92, 1 94; contrasted with Hegel, 
1 98, 202-3; Heideggerianism of. 1 99, 
20 1-2; on "the Imaginary," 200; 
linguistic turn of, 1 97; on the "mirror 
stage," 1 93-96, 203; on misrecog­
nition, 1 95-96; on objet a, 204; on 
the phallus, 202-3; on "the Real," 
200-202; on signifier and signified, 
200; on signifying chain, 200; on 
"the Symbolic," 200-202 
"Law of the Heart", 1 23-24 
Laws, 75 
Left Hegelians, 9, 1 64 
Leonardo da Vinci, 1 22 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 1 92, 1 96-97, 200 
Life, 15-19, 8 1-82; as the object of 
desire, 1 9  
Locke, John, 8 8  
Lord of the Flies (Golding) , 1 26 
Lukacs, Georg, 1 34 
Malraux, Andre, 1 1 0 
Marcus Aurelius, I 06 
Marcuse, Herbert, 1 63 
Index • 235 
Marx, Karl, 8, 9, 1 34, 1 39, 1 44, 1 67, 
2 1 0, 2 1 3, 2 1 7- 1 8  
Master Consciousness, 24-25 
Master-Slave Dialectic, 20-28, 49-50, 
95-99, 1 04; see also master con­
sciousness and slave consciousness 
Mead, George Herbert, 2 1 7  
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 1 1 2, 1 27, 1 39, 
1 43-46; on relation between death 
and reason, 145 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 1 0, 1 20, 1 39, 1 63, 
1 64, 1 67, 1 7 1 ,  1 77-78, 1 79-82, 1 87, 
1 89; and "the last man," 1 7 1 ,  1 87; on 
positivism, 1 87 
Nietzsche and Philosophy (Deleuze), 1 80 
Pascal, Blaise, 1 5  9 
Perception, 5 ,  72, 77 
Phenomenology, analyzed, 65-67; con­
trasted with metaphysics, 83-84; 
as response to metaphysical dualisms, 
67-68; contrasted with phenomen­
alism, 66; movement toward truth, 68 
Philosophical Discourse of Modernity 
(Habermas), 2 10, 2 1 5, 220 
Philosophy of Right (Hegel), 8-9 
Philosophy of Spirit (Hegel), 205, 207, 
2 1 2, 2 1 6  
Plato, 72, 77-78, 8 8 ,  99, 109, 1 54, 
1 55; Hegel contrasted with, 77 
Reason, 6 1 ,  78, 1 22-24 
Recognition, 20-22, 49, 87-92, 94-95, 
97-99, 1 0 1 ,  1 85; and self-certainty, 
22 
Right Hegelians, 9 
Robinson Crusoe, 50 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 88 

236 • Index 
Russell, Bertrand, 1 1 2 
Ryle, Gilbert, 56 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 1 25, 1 27, 1 39-43, 
1 45, 1 64, 1 92, 1 96; on being vs. 
knowing, 1 4 1 -42; on the cogito, 1 43; 
contrasted with Hegel, 1 40; on 
Hegel's epistemological optimism, 
1 42; on Hegel's ontological optimism, 
1 43 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 1 92, 1 99; on 
linguistic sign, 1 99 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 7, 
9; Hegel's criticism of, 7 
Science of Logic (Hegel), 8 
Self-Certainty, 1 3 ,  80, 82, 90-9 1 ;  and 
desire, 1 8-19 
Self-Consciousness, 5 5-63; and alien­
ation, 6 1 -63; contrasted with con­
sciousness, 80-8 1 ;  as desire, 1 5 ,  
18-19; generated through opposi­
tion, 57-5 8; impetus for, 55-56; and 
life, 57; and overcoming metaphysical 
dualisms, 78; and otherness, 1 4-15, 
20-2 1 ;  as process, 56, 8 1 ;  and self­
certainty, 79-80; and truth, 14, 84; 
as turning point in Phenomenology, 1 
Sense-Certainty, 4-5, 72, 76-77 
Sickness Unto Death (Kierkegaard), 80 
Skepticism, 3 1-35, 39, 59-60, 
1 08-1 0; and freedom, 33-34; and 
the objective world, 32; as self­
contradictory, 34; as the realization of 
Stoicism, 3 1-32, 10 8-9; as sophistic, 
1 09 
Slave Consciousness, 25-28, 1 04-6, 
1 1 8; and alienation, 1 1 8; and death, 
26; and fear, 27-28; and service, 
27-28; and truth, 26; and work, 27 
Socrates, 1 1 9 
Solipsism, 85 
Solon, 50 
Spinoza, Baruch de, 93, 94 
Spirit of Christianity (Hegel), 207; on 
criminality, 207-8 
Stoicism, 29-3 1 ,  32, 39, 59, 1 06-8; as 
abstract freedom, 30-3 1 ,  1 07; 
freedom as highest value of, 1 07; as 
freedom of thought, 30; as indetermi­
nate, 3 1  
Struggle fo r  Recognition (Honneth), 206, 
2 1 6, 220 
Studies on Marx and Hegel (Hyppolite), 
1 34 
Subject-Object Paradigm, 1 64, 205, 
2 1 5- 1 6, 22 1 -22 
System of Ethical Life (Hegel), 205, 2 1 2, 
2 1 6, 2 1 7  
Understanding (the), 75-76, 77, 78 
Unhappy Consciousness, 34-46, 
1 1  0-20; Christianity as expression of, 
1 1 1- 1 2; and desiring and working, 
40-42; as divided against itself, 35, 
1 1 1 - 1 2, 1 1 5- 1 6; and the mediating 
priest, 44, 1 16; and the pure heart, 
39-40; contrJSted with Skepticism, 
1 1 3; contrasted with Stoicism, 1 1 3; 
and the Trinity, 1 1 4- 1 6; the universal 
Being, 43-46 
View ofToledo (El Greco), 1 1 0 
Wahl, Jean, 1 1 3, 1 1 4, 1 1 6, 1 25, 1 33, 
1 57-60; on Deleuze, 1 82; self­
consciousness as unhappy, 1 57-60 
Winicott, Donald, 2 1 7  
World-in-Itself, 5-6, 74-75 
Young Hegelians, 8 

