
LECTURES 
on the 
PHILOSOPHY 
of 
SPIRIT 1827-8 


GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL 
LECTURES ON THE 
PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 
1827-8 
Translated and with an Introduction by 
ROBERT R. WILLIAMS 
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

OXFORD 
\JNIVJ!B.SITY Pli.BSS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
With offices in 
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 
Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York 
This volume is a translation of G. W. F. Hegel: Vorlesungen uber die 
Philosophie des Geistes (1827-8), transcribed by Johann Erdmann and Ferdinand Waiter, 
edited by Franz Hespe and Burkhard Tuschling (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1994), 
vol. 13 in the series G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen: Ausgewiihlte Nachschriften und 
Manuskripte, edited by Pierre Garniron and Waiter Jaeschke, copyright 
© 1989, 1996 by Felix Meiner Verlag GmbH, Hamburg 
© Translation and introduction Robert R. Williams 2007 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 
First published 2007 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above 
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Data available 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Data available 
Typeset by SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India 
Printed in Great Britain 
on acid-free paper by 
Biddies Ltd., King's Lynn, Norfolk 
ISBN 978-0-19-921702-1 
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2 

CONTENTS 
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
1 
1. Why These Lectures? 
1 
2. Hegel Between the Ancients and the Modems 
7 
3. Divisions and Topics in Philosophy of Subjective Spirit 
12 
4. Anthropology: Slumbering Spirit 
14 
A. Animal Magnetism and Clairvoyance 
15 
B. Dementia 
16 
5. Phenomenology of Spirit 
18 
A. Reciprocal Recognition, Spirit, and the Concept of Right 
22 
B. Recognition and Self-Actualization 
26 
6. Psychology: Theoretical Spirit 
27 
A. Spirit for Itself: From the Found to the Posited 
29 
B. Imagination, Sign, Memory 
33 
C. Mechanical Memory and Transcendental Deduction 
37 
7. Psychology: Practical Spirit: The Synthesis of Kant 
and Aristotle 
39 
A. The Formalism of the Psychology 
46 
B. Unresolved Issues: The Unity of the Philosophy of Spirit 
48 
8. Notes on the Text and Translation 
52 
HEGEL'S LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 
INTRODUCTION 
ANTHROPOLOGY 
1. Natural Soul 
2. The Dreaming Soul 
A. Sentience 
B. Self-Feeling 
C. Habit 
3. Actual Soul 
V 
57 
81 
83 
124 
125 
139 
153 
158 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
1. Consciousness as Such 
2. Self-Consciousness 
3. Reason 
PSYCHOLOGY 
1. Theoretical Spirit 
A. Intuition 
B. Representation 
C. Thought 
2. Practical Spirit 
GLOSSARY 
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
GENERAL INDEX 
CONTENTS 
vi 
165 
173 
182 
195 
199 
204 
206 
213 
235 
247 
267 
279 
283 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
1. WHY THESE LECTURES? 
The Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit 1827-8 is in many respects a 
'new' Hegel text, first published in Germany in 1994. 1 It is a transcription 
made by Johann Eduard Erdmann, a German philosopher who attended 
Hegel's lectures as a student in 1827. Not only is it a 'new' Hegel text, this 
lecture transcript illumines a less well-known, less well-understood area in 
Hegel's thought, one to which Hegel himself attached special importance. 
One puzzle in Hegel scholarship is that in spite of the renaissance of interest 
in his thought, and in spite of the importance Hegel himself attached to it, 
his Philosophy of Subjective Spirit has received very little attention. There is 
an enormous secondary bibliography on Hegel's Phenomenology and Logic, 
as well as the Philosophy of Right, but very few studies of the Philoso-
phy of Subjective Spirit, 2 Moreover, there is no scholarly consensus that 
this work is somehow 'insignificant' in comparison to the others. On the 
1. Hegels Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie des Geistes 182718, ed. Franz Hespe and 
Burkhard Tuschling (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1994). Hereafter cited as VPG 1827. 
2. In English, see Murray Greene, Hegel on the Soul (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1970); Willem deVries, Hegel's Theory of Mental Activity (lthaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1987); Daniel Berthold-Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness (Albany, NY: State University 
of New York Press, 1995); Alfredo Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000), Heikki lkiiheimo, Self-Consciousness and Intersubjectivity: A Study 
of Hegel's Encyclopedia Philosophy of Subjective Spirit (1830) (Jyviiskylii, Finland: University 
of Jyviiskylii, Publications in Philosophy, 2000); in German see Iring Fetscher, Hegels Lehre 
vom Menschen (Stuttgart: Frommann, 1970); Adrian Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten 
(Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog; 1987); Lothar Eley (ed.), Hegels Theorie der subjektiven 
Geistes (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1990); Franz Hespe and Burkhant Tuschling (eds.), 
Psychologie und Anthropologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, Spekulation und Erfahrung 
(Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1991); M. Wolf£, Das Korper-Seele Problem: Kommentar 
zu Hegel (Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1992); and H. Schnadelbach, Hegels Enzyklopiidie der 
philosophischen Wissenschaften: Ein Kommentar (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2000); Christolph 
Halbig, Objektives Denken: Erkenntnistheorie und 'Philosophy of Mind' in Hegels System 
(Frommann-Holzboog, 2002). 
1 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
contrary, even a cursory examination of the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit 
reveals that it contains material of interest to contemporary philosophy of 
mind and social science. So we are led to ask, why has the Philosophy 
of Subjective Spirit fared poorly in scholarly interest by comparison with 
other dimensions of Hegel's thought? The explanation is to be found in its 
relative unintelligibility. The reasons for this unintelligibility are not simply 
inherent in the work itself, but rather in factors surrounding its origins and 
reception, especially in the English-speaking world. In this section we focus 
on these factors and on the potential significance of these recently discovered 
lectures for the study and understanding of the Philosophy of Subjective 
Spirit. Those wishing for an account of the main themes of this work and 
the lectures may skip directly to section 11. 
The Philosophy of Spirit is the third part of Hegel's Encyclopedia of 
the Philosophical Sciences (1817). Hegel planned to publish an expanded 
version of the first part, the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, in 1822 as 
a self-standing parallel volume to the Philosophy of Right (1821), which 
elaborates his philosophy of objective spirit. He began composing an intro-
duction to the Philosophy of Spirit, 3 but for unknown reasons abandoned 
the project; instead, he brought out a revised and greatly expanded second 
edition of his Encyclopedia in 1827. Hegel delivered these lectures shortly 
after the publication of the 1827 edition. 
Hegel's Encyclopedia was published in three editions: 1817, 1827, and 
1830.4 Each of these editions is an outline of paragraphs from which Hegel 
lectured. Hegel's procedure was to elaborate and explain this outline in 
his lectures. This procedure is underscored by the full title of the 182 7 
edition which reads: 'Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in outline, 
for use in his lectures.' In a letter to Victor Cousin in July 1827, Hegel 
wrote ' ... this book is but a succession of theses, their development and 
clarification being reserved for the courses ... '. 5 In the preface to the 182 7 
3. Published as Ein Fragment zur Philosophie des Geistes (1822-5) in Hegel's Philosophy 
of Subjective Spirit, ed. and trans. M. J. Petry, vol. I (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978), 90-139. 
4. Hegel, Enzyklopi:idie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, Werke, ed. Eva Moldenhauer 
and Karl M. Michel, Theorie Werkausgabe (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970), vols. 8-10. Eng-
lish translations of the 1830 edition: Hegel's Logic, Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, trans. W. 
Wallace (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1873, 1975); Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, trans. A. V. 
Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970). Hereafter cited as Enc. 1830 with paragraph 
number. There is a translation of the Encyclopedia 1817 edition by S. Taubeneck (New York: 
Continuum, 1990), hereafter Enc. 1817. Unless otherwise indicated, all references are to the 
1830 edition. All translations are my own, although I have consulted (and often corrected) the 
Wallace translation. 
5. Hegel: The Letters, trans. Clark Butler and Christine Seiler (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1984), 640, my italics. 
2 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
edition, Hegel wrote that 'the pressure for abbreviation which an outline 
requires causes this second edition to have the same purpose as the first 
edition, namely, it is to serve as a Vorlesebuch that receives its necessary 
elaboration and explanation through orallectures.'6 Thus in Hegel's view, 
the Encyclopedia is not a complete stand-alone publication like his Logic or 
Phenomenology, but rather a handbook or outline to assist his students in 
following his lectures. As an outline, the handbook compresses the material 
almost to the point of unintelligibility; the 'making sense' and explanation 
of the material was supposed to occur in the lectures. Taken by itself, 
the published Encyclopedia outline is virtually uninterpretable because the 
oral explanation Hegel deemed necessary for understanding the material is 
lacking. 
Hegel's judgment on his Vorlesebuch has recently been echoed by J. N. 
Findlay and Herbert Schnadelbach. 7 When Findlay helped to bring out 
reprints of the Encyclopedia in English, he argued for the inclusion and 
translation of supplementary materials (Zusiitze) compiled from student 
notes and transcripts of Hegel's lectures. The reason for including the 
Zusiitze, Findlay argued, is that 'Hegel's Encyclopedia was a condensed, 
arid compendium, put out as a foundation for detailed comment and 
explanation in lectures. Without such material as provided by the edito-
rial Zusiitze, the text of Hegel's Encyclopedia would be largely uninter-
pretable, a monumental inscription in Linear B.'8 More recently, Herbert 
Schnadelbach justifies his commentary on Hegel's Encyclopedia thus: 'This 
commentary is the attempt to make an unreadable book readable. It was not 
conceived primarily to be read, but for use in [Hegel's] lectures.'9 Beginning 
with Hegel himself, those familiar with Hegel's Encyclopedia recognize that 
its numbered paragraphs form an outline so condensed and compressed that 
they are virtually unintelligible apart from Hegel's lectures. Hegel intended 
to remedy this situation by publishing a complete Philosophy of Subjective 
6. Hegel, Werke, ed. Moldenhauer and Michel, Theorie Werkausgabe, 8:14. My italics. 
7. This judgment is not universally accepted. Adriaan Peperzak believes that the 'Haupt-
text' of the Encyclopedia is not only intelligible, but also contains a carefully thought-out 
argument exhibiting rational necessity. Peperzak locates the proper argumentation of the 
Encyclopedia not in the remarks and illustrations that Hegel added, but 'solely in the main text 
consisting of paragraphs internally connected to each other' (Selbsterkenntniss des Absoluten, 
13). Hegel did not go this far. Although he is committed to defending the necessity of thought 
determinations and transitions, Hegel did not identify logical necessity with the sequence of the 
paragraphs of the Encyclopedia. Rather he characterized the Encyclopedia to Victor Cousin as 
'but a succession of theses whose development and clarification is reserved for the courses' (see 
n. 7 above). 
8. J. N. Findlay, Foreword to Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, trans. Miller, p. vii. 
9. Schniidelbach, Hegels Enzyklopiidie, 11. 
3 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
Spirit that would, like the Philosophy of Right, combine the outline with 
the elaboration provided by the lectures; however this project was never 
realized. 
After Hegel's death, his students who edited and published his collected 
works also confronted the intelligibility problem. Their solution was to fill 
in the abstract outline of the Encyclopedia handbook by drawing upon 
notes and transcripts of Hegel's lectures. Ludwig Boumann was assigned the 
task of editing and preparing the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit. Boumann 
sought to fill in the handbook outline by constructing supplemental notes 
and additions (Zusatze). For these additions he made use of several (as many 
as eight) different lecture manuscripts dating from between 1816 and 1830, 
most of which have been destroyed or lost. 10 Unfortunately, Boumann 
conflated materials from different years, ignoring and passing over their 
context in the development of Hegel's thought. In addition Boumann tells 
us that, owing to the often fragmentary nature of these materials, he had 
to work hard composing them so that they would not fall below the style 
and level of the paragraphs of the Vorlesebuch. Boumann engaged in further 
editorial interpretation by appending these Zusatze to the paragraphs of the 
1830 edition, when in fact most of the lectures and the student transcripts 
were based on the 1817 edition of the Encyclopedia. 
While Boumann unquestionably had the advantage of a living memory 
of a classroom performance to guide him, the disadvantage of Boumann's 
and other Zusatze is that they are editorial constructions and conflations of 
several transcripts of lectures from different auditors and different years. 11 
This conflation of materials does not follow modern editorial practice, 
which seeks to avoid interpretation of the texts and allows the reader to 
see for himself changes and/or developments in a writer's thought from one 
edition or lecture series to another. For these reasons Otto Poggeler decided 
to exclude all the Zusatze from his edition of the 1830 edition of Hegel's 
Encyclopedia. 12 Poggeler and Nicolin produced a much shorter, 'pure' text, 
to wit, Hegel's original outline. 
But what happens to the interpretation of Hegel's Philosophy of Subjec-
tive Spirit when the Zusatze are excluded? The reader is then confronted 
with a compressed outline that both Hegel and many scholars regard as 
10. Hegel published the Philosophy of Spirit as the first part of his Encyclopedia in 1817. 
In Berlin he lectured on the Philosophy of Spirit in 1820, 1822, 1825, 1827, and 1830. 
11. There are other problems as well: few of the Boumann Zusiitze can be independently 
confirmed from existing Nachschriften of Hegel's lectures which have since been discovered. 
This does not mean that they are false, only that they cannot be checked and confirmed. 
12. G. W. F. Hegel, Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften (1830), ed. 
Friedhelm Nicolin and Otto Poggeler (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1959). 
4 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
nearly unreadable and uninterpretable. No wonder that the Philosophy of 
Subjective Spirit has been neglected, because the exclusion of the Zusatze 
actually occurred in the reception of the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit 
in the English-speaking world. When William Wallace translated Hegel's 
Encyclopedia in the nineteenth century, he translated the Zusatze of the 
Encyclopedia Logic, but not those for the Encyclopedia Philosophy of 
Spirit. For nearly one hundred years all that English readers had available 
to them was Hegel's handbook outline. The Boumann Zusatze were not 
translated into English until J. N. Findlay brought out a second English 
edition nearly 100 years later in 1971. The result? While there have been 
several fine studies in English of Hegel's so-called shorter logic (the Ency-
clopedia logic), there were almost no studies of Hegel's Philosophy of Spirit 
until after the publication of Findlay's edition by Oxford University Press 
in 1975 and Michael Petry's three-volume edition Philosophy of Subjective 
Spirit in 1978.13 This gap in scholarship suggests that Findlay was probably 
correct in his judgment that without the editorial Zusatze, the text of 
Hegel's Encyclopedia would be largely uninterpretable. Since 1971, when 
the Boumann Zusatze were first made available in English translation, at 
least two significant studies of Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit have 
appeared in English: Willem de Vries, Hegel's Theory of Mental Activity 
(1987) and Daniel Berthold-Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness ( 1995). Both 
studies make use of the Zusatze. Berthold-Bond's study is almost entirely 
based on three of the Zusatze. In spite of their defects, the Boumann Zusatze 
have proven to be indispensable. 
Until now, scholars interested in Hegel's philosophy of spirit have been 
confronted by two unattractive alternatives: either confine their exami-
nation to the largely uninterpretable handbook outline, or rely upon the 
Boumann Zusatze. However, thanks to a recent discovery, we now have a 
complete transcript of one of the lecture courses that Hegel offered on the 
Philosophy of Spirit. 14 This transcript allows us to see for the first time 
13. Petty's edition is based on the 1830 edition plus the Boumann Zusiitze and the currently 
available transcripts ofHotho (1822), Kehler (1825), and Griesheim (1825). 
14. This is a transcript made by one of Hegel's students. It is not a text composed and 
published by Hegel himself. However, to exclude such transcripts from consideration would 
be to restrict Hegel scholarship to the Phenomenology (1807), the Logic, the Encyclopedia 
outline and the Philosophy of Right, and would exclude such materials as Hegel's Lectures on 
Aesthetics, Philosophy of Religion, History of Philosophy, and Philosophy of History. These 
lectures have proven to be important, indispensible sources for the study of Hegel's thought that 
have both illumined and vastly supplemented the published works; these recently discovered 
Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit 1827-8 should also count as an important and valuable 
supplement to Hegel's Encyclopedia Philosophy of Sub;ective Spirit. 
5 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
an entire lecture course on the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit. In these 
lectures Hegel introduced material that goes far beyond anything in the 
handbook outline or anything previously published. Further, this transcript 
originates not from different lectures presented at different times, but from 
one lecture series. This manuscript is not an editorially constructed text 
like Boumann's Zusiitze, but a transcript of the entire course, made by a 
recognized philosopher. Unlike the Boumann Zusiitze, these materials can 
be dated with certainty. These lectures are the first course on the Philosophy 
of Spirit that Hegel presented after substantially revising and expanding his 
handbook in its second (1827) edition in which the Encyclopedia achieved 
its mature, if penultimate, formulation. In these lectures Hegel does not 
simply repeat the presentation of the handbook, but presents a new intro-
duction to the concept of spirit which differs from all previously published 
versiOns. 
A word of clarification concerning the title and scope of these lectures. 
The title of Hegel's lecture course is simply Philosophy of Spirit. However, 
beginning with second (1827) edition of the Encyclopedia, Hegel systemat-
ically distinguished the philosophy of spirit into subjective spirit, objective 
spirit, and absolute spirit. Erdmann did not observe these systematic divi-
sions; his manuscript reads 'Hegel. Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit'. 
Erdmann probably replicated the announcement for Hegel's lectures. How-
ever, while the title of the lectures may appear to promise an introduction 
to the entire philosophy of spirit as a whole, their focus is principally on 
subjective spirit as Hegel explains: 'Here we consider only the finite spirit, 
but in it the essential substance is to be spirit. It has this in common with 
the infinite spirit, to be spirit.' 15 It should be noted that the division of 
spirit into subjective, objective, and absolute does not mean that there are 
three separate entities.16 Spirit is a self-organizing totality, and in the 1827 
lectures the unifying theme which ties subjective, objective, and absolute 
spirit together is freedom. Only when spirit comes to be its own object is it 
free, actual spirit. Only then does the concept of right emerge, grounded in 
spirit itself. Thus subjective spirit furnishes the deduction of the concept of 
right presupposed by the Philosophy of Right. 17 
15. VPG 1827, 3; see below, p. 57. 
16. Iring Fetscher observes that 'every distinction and separation of the ... abstract basic 
divisions of the doctrine of spirit [viz., subjective spirit v. objective spirit] have merely a 
provisional character, for in truth these elements exist only in and through each other. However, 
in order to comprehend their vital interpenetration, it is a necessary preliminary to distinguish 
them' (Hegels Lehre vom Menschen, 22). 
17. Subjective spirit grounds objective spirit by providing the concept of right wherein 
spirit becomes objective. See below, pp. 32-5. 
6 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
2. HEGEL BETWEEN THE ANCIENTS AND THE MODERNS 
There is no consensus concerning the interpretation, much less significance, 
of Hegel's Philosophy of Spirit. Recently two books have appeared which 
offer divergent interpretations and estimates of it. 18 In part the divergence 
is over the significance of Aristotle and Kant for Hegel's Philosophy of 
Spirit. Alfredo Ferrarin maintains that Hegel's Philosophy of Spirit is not 
only influenced by Aristotle, but that Hegel appropriates the structure of 
his Psychology and Anthropology from Aristotle's De Anima. 19 Consider 
what Hegel has to say about Aristotle: 
The books of Aristotle concerning the soul with his treatises on its particular aspects 
and states are still the most outstanding or rather the only work of speculative 
interest on this subject. The essential purpose of a philosophy of spirit can only 
be to introduce again the concept into the knowledge of spirit, in order to open up 
and retrieve the meaning of those Aristotelian books. 20 
It is rare to find in Hegel such unqualified praise for any philosopher. This 
seems to forge a connection between Aristotle and Hegel's philosophy of 
spirit. The philosophy of spirit is intended to be at least in part a retrieval 
of Aristotle's De Anima. 
Such a retrieval is necessary because of what Hegel calls the 'deplorable 
condition' of psychology, which assumes or posits different faculties or 
powers of the mind which are taken as external to each other and func-
tioning autonomously in isolation. 21 So analyzed and understood, the only 
connection between these faculties, powers, and forces is an utterly external, 
coincidental 'also'.22 This abstractive approach, shared by rationalist and 
empirical psychologies, splinters and fragments spirit. Such fragmentation 
loses sight of spirit itself as a coherent living totality. Hegel complains that 
'if the activities of spirit are treated as mere manifestations, forces, perhaps 
in terms stating their utility ... for some other interest ... there is no indi-
cation of the true final end of the whole business.'23 From this perspective 
there is for Hegel no difference between empiricist psychology, rationalist 
18. Hermann Driie, 'Hegels Philosophie des Geistes', in H. Schnadelbach (ed.), Hegels 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften: Ein Kommentar (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 
2000), 206-89; Alfredo Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2000). 
19. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 252. 
20. Enc. 1830, §378. 
21. Hegel includes empiricist and rationalist psychology or rational pneumatology in this 
criticism. 
22. VPG 1827, 9-10; see below, p. 63. 
23. Enc. 1830, §442A. I have modified the Wallace translation. 
7 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
pneumatology, or Kant's critical philosophy. Any 'philosophy that pretends 
to investigate the forms of knowing abstractly, that is, which begins by 
separating its sources, understanding and sensibility, lacks precisely the 
fundamental trait of Hegel's retrieval of Aristotle: the unitary consideration 
of the various forms of living, sensing, knowing and willing as the stages in 
and through which the teleological process of living subjectivity articulates 
itself.'24 
The organizing principle of the philosophy of spirit is spirit itself. 
More precisely, spirit must be investigated from the perspective of its 
self-knowledge, for its self-knowledge-having itself for its own object-
constitutes its liberation from nature, namely its freedom. Spirit cannot be 
investigated externally or in investigations of separate faculties; all attempts 
to do so have had the unsatisfactory result, 'both for the spirit as such and 
for metaphysics and philosophy generally [that] all attempts to recognize 
the necessity of what is in and for itself have been abandoned, along 
with the effort to realize the concept and the truth.'25 The splintering and 
fragmentation of spirit into discrete faculties and powers contradicts spirit's 
unity; for the so-called faculties and powers are not actual in abstraction and 
isolation, but only as they constitute a self-organizing totality. Spirit must 
be understood as self-organizing and self-knowing. According to Hegel the 
'true and final end of this whole business can only be the concept (of spirit) 
itself, and the activity of the concept can only have itself for its end, to 
suspend the form of immediacy or subjectivity and to reach and get hold of 
itself and to liberate itself to itself.'26 
Consequently Hegel retrieves Aristotle because the latter helps in over-
coming the abstract analytical separation of the various powers of spirit. 
Aristotle points to the importance of conceiving spirit as a self-conceiving 
unity, as a corrective to the abstractive understanding: 'The difficulty for the 
understanding consists in freeing itself from the separation it has arbitrarily 
imposed between the faculties of the soul, between feeling and thinking 
spirit, and in coming to see that in human beings there is only one reason 
in feeling, thinking and willing.'27 According to Alfredo Ferrarin, Aristotle 
is important for Hegel 'because he understands the soul as an indivisible 
unity that lives, feels, remembers, thinks, wills, and in which the superior 
is implicitly present in the inferior, the Nous in the lowest functions. Hegel 
understands this as the negativity of subjectivity which idealizes its inferior 
24. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 242. 
25. Enc. 1817, §367; cf. Enc. 1830, §444. 
26. Enc. 1830, §442A. I have modified the Wallace translation. 
27. Enc. 1830, §471A. 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
moments in its progression, so that the Philosophy of Spirit appropriates 
the structure of the De Anima, which progresses from the soul's immediate 
unity with nature to sensation, from the inwardization of experience to 
thinking and practical will.'2s 
In contrast to Ferrarin, Hermann Driie acknowledges that Hegel praises 
and is apparently indebted to Aristotle, but he denies that Hegel's philos-
ophy of spirit actually follows De Anima. Driie observes: 'Hegel praises 
Aristotle as the most important author of all time for psychology, especially 
the latter's De Anima. However, the powers and functions mentioned in 
Hegel's psychology are scarcely to be found at all in Aristotle. They belong 
rather to the funds of late scholastic and enlightenment psychology.'29 For 
Driie, Hegel is more indebted to modern figures like Wolf£ and Kant who are 
not explicitly mentioned. Driie acknowledges that Hegel praises Aristotle 
because the latter does not conceive the soul analogously to a thing, but 
rather understands it as the energeia or entelechy of the body. But Driie 
maintains that the actual material of Hegel's psychology has 'very little in 
common with Aristotle. It stems chiefly out of the psychology of Christian 
Wolf£, specifically out of his empirical rather than rational psychology 
which yielded little content. Wolf£ treated, among other matters, sensation, 
imagination, memory, understanding, anticipation, affect, will and freedom 
of choice. These unities were literally taken over by Hegel and grasped 
together with a finalizing grip as expressions of theoretical and practical 
spirit.'30 
It is possible that Driie and Ferrarin are both correct. Driie is correct that 
the proximate basis of Hegel's reception of Aristotle lies in Kant, Wolf£, and 
Leibniz. Certainly Leibniz's concept of the monad as an entelechy stands 
in the broad Neo-Aristotelian tradition. However, instead of following such 
figures as Kant and Wolf£, it is rather the case that Hegel frequently criticizes 
them. Specifically Hegel criticizes Wolff's psychology for abstracting and 
hypostatizing the faculties, treating them as if they, and not spirit, were 
subjects. 31 In contrast, Hegel demands that all the faculties be treated as 
activities and functions of spirit. It is against this background that Hegel's 
well-known criticism of Kant's critical philosophy for separating reason 
from sensibility can be appreciated. 
28. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 252. 
29. Driie, 'Hegel's philosophie des Geistes', 215. 
30. Ibid., 282. 
31. See Franz Hespe, 'System und Funktion der Philosophie des subjektiven Geistes', in 
Hespe and Tuschling (eds.), Psychologie und Anthropologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, 
517-21. 
9 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
On the other hand, Hegel does not simply repeat Aristotle either. Hegel 
identifies 'Know yourself' as the basic imperative of spirit, and regards it 
as a condition of spirit's achieving its vocation. It is self-knowledge which 
unifies the various faculties, powers, and/or functions of spirit. On this issue 
Hegel acknowledges and praises Kant: 'one of Kant's great contributions to 
philosophy consists in his distinction between relative or external, and inter-
nal purposiveness. In the latter he has opened up the concept of life .. .'32 
Unfortunately Kant compromised his own contribution when he interpreted 
teleology as a merely subjective maxim, and thus failed to examine 'the sole 
question to which philosophic interest demands an answer,' to wit, whether 
the principle is true. 33 
Taking our cue from Hegel's praise of Kant, the gulf between Hegel and 
Aristotle may be appreciated by considering that Aristotle takes the soul 
to be a part of nature; thus the De Anima is part of natural philosophy. 34 
Since the soul emerges in nature, it is treated as part of nature. Aristotle 
conceives the self-actualization of the human soul in terms of the scheme 
of potentiality (dynamis) and actuality (energeia). So conceived, this natural 
model implies that there is an essential human nature which prescribes an 
end to be realized (as an oak tree is the end prescribed by nature to an 
acorn). If so, then for Aristotle reason is not self-determining, but is rather 
more nearly instrumental, namely, it realizes a pre-determined end given by 
nature. To be sure, this model does not capture the whole of Aristotle's view 
of the soul or of freedom. In Nicomachean Ethics, for example, Aristotle 
holds that virtues arise in us neither by nature nor contrary to nature, 35 
and this implies some conception of freedom. Nevertheless, even Ferrarin 
concedes that there is no equivalent to the modern conception of will or 
freedom in Aristotle. 36 
In contrast to Aristotle's apparently naturalistic doctrine of the soul, 
Hegel maintains that in the modern view of the human subject, the will, 
freedom, becomes its own object and its own end. It is for-itself; the 
subject is self-grounding and self-determining in a far more radical and 
fundamental sense than Aristotle and the ancients recognize. In Hegel's 
32. Hegel, Science of Logic trans. A. V. Miller (New York: Humanities Press, 1969), 737. 
I have modified the translation. 
33. Ibid., 739. 
34. Aristotle, De Anima I, 403a25 ff. The only exception in Aristotle's psychology is the 
active Nous, which is capable of existing and functioning apart from the other natural psychic 
powers, including passive Nous (1, 413b25 ff.). Active Nous is not part of nature; it is separable, 
and thus studied not by physics but by first philosophy or metaphysics. 
35. Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics, 1103a23-5. 
36. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 330 ff. 
10 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
view, Aristotle and the ancient Greeks conceived the human being 'as free 
within nature ... as remaining confined within nature ... advancing to pure 
thought only in philosophy but not in religion ... being bogged down in 
what corresponds in thought to immediacy.'37 In contrast, modernity arises 
when the human being suspends immediacy and raises itself to a conscious-
ness of absolute or infinite spirit, a raising up which begins in religion. 
This confrontation of human spirit with infinite spirit has two important 
consequences for understanding the modern subject: (1) The human spirit is, 
in comparison to infinite spirit, reduced to finitude, i.e., to limited, natural 
spirit. It becomes mortal finitude. (2) 'In another respect however it is 
through this very relation which comes into being with this comparison, that 
the human spirit has won a wholly free foundation within itself, and thus 
has given itself another relation to nature, namely, that of being independent 
of it.' 38 The human being, although finite and mortal, is for itself, to wit, 
self-grounding and self-determining, its own object and end. On the one 
hand, the human being is not infinite or divine, but finite, part of nature; 
on the other hand, the human being is the image of God (imago dei). In its 
capacity of self-determination spirit is independent of nature. 
For Hegel, spirit's capacity to be self-grounding and to be its own end 
have a logical priority over nature. While spirit does emerge out of nature 
as Aristotle contended, this emergence 
must not be so conceived as though nature were the absolute immediate, the first, 
the original positing, and spirit only something posited by nature. Rather nature is 
posited by spirit, and spirit is the absolute first. Spirit existing in and for itself is 
not the mere result of nature, but in truth, spirit is its own result. It brings itself 
forth from presuppositions that it constructs for itself, from the logical idea and 
from external nature: spirit is the truth of both ... The appearance that spirit is 
mediated through an other [nature] is thus suspended by spirit itself, because spirit 
has, so to speak, the sovereign ingratitude to suspend that through which it appears 
to be mediated, to mediate its mediator, to reduce its mediator to something that 
exists and endures only through spirit. In this way spirit makes itself completely 
independent. This implies that the transition from nature to spirit is not a transition 
to something utterly other, but only a process wherein spirit comes to itself out of its 
self-externality in nature. Just as little is the specific distinction between nature and 
spirit suspended, because spirit does not proceed out of nature in a natural way. 39 
The priority of nature over spirit is suspended by spirit itself in its self-
development. While Hegel expresses this suspension too negatively when he 
37. Hegel, Ein Fragment zur Philosophie des Geistes (1822-5), in M. J. Petry (ed.), 
Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, 93. 
38. Ibid. 
39. Enc. 1830, §381 Zusatz. Italics mine. 
11 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
says that nature 'has disappeared' in spirit, 40 a closer reading reveals that it 
is only nature's immediacy and absolute priority that are suspended. Nature 
does not simply disappear, but continues on a higher level in spirit. 41 
Nature continues to be the indispensable other of spirit. This is why 
Hegel considers Aristotle to be so important. Spirit begins in 'slumbering' 
subjection to nature; it must negate the immediacy of nature, and come 
to itself in and through a suspension of the externality and priority of 
nature. Spirit 'is absolute negativity, because in nature the concept has its 
complete but external objectivity, has suspended this its externalization, 
and in this suspension has become identical with itself. Spirit is this identity 
only as it returns to itself out of nature.'42 Hegel's retrieval of Aristotle is 
not a simple repetition. Although spirit emerges from nature, it does not 
emerge in a natural way, or by natural causality. Spirit is self-grounding 
and self-liberating. The point that needs to be kept in mind is that, given 
the sublation (Aufhebung) of nature in self-grounding spirit, the meaning of 
the terms Hegel appropriates from Aristotle such as energeia (Wirklichkeit, 
Tiitigkeit, Aktuositiit), dynamis (Moglichkeit, an sich), active and passive 
Nous, as well as the transition from possible to actual, self-actualization, 
and teleology itself, all undergo a corresponding transformation when they 
are removed from the context of Aristotle's philosophy of nature, and 
become employed in the philosophy of spirit. As self-grounding and free, 
spirit suspends its natural origins, opposes itself to nature and through such 
opposition comes to be for itself. Spirit may be conceived teleologically; 
however its telos is not predetermined by nature but rather is to be for 
itself, i.e., free. 
3. DIVISIONS AND TOPICS IN PHILOSOPHY OF 
SUBJECTIVE SPIRIT 
Hegel's introduction to the 1827 lectures follows none of the published 
handbook outlines. Spirit's free self-development is the central organizing 
40. Enc. 1830, §381. 
41. This becomes clear in Hegel's account of habit (Gewohnheit). See also Hespe: 'the 
overcoming of natural determinacies and the liberation from natural sentience, inclinations 
and feelings, does not mean ... that nature and the natural sentience, inclinations and feelings 
disappear, but rather that the soul constitutes them as aspects of its own totality and subor-
dinates them to this totality' ('System and function der philosophie des subjektiven Geistes', 
503). 
42. Enc. 1830, §381. 
12 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
principle of the lectures. Hegel's answer to the question 'What is Spirit?' 
is that 'spirit is this movement, this process, this activity of going out of 
nature and of liberating itself from nature .... The nature of spirit is to 
be this absolute liveliness, to be this process itself, namely, of proceeding 
out of its natural origins and natural immediacy, to abandon and suspend 
these conditions and thus to come to itself, to free itself. Spirit is only as 
it comes to itself, it exists only as it produces itself. Its actuality is only 
that it has made itself to be what it is.'43 Hegel elaborates this concept of 
spirit's freedom as its vocation or end, and makes spirit's self-development 
the theme and organizing principle of his 1827lectures: 
The vocation of spirit is to make itself be what it is in itself .... The absolute 
predisposition or substance of spirit is its freedom, and the vocation of its acting, 
the act of spirit, is to liberate itself. That spirit is free in itself, that its efficacy, 
its activity, is to liberate itself, and the history of its liberation-this is what our 
discipline is all about: It is our task to watch spirit achieving by itself its vocation, 
namely, freedom. Thereby both the content and the point of view are given from 
which we want to consider this discipline. We examine the series of stages through 
which spirit liberates itself, and the goal is that spirit becomes free, as free spirit. 44 
The narrative tells the story of spirit's triumph over externality. The tri-
umph over externality begins with the simplest organic life, proceeds to the 
opposition of spirit in the struggle for recognition, and culminates in the 
emergence of free spirit, to wit, spirit for itself (fursichsein). 
In the living organism, the material parts cease to be isolated bits of 
matter external to each other and instead become members of the self-
organizing organic union and process. The organic union itself is not 
another part; it is immaterial, ideal, and it communicates itself to its 
members by organizing them and overcoming their mutual externality. The 
organism as such is a triumph over externality because it is a self-organizing, 
self-producing, living totality that pervades and is present in all its members. 
But it is not yet for itself. It is not yet the human soul, but the soul of 
nature (Naturgeist). Hegel speaks of soul as Naturgeist, spirit immersed in 
nature, as slumbering spirit. Spirit's immersion in nature is treated in the 
Anthropology. However, the decisive point is that the 'nature' of spirit is 
not to be mere nature, but rather to break with and oppose itself to nature. 
The Phenomenology corresponds to the first stage of liberation; it treats the 
emergence of the I in opposition to nature in the struggle for recognition 
and the development of a universal consciousness and social reason. Third, 
43. Kehler MSS. Petry (ed.), Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, I. 6. 
44. VPG 1827, 7; see below, pp. 60-1. 
13 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
the topic of the Psychology is spirit as having liberated itself, having come to 
be for itself and at home in its world. Accordingly, the basic divisions of the 
Philosophy of Spirit are as follows: ( 1) Spirit in its immediacy, as immersed 
in and dependent on nature: Anthropology. (2) Spirit emergent from and 
in opposition to nature: Phenomenology. The human being emerges from 
nature through the struggle for recognition and achieves an intersubjectively 
mediated universal consciousness or spirit. Spirit comes to be for itself only 
in and through the recognition of an other. Spirit is Hegel's corrective to the 
modern (Cartesian) conception of subjectivity. (3) Spirit for itself, the drive 
to suspend its apparent subjectivity: Psychology. Theoretical and Practical 
Spirit.45 
4. ANTHROPOLOGY: SLUMBERING SPIRIT 
The material in the anthropology section was originally discussed under 
the general rubric of soul. The starting point is soul in general or soul 
of nature, but Hegel quickly narrows his focus to the human soul. The 
material treated here is much wider in scope than might be expected from 
the title 'anthropology'. Hegel ranges over cosmology, the solar system, to 
the earthly body, geography, geographic distinctions, to continents, to racial 
differences and physiognomy. 46 
The Naturgeist is spirit not yet for itself, but rather immersed in nature, 
i.e., in subjection to and determination by natural influences. Hegel identi-
fies the Naturgeist with the passive Nous of Aristotle. 47 Slumbering spirit is 
the possibility of actual or free spirit. The range of topics he discusses under 
the rubric of spirit in nature includes embodiment, physiology, sentience, the 
influence of natural phenomena such as climate, weather, stars on human 
life, as well as sleeping and waking. Also included are race and gender, as 
well as illness, including dementia. As spirit gradually liberates itself from 
nature, natural conditions are supposed to have less influence and become 
more marginal. Spirit's process of liberation aims at transforming natural 
givens into its own posits, thereby not eliminating nature but transforming 
and pervading it. 
45. Diising claims that the basic logical determinations of being (immediate abstract being), 
essence (relation, opposition) and concept (totality) underlie these divisions. See Klaus Diising, 
'Endliche und Absolute Subjektivitat', in L. Eley (ed.), Hegels Theorie des subjektiven Geistes 
(Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1990), 48-9. 
46. Hegel's perspective on geography and race is Eurocentric. 
47. VPG 1827, 27; see below, p. 77. 
14 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
A. Animal Magnetism and Clairvoyance 
Hegel criticizes the empiricist and rationalist psychologies of his day. Their 
abstract causal-mechanical analyses and their categories are inadequate to 
deal with the vitality and freedom of spirit. Equally important is Hegel's 
recognition of the significance of the empirical phenomenon of hypnotism 
(animal magnetism). This phenomenon cannot be explained within the 
dualistic and causal-mechanical schemes of psychology. Animal magnetism 
presents a direct, non-causally mediated influence between subjects. Thus it 
eludes the basic conceptual framework of empiricist psychology, pneumatol-
ogy, etc. Hegel does not mean that animal magnetism cannot be explained 
at all; he is raising the question as to what counts as a suitable explanation 
while denying that causal-mechanical explanations are sufficient. Hegel 
does not believe that animal magnetism and hypnotism provide access 
to a superior epistemological position, much less reveal 'higher truths.' 
Rather such phenomena are evidence that spirit can fall below its level 
and regress into quasi-natural immediacy and dependence. 48 The phenom-
enon of hypnotism highlights the inadequacy of rationalist psychology and 
demonstrates the necessity of an alternative position such as his own. Hegel 
understands his own philosophical doctrine to be both connected with and 
capable of resolving these anomalous phenomena. 49 
Although spirit is supposed to undergo a progressive development from 
lower to higher levels and thus liberate itself from nature, a dysteleological 
48. This observation opens up the possibility for understanding madness as a regression. 
49. See deVries, Hegel's Theory of Mental Activity, 28. The following text from a fragment 
of the Philosophy of Spirit, Hegel wrote in 1822-5 clarifies and supports this contention: 'But 
in the experience of animal magnetism it is in the region of external phenomena itself that 
the rational connection of causes and effects together with its conditions of spatio-temporal 
determinations, loses its sense and validity. And within the sensible existence itself and its 
conditions, the higher nature of spirit makes itself valid and becomes apparent. Later it will 
he shown that the phenomena of animal magnetism do not transcend the concept of spirit, do 
not transcend or elude its thinking and its reason, and that on the contrary, these phenomena 
belong to a state and stage of development in which spirit is sick, and is reduced to and sunk 
below the power of its true worth to a lower existence. Thus it is folly and a false hope to see in 
the phenomena of this animal magnetism an elevation of spirit and an opening of depths more 
profound than its thinking concept. Rather it is these phenomena in the field of experience itself 
which compel us to call upon the concept of spirit and which make it no longer permissible to 
remain with the conceptless comprehension of spirit according to ordinary psychology and the 
so-called natural process of things. The ideality of the sensible-rational distinction, in general 
the ideality of finite determinations manifest in these phenomena, is what gives them a kinship 
with philosophy. Ideality also has reconciling importance for history, in which, under the name 
of miracles, so many phenomena have been mishandled and rejected by the understanding, 
which assumes as its measure of truth the external connection of causes and effects, and the 
conditional character of sensible existence (Fragment on Philosophy of Spirit 1822-5, in Petry 
(ed.), Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, I, 99, my translation). 
15 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
regression to a lower level or stage of development is always possible. In 
short, spirit can become ill. Such regressions are possible because the lower 
levels/stages are present in the higher, but present as suspended (aufge-
hoben). In regressions such as dementia, this suspension breaks down, and 
the organism becomes divided against itself. 
Such regression also occurs, Hegel believes, in animal magnetism and 
clairvoyance. These are discussed under the subdivision of 'dreaming soul'. 
Dreaming soul involves the concept of self-feeling in which the soul is 
a sentient totality but not yet in control of itself. It is a pre-conscious 
condition and some interpreters find in it a Hegelian version of the uncon-
scious mind. 50 Self-feeling is the beginning, but only the beginning, of the 
differentiation of spirit from nature. Spirit is not yet for itself, much less 
in control of itself; it is unstable and thus susceptible to control by other. 
This condition is present in animal magnetism and hypnotic suggestion. In 
hypnotism a person comes under the influence of and depends on another. 
This is unusual because it is a direct, unmediated psychic dependence. The 
puzzle is how this is possible. Causal explanations are inadequate. 
In clairvoyance, feeling replaces the sense of sight: it is not the eye that 
sees, but the self-feeling (Selbstge(Uhl). But what is seen? Is clairvoyance 
or the hypnotic trance a revelation of some superior wisdom? Hegel denies 
that it is: the clairvoyant sees no further than himself or than the hypnotizer. 
Thus these phenomena do not constitute a 'higher condition' of insight, but 
rather a reduction of the human being to natural sentience. Hegel regards 
this 'sight' not as a superior insight, but as passivity, as weakness of spirit. 
B. Dementia 
Dementia or madness is also a disrupted or arrested self-feeling in which 
a human being regresses to a lower condition or state. Dementia is not 
just a mental problem, it is both spiritual and physical. Hegel considers 
dementia as an illness, namely a breakdown of organic function and process. 
The self-feeling does not develop normally into a shared, common life-
world and rationality; rather it becomes a flight from the world. The self-
feeling is projected as if it were objective, and displaces objective reality 
apprehension. Hence dementia is a deficit in world relation. 51 
50. See Berthold-Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness. 
51. Hegel's account of dementia resembles aspects of his analysis of the beautiful soul in the 
Phenomenology of Spirit, §658 (trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977)). 
Hegel's discussion of the beautiful soul portrays it as in flight from the world into subjectivity, 
while projecting an ideal fantasy world that it fancies as higher than the real world of action. 
16 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
Hegel identifies three forms/stages of dementia: (1) imbecility, (2) folly, 
and (3) frenzy. Hegel observes that frenzy can be influenced by a sense 
of unjust treatment, of victimization, and he points out that it can turn 
into complete distrust of others and malice. Hegel's theory of dementia pre-
supposes a fundamental ontology of human being that articulates universal 
structures, features, and possibilities that are shared by both the sane and 
the demented. Hegel agrees with Pinel that the demented are not subhuman 
beasts, but rather share a common humanity and rationality. Dementia thus 
lies on a continuum of universal human possibilities. It plays upon and 
distorts these fundamental capacities and possibilities. 
In Hegel's view, this recognition has important implications for the treat-
ment of dementia. Outside of their specific subjective folly, the demented 
are rational human beings who have a sense of right and wrong, justice 
and injustice, and the treatment of their dementia must address this sense. 52 
So the treatment of dementia should begin not by attacking the subjective 
folly, but by seeking to engage the demented on the presupposition of their 
fundamental humanity. The goal of therapy is to re-engage the patient 
with the world and with others. One way to do this is to engage the 
patient in work. In this respect Hegel follows Pinel. However the point 
of such work is not external to the work itself, such as obtaining cheap 
slave labor, or training people to become docile laborers or an efficient, 
productive work force as Foucault has suggested. Rather Hegel believes that 
the therapeutic significance of work must reside in work itself, because work 
is an engagement with the world: 'The first point is that one seeks to occupy 
the demented outside of their dementia; through some other interest one 
seeks to engage them in work. To work means to become interested in a 
cause, to become interested in a cause outside of subjectivity.'53 If dementia 
involves a flight from the world into subjective self-feeling, working, i.e., 
interest and engagement in a cause, can break the solipsism of dementia by 
engaging a person with the world and with others. 
Since dementia is in part a deficit in world-relation and projection 
of a fixed idea based in self-feeling, any treatment of dementia presup-
poses a relation of communication and trust between the demented and 
The beautiful soul does not act, but substitutes its subjective fancies and ideals for action. But 
precisely because it is a flight from actuality and action, the freedom and autonomy of the 
beautiful soul are merely negative, without determinacy and without actuality. As Hegel notes, 
such abstract freedom may end in dementia. This observation may also refer to his friend the 
poet Holderlin. See Berthold-Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness. 
52. VPG 1827, 120; see below, p. 149. 
53. Ibid., 120; see below, p. 150. 
17 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
their overseers and therapists. Trusting another human being is an act of 
self-transcendence that presupposes mutual recognition. Hegel maintains 
that trust is the beginning and origin of objectivity. 54 However, Hegel also 
insists that the trust of the demented is something that must actually be 
earned by the therapist. Without this proviso, the relation of the therapist 
to the demented might be simply another form of master and slave. 
Hegel observes that the demented can be easily deceived. This fact 
complicates treatment. On the one hand, it makes it more convenient and 
easy to dominate and control them. But such coercion and domination 
ultimately undermines therapy and may itself contribute to dementia insofar 
as dementia may result from harsh and unfair treatment. Hegel concedes 
that some deception may be necessary for reasons of health and safety. 
However, Hegel insists that even if it is justified, deception cannot be 
allowed to stand55 for then the demented would never become aware of 
their folly. Such deception and resulting false consciousness would not only 
undermine the treatment, but also may produce dementia. So any deception 
must ultimately be revealed and overcome: no genuine cure of dementia can 
rest upon or result from deception or lies. 
Finally, Hegel's account of habit shows an Aristotelian heritage formu-
lated in terms of a modern understanding of subjective freedom. On the 
one hand, Hegel portrays habit as a break with nature; the formation of 
habit is a liberation from natural immediacy and inclinations because the 
self trains and disciplines itself. Habit is an acquired adroitness. But on 
the other hand, habit is an acquired capacity or structure of behavior. In 
reference to the will, it is a second nature, a kind of pre-reflective necessity. 
Habit is a structure of continuous willing that no longer needs to be willed. 
It is characterized by hardness, and is difficult to change or modify. I am this 
habit; habit is a second nature that I have created and cultivated. 56 Thus, in 
habit, freedom has started to become a second nature. 
5. PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
The Phenomenology of the Encyclopedia differs from the 1807 Phenom-
enology of Spirit. The latter was intended to be an introduction to Hegel's 
system, whereas the former is part of the system. The Phenomenology 
of the system is considerably abbreviated. It is no longer an archeology 
of knowledge from sense certainty to understanding, reason and spirit to 
54. Ibid., 120; see below, p. 150. 
56. Ibid., 125; see below, p. 154. 
55. Ibid., 120-1; see below, p. 151. 
18 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
absolute knowing, but rather is confined to an exploration of one stage of 
spirit's development; specifically it focuses on consciousness as the sphere 
of difference and opposition. 57 It charts the emergence of the I, and the 
opposition between the I and its objects. The Phenomenology is supposed 
to show the development from the I in its immediacy, wherein it takes itself 
to be a bare, abstract, self-seeking particular, through the struggle for recog-
nition and master/slave, to the I which through reciprocal recognition has 
become a universal consciousness, a 'We'. The 'We' in turn grounds reason 
and rationality. Consciousness is transformed from the abstract I = I, into 
self-consciousness, and self-consciousness is transformed through reciprocal 
recognition into an intersubjectively constituted universal consciousness. 
This development is propelled by difference or opposition. The gradual 
overcoming of opposition means that the subject discovers itself in its other. 
While Aristotle understood the human soul to be part of and fundamen-
tally continuous with nature (with the exception of the active Nous or intel-
lect), the Phenomenology focuses on spirit's negativity: as consciousness, 
spirit is capable of opposing itself to nature, including its own life. Spirit's 
vocation is to liberate itself from nature. It does not serve a pre-given natural 
end; rather, it seeks freedom, and its task is to liberate itself, to become 
its own object. Spirit does not proceed from nature in a natural way, but 
rather must suspend its natural immediacy. This occurs in a struggle for 
recognition. 
The struggle for recognition depicts the emergence of spirit from nature 
in two stages. The first is the life and death struggle; this struggle culmi-
nates in master/slave. Master/slave resolves the contradiction of the original 
encounter, but propounds a new contradiction, namely a relation based on 
coercion and domination. The overcoming of this second contradiction is 
the second stage; it occurs in mutual recognition. Spirit comes to be for 
itself in an intersubjectively mediated process. In the process of mutual 
recognition the I and its other mutually liberate themselves from their 
immediacy to a free, self-actualized togetherness. Now each 'I' is also a 
'We'. Freedom and self-actualization are thus intersubjectively mediated. 
It is through such mediation that spirit has itself, to wit, its freedom, as 
its own end. This freedom is a universal freedom, a mediated autonomy 
which is both communal-involving a plurality of others-and rational-
involving objectivity and equality in accordance with the concept of law. 
57. The 1817 Philosophy of Spirit distinguishes three stages in spirit's development: 
Soul, Consciousness, Spirit. These were later replaced in the second 1827 edition with 
the titles Anthropology, Phenomenology and Psychology respectively. The second stage-
Consciousness--constitutes a sphere of opposition, which is overcome in spirit. 
19 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Mutual recognition grounds a socially constituted reason. Although this 
'phenomenology of the system' is shorter than the 1807 Phenomenology, it 
remains important because here Hegel presents a positive account of mutual 
recognition as an affirmative self-knowledge in other. 58 
Commentators have been perplexed by this dense section and disagree 
over its significance. For example, Adriaan Peperzak maintains that 'The 
entire sense of the "struggle for recognition" in the Encyclopedia phenom-
enology does not at all consist in a thematization of intersubjectivity (there is 
no talk of speaking, thinking, willing, acting, right and exchange), but only 
in a process through which the immediate or abstract self-consciousness 
must become an other for itself in order to be able to identify with 
itself.'59 The other of consciousness is consciousness itself as other, i.e., 
self-consciousness. This reading reduces Hegel's account of recognition to 
a monosubjectival theory and places Hegel in the Cartesian-Kantian phi-
losophy of the subject. 60 
Hermann Driie has a different interpretation. Contrary to Peperzak, 
he observes that for Hegel self-consciousness exists for itself only in and 
through another self-consciousness, and so requires intersubjective recog-
nition. Thus according to Driie, Hegel intends to show that universal 
consciousness and reason are intersubjectively mediated and constituted. 
However, Driie believes that Hegel's account of self-consciousness is not 
intended as a description of the actual development of consciousness, but 
is rather a logical-conceptual construction, 'a historicising fiction of social 
constitution comparable to Freud's project in Totem and Taboo. Hegel's 
theory of self-consciousness is therefore one part a conceptual construction 
and one part an historical fiction.' 61 The fiction is that the state of nature 
is to be understood as a struggle for recognition, a helium omnium contra 
omnes. Against such a Hobbesian background, Driie finds it implausible 
58. See Franz Hespe, 'System und Funktion der Philosophie der subjektiven Geistes', in 
Hespe and Tuschling (eds.), Psychologie und Anthropologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, 
509-10. As Hespe notes, Hegel identifies the philosophies of Kant and Fichte as dwelling in 
but failing to resolve the oppositions of consciousness which are constitutive of the phenom-
enology. Hegel's account in the phenomenology culminates in the constitution of a universal 
consciousness through reciprocal recognition that not only constitutes reason, but also reveals 
the Kantian and Fichtean philosophies of finitude to be versions of the false or spurious infinity. 
59. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 40. 
60. This reading reduces affirmative self-knowledge in other constitutive of spirit to a self-
identification in otherness. It is a one-sided reading that misses what is distinctive in Hegel's 
concept of spirit: its genesis in mutual recognition, and the intersubjective structure of ethical 
life. 
61. Driie, 'Hegels Philosophie des Geistes', in Schnadelbach (ed.), Hegels Enzyklopiidie der 
philosophischen Wissenschaften, 260-61. 
20 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
that master and slave culminates in mutual recognition and liberation. He 
dismisses this as purely conceptual construction, 'a classicist idyll'. 62 
Finally, Franz Hespe, the co-editor of the 1827 lectures, has yet another 
view. He maintains that for Hegel self-consciousness is possible only in 
relation to an other, and adequately realized only in relation to another 
self-consciousness. 'Therefore self-consciousness for Hegel is possible only 
in relation to another self-consciousness and thus only intersubjectively 
possible. This reference to intersubjective conditions of possibility of self-
consciousness is not to be understood simply as an expression of empirical 
fact, [namely the fact of intersubjectivity,] but rather articulates what self-
consciousness is according to its very concept.'63 Hespe cites the 1827 
lectures in support of his interpretation: 'the material in which the I and 
freedom can be realized is only another self-consciousness. The latter is the 
reality, the objectivity, and the externality of the first.' 64 The I comes to be 
for itself only through the mediation (recognition) of another. 
The Philosophy of Spirit may be read, as Peperzak does, as a philosophy 
of the subject. On the other hand, Hegel's remarks, examples, and illustra-
tions are clearly intersubjective. In the 1827 lectures Hegel asserts: ' ... in 
order for me to have self-consciousness, it is necessary to know myself 
in an other.'65 Only another subject can objectify the self and make it 
available to itself as an object; thus the other is a condition of being for self 
({Ursichsein). This is the point that Hespe makes when he asserts that for 
Hegel self-consciousness is already intersubjective in its concept. Peperzak's 
interpretation can be maintained only by ignoring Hespe's point, and by 
excluding much of what Hegel says in his remarks that amplify that point. 
Consider the following text: 
There are two real, independent beings confronting each other .... They are both 
personally, absolutely independent, and nevertheless they are for each other. Thus I 
know that the other is an I, but in its appearance it confronts me like a thing, like 
something completely external to me. This is the highest contradiction-the most 
perfect indifference towards each other, and [yet] perfect unity and identity. The 
62. Ibid., 261. 
63. Hespe, 'System und Funktion des Philosophie des Subjektiven Geistes', in Hespe and 
Tuschling (eds.), Psychologie und Anthropologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, 511. Italics 
mine. lring Fetscher makes a similar point: the relevant objectification of consciousness in self-
knowledge is not one that one can give oneself, but one that requires an other consciousness. 
The 'object' is another subject, for only another subject can objectify me and thus make me 
available to myself as a totality. See Fetscher, Hegels Lehre vom Menschen, 125. 
64. Ibid., German manuscript 155, VPG 1827, 170; see below, p. 190. 
65. VPG 1827, 144; see below, pp. 170, 193. 
21 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
sublation of the contradiction-for it cannot remain a contradiction-is the process 
of recognition. 66 
Only an extremely narrow reading of the Philosophy of Spirit would sup-
press texts like this one. Hegel does not accept, but rather seeks to correct 
and transform the modern philosophy of the subject. Recognition is his anti-
Cartesian, anti-Kantian corrective. 
A. Reciprocal Recognition, Spirit, and the Concept of Right 
It is well known that Hegel's account of the process of recognition develops 
it initially in terms of a life and death struggle (Hegel's account of the state 
of nature). Next comes master/slave as an unequal recognition that puts an 
end to the violence of the state of nature while institutionalizing coercion, 
domination, and inequality. The master is recognized by the slave, but does 
not recognize the slave; the slave recognizes the master, but is not recognized 
by the master. Thus master and slave are constituted by an asymmetrical, 
unequal recognition. This account is presented in one of the most famous 
passages in Hegel's 1807 Phenomenology of Spirit. 
Less well appreciated is Hegel's view that the coercion and inequalities of 
master/slave must be suspended and transcended; the unequal recognition 
founded on coercion is one-sided and constitutes an incomplete intersub-
jective mediation. This incomplete mediation means that master and slave 
are unfree, deficiently actual, a relationship that is unstable because of its 
inequality and asymmetry. This deficient, incomplete mediation must be 
overcome. Reciprocal recognition overcomes the asymmetry and inequality 
and completes the process of mediation that was short-circuited in the 
one-sided recognition of master/slave. Only through reciprocal recognition 
is an affirmative self-knowledge, in other possible. Such affirmative self-
knowledge can be accomplished only jointly and mutually, and this reci-
procity constitutes the universal self-consciousness or spirit, the I that is a 
We. This point is developed in the Phenomenology of the system. 
Hegel characterizes the universal consciousness as 'the affirmative knowl-
edge of itself in another self .. .' that involves a 'real universality as mutuality 
when it knows itself recognized in a free other and knows this insofar as it 
recognizes the other and knows it as free.' 67 In his remark, Hegel adds: 
This universal reappearance of self-consciousness [affirmative self-knowledge in 
other], the concept, that knows itself in its objectivity as subjectivity identical with 
66. VPG 1827, 166-7; see below, p. 187. 
67. Enc. 1830, §436. 
22 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
itself, is the form of consciousness of the substance of every essential spirituality, of 
the family, of the fatherland, of the state, and also the form of all the virtues, love, 
friendship, bravery, honor and fame. 68 
The universal consciousness constituted through reciprocal recognition is 
the universal structure inherent in the intersubjectivities and institutions of 
ethical life (Sittlichkeit). Iring Fetscher emphasizes that this universal self-
consciousness constituted through reciprocal recognition is for Hegel the 
existential genesis of reason and rationality: 
Reciprocal recognition ... is the Urform, the fundamental phenomenon, of the rea-
son realizing itself in human experience. This universal consciousness is the funda-
mental form, the structure of both the social consciousness ( Gesellschaftsbewusst-
sein or We consciousness) and of the individual consciousness that knows itself 
to be universally valid and rational. This universal consciousness constitutes the 
foundation, the substance of any essential spirituality (institution) .... Consequently 
the universal self-consciousness is not only the human phenomenal form of the 
ontological principle, (Idea)-the idea is the true in and for itself, the absolute unity 
of concept and objectivity-but also the foundation and substance of ethical life. 69 
Fetscher underscores the point that both the 'We' and the 'I' are grounded 
in reciprocal recognition; both constitute the universal consciousness. The 
universal consciousness is not a pre-recognitive, solitary recluse but the 
accomplishment of mutual recognition. Hegel maintains that all the insti-
tutions of ethical life, as well as all the virtues have this intersubjective-
universal structure as their substantial basis; all are particular specifications 
of the universal consciousness. 
Hegel illustrates what affirmative self-.knowledge in other looks like with 
references to intersubjective phenomena such as love and friendship. 
The process of consciousness that we are considering, is the realization of the 
concept. What is posited in the concept in its simplicity-the ideality of the other 
and the unity of the two-is the abstract. The reality is that each of these moments 
obtains a concrete meaning, that each of these moments itself is the concept as a 
whole. Thus in friendship the two sides constitute this whole. Each [is] I, and I 
in such a way that the I, since it is not merely an unyielding individual, but has 
suspended itself, has negated itself and has its conscious relation to itself in the self-
consciousness of the other. 70 
68. Ibid. 
69. Fetscher, Hegels Lehre vom Menschen, 120. Italics mine. 
70. VPG 1827, 144; see below, p. 170. Ferdinand Waiter heard Hegel say: 'In friendship 
and love, I exist not simply for myself but am in an other and yet independent. Here therefore 
are two, so that both are no longer the abstract moment of the whole concept ... '. 
23 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Later Hegel elaborated the intersubjective structure of mutual recogni-
tion inherent in love, friendship, and ethical life. Hegel not only agrees 
with but affirms Aristotle's view that all the virtues are relational and 
social. 
In order for me to have self-consciousness it is necessary to know myself in an 
other. Thus insofar as I lose my self-consciousness in an other, I also know myself 
affirmatively in the other. Here the limit or restriction that previously was immanent 
in desire and self-seeking is concealed. 
Self-consciousness thus reaches beyond itself; it continues in an other self-
consciousness so that there are no longer two self-seeking individuals opposed 
to each other, but rather a single self-consciousness, and thus it is a univer-
sal self-consciousness. Insofar as it is a particular it is separate from the other. 
These abstract determinations are present in much more concrete forms. The 
substance of this self-consciousness is the universality-of a self-knowledge that 
leaves behind self-seeking [particularity] and that continues itself in union with 
the other. This condition is found in love .... All the virtues have this founda-
tion, as does love .... Since the human being appears to lose himself, he cannot 
endure in his isolation but is in need of another consciousness. Thus he loses 
himself [in another]. But precisely [in] this condition of self-externality (Ausser-
lichkeit), of being beyond the limits of his individuality, he gains his substantial 
self-consciousness. This [condition of self-externality, of being beyond oneself] is 
the condition of being recognized. In an ethical totality such as a family or a state, 
all are recognized. Thus [in mutual recognition] the struggle for recognition has 
disappeared. 71 
These formulations strongly support Axel Honneth's contention, quite cor-
rect in my opinion, that the concept of love lies at the core of Hegel's theory 
of ethical life. 72 
The achievement of the intersubjective universal self-consciousness con-
stitutes Hegel's deduction of the concept of right. It is well known that 
the Philosophy of Right does not provide the deduction or justification of 
the concept of right; rather it presupposes that deduction from elsewhere, 
namely subjective spirit. 73 But where in subjective spirit does this occur? 
Tuschling believes that the 1827lectures are important because they provide 
the explicit grounding of the concept of right that is promised but in fact 
71. VPG 1827, 174; see below, p. 194. My italics. 
72. Axe! Honneth, The Struggle for Recognition, trans. J. Anderson (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1996), 107. 
73. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §2. 
24 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
missing from the published handbook outline. 74 Consider the following 
remark from the lectures: 
That spirit is free in itself, that its efficacy, its activity, is to liberate itself, and the 
history of its liberation-this is what our discipline is all about: It is our task to watch 
spirit achieving by itself its vocation, namely, freedom .... We examine the series of 
stages through which spirit liberates itself, and the goal is that spirit becomes free, 
as free spirit. With this liberation the science of objective spirit, i.e., the spirit that is 
objective to itself, begins, and with this liberation right and law begin. 75 
In contrast, Alien Wood maintains that the concept of right is 'deduced' not 
in subjective spirit, but in objective spirit. 76 Wood's view is incorrect. While 
right is discussed in objective spirit as co-extensive with the existence of 
freedom, this discussion presupposes that spirit is already on the objective 
level. As such it presupposes rather than delivers the requisite deduction 
of right. And it overlooks the crucial point, namely, the concept of right, 
which Hegel defines broadly as any determinate existence of freedom, 77 
is co-extensive with whole domain of objective spirit. Right is not simply 
part of that domain; rather it grounds and eo-constitutes that domain. 
As the 1827 lectures make clear, right is grounded in the transition from 
subjective to objective spirit, and this transition is effected in and mediated 
by mutual recognition. Recognition provides not only the self-actualization 
and liberation of spirit from nature, this self-actualization of spirit in mutual 
recognition also constitutes the grounding of both the concept of right 
and objective spirit. Hegel links the deduction of right with the liberation 
and self-actualization of spirit as universal consciousness and reason. The 
liberation of spirit is its mediated self-actualization in freedom where it has 
itself for its object, and constitutes itself as objective spirit. 
74. Burkhard Tuschling underscores the importance of this manuscript for the deduction 
of the concept of right from the concept of spirit: here alone is the deduction of right 
presupposed by the Philosophy of Right actually delivered. According to Tuschling, 'Right 
is spirit, objective spirit because freedom is the substance of spirit, both finite and infinite 
spirit .... The consolidation of subjective spirit within itself as the self-actualization of objective 
spirit, this synthetic conception of spirit with freedom, subjectivity and right, does not occur in 
his magnum opus [Philosophy of Right], nor in the first or second editions of the Encyclopedia, 
but occurs for the first time here in this lecture .. .' (VPG 1827, pp. xxix-xxxi). 
75. VPG 1827, 7; see below, p. 61. 
76. Philosophy of Right, §2, p. 392, n. 1. He refers to §§485-7 of the 1830 Encyclopedia. 
Wood wrote this before the discovery of the 1827 Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit. 
77. Philosophy of Right, §29. 
25 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
B. Recognition and Self-Actualization 
Recognition is not only connected to the deduction of right, it also mediates 
the self-realization and self-actualization of freedom. In his analysis of 
recognition, Hegel shows that the self's relation to itself (fursichsein) is 
mediated by its relation to other, by the other's recognition. Hence without 
recognition the individual self would be deficiently self-related and defi-
ciently actual. The struggle for recognition shows that it is necessary to 
manifest one's freedom to others and thereby become actual in the world. 
A spirit that remains merely subjective may exist, but it lacks actuality; it 
achieves actuality only in becoming objective, and this means becoming 
and remaining self-related in relation to another in a process of mutual 
recognition. For Hegel, autonomy is a mediated autonomy. 
The capacity of autonomy is an abstract possibility, but for that capacity 
to become actual, recognition is necessary. Apart from action, autonomy is 
merely abstract; but action involves relations to others and to the world. 
In the world freedom is not a given, nor is it merely reflective; it must be 
concretely risked and won in struggles for recognition, and in relation to 
others. For Hegel freedom is actual not in isolation but only in relation to 
and community with others. Hegel brings together the themes of freedom, 
self-actualization, and mutual recognition in his Lectures on the History of 
Philosophy: 
As the foundation of our being we recognize only freedom. This determination 
is not transitory. All other determinations of our being are fleeting and variable. 
Only freedom remains constant as our fundamental characteristic. That I cannot 
be a slave is my innermost being, my nature, my category. Slavery contradicts my 
consciousness. This is the sense in which spirit's self-knowledge constitutes its very 
being, so that out of this self-knowledge the whole of its condition is exhausted. 
More precisely, this connection of freedom and our nature implies that the 
universality of consciousness constitutes freedom. If I know myself as universal, I 
know myself as free .... But the free will as free is this: that its content is a universal. 
In this universal I am identical with myself. However, that others are identical and 
co-equal with me also hangs together with this identity. For the others are just as 
universal as I am. I am free only insofar as I posit the freedom of others and am 
recognized by others as free. Real freedom presupposes others who are free. Freedom 
is existent and actual only among many. In this there is implied the relation of a free 
being to other, free beings, and this implies the laws of right and of ethical life. The 
freedom of the will lies only in the conditions of the universal will. 78 
78. Hegel, Einleitung in die Geschichte der Philosophie, ed. J. Hoffmeister (Hamburg: 
Meiner Verlag, 1940), 233-4. Italics mine. 
26 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
In this passage, Hegel brings together the abstract formal universality of the 
transcendental subject, or I = I, with plurality and communal universality. 
The I = I identity is pre-recognitive, abstract, formal, and solitary. Hegel 
denies this abstraction is actual, insisting that the I = I hangs together with 
plurality; it is mediated through others who are co-equal in principle. Recog-
nition underlies self-realization, right, and constitutes the intersubjective 
structure of ethical life. The I = I is actual only as spirit. 
The Philosophy of Subjective Spirit grounds and establishes, but does 
not develop the content of objective spirit. That will be the task of the 
objective spirit section of the Encyclopedia, and its further elaboration in 
the Philosophy of Right. However at the conclusion of the Phenomenology, 
spirit has advanced to a new level. It is no longer soul or Naturgeist; it 
is no longer consciousness in opposition to nature, or in opposition to an 
other. Rather, spirit is now free or 'for itself'. Spirit is the recognition of 
the identity between the 'subjective reason' of consciousness and the 'objec-
tive reason' present in the world. So understood, spirit is not a worldless 
Cartesian cogito or a 'merely subjective' freedom, but rather a totality, a 
world structure. Spirit 'for itself' becomes the topic of Hegel's philosophical 
psychology. 
6. PSYCHOLOGY: THEORETICAL SPIRIT 
The Psychology is one of the more obscure parts of the Encyclopedia, chiefly 
because of its formal character. Nevertheless it contains important material, 
to wit, Hegel's interesting treatment of language, sign, and memory in the 
constitution of objectivity, and his important synthesis of Kant and Aristotle 
in practical spirit. 
Some of the obscurity of the Psychology turns in part on the question 
of its place in the transition from subjective spirit to objective spirit. Is the 
Psychology already on the level of objective spirit? Or does it remain the 
final stage of subjective spirit? Actually it straddles both regions, and this 
straddling produces tension and confusion. The Phenomenology concluded 
with the universal consciousness constituted by reciprocal recognition, and 
with a social-universal reason confident that it would find rationality in the 
world. So it looks like the Psychology should start with a consciousness of 
totality. And it does. 79 Nevertheless, the Psychology considers spirit as still 
finite and subjective. It begins with spirit as a totality that is implicitly both 
79. Enc. 1830, §440. 
27 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
subjective and objective. But while spirit is an implicit totality, it is also 
immediate. This immediacy must be overcome. Psychology will thematize 
that totality, and will gradually remove the form of immediacy with which 
knowing begins and which hinders the cognitive process. 80 Thus spirit will 
come to know the reason and rationality which it finds in its object to be 
identical with its own rationality. 
As we have seen, Hegel is clear about what he finds objectionable in mod-
ern rationalist and empiricist psychology: (1) the tendency to reduce spirit 
to a mere collection or aggregate of different faculties; (2) these faculties 
are in turn considered in isolation from each other, and in isolation from 
the unity and activity of spirit;81 (3) spirit is thus broken up, fragmented 
and dispersed. Such fragmentation diverts it from its supreme task and 
end, namely, knowledge and above all, self-knowledge;82 (4) the reductio 
ad absurdum that psychology, construed as an empirical-anthropological 
discipline, has been declared the basis of metaphysics and philosophy;83 
with the result (5) that for metaphysics and philosophy, all attempts to grasp 
the truth, to conceive the necessity of what exists in and for itself, have been 
abandoned. 84 
In opposition to such views, Hegel asserts that spirit must be understood 
as a unity, i.e., as an organic totality, and this is why he retrieves the 
Aristotelian program. What unifies spirit is its vocation to know the world 
and itself. This self-knowledge of spirit is not only the final end of the 
cognitive process, it is also the final end of psychology in Hegel's sense: 
'This final end can only be the concept itself and can only have the activity 
of the concept for its aim, namely, to suspend the form of immediacy or 
subjectivity, to reach and grasp itself in order to liberate itself to itself. In 
this way the so-called faculties of spirit in their differentiation are to be 
considered only as stages of this liberation. This is the only rational way 
of studying spirit and its diverse activities.'85 Consequently while Hegel 
will speak of intuition, representation, memory, understanding and reason, 
he conceives these not as separate faculties but as moments or stages in 
cognitive process. Any separation between reason and sensibility, between 
feeling and reason, or between understanding and reason is ruled out. 'The 
difficulty for the understanding consists in freeing itself from the separation 
80. Ibid., §441 and Zusatz. 
81. Ibid., §§445, 442. 
82. Ibid., §§442, 445. 
83. Ibid., §444. 
84. Ibid., §444. 
85. Ibid., §442. As he explains in the 1827lectures, 'Reason is the activity of distinguishing 
itself from itself, of differentiating itself into a system of totality, into a plenitude where 
differences do not become [utterly] free but remain moments in the unity.' VPG 1827, 178-9; 
See below, p. 199. 
28 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
that it has arbitrarily introduced between the faculties of feeling and a 
thinking spirit and coming to see that in the human being there is only 
one reason in feeling, willing and thinking.' 86 
A. Spirit for Itself: From the Found to the Posited 
In the Philosophy of Spirit the higher levels have for their object the 
lower levels and stages that preceded them. Thus, in the Phenomenology, 
consciousness puts in play and places at risk the natural life that was the 
subject matter of the Anthropology. In this way consciousness demonstrates 
its transcendence of nature and natural instincts such as self-preservation. 
Similarly, the Psychology has for its object the preceding stage of the 
universal consciousness which has become spirit and reason; consciousness 
is only implicitly the identity of the I with its other, but spirit posits this 
identity explicitly for itself. Spirit knows itself (subjective reason) and its 
other (objective reason) to be the same rationality in principle. Hence the 
development of spirit will be twofold; it will proceed according to the ratio-
nal determination that the content is both something existing independently 
in itself (objective reason) which is found or given, and spirit's own, posited 
by its freedom (subjective reason). 87 Rational determinations or categories 
are unities of thought and being. They exist as 'doubled: those of being 
(das Seiende), and those which are spirit's own (das Seinige); according to 
the former spirit finds something existent in itself; according to the latter 
spirit posits that something only as spirit's own.' 88 Thus 'free spirit makes 
objectivity subjective and subjectivity objective. The determinations known 
by spirit are indeed immanent in the object, but at the same time they are 
posited by spirit.'89 Ferrarin comments: 'the psychology should not be read 
as a chronological or temporal development, nor as a transcendental regress 
from conditioned to condition, but as the movement from the found to the 
produced, from external necessity to freedom.' 90 
This account of the double movement of spirit from the found to the 
posited is spelled out further by Hegel in §445: 
The intelligence finds itself determined; this is the appearance from which it proceeds 
in its immediacy. But as knowing, intelligence posits the found (das Gefundene) as its 
own. Its activity has to do with the empty form of finding reason, and its end is that 
its concept is for itself, that is, to be for itself reason, along with which the content 
is realized as rational. This activity is cognition (Erkennen). The formal knowing, 
which is only certainty, raises itself, because reason is concrete, to determinate and 
86. Enc. 1830, §471. 
89. Ibid., §441 Zusatz. 
87. Ibid., §443. 
88. Ibid., §443. 
90. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 287. Italics mine. 
29 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
conceptual knowing. The process of this development is itself rational, a specific nec-
essary transition, determined by the concept, from one determination of intelligent 
activity (a so-called faculty of spirit) into another. 91 
Spirit finds itself determined, namely, by the given. But second, as knowing, 
intelligence posits the found or given as its own. Hence the found is com-
patible with freedom, because it is not what is found that must be negated 
and overcome, but only the formal immediacy with which it is given. The 
content that is found or given, is already rational in principle. The activity 
of spirit overcomes the immediacy with which the rationality in the object 
appears as something merely found, merely given. Spirit recognizes the 
rationality in the object as identical with its own rationality and thus posits 
the object as its own. This appropriation overcomes the initial appearance 
that the rational is something merely found or contingent. 
In the condition of immediacy spirit is hindered from recognizing the 
rationality and determinacy of its object. Spirit must overcome its own 
immediacy and liberate itself from the inadequate forms in which the 
rationality of the object is concealed. These forms include 'the given' and 
'the found,' 'contingency,' mere isolated particularity and externality; all 
these characterize the immediacy of knowing. The immanent rationality 
and necessity of the object emerge in a process which progressively strips 
away the externality and contingency of the inadequate forms of cognition. 
Insight into this immanent rationality in the object overcomes its strange, 
alien character. Hegel describes spirit as seeking and finding in the world a 
rationality that is congruent with its own rationality. Reason in the world 
and reason in spirit are one, i.e., are the same reason and rationality. 
Hegel writes that 'intelligence posits the found (das Gefundene, das 
Seiende) as its own (das Seinige).' What does such positing mean? How 
does it relate to the found and the given? Does it mean to appropriate and 
understand the given, to make it one's own in cognition? Or does it mean 
to produce the given in a causal metaphysical sense? 92 Alfredo Ferrarin 
provides one interpretation: it means that what appears to be given turns 
out to be produced: 
91. Enc. 1830, §445. 
92. The term 'posit' (setzen) is an operative term in German idealism. Because it is an 
operative term, it is rarely thematized and clarified. Subsequently it has received a wide range 
of interpretations ranging from a modest and benign mental-cognitive act of reflection or 
consideration of an object to a strong metaphysical sense of producing and creating its object, 
as in the case of an intuitive intellect. In the Psychology, Hegel is focusing on theoretical spirit, 
i.e., cognition, and for the most part uses 'posit' in a cognitive rather than strong metaphysical 
sense. 
30 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
If the content, at first contingent and external, is then progressively transformed 
into intelligence's property, thus acquires a higher existence or ideal citizenship in 
the domain of spirit; and if it is made rational or is seen as spirit's production-then 
in this inwardization of the object intelligence at the same time recollects itself and 
relates itself to its products. It finally knows what is true for it as its own production. 
While the content is determined by the form it acquires, it is progressively reduced 
to the form that it has for intelligence; the more conceptual and comprehensive 
the form, the less is the content affected by difference, until the gap between 
form and content we started out with increasingly vanishes. The more the content 
is assimilated to its form, the less it is what it was as immediate and external. 
In the end there will be no more difference between the object and the subject, 
between what is found and what is produced, between thought determination and 
externality. 93 
This statement is ambiguous in that it wavers between a strong metaphysical 
reading of positing as production, and a cognitive-epistemological reading 
in which positing means cognitive appropriation. 94 Part of the difficulty 
lies with Ferrarin's claim that being (das Sein) as a product of spirit. This 
sounds too metaphysical and causal, especially in view of Hegel's rejection 
of metaphysical idealism of a Berkeleyan sort, because 'it is folly to deny the 
reality of matter.' 95 
On the other hand, Hegel would be critical of any 'myth of the given', 
i.e., any view that the given signifies an 'immaculate perception' 'untainted' 
by any concept. Such a view posits a separation between reason and sense 
in which reason and its conceptual schemes are imposed on, 'assimilate' and 
distort some 'pure' given. Ferrarin correctly notes that for both Hegel and 
Aristotle 'we perceive and think complex categorial relations.'96 Thus there 
are no bare particulars independent of and opposed to universals, there are 
only universals in particulars and particulars in universals. Perception is an 
implicit judgment. 
If that is the case, then the 'found' (das Gefundene) is not merely external 
but also a cognitive form. According to Hegel the given is one of the poorest 
forms of cognition; it is inadequate because it posits a gap, between what is 
and what is thought, between being and thought. Ferrarin contends that 
in the cognitive process the object 'is progressively reduced to the form 
that it has for intelligence; the more conceptual and comprehensive the 
93. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 288, my italics. 
94. Ferrarin's metaphysical reading is supported by the Boumann Zusatz to §442: 'the fact 
that the content or object is for our knowing something given, something coming to it from 
the outside, is only an illusory appearance and mind, by removing this appearance proves itself 
to be ... absolute self-determining ... the ideal existence that produces all reality from itself.' 
95. VPG 1827; see below, p. 69. 
96. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 297. 
31 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
form, the less is the content affected by difference, until the gap between 
form and content we started out with increasingly vanishes. The more the 
content is assimilated to its form, the less it is what it was as immediate 
and external.'97 Thus Hegel's position is that 'intuition and concept are no 
longer forms given at the outset as separate, but rather form the two poles 
of givenness and constitution, of apparent passivity and activity, within 
the immanent motion of thought.'98 Some might interpret this movement 
from the found to the posited as an elimination of the given. 99 But if the 
process of cognition simply eliminated the found, it would be a road to 
nowhere. This objection is another version of the dualism between thought 
and being, reason and sense. It assumes that thought is merely subjective, 
a mere immanence that is incapable of comprehending what is. But this 
alleged elimination of the object of knowledge is belied by Hegel's remarks 
on attention. Attention properly understood is the very opposite of an 
idealist stance which, having nullified the object, postures as being above 
it all. Rather attention is an immersion in the object, a suspending of one's 
own interests and desires in order to allow the thing itself to generate its 
own categories and criteria. This makes sense only if the movement from 
the found to the posited-the attended to-is 'understood more exactly as 
the filling of oneself with a content that is both objective and subjective, 
or, in other words, that is not only for me, but also possesses a being of its 
own.'100 The point is not to eliminate the given content, but to be attentive 
to it, and appropriate it. Cognition is that appropriation. 101 As Hegel put 
the point in another context: 'What is represented ceases to be ... something 
alien to the self's knowledge only when the subject has produced it, and 
therefore beholds the determination of the object as its own, and thus 
beholds itself in the object.' 102 
97. Ibid., 288. 
98. Ibid., 292. 
99. Cf. Ferrarin: 'the relation between givenness and subjective constitution is no longer 
one between two opposites. On the contrary, this relation shows itself as the transition from an 
apparent heteronomy to a self-determination of spirit discovering itself as notion or absolute 
reason, where self-knowledge appears as the foundation of the possibility of the knowledge of 
objectivity' (Hegel and Aristotle, 291). 
100. Enc. 1830, §448 Zusatz. 
101. For a similar account, cf. Stephen Crites's distinction between an experience-negating 
idealism and an experience-appropriating idealism (Dialectic and Gospel in the Develop-
ment of Hegel's Thinking (Pennsylvania, PA: Penn State University Press, 1998), 265). Crites 
observes that Hegel's thought remains ambiguous, suspended between these two quite different 
alternatives, but argues that Hegel tends towards the experience-appropriating hermeneutical 
idealism. 
102. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. Miller, §684 Hegel, Phiinomenologie des 
Geistes, ed. J. Hoffmeister (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1952), 482. 
32 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
B. Imagination, Sign, Memory 
Imagination is not restricted to reproducing images and intuitions. It is also 
productive, i.e., capable of projecting new images and possibilities and going 
beyond the given. This is the sign-creating, name-bestowing imagination 
or Phantasie. Phantasie is not reproductive imagination (Einbildungskraft) 
which is dependent on intuition. Phantasie is capable of producing a new 
synthesis by itself independently of intuition. The superiority of spirit is 
manifest in the creation of signs and language. The sign is an image which 
has received from spirit a new soul, an independent representation con-
structed by productive imagination. This is most dearly seen in the name. 
The name is an externality that has no sense, and receives its significance 
only as a sign, produced by spirit. 103 Hegel's example is the name 'lion:' 
we need neither the actual vision of the animal, nor its image: the name 
alone, if we understand it, is the unimaged simple representation. We think 
in names.104 The name replaces the found (das Gefundene); as posited by 
spirit the name inverts the initial relation so that an intuition (of a given) 
is no longer necessary. The intuition is thus suspended in the name. As 
Hegel observes, intuition, das Gefundene, when employed as a sign, has the 
essential determination of existing only as suspended (aufgehoben). 105 Once 
the name is understood, an intuition is no longer necessary; the form of the 
found (but not its meaning) has been displaced. The name is subjectively-
inwardly constituted, but it is also an externalization of spirit. Hegel main-
tains that the inwardizing or recollecting of the name is a self-externalization 
of intelligence. The name is both an externalization of intelligence and its 
recollection: The name gives existence to the content in intelligence and is 
the externality of intelligence to itself. 106 Thus the name suspends the found 
as intuition, and preserves it on a higher level as sign. Spirit is not only able 
to suspend and cancel the found, but also to preserve it and re-create it on a 
higher level of objectivity that is no longer dependent on the lower. We think 
in names, not in images. In this sense spirit is the condition of objectivity, 
but this assertion is an anticipation, not yet a conclusion. 107 
Hegel takes a further step in the constitution of objectivity in his discus-
sion of memory. He notes that 'to comprehend the position and meaning 
of memory and to understand its organic interconnection with thought is 
one of the most difficult points, and hitherto one quite unconsidered in the 
103. Enc. 1830, §459. 
104. Ibid., §462. 
105. Ibid., §459. 
106. Ibid., §462. 
107. Thus Ferrarin's claim that spirit's self-knowledge appears as the foundation of the 
possibility of the knowledge of objectivity (Hegel and Aristotle, 291) is correct. 
33 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
theory of spirit.'108 Moreover, it is not just memory, but mechanical memory 
that most interests Hegel because he believes the latter is a crucial stage in 
the constitution of objectivity. 109 It reveals how subjective inwardness must 
be leveled and prepared as pure abstract universal space, in order to become 
the space of objectivity. 110 
Here is how Hegel explains memory in his published outline: 
The supreme recollection of representation is the supreme self-divestment of intel-
ligence, in which it posits itself as being, the universal space of names as such, 
i.e., meaningless words. The I, which is this abstract being, is, as subjectivity, the 
power over the different names, the empty tie which fixes the names in a series and 
keeps them in stable order. This is the power of abstract subjectivity, or mechanical 
memory. So far as the names merely exist (das Gefundene), and intelligence is here 
itself this being of theirs, its power is a merely abstract subjectivity-memory. And, 
on account of the complete externality in which the members of such series of names 
stand to one another, and because intelligence is itself this externality, subjective 
though it may be, the intelligence is called mechanical memory. 111 
The development and exercise of mechanical memory requires the self-
divestment and self-externalization of intelligence. In mechanical memory 
spirit levels and constitutes itself as the abstract space of names, or as 
abstract subjectivity that is the connection between names and signs assem-
bled in an arbitrary series. Hegel amplified his view of mechanical memory 
in a discussion of rote memorization in the 1827lectures: 
We call that mechanical, where a plurality of things stand in relation to each other, 
and are related, but in this relation remain at the same time external to each other. 
The intelligence is the power over the signs; as mechanical memory it is this center, 
this subject that holds the signs merely as signs, as words without meaning ... These 
signs are meaningless. I can learn a series of names and numbers by heart, but so far 
108. Enc. 1830, §464. For a discussion of this sweeping claim, cf. H. F. Fulda, 'Vom 
Gedachtnis zum Denken', in Hespe and Tuschling (eds.), Psychologie und Anthropologie oder 
Philosophie des Geistes 321-60. 
109. Burkhard Tuschling claims that Hegel works out a transcendental deduction of 
objectivity that eluded Kant and the other German idealists. See VPG 1827, introduction, 
p. xxxvi. Ferrarin also calls attention to the significance of memory and memorization, but 
not in a transcendental sense or context. Rather memory is an unperceived link between signs, 
the last stage of representation and the first stage of thought (Hegel and Aristotle, 299-301). 
Fulda is more critical of Hegel's discussion, focusing on the terms, details, and transitions 
of Hegel's argument, which he characterizes as 'difficult to penetrate, to see through' ('Vom 
Gedachtnis zum Denken', 359). Richard Winfield finds similar obscurities if not problems 
in Hegel's account. See Winfield, 'Identity, Difference and the Unity of Mind, Reflections on 
Hegel's Determination of Psyche, Consciousness and Intelligence', in Philip Grier (ed.), Identity 
and Difference: Studies in Hegel's Logic and Politics (Aibany, NY: SUNY Press, 2007). 
110. Enc. 1830, §464. 
111. Ibid., §463.1talics mine. 
34 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
as this is mere rote memorization, there is no meaning and no significance in this for 
me. The intelligence is the space in which these determinations exist; the intelligence 
is what holds them together and which knows them in this vital connection .... If one 
knows [something] entirely by rote memorization, then one recites it in an entirely 
meaningless sound. Meaning interrupts the mere mechanism of memory. It appears 
miraculous that the spirit, this essential freedom at home with itself, relates to itself 
externally in its [own] inwardness in an entirely mechanical way. 112 
Ferdinand Walter heard Hegel as follows: 
With mechanical memory one knows something by rote memorization; one has no 
idea of what the words mean. The recitation of what is known by rote happens 
by itself automatically without accent. Children, when they are supposed to recite 
something by heart, have a sing-song school sound, and this is the correct tone for 
a recitation known by heart. If one recites with accent, this implies that one has 
a meaning, a significance, that one orders the particular determinations according 
to the nature of their connection-the accent depends on sense-if on the contrary 
one knows something purely by rote, then one speaks it in this entirely meaningless 
tone. What is recited by rote is spoken without meaning. To speak meaningfully 
is to speak with accent. The sense comes into the picture and breaks through the 
mere mechanical memory. Memory is the most wonderful power insofar as the 
intelligence, this inwardness, has this complete externality. 113 
Hegel underscores that the rote memorization of meaningless, reference-less 
names and signs and holding them in an arbitrary but stable repeatable 
order is not easy, but requires rigorous discipline and training. This dis-
ciplining of mechanical memory is not only a divestment of meaning and 
sense, rote memorization is also torture: 
The exercise of memory implies the levelling of the ground and preparation of the 
way to pure being. The compulsion of rote memorization is torture. Rote memoriza-
tion is the torture of turning oneself into this abstraction and of consolidating oneself 
in this abstraction. In this abstraction will is the inner that is made into something 
mechanical in itself. This preparation of the soil of inwardness [is necessary] to 
constitute thinking as such in the form of intelligence. 114 
Rote memorization is an extreme abstraction from all meaning whereby 
spirit transforms itself into pure leveled, inner space, a mechanism for 
holding and ordering arbitrary, externally related names and signs in a 
purely arbitrary series. Mechanical memory replicates the self-discipline of 
112. VPG 1827, 220; see below, p. 233. 
113. Ibid. see below, p. 234; Cf. Hegel, The Encyclopedia Logic, §195R. 
114. VPG 1827, 226; see below, p. 237 n. 32. 
35 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
habit at the level of theoretical spirit. It prepares the soil of inwardness for 
abstract thinking and for the abstract objectivity of thought. 
However, considered in and for itself, such self-externalization in mem-
orization of meaningless names involves the loss of meaning and spirit's 
loss of itself. The self-externalization of spirit in memory is something like a 
death of meaning, or nihilism. The death of meaning in mechanical memory 
marks the extreme limit of spirit's self-externalization. 
Yet it is in the death of meaning, spirit's 'dismemberment,' that spirit 
finds and discovers itself. Since the signs are without meaning and without 
reference, they are held together only by spirit, which is the tie that binds 
the signs together. This tie is not a naturally occurring series order, or a 
perception of something external; rather the tie itself is wholly external and 
as such without meaning. Mechanical memory is spirit constituting itself as 
a mechanism, in which it relates to itself externally. Spirit discovers itself as 
the connection or tie between the meaningless signs in abstract inner space. 
What does spirit discover when it thus finds itself? It finds that it is abstract 
inwardness (which Hegel likens to a pit) which is nevertheless completely 
self-external. This abstract inwardness that is self-external is the objective 
tie that binds meaningless names and signs together in arbitrary but stable 
order. 
Whereas in intuition spirit has been so external as to pick up its facts ready-made 
and in representation it recollects this found in itself and makes it its own, now in 
mechanical memory, spirit makes itself external in itself, so that its own appears 
as something found. The one moment of thinking, objectivity, is here posited in 
intelligence itself as a quality of it. 115 
Thus the given, the found, are thus constituted as the extreme self-
externalization of spirit, on the boundary of the death of meaning in 
meaninglessness. Spirit makes itself external in itself, with the result that 
its own appears to it as something it merely finds. 
This analysis of mechanical memory is Hegel's original, independent 
reconstruction and transformation of the reversal and inversion of 'sub-
jectivity' and 'objectivity' in Kant's transcendental deduction. Mechanical 
memory shows that spirit is capable of constituting 'the found' (das Gefun-
dene) with which the Psychology begins. Objectivity is thus a 'subjective' 
accomplishment, but not a self-legislating form-giving activity as Kant 
would have it. Rather, in mechanical memory spirit turns itself into a self-
external mechanism. In this externality spirit appears to itself not only 
115. Enc. 1830, §463. Italics mine. 
36 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
as other, but as something it merely finds, namely, the leveled space and 
abstract, external tie that binds together meaningless signs. In mechanical 
memory, in rote memorization, spirit's own (das Seinige) is something 
spirit happens to find (das Gefundenwerdendes). This account of self-
externalization recalls the preface of the Phenomenology of Spirit in which 
Hegel describes spirit as tarrying with the negative and finding itself utter 
dismemberment. 116 Only when it is driven to this extreme of self-externality 
or 'dismemberment,' does spirit find itself and recognize itself. What is 
found is its own; what it finds is itself. Only as thus capable of recognizing 
itself in utter externality is spirit at home with itself (bei sich), the unity of 
subjectivity and objectivity. 
C. Mechanical Memory and Transcendental Deduction 
Burkhard Tuschling claims that in the 1827 lectures Hegel presents the 
most complete and explicit account of transcendental deduction in German 
idealism, an account that exceeds anything in Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, or 
in Hegel's published writings.117 According to Tuschling, Hegel's answer to 
the question how thought is objective is found in his account of mechanical 
memory. He cites the following passage: 
For us or implicitly ... the intelligence is reason .... That objectivity exists in the 
intelligence in general rests on the intuition that what is immediately given, I also 
posit in myself. The other side of this is that the intelligence posits itself as the 
objective ... The place of memory in this is to be the moment in which the unity of 
the subject and the object is not only implicit in the intelligence, but is also posited 
in the intelligence; the intelligence is this externality. So the intelligence realizes that 
that which is inherent in it is also something external, [that] the objectivity is not 
something different from the intelligence, but is identical with it .... The absolute 
end of memory is that the intelligence be real, that the unity of subjectivity and 
objectivity come into existence. 118 
Stephen Houlgate appears to agree with Tuschling's thesis that Hegel's 
account of mechanical memory is relevant to transcendental deduction. 
Houlgate maintains that what spirit discovers when it discovers itself in 
the self-externalization of mechanical memory is that it is 'the abstract 
activity of connecting as such, the abstract form of connection ... abstract 
116. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit: 'The life of spirit is not the life that shrinks from 
death and keeps itself untouched by devastation, but rather the life that endures it and 
maintains itself in it. It wins its truth only when, in utter dismemberment, it finds itself' (§32, 
Miller trans., 19). Death is the death of meaning. 
117. VPG 1827, introductions, p. xxxvi. 
118. VPG 1827, 221-2; see below, p. 235. 
37 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
subjectivity ... what Kant thought of as ... [the] transcendental unity of 
apperception.' 119 As Hegel puts it, the intelligence is the identity of sub-
jective and objective, of thought and being. 
It is also possible that this exploration of mechanical memory may 
constitute Hegel's appropriation and transformation of Aristotle's passive 
Nous. The passive intellect has no form of its own but is the possibility 
of becoming all forms, even to the point of 'comprehending' and holding 
meaningless signs together in its abstract inner space. What Hegel's analysis 
of mechanical memory opens up is the unity of active and passive Nous for 
spirit itself: spirit recognizes that it can endure the dismemberment of mean-
ing because it is itself the tie that binds and holds even this dismemberment 
together. Here spirit discovers that being (das Sein) is its own (das Seinige), 
and that its own is [to wit, is objective, independent]. This exercise of mem-
ory prepares the way to the concept of being. Hegel explicitly identifies the 
prodigious effort of spirit in mechanical memory as the path to pure being-
which is the opening category with which the Science of Logic begins. 120 
However, Tuschling errs when he claims that Hegel retrieves Parmenides' 
conception of being as pure identity that excludes the nothing. Hegel does 
not simply retrieve Parmenides' abstract identity; his account of memory 
shows why. Hegel is closer to Heraclitos than to Parmenides. Hegel's path 
to the identity of thought and being goes through the door that Parmenides 
avoids and warns against, namely the way of spirit's self-externalization 
and 'dismemberment,' to wit, the way of non-being. The concept of being 
turns on confronting the death of meaning and the utter externality of 
thought to itself. The identity of subjectivity and objectivity, thought and 
being, which Hegel asserts, is constituted only when spirit in its utter self-
externality and dismemberment of meaning finds and recognizes itself. This 
identity therefore should not be construed as the abstract identity of the 
understanding that shuns contradiction and dismemberment but rather as 
an identity of reason that requires negation, and 'is' only as a negation of 
negation. 
It is difficult to overestimate the importance Hegel attaches to memory in 
his account of theoretical spirit and objectivity. The result of this analysis is 
119. Step hen Houlgate, 'Hegel, Derrida and Restricted Economy: The Case of Mechanical 
Memory,' Journal of the History of Philosophy, 34/1 Uanuary 1996): 79-93. 
120. VPG 1827, 228; see below, p. 239. The death of meaning and the reversal in which 
meaning is recovered in spirit's finding and reconnecting with itself is parallel to the indistin-
guishability of being from nothing, its vanishing into nothing, and the reversion from nothing 
to being in the Logic. The Philosophy of Spirit introduces a layer of possible meaninglessness 
as the background of the beginning of the Logic, which the Logic captures in the collapse of 
being and nothing into each other as the same empty featurelessness, absence of determination. 
38 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
characterized by Hegel in the doctrine that intelligence is 'recognitive'. This 
is not the intersubjective sense of recognition (Anerkennen). Rather 'recog-
nitive' here means that intelligence is identity of the subjective and objective. 
In other words, recognitive intelligence knows that 'what is thought is, and 
that what is only is [actual] insofar as it is thought.' 121 Both the thought 
and the 'is' are dialectical. 
7. PRACTICAL SPIRIT: THE SYNTHESIS OF 
KANT AND ARISTOTLE 
If theoretical spirit has as its task translating the found being into cognition, 
i.e, cognitive appropriation, practical spirit has as its task translating a 
subjective end into externality and realizing this end in the world. That 
is, practical spirit aims at self-actualization through action. As many com-
mentators have noted, in this section Hegel is attempting, on a high level of 
abstraction, a synthesis of Kant's and Aristotle's practical philosophies. 122 
He is attempting to mediate between the ancients and the modems. 123 
Adriaan Peperzak contends that 'the Aristotelian roots of Hegel's doctrine 
of practical spirit are visible, but the way Hegel integrates them is medi-
ated through their Kantian transformation.'124 Peperzak finds that Hegel 
remains too close to Kant; on the other hand, Alfredo Ferrarin focuses on 
Hegel's retrieval of Aristotle. 
My thesis is that Hegel both agrees and disagrees with both Kant and 
Aristotle, and that he draws upon the strengths of each to correct the 
deficiencies he identifies in the other's position. Hegel praises Kant's concept 
of inner purposiveness, because it makes possible a retrieval of Aristotle's 
concept of life as entelechy. He agrees with Kant that self-determining free-
dom is the basis of ethics but he finds that Kant conceives freedom formally 
and that the categorical imperative reduces to the empty form of abstract 
universality and tautology. Hegel believes Kantian morality is unable to 
generate or justify any determinate ethical content and thus remains empty 
and formal. In contrast, Aristotle grasps the human being as a social and 
political animal, and understands human action as teleological. But Aris-
totelian teleology is more nearly external than internal because Aristotle 
121. Enc. 1830, §465. 
122. Driie, Hegels Philosophie des Geistes, in Schniidelbach (ed.); Ferrarin, Hegel and 
Aristotle; Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten. 
123. Philosophy of Right, §§124, 185. 
124. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 46. 
39 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
conceives human being as part of nature and has a deficient concept of 
freedom and will. In what follows I want to show how Hegel's account of 
spirit's self-actualization might be plausibly interpreted as correcting Kant's 
formalism by means of Aristotle, and correcting Aristotle's deficient concept 
of freedom by means of Kant. 
Hegel not only begins practical spirit with a quasi-Kantian formulation 
of autonomous will, he also appropriates Kant's distinction between Wille, 
or rational self-legislation, and Willkur, or the will as arbitrary, subjective, 
or agential freedom. 125 The distinction of these senses of the will and their 
correlation forms the Kantian element of Hegel's theory of spirit's self-
actualization. This starting point allows Hegel to transform and integrate 
Aristotelian elements into practical spirit on the basis of autonomous free-
dom. 
The autonomy of the will implies spirit has broken with nature; the 
autonomous will does not follow ends prescribed from elsewhere, be it 
feeling, desire, inclination, or nature. Any externally prescribed end con-
stitutes heteronomy of the will. The autonomous will is self-legislative: it 
determines and prescribes its own end. The end it prescribes for itself is 
freedom; the will has its freedom as its own object and end. However, 
Kant's account of autonomy suffers from two related defects: formalism, 
and the separation of reason from sensibility. In making universality and 
freedom from contradiction the supreme test of moral autonomy, Hegel 
believes Kant produces a purely formal concept of duty; in Hegel's view 
Kant cannot derive any determinate or specific content from the abstract 
form of pure law, or abstract universal. 126 Consequently, while Kant's ethics 
(morality) does nevertheless manage to provide duties which have some 
content, Hegel charges these are not derived from formal self-determining 
freedom but smuggled in. This shows the dependence of Kantian morality 
on ethical life (Sittlichkeit). 
Second, Hegel criticizes Kant for separating reason from sensibility. As a 
result of this dualism, the moral subject is split into an internal master and 
slave, with reason subjugating or repressing sensibility, including the drives 
and inclinations. The separation of reason from sensibility violates Hegel's 
Aristotle-inspired fundamental principle that there is only one reason in 
125. Enc. 1830, §469. On the Wille!Willkur distinction, cf. Lewis White Beck, A Com-
mentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), 
176-80; Henry Allison, Kant's Theory of Freedom (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1990), eh. 7. 
126. Hegel, Natural Law, trans. T. M. Knox (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1975); 75-6. 
40 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
feeling, volition, and thought. 127 To be sure, Kant offers an important 
critique of hedonism and utilitarianism, eudaimonism, and Hegel accepts 
much of Kant's critique. But he does not want to follow Kant in declaring 
that the only good is the abstract good will. For in positing a separation 
between reason and sensibility, Kant reduces the feelings, emotions, drives, 
passions, etc., to heteronomy. In Hegel's view, the senses and passions 
appear to have only a negative connotation for Kant and play no affirmative 
role in ethics. Because that is the case, Kant has a deficient theory of ethical 
self-actualization. 
Moreover, when Kant addresses the issue of the self-actualization of 
rational morality, it turns out that the infinite end that reason legislates for 
itself-the conformity of Willkur to Wille-cannot be achieved save through 
a process of infinite striving, or infinite deferral. Hence Kant finds it neces-
sary to introduce the postulates of practical reason: freedom, immortality, 
and God, to buttress his account of morality, to ensure that 'ought implies 
can', i.e., that reason can attain its self-legislated end. More polemically, 
Hegel shows that the postulates are a nest of contradictions, dissembling, 
and bad faith. 128 
In contrast, Aristode has an affirmative, but limited and parochial the-
ory of self-actualization through praxis. Hegel is attracted to Aristode's 
view of action as teleological because it overcomes the duality between 
reason and sensibility, between spirit and nature. As Ferrarin notes, Hegel 
believes that the passions play an important role in Aristode's theory of self-
actualization. 129 Hence they cannot be dismissed as merely negative as far 
as ethics are concerned. However, as Ferrarin also observes, for Aristode the 
end that is to be realized in action is prescribed for human beings by human 
nature, not self-legislated by human reason. Reason accepts such naturally 
prescribed ends and is confined to an instrumental role in determining 
the means to the externally prescribed end. 13° From Hegel's perspective, 
even though Aristode's concept of life includes internal purposiveness, he 
nevertheless belongs to the ancient world, which has a deficient sense of 
and appreciation for subjective freedom and the will. 
The complexity of Hegel's synthetic project can be stated in historical-
epochal terms. According to Hegel, the Greeks, including Aristode, appre-
hend spirit only as part of nature and as free within nature. They have not 
127. Enc. 1830, §471. 
128. Cf. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, §§596-631. 
129. Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 332. However, he believes that Hegel misinterprets 
Aristotle on this point. 
130. Ibid., 334. 
41 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
attained the concept of spirit itself. 131 This epoch and its view of the world 
has been superseded by a higher standpoint. As we have seen, modernity 
arises when the human being raises itself to a consciousness of God or 
infinite spirit. In this relation to the actual infinite, human spirit is reduced 
to mortal finitude, but as imago dei it also gains a wholly free foundation 
in itself. As self-grounding, it gives itself another relation to nature, namely 
independence; thus spirit supersedes the Greek world-view. Modern spirit is 
constituted by both mortal finitude and infinitude, namely, its transcendence 
of nature, its capacity and right to determine its ends out of itself, or in 
Kant's term, its autonomy. 132 This concept of self-determining freedom 
corrects the parochialism and other defects in Aristotle's concept of freedom 
and will. This is the context or horizon within which Hegel appropriates and 
transforms Aristotelian teleology from a teleology of nature into a teleology 
of freedom, i.e., an inner purposiveness, wherein freedom becomes its own 
object and end. 
Thus we can begin to see the outlines of Hegel's project in Practical 
Spirit: the reconciliation of Kant with Aristotle, in such a way that both 
Kant's formalism, his separation of reason from sensibility, and Aristotle's 
deficient concept of the will are overcome. According to Peperzak, Hegel 
conflates under the concept of spirit's self-actualization not only Aristotelian 
practice and production, but also Kantian hypothetical and categorical 
imperatives. 133 The important point in this conflation is that spirit does not 
merely actualize ends prescribed to it by nature. Spirit is for itself; freedom 
is its own object and end, and capable of issuing its own imperatives. 
Further, self-determination here includes the hypothetical and the cate-
gorical imperatives. Hegel treats these imperatives as different forms and 
131. Cf. Hegel's following remark: 
To the Greek the human was granted as his portion, that is, the free spirit, but the spirit had not 
yet apprehended its infinity. It is not the absolute, holy spirit that would be poured out over 
the Greek world and the knowledge of which the latter would come to possess. Rather the 
Greeks apprehended the human being as free within nature, so that the human being retains 
in nature the organ of his consciousness and thus remains confined to nature. To be sure 
the Greek advances to pure thought, but only in philosophy, not in religion; the latter is not 
able to free itself from the abstraction-being entangled with what corresponds in thought to 
immediacy-and thus does not come to the concept of spirit itself. 
(Hegel, Fragment on Philosophy of Spirit 1822-5, in Petry (ed.), Hegel's Philosophy of Sub-
jective Spirit, I, 93. Also found in Hegel, Werke, ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl M. Michel, 
Theorie Werkausgabe (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1971), vol. 11, 527. 
132. Cf. Philosophy of Right, § § 124, 185. 
133. Adrinan Peperzak, Praktische Philosophie (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1991), 
38, cited by Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 330. 
42 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
stages of spirit's ethical self-actualization, starting with the will in its 
immediate particularity where it depends on a given and moving through 
the stages of the feeling of the pleasant and unpleasant, to drive, inclination, 
through eudaimonism, and finally to universal, rational self-determination. 
Thus Hegel appropriates Aristotle's naturalism, subjects it to Kant's cri-
tique of hedonism and eudaimonism, and transforms it into an account 
of necessary but inferior forms of inner purposiveness, which culminates 
in ethical self-realization. In these lower forms, the end is the satisfaction 
of feeling, of drive, of inclination, or the totality of pleasant feelings as in 
eudaimonism, but in none of them is freedom itself taken as the absolute 
end. 
This critique of hedonism is by no means a rejection of it as essen-
tially heteronomous. Rather Hegel corrects Kant by regarding feelings, 
and more importantly, the drives and passions, as precursors of ratio-
nal self-determination, analogues (Vorforms) of the autonomous self-
actualization.134 Thus Kant's separation of reason from sensibility is over-
come and his concept of autonomy and ethical subjectivity are enriched: the 
drives and passions are not heteronomous, but analogues of rational self-
determination and dimensions of self-actualization. 135 Hegel agrees with 
Kant that practical reason or practical spirit is autonomous and determines 
its own ends. Hence it does not have to conform to a pre-given nature as 
Aristotle thought, but neither does spirit have to suppress or go against 
natural drives as Kant would seem to have it. 136 For Hegel reason is 
not only a faculty of thinking and legislating, it is also a drive towards 
self-actualization. Thus Hegel enriches Kant by drawing upon Aristotle's 
concept of drives as inferior but necessary forms and stages of inner pur-
posiveness and self-determination. The self-actualization of reason in spirit 
does not stifle or repress the drives, but includes and sublates them. The 
drives are not essentially heteronomous, 137 because reason itself is practical. 
Reason is not only formally self-determining asKant asserted, but also, as 
Aristotle saw, has the character of a drive to seek satisfaction, fulfillment 
and self-realization in the world: 
134. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 50. 
135. Cf. Enc. 1830, §204R, where Hegel notes that need and drive are the readiest 
examples of inner purpose. Experienced as felt contradictions, they lead to the act of negating 
the negation (contradiction). 
136. Hegel paraphrases Schiller's jest at Kant's stern concept of duty as reason opposed to 
the inclinations: 'Do with abhorrence what morality enjoins.' (Philosophy of Right, §124). 
137. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 48-51; Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle, 
331-2. 
43 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The intelligence as such is still one-sided. Theory should be realized ... the concept 
has this determination, that it suspends the one-sidedness of its subjectivity, gives 
itself the determination of being, immediacy and objectivity in general; thus it is 
end. 138 
Again: 
The formal rationality of the drive means that the content of the drive does not 
remain merely subjective, but is made to be something immediate .... the drive has 
the property of suspending the one-sided determination of subjectivity .. .' 139 
Because spirit incorporates Kant's categorical imperative as a drive towards 
self-actualization, this transforms Kant's subjective idealism into a dynamic 
objective idealism in which 'the drive has the property of suspending the 
one-sided determination of subjectivity.' Spirit's end cannot remain merely 
subjective, because then it would remain unrealized, and spirit would not 
be actual. Rather spirit must suspend its subjectivism and become actual. 
This drive to self-actualization has a fundamentally ethical sense. According 
to Peperzak, Hegel's psychology is also a fundamental ethics, whose basic 
principle is 'Become what you [already implicitly] are! This principle com-
prehends and is valid for the entire philosophy of subjective spirit.'140 Thus 
Kant's formalism and separation of reason from sensibility are corrected 
by Aristotle's analysis of the drive (inner purposiveness), and Aristotle's 
conception of the natural teleology of the drives is reformulated on the basis 
of and as an expression of ethical self-realization. 
Further, the abstract autonomy of Kant's pure will must also be over-
come, and Aristotle helps Hegel to address this issue. Pure freedom is 
negative, the will of the void. As a corrective to pure freedom, Hegel 
maintains the will must become actual, and it can be actual only if it wills 
something. But to will something is to limit oneself. Thus Hegel argues that 
self-limitation is a necessary feature of self-actualization. Hegel develops this 
idea in the context of Aristotle's view that action is always particular. Hegel 
adds that the particularity of action requires self-limitation. Hegel cites 
Goethe's dictum that someone who wants to accomplish great things must 
know how to limit himself. Self-limitation is necessary for self-actualization, 
for someone who attempts to do everything really will accomplish 
138. VPG 1827, 239; see below, p. 248. 
139. Ibid., 254-5; see below, p. 258-9. 
140. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 50. Fetscher makes a similar point about 
the identity of ethics and ontology in Hegel's philosophy of spirit (Hegels Lehre vom Menschen, 
120). 
44 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
nothing. 141 Self-realization requires self-limitation, and self-limitation, the 
placing of the self as a totality in a specific cause is or requires passion. 
By itself passion is neither good nor evil. The form of passion expresses only that 
the subject has placed all his interests in some special determination and that this 
special interest claims his whole individuality. 142 
Hegel cites Goethe on passion: 
Nothing great can be accomplished without passion. When a human being wills 
something great-of whatever sort it may be-he must put his will into the cause 
(Sache) and subordinate every other cause to this one. Insofar as he places himself 
entirely in the cause it is his. 143 
Passion is the drive of reason towards self-actualization. Only when spirit 
can become and remain self-related in relation to and union with the other, 
is spirit free and actual. This structure is also present in love. 144 
Thus, for Hegel, Aristotle supplies what is lacking in Kant, namely 
the moment of self-limitation or determinacy, without which the will 
or the self cannot be actual. 145 This moment of determinacy overcomes 
Kantian formalism and its reflective, subjective morality: 'The formal 
rationality of the drive and inclination consist only in their universal 
drive not to remain subjective, but to suspend subjectivity, to become 
realized through the activity of the subject itsel£.' 146 This drive towards 
self-actualization is not a pregiven natural drive or external teleology: 'Its 
authentic rationality cannot appear in the consideration of an external 
reflection which presupposes independent natural determinations and 
immediate drives, and thus lacks a principle and final end for these. It is 
an immanent reflection of spirit itself, to go beyond and transcend their 
141. Enc. 1830, §80 Zusatz. 
142. VPG 1827, 253; see below, p. 257 Enc. 1830, §474. 
143. See below, p. 258. Passion, the placing of the self as a totality in a specific determina-
tion or cause, is also linked to madness and tragedy. The collision between Antigone and Creon 
is tragic, because each fails to recognize the other as legitimate. The recognition that occurs 
in tragedy is a discovery, mediated by apparently blind and innocent suffering, that doing the 
right thing nevertheless implies erring and guilt. It is worth noting that non-recognition of 
other and a blind, single-minded commitment to a narrowly conceived (one-sided) cause or 
fixed idea are also features of madness. 
144. Enc. 1830, §§382-3. Cf. Hegel's account of love: 'The first moment in love is that I do 
not wish to be an independent person in my own right and that if I were, I would feel deficient 
and incomplete .... Love means in general the consciousness of my unity with another, so that 
I am not isolated on my own, but gain my self-consciousness only through the renunciation 
of my independent existence and through knowing myself as the unity of myself with another 
and of the other with me' (Philosophy of Right, § 158 Zusatz). 
145. Cf. Philosophy of Right, §§5-7. 
146. Enc. 1830, §474. 
45 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
particularity as well as their natural immediacy, and to give their contents 
a rationality and an objectivity wherein they exist as necessary ties of social 
relations, namely as rights and duties.' 147 
A. The Formalism of the Psychology 
Hegel corrects Kant's formalism by introducing a moment of determinate 
self-actualization; nevertheless Hegel's account remains formal. It is ironic 
that Hegel, the critic of Kantian formalism, perpetuates here an at least 
methodological formalism of his own. Hegel himself points this out: 'Its fini-
tude consists in its formalism, that its abstract determinacy, its ownness-to 
be self-fulfilling and self-actualizing-is not identified with the developed 
and articulated reason.' 148 In his Psychology, Hegel argues that spirit is self-
actualizing, and that spirit's self-actualization constitutes spirit as objective. 
However, in the Psychology spirit is still considered methodologically as 
finite; this finitude renders the discussion of spirit's self-actualization formal. 
The Psychology provides no account of the determinate content of spirit's 
self-actualization. Hegel defers any account of the concrete content of self-
actualization to objective spirit, saying 'Here [in the Psychology] we con-
sider only the form; the content in its objective development is the ... system 
of duties.' 149 'What concerns this content itself belongs in the examination 
of objective spirit.' 150 Thus the question of the determinate content of 
spirit's self-actualization-the moment of the will's determinacy in social 
institutions, rights, and duties-is deferred to objective spirit. This deferral 
means that the Psychology considers spirit as finite and this methodological 
restriction gives freedom and self-actualization a formal look. 
The Psychology appears to develop the transition to objective spirit, 
community, and social institutions out of the concept of the rational will. 151 
What is missing from this development and discussion is Hegel's own 
phenomenological account of desire, and the genesis through reciprocal 
recognition of the universal consciousness, the I that is a We. Hegel's 
psychological account of self-actualization appears to abstract from his 
Phenomenology, and thus appears to present a methodologically individ-
ualistic account of the rational will. This makes it appear as if the will 
becomes plural only at the level of objective spirit. But why are the drives 
fundamentally social? This is presupposed, not explained or shown. In the 
Psychology this move to the social level is not apparent or made explicit; 
147. Ibid. 
148. Enc. 1830, §469. 
149. VPG 1827, 248; see below, p. 254. 
150. Ibid., 255; see below, p. 259. 
151. Peperzak, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 58-9. 
46 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
hence the Psychology appears to be formal, because what is missing is an 
account of self-actualization wherein spirit becomes determinately objective 
and social. 
Peperzak offers a half-hearted defense of Hegel against the charge of for-
malism. He suggests that Hegel's is a benign and methodological formalism 
of procedure, rather than an empty formalism. 152 Subjective spirit is formal 
in that it abstracts from the larger totality of objective spirit and absolute 
spirit. If that is correct, the issue is whether Hegel can derive a concrete 
system of rights and duties of a universally valid morality from the neces-
sary self-specification of the rational will. Peperzak answers this question 
tentatively in the affirmative. 
The individual will which necessarily wills its freedom, is something that must be 
respected. (I pass over the question whether the respectability of an individual will 
can be conceived unless one can already conceive a plurality of individual wills, that 
is, whether the human plurality is according to the concept a prior or derivative 
concept.) The requirement that the individual will should be respected, is the exter-
nal aspect of the freedom of the will. Right is nothing other than the ... existence 
of freedom. If this is the case, then Hegel can formulate the fundamental imperative 
approximately like Kant: be a person and respect others as persons. With this the 
normative foundation of a world consisting of individual persons or subjects of 
rights is given. All these persons should mutually recognize their rights. 153 
Peperzak concludes: 'In case Hegel has in fact demonstrated the necessity 
of the institutions he describes, he can rightly assert that he has overcome 
formalism.' 154 
Peperzak is correct that Hegel does not intend a merely formal con-
cept of freedom. But his defense of Hegel in the above passage is faulty, 
since Peperzak brackets the question of human plurality. This means that 
his defense of Hegel against formalism exhibits and suffers from its own 
formalism. For when human plurality is bracketed, the result appears to 
be a merely abstract individual fursichsein without context, determinacy 
and without any transition into its opposite-the many, plurality. How one 
gets from this formal, finite, and apparently individual fursichsein to the 
necessity of social institutions and rights, is far from clear. As we have 
seen, Hegel not only believes that intersubjective recognition is a condition 
of both freedom and right, he declares-in the preceding Phenomenology 
of Spirit-that the universal consciousness which arises out of reciprocal 
152. Ibid., 47. 
153. Ibid., 60-1. 
154. Ibid., 63. 
47 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
recognition constitutes the general formal structure of ethical substance, 
including the virtues and the institutions of ethical life. 155 
Peperzak belatedly introduces the concept of intersubjective recognition 
that he previously denied to be part of Hegel's argument, 156 but only in a 
comment on spirit that is already objective, i.e., existing on the objective 
social level. 157 Thus, for Peperzak, recognition plays no role in constituting 
this already objective spirit or in the transition from subjective to objective 
spirit. Recognition is presented as logically derivative from an abstract 
Kantian argument about the will and respect for individual freedom. But 
this is implausible as Peperzak himself admits, when he concludes his 
discussion of Hegel's formalism with the observation that 'while Hegel 
tirelessly traces the connections between the practical life of individual and 
of collectivities and reconstructs these conceptually, it appears that in the 
end he has done the same thing that he reproaches Kant for doing,' 158 
namely, formalism. 
B. Unresolved Issues: The Unity of the Philosophy of Spirit 
From the phenomenological perspective, recognition and the corresponding 
human plurality are conditions of respect, and not derivative from it. This 
observation presupposes that the Philosophy of Spirit has some sort of 
unity, and that the Phenomenology is a necessary stage, not only in spirit's 
liberation, but also in the overall argument of the Philosophy of Spirit, 
and as such is presupposed by the Psychology. 159 Yet this presupposition 
is supported only in a programmatic sense by Hegel's texts. The Philosophy 
155. Enc. 1830, §436 Anmerkung. Peperzak's decision to exclude not only the Boumann 
Zusiitze but also Hegel's own remarks from the 'proper argument' of the Encyclopedia (Selbst-
erkenntnis des Absoluten, 13) may be a factor contributing to the formalism of his account of 
that argument. 
156. Peperzak writes: 'The entire sense of the struggle for recognition contained in the 
Phenomenology of the Encyclopedia lies not at all in a thematization of intersubjectivity, but 
only in a process through which the immediate or abstract self-consciousness must become 
other for itself in order to be able to identify itself with itself' (Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten, 
40). 
157. Ibid., 61. Peperzak is commenting on Enc. 1830, §488, which is part of objective 
spirit. 
158. Ibid., 65. 
159. This presupposition of order and coherence may be questionable. Tuschling observes 
in his introduction (pp. x-xi) that Hegel's original announcement of his course was titled 
not 'Philosophy of Spirit', but simply 'Anthropology and Psychology'. In 1825, he added 
'Philosophy of Spirit', but only as a subtitle. In 1829-30 he titled the course 'Psychology and 
Anthropology or Philosophy of Spirit.' It is interesting that the 'Phenomenology of Spirit' is 
conspicuous by its absence, and that the psychology precedes the anthropology. This suggests 
that the materials comprising 'the philosophy of spirit' were constructed and developed 
48 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
of Spirit is divided into the Phenomenology that considers spirit at the level 
of consciousness, spirit in relation and opposition, and the Psychology that 
considers spirit for itself, as self-related. 160 The Psychology turns out to be 
chiefly an inquiry into theoretical and practical spirit. The latter focuses on 
the will and, according to Hegel, this will exists on both an individual and 
a social level, parallel to the structure of Plato's Republic: 
It is the immanent reflection of spirit itself to pass beyond their [drives and passions] 
particularity as beyond their natural immediacy and to give their content rationality 
and objectivity, in which they exist as necessary ties of social relations, rights and 
duties. This objectivation shows their content, their relation to each other, as well 
as their truth. And thus it was a true insight on Plato's part ... when he showed that 
what justice is in and for itself can be exhibited only in the objective shape of justice, 
namely in the construction of the state as ethical life. 161 
But unless the Psychology is already dealing with objective spirit this 
reference to Plato's Republic leaves the question of the transition from 
subjective to objective spirit unclarified. How does the drive towards self-
actualization-that the rational end cannot remain subjective but must 
become actual and objective-clarify or articulate the transition from the 
individual to the social, from subjective to objective spirit? The Psychology 
offers no explanation. If this absence of explanation means that the Psy-
chology presupposes that Spirit is already objective, then it would seem that 
the Psychology does not belong in subjective spirit but rather in objective 
independently without any necessary order of linkage and dependence. The Phenomenology 
section was in tlte 1817 edition titled simply 'consciousness'. It was only in tlte second revised 
edition of the Encyclopedia in 1827 that Hegel arranged the material as we currently have 
it, the Philosophy of Spirit being divided into subjective, objective, and absolute spirit, and 
subjective spirit being subdivided into antltropology, phenomenology of spirit, and psychology. 
We do not know if in his 1829-30 lectures he followed tlte order of the announcement, in 
which the psychology preceded the anthropology, or tlte order of his handbook. However these 
philological-textual questions may be decided, it is also important to note that in his Science of 
Logic, Hegel outlined the idea of spirit in terms of a tripartite division of soul, consciousness, 
and spirit as such (Science of Logic, trans. Miller, 780-2). He indicates that anthropology, 
which includes spirit in its irrational manifestatations, deals with the soul as immersed in 
nature, and that the phenomenology of spirit is 'a science of spirit which stands midway 
between the science of natural spirit and spirit as such' (ibid., 781). Hegel also distinguishes 
divergent systematic orderings of the disciplines, which in part depend on whether the logic is 
taken as the first science or as the last (ibid., 782). Thus it would appear tltat while Hegel's 
course titles and nomenclature may be fluid, his basic conception of philosophy of spirit was 
already worked out as early as 1812-16, and it included the phenomenology as an intermediate 
discipline. 
160. Enc. 1830, §385. 
161. Enc. 1830, §474. 
49 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
spirit. 162 Hegel's presentation is defective because it treats spirit as finite, yet 
spirit has already transcended the level of 'subjective' spirit when it achieved 
being-for-self (fursichsein). 
The basic issue is how Hegel's account of spirit's self-actualization 
hangs together. According to the Phenomenology spirit's self-actualization 
is located in the universal consciousness arising out of and mediated by 
intersubjective mutual recognition. This is an intersubjective-social account 
of self-actualization and of objective spirit. Spirit is Hegel's anti-formalist 
corrective to Cartesian and Kantian views of the modern subject. On the 
other hand, the Psychology account of self-actualization proceeds from 
an analysis of drives and passions as analogues of the rational will. The 
will must not remain merely subjective, but must suspend its subjectivity 
by the subject's own agency. Yet this 'subject' is only formally presented, 
together with references to Plato's Republic and its analogy between the 
soul and the state. This 'subject' that realizes itself objectively is not an 
abstract atomic individual or a particular arbitrary will. It is a universal will 
which sublates the drives into the universal end of happiness, and which 
surpasses such eudaimonism when it wills freedom as its absolute end; as 
universal will it gives itself duties and rights. But what is missing from this 
account is how this will which comes to be its own object and which wills 
freedom as its absolute end, is related to the universal consciousness of the 
Phenomenology-the I that is also a We. What is missing is an account 
of how the rational drive towards self-actualization which suspends its 
subjective forms of feelings, drive, and passions is related to the desire that 
tries to resolve the contradictions of the process of mutual recognition. 
Conversely, how is the process of mutual recognition also a development 
and self-actualization of the universal rational will? The Phenomenology 
account of mutual recognition with its resulting universal consciousness 
and social rationality, and the Psychology account of the self-actualizing 
will that becomes objective in morality and in the state, appear to run on 
parallel but separate tracks. 
Franz Hespe suggests an important inner connection between the inter-
subjective universal consciousness and theoretical and practical spirit when 
he writes: 'Recognition therefore opens up for the first time a theoret-
ical perspective on the liberation of spirit, namely, that I am capable 
of recognizing nature as determined by spirit, but I have this capac-
ity not as a merely subjective self-consciousness, but only as universal 
162. This would also mean that subjective spirit consists of the anthropology and phenom-
enology, and that the transition from subjective to objective spirit is made at the conclusion of 
the phenomenology. 
50 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
consciousness.'163 Hespe is right when he claims that for Hegel univer-
sal consciousness is intersubjectively constituted and the resulting critical 
rationality is not merely subjective, but an 'in the world' social rationality. 
Consequently for Hespe the Phenomenology of the system is not a mere 
superfluous afterthought sandwiched between the Anthropology and the 
Psychology. On the contrary, 
The phenomenology has ... an extraordinarily significant function in the architec-
tonics of the philosophy of subjective spirit. It performs the important function of 
distinguishing between a subjective consciousness and an objective consciousness 
and thus grounds the reality of the outer world for consciousness. Otherwise con-
sciousness would be merely a monadic individual which neither distinguished itself 
from the outer world nor possessed self-consciousness. The phenomenology grounds 
the necessity of the unity and identity of the '1', namely the necessity of the self-
consciousness as the final point of reckoning for all thinking, representing and the 
like, but through this demonstration of such [subjective] necessity, it also overcomes 
the standpoint of the merely individual subject and completes the transition from a 
merely individual reference to a universal reference of the subject to the outer world, 
whose thoughts are not mere personal idiosyncrasies but universal, communicable 
and capable of truth. 164 
Hegel's two accounts of spirit's self-realization as objective spirit-namely 
as intersubjective universal consciousness (reason) and as self-actualizing 
universal will-do not constitute a temporal sequence of stages of devel-
opment. Nor are they incompatible; on the contrary, they rather seem to 
be complementary. Each exhibits different aspects and dimensions of the 
liberation of spirit from nature and the raising of consciousness from its 
particularity to its universality. The Phenomenology criticizes self-seeking 
desire and shows the constitution of the universal consciousness as spirit 
through reciprocal recognition. The Psychology shows the raising of spirit to 
the universal level of objective spirit in two steps: (1) as spirit's constitution 
of objectivity in the self-externalization of mechanical memory, and (2) as 
practical will which suspends its subjectivity by the subject's own agency 
and becomes a universal will whose content is subsequently specified in 
the institutions of objective spirit. Each in its own way makes the point 
that although spirit is subjective, it is never merely subjective but rather 
is always implicitly if not explicitly intersubjective, social, rational, and 
objective. However, Hegel did not bring all these themes together in a final 
comprehensive and systematic formulation within 'subjective spirit'. We are 
163. Hespe, 'System und Funktion des Philosophie des subjektiven Geistes', in Hespe and 
Tuschling (eds.), Psychologie und Anthropologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, 514. 
164. Ibid., 516. 
51 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
left, not with the unified, coherent doctrine of spirit that Hegel called for 
and seemed to promise, but rather with a tripartite outline in which the 
Phenomenology account of mutual recognition and universal consciousness 
is inserted between the quasi-Aristotelian discussions of soul in the Anthro-
pology, and the Aristotelian and Kantian analyses of theory and practice 
in the Psychology. Thus we are left with several questions. What is spirit? 
What unifies spirit? How do the anthropology, the phenomenology, and the 
psychology fit together and add up to a coherent philosophy of spirit? How 
does the phenomenology relate to the psychology, and how do both, taken 
together, clarify and constitute the 'transition' from subjective to objective 
spirit? These are questions that will need to be examined and sorted out by 
subsequent inquiry. 
8. NOTES ON THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION 
The German edition edited by Franz Hespe and Burkhard Tuschling con-
tains a main text comprised by the Erdmann manuscript, and a supple-
mentary text by Ferdinand Waiter. The juxtaposition of these two texts is 
not sheer coincidence. Erdmann and Waiter themselves were not complete 
strangers, but rather were relatives; Waiter was Erdmann's maternal uncle, 
who was only four years older than Erdmann. By their own account, 
the two lived together in Berlin while attending Hegel's 1827 lectures on 
the Philosophy of Spirit. 165 Much less is known about Waiter than about 
Erdmann. 166 
Erdmann recounts hearing Hegel lecture. Hegel neither dictated his lec-
tures, nor delivered them in such a way that one could record them verba-
tim. Hegel brought several pages of notes with him to class; he searched and 
165. VPG 1827, 269. 
166. Johann Eduard Erdmann (1805-92), German theologian and philosopher, was born 
at Wolmar in Livonia on 13 June 1805. He studied theology at Dorpat and afterwards studied 
both theology and philosophy at Berlin (1826-8), where he attended Hegel's lectures. From 
1829 to 1832 he was a minister of religion in his native town. Afterwards he devoted himself 
to philosophy, and qualified in that subject at Berlin in 1834. In 1836 he was professor-
extraordinary at Halle, became full professor in 1839, and died there on 12 June 1892. He 
published many treatises, including Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie (2 vols., 1866), 
the third edition of which has been translated into English, Leib und Seele (1837), Grundriss 
der Psychologie (1840), Grundriss der Logik und Metaphysik (1841), and Psychologische 
Briefe (1851). Ferdinand Waiter, like Erdmann, was born in Livland. He became a pastor and 
later general superintendant of Livland; this information is taken from his son and biographer 
Julius Waiter (1841-1922), a professor of philosophy in Konigsburg. 
52 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
shuffled through these in order to find the proper terms and expressions. 
Consequently Hegel's lecture style was laborious. The main ideas were 
brought forth by Hegel in pregnant keywords which made clear the general 
substantial sense and spirit of what he wanted to say, but those taking 
the notes also had to formulate the material themselves. Consequently in 
light of this joint activity in transcribing Hegel's lectures, Erdmann believed 
that it would be difficult to decide how Hegel thought (i.e., his thought 
process) concerning a specific point by relying simply on a transcription of 
his lectures. On the other hand Erdmann indicates that Hegel always strove 
to communicate what he thought to his students. Another auditor reported 
'Hegel spoke with a clarity and popularity ... nothing was dialectically 
developed merely to excite or impress his hearers.' 167 
The process of transcribing and writing out the transcription of Hegel's 
lectures did not end in the lecture hall. Erdmann declares that his tran-
script was produced at home on the basis of his own notes. 168 Erdmann's 
text is not a verbatim transcription but a reconstruction; however it is a 
reconstruction based on a living memory of what Hegel said in the lecture. 
This living memory shows itself in Erdmann's own revisions and corrections 
as he recalls and re-thinks the material a second time. 169 In contrast to 
Erdmann, Waiter's text is based not only on his notes, but also on the notes 
of other sources. Waiter's text is more heterogeneous, whereas Erdmann's 
stems from one hand and one source. The German editors conclude that 
neither of the two manuscripts provide the exact words of Hegel, that 
both are the result of individually diverse transcriptions of the lectures 
and hermeneutical working out of the texts. Of course it is possible that 
they both got Hegel wrong, but when we compare their accounts against 
each other and against Hegel's Vorlesebuch outline, that they got Hegel 
wholly wrong seems unlikely. The substantial agreements in those passages 
in which Waiter parallels Erdmann, show that while the transcriptions do 
not offer a literal protocol, they nevertheless reliably document the train of 
thought of the lectures. 170 
The German editors Hespe and Tuschling claim that the Erdmann tran-
script is superior to the previously discovered transcripts of Hotho (1822), 
Griesheim (1825), and Kehler (1825), not only because it is more complete, 
but also because it exhibits a more consistent conceptual unity. In their 
167. Ibid., 270-1 n. 11. 
168. VPG 1827,276. 
169. As an example of such self-correction, the German editors point to Erdmann's replace-
ment of 'the infinite separation' (die unendliche Absonderung) with 'the infinite, absolute' (das 
Unendliche, Absolute) on p. 5 of the German edition (see below, p. 59, I. 1). 
170. VPG 1827,279. 
53 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
judgment its literary form is also superior to any of the others. 171 Moreover, 
it comes from an identifiable source whose reliability can be checked by 
comparing it with the Waiter material. 172 It will give interpreters a third 
alternative to the 'pure' but almost unintelligible text of the handbook 
outline, and Boumann's readable, but questionable, editorial creations. It 
will permit readers to deal more intelligently with Hegel's handbook (Vor-
lesebuch) outline and more critically with the Boumann Zusatze. Finally, 
the 1827 lectures will allow Hegel's handbook outline to function for 
contemporary readers as it did for his students, namely, as the official outline 
and guide to the orally elaborated lecture materials. 
As already noted, the German editors take the Erdmann transcript as 
the main text, and make use of Walter as a variant to the Erdmann. The 
English translation follows this practice, but relegates the Walter material 
to footnotes. It should be noted that in some cases Walter provides a 
variant reading for the Erdmann manuscript, and in some cases Walter 
provides additional material not found in Erdmann. The Walter material 
appears in footnotes which are identified by 'W'. In those cases where Walter 
provides a variant reading, the Erdmann text for which Walter is a variant 
reading is identified in the main text with the tilde character ("') placed 
at the beginning and the end of the text for which Walter offers variant 
material; thus "' ... "' . The note is identified as 'W reads'. In other cases 
Walter provides additional material not found in Erdmann. This material is 
identified as 'W adds' and no tildes are used in the main text. 
The German edition is required to include all variant readings, no matter 
how trivial. Including all the variants would have produced a needlessly 
complicated English text. Consequently, not every variant reading in the 
German text has been translated, but only those which contained significant 
new material or made a substantial addition to the main text. In this sense 
171. See ibid., 279. 
172. Burkhard Tuschling claims that the Waiter material both supplements the Erdmann, 
and provides a way of checking and establishing the reliability of the Erdmann transcript. But 
how can Waiter both supplement the more complete Erdmann transcript while at the same 
time serving as a check on Erdmann's reliability? The Waiter material supplements Erdmann 
in the sense that Waiter provides some additional material not found in Erdmann. The Waiter 
material provides a check for Erdmann in the sense that Waiter frequently provides a parallel 
reading for Erdmann that can be used to check Erdmann's reliability. However, Tuschling also 
observes that the Waiter material is more heterogeneous (multi-sourced) than the Erdmann, 
and that it is not as complete or extensive as the Erdmann transcript. Hence it cannot be used 
to check the entire Erdmann transcript, but only those passages for which the two present 
parallel versions. Since many of these passages are parallel both in wording and in their sense, 
Tuschling believes that the Erdmann transcript as a whole is reliable in capturing not Hegel's 
every word, but the spirit and sense of what Hegel said. 
54 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
the translation is an abridgment and interpretation of the German original. 
But since many of the Waiter additions are substantial and important, they 
have been translated. 
Editorial footnotes, whether from the German editor Burkhard 
Tuschling, or from the translator, are identified thus: [Ed.]. The page num-
bers of the German edition are included in the text of the translation. They 
are preceded by a vertical line: 1. Thus page 100 in the German edition 
is marked in the translation by 1100. Tuschling's interpolations, which are 
often words or phrases written in the margin of the Erdmann manuscript, 
are marked thus < ... >.The translator's interpolations, whether supplying 
a missing word or indicating German terms, are in brackets, thus [ ... ]. 
Making Hegel speak English is not easy, and if Gadamer is correct about 
the extent to which Hegel's thought is embedded in the German language, 
probably nearly impossible. 173 Every translation remains an interpretation 
of, and not a replacement for, the original text. I have appended discussion 
of some translation issues in editor's notes in the text, and sometimes 
included key German terms in brackets [ ... ]. Readers can also consult 
the translation glossary. I have drawn upon the glossaries of the Hegel 
Lectures translation series, as well as those of Harris et al. However, since 
the Philosophy of Spirit material differs from the Logic and from the other 
lectures, this translation's glossary necessarily contains some special terms 
of its own. 
What to do about aufheben? As is well known, Hegel explains that it 
means both to cancel and to preserve on a higher level. Rather than follow-
ing Stirling who coined the term 'sublate' and imposed on it the second sense 
of 'preserve' that Hegel claimed for 'aufheben,' I have accepted Suchting's 
proposal to translate 'aufheben' as 'suspend' rather than as sublate. In 
contrast to sublate, 'suspend' is felicitously ambiguous in Hegel's sense: it 
means 'to put out of operation,' and 'to hang from', i.e., to be lifted up and 
to depend on that from which one 'hangs'. 174 While I cannot speak for the 
Logic, I can say that 'suspend' best conveys the sense of many passages in the 
Philosophy of Spirit, particularly those dealing with organism and organic 
process. If an organism fails to suspend the independence of its members, 
let alone their contradictions and conflicts, it fails to sustain itself as a vital 
living being, and becomes ill or perishes. If it does suspend those conflicts, 
the organism also surmounts them, and they are suspended from and are 
preserved in and depend on the organic totality as it in turn organizes 
173. H. G. Gadamer, Hegel's Dialectic: Five Hermeneutical Studies, trans. P. C. Smith (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1976), 112. 
174. See Suchting's Minority Report in The Encyclopedia Logic, pp. xxxv-xxxvi. 
55 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
and reproduces itself in them. In any case the reader is referred to Hegel's 
own explanation of aufheben in the Science of Logic, 175 and to the debate 
between Suchting and Harris in their translation of the Encyclopedia Logic. 
Translating Hegel is a demanding task, especially without an official 
translation team. Fortunately several institutions and people assisted me. 
I should like to acknowledge research support from the University of Illi-
nois at Chicago, Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research, and a Sum-
mer Scholar grant from Hiram College. In addition, the German editors, 
Burkhard Tuschling and Franz Hespe, have offered support and encourage-
ment in support of this translation. Thanks go to Burkhard Tuschling for a 
close scrutiny of portions of the translation, and to Franz Hespe for clarify-
ing Hegel's discussion of the Phoenician alphabet. Thanks also go to Waiter 
Jaeschke, director of the Hegel Archive in Bochum, for helpful discussions of 
this difficult text, and to Rolf-Peter Horstmann for helpful criticism of the 
translator's introduction. I wish to acknowledge the unflagging assistance 
of Claudia Fritsch, my research assistant, who reviewed the translation, 
caught many errors, and made interesting observations about how Hegel's 
lecture style is reflected in the transcript. Thanks go to Benjamin Steiner, 
a teaching assistant at Hiram College, for correcting the early draft of the 
Anthropology. Thanks go to George di Giovanni, for his helpful advice on 
rendering some 'impossible terms' like Seelenhaftigkeit. That too will be 
discussed in a translator's note. Thanks also go to Peter Hodgson who made 
valuable suggestions about translating Hegel and encouragement about 
improving the style of Erdmann's manuscript and Hegel's often repetitive 
lecturing. To that end I have shortened some long sentences and broken 
long passages up into shorter paragraphs that reflect discrete themes and 
topics. The remaining errors are my responsibility. 
175. Hegel, Science of Logic, 106 ff. 
56 
Robert R. Williams 
Chicago, June 2006 

INTRODUCTION 
I Our object is the philosophy of spirit or anthropology and psychology. 
3 
Anthropology as such considers spirit in its natural life, when spirit is still 
immersed in nature, and appears as spirit in conflict and in relation to 
corporeity. Psychology has for its object spirit as it relates to and develops 
[freely] out of itself. The phenomenology of spirit, spirit as consciousness, 
stands between anthropology and psychology. In anthropology spirit is 
immersed in its natural corporeity; in psychology spirit constitutes itself in 
its freedom, i.e., free spirit. Between these two is the process wherein spirit 
<begins> to step forth from nature, while still referring to and standing 
in relation to nature. The second [stage] is spirit as consciousness, or spirit 
in its phenomena. Here we exist and know something, i.e., have an object 
externally, and at the same time we know ourselves. I am related to myself 
and at the same time relate myself to something other that is not I. I relate 
myself to an object that is related to itself. Thus we begin to consider spirit 
in general. It is a worthy object. Here we consider only the finite spirit, but 
in it the essential substance is to be spirit. It has this in common with the 
infinite spirit, to be spirit. 
When we speak of the worthiness of the spirit, it can occur to us when 
we distinguish nature from spirit and oppose nature to spirit, [to ask] which 
is superior and which is the more worthy? 1 In a true examination of spirit 
we find that spirit compares itself with nature, is essentially directed towards 
nature, and has its own nature together with nature in general as the objects 
of its activity. It has been often said as a general view that the works of 
human beings are considered to have less value than nature. I The human 
4 
being is natural, but as human, he is supposed not to be merely natural, but 
also to be spiritual. [Yet] there is a widespread view that human effects and 
doings are so far inferior to natural events and to the entry of nature into 
1. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §248A for a similar account of the relation between spirit and 
nature. 
57 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
[human] arrangements and works that one can often find the natural called 
divine in contrast to the human. For example, floods and other natural 
disasters have been regarded as acts of God, as acts greater than humans are 
able to accomplish. [Moreover] art and other human products are supposed 
to be inferior to the works of nature. The process of nature is represented as 
something eternal, unchangeable, divine, while the human is represented as 
belonging to contingency and to arbitrary freedom, which deserves less to 
be appreciated than the natural. However, if we are supposed to determine 
the true relation [between spirit and nature], the reverse is the case. When 
the human being thinks for himself and explores the depth of his spirit, 
he knows that his freedom is something far superior to all the creations 
and products of nature. Through his freedom the human being knows that 
he is more sublime. The human being knows his freedom, his spirit, justly 
as something divine in a far higher sense than anything natural. When the 
human being is spiritual, and his spirit is free, so spirit and freedom are 
present in everything, even in what appears as the least. In everything human 
there is included the infinite stamp of spirit, [namely] freedom. If we bring 
the representation of God [to this stamp of spirit], it is clumsy and artless to 
desire to <see> God only on the side of nature, but not on the side of the 
human. God is essentially spirit2 and if God is to be known, God must be 
known spiritually; God's acts are essentially spiritual acts. 
If it is said that God thunders and is known in thundering, 3 something 
higher than thunder is required for the human being conscious of his 
freedom and spirituality. God as spirit is not essentially revealed to him 
in such natural phenomena. From this perspective the object of spirit is 
to be regarded as something more worthy. This object may be regarded 
as most comprehensible and easiest to know. We ourselves are spirit, and 
5 
I when we know spirit we are at home with ourselves. However, even if 
spirit appears to be the closest to us because no separation occurs, this does 
not mean that spirit is the first thing that presents itself for consideration. 
Finite spirit stands between two realms: one, the natural, is the corporal; 
the other, distinct from and opposed to nature is the infinite, the absolute. 
The finite spirit finds itself between the two. The human being is spirit, is 
spiritual in its relation to God, but finite in its connection with nature. God 
and nature are prior in the order of consideration to the human spirit. In 
the beginning of our lives we consider first external things, and then from 
these we rise from the finite to that which exists in and for itself. The human 
being is at first directed outwards, and outside of him there is both the finite 
2. [Ed.] John 4: 24. 
3. [Ed.] Job 37: 5. 
58 

INTRODUCTION 
and temporal, and the infinite, the absolute. It is later that the human being 
returns to himself and directs his consideration and interest towards himself. 
In regard to the science of spirit, it should be noted that the command of 
the delphic Apollo was first given to the Greeks as their highest command: 
know yourself. 4 This is not to be taken as one command among others, 
but as the command of the knowing God, in comparison with which 
everything else is only subordinate and dependent. This is also not to be 
understood as a command that the individual should know himself in his 
particular ends, inclinations, and weaknesses, rather it is the command of 
the knowing God, a general command that the human being should know 
his essence, i.e., the spirit. For spirit to have given this command to the 
Greeks, special conditions and modes of self-consciousness were required, 
and these conditions were first met by the Greeks. Peoples have developed 
their science in reference to some objects, but not to other objects. Thus the 
Greeks had no physics in our sense. If a people such as the Indians and the 
Chinese specialize in science, it goes without saying that this science will 
not have spirit for its object. In order for the science of spirit [Geisteswis-
senschaft] to have significance for a people, it is necessary that spirit itself 
have infinite value and importance for knowledge. It has such significance 
and importance only as free spirit I that is, when spirit has come to the 
6 
consciousness of its own freedom. This consciousness [of freedom] began 
with the Greeks, for there it came to pass that spirit began to come to itself 
and know itself. 5 
Greek spirit proceeded from oriental exuberance. One characteristic of 
the latter is slavery towards absolute being. Here religion itself is despotism, 
with which political despotism is connected: on the one hand despotism, 
and on the other, subjection to the absolute being. Opposed to oriental 
exuberance and unrestricted arbitrariness is that condition wherein the 
human being has joy in himself. Such contentment he finds only in that 
freedom which is the measure and limit of ethical life. The task of knowing 
oneself is bound up with this consciousness. This consciousness of freedom 
bestows on the human being a universal interest in his inner life, but in 
his inner life he finds a wealth of interests and manifold contradictions 
between such interests, a chaotic wealth in which he is pulled first in one 
direction and then in another. In this plurality one is the truest and highest, 
to which the human being has subordinated the multiplicity of his desiring 
4. [Ed.] The inscription of the temple of Apollo at Delphi; it is repeated at the end of the 
lecture. For Hegel, self-knowledge (Selbsterkenntnis) is the central task of philosophy. See also 
Encyclopedia §377 Addition, and Philosophy of Right §343 Addition. 
5. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §482A. 
59 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
and willing. The [chief] interest is to isolate and identify this one, the true 
in the midst of these riches, the true determination among the many that 
stand in tension and contradiction. The matter is not yet settled merely by 
self-reference. Through the consciousness of its freedom spirit has become a 
riddle to itself insofar as self-contradictory determinations occur in a single 
[consciousness]. The solution to this riddle is the simple meaning wherein 
everything apparently contradictory makes sense, is explained, and is put in 
its proper place. 
If it is asked, what is spirit? the proper sense of this question is what 
is essential in spirit, and this is equivalent to the question, what is the 
vocation6 [Bestimmung] of the human as such? Vocation expresses on the 
one hand a difference [between what is, and what is supposed to be], an end, 
a purpose that is supposed to be achieved. [That is,] what should the human 
being make of himself? What should he be? What should he bring forth in 
himself by his freedom? On the other hand, vocation means the origin, what 
the human being is in himself [an sich]. The human being is supposed to 
bring himself about, but he cannot make himself to be anything other, and 
can have no other end, except what he originally is in himself. What the 
human being is in himself is called his fundamental disposition or tendency. 
The nature of spirit is to bring forth what it is, to bring it to manifestation, 
7 
to disclosure, to consciousness. I The vocation of spirit is to make itself be 
what it is in itself.-This is a tremendous distinction: what spirit is in itself, 
and what spirit is supposed to bring forth of itself. The content is one and 
the same; there is only a difference in form-that spirit makes itself become 
what it originally is. Every interest in the history of the world spirit turns 
on this distinction: to bring to consciousness what [the] in itself is, so that 
this inner potential also comes to be explicit and for itself. This absolute 
disposition is that to which everything else reduces, the origin. The absolute 
disposition or substance of spirit is its freedom, and the destiny of its action, 
6. [Ed.] The term Bestimmung has a variety of meanings, e.g., 'determination', 'definition', 
'condition', and 'vocation'. When, as in this passage, it is taken in a practical sense, it means 
'vocation' or 'destiny'. However, destiny is often associated with fate. German philosophical 
dictionaries refer to Fichte's Bestimmung des Menschen as an example, which is translated 
into English as 'The Vocation of Man'. Here vocation is not intended in the narrow sense 
of a special divine calling to a particular profession, but in a teleological-rational sense. This 
rational sense of vocation is explained in these passages, where Hegellinks the human vocation 
to the command given to the Greeks by the oracle of Apollo at Delphi, namely, gnothi seauton, 
know yourself. Self-knowledge is both a condition and a result in Hegel's developmental 
anthropology. The human being has to discover and then become what it implicitly is. Hegel 
reinterprets this command to self-knowledge as the command of the knowing God. At the 
conclusion of this lecture course, Hegel returns to this theme of a divine call (Ruf) to self-
knowledge as the supreme end of spirit. 
60 

INTRODUCTION 
the act of spirit is to liberate itself. That spirit is free in itself, that its efficacy, 
its activity, is to liberate itself, and the history of its liberation- this is what 
our discipline is all about: It is our task to watch spirit achieving by itself 
its vocation and its destiny, namely, freedom. Thereby both the content and 
the point of view are given from which we want to consider this discipline. 
We examine the series of stages through which spirit liberates itself, and the 
goal is that spirit comes to be free, as free spirit. With this liberation the 
science of objective spirit, i.e., the spirit that is objective to itself, begins, 
and with this liberation right also begins. 
Concerning the method of treating our object, we should recall the forms 
of self-knowledge and [empirical] human knowledge. 7 In this empirical 
human knowledge [Menschenkenntnis] we have in mind the particularity 
of human beings only. <As for> self-knowledge that we are supposed to 
possess, we focus in particular on the deficiency of the inclinations. The 
human being should know with what weaknesses it is afflicted. Prudence 
[Besonnenheit] in behavior, etc., is important, but it cannot be the object 
of science. 'One should become acquainted with human beings in order 
to use them, in order to be on one's guard against them, and so forth.' 
All this refers to the particularity of human beings, a particularity that is 
either indifferent or untrue. The genuine element in the human being is 
its correspondence to the nature of its spirit. The former prudence leads 
easily to a surveillance of human beings, a type of treachery. This type of 
human knowledge is specially recommended as advantageous-[ namely] to 
use human beings for one's [own] ends [and] to protect oneself from others. 
The empirical human knowledge I connected with psychology has been 
8 
particularly invoked in pragmatic history. 8 History has two dimensions. 
The first is the substantial element, the end, the content, and the second 
is that this content is set in motion by the subjective. Actualization is the 
relevant aspect, and the particularity etc., the individual, everything that 
is specially emphasized in pragmatic history, falls on this subjective side. In 
order to clarify a topic, to isolate its ground, [the pragmatic historians] went 
back to intentions. In this way great undertakings have been minimized, 
since they are explained by subjective satisfactions etc., although [subjective] 
particularity in fact played only a peripheral role in the acting subject. On 
the contrary, great undertakings cannot be derived from particularity. For 
7. [Ed.] See Encyclopedia §377 Addition. Here Hegel criticizes W. T. Krug, Allgemeines 
Handworterbuch der philosophischen Wissenschaften nebst ihrer Literatur und Geschichte, 
1827 ff. 
8. [Ed.] For Hegel's criticism of pragmatic history writing, cf. Encyclopedia §§ 140A, 
377A, 549A. 
61 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
example, a great man is not a hero to his valet, although the valet 'can 
observe the great man when he is not [acting like] a hero, and therefore 
should know him the best'. 9 This [kind of] knowledge of the human there-
forefocuses [only] on the particular, not on the universal, on spirit. 
Spirit then became the object of science, and there were at that time two 
sciences, empirical psychology and pneumatology. 10 Empirical psychology 
provides a knowledge of spirit as the latter is observed and researched. 
Pneumatology provided such determinations of spirit as for example, imma-
teriality, on which the concept of immortality was based. However, with 
these determinations one still knows very little about spirit as concretely 
developed. To comprehend spirit concretely, it is necessary to turn to 
experience-since there is not much to be got from metaphysics-and to 
fetch concreteness there. In this way experience has to supplement the 
poverty of the metaphysical, a priori consideration of spirit, and in this 
way this psychology grounds itself in experience. It has been a common 
misunderstanding that philosophy devalues and reduces experience. But 
experience belongs to everything that human beings know; they must have 
inner and outer intuitions of objects, and they obtain these only through 
experience. Experience is essential and indispensable. 
The next step is to think experience. Experience means more than mere 
sensible grasping or mere perception; it already includes a universality 
9 
within itself. If something I is supposed to count as experience, there must 
be a law, something universal, and not merely a particular perception. This 
something must be raised by thinking to universality. Universality requires 
thinking. 11 Individual observations are raised by thought to universality; 
only then do they count as experience. Whether what is present in percep-
tion is rightly comprehended depends on this universality, this category, 
so that experience is supposed to be universaL-It is a quite different 
matter if the empirical form of perception itself is supposed to be made 
the foundation of philosophy. Philosophy must contradict this. Insight into 
necessity and the comprehension of necessity are the task of philosophy, 
but experience signifies merely that something is. Philosophy [to be sure] 
must agree with what is actual. It considers what actually is, and what is 
9. [Ed.] A reference to Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit (1807), trans. A. V. Miller, 404. 
10. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §§34, 378, 389. 
11. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia § §465 ff., where thinking is presented as not merely sub-
jective, i.e., not merely as happening in the mind, but is to be understood in the sense of 
the Aristotelian-Leibnizian entelecheia, that is to say, both as an intellectual activity and an 
objective structure and process. 
62 

INTRODUCTION 
must allow of being proved. But philosophy shows the necessity, and this 
knowledge of necessity experience does not attain. 
In order to experience, one must be capable of thought and reason. 
Thus experience and empirical psychology on the one hand, and philosophy 
and conceptual thinking on the other, are not opposed to each other as is 
often falsely believed. Philosophy contradicts only the assumption that the 
fact that something is should be the final ground of its validity. One must 
also have insight into the necessity. The other aspect in which philosophy 
contradicts empiricism is that the latter is by no means without meta-
physics. Experience contains general thought-determinations and everything 
depends on whether these empiricist thought-determinations are true. It 
is the [metaphysical] aspect of these empiricist thought-determinations to 
which philosophy is opposed. 
In psychology representations of the will and imagination are introduced. 
These we can acquire without much education. Philosophy finds this dou-
bled element deficient, namely, in regard to the category no necessity is 
demonstrated. It is said that the human being possesses imagination and 
so forth; 12 these faculties are set alongside each other. Different modes of 
action are discovered, and these are juxtaposed in such a way that their 
only connection is the 'also' [das Auch]. They are [thus related] like things 
in space, indifferent to each other, I each in its own place. The category of 
10 
force [here] is defective, since it is imagined that this force has such-and-such 
modes of producing effects. Each of these forces is taken as independent, 
even when one says that spirit possesses them. They are not bound in a 
unity that constitutes them. When things are imagined thus, their unity is 
not evident. This is the defect in [the empiricist view of] the categories. 
The connecting 'also' always allows the independence of every activity and 
their mutual indifference. The soul appears as an external connection of all 
these diverse types of powers and activities. This is a defect in respect to 
form, and one has a [negative] feeling against this way of treating spirit and 
splitting it up, because we know that spirit is only a unity; this [analytical] 
splintering contradicts the self-consciousness that spirit is utterly one. In the 
philosophical mode of consideration, the concept, the concrete unity, must 
replace the category of the 'also', this abstract [external] connection. In this 
way the splintering of spirit is overcome and corrected. This deficient unity 
also becomes evident in another way; this unity also has another form. I 
am one, and all these activities are absolutely united in me. As the one, I 
12. [Ed.] For Hegel's critique of empirical psychology, cf. Encyclopedia §§135A, 259A, 
379,387A,442,445A,471A. 
63 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
am not only a substrate, but a subject, so my end is also essentially only 
one, and my action is directed to one end. However, according to empiricist 
psychology, each of these powers [Krafte] has a different end, and special 
ends are presupposed which these faculties serve. But since spirit is only 
one, it has only one end, and those many ends are subordinate to it. This 
subordination appears as a splintering. To be sure, some say 'activities' 
instead of powers, and this is some <improvement> but not much. For 
since these activities have entirely separate contents, they remain external 
and isolated from each other, and so the same deficiency remains. 
Pneumatology or rational psychology also exhibits this [abstract] mode 
of consideration. Here the soul is not supposed to be considered according 
to its phenomena, but according to what it essentially is. Pneumatology 
is the metaphysical consideration of the soul according to entirely gen-
11 
eral definitions and determinations. Matter is regarded I as a composite 
manifold in itself, as an aggregate of many. In the [abstract] simple there 
is no determination of and by the other; the simple is not supposed to 
have other-being [Anderssein] in itself. If something is supposed to undergo 
alteration, the possibility of the alteration must reside in the thing itself. 
These metaphysical determinations are to be found in Plato's Phaedo. 13 
These determinations are one-sided; [however] the true must be concrete. 
The [merely] abstract has no truth. In what is simple there is no determi-
nation by the other; in Phaedo Plato's concern was to assert the simplicity 
of the soul. But that which is simple has the determination to pass over 
[into its opposite]. Being-for-itself is a simplicity, but it also essentially has 
an intensive element, a degree. Kant objected that if the soul is qualitatively 
simple, it could nevertheless be quantitatively the opposite. 14 Consequently 
simplicity does not exclude intensity nor is it saved from it. The soul is 
consciousness, and if this is represented under the quality of intensity, it can 
be in a higher or lower degree. Complete weakness of consciousness does 
not suspend the simplicity of the soul. Pneumatology also treats the relation 
between soul and body. The soul is for itself, simple, while matter is the 
opposite, [namely] manifold. The soul has relation to matter, and relation 
presupposes something in common, a community or unity. But how can the 
simple be in unity with that which is complex and manifold? 
Does it not cease to be the simple when it is touched by matter? The 
disentanglement of this contradiction constitutes the difficulty. Pneumatol-
ogy defines the soul according to what it is; however the soul is not a 
13. [Ed.] Plato, Phaedo 105b-107a. 
14. [Ed.] Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B 414-15. 
64 

INTRODUCTION 
being, rather it is essentially active, a manifold, and must be conceived as 
spirit. Abstractions like simplicity are insufficient to determine the richness 
and abundance of spirit, because spirit is more than something simple or a 
mere being. The concept of the soul includes both the simplicity of rational 
psychology, and the multiplicity, the rich content of empirical psychology. 
[Only] the two taken together amount to a full consideration. Each taken 
by itself is one-sided. The unity of both belongs to the idea, but not the 
abstract unity. Empirical psychology represents the soul as disintegrated, 
and what Aristotle has written about the soul is still to be recommended as 
the most philosophical. 15 Like everything else, Aristotle conceives the soul 
speculatively in its concept, and philosophy needs I to return to this manner 
12 
of consideration. 
Recently there have been many attempts16 to systematize the science of 
spirit, which contains a treasure of materials. In the beginning, the concept 
of spirit must be treated in a preliminary way and a division [of the subject] 
must be made. However we cannot follow the order of paragraphs, 17 
because spirit is treated there as a unity in the context of the whole. A 
scientific treatment does not begin with spirit; rather spirit constitutes a 
form of existence of the idea. Of course, we begin with spirit, but this is not 
a proper first beginning because it depends on a presupposition: we take 
spirit first of all from representation. However, in the progress of science, 
spirit is a result in the sense that it is the truth of something that precedes it, 
namely, nature. Nature gathers itself and returns to the determinate form of 
the idea. If spirit is the truth of what precedes it, it is in fact prior to what 
precedes it, and the position that spirit is a result, is shown to be one-sided. 
There is a reversal from result to beginning, to starting point. That spirit 
and the idea are the truth will not be proven here, but will be taken as a 
premise. The point where this is to be proven is the connection with nature, 
that spirit is the truth of nature. The whole preceding discussion is a proof 
of this. 
What is spirit? This we have to assume as a premise, and to appeal to 
the representation [of spirit]. What spirit is, the concept of spirit, can at 
first only be something entirely formal, because what spirit is is the concern 
of our entire <discipline>. This part can only contain the formal universal 
essence, the substance of spirit, and this is freedom. How this determination 
15. [Ed.] Hegel refers to Aristotle, De Anima: Encyclopedia §378. 
16. [Ed.] References to A. K. A.von Eschenmayer, Psychologie in drei Teilen as empirische, 
reine und angewandte (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1817, 1822), and H. Steffens, Anthropologie 
(Breslau, 1822). 
17. [Ed.] That is, the order of paragraphs of the Encyclopedia. 
65 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
[freedom] is connected to nature, we shall see afterwards. The essence of 
spirit is freedom; this assertion has its proof in the preceding and the entire 
discussion that follows will constitute the explanation and demonstration 
of this proposal. 
The human being is spirit. What is the innermost, concentrated nature, 
the root of spirit? Freedom, I, thinking. I am spirit, the concrete, and when 
I take together all that appears to me, I say 'I' and only a human being 
can do that. The I is a completely simple representation, and is simple 
13 insofar as I can I abstract from everything, i.e., negate everything. When 
I say 'pure I' I have abstracted from all content. There is nothing particular 
or determinate therein. The pure I is this utterly simple universal that exists 
only through the activity of negating and abstracting. Since I have removed 
every particular from myself, I am absolutely only by myself, and with 
nothing other, as for example, I am when I intuit something. If I have an 
end, this end is always a determinate content in contrast to the universal that 
I am. The entirely colorless light18 represents the I in nature, and the fact 
that I am only at home with myself and am not affected by or dependent on 
anything other-this is human freedom. Freedom consists in the fact that 
the human being can abstract from everything, even from life and from 
the entire encompassing world of consciousness. In representation I can 
abstract from everything, and even in actuality as such I can abstract from 
all inner existence. This latter fact of abstraction shows that all my ends 
and interests are external to me, insofar as they are different from me and 
from my I. This exclusive being-only-by-self is freedom, first of all, formal 
freedom. 
"'All determinations and activities proceed from freedom and are sub-
14 
ordinate to freedom."' 19 The human being can"'bear infinite I anguish. 
This is the special prerogative of freedom, conceived as concrete freedom. 
Anguish is experienced only by the living being. Anguish is negative, and yet 
in this negation we preserve ourselves; this is a contradiction. 20 Self-feeling 
18. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia Philosophy of Nature §§275-8. Colorless light is indeterminate, 
prior to, and without distinctions or differentiations. This is spirit in its slumber, not yet for 
itself as spirit. 
19. W reads: <All other determinations of the nature of spirit and its activities are only 
moments and modifications of freedom.> 
20. [Ed.] Cf. Science of Logic, trans. Miller, p. 770 (corrected)' ... since it is the absolute 
identity in this disruption, the living being is for itself this disruption and has the feeling of 
this contradiction, which is anguish. Anguish is therefore the prerogative of living beings; 
because they are the existent concept, they are an actuality of infinite power such that they are 
within themselves the negative of themselves, their negativity is for them, and they maintain 
themselves in their otherness. It is said that contradiction is unthinkable; but the fact is that in 
the anguish of a living being contradiction is even an actual existence.' 
66 

INTRODUCTION 
is affirmative in the sense that, when it is negated, it does not disappear-
which is not the case in nature. [In spirit] contradiction as such comes 
to light. In injury, the negation of my self-feeling is itself still my self-
feeling. What negates spirit is subordinate to spirit's affirmation, its unity 
with itself. This is the determination of freedom as such. Abstract freedom 
means that I am capable of suspending all content, all determinations in 
me. Concrete freedom means that in whatever determines, limits, or negates 
me, I nevertheless remain at home with myself [ nur bei mir selbst bin] and 
annihilate the other[ness]. Freedom constitutes the essential determination 
of spirit, and we can say that freedom is the concept of spirit.~21 By 'con-
cept' is understood first of all the simple determination that constitutes the 
distinctive characteristic of something. However, the philosophical concept 
is a simple determinacy that includes difference as suspended, so that the 
subject is rendered determinate, and incorporates the difference in such a 
way that in this difference it has returned to itself. ~The concept includes 
the difference, but the difference is at the same time transparent. I have 
many determinations that are incompatible with me, and in this difference 
I am nevertheless at home with myself, and have returned to myself. In 
this science we have to grasp the finite firmly in both its difference and its 
unity.~ 22 
I Freedom is the concept itself that has come to existence. In every sen-
15 
sible intuition there is an external object; insofar as it is my representation, 
I am at home with myself, since I am together with this content. There 
is a difference, but I have negated it. Philosophy means that we consider 
21. W reads: The human being can bear anguish-herein lies what belongs to the nature 
of freedom in its concrete [normative] determination. <Only the living [being] experiences 
anguish.> Anguish is something negative that is in us. (We have a defect and are discontent 
etc. = anguish = negative.) To endure anguish means that we preserve ourselves in spite of 
the negative that is in us. There is a contradiction in this. 'I am simple' <is> an affirmative, 
and 'I am hungry' a negative. If now the affirmative is negated, one means [falsely] that it 
disappears. In nature this is true, as for example, red is the negative of non-red, or light cannot 
endure its negation. In contrast, in the living and even more so in spiritual matters this is 
not so. If I am hungry, this is a negative, it contradicts my affirmative feeling of self, and 
nevertheless I feel this.-Self-negation is immanent in it, but subordinate to its affirmation, 
its unity.-The determination of formal <or abstract> freedom is that I am capable of 
suspending all determinations in me. The determination of concrete freedom is that I exist 
in my determination, that I annihilate it and persist by myself. This is the abstract concept of 
freedom that is the fundamental determination of our spirit. 
22. W reads: a difference that is at the same no difference, immediately as a suspended 
difference. I am simple; I have determinations in me, that are other than me (intuitions, 
perceptions), that are unbearable also for another (pain, anguish); but nevertheless from this 
difference, I have returned to myself. It is only my intuition, and therefore it is no other, it 
is in me and is mine. In science we must, above all, grasp the finite firmly, know it< in its> 
difference and its unity. 
67 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
everything in this medium of freedom sub specie aeterni.23 ~The determi-
nation of freedom is also what we call ideality. A difference is posited but its 
independence is at the same time suspended. I comport myself idealistically; 
I look at something and it is independent over and against me, but this 
whole representation [of independence] is mine; I am the bearer of it, and 
the object's independence is ideal. 
The fundamental determination of spirit is freedom; in freedom every-
thing is posited as ideal. We allow this as valid, but we take up now another 
aspect, namely, nature, which stands in contrast and next to spirit. Here we 
place ourselves at a standpoint where we have to consider these two not 
as side by side, but rather as constitutive of the ideality of the external in 
its entire scope. This is the speculative standpoint, from which we likewise 
have to conceive spirit."-'24 Spirit is to be regarded as higher than nature. But 
the speculative standpoint requires that ideality be considered as the truth 
of nature itself. It requires that the freedom of spirit is to be taken as the one 
and only, what is truly actual, not merely as something higher. Two points 
need to be made: (1) that this is the speculative standpoint, and (2) that we 
16 
have to show I how we arrive at and demonstrate this standpoint. The latter 
is the transition from nature, which has the sense that nature is the eternal 
activity of turning itself into the ideal, of being eternally only what issues 
from spirit. Nature, which includes the concept as a law, is this: to be the 
process of bringing the concept to existence, and the existent concept is the 
concept in its freedom, namely spirit. This standpoint will be demonstrated 
by the connection with nature in the concept. The standpoint in terms of 
which I preserve myself in contrast to nature, will itself emerge from this sin-
gularity in the form of consciousness. We are at the speculative standpoint, 
and what is to be shown is the form in which the need for the speculative has 
manifested itself. The speculative in the proper sense grasps a unity of those 
differences that ordinary consciousness and the understanding keep entirely 
23. [Ed.] Spinoza, Ethics V: Prop. XXX; cf. also V: Prop. XXIX, ll: Prop. XLIV 
Corollary 2. 
24. W reads: Freedom = Ideality. The ideal is anything determinate and different in some 
way, but in such a way that the difference <its independence> is at the same time suspended. 
(I comport myself idealistically; I look at the house. The house is reality, independent of me. 
But the entire content of my representation is no longer independent; only I, the bearer of this 
content am independent.) 
Since in spirit everything is posited as ideal <or since the fundamental determination of 
spirit is freedom> we allow it to count as valid. But the ordinary representation allows the 
spirit to be on one side, but nature next to it on the other side. That is not so here! Here we do 
not have freedom and reality (nature) next to each other, but we have to take freedom <or the 
ideality of the external> in its entire scope so that freedom is the all-encompassing. This is the 
speculative standpoint in which we likewise have to take up spirit. 
68 

INTRODUCTION 
separate. Understanding has the characteristic of establishing and fixing the 
finite. Reason negates and suspends the finite. "-'We have taken nature in the 
metaphysical, abstract sense as matter. 25 Spirit and matter are different ....... 26, 
a dualism, a difference that counts as something absolutely independent, 27 
but the unity of spirit is opposed to such dualism. This contradiction of 
reason's demand for unity can be dissolved in two ways: 
1. when it is said28 that matter is essential, while spirit is merely an 
appearance, form, or modification [of matter]. This is the standpoint 
of materialism which answers the speculative need to suspend the 
dualism of the understanding. This dualism is also I expressed linguis-
17 
tically as a dualism between God and world, between good and evil; 
such dualism constitutes a general difficulty. The human being who 
has not yet reached the level of reason allows [contradictions] to stand 
peaceably alongside each other. But if the need for reason arises, spirit 
presses towards unity. This unity is so conceived that matter is the true, 
while spirit is its product. If matter thus unites things, then spirit would 
come forth as fleeting and transitory. This standpoint of materialism 
is approximately that of naturalism-a mode of thought particularly 
favored in France. However, one should not thus misunderstand, but 
rather honor the demand for unity. 
2. Spirit is self-sufficient, genuine, while nature is only an appearance of 
spirit, and not something in and for itself, not something truly real. 
Materialism is much preferable to this spiritualistic idealism, since its 
view is that matter is independent and spirit is dependent. "-'Idealism 
has much against it, because one needs only to touch matter in order 
to experience resistance. It is folly to deny the reality of matter."'-'29 
Materialism satisfies the demand for unity, and human beings are easily 
inclined to abandon the reality of the spiritual in favor of the sensible. Our 
25. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §389A. 
26. W reads: The difference, which ensues from our discussion is spirit and matter (Nature 
in metaphysical abstraction). 
27. W adds: Spirit on the one hand and matter on the other are independent.-In elemen-
tary thinking, where only understanding rules, this distinction counts and it originates <and 
to be sure this dualism comes to expression everywhere (good and evil, etc.) and constitutes 
the most difficulty. So long as human beings remain at the level of understanding, this dualism 
counts. But where the need of reason opens up, spirit presses on towards unity, to conceive the 
difference in a unity, in some sort of relationship.> 
28. [Ed.] Encyclopedia §389A. See also d' Holbach, Systeme de la nature (London, 1770). 
29. W reads: This (idealism=) spiritualism has the disadvantage that the sensible exists in 
our consciousness as essentially real. <lt> is <therefore> difficult to make people believe this 
view. 
69 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
ordinary consciousness holds fast to the sensible, and rightly. However, its 
standpoint is not the absolute standpoint. It is easy to believe that there 
is no other standpoint for considering things. Therefore, before we doubt 
that physical things are real, it can be that we doubt the self-sufficiency of 
the soul, and that lends support to materi::dism. Further, matter is taken to 
be lawful, and nature as a system where everything takes place according 
to laws. In reference to spirit, many experiences can be adduced to show 
that spirit is dependent, the result of nature, illness etc. The essentiality 
18 
of matter is thus emphasized <against> I the dependence of spirit. The 
opposed view is that the spiritual alone is real. It is difficult to make this 
plausible. "-'In Germany materialism has met with less acceptance."'3° For 
the Frenchman with his rationality, with his consistency, everything must be 
one; in Germany matter was independent, but so was spirit. If one regards 
spirit as the true power of the material, 31 this view has found acceptance. 
It is implied when we say that spirit is the only genuine reality in contrast 
to nature. It also occurs to us concerning spirit that when, (here we are 
thinking arbitrarily not of all but rather of only a few human beings, 32 ) we 
come to believe in the miraculous, that matter cannot withstand spiritual 
power. In order to avoid such a view-this wild dissolution of the orderly 
process of natural law33-
we remain either with "-'materialism or with 
dead-end dualism"'. 34 Miracles go together with religion; we can pass over 
this aspect of the question. 
With animal magnetism [hypnotism] we discover that we cannot manage 
with the independence of either one side or the other. 35 The affections of 
the spirit can kill a human being. 36 In magnetism the spiritual appears as a 
power above natural laws; its phenomena contradict the order of nature. In 
natural entities a series of mediations constitutes the natural law-whatever 
is must have its cause-and this order is lacking in magnetism. In this case 
19 
we are on the field of wonders. One struggles I against such experiences 
because they push one into the arms of superstition. These are the two 
opposed views wherein spiritualism has the disadvantage. 
30. W reads: In Germany materialism was less marketable than in France, and therein as 
well as in their constitutions, etc., the difference of these peoples expressed itself. 
31. W adds: so that the natural must be subordinate to the will of spirit. 
32. W reads: and if one does not assume this arbitrariness as befitting every spirit, so 
nevertheless [we think of it as befitting] a few,-. 
33. W reads: natural necessity. 
34. W reads: a connection of sovereign matter and sovereign spirit, this dualism.-Miracles 
35. [Ed.] Encyclopedia §379; cf. A. C. A. Eschenmayer, Psychologie in drei Teilen as 
empirische, reine und angewandte (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1817, 1822). 
36. W adds: kill, because an illness can disrupt and derange the spirit. 
70 

INTRODUCTION 
In such phenomena we <also> find the need of our time, namely, to 
"'Comprehend the relation of spirit to matter "". 37 It has been said that we 
assert that the fundamental essence of spirit is freedom. This is freedom 
from and in the natural. Freedom must not be conceived as arbitrariness 
but as lawful freedom. -
This relation of spirit is our chief object, and the 
fundamental relation of the concept is the first matter we have to consider. 
Before this examination, I want to provide an overview of what we have 
to deal with. Our discipline shows the way of liberation. Spirit is free, but 
first it is merely implicitly free in itself. It has to bring forth what it is 
implicitly in itself. 38 This process is the content of our discipline: to liberate 
oneself, i.e., to liberate oneself from nature. This has a threefold dimension. 
1. The relation of spirit to "'nature, or its unity with nature, how it is 
only in itself or for us, a unity that lies beyond consciousness"'. 39 I 
have said 'unity'. But this is actually a poor, superficial expression that 
one can use as an abbreviation. In philosophy we have to do with 
the specific determinacy of unity, and without this determinacy unity 
is abstract and one-sided. Those who rely on such expressions revile 
philosophy. But what really counts is not unity in general, but how 
unity is determined. If one speaks [only] of unity, this is only half the 
story, and the matter becomes falsified. I 
20 
2. The immediate unity of spirit (no longer as it is in itself). In its 
immediate unity spirit is yet only a natural being; this is natural unity. 
3. The third dimension is that this relation is for spirit itself; it becomes 
for spirit and is produced by spirit. (The first [dimension] no longer 
belongs to the present discussion as such.) 
The first [topic] is spirit as immersed in nature. Here spirit does not yet 
exist for itself, but exists as nature spirit [Naturgeist]. Nature spirit is soul. 
Even animals have souls. The animal is sensible, not as universal [but as 
a particular or] for itself. The human being as nature spirit is soul. This 
expression is acceptable. 40 The <earlier> metaphysics asked whether the 
37. W reads: for all these phenomena are inconceivable from the standpoint of non-
speculative thinking, the standpoint of ordinary consciousness. 
38. W reads: bring forth, spirit must free itself, freely spirit produces its world from itself. 
39. W reads: Nature in itself or the unity of spirit and nature in itself,-a unity as it is only 
in itself or for us, a unity which is contrary to the laws of ordinary consciousness, and which 
enters our consciousness only through philosophical analysis. 
40. [Ed.] From GW 12: 197: 'The name "soul" is otherwise used for particular finite spirit 
in general, and rational or empirical psychology is supposed to be equivalent to a doctrine of 
spirit. But the expression "soul" creates the impression that it is a "thing" like other things. 
One inquires concerning its locus, its spatial determinations from which its powers have effect. 
There is more: how this thing is immortal, subject to temporal conditions but removed from 
71 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
soul is simple, designated the soul as a thing, and asked for its seat, by 
which was meant its spatial existence. ~Since the soul has been discussed 
in these terms, we are justified in using this expression for spirit, so far as 
it is merely existing [like a thing].~41 This is the first part: Anthropology. 
~Even here a break between soul and its existence will arise. Spirit is still 
impeded, hemmed in by its corporeity. (In magnetic sleep spirit falls back 
into its entanglement in nature.)rv42 
The second is the Phenomenology of Spirit. This break [with nature] 
advances to the point where the impediments of ensoulment [Seelen-
haftigkeit]43 are purged so that subjectivity comes to be for itself. Subjec-
21 
tivity becomes the 'I' and with I this emergence the second level begins, 
namely, "'the consideration of the standpoint of consciousness. This is the 
usual, ordinary standpoint. rv44 In the first part [Anthropology] I am wholly 
in nature; in the second [Phenomenology of Spirit] I have opposed myself to 
nature. 45 What I used to be now becomes my object. This is the standpoint 
of the appearance of spirit, the standpoint of relation, of contradiction, 
i.e., the posited existential contradiction. I am independent, as are external 
things, and nevertheless they have power over me, <and I over them> etc. 
change .... The dark region in which spirit lives as a nature spirit in sympathy with nature must 
be relinquished to anthropology .... ' See Encyclopedia §321A, §34. 
41. W reads: The spatial is a material, if also always simple. Spirit as thing is indeed soul, 
as we also treat the animal soul as a thing. Therein we are justified to use the expression soul 
in this restricted sense for spirit, so far as spirit is existent. 
42. W reads: The madness of the human being, the condition of animal magnetism etc., 
belong here, - where spirit falls away from its lucidity and freedom into its raw natural 
condition [Natiirlichkeit], its entanglement with nature. But here also begins the contradiction 
between the capacity to be ensouled [Seelenhaftigkeit] and matter, also <the> break between 
<the> soul and its being;-. 
43. [Ed.] Seelenhaftigkeit, which is here translated as ensoulment, characterizes a dispo-
sition towards subjectivity that is not yet subjectivity; it names Geist in the beginning of its 
break or rupture with nature, but still in a condition of being impeded by nature, as hemmed 
in by nature, prior to its emergence into contradiction and opposition. Hence Erdmann has 
Seelenhaftigkeit purging itself and widening the break with nature so that Seelenhaftigkeit is 
superseded by subjectivity which, as for itself, opposes itself to nature. In the preceding note, 
Waiter has Seelenhaftigkeit as the beginning of the contradiction between soul and matter, 
the beginning of the break between the soul and its being. Hence I have translated it there 
as a capacity to be ensouled. When that capacity is realized, the result is ensoulment, which, 
regarded from a yet higher standpoint, is both more than nature and yet still impeded by 
nature. When this impediment and contradiction become explicit, Seelenhaftigkeit is super-
seded by consciousness [Bewusstsein]. When the contradiction constitutive of consciousness is 
suspended, then consciousness is superseded by spirit [Geist]. 
44. W: This ego is free, but entirely abstract and essentially related to external objects. 
45. W adds: opposed as to an object that is external, as objective external nature. 
72 

INTRODUCTION 
This is the standpoint of formal freedom, which is therefore freedom in its 
contradiction. 
The third is spirit in itself, the object of Psychology, the spirit that relates 
only to itself, but is also determinate. It finds its determination in spirit, and 
its progress is to posit as its own this determination in which it finds itself 
and thus to determine itself out of itself (desire, will). With this we release 
the spirit which is now free for itself. 
The first [stage] is therefore a relation of spirit to nature, where it is 
in itself, in concept, and this determines the way and manner in which 
we have to conceive it. What is to be conceived is spirit in general. The 
concept of spirit, stated abstractly, is that spirit is free, and freedom means 
that all determinations of spirit may be posited as something only ideal, 
as something that spirit negates so that spirit is the self-relating pure light. 
"'This ideality of everything <other> is what freedom is."'46 In this abstract 
statement we have not yet considered whether what spirit negates is actually 
negated, or merely set aside, i.e., whether spirit is not a mere escape from 
the world. Here we are not concerned with this mode I of spirit, with 
22 
the question whether the world is something that exists in and for itself. 
Rather the question concerns the truth of nature, namely the suspension47 
of the opposition [between nature and spirit];48 it concerns the speculative 
consideration of the opposition. It could be historically demonstrated how, 
in what precedes the science of spirit, the orientation towards spirit is 
constituted. The philosophy of spirit is a special division of philosophy. It 
has a backward reference to the entire idea of divine life. The orientation of 
nature towards spirit is as follows: 
The idea, what is in and for itself, is first of all the pure logical idea 49 in 
its clarity, but it determines itself to [become] nature. 50 God's eternal being 
that is at home with itself, decides to produce its content in nature. Nature 
is the absolute concept in its reality, but in such a way that this reality 
is determined as mutual externality [Aussereinander] and self-externality 
[ Aussersichsein ]. 51 ""The rationality of nature means that the concept is the 
soul of nature, and that this [external] realization is the untrue existence of 
46. W reads: (The ideal is something suspended, so that I do not relate myself to something 
independent, wherein I would not be free.). 
4 7. W adds: If we consider this standpoint, everything that follows from it is the standpoint 
of consciousness. The question concerns the relation of spirit to nature in and for itself. 
48. W adds: but rather it is the question concerning the relation of this freedom to nature, 
whether freedom is independent and remains outside of its relation to nature. 
49. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §§213-44. 
50. W adds: This is the creation of the world. 
51. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §§247, 248, 248A. 
73 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
the idea, the defection [Abfall] of the idea"", 52 because the concept does not 
yet exist as it is in itself, at home with itself, but rather in the form of self-
externality. Abstractly stated, this form is what we call space and time (the 
tranquil mutual externality and the restless mutual externality). In space 
everything exists;"" in time everything passes away"', 53 but does not fulfill 
its determination of negation. Time is the perennial re-awakening."' Nature 
23 
therefore is the contradiction, 54 I that which is <in> itself untrue and not 
adequate to the concept. Thus nature is this externality [Ausserlichkeit]. 
This is how the idea exists as nature and, as has already been said, in an 
untrue existence. The untruth lies in a non-correspondence between the 
concept and the reality."" 55 Here it can be explained that spirit, in contrast, 
is the truth, for it is at home with itself: the other to which I relate myself is 
the same as what I am. I am the subjective and have objectivity. ""That is 
the I that distinguishes itself from me. But the object is identical with the 
first I. Here truth is found, because the subjective corresponds fully with 
the objective. Freedom-the ideality of everything other-is also truth. This 
truth exists first in spirit. Likewise nature is the untrue existence of the 
concept because the concept is the center that is immanent and because 
reality does not correspond to the concept, but is here material."-'56 We 
can see without any qualifications that since nature is the untrue, the self-
contradictory, it cannot remain [mere nature]. Rather the concept in nature 
presses on to make57 a true existence for itself. The concept is a center that 
52. W reads: Nature is idea, reason (God has added reason to nature), nature is rational 
in itself, i.e., the concept is the soul of nature. But the concept actually is present in nature in 
a way that is inappropriate to the concept. Therefore nature is the realization of the untrue 
existence of the idea, or its defection; 
53. W reads: everything passes away; the enduring existent disappears, but only so that it 
immediately produces itself again. 
54. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §248A. 
55. W reads: This is characteristic of nature. The concept is subjective, by itself, but in 
reality thrown outside itself in the mode of mutual externality [Aussereinandersein]. 
56. W adds: When I am object to myself, I am for myself. Self-consciousness, for an other 
being, constitutes determinate existence in general. In the freedom of spirit (abstract freedom 
as an example, or pure self-consciousness), in this relation I have concepts. The subject is 
what I am; the object, the I that I distinguish from myself, the I as a 'something' of which I 
know. In this self-consciousness the object which I know is identical with the subject that does 
the knowing, with the first I. Here therefore is the truth: for here the subjective corresponds 
completely with the objective and vice versa.-My reality is none other than I. Freedom is 
the ideality of all other being, the truth (that reality, (existence) corresponds to the subjective, 
to the concept) is first attained in spirit, in self-consciousness. Therefore nature is the untrue 
existence of the concept; the idea. The concept is the center, the immanent. However, reality 
(existence) does not correspond to the idea, but nature remains the reality of the material, of 
mutual externality. This is the characteristic of nature in general. 
57. W adds: i.e., make its existence (reality) equal to itself, to make itself equal to itself. 
74 

INTRODUCTION 
drives itself I to come to the surface, to "'Supersede mutual externality""ss, 
24 
or conversely, nature returns into itself in order to attain its center. The 
process of the concept that suspends its untruth is the object of the philos-
ophy of nature. It is ordered into stages of liberation of the concept [from 
nature]. For example, we know that all bodies are heavy, i.e., they strive 
towards a center. 59 This seeking of the center means that everything seeks 
to achieve unity with itself. What they seek can be represented as a point. 
Matter, since it strives to suspend its mutual externality and to become 
wholly ideal, strives therefore to negate its reality, and that would occur 
if it arrived at its unity. This is the misfortune of matter: to strive eternally 
for a unity that it never attains. In contrast, spirit, in its freedom, attains its 
center wherein it comes to existence (for I am for myself, I am the whole 
universal and my object is also I). On the other hand, matter is mutual 
externality [Auf.?ereinander]. The concept in nature is just this: to overcome 
this mutual externality. The highest point to which nature attains in this 
overcoming is life, feeling. Sentience is an achievement that still falls within 
nature. 60 Life is not yet freedom, but in life there exists at the very least 
the highest shape in which the mutual externality is suspended. The living 
[being] is a single subject that in spite of its unity is still a plurality. These 
material members are mutually external to each other, but they have this in 
common: that for them their mutual externality is immediately ideal. Their 
ideality means that none of them is independent, but rather I the subject is 
25 
the bearer of all the individual members. Because the individual members 
cease to be independent, life is the highest mode in which the unity of the 
concept exists in nature. 
"'Mere parts become members [only] in living [organisms]. As sentient 
soul"-'61 the I is omnipresent in the body, and it exists only as a unity. 62 
This omnipresence shows that the material mutual externality of nature 
58. W reads: suspend and make itself identical with itself; 
59. W adds: Bodies on the earth strive for the center of the earth, the planets strive for the 
center of the sun, even if they fail to reach the center soon, remain external. 
60. W adds: Life stands immediately in closest proximity to spirit, <and> from life the 
concept makes the transition to spirit.-. 
61. W adds: The concept is the inner. In living beings it begins to come into externality 
and into appearance. The body dissected, cut up in its parts which are laid alongside each 
other (as in osteology), decomposes and is no longer living. What in the inorganic sphere are 
called parts, are in the organic sphere called members; the latter exist only insofar as they are 
pervaded by a subjective unity of vitality.-ln sentience this is the case in a more precise way, 
particuarly in view of the external determination of spatiality.-the I as sentient soul. 
62. W adds: I am constantly conscious of this unity. When feeling the tip of my finger, I 
[also] feel [myself] there. There the feeling soul exists, the capacity of feeling, sensation. <In 
my consciousness I can distinguish myself from my feeling; but> so far as the animal only feels, 
the sensible soul is present, and present all over. And nevertheless it is only one. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
has no truth. The sentient soul does not believe in the mutual externality; 
it is idealistic and thus speculative. If the material externality were itself 
something for the sentient soul, then the soul would exist only in one place. 
It is63 the subject, "'and matter is subordinate to it"'. 64 The judgment 
that matter is not the truth rests upon this "-'ideality"'. 65 In the animal 
the concept comes to this power over matter; the animal is the highest 
mode of the concept in nature; the concept has superseded the mutual 
externality, and the "'Substantial and material are only moments"'. 66 In the 
animal this subjectivity is still present in an immediate way; substantiality 
26 
lacks the dimension I of being for itself [Fursichseins]. The animal is this 
contradiction; the subjectivity is simple relation to itself that is concrete, 
and the process of the animal is to suspend this contradiction <so that> the 
substantial universal (the species) as such comes to existence. The species is 
thus "'the drive to destroy the individual existence"'. 67 The species itself is 
that which is efficacious and which supersedes the immediate particularity 
of the animal, and the animal suspends the unyielding character of its 
particularity. 68 In this process the animal does not want to preserve itself 
as an individual, but in identity with an other. In this identity with other 
the contradiction is suspended. In nature, the species, this universality, does 
not come to an enduring existence, and falls back to a mere individual, 
something produced. The concept of spirit is precisely this: this unity of its 
universality with itself, a concrete unity that includes subjectivity in itself but 
which has equalized itself with itself through the negation of individuality. 
"'This concrete universality"'69 is what we have had as freedom. 
§389 The soul is the general immateriality of nature, the simple ideal 
life of nature and in this simple being in itself the mutual externality 
[Auf.?ereinander] of nature is gathered together. Here we are not yet thinking 
of the individual soul, but of the soul in general, what has been called 
the soul of nature. This is 70 the determination that underlies the whole, 
63. W adds: is omnipresent and one. 
64. W reads: so that the material externality is suspended in it as ideal. 
65. W adds: this representation of ideality, the to me on of the ancients. 
66. W adds: the animal is not yet spirit. It is rather the existing, phenomenal concept of the 
substantial. The material is only accident, a [subordinate] moment. 
67. W adds: the drive, this negation in its universality, to destroy the immediate individual 
existence through the process of the species, the begetting, that suspends the immediate 
individuality of the animal. It has the feeling that it is not satisfied as a self-sufficient individual 
and gives up its independent individual existence. In begetting the species realizes itself. 
68. W adds: the individual is otherwise self-seeking. 
69. W reads: This substantiality is the concept of spirit,-. 
70. W adds: This universal soul, the general truth of nature, is. 
76 

INTRODUCTION 
with which we begin, so that in all further determinations 71 this universal 
substantiality-as we haven earlier described it-remains omnipresent. 
I The soul is the first underlying mode of spirit. The soul is to be 
27 
conceived as substance, the universal, as the self-enduring, such that all 
particularity does not step outside of this substantiality. ~The substantiality 
is a negative unity that negates the particular and renders it ideal~.73 
The soul therefore is slumbering spirit, or the passive Nous of Aristotle, 74 
which is everything according to possibility. 75 Aristotle says: the concept is 
self-conceiving. There are two [dimensions]: Nous as the activity of thinking 
and Nous as the object thought. The Nous as object is the passive reason 
[Nous pathetikos]; passive reason is everything according to possibility 
(dynamis). This substantial unity is still only a possibility, not actuality. 
"'That nature is thus a striving etc., must here be presupposed from the 
logic and philosophy of nature."'76 Here we seek only to show that the truth 
of materiality is its ideality.-We start from this ideality as a substantial 
basis. 
The question concerning the immateriality of the soul has been of great 
interest. It follows from what has been said that the soul is not a material 
mutual externality, nor is it something immaterial in contrast to the mater-
ial. The soul is immaterial only in the sense that the immaterial is the true, 
and the material is the untrue. The immateriality of the soul is therefore 
<not> asserted in opposition to matter, but only in the sense that I the 
28 
soul alone is truly real and independent. The self-externality of nature has 
volatilized into universality. 
71. W adds: the progressive determination and development (the individual soul belongs 
also to the further determination of the universal soul). 
72. W adds: have-and that the progressive further determination does not fall outside 
of this one universal, substantial souL-So this standpoint must be presented in advance as 
designating the transition from the natural to the sphere of spirit. 
73. W adds: substantial unity;-so the absolute basis of all particularization and further 
specific determinations of spirit, that spirit has in its substantial unity all matter of its determi-
nation, and the substantial unity remains the all pervading, identical ideality.-(This substance 
is also at the same time to be grasped as subjectivity in itself. Subjectivity in general is negative 
unity, that negates and renders ideal the particular, subjective unity.)-. 
74. [Ed.] Aristotle, De Anima 429a10-432al4. On Hegel's translation and interpretation 
of Aristotle, cf. Alfredo Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle (Cambridge: University Press, 2000), 
312-13. 
75. W adds: but only according to possibility, actual only in activity, while it is thought. 
76. W reads: The conviction that matter is only finite, that material reality is not genuine 
reality, [but] the apparent independence of matter and that only ideal truth exists (what here 
must be presupposed from logic and metaphysics) can be fully demonstrated only at the 
conclusion of the study. 
77 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The question concerning the community of the soul with the body creates 
no difficulties here, because matter is nothing independent. ~It is easy to 
lapse into an apparent chemical neutralization [of matter] but that is a 
subordinate category.~ 77 In fact this is not a community, but the soul is 
in and for itself contrasted with the corporal, so that it has no difficulty in 
the body. Only if both are taken as independent is the question a difficult 
one. It becomes difficult if this dualism is tacitly assumed. 78 
We turn now to the determination of the universal foundation. This 
development is no stepping forth, but remains in a subjective unity in which 
all shapes are preserved. As a universal substance the soul progressively 
determines itself and this progressive determination is no mutual externality 
of figures; rather this universality determines itself to subject, to singularity, 
and all figures remain within this subjectivity. In nature these various levels 
manifest themselves as external enduring figures. Gravity as a totality is 
the solar system, the material mutual externality, and the transcendence 
of this mutual externality, [namely] a contraction into self (repulsion and 
attraction). <Here the idea exists as a mechanism.> 79 The material idea 
determines itself further to become the physical. It becomes a special circle, 
29 
another mode of existing. 80 The elements, etc. I remain subordinate to their 
substance, gravity, ~but form a special existence. The spheres of nature are 
developments of one and the same material idea, but the animal kingdom 
has its own individualities, etc., a series of systems that are external to 
each other and have particular existences as their actuality."'81 In spirit 
it is otherwise; spirit also perfects itself in such systems, but they do not 
fall apart into mutual externality, but remain enclosed in the one subject 
in a subjective unity. The difficulty relates to this. 82 When we have to 
consider a particular level, this is not a particular figure. The heavenly 
bodies in their absolute mechanism isolate physical determinations into 
proper existences. 83 <When> spirit is considered concretely in its various 
77. W reads: The relation of soul to body; this unity must not be represented as a 
compound. Just as little should it be represented as a neutralization, from which it could 
easily occur to one that such a compounding of body with soul would be a chemical category. 
However, a chemical existence is not a genuine existence. 
78. W adds: For then no community can occur. 
79. W adds: This is the first level of development of self-determining matter. 
80. W adds: We have the elements of water, air, fire, etc. 
81. W reads: but appear in special individuality in contrast to what we call heavenly bodies. 
Every new sphere constitutes a system that manifests itself again as a special existence.-The 
physical individuality forms a realm of minerals, and from a realm of minerals to a realm of 
plants, and from a realm of plants to a realm of animals. 
82. [Ed.] Hegel adds §380. 
83. W adds: In spirit however its distinct levels have no such separate existence. 
78 

INTRODUCTION 
levels and stages, we must already take further stages into consideration. 
When we consider feeling, ~we must also take into consideration religious 
and ethical feelings~. 84 These spheres are far removed from feeling as such. 
Further [considerations] will develop that point more fully. The awakening 
of the soul belongs to anthropology, but at the same time we know that 
[this] awakening is far more concrete; it includes consciousness. ~In these 
lower stages I we have to anticipate a content that does not occur on 
30 
these lower levels as such. Thus in our presentation we have to separate 
levels and stages from each other. But when we want to consider them 
more concretely, we have to anticipate further stages. This anticipation is 
all the more necessary since spirit can become sick, it can decline into a 
lower condition. In this way the cultivated spirit can regress into a soul 
existence.~ 85 Thus in [discussing] these lower levels we have to anticipate 
what applies to the rational consciousness. In the development of the realm 
of souls, these levels and stages do not fall asunder. Second, we have to 
consider every form for itself. Third, when necessary we have to grasp such 
lower levels in a concrete way. Now we turn to our object, and the first 
discipline is anthropology. 
84. W reads: we consider and know that ethical, legal, and religious feelings exist. But in 
order to know what these feelings are, we must already know what right, ethical life and God 
are. 
85. W reads: So in our presentation we have to separate these levels purely from one 
another, and also at the same time (necessitated by the interest to consider them more con-
cretely) we have to anticipate the knowledge of further levels. This is a further requirement 
because spirit can become ill, and is capable of declining from the level of its freedom 
into shapes of lower stages of development, e.g., the condition of animal magnetism and of 
madness. The cultivated spirit can sink to the level of [a merely] anthropological existence of 
the soul. 
79 


ANTHROPOLOGY 
Anthropology has for its subject matter the soul in its uncultivated natural 
condition. 1 In every such determination it is the case that soul in its natural 
condition is to be sure, a foundation, but it enters a further dialectic: 
The goal of the natural soul is liberation from this uncultivated natural 
condition; in freedom it becomes I, the free being at home with itself of 
spirit. I regard the soul as spirit in its "' immediate existence;2 "' it is not 
yet spirit as spirit. For it belongs to spirit to negate and render ideal its 
immediacy, its being, its immersion in nature, and to make these its own. 
It thus unites with itself through a suspension of its immediacy. I Insofar 
31 
as something mediates itself with itself, the other by means of which it 
is mediated disappears, and with this the mediation itself disappears. We 
begin with the immediate, because the concrete is no longer the first or 
simple. Rather the concrete implies different determinations, whereby each 
is mediated by the other. 3 This beginning is only a starting point, something 
imperfect, for spirit as such does not exist immediately. This beginning is the 
least true mode of spirit's existence. Also, immediacy itself is an abstraction, 
and determines itself essentially as something posited. (Parents are mediated 
through others equally as much as children, although we can consider them 
as immediate.) The determination of immediacy is one-sided. The other 
determination [of immediacy] is that this immediate soul itself is posited, 
that it is itself mediated. This positing [of the immediate] is the positing of 
spirit itself. This positing is presupposed, but spirit is itself the positing 
of this prius. It is spirit itself, which has itself as an other before itself. 
Consciousness finds itself confronting an other, and its further development 
1. W adds: or the nature-spirit, the immediate, subjective spirit,-the natural soul, soul in 
its natural condition. 
2. W adds: Its mediation is to mediate itself with itself. Mediation constitutes finitude, so 
far as something is mediated by another. 
3. W adds: The immediate is only simple. Therefore it is with the immediacy of spirit with 
which we must begin. 
81 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
is to appropriate that other to itself. So we start with the immediate, but 
we also know that spirit as soul presupposes itself [as spirit]. It is a play of 
spirit4 whereby it comes to itself. The more precise division of anthropology 
involves first the naturally determinate soul as such. This conditionedness 
occurs beyond the level of consciousness; it is implanted in the naturally 
determinate soul prior to consciousness. This naturally determinate soul 
continues its development to subjectivity, to sentient soul. This is the first 
part [of the Anthropology]. The more precise divisions within this first 
32 
part are first that this natural soul is determined as individuality I that is 
still immediate, not yet "'feeling, because in feeling self-relation includes 
a distinguishing of itself from itself."'5 The second is an alteration in this 
individual, and for this alteration it is essential that the individual develop 
in opposition to itself. These alterations are threefold: age of life, sexual 
relations, and awakening. These alterations are opposed to the natural state 
as sleep. The third of these alterations is the sentient soul, as identifying 
with itself, as subjectivity. 
The second part of the Anthropology is the dreaming soul, the difference 
of the sentient soul from itself. The first element here is the sentient soul 
as totality relating to itself, a separation without any separation, or a 
separationless separation. The second element is that the sentient soul no 
longer senses itself in its universality, but is immersed in its particularity. 
This immersion in particularity is a pathological condition. The first state 
of separationless separation is animal magnetism [i.e., hypnotism] and the 
latter condition of immersion in particularity is dementia. "'The third is 
habit, custom, in which the soul subordinates corporeity entirely to itself, 
posits corporeity as ideal, and becomes a soul indifferent to its feeling. 
The third element we have to examine is the sentient natural soul. 6 
Sentience has three moments: individuality, individuality in opposition to 
33 
itself as an other, and third, the return out of otherness to itself."'7 I In 
4. W adds: of the absolute spirit with itself. 
5. W reads: feeling (a relating of individuality to itself): for to it belongs a distinguishing of 
individuality from itself, in order to be able to be identical with itself. 
6. [Ed.] Erdmann corrected his own account of the sequence here. His account of the 
first-the sentient natural soul-is incorrect, because this sentient natural soul would not be 
third in addition to the natural and dreaming soul, but only a subordinate section to the first, 
i.e., the natural soul. Waiter has omitted the first section on natural soul and arranged this 
section correctly under the section titled 'sentient soul' [Empfindende Seele]. Waiter's divisions 
as a whole are correct. 
7. W adds: c) custom. That the feeling soul as subject subordinates its feeling and corpor-
eity. 3.) Actuality of the soul-[ the] structured and sentient soul, that as corporeity is actual 
in its immediate being. Soul that as subject is free in its corporeity so far as it is master, and 
reduces corporeity to a mere mode of its expression, to a mere sign of itself. (1) Sentient soul. 
82 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
order for this relation of individuality to itself in sentience to come about, 
individuality must be two, and therefore individuality must distinguish itself 
from itself. 
1. NATURAL SOUL 
The first is immediate individuality, the natural soul in general (§§391-5),8 
the natural determinacy of the soul. The individuality of the soul consists 
of three elements: the first is soul in its entirely general natural life as the 
natural determinacy of the soul. 9 Since these must appear in consciousness, 
they exist as natural changes of natural objects on the one hand, and on 
the other, they have their own existence separated from the soul, which is 
[nevertheless] the proper immanent determination of the soul. 10 The human 
being is thus the microcosm, i.e., the peculiar determinacies of the soul are 
present as external existents. The Leibnizian monad 11 should be recalled: 
every monad is in itself the entire universe. The monad is representing 
(its ideality), not with I consciousness, but representative in general. Each 
34 
monad is [potentially] the universe as the seed is [potentially] the tree. They 
distinguish themselves simply through the fact that their representations are 
obscure or clear. 12 The totality is ideal; the monads represent it, but only 
darkly or clearly.-Another [element] is that in the soul these differences 
unfold themselves, become known and become conscious. Further, these 
determinations exist as an external nature. We speak most clearly about 
those determinations when we speak of them as if they were corporal 
There are three elements in sentience: individuality, subjectivity that is only individuality (b) this 
individuality opposes itself as to an other.-the difference of individuality from itself, the other-
being of individuality. (c) the return out of this other-being to itself; going together with itself. 
(Individuality has itself-individuality-for its object.-Feeling, self-referentiality, relation to 
itself.) 
8. [Ed.] Hegel refers to the numbered paragraphs in his 1827 Encyclopedia Philosophy 
of Spirit. 
9. W adds: These natural determinations are present in the existing soul and are of two 
types, ideality, and behind the ideality, free existence. 
10. W adds: to which the soul as such relates itself not as to something external; rather the 
soul in itself has these determinations as natural qualities. 
11. W adds: (Every individual, every atom is a monad. Atom in the ancient sense is in itself 
utterly without determination. All determinations are only syntheses and aggregates of atoms. 
The atom in itself is the <entire> universe.) [Ed.] On the monad, cf. Leibniz, Principles of 
Nature and Grace §§2-4, 12; Monadology §§14, 19-30, 61-3. 
12. W adds: are clear consciousness. The soul as a monad is the totality of the universe. 
83 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
determinations in nature. [Subjective] influence is excluded, because here 
the dependence of the soul on nature is presupposed. In nature these char-
acteristics are entirely universal. 
The soul's life participates in natural life, and here we recall the cosmic, 
sidereal life of humans. 13 The most universal determination of nature is the 
solar system in its movement; this is the life of gravity. 14 This life is the to be 
conceived in such a way that it only provides the abstract foundation which 
is the context in which psychic life individualizes itself. "'Here belong those 
astrological representations that posit a harmony between the outer and 
the inner."-' 15 In view of this relationship, one must grasp the determinate 
representation of the situation, that this life of free mechanics is determined 
only through relation of space to time. ""'These condition the life that the 
35 
material here lives. Gravity I developed in its various aspects gives space and 
time as its moments."-'16 What are called the laws of heavenly movement 
depends simply on space and time and on their concepts and how they relate 
to their concepts. The earth is living, is individualizing; it is the concrete 
related to the abstract, the sun. The position of the earth is determined 
as a member of this [solar] system. It is not opposed to or in a different 
relation with the other members; it is individualized in this system. The 
earth is what it is as a member of this whole system. The positions of the 
planets have no relation to the soul, which is a higher individualization. 
These determinations of the planets must be conceived in this manner, and 
not as if they had a reflection in or relation to the soul.17 When the earth is 
ready then the soul and the human being emerge, and this basic individuality 
is the final one. World history has been considered according to epochs 
of natural changes; it has been related to alterations of nature as these 
occur in the solar system. For example, [Du puis] has traced all ideas of 
13. [Ed.] This terminology goes back to F. A. Mesmer and J. W. Ritter. Cf. Mesmer, De 
planetarum influxu in corpus humanum (Vienna, 1766). Cf. J. W. Ritter (ed.), Der Siderismus, 
vol. 1 (Tubingen, 1808); D. G. Kieser, Das siderische Baquet und der Siderismus, Neue 
Beobachtungen, Versuch und Erfahrungen iiber dieselben, in C. A. Eschenmayer, D. G. Kieser, 
and F. Nasse (eds.), Archiv fur den thierischen Magnetismus, vol. 5 part 2 (Halle, 1819), 1-84. 
14. W adds: This life of gravity (movement and position of the heavenly body). 
15. W reads: representations and ideas that the position of heavenly bodies has a connec-
tion to the fate of nations and indviduals. This posits a harmony between external and internal 
so far as this harmony itself is determined by fate (the universal underlies this, but is conceived 
in a muddled way). 
16. W reads: The life that matter lives here is conditioned only by the relation of space and 
time-free mechanics, movement of matter.-matter, gravity, develop in vitality in movements, 
present themselves as movement,-and space and time are moments of movement. 
17. W adds: or that these alterations in history would have reference to changes in the 
whole system. 
84 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
religion and cultus to determinations of nature. 18 He related the so-called 
displacement of day by night to changes in religion, and sought to compare 
the Egyptian reverence for bulls with Christian reverence for lambs. Rather 
it should be established that the earthly body, so far as it has a place in 
the system, stands in a peaceful connection with it. Determinations in the 
system are not changes in the earthly body, much less changes in spirit or 
in the soul. In earth, this body of individuality, there are alterations that 
manifest I themselves as differences in it, climate, etc. These alterations 
36 
thus appear as such, they belong to the natural soul; differences of the 
seasons belong here. The soul eo-lives with these, but only as established 
in paragraph §392, namely as dark and obscure moods. 
The soul has the character of universality in itself, which becomes indif-
ferent to these natural determinations. ,...., Animals are entirely bound to 
natural determinations"-' 19 and fail to rise above these natural alterations. 
Plants are tied to seasonal changes, as are animals. The nature of the 
human soul, i.e., the soul itself, also has these alterations within it, but 
in a subordinate way. These alterations consist partly only of moods, but 
the cultivated human being rises above these. External sensations such as 
cold effect alterations in our affairs. "-'In any case, the human being has 
need of such changes. The less cultivated the human being is, the more these 
natural changes exercise power over him"'. 20 In addition, periods of the 
day are also different, and in the case of some matters one cannot imagine 
doing them in the morning. The day belongs to the sphere of opposition and 
labor; evening is the time of return, while at midnight the spirit is inclined 
to be alone, reflective. Thus the Romans held their public meetings in the 
morning, while the English held theirs in the evening and at midnight. 
One oft-noted natural alteration is the various phases of the moon. 21 
Earlier, people believed that there was a connection between the phases of 
the moon and psychic states. We must not call this an influence, because 
18. [Ed.] Charles Francois Dupuis, Origine de tousles cultes, ou religion universelle (Paris, 
1795). 
19. W reads: the subordinate organizations (the vegetable and animal world) are entirely 
immersed in natural life and the course of their lives hang together with their conditions etc. 
They are chiefly grounded in this sympathy with nature, 
20. W reads: In different external changes we find ourselves differently disposed; the less 
cultivated a human being is, the more [affected he is by these changes]. 
21. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §361A. The claim that phases of the moon exert influence 
upon psychic states was disputed by J. M. Cox, Practical Observations on Insanity, (1806, 
German translation 1811). In the unpublished lecture manuscript No. 154a, Hegel's notes run: 
'Madness, Moon;-Pinel? denies this. Or Reil?' (J. C. Reil, Rhapsodien uber die Anwendung 
der psychischen Curmethode auf Geisteszerrntungen (Halle, 1803). Hegel made a few brief 
excerpts from the beginning of this book. Cf. Hegel, Berliner Schriften 692. 
85 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
37 
there is I no talk here of an external relation, but rather of a coincidence. 
Many observations have been made about this. In particular, correlations 
have been asserted [to hold] between phases of the moon and mental illness. 
In particular cases paroxysms have been stronger in certain positions of 
the moon. That such phases of the moon can affect human disposition has 
been established. But it should be pointed out that the human organism, 
even as an animal, is more free from such influence [than the animal], 
and it is only when its energy is diminished22 that the human declines 
into uncultivated natural immediacy wherein the lunar influence shows 
itself more. In physical determinations there lies in part something that can 
devolve into superstition, a belief in a connection which cannot be allowed 
to count as lawful. That remedies help is founded on experience. Others find 
this not confirmed, but the first experiences are not set aside even if they are 
shown to be limited. 
Connections of another type fall especially in the spiritual sphere. When 
the human being resolves on something, a question arises concerning the 
result and the connection between the result and the original resolve. Here 
superstition plays a part. The human being grasps its resolve according 
to the greater or lesser likelihood of success. For the ancients, the chief 
superstitions for assuring oneself were oracles, the entrails of animals and 
birds, etc. 23 When human beings take refuge in such things, in external 
circumstances, in order to reach decision, they do not yet possess the 
inner strength to decide for themselves. What happens most often in this 
regard is pure superstition, political fraud, etc. But there may also be a few 
beginnings therein, that indeed have some connection between the sign and 
the agent carrying out the decision. They have often busied themselves with 
38 
observations of sacrifices I and food particularly in diverse circumstances. 
The outcome of a battle depended on personal courage; their bravery was 
different from the modern, which must be bravery as the discipline to rely 
on the whole. The courage of the individual as such is at the same time an 
embodiment, "'a determinate bodily condition, a mood which, although not 
yet an illness, can become depressed. This mood is connected with physical 
circumstances."'24 Insofar as bodily disposition was an essential element 
22. W adds: its freedom is diminished. 
23. [Ed.] Hegel's detailed discussions of ancient oracles and the significance of signs are 
found in Hegel's Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (GW 17.157-64; ET 2:183-8). Hegel 
relies on Etienne Clavier, Memoire sur les oracles des anciens (Paris, 1818) (the book was in 
Hegel's library), and on Karl Philipp Moritz, Anthousa, oder Roms Alterthiimer (Berlin, 1797), 
350-3, for the examination of entrails. 
24. W reads: a bodily mood-as we already insinuate in ordinary life when we physically 
hint at the courage of a person, and say, 'he has heart'. There is no bravery that cannot through 
86 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
[of bravery], it is connected with the fact that this bodily disposition was 
something in common with animals, and the release [Abspannung] of this 
disposition can be known according to the type of feeding or digestion. 
These can serve as signs for a determinate physical mood. Herein lies a 
type of connection not to be ignored. Union with nature25 is precisely what 
constitutes the animal. In those who are closer to nature are found more 
such linkages with nature than in cultivated people who are more free. We 
can easily make night out of day. 26 These are the first, these determinations 
of nature. 
The universal planetary life constitutes itself in various ways. 27 The first 
point I concerns the general position of the earth; the second is the differenti-
39 
ation of the general life of nature, which gives the particular natural spirits. 
The differentiation of our earthly body is familiar: the earth is divided into 
four continents, and a fifth [region] is the totality of scattered islands that 
manifest a great lack of development and culture. Much depends on these 
differences: the terrestrial differences are connected with different natural 
determinations of humans. We acknowledge that America forms another 
world in contrast to the old. The old world is divided into three parts, 
and this seems at first to be accidental. However this representation of 
these divisions may occur in humans, it is certain that the differentiations 
of the parts is also confirmed in the different spiritual sensitivities of their 
inhabitants. The geographic distribution is connected with races, differences 
that are in general extremely striking. It is assumed at present that there are 
four races. 28 The first is the American in general, which although it contains 
a variety that differ from each other, nevertheless forms a contrast with the 
old world. In the latter the African character is very different. Then comes 
the Asiatic in contrast to the European character. ,...., The Mediterranean Sea 
connects these three parts of the earth. In this regard, North Africa belongs 
a depressed mood at some point get cold feet. This is connected with physical conditions or 
the environment. So for example, when he is bogged down in a morass, the human being finds 
himself physically exhausted and not in a spiritual disposition for courage. 
25. W adds: which is often called the true condition and end of man, 
26. W reads: Because for us the moods do not have as much power as with the less 
educated. 
27. [Ed.] Reference is to Encyclopedia 1827 edition, §393: The universal planetary life of 
the natural spirit. (2) specifies itself in the concrete differences of the earth, and is divided into 
special natural spirits that, on the whole, express the nature of the geographic divisions of the 
world and constitute racial differences. 
28. [Ed.] On the distinction of four races, cf. Kant, Von den verschiedenen Racen der 
Menschen, Kant, Schriften 11432 ff.; J. F. Blumenbach, Einteilung des Menschengeschlechts in 
{Unf Hauptrassen, in Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte, part 1 (Gottingen, 1806). 
87 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
much more to Europe than to Africa proper, from which the North is 
40 
separated by desert. I Conversely, the Spanish have been called the Africans 
of Europe. North Africa has much more of a European character. It is 
similar with the Near East. As soon as one crosses the Indus, one finds a 
character vastly different from the European. 29 Here one first senses that 
one is in a different part of the world. 
This difference manifests itself also in spiritual and temperamental dif-
ferences of the human species."'30 In view of the physical constitution of 
the earth, the next difference is the distinction between north and south. 
This is a more quantitative difference of cold and warm climates. As we 
know, the effects and influences of climate are extremely variable. 31 The 
north-south polarity must be distinguished from the east-west polarity. 32 
"'The differences of the continents are formed out of both together. The 
differences of polarity are not merely apparent."'33 The differences of races 
are therefore in part merely physiological; here belong differences of color. 34 
The white color is to be regarded as inherently the most perfect, 35 not 
only out of custom, but this skin color is the result of the free activity 
29. [Ed.] Cf. Mss Ackersdijck: G. W. F. Hegel, Dictat iiber Philosophie der Geschichte, 
1830-1, p. 142: 'Elphinstone says when one goes from Asia Minor and the Turkish provinces 
to India, the contrast is extremely striking. In the former the European still believes himself 
at home; in reference to human passions, virtues, vices, all still have something human. But it 
is entirely otherwise in India, where everything emerges in sharpest contrast.' Hegel's source 
is Mountstuart Elphinstone, An Account of the Kingdom of Cabul and its Dependencies in 
Persia, Tartary and India (London, 1815). 
30. W reads: Asia, Africa and Europe are again bound by the Mediterranean Sea, this great 
middle point of the vital ancient world, that so little separates these three regions, that (with 
greater justice than we can call the French Spaniards the African in Europe) one can reckon 
North Mrica (which the Sahara, the vast dry desert, separates more from Southern Mrica than 
the Mediterranean separates it from Europe) and Asia Minor (completely different from Asia 
beyond the Indus, but less different from Europe) as European, based upon great agreement in 
vegetation and geology as well as in the customs of these humans with those of Europe. This 
difference of races proves to be a difference of the spiritual, or at least psychological condition 
of the human species. Concerning this difference (variety of origins, etc.), it is connected partly 
with physiology, partly with spiritual disposition. 
31. W adds: In warmer zones humans have different structures than in those where cold 
hinders external activity. 
32. [Ed.] Cf. Gotrfried Reinhold Treviranus, Biologie oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur 
fiir Naturforscher und Arzte, 6 vols. (Gottingen 1802-22), vol. 2, 443. See also Encyclopedia 
§393. 
33. W reads: East and West appear to be merely relative, since every point against one is an 
eastern, and against the other, a western, but this appears is merely an appearance as proven 
by closer examination, where East and West are found to be constituted by fixed differences. 
34. W adds: Black predominates with Mricans, Yellow with East-Asians, copper with 
Americans and White with Europeans. 
35. [Ed.] This favorable singling out of the white skin color is found also in Goethe, 
Farbenlehre, vol. 1, §§672. 
88 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
of blood, and the feelings that are connected with the movement of the 
blood can ~present themselves through this skin. This creates the possibility 
that I with such blood movement the inner feelings can make a sign of their 
41 
presence; the play of such feelings exhibits itself in the skin. The European 
skin is not exclusively white.~3 6 
Further, to physiological differences belong differences of hair, the diverse 
shapes of the skull. 37 The difference in formation of the skull is not so 
easy to determine, because it is not so well established as is crystallization 
for example. ~A certain measurement assumed by Peter Camper38 is deter-
mined through lines and angles.~ 39 The line which he determined, extends 
horizontally from the external ear channel to the root of the nose, and 
another line extends from there to the forehead. These two lines make an 
angle, and in the case of Greek statues this is almost always a right angle. 
In the case of animals, when one draws this angle, it is very pointed; with 
humans it is less pointed. In the case of Negroes the angle is more pointed 
than in Europeans. Blumenbach correctly remarks that many indetermina-
cies remain, and he acknowledges that one must consider the skull from 
above. This shows the protrusion of the teeth and the cheekbone. In the 
case of Negro skulls, for example, the cheekbone is very protruded. 40 The 
more precise detail is to be determined physiologically-the I characteristic 
42 
is thus the sharper point of the Camper angles, then the protrusion of the 
teeth, jaw etc. These are the chief elements of the osteological structure. 
What concerns us more precisely is how far these considerations coincide 
or are connected with the relation to spirit. The latter are not to be under-
estimated. Namely, when we represent the Camper angle as very pointed, 
we will recall an animal physiognomy, because this practical member, that 
36. W reads: freely make visible, in these chief skin color (one can easily see anxiety, fear, 
shame, in this skin color); this color is not fixed, but there is a possibility that the play of 
emotions expresses itself therein and makes these into signs. Herein lies the basis for declaring 
the European skin color to be the most perfect. It is not however, purely white in the usual 
sense of this term. The European skin color is also blue, red, yellow, and to be sure yellow is 
the proper color of the skin as such, all colors play therein. 
37. [Ed.] J. F. Blumenbach, De generis humani varietate nativa (Gottingen, 1795). 
38. [Ed.] Peter Camper, Dissertation sur les varietes naturelles qui characterisent la phys-
ionomie des hommes des divers climats et differens ages (Paris, 1791). 
39. W reads: In determining measurements of the skull, Camper has assumed certain 
points, bound together through lines, and called attention to the angle formed by these lines,-
first in order to determine beauty (as Greek works of art established the norm) insofar as it 
depends on the form of the skull. 
40. W adds: from the oval of the skulL-Different forms of the skull itself (rounder, 
longer) are revealed in careful consideration, particularly where protrusion of the cheekbone is 
pronounced. In this way Blumenbach determined the skulls of the Caucasian, Mongolian, and 
Tungu etc. races. 
89 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
is determined for the purpose of eating, protrudes. 41 In contrast, where 
the Camper angle approximates a right angle, the eyes are more promi-
nent in approximation to the ideal, and still more of an angle makes the 
thinking forehead predominant relative to the organ that satisfies bodily 
needs. Another element is the protrusion of the cheekbone. 42 This pro-
trusion has the same connection, namely the muscles of chewing (that are 
attached below the cheekbone) show by this protrusion the pressure of need. 
Thus physiology has a spiritual significance. When racial differences are 
considered in such a way, they are not only external, but are essentially 
connected with the spiritual. As far as the more precise spiritual differences 
among races are concerned, America is a highly interesting continent, but 
only by virtue of the fact that Europeans have settled there. The ones who 
have drawn attention to themselves through the fact that they have made 
themselves independent43 and have given themselves rational laws, are not 
the native Americans as such, but the Creoles. The authentic American 
43 
race "'has I manifested itself as a mature, but also weak, culture of its 
type."'44 In the history of states, occupations of people are important, but 
in America there were no shepherds, no patriarchal way of life, and also 
no agrarian peoples. 45 Agriculture rests on the fact that people build their 
subsistence on certain basic plants. However, the agricultural way of life 
did not exist for the native Americans, nor did property ownership and law, 
because these are connected with the agriculture. The native Americans first 
became acquainted with horses and iron through the Europeans. They were 
not cultivated by contact with the Europeans but rather were destroyed. 46 
The superior culture of the Europeans crushed those who were incapable 
of adjusting to it; when the native Americans came into contact with the 
European atmosphere, they were crushed by it, "'even where they were 
treated leniently."'47 
41. W adds: the animal jaws and nose protrude more. 
42. W adds: cheekbone, that is especially conspicuous in Mongols. 
43. W adds: created human rights. 
44. W reads: when it has become acquainted with the Europeans, has shown itself to 
be a mature culture of its type at a higher level of development, but nevertheless a species 
with weaker cultivation. The differences between them and the Europeans are wide-ranging, 
deriving from physical and moral conditions. 
45. [Ed.] Cf. Lectures on the Philosophy of World History, trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975), 162-5; see also Rousseau, On the Origin of Inequality; 
Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws, book XVIII, eh. IX. 
46. W adds: destroyed by this contact with a physically and intellectually more powerful 
culture. 
4 7. W reads: and so in South America they are in the most miserable condition, slavery, and 
even in North America, where they were treated with greater justice and were less suppressed, 
they have declined into insignificance.-Even in modern times they have raised themselves to 
90 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
In the old world we have Africans, Asians, and Europeans, whose char-
acteristics differ both physiologically and mentally. The Africans retain a 
pure inwardness that never proceeds to development. The Africans are now 
as they have been for the last thousand years. They have never gone out 
of themselves, but always remain within themselves in a childlike manner. 
They have remained in the condition of [raw] particularity, of individuality, 
of desire, and have not developed the oppositions of the understanding, of 
[universal] law and particular instances. On the one hand they are gentle 
and meek, on the other they are frightfully cruel. They are accustomed to 
slavery, for freedom can exist only "'Where the human being is conscious 
of himself as a universal end in itself, and reflectively knows himself as a 
thinking person."'48 I 
44 
In the Asians the universal emerges. They have an objective God, an all-
encompassing, all-dominating law, right and state. The universal emerges 
there, but with the qualification that the subjective is submerged in it, so that 
individuality is wiped out. This universal can be rational, but nevertheless 
the condition is an irrational, unfree one, because the element of morality 
is lacking, even though the determinations of the laws, etc., are rational. 49 
After European influence subjectivity50 emerges to be sure, but in such a 
way that "'it is merely a roaming in the universal without actual results. This 
is a comet-like condition-complete wild abandon in fantasy and absolute 
bondage in actuality."'51 
The Caucasian, European, Germanic race validates both the substantiat52 
and the subjective, 53 the principles of morals and conscience. There concrete 
the level of using horses, but never to the level of constitution etc., a condition that for us is 
alone respectable. 
48. W reads: Where the human being thinks: for the consciousness of freedom is the 
consciousness of a universality that exists in and for itself. Thus the African, who exists in 
his compact, solid singularity, never comes out of his singularity (desire) and never passes over 
into the universal life, and consequently, has no concept of right, law, state, science, and no 
concept of an objective God. 
49. W adds: The power, endurance, and indolence of these realms attests this; where human 
beings are unfree in religion, they are also unfree in their form of governance, and in their laws, 
which are despotic. 
50. W reads: subjective freedom. 
51. W reads: the emergence of subjectivity in the universal is only a roaming in something 
universal; it is without result and does not amount to any genuine action. This character can 
be compared with a comet-like situation in physics; it is a freedom in imagination only, that is 
a roaming in fantasy, a fantastic, boundless exuberance coupled with an absolute bondage in 
actuality. 
52. W reads: Universal, ttue, substantial (in regard to religion God is the substantial truth 
in contrast to subjectivity), 
53. W reads: subjective freedom. 
91 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
freedom exists, the harmony of freedom as [substantive] content and free-
45 
dom as formal principle. I 
These are the general differences according to which nature determines 
itself. These differences are constituted according to deeper spiritual con-
ditions. 54 The latter do not belong here, but they must be anticipated in 
order to express the matter more concretely. The dispositions are entirely 
abstract, 55 but they develop and gain a concrete content as previously 
indicated. 
These differences particularize themselves more and more. These further 
particularizations do not allow of being demonstrated according to the 
concept because many contingencies are also in play. As far as history 
reaches, such different folk characteristics exist. "'The ancient Gauls and 
the contemporary French character agree in these [characteristics]."'56 But 
in other nations these characteristics are more difficult to find. For exam-
ple, when we consider Italy, which was dominated by Rome, individuality 
was subjected and subordinated to a single end. "'Today in Italy every-
thing has disintegrated into isolated individual cities; this is the opposite 
condition of the rigid Roman unity."'57 Meanwhile, if one considers the 
matter more closely, one cannot fail to appreciate that the former Roman 
46 
unity I manifests itself in violence, and that the flight into disintegration 
had to emerge in opposition to the Roman unity [which was] so contrary to 
nature. 
"'As previously pointed out, we see different characteristics of peoples. In 
47 
spite of the unity I of religion, education, and sciences, etc., this diversity of 
local spirits has emerged. Such particularizations continue in this way. For 
example, if we consider the Greeks, we find in them differences dependent 
on climate. The diversity of tribes has always maintained an importance. 
When the Greeks achieved the peak of their civilization, then we see the 
54. W adds: (religious, ethical, etc.). 
55. W adds: but they relate to the conditions of abstract laws, of universality and singular-
ity; 
56. W reads: as the Germans for example, and the Gauls have always asserted the same 
character.-( So the Gauls, although ravaged by many foreign peoples, made into a province by 
the Romans and preserved as such for centuries, and although they acquired another religion 
in Christianity, etc., nevertheless are in agreement with contemporary Frenchmen in respect to 
the general national character. 
57. W reads: as it has completely disintegrated into a mass of individual cities and states 
and where many of these have become tied to larger states, the chief character of a multiplicity 
and separated states [emerges] and which still remains,-as the language is on the whole 
the same yet they have never desired to become a political totality-and they recognize this 
disintegration in total opposition to the inflexibility of Roman unity-so the Roman national 
character appears to be entirely opposite to the Italian. 
92 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
Lacedemonians in the South. With them the solid substantial life of the 
state is predominant. In this substantial life individuality recedes. We can 
only wonder at the complete submergence of individuals in this universal 
interest. But it is not attractive or appealing to our own spirit because 
subjective freedom has no importance there. Family life, art, and science 
could not blossom in their culture as these did in Athens. In the case of 
the Thebans, we see subjectivity to be dominant, the friendship clubs of 
the youths. This subjectivity of the Thebans later declined into revelry and 
corruption. Between both of these extremes stand the Athenians, for whom 
patriotism, lawfulness, and ethics, and with these subjective freedom, all 
have received their due, and, as a result, art and science likewise. In a similar 
way the Ionian philosophy had nature as its principle; I the western Eleatic 
48 
philosophy had abstract thought, and the Athenian philosophy in the middle 
had the concrete thought, namely, the Nous. 
The particularizations are determined by the determinations of the 
concept. We have northern and southern Germany. The philosophies of 
subjectivity-Bohme, Kant, and Fichte-came from northern Germany. 
With cultivated persons these [regional] differences are dropped, because 
these people live according to general determinations. So much for the 
particularizations of the natural soul. ....... 58 
58. W reads: We see the national characters of Europe within which the European uni-
versality stands in distinction from the Asian. Notwithstanding the common feature that the 
Germanic nationalities are the dominant ones in all these states, notwithstanding the unity in 
religion and culture, etc., notwithstanding all this, the differences of local spirits have managed 
to extricate themselves.-Such differences and particularizations proceed from a principle, and 
within particularizations this process continues. For example, when we considered the Greeks, 
we saw differences that are connected with climate. Greece was originally divided into many 
families. These family differences have always preserved an importance, but they prove to be 
something of further interest only for scholarly investigations. The Greeks, viewed in their 
highest cultural development, are the Athenians, the Lacedemonians, and Thebans, for these 
above all arouse our interest. (1) The Lacedemonians (doric) in the south. We regard them as 
exhibiting ethical life in its purity, the solid substantial life of the state, and subjective freedom 
is less important in view of this substantial unity. We can well wonder at the Lacedemonians 
owing to their virtue and eagerness to live solely for their country; but at the same time they do 
not inspire our hearts: for free individuality never emerges in them. Private property, beauty of 
family life etc., fall short--equally, fine arts and sciences have not blossomed in their culture as 
these did with the Athenians.-The other extreme to the Lacedemonians are (2) the Thebans 
(Boetians) more towards the north of Greece. With these we find subjectivity predominant,-
as in friendship organizations of youth, that bind themselves for life and death. Whereas the 
Lacedemonians were immersed in the substantial unity of the nation, the Thebans had free 
associations of the heart. The subjective life of the Thebans later passed over into orgies, and 
fell into corruption owing to a lack of a universal ethical interest.-( 3) Between these two stand 
the Athenians, who allowed nation, law, ethics and subjective freedom both to have their rights 
equally. Therefore they also allowed subjective freedom to proceed freely in science and in art. 
93 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
§395 The third is individuality, the soul becomes individually determined. 
Here multiplicity arises in which one individual closes itself against the 
others. Every individual is different from others, has a special talent and 
so it goes into infinite multiplicity. Differences that have been specially 
emphasized are those of temperaments. 59 With greater cultivation these 
temperaments disappear gradually, so that today it cannot easily be said 
that someone has any particular temperament, for several temperaments 
may be united in a single individual; no one is the abstraction of one 
temperament. 60 The difference of temperaments must be grounded on the 
determinations of the concept: on the one hand there is the thing itself 
[Sache], the end, and on the other there is subjective particularity. The 
difference of the temperaments can therefore only express the relation of 
these two. So we can say that the phlegmatic temperament is directed to the 
[substantial] thing itself, but with less activity of subjectivity. But once it has 
united with the substance itself, it can persist therein. 
49 
The sanguine temperament has the mobility and agility of I subjectivity, 
so that it grasps the thing itself more lightly, but can also more easily 
abandon it. 
The melancholic and the choleric temperament are directed more 
towards their own subjectivity. 
Particular individuality produces countless differences. Talent, genius is 
also such a difference. Art is not only the rational, it is also the spiritual 
made intuitive in a sensible way. There the natural aspect of the artist is 
From another perspective we can see the same: The Ionian philosophy (against the East) 
had for its principle a natural-one can even say material-principle;-the Eleatic (against the 
West) philosophy had abstract thought (Pythagoras [Hegel apparently means Parmenides]), the 
Athenian (in the middle) had concrete thought, the Nous of Socrates. So the national character 
often particularizes itself within a given sphere, and these particularizations are oriented and 
determined in their differences by the determinations of the concept in general.-This is also 
the case in another respect, as in Greece. For example, Germany is divided into northern and 
southern sections.-In northern Germany there arose the philosophy of subjectivity Uakob 
Bohme, Fichte, and Kant), in southern Germany in contrast:-Hegel does not say. To develop 
this [point] further would lead us too far astray. Cultivated men raise themselves above these 
[regional] differences, and it is difficult to recognize any national character in them, because the 
distinguishing feature of educated human beings consists in acting, existing, and being actual 
in accordance with universal modes of thought. 
As already said, this is the sphere that concerns the particular determinations and special-
izations of the universal soul. 
59. [Ed.] Cf. Kant, Anthropologie in pragmatische Hinsicht, Schriften VII, 286-91. 
60. W adds: Kant in his so-called Anthropology gives a thorough description of particular 
temperaments. But he presents only very external determinations that can occur more or less 
in other temperaments. 
94 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
also an element in art. Talents are also different; genius refers more to 
totality, while talent refers more to a particular sphere and the difference 
of talents is manifest often in an entirely miraculous way. Many have a 
decisive talent for [mathematical] reckoning etc., idiosyncrasies. In fam-
ilies many such distinctive tendencies become distinctive characters as is 
manifest in aristocracies ""where circumstances also play a role. Charac-
ter mixes with greater cultivation, i.e., conduct according to a universal 
norm."-'61 These peculiarities do not affect what is essential in humans, 
namely, religion, reason, science, etc. The latter are not affected by tem-
peraments or character. 62 Religion, reason, and science remain above special 
talent or genius. The former belong to a higher sphere than the special tal-
ents, and one cannot reproach nature for its injustice, for the essential point 
is that the human being is human, and ""all have the equal right to what 
makes a human being human."-'63 These are I the natural determinations 
of the soul; they are the universal, particular, and finite determinations of 
individuality. 
In §396 the natural changes are set forth. The soul is essentially individ-
ual. 64 Individuality is determinacy existing for itself, and the other deter-
minations fall within this one individuality, while, for example, different 
national characteristics of people fall outside them. Here the differences 
are immanent in that one individuality through which they are bound 
together. The subject persists as one and the same throughout its phases 
of development. Even here we must also anticipate the knowledge of the 
concrete cultivated spirit. The difference is natural, but it comes to existence 
in a determinate mode in the spiritual, and we bring this mode with us 
here. ""One must here renounce such questions as 'If the physical condition 
is thus, how is the spiritual?' One must not separate the two so that the 
physical becomes the cause.""65 Rather in the soul the unity of the physical 
and the spiritual is present. 
A closer look at these differences then shows the differences to be 
alterations in the individual, and in fact the individual is the totality of 
these changes. Since these alterations are different, they exclude each other, 
61. W reads: Such special traits blend more in greater states of societies where families do 
not have such great privileges, etc. 
62. W reads: These have universal validity for humans. 
63. W reads: participation in religion, ethical life, etc., everyone has this, and it does not 
depend on talents. 
64. W reads: at first undetermined and then individual. 
65. W reads: One must not regard the physical as foundation; the spiritual refers to the 
physical and can be known as ground and consequent, cause and effect. 
95 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
and belonging to an individual only if they can fall outside of each other 
temporally, i.e., are temporally successive. These alterations are as follows: 
(1) The periods of life, (2) the sex relation, in which the individual, 
51 
who is himself an opposition, is opposed to other individuals, I and (3) the 
individual in himself is a judgment, so that individuality existing for itself 
differs from itself as mere existence. Therefore there are 
(1) the totality of changes that follow each other successively, 
(2) the difference or the individual as one-sided, and 
(3) the totality, that is, the judgment, is the totality that opposes itself 
to itself; in this opposition it does not fall apart into two, but rather 
the opposition occurs in a single individual. The judgment then is the 
awakening of the soul. 
§396 The first is the natural course of the periods of life, as a natural 
individual it is a totality, but as a natural individual it is also mortal. As 
an immediate singular of nature, it is contrasted with its universality, its 
species. It is this contradiction, and its life is precisely this conflict between 
these two extreme moments, a contradiction that is dissolved when the 
species prevails as substantial universality. However, the individual dies. The 
individual presents itself as this natural process. The human being is mortal 
by nature; it is a real possibility, i.e., necessity, that the human dies. The 
human being perishes of himself; he is himself the species and the species is 
nothing foreign to him. At the same time he exists immediately, and this is 
the contradiction in him. This process is the natural course of the stages of 
life. "'It is the privilege of organic nature to be mortal. The inorganic nature 
endures because it is subordinate, because it is abstract."'66 
The extremes of life are childhood and old age. The latter dissolves 
into a second childhood, and its conceptual determinacy is totality with-
out opposition. "'In the child the contradiction between universality and 
particularity has not yet arisen."'67 We will give only the chief moments 
52 
of the spiritual significance of this development. I The physiological does 
not belong here. In the child there is a unity without opposition, namely, 
innocence, a peaceful relation to oneself and to the world. 68 The emergence 
of the child into the light is a mighty leap. Birth is a leap [saltus], not a 
merely gradual change; the physiological changes are not as significant. The 
child is still concealed in itself in a vegetative way, but soon after birth it 
66. W reads: In general the individual has this process. The organic does not. Mountains, 
stones, etc., endure and are abstract natures. 
67. W reads: The child is the spirit as still shrouded in itself. 
68. W adds: The child steps into the world out of a type of life lacking in individuality. 
96 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
shows itself to be human. In youth there arises the contrast of the individual 
against the universal (it is supposed to be so and so, e.g., the ideal, the 'ought 
to be', etc.). In adulthood there is a contrast too, but totally different. In old 
age there is the peace of return, whereas the innocent peace of the child is 
supposed to be broken. 
In childhood there are several periods to be distinguished. The child 
shows itself as human already in its organization as destined for manifold 
dexterities of life. ""It announces itself not as needy, but as justified and 
unruly against the external world. It is justified in an entirely different 
way than an animal; in its cry it manifests an absolute certainty about its 
satisfaction. The first period of life has to do especially with sensible forms; 
in no other period of life does the human being learn so much.""'69 
There is very much that is learned; e.g., those who, born blind, when they 
gain their sight, have no idea of distance, etc. 70 The child acquires a great 
amount of content in this period. I The next step is that the child passes 
53 
over into the practical, [asserts] his worth against the outer world. This is 
evident in the development of the teeth, language, standing upright, and 
motion. The human being stands only because he wills to do so; if we do 
not will, if our will to stand disappears, we collapse. The teeth are organs 
directed outwards, thus they are presupposed also in the animal world as 
difference, for through them the animal asserts itself as a difference against 
the outer world. Through language we obtain our relation to humans as 
human. 
The child concerns himself with the outer world, first of all in play, with-
out seriousness or consequence. In play it is evident that children express 
their self-feeling and self-worth vis-a-vis the outer world by destroying their 
toys, etc. But later things become serious, and this seriousness consists 
in the fact that a rupture is introduced. Something alien is introduced 
into children, and they as human beings have the presentiment that such 
rupture is necessary. The alien and strange is the first lesson; reading and 
writing, abstract tones and signs are the elementary lessons, although in 
and by themselves [may be] entirely without spirit. This purely external 
69. W reads: The child announces itself along with its right to satisfaction in an imperious 
way when its needs arise, justified and raging against the outer world. His cry reveals his 
absolute certainty that he must be satisfied. This first childlike period has to do primarily 
with sentient forms; the development of sensible determinations and the learning of sensible 
differences-sensible determinations in general. 
70. [Ed.] That those born blind have no idea of distance was asserted by William 
Cheselden, 'An account of some observations made by a young gentlemen who was born 
blind', Phi/. Trans. Roy. Soc., 35 (1728), 447. Kant also reflects this view, cf. Critique of Pure 
Reason AS75 B603. 
97 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
totality is what they must occupy themselves with. More precisely, this 
rupture has the sense that they preserve the idea that in the parents and 
other adults there is something entirely different than in the child. Here 
arises the consciousness of that alien element, that adults are other, and 
this alien element, as [already] actual, is something higher than the child. 
Parents are the will of children. This is respect, the first relation of the 
rupture. What the children do, they do according to authority, and this 
feeling that there is something superior in the adults is the very thing that 
brings up children. On the basis of this feeling they must be brought up. 
The pedagogues of play71 have lowered themselves to the level of children, 
as though childishness were their authentic measure. When children notice 
this lowering, they lose the presentiment of authority. Such children will 
easily treat everything with contempt, because in their earliest period they 
have developed no respect. Here also belongs the idea that one should not 
speak to children about God-although they already have a presentiment 
of something greater. Further, it has been said that one should cultivate the 
understanding of the children and this cultivation of the 'little understand-
ing' has had impertinence as its result. The education of the child consists 
in his knowing how to learn from others and his acquiring the desire to 
54 
become an adult. This desire I is what draws him towards adulthood. The 
way to the satisfaction of this desire is to appropriate everything external 
and make it one's own. This period of learning is childhood. Through this 
appropriation children begin to acquire objective value. As children they 
are always beloved, but through this acquired worth there arises another 
relation, namely the world of the school. "'The school is the mediating link 
between family and civil society. Here there is another evaluation of the 
youth, another way of counting than the way of the family."' 72 
The boy who has learned the breadth of everything appropriate for his 
age, passes into youth and adolescence. He knows religion, has general ideas 
of right and ethics, as well as external knowledge. If all of this has become 
his, he has achieved independence "'and will and self-determination enter 
the picture . .-v73 As a youngster in theoretical relation, he now becomes self-
reliant. The human being becomes free. In youth, the opposition emerges in 
a different way: .-vhe has ends and drives; on the other hand, these ends and 
71. [Ed.] The reference is to the philanthropists Basedow, Salzmann, and Campe. 
72. W reads: In family the children are loved simply as they are. Other relations arise upon 
entry into the world of the school. Here they are valued for what they learn. They must learn 
to conduct themselves according to rules, to follow an external order. School life is the passage 
from the family into the world of civil society. 
73. W reads: will, self-determination, desire, drive, inclination, decision, to depend on 
oneself then arise. It is then that the human being is free. 
98 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
drives have as their end the true, the essential, and so the drive filled with the 
true and the essential is designated as the ideal. But then the youth discovers 
that external world does not correspond to or agree with his ideal."'-'74 The 
youth I confronts the world with his general notions and ideals, and because 
55 
his relation to the world is essential, he must get to know it. But he can 
participate only in a particular aspect of actuality, and prepares himself for 
a particular position. Now he prepares to apply what he has learned, and 
this is the transition to adulthood, which can often appear painful, since the 
world does not correspond to the ideal. This transition gives him an entirely 
different relation. The adolescent knew how to judge everything; he is more 
disinterested. But now in relation to the world there appears a restraint, 
a condition, a confinement to a particular purpose. This transition often 
shows itself physically as hypochondria, as a withdrawal into inwardness, 
as a disgust and repulsion in relations to externality. 
The condition of the adult is that he has to do with a world that is already 
complete in and for itself. The world is a great power which he is unable to 
change, but wherein he can only seek a limited sphere to participate with 
his own activity. 75 The end that he attains is, on the one hand, the world's 
end, which goes on. On the other hand, the end he attains is a subjective 
end, for from the fact that he obtains a subjective totality, viz., the family, an 
objective totality, the state itself likewise proceeds. The adult has his worth 
through sharing in an undertaking in which the great totality, the work 
of the world, specifies and realizes itself. The objectification that he gives 
himself brings about a unity between his own interests and the universal. 
He becomes accustomed to this and passes over into old age. 
The old person lives primarily in memories and without having any vital 
or powerful interest. The memory diminishes I because the old person is 
56 
no longer interested in details, but only in the universal. Old age likes to 
moralize; "'the loss of interests is the disappearance of life, which consists 
in the opposition between particular interests and the universal."' 76 This 
74. W reads: In him there is present self-determination and knowledge of right in general 
etc., and this is his own, his inner possession. On the one hand there is purpose in general that 
arises, and on the other there is drive for the truth, etc., which is called the ideal. The period of 
youth corresponds to the ideal world. There we have the relation of the ideal, inner world to 
external reality. The external actuality does not correspond to the ideal, and the youth is not 
satisfied in his present state of desire for the ideal. 
75. W reads: The human being judges the world no longer according to his ideals, he finds 
it complete and has only restricted dealings with it. 
76. W reads: This loss of interest and custom is precisely the disappearance of vitality. 
Vitality consists in opposition, the human being was not satisfied in his ends. When his ends 
have been attained in satisfaction, or he (has) given them up in dissatisfaction, 
99 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
contrast between interests and their satisfaction disappears. It has been 
replaced by unity and habit, the lack of vitality in which spirit goes to its 
death. These are the principles of the stages of life. 
§397 We proceed now to the species relation. 77 The first element was the 
totality of changes in the subject; the second is that these determinations 
become alterations, divisions, become determinations of the species itself, 
the tension of the species in an individuality. The species is particularized 
so that every side of an opposition is independent as an individual. In 
its individuality it is divided against the species, but in such a way that 
individuals [nevertheless] have the drive to posit the species. The animal 
element of the species process belongs in the reflection of life as such, 
therefore in the philosophy of nature. Individuals have the disposition to 
cancel their one-sidedness. This is the task of particularity through which 
the universal is posited. This is love in general, which has an animal aspect. 
Also in spiritual love this unity is posited, so that one has consciousness 
not in oneself, but in another. One is certain that the other [also] has his 
consciousness in the unity. 
We now examine the species-sexual relation more closely. These are 
natural differences between individuals, but the human being is also con-
ditioned by a difference of a spiritual sort. The difference is that one sex 
remains identical with itself and does not advance to the contrast between 
universal and particular, whereas the other produces the unity of universal 
and particular through its own activity. Man and woman. The one remains 
in this totality, while in the other there is disunion, rupture, and the unity 
is brought about later. This disunion is in the man. The man is the active 
57 
one in general. I posit a determination in me in reference I to something 
present at hand, and my activity is to balance the elements contrasted, 
wherein these at first only subjective ends become objective. This disunion, 
desire, and need to overcome them, fall to the man. Need, the struggle 
against the outer world fall to the man. The end determines itself more 
closely as a universal in contrast to the particular. So strength, might, and 
power fall to the man, a universal that is willed, in contrast with which 
other individualities are related as merely singulars. To character belongs a 
universal end and perseverance to realize the end. The others also want that, 
but their activity is not identical with the universal, the essential end. The 
objective undertaking befits the man. To this belongs the higher universality, 
77. [Ed.] Hegel uses the term Geschlechtsverhaltnis. The term Geschlecht can mean both 
species and sex. Although species relations include sexual relations, to translate Geschlechtsver-
haltnis here as sexual relation would be misleading because in English the latter connotation is 
too narrow. 
100 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
the labor of spirit "-'to know what is rational, and to realize the rational in 
the outer world. The conduct of the state is business of the man. This is the 
labor of spirit that brings the rational, I the universal end to consciousness. 
Women are concerned more with the personal and the particular; they 
like to make intrigues in the state. Likewise the youth has a universal, but 
only a universal of the heart. In enthusiasm they want to realize the universal 
directly, instead of a rational apportionment. Sciences, the products of the 
universal, are thus not matters for women. Mathematics and especially 
philosophy are produced necessarily by men. To be sure, there have been 
women with great learning, but their learning has applied to positive objects 
of the understanding. In order to produce a great work of art, the idea must 
be comprehended and realized through labor. The great works of art are by 
men."'78 In order to make the universal one's end, to will the universal, the 
rupture [of universal and particular] is necessary, as is deep self-absorption 
and the activity of labor. It is a matter of bringing forth the unity of universal 
and particular. "-'Woman I remains in this non-disrupted unity of the heart. 
5~ 
The education of women never enters into the extreme of pain that drives 
one to production. The objective existence of women is attained therefore 
in the family. This is the other, the counterpart to the state. The family 
is an ethical institution, because a rational unity establishes its bond, and 
this unity is the rationality of this relationship. This is the ethical, and this 
ethical life is present in the family as a feeling, as immediate natural ethical 
life, or piety and love. In the state, law, right, objective duties dominate. 
In the family these originate in and proceed from love. The woman, even 
in her objective existence [family], remains in the form of subjectivity. The 
woman, since she does not advance to the reflection of the understanding, 
78. W reads: To bring the higher universality to consciousness and to carry it out in actual 
existence. The conduct of the state is therefore the business of men. The end of the state is the 
rational will. But what the rationality of the will is, is known only through the labor of spirit 
that brings this at first only inward rationality to consciousness-essentially the conduct of the 
state, the universal end, is the business of men. Women are concerned more with the personal, 
not with the substantial matter itself. Where women come to power in a state, war results, the 
youth come to blows, where[ as] the universal of the mind is supposed to be brought forth. In 
objective labor everyone will be assigned a part of the work and the individual must renounce 
himself and subordinate himself to the whole. Where youth together with women come to 
power, the state hastens towards its ruin. Just as affairs of state are not for women, neither are 
the sciences as universals of thought. These are necessarily and especially brought forth only 
by men. Women can also be essentially capable of essential scientific knowledge (In Italy for 
example there were women professors of right, i.e., a science that deals with the positive and 
the particular, a science of the understanding, not of reason) as well as the state; science and 
higher works of art do not pertain to women: for to these there belongs a universal idea, an 
idea represented in imagination and brought forth in labor. Greater works of art are therefore 
produced by men. Sophocles, Homer, Raphael, Mozart.-
101 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
is not inclined to such one-sidedness as is the man. For the woman what is 
right and proper is determined through feeling, and she is earlier cultivated 
and educated. Religiosity is stronger with women, and remains more in the 
form of feeling, while in men a religion goes on to the level of thought. Man 
is more world-oriented; the woman is inclined towards piety, the inner, and 
if the worldly sphere is of a mean common sort, the woman appears as the 
higher and the more privileged. Where there is no state, no community, then 
nothing remains for the man than the lower occupations such as are pursued 
in Italy. In the man there is disruption, and in the woman there is a plant-
like unity of spirit. The woman rules the family, and her highest vocation 
is to be the mother of the family; whereas the man has still other objective 
60 
vocations."-'79 So the natural difference is also a spiritual difference. I 
§398 The third element in this differentiation of individuality is the judg-
ment or division [Urteil] in the individual itself-the awakening of the soul, 
etc. 
Individuality as being for itself confronts its own natural life in such a 
way that its first state is a confrontation with an opposite condition. It is 
79. W reads: The woman is the other side. She remains in the non-dirempted unity of 
spirit and the heart. The education and socialization of women never exhibits the extremes 
of universality and particularity that in men produces the extreme of pain that goads them to 
production. The woman attains her objective existence in the family. The family is the other 
of the state. It is ethical life, rational unity, that constitutes family ties. The family unity is 
constituted by members of different sexes. This unity is the rationality of this relationship. 
This rationality is ethical. At the same time ethical rationality is present in the family in the 
form of feeling-called piety by ancient families. This piety is the highest form of women's 
ethical life. Here love rules.-In the state, law and right prevail. Duties in families proceed from 
love, not abstract duties but proceeding from love and inclinations. In her development into 
objective existence, woman remains in the form of subjectivity. In her being woman exhibits 
a development, but this occurs in a beautiful inner peace, concord, and stability. The woman 
is not subject to the one-sided extremes that man is. Through feeling she senses what is fitting 
and proper. The man must gain his education through impropriety, opinions of every sort, 
and through one-sidedness.-Religiosity is stronger in the woman, but remains more in devout 
feeling in her, whereas the man comes to religion more in thought and reflection. 
These are the basic determinations of the differences between men and women. To the man 
belongs the mundane; to the woman belongs the idea. When the mundane is not of much 
worth, women appear to have great value and preference. When a state is weakened in its ends 
and comes to focus only on particular details, then women stand in high regard. So in Italy men 
are inferior, have to look after the affairs of the house; women have to purify themselves and 
go to church. There is no alternative for the men where there is no state or [public] common 
life. 
The matters of the understanding are the domain of men, who thus experience alienation, 
whereas women enjoy plant-like unity and harmony. In the family the sexual relation attains 
its spiritual and ethical significance and determination. The woman rules in the family and her 
highest vocation is to be mother of a family. In contrast, the man is not satisfied in the family, 
but has his vocation in the state, in business and the sciences, etc. 
102 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
here posited that the individual for itself sheds its natural life and opposes its 
natural life as a condition to itself, so that this its being for self is also only a 
natural condition. It is a single individual in which both states or conditions 
exist. The individual thus detaches its natural life from itself, but in such a 
way that is not yet free or for itself. The next step is "'that it determines 
itself as feeling"'. 80 This shedding [of the natural] is to be distinguished 
from the preceding "'Conditions that come to pass in the individual, so that 
we judge that these are only changes in the individual."'81 These present 
conditions are to be sure 'in' the individual, but in such a way that the one 
condition, waking, itself is a judgment [disruption] that opposes its being-
for-itself to natural life. Further the waking state is to be distinguished from 
the sexual relation, in that the latter is a drive [Trieb], a desire, in relation 
to the species. But here wakefulness is to have, in peaceful contrast, one's 
natural life as a state or condition. 
As previously noted, the first was immediate individuality, the naturally 
determined individuality. Second are the determinations and conditions 
that belong to being-for-oneself, which are (a) natural individuality and 
(b) its otherness [Anderssein], the tension of this individuality against itself 
in drive, and essentially in the sex drive. Here is the condition of being 
posited in opposition to oneself, the difference, disruption that is the drive 
itself. Herein the individual has no peaceful enduring existence in itself. For 
existence in self has as its condition the tension of the individual against 
the others, namely, disruption and the negation of disruption, i.e., I the 
61 
satisfaction of the drive. The state of being divided [drive] is itself negated 
and suspended. The natural individual, which was divided against itself, is 
now identical with itself, but as posited individuality, individuality as such 
and for itself. These are the abstract determinations on which depends the 
task of conceiving the difference in its essence. 
Individuality existing for itself is contrasted to individuality in itself; ini-
tially these are only contrasted, and this relation is the facade of alteration. 
Individuality existing for itself and individuality in itself are one individual, 
in which this judgment [disruption], this difference, exists, and the relation 
of the two is the fa~ade of alteration. The entire anthropology is concerned 
with determining this relation further. In this way there are alterations 
between the states that we designate as waking and sleep. 
80. W reads: that one is free to determine oneself to self-feeling [Selbstge(Uh[j, to feeling as 
such [Empfindung as solcher]. 
81. W reads: relation of the periods of life and sex. The stage or period of life is transitional, 
so that we judge it not to be the judgment of the individual in itself. 
103 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Our determination was that the individual existing for itself has excluded 
natural life from itself (the in-itself, the implicit being of individuality); it is 
in a state of opposition to slumbering natural life. Since these are natural 
conditions, they are bound to the form of externality and naturalness, i.e., 
to day and night. One can at will change day into night. Animals also 
alternate between these, but only in part, for the majority of animals sleep 
only at night. The bird of prey is immersed in desire, and in desire it has no 
theoretical relation to the external world. For the theoretical point of view 
the world is an enduring reality, valid in itself, and to theory it is a matter of 
indifference whether the world exists. In contrast, desire is hostile towards 
the endurance of the outer world; it negates the world and makes it null. 
For desire therefore the manifestation of an external world is not a matter 
of indifference or of a peaceful 'ought to be'. Rather its nightly predatory 
behavior stands in close connection with this phenomenon of the world. 
Wakefulness is the being-for-itself of the individual that is at the same 
time directed outwards. This relation is directed to an existent, no longer the 
internal disruption of the individual within itself, and his peaceful [relation] 
vis-a-vis the other. Therefore there is a relation posited in wakefulness: 
quiescent relation to self, and relation to the outer world, which should be 
allowed to be as existent; wakefulness has excluded its slumbering natural 
62 
life, the external in general. rv The waking individual I existing for itself has 
divided itself, has excluded its being-in-itself from itself, and relates itself to 
itself. Precisely this divided being is the individual itself.rv82 
Bichat in Sur la vie et la mort, has called attention to the physiological 
distinction. 83 He calls these two sides the organic life and the animal life. 
1. The organic life is the life of the simple relation of the individual to 
himself, the reproductive process, that also in irritability again belongs to 
82. W reads: physiologically the difference, the judgment should be recalled; the individual 
has divided itself, excluded its being in itself (its natural life) from itself and relates itself to it. 
The individual in itself is precisely this condition of [internal] division. 
83. [Ed.] Marie Fram;ois Xavier Bichat, Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la mort 
(Paris, 1800), 7 ff.; in German: Tiibingen, 1802, eh. 1, §1. Hegel touches upon this in §355 
and §389 Zusatz. Bichat distinguished between an animal and an organic system. To the former 
he assigned the system of sensibility and irritability, and to the latter, the reproductive system. 
This terminology is drawn from A. v. Hailer, Von der empfindlichen und reizbaren Teilen des 
menschlichen Korpers (published in Latin, 1753). Through this distinction of sensibility and 
irritability he derived a distinguishing characteristic of the organic that was valid for a long 
time. Schelling rejected the separation of these systems as well as the assumption of a proper 
organic lawfulness opposed to natural principles. Sensibility, irritability, and reproduction can 
be deduced as characteristics of the organic that in turn can be derived from natural principles. 
Hegel also criticized the distinction of sensibility, irritability, and reproduction as discrete 
systems of organism. 
104 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
reproduction; circulation of the blood continues in waking as well as in 
sleep. Only this organic life is connected with the external world through 
breathing and respiration. The life directed outward is the relation to the 
air. This root of life remains also in sleep. When this system ceases to be 
living, the human being is dead. 
2. The system of animality varies between active and passive. Within this 
animal system there are the subsystems of irritability and sensibility. In this 
animal system they come into their efficacy. To this belong the senses and 
muscle movement. Theoretically sensibility resides in the organs of sense, 
irritability is practically directed towards the world. In sleep the animal life 
ceases to be active; to this extent sleep and death are brothers. 84 The organs 
that are directed outwards fall under the judgment of duality and doubling 
and are therefore themselves doubled. The organs belonging to organic life 
are only individual and irregular. The former organs are inwardly double, 
and since there is no basis for variation, they are symmetrical. Eyes and ears 
are doubled. The outer directedness of the human figure is essentially the 
object of art, the spiritual expression in form and gesture. 
Concerning the further distinction between sleep and waking, it has 
usually been determined abstractly, i.e., there is sleep and there is waking. 
When we consider human sleep and waking, I insofar as these states must 
63 
be apprehended concretely, one wishes to take the distinction according to 
concrete conditions, namely, that in sleep there also exist representations. 
Here one doesn't want the abstract distinction between sleeping and wak-
ing, but so far as in both states the more concrete, wider activity of spirit 
occurs, one wants [to examine] the form of this representation. Thus this 
distinction is made into a vexing question. 85 
The images that we have in sleep are dreams. People have wondered 
whether the soul is active in sleep. Spirit, soul, is essentially activity, not a 
thing, not an abstract, self-relating, reflective, quiescent dead being; rather 
spirit is eternal movement. To be at home with self constitutes the dimension 
of rest, but this is a being with self that is at the same time a coming to 
self. (It is not worth the effort to retain or remember dreams, and one 
must not allow oneself to relate one's dreams to others.) One has images 
in waking and in dreams I also know of external objects. Dreaming is 
also consciousness, concerning oneself with images. This involves vexing 
84. [Ed.] Cf. Lessing, Werke, VI. 83 f.; 405; Goethe, Dichtung und Wahrheit, book 8; 
Schiller, Kabale und Liebe, V, 1; C. A. Kluge, Versuch einer Darstellung des animalischen 
Magnetismus (Berlin, 1811). 
85. [Ed.] The reference is to the question that Napoleon posed at the University of Padua. 
Cf. Encyclopedia §398. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
questions. The common elements are the images. In this concrete consider-
ation, it is supposed to be explained how the images of sleep differ from the 
images of waking. The general difference is that in waking I am confronted 
with the outer world, and this being-for-myself includes in its concrete 
significance that I am subject together with the totality of all determinations. 
In sleep I am not for myself; I am powerless, so that what I otherwise hold 
together in my subjectivity, now falls apart. In falling asleep both images and 
their interconnections disappear. The circumspect waking consciousness has 
power over the entire complex of images. In the dream state one allows 
everything to run through one's mind without connection, without purpose, 
and without understanding. Jean Paul had a technique to put children and 
himself to sleep: he invented a silly story full of nonsense and pretended 
that this was a real story. 86 This dissolution, this absence of connection 
where all connection is merely external, and this suppression of the power 
of consciousness over the images in an interconnected complex-all this is 
what produces sleep. Vertigo, dizziness, a swimming of the head, is akin to 
this. Vertigo originates when one moves rapidly, for then such a mass of 
64 
images passes before the eyes I so that we cannot bring them all together 
and comprehend them. In vertigo on a high tower, the eye is not accustomed 
to comprehend what is distant, or to comprehend distance as a relation. It is 
vertigo when one is in sleep. If one is sleeping, one stands in vertigo, and is 
about to fall. One has lost the consciousness of the center point, the center 
of gravity, when the will, the ground on which one stands, is weakened. 
Here originates indifference against all particular images that follow 
each other without order or connection; and this aspect must be noted. 
Monotony in the senses, which constitutes boredom, is what puts one to 
sleep. This dissolution wherein the unity of the soul absolves itself from 
multiplicity is in abstracto the character of the image as it exists in sleep. 
The superficial consideration is that in both conditions we have images, 
that the difference between waking and sleep refers to the form of being-for-
self, and the totality of the being-for-self is to be considered more closely. 
I, together with all this existence, am the centerpoint, and everything that 
I have before me is an objective complex that is rationally ordered. What 
appears to me I order in this objective complex. This entire interconnected 
nexus is concretely present in me in a veiled way. I am the whole connection, 
and this connection is the measure of the phenomena. Now I am sitting 
here. The 'now' is a result of preceding conditions, this place exists likewise 
86. [Ed.] Jean Paul, 'The Art of Bringing on Sleep', in Siimtliche Werke (Miinchen, 1976}, 
vol. 6, 238-50. Hegel became acquainted with Jean Paul while at Heidelberg. 
106 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
in connection I with my concrete condition. "'I do not have the 'now' 
65 
entirely present before me, but I am the unity that is present-so I relate 
myself to myself in waking. When something entirely unexpected appears 
to me, which does not fit into that complex, I can ask, am I awake or 
am I dreaming? When by and by I learn to comprehend this nexus, then I 
regard it [even the unexpected] as actual. This concrete consciousness is not 
developed, but is nevertheless implicitly present in me in a concealed way. It 
is the measure of my subsuming something as actual. In dreaming this nexus 
is not present. In dream I do not relate to myself as the concrete center. 
In dreams everything is ordered without reference to this concrete center-
point that constitutes actuality, the rationality of my representing, the most 
concentrated point of the nexus, that in turn constitutes objectivity.""87 It 
can still be added that even in dreams there is a correlation with "'the 
actual. But dreams occur without an actual objective association. Sensations 
and feelings can also be the content of dreams; images in the evening that 
continue in dreams, but dreams can also produce a sensation in the body. It 
depends on how one explains this sensation-! feel hardness and then say, 
there is something hard.""88 
I I have sensations in sleep, but it is the fantasy that accounts for 
66 
these, not the reflective, waking understanding. The imagination makes 
an image out of these feelings, and so feeling is the occasion for a spe-
cific dream. 89 In sleep the human being can have a feeling of an illness 
87. W reads: I do not have everything present in my consciousness, or in its development, 
but I am the present feeling, the unity of the complex. If in waking something suddenly comes 
to me outside of this coherence, so I ask myself whether I am awake or dreaming. This fact, 
that something occurs to me, of which I know not how it has come into connection with my 
existence--and now I learn to have insight into the nexus. I consider it as actual if it appears 
in connection with the rest-the concrete consciousness of the nexus is present to me in a 
concealed way, and this presence, this totality, is the criterion by which I measure everything 
that occurs to me. This is the waking consciousness. 
In dreams I do not relate to myself as this concrete center; here everything is in flux 
and confusion without any concrete center and without any actuality.-This is therefore the 
true difference, this diverse constitution of representation, the rationality of representation in 
waking is the concentratedness of the nexus in me. This coherence constitutes objectivity. 
88. W reads: connection of feeling with what is actual. Dreams go on and on forever 
without understanding. Feeling can also be the occasion of determinate content of the dream. 
If something has interested us in the evening, it can continue in a dream; but it can also 
produce special feelings in the body. It depends on how these feelings are explained. Feeling is 
immediate. I explain the feeling of [my] finger when I say, there is something hard through the 
fact that I feel it. 
89. W adds: especially in the morning, when one has the most lively dreams because 
then the soul opens itself again to external impression.-So dreams often have such external 
occasions beyond the fact that the spirit during the day has had particularly interesting 
pastimes.-Eating. 
107 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
that afterwards is followed by an actual illness. "'The system is already 
67 
actually I pathologically affected, but in the waking condition, normal 
undertakings and the like keep it from being felt. In waking such a feeling 
is objectively explained, i.e., in reference to its context. We will speak more 
precisely about this complex, concentrated objective context. 
In the remark [to §398] there is mention of the refreshment that sleep 
grants. It is noted how it is necessary to refresh oneself through sleep. Rest-
ing, as merely doing nothing, cannot be a refreshment, for rest in the sense of 
doing nothing is rather relaxation. The refreshment of sleep consists in the 
fact that in waking I am for myself in contrast and opposition to the outer 
world. There are two foci here; waking is distinguished from simple natural 
life and the simple substantiality. Sleep is this covering of oneself in oneself. 
In waking I divide myself from myself. In sleep I withdraw, I sink within 
myself but not because I place myself in opposition to my universality, 
but because I immerse myself in substantiality, which is the power of the 
68 
individual. I Occupation with particulars belongs to the category of being-
quantity, because power has a measure-this direction towards the outer is 
opposed to submergence in universality. 
We pass on now to sentience (Empfindung). It is the third element beside 
( 1) the natural qualities that are different for us, not for the individual, and 
(2) the alterations in the subject itself as it differs from itself. The third is the 
return, the remaining identical with self in disruption and alteration. Being-
identical-with-self is the first category. The second is alteration, a being-
different in oneself. The third is a being-different, but different in relation 
to oneself. This [moment of return] is sentience as such.90 
Sleeping and waking are alternating states forming an infinite progres-
sion. 91 They cannot derive from each other; this progression means that 
they do not exist in their truth, i.e., in their unity. They have only a negative 
relation."'92 Truth is the genuine infinity in contrast to the aforementioned 
90. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §381 Zusatz: 'Sentience [Empfindung] is the omnipresence of 
the unity of the animal in all its members, which immediately communicate every impression 
and influence to the one whole which in the animal begins to come to be for itself.' 
91. [Ed.] Hegel speaks of an infinite progression, but here progress is also regress: the 
perpetual transcending of a limit that constantly re-establishes or reinscribes the limit and so 
constitutes only a negative relation. Hegel does not use the term 'infinite regress,' but the 'bad' 
or 'spurious infinite'. 
92. W reads: so that prophecies often have essential grounds. The sick person is already 
pathologically affected; waking does not allow the pathology to emerge unhindered, whereas 
this can happen in sleep where there is no tension of wakefulness.-So dreams also have 
connections with actual feelings and conditions. We will speak more about this totality that 
exists in self-feeling, this totality of the entire feeling that is present in self-feeling, when we 
examine the diremption of feeling. It is essential to have a definite account of what objectivity 
108 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
bad infinite. The true infinity (object of logic) contrasts with the bad infinity 
and is frequently confused with the latter. The true infinity means that when 
there is a transition from one to the other, this one, when it transitions into 
the other, in this other only comes to itself. The cause exists in the effect, and 
first in its effect becomes what it is. [Similarly] the genuine determination 
of waking is to be at home with oneself in being-other than oneself (sleep). 
The particular soul thus finds the determination of its sleeping nature. This 
determination exists in being; I am determined thus; it is a determination in 
me and this determination is to be sleeping, natural. But the individual soul, 
in opposition to its being-for-self, posits what the other is as identical with 
itself; "-'it posits the other as ideal in itself, I and in this [ideal] otherness 
69 
it remains simply at home with itself. Being awake, as being-for-self, is 
the exclusion of the uncultivated natural immediacy; this is its abstract 
determination. The concrete determination of being awake is that this other 
is. (There is posited a complex, a nexus of determination, which I am.) In remark (§398 end) 
sleep is the reinforcement of this activity, not as the simple negative of rest from activity, 
but as a return out of the world of determinations, of distraction(s), and out of the process 
of stabilization, namely, the singularities in the universal mode of subjectivity which is the 
substance of those determinations and therefore the absolute power over them. Sleep is the 
reinvigoration of feeling and of spirit, and of the entire concrete consciousness. One rests. 
Rest, understood as a merely doing nothing, cannot reinvigorate. Rest is rather, so far as it 
is absence of activity, relaxation,-but the reinvigoration of sleep consists in the fact that I 
immerse myself in the universal essence of subjectivity from which I am separated in waking. 
I for myself and opposed to the activity, and thus opposed to the external world-! can say 
there are two foci in human beings. Everything is directed outwards and is distinguished in 
its simple natural life. Activity contains duality, separation,-sleep is the fulfillment of self. In 
waking I isolate myself from my substantiality. I am opposed to myself in a special way in 
isolation from myself as species, universal being. In sleep I also have this separation. Then I 
go within myself, not in order to be for myself against this universal. I abandon myself and 
immerse myself in my substantiality. As [Alkgonosis] could not be overcome by Hercules so 
long as he touched his mother earth and could draw life from her, so in sleep we always 
return into substantial life, which is the true might and power over singularity. The direction 
outwards belongs to the category of determinate magnitude. This outer directedness suspends 
itself and sinks into the entire universal that is the power. We immerse ourselves in the unity 
which we give ourselves in sleep. Sentience. Sentience is the third of the natural qualities. 
The first two (1) the natural determination of the soul in general. The natural determination is 
different only for us, not for the individual. (2) The alterations in the individual. The individual 
in himself is distinguished from himself. Now (3) return, the logical third. In the disunion, 
the determination nevertheless to be identical with oneself. This is the category of what is 
called natural quality. (1) Being, (2) internal difference and the third category is now difference 
in self that suspends itself.-Sentience as such. Sleep and wake are not mere alterations (of 
periods of life) but alternating conditions. These are the exchange of two determinations that 
are inseparable. Their connection, inseparability, is their union. This is a progress into infinity. 
Sleep and waking, sleep and waking, etc., cause, that itself is effect, and has another as its cause 
that in turn is effect, etc. The boring exchange between one and the same. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
that is opposed to me is essentially related to me; that the other, the natural 
being, is for me, or that I am determined in being awake means that this 
other is no other, but rather in this other I have returned to myself. Such is 
being awake, sentience. 
Feeling is the being for self of the individual soul, so that it is at the 
same time dissolved in its universality.""93 There is no great distinction to 
be made between sentience [Empfindung] and feeling [Gefuh/]. 94 Sentience 
93. W reads: it negates the other being, posits it as ideal, and posits it in itself. In 
this condition of being-other, it remains itself. We have spoken about waking consciousness 
and understanding etc. This touches upon concrete content. But waking (taken in complete 
abstractness) is a being for self that is distinguished from natural life. Up till now we have 
remained with this abstract representation. The concrete is that I am for myself, and an other 
exists in contrast to me, but this other is related to me. Therefore, concretely being awake is 
that I am for myself in a determinate way, that the other is for me, that I am determined in 
my wakeful state-that I simply have returned into myself and this is feeling. Feeling is the 
being-for-self of the simple soul in its determinacy. The nature of the universal is determined 
and this means it is posited as ideal in being-for-self. 
94. W adds: Feeling. (Ge{Uhl] Feeling of revenge (Rachege{Uhl], feeling of justice (Ge{Uhl 
des Rechts], etc. Feeling (Empfindung] Feeling of revenge (Empfindung der Rache], feeling 
of justice etc. Moral feeling (moralisches Ge{Uhl] and moral feeling (moralische Empfindung]. 
[Ed.]: Hegel's point in these repetitious phrases seems to be to show that at the level of ordinary 
language, the terms Empfindung and Ge{Uhl are equivalent and interchangeable in German. 
At the level of philosophical theories of knowledge, etc., some have formulated a technical 
distinction between these. For example, the term Empfindung was used to translate the English 
term 'sensation' (Locke) into German. This usage suggests that Empfindungl'sensation' has an 
object or stimulus that evokes it, produces it, etc. Empfindung/'sensation' depends on a given. 
Hegel himself notes in Enc. 1830, §402 a similar distinction. Empfindung is the transient 
impression or effect an object produces in us. For this reason it is essentially linked with 
passivity of the subject and connected to an external given. In contrast, Ge{Uhl may not have 
any identifiable object or stimulus ready at hand, and is thus more related to the subject's 
unity and activity, including mood, emotion, etc., in contrast to sensations (Empfindungen) 
and impressions (Eindriicken). In Enc. 1830, §407, Hegel uses the term Selbstge{Uhl in this 
sense, but not Selbstempfindung, which suggests some sort of distinction. Willem deVries 
(Hegel's Theory of Mental Activity (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988), eh. 5) claims 
that Hegel did not develop any clear distinction between sensation (Empfindung) and feeling 
(Ge{Uhl) until the 1830 edition of the Encyclopedia. There, feeling (Ge{Uhl) is a higher-order 
term than sensation (Empfindung); feeling represents a deeper, fuller sense of the self as a 
totality. Thus deVries contends that 'since all feelings (Empfindungen) are its own, in every 
feeling (Empfindung) the soul is feeling ({Uhlen) itself, is self-feeling (Selbstge{Uhl)'. (ibid., 
76). In this usage Selbstge{Uhl is virtually equivalent to sentience, which Petry and I both 
use to translate Empfindung. But sentience need not imply a passive relation to a given 
object. However, Hoffmeister notes that unlike Empfindung, Ge{Uhl is capable of supporting 
contrasts or polarities, e.g., between pleasure and pain, between the pleasant and unpleasant 
(J. Hoffmeister, Worterbuch der philosophischen Begriffe (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1955), 
244). Feeling (Gefuhl) denotes a middle level between the level of sensation(s) (Empfindung), 
where the soul is immersed in and bound by a given, whether natural or substantial, and the 
level of consciousness where the soul attains liberation and freedom from nature. Empfindung 
designates 'something [merely] particular, contingent, one-sidedly subjective' (Enc. 1830, §400 
Z). Because it is chiefly passive, Empfindung denotes dependence on and immersion in nature. 
110 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
[Empfindung] expresses the same [sense] more from the subjective side, 
while feeling [ Gefuhl] expresses this sense in its determinacy according to 
its content. "-'Feeling = a finding in self [Insichfinden] that has the mode 
of immediacy, but is at the same time in itsel£.""'95 The form of simplicity 
is to be considered more closely. Dullness contrasts with clear presence of 
Ge{Uhl in contrast designates the union or unification of the Empfindungen or sensations. 
In this usage it is equivalent to sentience (Empfindung) as a general capacity. However, 
Ge{Uhl may go on to become Selbstge{Uhl, and this implies a contrast between the self 
and what is not-self or nature. Thus self-feeling as such is the beginning of the liberation 
from or transcendence of nature. Ge{Uhl names this middle ground between sensation and 
consciousness; it is the beginning, but only the beginning, of the separation/liberation of the 
soul from its raw natural substantiality, and the achievement of a subjective, in contrast 
to an objective, sense or 'consciousness' of itself as a totality (Enc. 1830, §402 Zusatz). 
Selbstgefuhl thus denotes the beginning of self-activity and self-presencing. Ge{Uhl comes to 
be the term designating this deeper conception of self as totality underlying polar contrasts; 
feeling is a pre-cognitive organization and unification of sensations that is crucial to Hegel's 
account of madness. There he employs it in his account of the dysfunctional projection of 
merely inner, subjective fantasies as objective. Such projections involve a skewed, distorted 
sense of objectivity, which includes an arrested development, or a retrogression of the subject 
to a condition of unfreedom. Since Ge{Uhl supports polarities, it is the precondition of the 
distinction between subjective and objective. However, the latter distinction is not yet explicit 
either at the level of Empfindung (Enc. 1830, §§400 Z, 402 Z) or at the level of Ge{Uhl 
(Enc. 1830, §402 Z, 118-19). The distinction between subject and object is made explicit 
only at the level of consciousness. Consciousness represents a liberation of the psychic life 
from nature and reflects free self-determination. Consciousness is the subject of part two of 
Hegel's Philosophy of Spirit, namely, the Phenomenology of Spirit. However, it should be noted 
that deVries's neat, systematic distinction between Empfindung and Ge{Uhl is not consistently 
followed by Hegel even in the 1830 Encyclopedia. For example, in §381 Zusatz, Hegel writes, 
'Feeling is the omnipresence of the unity of the animal in all its members, which immediately 
communicate every impression and influence to the one whole which in the animal begins to 
come to be for itself.' If deVries were correct, the term we would expect Hegel to use here 
for feeling would be Gefuhl, but instead Hegel uses Empfindung. Admittedly this is a Zusatz 
from Boumann; it could have come from any of Hegel's lectures between 1817 and 1830, 
and probably reflects Hegel's pre-1830 view. In our 1827 text, Hegel challenges any neat and 
sharp terminological distinction between Empfindung and Gefuhl. Hegel flatly asserts that 
linguistically there is no great distinction between Empfindung and Ge{Uhl. While he may have 
revised this view somewhat by 1830, his interchangeable usage of the terms is the nemesis of 
any translator, and requires any translation to be an act of interpretation. It should also be 
noted that matters are not much clearer linguistically in English. The English equivalents of 
the German terms Empfindung and Ge{Uhl namely, 'sentience', 'sensation' and 'feeling' are 
nearly, if not completely interchangeable according to their definitions in the Oxford English 
Dictionary. I have decided not to standardize the later distinction between Empfindung and 
Ge{Uhl in the translation, because that would impose a greater clarity than the text supports, 
and more importantly, greater clarity than the 1827 Hegel possesses. 
95. W reads: feeling [Gefuhl] for beauty. Feeling [Empfindung] also determined, but more 
according to its not being itself.-The deficiency of feeling, sensitivity, sensibility (direction 
depending on the form of feeling). Feeling, the finding of something in self, finding oneself in 
oneself. The main point is the simplicity of being-in-self in the determinacy. 
111 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
mind. The latter requires ""Specificity so that everything in its determinacy 
stands before consciousness."-'96 All determinacy therein is still immediate, 
but this immediacy is ideal, taken back into itself and canceled. This return 
is still the immediate simple mode of return. Feeling thus belongs to the 
70 
most particularized uniqueness of the subject. I What is in my heart97 
etc., that I have immediately; it is the immediate mode of my being, the 
soul existing in itself in its simplicity. Everything exists in feeling; I am 
subject, as such I exist in a specific way in some determinacy. So far as 
my determinateness is a being, this determinacy is feeling. When I speak 
of something objective or about general principles, then that is something 
universal that is there for everyone. It is for others; it is the element I 
have in common with others. Reasons, principles are also held in common, 
but this is not a dimension of feeling, rather the latter means that I am 
there according to my immediate singularity. The content that belongs to 
me, pertains to the natural idiosyncrasy or feeling. 98 To be sure, feeling, 
although a return to self, is a return to self that is still immediate. So 
everything exists in feeling. It is in my heart, the complex of feeling; "-'it is in 
me as this singular. Principles must be in the heart, which means they belong 
to my being"-'99 so that I am inseparable from this content. If I merely know 
about it, then it is not identical with my very being and immediacy. I must 
be it. This inseparability is necessary. We have this inseparability also in our 
images. We distinguish principles from our feeling. The judge, we say, has no 
71 
feeling. ""There is a great cause I that must be striven for; character restrains 
feeling. There we oppose the universal to feeling, and the universal is far 
greater than every particular. The judge who in this respect seems without 
feeling can always have a feeling for his duty, and this is greater than his 
singularity."" 100 
More precisely, the following distinction must be noted: ( 1) According 
to its form, feeling does not possess the distinction between subjective and 
objective. "-'With every sensation I double the content. The determination 
96. W reads: Development of the grounds, etc., comparison of a content with the 
universal,-this development is not found in feeling [EmpfindingJ. 
97. W reads: feelings. 
98. W adds: the standpoint of immediate singularity. 
99. W reads: So I determine myself as [the] universal of feeling.-It is not sufficient, so it 
has been said, that principles, religion, etc., be only in one's head; they must also be in one's 
heart, in one's feeling. 
100. W reads: a man who has to accomplish great ends, the principle, the universal, 
must lay aside his feelings. The greater purpose is that for which one must act. Character, 
understanding, reason, keep feeling under control. The judge can be without feeling;-and yet 
as an individual, a father of a family, etc., he can have feeling. That a man acts rightly is much 
greater than all those particularities. The feeling of his right, his duty, is higher than other 
feelings, and is not a feeling of his own particularity and subjectivity. 
112 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
'hardness' is entirely simple. But I double it. First I say 'hardness' in my 
finger; and then I say the object itself is hard."' 101 This doubling is not 
yet present in feeling as such. Afterwards we say that this feeling comes 
from this or that. But the feeling as such is the unity of my being and this 
impression. (2) But in feeling the content is still undeveloped and exists in 
an indefinite way. One must be aware of this, because it has been asserted 
that the truth exists only in feeling. 102 Then it would not be necessary 
to remind ourselves that the foregoing is a false idea, namely that some 
content is justified simply because it is felt in the heart. People have never 
debased themselves as much as in this idea. The first reason is that anyone 
who, when confronted with different opinions, appeals to his own feeling 
[Gefuhl], must be left alone. That's the end of the discussion, because he has 
fled the common world that others share and which constitutes the human 
sphere. 103 
I The further point is that feeling is a determinate, restricted, singular. 
72 
From this, we know that feeling [Empfindung] is capable of having any 
possible content, [and] that this content can be good or evil. Feeling "'has no 
criterion in itsel£"'104 because it is the feeling of a human being. Whatever 
is universal, that is for the human being the measure of something. 105 But 
feeling is merely singular and can contain in itself either good or evil. "'The 
universal has its basis in thought; this can also be felt; it is mine and so 
my immediate feeling, but it derives from spirit. In the animal, whatever it 
needs, whatever is good for it, exists in the mode of feeling, as instinct. But 
the human being has no instinct. Its instinct is reason. Thinking here is not at 
all to be understood as philosophical thinking. Thought in the pure element 
of thinking-it would be folly to demand this here. One knows a basic 
principle and it derives from spirit."'106 The good can be present in feeling, 
101. W reads: when we have a feeling, consciousness or intuition enters. As consciousness 
of it, I double the simple feeling: hardness exists both as an object and as my subjective feeling. 
102. [Ed.] The polemic is directed against Jacob Fries (Handbuch der praktische Philoso-
phie (Heidelberg: Mohr & Winter, 1818)), F. H. Jacobi (David Hume uber den Glauben, oder 
Idealismus und Realismus (Breslau: G. Loewe, 1787)) and Schleiermacher (Der christliche 
Glaube (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1821)). 
103. W adds: Rational men constitute something rationally through reasons, i.e., through 
something that is present also for another in his understanding. In feeling [Gefiihl] I take refuge 
in my particularity that excludes others. 
104. W reads: has no criterion in itself of what is true and right, etc. 
105. W reads: of that which constitutes right, etc. 
106. W adds: Religion has its origin in spirit, in thought. God should be revered as spirit. 
The ethical is a universal, rational aspect of willing that has its source and origin in thought. 
What has its origin in spirit can also be sensed and felt, and become mine. But it comes 
to feeling from spirit. An animal holds itself to feeling and instinct. Its vitality includes the 
criterion for what is good and not good for it. But the human being does not have instinct; 
113 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
but the only criterion of good is rationality. The true must have the form of 
universality. Concerning experience, it is known that animals do not have 
73 
religion. However, it is through thought that feeling becomes human. I That 
there can be bad feelings 107 and bad hearts is an entirely trivial experience. 
"'It is a consummated religious feeling with the Egyptians that an ox is God. 
This feeling is prattle, learned prattle; in actuality nowhere is it allowed to 
count as valid. The judge investigates the objective aspects of a matter,"'108 
the context, the necessity, the circumstances. This is what is objective; this 
is the rationality in the activity of judging. 
The worship of Apis has been felt [to be appropriate] but nevertheless 
this is a feeling which degrades human beings. 109 "-'Whether a feeling is 
appropriate depends on its content. A cultivated, purified feeling has a 
purified content, and this content is the rational, thought. The pious feeling 
originates when what is brought before the representation, the insight, is of 
a truthful sort."-'110 The content must be correct in itself; if the content is 
correct, then the feeling will be correct. Since this content is mine, and since 
I am identical with it in my immediacy, I feel it. "-'lt has been said that we 
should just hold fast to the point that every people has its religion in feeling, 
and that we should leave aside entirely the content of religion. This is a 
74 
special individual point of view I which philosophy has to consider when 
feeling is made the criterion."' 111 
it has reason instead, and reason must be universal in form. Reason and thought are not yet 
philosophical thought or knowledge in the element of pure spirit. Humans know that stealing 
is a vice, but they do not know this through philosophy. This knowledge comes from spirit and 
we know it, are conscious of it, without recourse to philosophical thinking. 
107. W reads: there can be good as well as bad feelings. 
108. W adds: That an ox or an ape is God is a fully religious feeling, but it is only a feeling, 
and nevertheless is degrading in spirit-there is only a prattle about this feeling. In actuality 
it is talk about nothing. Nowhere would the actual truth be decided on the basis of feeling. A 
judge does not act according to feelings, but investigates the objective aspect of a matter. 
109. [Ed.] On the cult of Apis, cf. Charles Francois Dupuis, Origine de tousles cultes, ou 
religion universelle (Paris, 1793). 
110. W reads: One must know how to give an account of what special reasons there are 
for this language of feelings. Feeling is only a form whose content can be true or false. 
111. W reads: Whoever says that religious feeling is that on which everything depends, 
shows only that he is satisfied with custom. He wants to hold fast to custom without reflecting 
further on the content of the custom. We are content and want to stand pat simply because 
this content is ours. This standpoint makes one impatient with reflective consideration. In 
general, religion is that to which we hold ourselves in feeling [Ge(Uhl]. Here philosophy has 
only to defend the view insofar as it is asserted as a philosophical standpoint, that feeling is 
the criterion of truth. Concerning this matter the points on which it depends have already been 
mentioned. 
114 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
As has been shown, feeling [das Gefiihl] is only a form for any content 
whatsoever. This form must now be considered more carefully. It has been 
noted that in feeling the distinction between subject and object is not yet 
present; this distinction belongs to consciousness. 112 But in feeling there is 
immediately present the distinction between immediate being and being-
in-itself. Feeling is this concrete whole and we can hold on to these two 
moments of feeling itself. Feeling must determine itself. ---If we consider 
these two moments, the immediate determinacy and being-in-itself, we 
can immediately consider this as the special content, that its content is 
immediate determinacy as such, or that the other aspect, being-in-itself, is 
the content of feeling. The latter aspect is the true determination of the 
form. If we make the immediate determination as such the content, then 
we have outer sensations [Empfindungen] and, in case of the other content 
[being-in-itself], inner sensations.---113 Therefore in this paragraph (§401) 
when this being-for-self [Fiirsichsein] or being-in-itself [Insichsein] is taken 
concretely as absorbed in itself, it is I, and the immediate determination 
is thus corporeity. Feeling is thus first of all feeling of corporeity. Feeling 
remembers ... 114 
It is further to be noted that I external sensations [EmpfindungenP 15 are 
75 
recalled and made inward. This is the first point. The second is that the 
sensations which originate in spirit must become embodied in order to be 
felt or sensed. 
The first to be considered are the external sensations [Empfindungen]. 
In general these are familiar as bodily determinations. It is not only a 
determinacy, but also a feeling [Gefiihl], a sensation [Empfindung], so that 
we find it in us. The immediate sensation is a sensation of a being, external 
sensation. Further it is to be noted that there is a circle of these sensations. 
We know these well as the five senses. 116 It is of interest to consider in what 
way these five senses constitute a totality; the concept is its determining 
element; the soul which the concept constitutes should be comprehended. 
We call sense here a mode of external sensation [Empfindung]. We shall 
briefly sketch the concept of sense. How does nature come to five senses? It 
112. W adds: Consciousness. We also have therefore no objectivity in feeling [Empfind-
ung]. 
113. W reads: If we accept this distinction we have two types of feelings-(1) outer, 
where the content is immediate determination; and (2) inner feeling, where the content is the 
determination of the subject existing in itself. 
114. [Ed.] Hegel refers to §401 of the 1827 edition of his Encyclopedia. 'Feeling is recalled 
through the fact that it is made inward in the being-for-self of the soul.' 
115. W reads: determinations, external sense impressions 
116. W adds: seeing, tasting, feeling, etc., touch. 
115 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
often comes only to four. 117 Three always serves as a basis, but it depends 
on whether one of these can be explicated. 
~The first is the immediate. But the immediate is concretely only so, that 
the concrete determinations are not yet connected to the points of unity. 
According to its content the matter itself is all there, but not yet explicitly 
76 
connected. I 
The second is the difference. The two elements no longer fall outside each 
other in such an immediate way, but are related.~ 118 
The third is the unity of the first two. Where this is fully developed there 
are five senses. The first element contains two, the second likewise two. 
Spirit comes essentially to three. Nature often to four. 
According to this scheme we have first the senses of simple ideality: 
sight and hearing. Second are the senses of difference: smell and taste. 
Third the sense of totality, namely feeling [Gefiihl]. Since these senses are 
at the same time sensations [Empfindungen], and we have to do with them, 
feeling as such determines itself in progressing outwards from itself. The 
first is the abstract feeling; the last must be its ~return [to itself], essentially 
self-feeling [Selbstgefiihl].~ 119 Therefore the last sense is exclusively called 
feeling [Fiihlen]. In hearing and seeing we do not sense ourselves, but in 
smelling and tasting such self-sensing begins. In feeling as such the return to 
self is completed. When I feel an object, I feel it offering resistance to me. 
""First [we have] sensibility in general, without return to self. The pro-
gression is to the sensation of corporeity and from there to return to self, 
i.e., self-feeling.~ 120 The physiological aspect does not concern us here. The 
first [sense] is seeing. When we see, we see an object; we do not sense the 
eye. The content is immediately projected outwards. We well know when 
we reflect on this, that our corporeity is determined in a certain way. But 
in healthy conditions we do not perceive the eye in seeing. (It is otherwise 
with the sense of taste) The content is projected on to the world for us; 
77 
what we see is that [kind of] being which is in space. I The sense of space 
117. W adds: as spirit comes to three. 
118. W reads: Three is the immediate in general. The immediate is concrete. The concrete 
content is not yet in its unity and is external to itself. The first is the eye, but not yet connected to 
a point of unity, not yet returned to identity. The second is the determination of the difference, 
where two fall outside each other as relative and related. 
119. W reads: return of feeling to itself in its subjectivity, self-sensing, self-feeling. 
120. W reads: During the phase of sensibility in general I feel both the object and myself 
against it.-Sense of self-feeling therefore-This is the more precise determination of the 
progress in the determination of this external feeling. (1) Feeling in general. (2) Feeling of 
corporeity. (3) Self-feeling or sensing of corporeity as a corporeity existing for itself in contrast 
to others.-
116 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
is not abstract space, but materialistic spatiality, so to speak, that the content 
is for us and manifests itself to us. This space that manifests itself physically 
is light. 121 "'Light is an immaterial matter; it has no weight, is not composed 
of parts, and is this indivisible connection, this inseparable unity."' 122 It 
is the pure manifesting of the object for us. The sense of sight is thus 
completely theoretical. The objects are for us, i.e, independent; we do not 
perceive our eyes. Seeing is therefore a feeling of abstract being and so 
remains external. 123 In sight we have only a surface before us, the abstract. 
"'We learn to judge the three dimensions as well as spatial distance only 
through habit. This manifestation is spiritually simple, immediate, without 
mediation."" 124 
The other ideal sense is hearing. If sight is the sense of physical spa-
tiality, hearing is the sense of physical (non-abstract) time. To be sure we 
see alterations, movements, but there time is only a moment in reference 
to space. Hearing is time become physical, so to speak. 125 What we call 
hearing is the vibration of the bodies in themselves. The body vibrates, and 
this vibration more precisely means that every part is displaced, exists in the 
place of others and is immediately again displaced by the others that assert 
themselves. Where there is one spatial-physical point, I immediately there 
78 
is another. This is the vibration of the body. This [account) is not allowed 
to count as valid: wherever a point exists there could be no other. Some 
take refuge [from the difficulty] in the pores. But the pores [of matter] are a 
mere fiction, nothing empirical. These are a matter projected by the under-
standing, "'Which helps itself thus."' 126 This vibration is the suspension of 
the mechanism of the body and its restoration. This inflow and outflow is 
what we hear. "'If the vibration continues, the real suspension of cohesion 
occurs, warming and melting. 127 What we distinguish as material points or 
parts are posited as temporal; i.e., it is, and because it is, it is not."' 128 
121. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §§275 f. 
122. W reads: Light is matter, but it is equally immaterial. It does not consist in parts, or 
out of particular independents. It is the indivisible, a (gathering) unity. 
123. W reads: In sight we are immersed in the object without reflexion on ourselves. The 
immaterial manifestation of what lies before us. 
124. W reads: (the dimension, distance etc. belong to reflection), sight is a spiritual mani-
festation, simple, unmediated relation. Sense of ideality. 
125. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §§298A, 300 f. 
126. W reads: which has completely made it up. 
127. [Ed.] On the transition from sound vibration to heat, cf. Encyclopedia §§302 ff. 
128. W reads: through resonance there is a transition to complete negation of cohesion. 
What we can view as material points are continually external and temporally posited. It is, 
and because it is, it is not. The unity of being and not-being. When I say 'now' the 'now' is no 
longer. This is time. The material, in vibrating, is thus temporally posited. 
117 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Time is the inseparability of the 'is' and the 'is-not'. So, in sound, the 
disappearance of the material is posited. This is the inwardness of the body 
that manifests itself, this subjectivity and negativity. This is what we hear. 
In hearing we do not have a feeling of the 'is' but only a feeling of the 
becoming, the material process of becoming, of pure physical self-alteration. 
It is, however, an ideal sense, because it is only this pure process of the 
becoming of the mechanical that is equally external to us and immediately 
inseparable from us. 
There is no feeling of our corporeity present in hearing. Since this con-
cerns the relation of space and time, it is likewise an ideal meaning. This is 
the first pair of senses, namely, ideal senses. 
The second are those senses in opposition. Where the transition is made 
to reality, the practical begins. Our corporeity begins to be felt, and our 
feeling begins. In smell we sense the volatilization of the body, its real 
79 
annihilation, or real resumption into a simple mode. I The body passes over 
into this simple mode, which is gas. This non-apparent consumption of the 
body-its volatilization-is what we sense in smell. There is therefore an 
existent, but one in transition to annihilation, its dissolution. 
Taste is closely connected with the foregoing. In this case it is we who 
accomplish the consumption. It is our activity that is present in the matter 
and at the same time our self-feeling. In smell we already begin to perceive 
our organs, and in taste this perception increases. "'(In Swabian 'to smell' is 
equivalent to 'to taste'). In these perceptions we sense ourselves.""129 These 
are the senses of difference-that being is simultaneously related to its other, 
and consequently to its annihilation. The element of water corresponds to 
the [sense of] taste. This neutral [element] individualized presents a concrete 
neutrality, and these are salts in general. 
The third sense is feeling [Gefuhl]. 130 In this we find being [as] offering us 
resistance, i.e., an independent existence against us, as we are independent 
for ourselves. [Here we find our corporeity again]; both sides are determined 
as existing for itself. In sight, the content is the existent; in feeling the content 
determines itself as existing for itself. It offers resistance. Weight belongs 
to these different modes of being-for-self, as does a tendency for matter 
to strive after the center. According to this ideality it is weight. The type 
of resistance is to be further distinguished, also heat belongs here, i.e., the 
dissolution of cohesion. 
129. W reads: In Swabian one does not distinguish smelling and tasting.-Our activity is 
directed towards being and senses itself therein. 
130. W reads: feeling, sense of touch. 
118 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
This is the totality of sensations that we call external and which belong 
to the senses. It can still be noted that the feeling of a sense has a certain 
measure (a quantitative determination as existent). Quantity and measure 
are categories of immediate being. They proceed from I being to being-
80 
for-self. In their [independent] being-for-self, we, the feeling ones, are for 
ourselves. Both fall asunder and only then there emerges the distinction of 
objectivity. In seeing there is only an immediate relation; we are engrossed in 
the object and have only one feeling. In feeling the perceiver is determined as 
existing for himself, and here arises a "-'relation.""131 Here a comparison, a 
relation between both arises. This relation includes what we call the pleasant 
and the unpleasant, an agreement of the existent with our being-for-self. We 
are determined as being for ourselves, but as such we have an inwardness 
full of content, and our inwardness can be appropriate or inappropriate to 
the content. The pleasant and repulsive arise here; this is at first a very 
superficial comparison. ""It can also be more fundamental so that this 
agreement can be further determined. For example, there can be a harm-
ful pleasure."-'132 Animals know this through instinct. But with humans 
instincts are entirely subordinate. We depend more on understanding than 
on instinct. Also the instinct of animals is not infallible. This pleasantness 
expresses an entirely superficial agreement of the external determination 
with our inner determination. A further agreement can also be mentioned. 
The symbolic aspect I ""Of feeling, namely, that an outer figure is present 
81 
and a universal meaning, a universal character, is connected with it.""133 
Sensible immediate feelings have in themselves a character that is common 
with inner inclinations and feelings, and are thus symbolic. 
Colors are especially symbolic, because colors have objectivity, are exis-
tents.134 ""It belongs to the symbol that it has existence and a character with 
traits distinct from its existence. In mourning one chooses a definite color, 
black or white. This absence of difference counts as a symbol of negativity, 
so white corresponds to innocence. Pure red has always been the queen of 
colors. 
131. W adds: dual relation: (1) the external senses (2) that an independent being has arisen, 
as well as an exclusion of other independent beings. 
132. W reads: there can be something pleasant to our feeling that is harmful to our health. 
But both can be bound together, e.g., narcotic addicting colors in odor, appearance, and (yet) 
harmful to health. 
133. W reads: In symbol there is an external form and signification, i.e., a certain attribute, 
determination, and general character that is connected with external structure (eagle the 
symbol of strength). 
134. [Ed.] Cf. Goethe, Farbenlehre, Part 1, §§915 ff., in Goethe's Werke 13, 520 f.; Kant, 
Critique of Judgement §59. 
119 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Symbolism implies that something has an essential determination that 
agrees with an inner determination. The two relate symbolically in that one 
and the same determination is contained in things that are different. Why 
a particular color is the symbol of an inner determination is very difficult 
to say, only because this is an utterly external determination of feeling, and 
82 
the other [determination] is I entirely inner. Light is white provided that it 
is visible. 135 In the case of innocence we represent to ourselves an undivided 
heart. What purple is in itself, depends on theory. Why purple is a royal 
calor-for this one must know the nature of calor. According to Newton, 
purple is not different from other colors. Red is an intermixture of two 
darkenings (blue and yellow), a balance that then intensifies to subjectiv-
ity, individuality and within such intensity, to power and strength. 136 On 
account of this nature, red stands out. With blue something bright shines 
through the darkness. Conversely, yellow is the darkening of a light through 
dimming. For this reason blue is mild, also cold, because darkness is the 
base, the substantial element.""'137 
135. [Ed.] According to Goethe's theory, colors originate through an interplay of light 
and darkness; Cf. Farbenlehre, Part 1, Einleitung, Goethe's Werke 13, 326. According to this 
theory, white originates as a pure darkening of the transparent (§§175, 494 ff.); following 
this, according to Hegel's interpretation light attains existence for us or becomes visible 
(Encyclopedia §317 A). In contrast, Newton's view was that the white of sunlight is a synthesis 
of the basic colors in a mixture ( Opticks, book 1, part 2, prop. V. theor. IV, Opera quae exstant 
omnia (London, 1770-85)). 
136. [Ed.] According to Goethe, blue originates in darkness, yellow in light. On the corre-
lation of the colors yellow and blue with inner emotional states (warm and cold respectively), 
cf. Goethe, op cit. §§764-71; 778-85. 
137. W reads: Smells are not easily taken as symbols in contrast to colors. One speaks of 
cheerful and serious colors. For example, in mourning one chooses traditional colors that are 
symbolic. Black designates absence of distinctions; white symbolizes innocence. It has been felt 
that white simply is (not Newton). In contrast, red is the royal color. It is difficult to say why a 
color is a symbol of an inner disposition, because feeling is opposite to external determination, 
the other is the inner. White is the simple. Pure light is, taken externally, a pigment of all 
representations etc., a visible mode of light. Innocence, purity, is a heart without any inner 
discord. 
Rose red, a serene, cheerful color, symbolizes love. Why is red a royal color? One must 
understand the nature of red. Red is an intermixture of two modes of dimming (blue and 
yellow in opposition).-(The white that is non-opaque becomes through its seven dimmings 
the dark, the mysterious. If the bright in its seven dimmings predominates it becomes light 
grey, where darkness predominates it becomes dark grey.)-A balance adjusts both dimmings 
to individuality, to subjectivity. The powerful, the strong, the individual among colors.-This 
is the individual nature of this color, hence it is the symbol of the noble and powerful. Blue 
is mild and cold. Blue has a dark, gloomy base, where light shines through. Where light color 
is the base, and dark transparent medium dulls it, the result is a yellow. The heavens are thus 
blue; it is entirely night-black. Atmosphere offers no resistance. Night, the absence of light in 
the heavens, becomes blue through a lighter medium of atmosphere. 
120 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
Tones are also symbolical. There is a tone that without any melody 
can by itself be bright and cheerful. It includes determinacy in another 
way through the relation of tones, melodies, harmony. 138• 139 The objective 
element of these relations are numbers: the tone, the vibration of coher-
ence, are determined according to the number of vibrations. Harmony is 
something symbolic, corresponding to our feeling. 140 One considers har-
mony so noble, that numbers should hardly constitute its objective ground. 
But the nature of feeling is to have the manifold and concrete as simple 
determinations. Sensation, the form of simplicity, reduces what is concrete 
in itself to a simple determination. So a sense of vision such as "'blue, 
is an entirely I simple determination and nevertheless a relation of light 
83 
and dark-sensation reduces it to the form of simplicity. It is then only a 
blending."'141 It is similar with tones; "-'determinate tones have a numerical 
relation, and if this is a specific ratio, we hear it as entirely simple."-'142 
One must have this simplification in mind when we compare the content of 
something sensed in perceptual relation to the same content in its objective 
condition. 
The other dimension is inner sensation [innere Empfindung]. Sensation 
essentially includes the moment of natural immediacy; the inner sensa-
tion is thus embodied. 143 This embodiment is now to be considered. In 
the remark there is talk of a psychic physiology, which demonstrates the 
form of embodiment through which it becomes sensation. We have feelings 
138. W adds: [can] be [cheerful and] please the mind. It still includes in another mode 
determination in itself, so through the difference of tone, through different tones that have a 
certain relation, harmony and disharmony are determined. 
139. [Ed.] This doctrine goes back to Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans; it was further 
developed by Descartes, Compendium Musicae (1650). In the Encyclopedia Hegel refers to 
Giuseppe Tartini, Trattato de musica second la vera scienza dell'armonia (Padua, 1754), and 
to Ernst Florens Friedrich Chladni, Die Akustik (Leipzig, 1802). Hegel presents a more detailed 
account of his theory of harmony in his Lectures on Aesthetics. 
140. W adds: It strikes us particularly with tones that harmony and melody have numerical 
relations as their objective ground 
141. W reads: Blue is a relation,-so it appears simple. This completely simple determina-
tion 'blue' is thus: a spatial relation of clear and dark, where the dark constitutes the foundation 
and the clear functions as a medium through which we see the dark and the gloomy. This 
relation is what we sense; but in sensing this is reduced to the form of simplicity, 'blue'.-Red 
permeates the balance. Green is the simple mixture of blue and yellow. 
142. W reads: More tones together have a determinate numerical relation. If these are of a 
simple nature, 2 or 3, the tone is harmonious to the ear. The third, fourth, and fifth are simple 
harmonies, although objectively considered they are a relation of numbers of a determinate 
frequency of vibrations in a certain period of time. 
143. [Ed.] In the addition to Encyclopedia §401 Hegel refers the idea of the embodiment 
of feelings and sensations to M. F. X. Bichat, Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la mort 
(Paris, 1800). 
121 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
[Empfindungen] of hate and love, etc. These determinations constitute the 
content. One could demand a system of inner feelings. But the content of 
inner feelings is derived from spirit. Right, ethical life, and love are spiritual. 
Envy and hate derive from the representation. 144 The systematic content 
of feelings is a spiritual system. In pursuing this further, the same point 
will prove true of inclinations, 145 namely that the content is the authentic 
element and is to be considered in objective spirit. Here we bracket this 
84 
content. I The other point is that this content, in order to be perceived, 
must be embodied. In sensation we have still to do with immediate cor-
poreity. Insofar as something is sensed, it must be corporalized. A psychic 
physiology would be the system of embodiment of this inner content. Such 
embodiment occurs in anger, shame, laughter and crying. Other modes of 
embodiments are to be distinguished from such immediate embodiments. 
Gestures, countenance, are also embodiments of inner feelings. Gesture is 
a sign that expresses the beginning of an activity. The embodiment that 
we have here is wholly immediate. It is not conscious or arbitrary. It has 
its seat chiefly in what can be called viscera and the lymphatic system. 
Earlier we noted the distinction between animal and organic life. Here 
the psychic physiology would have to state the psychic significance of the 
organs, e.g., the liver. Anger is the outbreak of my self-feeling or mood in 
response to injury. 146 "'Envy is the wishrv 147 that the superior be brought 
down (Nemesis). In anger humans become red, for the breast, the heart, is 
the center of irritability, and the latter is driven outward, a being-directed 
externally. With anger and courage the heart and especially the blood are 
brought into motion, wherein these inner feelings embody themselves. 
85 
"'Anger is bound up with the gushing of gall and with the appearance I of 
blood in the extremities. Shame is also an anger, an involuntary displeasure 
about appearing in a certain way. In contrast, with anxiety there is a 
withdrawal of blood from the extremities. Terror makes the hair gray. The 
standing of the hair on end also embodies terror."' 148 Then there are crying 
144. W adds: which I make for myself of an individual 
145. W adds: the feeling of right, etc., is, according to its content, to be considered in right, 
in the doctrine of right. 
146. W adds: but more of an imagined injury that another has preference 
147. W reads: envy, the nemesis of the ancients, the will 
148. W reads: Anger, courage, the heart that brings the blood into movement wherein 
these inner feelings are embodied. Anger embodies itself in the blood that rises into the face. 
Gall is, physiologically speaking, the anger that has gushed forth from the liver, and drives the 
blood into the extremities. Shame is the emergence of the blood in the face and breast; also 
a beginning of anger in displeasure with oneself. One is ashamed of actions and of an utterly 
false suspicion. Shame is a displeasure at appearing before others in such a light. Conversely, 
one associates fear with the withdrawal of blood from the extremities, cold sweats, chattering 
122 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
and laughing. Physiology does not have much to say about these. There 
are expressions in which both underlie the awareness of a contradiction. In 
crying it is I, my vital feeling, which is injured, and I feel its negativity-that 
is the experienced contradiction. 
"-Loss of a person belonging to my totality."- 149 It is rightly said that 
tears make this easier. Such an event is a crisis where the inner determination 
becomes feeling and expresses itself to the point of tears. The connection 
is difficult to give. Tears are one mode of appearance, more mucous is 
excreted in the nose; the pain becomes water as it were. This embodiment 
is found especially in the viscera, and to these also belong the glandular 
system; there is some connection between these. Tears make matters easier 
because the sensibility finds this expression, and the oppression of the breast 
ceases. If pain is inwardly concentrated so that it cannot come to tears, it 
becomes still stronger and can produce illness and death. But through tears 
the pain is turned outwards and relieved. This agrees with the professional 
mourners of the ancients; the expression of sympathy was a great hardship, 
but this repetition I of the loss brought it to external representation and this 
86 
repetition is already a lightening of the suffering. The expression of a pain 
in a poem for example, is an easing of suffering. 150 Laughter is the other to 
crying. It has many gradations from raw laughter to laughing with tears in 
the eyes-and the difference of the emotional disposition is evident in these 
modifications. Laughter can go to the point of tears just as people often cry 
for joy. As one wants to take in air in crying, the opposite is true in laughing. 
Laughter is also occasioned by contradiction. An action is laughable when 
it brings about the opposite of what is intended. 151 The object in this case 
need not be inwardly interesting, but must be more external. Laughter is 
more external than is crying. It is connected with language; it is a noise that 
of the teeth (a symptom of both cold and of fever). In the face of fear and terror, the hair grows 
grey. There is a withdrawal of life from the extremities. This happened for example to Marie 
Antoinette. The standing of the hair on end in cases of fright and of wonder, etc., are particular 
modes of embodiment of inner conditions. 
149. W reads: with inner pain, loss of persons who belong to my totality, my personal life 
and feeling 
150. W adds: Goethe for example, in difficult and distressing situations sought to make a 
novel or poem out of them and thus sought to express himself outwardly and remove the 
distress from his heart. [Ed.] In the supplement to Encyclopedia §401 and in the Kehler 
Nachschrift (Philosophie des Geistes nach Hegel ed. H. von Kehler, Summer 1825, repr. in 
Petry, Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, Vol. 2), Hegel says concerning Goethe that many times 
he relieved his suffering through a poem. 
151. W adds: Fools, according to Aristophanes, have great intentions for the state, but 
bring about the opposite. 
123 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
is not articulated and thus it spoils itself. The physiological investigation of 
laughter is not easy, nor is the investigation of moans and groans and the 
like. 
This is the embodiment of the inner determination that must posit itself 
corporally in order to be sentient. Mere corporeity is not sentience; sentience 
must remember itself and the merely inner must find embodiment. 
We have considered sentience [Empfindung]. Sensations are mani-
fold. Sensing is something singular. Sensations and feelings are singular, 
87 
"'transitory, are alterations of I immediacy. This knowledge means that the 
soul is a sentient totality. The soul is the subject of sentience, it is sentient 
totality, the totality of sentience. - 152 This is the dreaming soul. 
2. THE DREAMING SOUL 
§403 The consideration of the soul has been confined to its sentience, but 
this sentience is the soul in its totality. "'Next we must note the further 
development and the end. This is that the sentient totality take possession 
of itself and assert its power over itself."'-'153 As sentience, the soul is 
totality, but an as yet contingent totality, 154 not yet for itself. The standpoint 
towards which this totality is directed is [that of] consciousness. 155 The soul 
is still only the plaything [Spielball] of alterations. These develop in it as in 
the monad, or one may take these as coming from outside; in brief, I am 
a contingent realization of these given alterations. ""'The end of the subject 
is that it become purely and simply for itself,"'156 distinct from and master 
over what fills it. The end is that the subject take possession of the richness 
of its totality. That we are something, and that something is in us, does not 
88 
imply that these are in our possession. For example, in illness I humans 
152. W reads: transitory determinations, alterations posited in their substantiality in the 
being-for-self of the soul that is identical with that substantiality. But the truth of the singular 
and the transitory is the universal. This manifold of sentience taken together as a totality, is the 
subject of the soul. The sentient soul is the totality of sentience reflected into itself, the sense of 
the total substantiality which it is in itself.-So we have to consider the soul now as totality of 
sentience. 
153. W reads: (1) subject of sentience, totality of sentience,-simple ideality, subjectivity 
of sentience. (2) The goal is that the individual posit itself as this sentient subjectivity, take 
possession of itself, become the power over itself, become for itself the power over itself. 
154. W adds: But it is not yet master of itself, a totality 
155. W adds: sentient totality, the totality that I am; physical monad,-where this and that 
posits itself in me, I am still identical with these my determinations. 
156. W adds: It has to do with freedom, that this sentient subject becomes free, 
124 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
suddenly speak foreign languages that they have long forgotten. That we 
are capable of this means that we must bring it [the foreign language] out 
of this pit that we are, and we must bring it before consciousness, before 
our imagination. The human being is a sentient totality, but not yet the 
power over this totality. In order to achieve this self-mastery, the soul begins 
to distinguish itself, to determine itself, and its end is to become an 'I'. 157 
When we have forgotten something, we are divided: the one which we are 
in ourselves; the other, the consciousness, the power over us. Thus there is 
a division, and the progress of the totality consists precisely in this act of 
self-division. The sentient totality is at first only one. Thus we come into the 
sphere of doubling of personality, namely the existent person in itself, and 
the free subject. Cf. Remark. 
The soul posits difference in itself. That from which it distinguishes 
itself is at first not object. Rather the soul judges and divides itself; it is 
subject, and the soul's object is its own substance, its complete content, 
so that the soul is its own object. This is the sentient soul. As such it is 
determining so that the soul in itself distinguishes itself from itself. This 
chapter of the anthropology is the most difficult because it is the most 
obscure. 
It should be noted that we have to examine the stages of this deter-
mination [of internal self-division] in their immediate significance, and 
then we note that these stages can also be conditions of the I self-
89 
possessed, free conscious spirit. "'In these conditions the free self-conscious 
spirit is ill,"'158 it regresses to the level of the sentient soul. The first 
of these illnesses is somnambulism, and the second is the condition of 
dementia. 
A. Sentience 
§405 The first mode of determination of the totality is the passive total-
ity of individuality. The sentient totality is at first immediate; it appears 
not to be determined. But this constitutes its weakness. "'This absence of 
determination in fact means that the sentient totality is in the determina-
tion of immediacy."'159 This is the logical determination, and is concretely 
157. W adds: every individual is a world of determinations over whose unity we have 
power; and when we forget, we no longer have power. 
158. W reads: as states of the free conscious spirit, they are its illnesses. Herein therefore 
fall the illnesses of the soul. 
159. W reads: freedom of spirit is to be for itself; in contrast, sentient totality is, through 
this lack of determination, in its highest determination, [namely] in the determination of 
immediacy, of raw naturalness 
125 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
represented by the term 'genius'. 16° Every man is his own genius. The 
genius is distinguished from the person by the fact that the person is 
conscious of his genius, i.e., his entire consciousless totality in the mode 
of feeling can warn him. ""So we can say: the soul is the genius of the 
human"-'. 161 
This totality that the soul is, exists as sentience. This totality is passive. 
Passivity is its determination. The essential point is that in this sentient 
totality "-'all determinations"" 162 are included and concealed. The two chief 
types that belong here are: 
The first is the child in the mother's womb. The child is human, but 
only potentially. The child is not at all independent, but is like a member 
90 of the mother. The mother pervades the child psychically; I the child is a 
moment of its mother. ""The child has no true independence;""163 it is, so 
to speak, only an attribute of its mother. This is an immediate relation, 
the mother is a sentient totality and the child is only a moment in her. 
The physical dispositions of parents are thus communicated to the child. 
This communication occurs in this sphere of sentient totality in an entirely 
immediate way. More essential than their physiological connection is the 
unity of [their] vitality. This substantial unity is the basic relation, or 
rather the absence of relation, the immediate (this unity is what we seek to 
clarify). Specific qualities of the mother exist also in the child. For example, 
birthmarks [Muttermiiler], which one denies without justification. With this 
denial is connected a denial of the foundation of empirical science. To be 
sure, there are many tall tales concerning birthmarks, but also confirmed 
experiences that demonstrate the connection. Children have been born with 
broken arms. 164 Frights of the mother have produced lasting dispositions 
in the children. The influence that the anger of the wet nurse has on the 
child is already an influence mediated through the movement of the bile. 
The child in the mother's womb, which is determined by an emotion of the 
mother, is immediately affected. The mother is here the genius of the child, 
the sentient selfhood, in which the child is concealed merely as a moment. 
160. W adds: genius, which is sensation without consciousness. 
161. W reads: so we can call this form of the soul, sentient totality, the genius of the human 
being. 
162. W reads: everything that belongs to the being of the individual. 
163. W reads: Its independence has no truth or actuality in respect to its vitality, nor any 
meaning with respect to its vocation of becoming spirit. 
164. W adds: when the mother has violently injured her arm. Frights of the mother have 
produced enduring dispositions in the child. The child at the mother's breast will be injured 
through the anger of the mother. There is a communication through the embodiment of anger 
in the milk. 
126 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
The sentience of the mother embodies itself in the child in an immediate 
way165 (Dr Sachs). 166 
I Another example of this is that humans die of a powerful fright and 
91 
of joy. Hypochondria also belongs here. Distress becomes embodied, and 
becomes a chronic illness, a universal, enduring mood of corporeity. In 
these effects we have to establish the sentient totality, how the child in the 
mother's womb is [related to her] "'as accident to a substance; how the 
mother is the genius, this sentient totality outside the [child's] consciousness. 
The individual remains this sentient totality in the inseparability of its 
content from its corporeity, and yet he remains outside the determinations 
of his own consciousness. If pain enters this unity, the individual can be 
overwhelmed by the disproportion between what happens to him and what 
he otherwise is. This disproportion is then also an element in the sentient 
totality and the latter can be destroyed."' 167 The cultivated spirit that 
has arisen above this genius and corporeity, consists in subjugating the 
corporeity (as we shall see in habit). Where this is not the case, and the 
human being remains more on the level of sentient totality, what has been 
said [about the rupture of totality] is the result. Suicide is something other; 
it is also a disproportion in consciousness that through the mediation of the 
will becomes dangerous to corporeity. 168 The complete disproportionality 
of this I contradiction has its effect, not directly, but through the decision 
92 
not to live any longer. 
165. W adds: There is an example of two albino children. An elder brother of the albino 
children, who was a physician, relates the following story. His father was a clergyman in 
Steiermark, where one day an expectant mother went into a darkened barn. Outside there 
was snow and bright sunshine; she stepped from this bright light into the dark stall. There was 
a crack in this barn through which sunlight shone and concentrated as a point of light in a 
corner. In this corner sat a hare, and this ray of sunlight fell upon its eye. She saw only the 
shining eye of the hare. She stepped from the dazzling sunlight into the darkness, and her eyes 
fell in the darkness upon the shining eye of the hare. When the son was born, he was albino, 
and his sister was also. 
166. [Ed.] Georg Tobias and Ludwig Sachs, Historia Natura/is duorum Leucaetheiopum 
auctoris ipsius et sororis eius (Sulzbach, 1812). 
167. W adds: as a child in the mother's womb is an accident of the mother, and is pervaded 
through and through, so can such a content appear in its sentient totality, in this genius. 
(The genius is open to consciousness, open to imagination, genius is also consciousness, but 
often remains sentient totality; the indivisibility of its content and corporeity-open at the 
same time for other determinations). So it can be that this content cannot be endured by this 
consciousness, and it is disproportional to the sense of this consciousness, that this individual 
is overpowered through the disproportionality between what it is and what enters it. This 
disproportionality rends and destroys the sentient totality. 
168. W adds: Cato the younger. Absolute contradiction. Roman republic ingrained in his 
character, and what was, was no longer a republic. He could not endure this contradiction. 
127 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Here in contrast, this disproportionality in consciousness does not pass 
over through mediation to a disproportion in corporeity, but is rather 
carried out immediately into corporeity. 
This sentient totality is existent, and so falls under the category of being, 
also the category of quantity. The genius has a measure, and when its 
measure is exceeded, it perishes. 
The third are the manifestations of the power of genius over its corpor-
eity. There belongs here a kind of miracle that humans are healed through 
faith. For any type of illness it is possible that faith will not help. But in 
many cases [it does], namely, when nerves are paralyzed and contracted, the 
vegetative life is still present, but the fluidity of vitality has been interrupted 
and broken. There are examples-not at all rare-of lame people healed by 
the fire of faith, by magic, or through mere words. Many such miracle cures 
belong here. When the age becomes more rational, so these [cures] that 
once were efficacious become no longer effective. With educated people 
there is no longer such an intense certainty. But where there is such cer-
tainty, the concentrated feeling is the substantial force against the particular 
circumstances-i.e., the interruption or loss of function. In this gathering the 
whole vitality is concentrated, and the accidental can put up no resistance 
to this totality. 
In §406 we speak about another topic, namely this sentient totality as 
a condition of illness. The main issue is the point of view that has to be 
93 
established. The human being is the sentient totality, I and the latter is 
[ ... ]169 wherein the totality of what the human being is is contained. We 
have to compare the other, how the human being exists as conscious. The 
human being is this totality; as a conscious, self-possessed human being its 
actuality is present for it as an external world, to which it relates itself. 
The second point is that this totality itself is unfolded as external. In this 
unfolding everything stands in a rational connection, and in a manner 
familiar to the human being. In consciousness reflective self-control is the 
chief determination, so that I relate myself to everything in a mediated way. 
What belongs to my actuality is only what in the external world is for 
me. It exists outwardly; on the other side I exist inwardly. "'The relation of 
children to parents is external, but this relation is also the inner actuality of 
the children."' 170 
169. [Ed.] gap in original text. 
170. W reads: the children exist for the parents, the children exist in the parental affections 
and belong to their actuality. The children's love for their parents is also the inner actuality of 
the children and not external. 
128 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
If the human being falls below conscious, rational life into mere sen-
tience, he becomes ill. 171 His consciousness, his being turned towards the 
world, can become obstructed and a paralysis can arise. This can be a mere 
weakness of his subjectivity, the power of his subjective self-feeling. 172 The 
subject's self-feeling can be weaker; however the I hindrance of corporeity 
94 
can also be more specific. This hindrance arises in the nervous life in general, 
and particularly in the visage of a face whose eyes have become entranced. 
When a person is blind, he knows that he cannot see, but he has no 
consciousness of defect. In this diseased condition the human being is in 
a rational dream-he is still outwardly directed, but in such a way that an 
obstruction has arisen. 
The main phenomena must now be considered. The chief condition is173 
somnambulism. There is also a natural somnambulism. 174 This condition 
appears in pregnancy, in the development of a young woman, and a few 
hours prior to death, etc. The previously mentioned obstruction in con-
sciousness in the outwardly directed activity becomes a retrogression into 
the life of feeling. There one relates to the objective content as to something 
belonging to one's genius, one's feeling. One knows of it in an immediate 
way. Here belong the phenomena in which sight is fully obstructed, [as if] 
the eye had become frozen. Seeing is negated, and yet the common feeling 
can be present and effective. The human being is not sentient only through 
his eyesight. It may happen that the common feeling specifies itself to a 
sight without eyes. In this condition a person can have the feeling as though 
he had seen with his fingers, particularly when objects are placed on the 
chest cavity over his heart. It is feeling as such that assumes this form 
of sight, so that the organ of the eye is not necessary. In the same way, 
we do not have a special eye for blue and [another] for yellow; feeling in 
general collects itself, specifically as sight. There are several examples of 
this. Feeling specifies itself I to sight, and the organ of this species, the eye, 
95 
is omitted. A center of cerebration is paralyzed. It has been said that it is 
wholly paralyzed and the ganglia system is substituted for it. This is credible; 
171. W adds: the human being is the totality of his character. What he is, that is he. 
What he is as consciousness he directs towards the external, so that this content is to him 
the external world. He stands in mediation with this content. This content is the mediated 
world. 
172. W adds: self-feeling. In the power of his self-conscious self-feeling, he projects the 
content outwards, and relates to it as to an external world. 
173. W adds: is the condition of animal magnetism and. 
174. W adds: somnambulism. Sleepwalking also belongs here. Cataleptic condition, St 
Vitus dance also have similarities with it. 
129 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
"'Since cerebration outwards is paralyzed, spirit is immersed in itself in 
hypochondria."' 175 
Witches have used magic potions or have smeared themselves with salves. 
These have been mostly of Hyoseyamus niger or Digitalis. Jean Baptiste 
Helmont conducted such an experiment on himself. 176 With a diet of 
Aconitum napellus it appeared to him as though his images were in the 
vicinity of his stomach, and far keener than usual. The raising of the images 
has been connected with feelings of delight. 
A second phenomenon goes so far that one does not actually know its 
full scope, namely, a knowing of one's actuality insofar as it is not present 
as external world, but insofar as it is the content of genius, a merely inward 
knowing of what in waking one could know only through mediation. 
When the human being stands opposed to the outer world, it is not only 
void of content, but the content of the world is the human being's own inner 
content. "-'Family ties"-' 177 constitute my actuality, and it is possible that if 
"'Such a [family] bond, that exists as a single person, were torn from me, 
I would perish."-'178 This bond is a reality in me; if one is thus torn away, 
if a family member dies, a branch of my life also dies and my actuality 
itself can be lost. It is not unusual that in such a loss the individual loses 
his own actuality, but the latter loss of actuality also occurs in a different 
96 
way. I The family tie constitutes my actuality. 179 There can be people who, 
when in the external situation some change occurs, know about this in their 
own inwardness, their genius. So we have now to consider what exists in 
the form of presentiments. A man of forceful, sound self-feeling is bound to 
the usual condition of knowing. "'But there are several examples in which, 
removed at a distance, a subject suffered a loss, nevertheless experienced 
an immediate sensation of that loss, believing that he had heard a noise or 
some such thing."-' 180 As already pointed out, the root problem is how to 
conceive this. 
175. W reads: Brain activity is directed outwards. The plexis solaris, etc., ganglia of the 
lower body, have been called the brains of the lower body. And when the brain activity is 
paralyzed, the organism is sunk within itself, as it were, in hypochondria. 
176. [Ed.] Jean Baptiste van Helmont, Demens Idea, Ortus medicinae, Opera Omnia 
(Frankfurt, 1682), 262-72. 
177. W reads: Love, friendship, family. 
178. W reads: [if] this world (so far as my life as a whole stands in this union) dies, my 
whole inner actuality likewise perishes with it. 
179. W adds: there is an absolute connection between the two, [which constitute] one and 
the same reality. 
180. W reads: A kinsman can be distant from me. But his existence belongs to my actuality. 
There are examples in which kinfolk have died, and this death is immediately felt in the subject, 
who suffers loss and has immediate awareness of such loss. In other cases an individual believes 
130 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
The genius is not bound to the mediations of ordinary reflective con-
sciousness. Connected with this is the fact that sensations of objects can 
be present in the body, objects of which one otherwise can have awareness 
and knowledge only in a completely different way. A neurasthenic person 
can thus have sensations, when the reflective person must go through many 
mediations. Neurasthenics are people who have a feeling for whether they 
are over water or metal concealed in the ground. 181 When they are walking 
over ground where there is water or metal, they feel in their body sickness, 
nausea and the like. (Campetti) 182 
,..__This weakness is an obstruction of the connection with the external 
world. This weakness manifests itself in sensitivity I towards all sorts of 
97 
things.,..__ 183 A further condition of such a weakness is that individuals have 
lacked independence to such an extent that they existed merely in a state 
of eo-feeling with others. The sound individual is independent being-for-
itself; 184 the sensations of the soul are present in him as an individual. But 
in this weakness the feelings, the states of another are in the individual 
and in such an immediate way that the individual's own genius is not 
independent. ,..__Kluge's History of Magnetism contains several examples. 
These presentiments are very remarkable, and often one does not know 
what to make of them. Presentiments of illness are possible through the fact 
that illness does not suddenly arise but requires time in order to develop. So 
the genius is already capable of having a feeling of illness.,..__ 185 
he has heard a noise. This hearing is clearly nothing external, but rather something in the 
subject. The facts cannot be denied. 
181. W adds: This is connected with the divining rod. 
182. [Ed.] Francesco Campetti, as reported by J. W. Ritter, Der Siderismus, vol. 1 (Tiibin-
gen, 1808). See also M. J. Petry, Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, vol. 11, 260 ff. 
183. W reads: The general weakness of the organs is bound up with sensitivity to the outer 
world. When a human being is sick, his connection with the outer world is disrupted, and 
this is connected with eating and drinking; but he remains sensitive to air and warmth etc. 
The examples of the former feeling for the presence of water etc. were related to this type of 
weakness. Campetti brought by Ritter to Munich (Siderism), and found concealed ore. Servant 
of the lord of Salis. 
184. W reads: for itself, and its connection, its dedication etc., to others is present in it, but 
at the same time there is yet an independent existence; there are sensations that proceed from 
it as individual; 
185. W reads: Kluges' History of Magnetism is a useful book, in which the many symptoms 
of animal magnetism are gathered together in an arid but rational manner. Here is one: A 
doctor sympathized with his sister to such an extent that he fell into disquiet as soon as she 
became ill etc. Premonitions prior in time to one's own illnesses or the illnesses of another, with 
those with whom one stands in such exaggerated sympathy, are possible through the fact that 
in an individual an illness does not suddenly arise, where therefore the genius (the feeling of 
an individual in and of himself) already has a feeling of the illness, which the waking reflective 
1 ~1 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The further phenomena are those of animal magnetism. This name 
derives from the fact that in the first information about the phenomenon, 
metal, more precisely, magnets, were used. Mesmer first called attention to 
these phenomena. He began to use magnets. ""Only later was it recalled 
that many earlier sorts of phenomena are connected with this one.'"'-'186 
98 
In his first public appearances, I Mesmer had to endure a difficult history, 
and this affected him. He himself described an outrageous incident187 with 
Demoiselle Paradis. 188 Today magnetism has become discredited, and with 
justification, owing to its fraud and abuse. But this does not discredit the 
phenomena that had been noted. In clairvoyant persons there nevertheless 
occur many deceptions, and often they are spurred into actions of fraud and 
abuse by their vanity. 
A main phenomenon is falling into trance, although such sleep is not 
yet a proof that the magnetic cure is effective. 189 If the condition presents 
itself in developed form, the person must fall into a trance. But this trance 
resembles the condition of sleepwalkers. In the latter case the sense of sight 
human being does not feel. [Ed.] Car! Alexander Ferdinand Kluge, Versuch einer Darstellung 
des animalischen Magnetismus (Berlin, 1811). 
186. W reads: (this still today occurs with magnets with the sick. In the magnetic state there 
is generally strong sensitivity to metal.) Animal, because magnets are applied to the animal 
organism. Mesmer began his cures in the 1760s, and afterwards it was recalled that there were 
earlier cures in healing through the laying on of the hands, etc. 
187. [Ed.] Mesmer reported this incident with his patient Paradis in his Memoire sur la 
decouverte du magnetisme animal (Geneve, 1779), 41 ff.; German translation: Abhandlung 
uber die Entdeckung des thierischen Magnetismus (Karlsruhe, 1781), 31 ff. Mesmer had 
Mademoiselle Paradis in his care at a sanatorium, where he attempted to cure her blindness, 
but in spite of initial success, he saw the long-term recovery threatened by the fact that the 
patient's father, out of ill will, forbade him from treating the slowly recovering patient in 
his home. The relapses of the patient were according to Mesmer the consequence of the 
interference of her father, who accused Mesmer of not succeeding in his cure, an allegation 
against which Mesmer had to defend himself. 
188. W adds: Paradis, who was blind from the age of 5 with amaurosis so that the eyes 
bulged out and moved convulsively:-suffered from many obstructions. Stark treated her 
vigorously for 10 years in vain. Mesmer restored her vision before thousands of witnesses. 
Incongruities as a result of this: The crudity of the father (who feared that the girl would 
lose her pension from the empress. And the mother who shoved the girl into the wall striking 
her head so that convulsions etc., followed and the girl again became blind. So that was in 
Vienna. Mesmer then went to Paris where he lectured about his method to an entire society. 
This society has broadened the inquiry and information concerning this condition further than 
Mesmer, who behaved inappropriately in many respects (he wanted to have a hospital in a 
grand style that would have cost several million pounds). Above all these men have made 
known and developed further this method of treatment. 
189. W adds: an individual can be treated a month long without [inducing] sleep and not 
without effect. 
132 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
is paralyzed. However, they are aware of their surroundings, and so they 
quite correctly relate themselves towards the outer world. The residual 
feeling replaces sight and particularizes itself to this specific function that 
we designate as sight. 190 There is much in this sleepwalking that is entirely 
correct, but also much I deception and so misfortune often occurs. But the 
99 
sleepwalker does much that is correct. The magnetic somnambulists are not 
dreaming "'Such that there is an accidental connection of images;"' 191 rather 
they know of themselves what they are, but as feeling beings they know 
this through their genius. This knowledge is a theoretical knowing of the 
feeling genius in itself. They know of their genius, the actual human being, 
but this actual human being is isolated, without rational relation to the 
outer world. 192 By being so immersed in their emotional life, it follows that 
human beings are not spiritually or mentally independent, but depend on 
others, as an accident is related to a substance, as a child in its mother's 
womb. 193 They are such that they do not belong to themselves but exist in 
the power of an other. These are the two determinations that are connected 
here. More closely considered, it is known that one person is placed in such 
a condition by an other. There are also cases where this condition arises in 
a natural way. 194 The usual case is that people are put into such a condition 
through manipulation. 
The human being in this condition exists only as feeling life 
[ Gefuhlsleben] which on the one hand is psychic, but on the other hand 
is identical with corporeity. Grasped in and affected through its 'psychic 
corporeity', the person can be brought under the power of another. I 
100 
The subject to be magnetized is manipulated by using one's hands. This 
manipulation is not indecent. No touching is necessary. This manipulation 
is the initial stage; the influence is physiologically difficult to determine. The 
production of heat or electricity are not appropriate categories. The chest 
cavity over the heart is very important. If the person is very sentient he 
190. W adds: sometimes night walkers hear [others] speaking, sometimes not; they hear 
music, sometimes correctly, sometimes not; they reply to questions, but often produce confu-
sions. Mixtures of correctness and incorrectness. Vision is paralyzed. 
191. W reads: they sleep also. There is in their representations not an accidental connec-
tion, that would exist without understanding as in dreams. 
192. W adds: without the alertness of the senses and without waking relations to this its 
actuality as a surrounding world external to him. 
193. [Ed.] Cf. Friedrich Hufeland, Uber Sympathie (Weimar, 1811), 108£.: 'There is in 
organic nature only one relation in which sympathy, in analogy with animal magnetism, 
expresses the highest degree of dependence of one individual on another, namely, that which 
we perceive in the indivisible connection of the unborn infant with the mother ... '. 
194. W adds: conditions of illness, especially with women in the years of their development; 
women in pregnancy. 
133 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
needs less manipulation, merely moving the hands can often induce sleep, 
and stronger manipulations often produce convulsions. A French school has 
refused manipulation altogether, 195 claiming that it is merely a matter of will 
and belief. 196 The person must be manipulated from the head down and 
with serious intent. Manipulations from below to above can also introduce 
convulsions. It may also turn out that nothing happens-no effects, no 
trance, no second sight or clairvoyance. The one being magnetized may feel 
warmth in the parts over which the magnetizing hand moves. The effect is 
an enhancement that can include the sex drive. 
Finally the trance is induced, and if the person is only receptive, this 
receptivity does not at all depend on their will, but is something completely 
involuntary. This trance can be the whole effect and it can complete the 
healing by and for itsel£.197 The patient becomes accustomed to the period 
of the trance. The main effect is the trance itself. In this trance-sleep, 
the human being is restored to its substantial unity with itself. 198 In this 
trance clairvoyance can also be produced. This has created a sensation. 
Magnetism is one of those things that one must see in order to believe. It 
often happens that enlightened people who have witnessed magnetism still 
101 
do not believe it. I 
Clairvoyance is immersion in inwardness. Mesmer did not yet know this. 
One of his students discovered it by accident. Usually clairvoyance arises 
after being magnetized on several days, and then the patients begin not to 
speak, but only to answer. To be sure, they answer only the magnetizer 
or someone with whom they are in rapport. The material element stands 
out, and rapport can be produced through metal, but silk in contrast is 
isolating [fails to produce rapport]. The question is, what do they see in 
this clairvoyance? 199 Its sphere is [restricted to] this individuality in general. 
They are this actual individual and only this; the sphere of clairvoyance 
extends no further. It is absurd to believe that this is a higher condition 
195. [Ed.] Cf. Kluge, Versuch einer Darstellung des animalischen Magnetismus (Berlin, 
1811), §47. 
196. W adds: This school transfixed the patient with the eyes only and said, croyez et 
reveillez (believe and awaken). 
197. W adds: The person must be put in this state at the same time on other days. If that 
is not done in the same time period, the person feels restless, in grief and anxiety; this can 
progress to convulsions. 
198. W adds: is led back to the [substantial] unity of the all-pervading life process. 
199. W reads: What they see in themselves is what they know only from themselves, and 
(2) they know what is going on in the mind of the magnetizer-the sphere of that which they 
see in themselves is. 
134 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
in which higher revelations can occur. 200 The trance is a depression of the 
human, not its elevation or enhancement. The human being becomes con-
scious of the truth only in the activity of thinking. Religious people who are 
inwardly noble and compassionate indeed speak freely and can utter deep 
and remarkable things, but this does not transcend or exceed their individu-
ality. Plato expressed the correct view of the matter. Divination201 (fLaVTcta) 
counted for the ancients as something divine. The genius of Socrates is the 
same. He found himself often in such a condition, and his genius belonged 
to this condition. What his genius revealed to him is no special wisdom, 
but particular things that concerned only himself or his friends. Deleuze, a 
doctor in France, 202 maintains that in clairvoyance knowledge is oriented 
to the knowledge of the waking state. One possesses I no science except 
102 
the one that is acquired by study. "'Plato says concerning divination'"'-'203 
that with it the irrational element becomes to a certain extent capable of 
partaking in truth: if God had created the liver and given it the power of 
divination, this would be a sufficient proof that no sensible, level-headed 
person would be capable of partaking of a divine feeling except in sleep and 
with a demented understanding. 204 
Plato was aware that divination is something inferior that pertains to 
the non-rational soul. The main point is that they [clairvoyants] name their 
illnesses, especially chronic nervous disorders that are not yet fully devel-
oped. 205 Also, rheumatism, toothaches, yield to magnetism. Remarkably, it 
seems to have an effect on the maladies of menstruation. The somnambulists 
especially know how to specify these disorders and it is easy to admit that 
they discover deficiencies. They describe these conditions, but in an entirely 
ordinary manner, not in the manner of one who understands anatomy. Then 
they indicate the remedy for their disease. Cautious doctors have not only 
allowed themselves to accept these remedies, but have also prescribed cures 
and asked their patients whether they approve them. The remedy stands 
200. [Ed.] Hufeland, Ober Sympathie, 'The words of somnambulists are not prophecies of 
oracles .... One should not regard somnambulists as infallible or inspired beings that could be 
used for experiencing supernatural and concealed matters' (47). 
201. W reads: prophet (like Pythia). 
202. [Ed.] J. P. F. Deleuze, Histoire critique du magnetisme animal, 2 vols. (Paris, 1813-
19). 
203. W reads: Plato expressed it thus: (Ancients believed in prophecy, not only of the 
oracles, but of every human that could find himself in such a condition, and they believed also 
in the prophecy of the demented and those in sleep). 
204. [Ed.] Plato, Timaeus, 71-2. 
205. [Ed.] Cf. Kluge, Versuch einer Darstellung des animalischen Magnetismus, §§137 ff. 
and §§343 ff. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
in a necessary connection with the disease, and it is easy to admit206 that 
they can have a feeling of the appropriateness [of the cure]. With the giving 
of treatment another issue arises. These treatments can be extremely varied 
according to different countries and methods of curing. The main point 
is that the somnambulist on the one side expresses his own feelings, but 
on the other side, he knows what is in the imagination of the doctor. The 
means of cure are for the most part determined by the method of therapy of 
the doctor, and often by what they see the doctor prescribe, but also [they 
103 
include] home remedies, etc. I In particular the somnambulists state how 
long the illness will last, also how long they will sleep; nevertheless they 
often deceive themselves in these matters. 
Clairvoyants also know about distant objects. 207 The individual is actual, 
and to his actuality belongs everything that concerns him. Since clairvoyants 
know their actuality, and their actuality is this concentration of feeling, 
"'they know of all this in an immediate way"'.208 This is particularly 
true of blood friends. 209 The sphere of actuality extends also to persons 
that interest one, belong to one's environment, but extends further to such 
objects that belong to one's circle and of which one can therefore know in 
one's emotional life. Such stories can be found in the works of Johannes 
von Miiller, Briefe, 6 vols. 210 Here belongs the phenomenon of 'second 
sight' of the Scottish, which should be compared with Kieser's Journal. 211 
Also the prophet Miiller of Heidelberg can be mentioned.212 Afterwards he 
became discredited by numerous questions and the like. The occasion of his 
capability is noteworthy. At the death of his father he threw himself on top 
of his father, and with the most inner fervor prayed to God. The father was 
awakened, and this highest effort, this positing of the soul outside of itself, 
had fixed this predominantly emotional life [Gefuhlsleben] in him. 
The somnambulists also have this capacity but mischief is often done 
with it. One form is still to be mentioned. Clairvoyants very often speak of 
206. W adds: Gmelin in Heilbronn and Wienold in Bremen. 
207. [Ed.] Cf. Kluge, op. cit., §§159 ff. 
208. W reads: so they know of this without the mediation through which one otherwise 
knows of such objects existing outside of oneself. They know in an immediate way. 
209. W adds: the same blood. Family is an ethical, but also a natural unity. Actuality of 
the one is substantially included in the substantial actuality of the other. 
210. [Ed.] Johannes von Miiller, Siimtliche Werke, Part 6, ed. J. G. Miiller (Tiibingen, 
1811), 428 ff. 
211. [Ed.] D. G. Kieser, Das zweite Gesicht der Einwohner der westlichen Inseln Schott-
lands, in Archiv fUr tierischen Magnetismus, vol. VI, issue 3 (1820). 
212. [Ed.] Hegellearned about Miiller in a letter from Carove; cf. Briefe von und an Hegel, 
ed. Johannes Hoffmeister, vol. 11 (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1981), No. 379. 
136 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
a protective spirit of a deceased or revered friend. 213 Generally the mood 
of the clairvoyant is serious, ethical, often very religious. The body must 
fight through the crisis I of its disorder. This struggle is often united with a 
104 
struggle of good and evil. Thus often the person enters into the innermost 
core of his morality and fights the battle through. And the experience is that 
often the patient returns to himself out of this crisis more calm, milder and 
better. 
The other issue is the connection between the magnetizer and the one 
magnetized. 214 The latter is no independent individual; in his emotional life 
he is in the power of another. This is a condition of weaker personality, of 
unfreedom. The magnetized one is in rapport with the magnetizer; he hears 
only him. To be touched by others can affect the patient very unpleasantly 
to the point of paralysis. They not only hear only the magnetizer, but 
sense him even at a distance. He can be hours away and nevertheless can 
induce a trance in them through imagination and orientation of the will. 
It is possible that they sense him in the same way as the above examples 
have shown. "'The patients have a sense, a feeling, of the states, illnesses 
of the doctor."-'215 It is also peculiar that in waking they know nothing of 
what they have heard while in a clairvoyant state. The reverse is also true. 
Further, they feel the disorders of others with whom they have been placed 
in rapport. "'This feeling of the illnesses of others is something remarkable, 
and is carried still further: they are placed in rapport with pieces of clothing 
and the like. 216 The so-called 'baquet' belongs here, partly because many 
magnetized are placed in rapport, partly because they are brought into 
connection with a box etc. I Puysegur217 magnetized a tree like that. 218 
1 os 
Mesmer especially established rapport with the sick. 
Further, they often have a sense of the ideas of the doctor. The clair-
voyant's knowledge of many objects consists in reading off the ideas of 
the doctor, as it were. It is thus that they read and express the ideas of 
213. [Ed.] Eschenmayer gives examples of visions of such tutelary spirits in his Psychologie 
in drei Terlen as empirical, pure, and applied, §283. 
214. W adds: insofar as a person is in this state, he is in a relationship like that of a child 
to its mother in its mother's womb. 
215. W reads: They sense also the (depression) illness of the magnetizer. If he is in a bad 
mood, so are they. 
216. W adds: Count Puysegur. He consulted a somnambulist about his epilepsy, and the 
latter also became epileptic. Clairvoyant people have been placed in rapport with the clothing 
of a woman, and she determined their illnesses. 
217. [Ed.] A. M. J. C. Puysegur, Memoires pur servir a l'histoire et l'etablissiment du 
magnetisme animal (Paris, 1820). 
218. W adds: from its limbs strings lowered and from this throngs of people were healed. 
137 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
others. 219 It must also be pointed out that clairvoyants do not always see 
well: sometimes they see keenly, but often not at all. 
In such a condition the human being is a feeling totality [die (Uhlende 
Totalitiit]. Everything that happens in an unconscious way belongs in this 
sphere. One's genius is one's inner fate for which one cannot give an 
account. The genius often allows one to feel very different conditions for 
which one can offer no explanation. A difference arises between this feeling 
individuality and the self-conscious individuality. This difference falls within 
my entire actuality, and I can know of this in a way that contradicts my self-
conscious individuality. 
Also, deceptions are often found in the sphere of possibility of this 
condition. The individual has insight into himself in an immediate way, 
106 
but it is difficult to distinguish what I he sees in himself and what he 
sees in the magnetizer and expresses of the latter. 220 A second source of 
deceptions is that the somnambulent subject has his impartiality disturbed. 
As already noted, it is usually the rule that the somnambulent subject is 
milder, more ethical. "'But similarly, in a psychical respect there can arise 
a struggle between the subject and his better self. The condition thus often 
manifests an elevation, enhancement."-'221 Nevertheless the somnambulent 
subject can become muddled in his purity, can become vain; his desires 
can become whims. None of this transcends the [face] value that it has. 
All sorts of whims can, if they are realized, validate the idea that all 
of these whims are fulfilled in this [fantasy]. As with madness, various 
precautions need to be taken here, so that other people are not bothered 
by arbitrariness and their treatment impaired. It often happens that they 
find pleasure when they know things that cannot be known in a rational 
manner and are admired. They do not always see clearly, so it is often 
necessary that one must request that they look carefully. Through such 
219. W adds: he asked about a female friend, and she said where does the friend live?, 
and how and what? How can you see anything in this way? When I look at such a house, 
when I am asked about it, I was led there by a ray of light that proceeds from the questioner, 
through this I am united with the questioner. This ray of light with him brings me to the place 
mentioned in the discourse. My own attention and yours contributes much. Without attention 
I see only superficially. If another asks, he must ask with seriousness and have trust, otherwise 
I become confused. 
220. W adds: Many astonishing things in many phenomena thus fall away. 
221. W reads: It is his best part that arises as feeling in him. Physical illness is merely 
the struggle of the health of the body against disease. Without health there would be only 
death. Health, the harmonious condition, must exist as the basic condition. The same is 
true of the psychological dimension. Also here the better self must win a struggle against 
the evil disposition. Therefore there is an elevation and enhancement of the ethical-religious 
disposition. 
138 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
instigation the power of vision is increased, but it can also easily be 
overstimulated and in addition, vanity can bring them to express what 
they have not actually seen, and so that they even fall into trickery. The 
mere overstimulation in one direction has the disadvantage that the cure is 
delayed. 222 They take to brooding; the isolation of feeling becomes I weaker 
107 
in the transition to recovery; thus, the stimulus delays and retards the 
cure. 
The knowledge of this condition has been exhausted. Something new is 
not to be expected. 223 We turn now to something different. We have to 
forget the concrete and "'Consider the form of our object as sentient indi-
viduality in general [Gefiihlsindividualitiit iiberhaupt]. From this general 
form of sentient individuality, another form of sentient individuality is to 
be distinguished, namely, self-feeling [Selbstgefiihl], which means that the 
individual feels himself entirely in this abstraction of the self. 
B. Self-Feeling 
§407 We see individuality as sentient of itself. It is essentially self and 
this self becomes the object of feeling. I The individuality is being-for-
108 
itself, and this point [of unity] becomes the content. This is self-feeling 
[Selbstgefiihl]. Here we have to consider two dimensions; first, the self-
feeling as such. The individual senses himself, and to this feeling belongs 
the exclusion of particularity. He takes the feeling back into himself. The 
determinacy is an ideal. It is a determination from which the feeling subject 
frees himself precisely because he feels it. In this liberation he is not impeded 
by the determination, but exists in himself. He posits the content of the 
determination as negative, as abstracted from himself."'224 
222. W adds: When the healing begins, the separation of the emotional life from the 
rational conscious life is gradually reduced, the isolatiOn becomes weaker, and the capacity 
to see clairvoyandy is also diminished. When in the process of recovery the vision is constantly 
overstimulated, the cure is delayed. 
223. W adds: so there is nothing new in Kieser's Journal. 
224. W reads: The form [of self-feeling) is the total individuality as feeling. The feeling is 
something felt, and this is the entire individuality. The entire individuality is sentient individu-
ality. Sentient individuality in general, that is the standpoint. Thus we distinguish B. Sentient 
individuality [Gefiihlsindividualitat) as self-feeling [Selbstgefiihl] or that the individual feels 
itself, to feel the self. To sense and to sense something. Sentience, determinacy [Bestimmtheit] in 
general, recalls the outer etc. Individual as sensing itself.-Individual is as individual essentially 
a self, and this self is again essentially the content that is sensed. Individual as being-for-itself. It 
is for itself. The being itself = subjectivity in general; this point of unity of the individual must 
become [the) content.-The second is therefore self-feeling. Self-feeling as such: the individual 
139 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
This form of self-feeling can also shift and change into disorder. Since the 
already self-conscious individual is considered here, it can happen that he, 
the concrete human being, comes to a standstill "-'in the one form of feeling, 
and he remains in self-feeling in opposition to his rational actuality."'225 
This condition is dementia. 
Self-feeling is the sentient individuality sensing its being-for-itself. In the 
determinate feeling it reflects itself out of the particularity into itself. This 
reflection into self is the proof of one's self-worth and self-assurance. When 
the self is actual these particularities are ideal [and fluid]. 226 
Here is to be noted an element of selfhood that is added to and qualifies 
109 
sentience [Empfindung]. This element has the narrower specification I that 
will be retained in our exposition. This now becomes the content that is 
posited in us as being. Pieces of information are finitudes, this content 
remains in us, we preserve it when it is posited in us as being. As self-feeling, 
we are identical with our corporeity. The former qualitative content can be 
in us only so far as we are the self-feeling of this qualitative being. 227 In 
old age one does not remember so well as in youth. The body has become 
weaker. With greater power of self-feeling, such content is inscribed in us in 
the bronze table of our self-feeling and we retain it. This corporeity is to be 
taken as universal, not as an isolated point or as an organ of the soul. This 
is the moment in self-feeling that remembers the determinations inscribed 
in our being, that become our possession, and are made fast against dis-
appearance through the fact that they now belong to our being. This being 
belongs to us only in the condition of feeling. This preservation in memory, 
the fact that it belongs to the corporeity of our being, appears in many 
ways. 
feels itself. This form in general is that it feels itself, to which belongs that it feels itself by 
excluding the particularity, or that it has returned to itself and is at home with itself.-The 
determination, particularity, is something suspended, something from which the feeling subject 
at the same time frees itself in its feeling-and so it turns back to itself and feels itself. Its self 
is the abstract point of unity of individuality. The fact that this point is a self constitutes the 
abstraction. 
225. W reads: in which one form of self-feeling, which is a special determination, does 
not become master but withdraws into itself; in [this] self-feeling an opposition remains to the 
reasonable, rational actuality. 
226. W adds: (not to feel itself, not be at one with oneself). This determinate content is 
not excluded but preserved, posited in the being of the soul. We are ourselves as returning to 
ourselves in a given determination. 
227. W adds: Such come to us so far as we ourselves are beings-as we ourselves have 
abstract spirituality. Feelings etc. pass on and die out of the stream of universality. 
140 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
In illness something emerges that is not under the power of our conscious 
actuality. 228 This [unconscious] dimension, which is preserved in memory, 
can be erased by a blow, etc. Conversely, illnesses can again evoke many 
things that are outside our [conscious] power, and that otherwise could 
not be called forth again at will. What is thus in our [unconscious] being 
we cannot know. One forgets what one learns. Afterwards this is posited 
in one's being and can be awakened again under special conditions. The 
connections with corporeity reveal such examples, but as previously noted, 
one must not imagine the being of the soul has material extension. This 
self-feeling is therefore the return of the self into itself and has the deter-
mination of being the theoretical aspect, [while] the practical dimension is 
the feeling that arises from the satisfaction of what we want. According 
to this practical aspect, the determination begins from within, opens itself 
up in us and through it the I contradiction is posited in us. We and this 
110 
determination. But at the same time it is affected with negation, namely, 
it has not yet returned to us. The next is that in self-feeling itself there 
is division, a determination against the totality of self-feeling itself. Such 
desire is a disunion in us. This disunion also exists as an embodiment, 
a corporeity. In passion I am outside myself, that is, my entire totality 
sinks into a one-sided particularity, although this particularity is my own. I 
have fallen into a state of restrictedness [Beschriinkheit]. This disunion [of 
passion] is also corporeity, a corporeity divided against itself. In satisfaction, 
my self-separation and restrictedness are overcome, 229 and this overcoming 
is both mental and physical. In satisfaction I make myself healthy physically 
just as much as I come to myself spiritually. This is the self feeling as such: in 
it I restore my totality. I am divided; I am totality and I am particularity, and 
the satiated self-feeling has returned to itself out of this particularity. This 
is self-feeling: I obtain the totality through overcoming the particularity. I 
make that particularity ideal, and I am at home with myself [qua totality). 
The disorder of this dimension of self-feeling is dementia. Dementia is 
a condition that affects the self-feeling [totality], it is an illness of the self-
feeling. Insofar as it is a division [Urteil], it is the being-for-self of the soul 
in opposition to its particularity. Dementia is illness of spirit, but it is also 
a physical illness and this inseparability [of the physical and the spiritual] 
is precisely its characteristic. If dementia were simply spiritual, it would 
228. [Ed.] Here Hegel hints at an unconscious mind, which has both theoretical and 
practical dimensions, namely, wish-fulfillments. This is possibly the first nineteenth century 
theory of the unconscious. See Berthold-Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness, for a discussion of 
Hegel's anticipation of Freud. 
229. W adds: and falls away; I return to my totality. 
141 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
111 
be I folly and banality. 230 It is difficult to determine its boundaries. One 
can easily pass into folly owing to trivial interests. Dementia belongs to the 
division [Urteil] of self-feeling; more precisely, division, disruption, is pre-
cisely what this illness does, namely, the human being does not move beyond 
this disunion. [In dementia] one's particular inclination is not controlled by 
the totality of self-feeling. The self-possessed human being arranges every 
particular feeling in a totality. Something particular goes through the head. 
Since he has his self-feeling in his totality, and since he possesses the feeling 
of his actuality, he arranges his self-feeling in that totality. The human being 
possesses a capacity for self-esteem. This self-esteem oscillates between 
meekness in which one values oneself too little, and arrogance into which 
it can just as easily pass. Self-esteem is thus conceived in this oscillating 
condition, without the human being possessing the right measure or balance 
in every instant. A person can possess more determinate inclinations such as 
actual pride, but there too he will control their expression in some way. He 
knows how it goes and how it stands in the world, and he will keep these 
inclinations to himself. A human being can be completely perverse and yet 
outwardly bearable. His rational consciousness restrains such inclinations, 
always lives in this composure, and keeps them hidden in itself. This is 
his totality, his consciousness of his actuality. He has a feeling of this 
actuality. 
Now it can happen that the human being becomes ill, not only that he 
has the same imaginary ideas and keeps them to himself, but also that 
these pretensions that he has now themselves acquire a fixed corporeity. 
Earlier we have spoken of embodiment, corporeity. "'Dementia also has 
112 
an embodiment, a corporeity; it belongs to I this individual, and thus has 
an existent [somatic] aspect. In a self-possessed consciousness this partic-
ular being [somatic aspect] is taken back into self; the somatic aspect is 
overcome."-'231 But disorder arises when this particular becomes fixed in an 
existent, somatic way. A somatic illness as such means that an organ or sys-
tem acquires an activity which hinders the processes of the entire organism. 
230. W adds: banality = (humans who are immersed in the particularities of interests, of 
the body, can never raise themselves out of this immersion to the level of spirit, and cannot 
understand spiritual interests because they are not their own, can easily appear [to be] truly in 
the condition of folly).-
231. W reads: that the human being has desires, etc., is not only spiritual, but belongs to 
the self as this [particular] self, and so it has an existent dimension. Since now it has an existent 
side, in a healthy soul this existence is taken back into the universal health.-satisfaction is this, 
to make oneself healthy at the same time, not only to attain one's will in general, but also to 
acquire one's corporeity. 
142 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
""Likewise in self-feeling a blockage [Knoten] can arise ...... 232 against which 
the totality of self-feeling can do nothing because this blockage has become 
somatic. 
The totality of self-possessed [rationat]233 consciousness is disrupted and 
""a passion or disposition becomes fixed against the objective coherent 
232. W reads: so it is still possible in general self-feeling, because it has a somatic aspect, 
that a disorder arises, and this blockage in the corporeity of self-feeling is also a blockage in 
the totality of representation, 
233. W reads: self-possessed, at home with itself, rational [beisichseienden verstiindigen]. 
[Ed.]ln this Waiter note, Hegel plays upon German terms such as beisichseienden, besonnen, 
which means bei + sinnen, and verstiindigen. These word-plays and cross references are 
impossible to reproduce literally. This Waiter note makes some important terminological 
connections: Hegel's favorite expression bei sich in anderen zu sein, being at home with self in 
another, articulates the self as a complex dialectical totality in which the vital unity pervades 
all its dimensions, determinations, and members. Hegel maintains that just as a condition of 
disease presupposes a prior concept of organic health, so dementia can only be understood 
on the presupposition of a common human nature in a condition of health and wholeness, 
that is at once self-possessed (besonnen) and beisichseiende, being at home with self in one's 
determinations. The self-possessed person is not free from contrasts, oscillations, and anxieties 
of self-esteem mentioned previously, but manages to hold them more or less together in some 
sort of equilibrium, which the German term besonnen, bei + sinnen, expresses. In English we 
say that such a person is 'in his right mind', exhibits 'presence of mind', is 'level-headed', is 
self-possessed, i.e., not 'prone to extremes' or to 'going off the deep end', i.e., 'sensible'. Note 
that here 'sensible' [bei+ sinnen) is not opposed to reason or the rational (as in epistemological 
discussions), but is equivalent to it, i.e., 'sensible' means 'reasonable', and reasonable means 
'self-possessed'. These meanings Hegel expresses by the terms Besonnenheit, besonnen, which 
are German renderings of Sophrosyne, which is one of virtues in Plato's Republic, usually 
translated as temperance or moderation. Dementia presents itself in symptoms that reveal 
that the equilibrium of the self implicit in the above expressions is disrupted, deranged, 
demented, i.e., the demented are no longer self-possessed, i.e., are said to be 'not in their 
right mind', are said 'not to exhibit presence of mind,' are 'not level-headed', 'go off the 
deep end', and 'are not sensible or rational'. The disruption in their SelbstgefUhl or subjective 
totality, in turn hinders the acknowledgment of a common world or objective totality. Because 
the demented are inwardly disrupted and divided against themselves, they are unable to 
experience fully, and not only project their SelbstgefUhl on the life-world, but confuse it 
with the life-world. Doubtless it will occur to the reader that many otherwise normal people, 
especially scientists, politicians, theologians, psychologists and philosophers, are sometimes 
said 'not to be in their right mind.' Hegel himself refers to the 'splendid absent-mindedness 
of Archimedes' and to madness in the English courts below. Michel Foucault generalizes this 
point concerning the continuum between madness and sanity as human possibilities when 
he cites Pascal in the preface to Madness and Civilization: 'Men are so necessarily mad 
that not to be mad would be another form of madness.' While Foucault thus quotes Pascal 
against the Cartesian separation of reason from madness, the quotation in fact articulates 
the central point in Hegel's appropriation and philosophical grounding of Pinel's reforming 
approach to dementia that acknowledges the rationality and humanity of the demented. 
Hegel conceives human being as a self-organizing totality. Only such a self-organizing totality 
is capable of both health and disease, both sanity and dementia. A stone does not have 
these capabilities or possibilities. Foucault fails to include or examine Hegel's treatment of 
143 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
totality.~ 234 Clairvoyance is distinct from dementia. In clairvoyance the 
entire actuality is in inwardness; the waking consciousness is only different 
in form from that totality in its inwardness. In dementia the self-feeling is 
divided in respect to its content; self-feeling exists in one-sided opposition 
to its totality. The distinction can also mean that the self-feeling is an empty 
daydream and does not come to the point of action-a lack of interest in 
113 
and I a deficit in reaction to the external world or apathy. The totality of 
rational consciousness does not direct the activity [which becomes] a dis-
quieted movement. This is absent-mindedness and twaddle-the complete 
indifference to action therefore, or also action, but with shallowness and 
vanity of self-feeling. 
This is the chief determination, that this condition is equally mental 
and physical, that corporeity is an essential moment. Whether the physical 
or the mental constitutes the beginning is difficult to say, or impossible 
to determine. 235 Often one finds nothing abnormal in the anatomy of 
demented people; in other cases many abnormalities are present. Often one 
finds arthritic or gouty nodes. In such cases the entire abstract corporeity is 
in play, therefore often nerve disorders. Bodily illness is often present in the 
depressed nervous system, in the lymphatic system and skeleton. But often 
illness is not noticeable in the merely vegetative system. Two points must be 
noted: (1) the forms of dementia and (2) the treatment of dementia. 
As for the various forms of dementia, this condition is infinitely varied, 
but the common feature is that a particularity becomes fixed and is not 
subjected to the totality of reasonable, sensible consciousness. The form of 
a fixed idea is contingent, accidental, and often has no connection with what 
114 
originates the dementia. 236 I 
human being and dementia in his survey in Madness and Civilization. Foucault avoids the 
ontology that the continuity thesis of reason and madness he here invokes presupposes. Instead 
Foucault's view is that madness is an extrinsic labelling, a social construction. In rejecting 
the medical model of disease, ignoring ontology, and restricting his account of madness to 
extrinsic labelling, Foucault can give no plausible account of what it is in the human being that 
oppression violates or that of which dementia is a derangement and distortion. See Berthold-
Bond, Hegel's Theory of Madness, 2, but especially eh. 8, 177-216. 
234. W reads: the subject throws itself into some inclination or other and clings to a false 
representation of this inclination, opposing it to the objective coherence of his actuality,-this 
solidification is at the same time essentially something existent, corporal. 
235. W adds: for even to madness belongs the vulnerability of the body to illness. This 
disposition is present in abstract self-feeling as such, so far as self-feeling is a universal 
corporeity. 
236. W adds: When the predominant feeling is one of pride, there are an infinite series of 
notions that the demented possess. cf. Mah, X, Fr 11, God. If hypochondria is predominant:-
anxiety, considering oneself as spiritually stricken by a fear of hens. If the feeling of corporal 
144 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
The various types of dementia include imbecility, folly and madness 
proper, or frenzy. 237 Imbecility in general. Under this belongs imbecility 
as such. It is very often the final form of dementia. It is the merely veg-
etative existence without interest. This condition is wretched and incur-
able. To this belongs cretinism, that appears to be bound to a particular 
locality (Herr von Buch says that wherever there are cretins there are no 
hailstorms). 238 With cretinism there is often connected goiter, contorted 
members, stupid facial expressions, inarticulate sounds etc. There are other 
examples of this most extreme dullness. There are many gradations. Pinel 
has written the best book about dementia, and Reil's Natural Philosophical 
Formalism is not better in any respect. 239 The best is found in Pinel. 
The psychic method in particular was founded by Pinel. This method 
was first given stimulus in Germany by Langermann. 240 Pinel includes the 
more interesting examples. He relates the case of a 28-year-old imbecilic 
young woman. 241 Her dementia was derived from a terror her mother 
suffered during a pregnancy. The young woman did not move, speak, 
appeared to be nearly without feeling or desire. Every morning she man-
ifested seizures of wild rage, although afterwards she manifested feelings of 
remorse. 
The first [type of dementia] is thus imbecility as such. It has been assumed 
that one fourth of the population of asylums are imbeciles. 242 There is also 
a type of imbecility that is a kind of catalepsy. Also a transitory imbecility, 
a complete inability I to be affected, utter inactivity. An Englishman in this 
115 
condition was cured by confronting him with an opposite image. To this 
general form there also belongs a dispersed absent-mindedness that is often 
the beginning of dementia. (There is also a splendid absent-mindedness 
burdens dominates: [there is] a hay wagon with four horses in the stomach. If feeling is located 
in the feet: feet of glass. These particular forms are more or less indifferent and have no 
connection with the immediate occasion of dementia. 
237. W adds: The general condition is spitefulness and malevolence, but also one of 
misfortune. 
238. [Ed.] Christoph Leopold von Buch, 1774-1853, geologist and paleontologist. 
239. [Ed.] Philippe Pine! (1745-1826), Philosophische-medizinische Abhandlung uber 
Geisteverriungen oder Manie (Vienna, 1801). ET A Treatise on Insanity (New York: Hafner, 
1962). J. Christoph Reil, Rhapsodien uber die Anwendung der psychischen Kurmethode auf 
Geisteszerrntungen (Halle, 1803). 
240. [Ed.] Johann Gottfried Langermann (1768-1832); from 1805 on he was director of 
a psychiatric institution at Bayreuth. 
241. [Ed.] Pine!, op. cit., 321 ff. 
242. W adds: In good institutions those considered incurable are separated. The imbeciles 
in particular belong to this group. 
145 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
that accompanies deep meditation, and perceives nothing outside itself-
Archimedes.) The absent-mindedness that becomes dementia is an immer-
sion in oneself, an inattentiveness towards the external environment. This 
daydreaming often becomes dementia. Twaddle, gibberish, are the opposites 
of absent-minded distraction and imbecility. 
Twaddle is this outer-directedness, a being driven towards external activ-
ity without any context or connection, without this activity being under 
the control of the self. 243 There are several levels of twaddle, and the 
boundaries are difficult to determine because the patient often still is capable 
of conducting his affairs. 
The second form is dementia or folly proper, distraction with a special 
content. This is an error, an imaginary idea that contradicts the actuality of 
the subject, a self-feeling that is arrested in one respect, ""'and this fixed 
aspect contradicts its actuality. The ethical human being is master over 
the evil genius that the dementia releases, and that posits such a passion 
116 
in a fixed manner."-'244 The imaginary notions I correspond to this fixed 
passion and inclination. They are errors concerning one's own worth, etc., 
but are posited by this special feeling that has become fixed. The forms 
of these notions are contingent. 245 In particular the passions that occur 
here are arrogance and vanity. These become fixed, and since they are 
not subordinate to the understanding, the result is dementia. The passion 
of love that is bound up with physical illness and weakness, is often a 
source of dementia. Dreams of blessedness are often nothing other than 
a reaction against a loss or misfortune, or because some persons are not 
allowed to have what they desire. But since they are unable to shrug off this 
loss from their inner reality, these dreams contradict them and their actual 
243. W adds: as having self-feeling in concrete ends and purposes. The most striking image 
of chaos has been: all [the patient's] ideas and speech are incoherent, etc. His outbursts are 
confined to childish outbreaks because he cannot summon himself to anger. Thus, drivel at the 
highest level. [Ed.] If the patient were self-present and self-controlled instead of in a condition 
of self-division that, according to Hegel, constitutes dementia, then there would be self-feeling 
in his concrete ends. 
244. W reads: so that this special self-feeling has no proper place in the totality. Folly is 
bound up with the alertness of a demented, irrational consciousness. In human hearts there are 
the beginnings of all evil passions. The rational, ethical person is the one who restrains and 
locks up the evil genius. But the main point is that the ethical person is master over the evil 
disposition and allows it no room. In the condition of folly this evil genius is released, set free. 
Such inclination and passion isolates itself; such evil disposition so far as it is not mastered by 
totality is dementia. 
245. W adds: of infinite variety and arbitrariness, hundreds and thousands of high-minded 
vanities and no two representations are alike. 
146 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
circumstances. 246 Then come the ideas, the contingent fantasies. Misfortune 
has very often placed humans in the condition of dementia; during the 
French Revolution many became demented. Even good fortune can make 
humans demented. For one calls that good fortune, if everything happens 
as one wishes it, and where this happens from youth on, it can lead to 
dementia. "'Therefore fantasy often presents itself as a substitute for failed 
hopes"-'.247 There are also demented persons I with severe depression and 
111 
"'complete despair, who have only a feeling of negativity"-'248 and who live 
in continual anxiety and fear. They appear to be surrounded by enemies who 
do them harm. Religious fanaticism is also a frequent source of dementia (it 
is said that these make up one fourth to one fifth of all those in asylums).249 
Images of the torments of hell have put many in the asylum. 250 Arrogant 
pride frequently assumes a religious form and becomes the intention to 
reform the world. Another form is hypochondria (melancholy), a sinking 
within oneself with the idea that one has no worth, and likewise a disbelief 
in the love and the honesty of people. It is a sense of one's negativity, of 
one's own powerlessness that is often mixed up with religious negativity 
and so manifests itself [as fatalism]. 251 Further, there is a disbelief in the 
results one could accomplish through one's own action. Melancholy is 
[often] bound up with inaction, and often bound up with a suicidal drive252 
such that the will cannot resist this tendency, and that, if one does not 
commit the deed, it is only because one is prevented from doing so by 
others. 
246. W adds: and since the idea remains thus fixed against their actuality, the representa-
tion develops that they are in actuality what they would not be, and have what they did not 
demand. 
247. W reads: A person who has always had his own way from youth falls easily into a 
rage over a resistance or a contradiction. It can later happen that since he believes himself to 
be infringed upon everywhere, that he falls into folly. Bad education! The follies, fantasies that 
the person has before him are frequently a substitute supplied by the imagination for a loss in 
actuality. And they appear as unfortunate only so far as what they project in imagination is 
not granted or obeyed. 
248. W reads: loss and misfortune, which throw humans back into disconsolateness, only 
into the one feeling of misfortune, the negativity. 
249. [Ed.] Cf. Pine!, Philosophische-medizinische Abhandlung uber Geisteverriungen oder 
Manie, 78-81. 
250. W adds: Often out of religious madness they commit acts of murder in order to save 
the other soul, or in order to be executed, or in order to gain time during trial to prepare 
themselves for death. 
251. W adds: which the religious representation often connects with being destined to 
eternal damnation. 
252. W reads: the suicidal drive can be present, since the human being is fully conscious, 
and since he has in himself a self-negating drive in a certain way, 
147 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The third form of dementia is madness, mania, or frenzy. This is partly 
an enduring condition and partly a symptom of dementia. It can result from 
118 
physical causes. I ~Wild rage is a symptom of many forms of dementia 
and appears only in brief periods.~ 253 Here we note the relations of the 
demented to others. They are often malicious and special attention must be 
directed to this circumstance during the treatment. This disposition to harm 
others can become a literal bloodthirstiness, which can be connected with 
a love for the individual whom they feel compelled to murder along with 
an abhorrence of such actions and a consciousness of their injustice. The 
malice of the demented that can advance to frenzy often comes from the 
fact that they feel themselves injured and mistreated, so that their rebellious 
outrage increases to utter malice, a condition in which it is difficult to win 
their trust again. It is to be noted that apart from the seizures, the demented 
are capable of speaking coherently and correctly. A judgment about their 
convalescence can be made only after a long observation. Apart from their 
dementia they have feelings that are entirely moral. Pinel says that every 
day in the asylum one can see affecting scenes. 254 In English courts there 
occurs another form of dementia-an impotence of the spirit, which is not 
yet dementia, and which often occurs in the administration of property. It 
can be attributed to twaddle. 255 
The other main aspect of this topic is the cure, healing. First of 
119 
all it is purely physical and medicinal in nature. I ~Illnesses must be 
treated in a purely medical fashion.~ 256 In modern times water baths 
have been applied, sudden immersion in water. In particular cases it can 
do good, but in others it can produce apoplexy. Cutting the hair has 
also helped. Dementia seems often to have a definite course, and cer-
tain quick cures fall mainly in the final stages where madness has been 
implicitly overcome. ~Imbecility proceeds to become folly and through 
253. W reads: disorder, where fits of rage sometimes follow periodically. After a mad dog's 
bite. Fit of rage, violent activity, injuries of others. This rage is for many mere folly, a symptom, 
not perennial, appearing only occasionally, partly as physical diseased condition, partly as 
occasioned in particular by inner feelings. 
254. [Ed.] Pine!, op. cit., 17: 'With the exception of novels, nowhere have I found such 
devoted married couples, tender loving fathers, esteemed and high-minded patriots than in the 
madhouses when the people are in their sane and quiet periods. Here every day any sensitive 
person can see some touching scenes.' 
255. W adds: distraction, in which the individual does what is inappropriate to his condi-
tion. 
256. W reads: specific illnesses, gout, etc., must be improved in the ordinary medical way 
(bloodletting, purgations etc. for head affection, abdominal aches and pains. In Spring and Fall 
Heslarn had the entire madhouse purged. [Ed.] Pine!, op. cit., 289 ff. 
148 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
folly passes over to reason. The reverse order ts the more dangerous 
one . ..._.257 
Many means are employed that are not capable of restraining the ill-
ness as such, but rather only restrain the mad frenzies: 258 straitjackets 
and swing. 259 However, the main aspect of the therapy is psychic healing. 
Previously the treatment of the illness had been entrusted to the brutality 
of barbaric men who see only evil in the outbreak of dementia and treat it 
accordingly. In modern times people have begun to take the mind into con-
sideration and to make people sound through a healing of the mind. 260 This 
presupposes that the demented are still human beings and are rational. Fur-
ther, one must not be insulted by a demented person. ""This presupposition 
is the same I as the idea that every illness presupposes health, and this idea 
120 
becomes the focal point of the treatment. It presupposes that the demented 
person still knows what right and wrong are, and that he possesses complete 
soundness and accountability outside of the specific sphere of his folly itself. 
Here we can abstract from his folly and turn ourselves to the rest [of the 
human being] ....... 261 Since his folly is not directly included in the rest of 
257. W reads: Folly often begins with dullness and apathy, imbecility, madness and then 
transitions to folly proper (fools are more curable than imbeciles) and from there a cure is more 
possible. But if the process goes from folly to rage to imbecility, then it is a more dangerous 
way.-
258. [Ed.] These methods are described in Jose£ Mason Cox, Practical Observation on 
Insanity (London, 1806), 137 ff. Hegel has more to say about Cox's methods of treatment in 
the 1825 Lectures; cf. Philosophie des Geistes, Petty, op cit., vol. 11, 380-1. 
259. W adds: Swing often produces dizziness and relieves the fool of the series of his crazy 
ideas and thus produces calm. 
260. [Ed.] Here is a passage where the English term 'mind' is appropriate as a translation 
of Geist. Following Pine! the mode of treatment Hegel endorses proceeds on the recognition 
that madness is not a loss of humanity or reduction to mere bestiality and the subhuman, but 
rather is a spiritual illness. Hegel's term is Verrucktheit which contains as its root meaning 
'displacement'. Displacement suggests Hegel's fundamental concept of dementia as the self 
which has become divided against itself into two centers, the conscious and the unconscious. 
The unconscious is not subject to direct rational control. Verrucktheit, the displacement of the 
self into two centers, is related to Wahnsinn literally, a delusional 'sense', i.e., the demented 
are capable of making sense, but a sense which is delusional. Hegel's Verrucktheit is best 
translated as 'dementia' because the latter term presupposes the concept of mind (mens), even 
as it suggests its disunion, derangement, and impairment. This also reveals how 'mind' is 
misconceived when it is thought of as a 'thing'; 'thinghood' conceals the crucial point here, 
namely the displacement and disunion the mind undergoes in dementia, when it both is and is 
not itself, and lives both sides of the contradiction in its self-feeling. 
261. W reads: Just as when one treats a body medically one presupposes that it still 
possesses health (i.e., possesses vital powers) and therefore hopes to cure it, so also in the 
case of the demented one presupposes that they still possess reason, that they have a sense of 
the right and wrong that have happened to them and that they have committed; that they are 
fully responsible outside the sphere of their particular folly in the wide field of the remainder 
of their behavior and conduct. With this treatment one lets the demented be in their folly and 
149 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
his humanity, he is accounted as having a consciousness of right and of 
injustice. It is from this latter perspective that one must consider and seek to 
influence him, and one must comport oneself towards him with justice and 
good will. 262 In this way one must impart to the demented respect for their 
supervisors. 
The issue of treatment, therapy, is a very interesting topic. The first point 
is that one seeks to occupy the demented outside of their dementia; through 
some other interest one seeks to engage them in work. 263 To work means 
to become interested in a cause, to become interested in a cause outside of 
subjectivity [outside the subjective folly]. This work, although mechanical 
at first, serves then to promote movement, vitality, and health. 264 
This method of extrication from dementia requires especially that a per-
son become distanced from his accustomed world. His accustomed world is 
part of his disordered self-feeling, which has made this world up and derives 
support from it. The novelty of the objects interrupts this support for the 
unimpeded course of the insane ideas. A further condition is that their trust 
must be earned. This trust is already implicit in this distancing from the 
accustomed world of the disordered self-feeling; trust is the beginning of 
an objectivity since by this trust one awakens an interest in an other. This 
trust is especially necessary for those who were driven to dementia through 
harsh treatment. Even with these it is possible to awaken confidence and 
trust, because they are human. A further point is that it is often necessary 
to induce in the demented a consciousness of a superior power by means 
of attention, respect, and fear in its various gradations. This is necessary to 
break their illusion and produce respect for something greater than their 
particular subjectivity. Very often ceremonial authority is used in order 
121 
to show that their opinion, their will, I is not something objective. An 
additional psychological element in this regard is the awakening of fear, 
namely, the representation or threat of violence itself does violence to them 
does not directly contradict it. Direct contradiction of their folly has no effect at all, and is 
itself a contradiction. Instead one turns to the rest of their behavior and conduct. 
262. W adds: Pine! has made the greatest contribution to this method of treatment. 
263. [Ed.] Pine!, op. cit., 239: 'It is the time-tested, universally valid result of experience 
that in all public asylums, as well as in prisons and hospitals, the most certain and perhaps 
only method of preserving the health, good order and good customs is the strict observance of 
a law of a mechanical occupation.' It should be noted that Hegel interprets work differently, 
namely as a form of self-transcendence and legitimate engagement with the world and others, 
in short, as self-actualization. For Hegel work has the significance of liberation, as his account 
of the slave in the master/slave relation attests. 
264. W adds: A madhouse in Naples is interesting owing to the arrangements made in this 
respect. 
150 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
so that they are led to do violence to themselves. Frequently arousing fear 
is necessary to prevent other, worse things [from happening]. Often the 
demented don't want to eat. It is necessary to arouse fear in them so that 
they force themselves inwardly to eat. 
A chief effect of fear is thus this self-domination which one also finds in 
the demented. This violence of images, for example, is also applied in such 
cases where the disorder is of a more epileptic kind"" as in the well-known 
narrative of Boerhaave. ""265 Nevertheless, violence or its threat must always 
be legitimate, and the structure of punishment must be preserved, so that the 
demented person knows that he has done something improper. 266 A further 
point to be emphasized is that the demented can be deceived very easily. 
This fact permits a means of controlling them, but it must be carefully and 
discriminately applied, since they are very mistrustful. Such deceptions are 
often very important, presumably where delay brings danger. But this also 
requires presence of mind and good will on the part of the overseer. 
Very often the demented can be deceived when one enters their fantasy in 
such a way as to suspend their disorder. The disorder can be momentarily 
suspended, but in order to become fully sound they must [themselves] know 
that their illness was folly, otherwise the therapy is only half concluded and 
relapse is possible. "-'But this deception must not remain behind in the recov-
ery [like a bitter aftertaste],""267 lest their treatment appear [negatively] to 
them I as it appeared during their dementia, so that no hate and no rebellion 
122 
remain behind. 
It is said that one can cure dementia by entering into its fantasy because 
then it is easy to bring the demented person into a contradiction with his 
dementia. Often the dementia recedes because the contradiction catches the 
demented person's attention. 268 
265. W adds: The infection in such evils can occur in fools and weak persons through 
vision, through the imagination. So Boerhaave threatened to have infected young women 
pinched with glowing pincers, and the attacks ceased. Reil narrates that an entire cloister of 
young women considered themselves to be cats. They were cured by the threat that the first who 
acted thus would be whipped by soldiers. [Ed.] Hermann Boerhaave (1668-1738), founder 
of clinical medical practice and research, taught at the University of Leiden. He collected 
and systematized the medical knowledge that had accumulated up to his time. Hegel read 
Boerhaave as early as 1794; Hegel also refers to Boerhaave in the transcripts of Kehler and 
Griesheim in Philosophy of Spirit, ed. Petry, vol. 2, 378. 
266. W adds: The repeated struggle between the automatic fits of rage and fear [of 
punishment] gradually grows stronger, and the symptoms of madness subside. 
267. W reads: The mere remembrance of an unjust treatment can produce a regression. 
268. W adds: Nevertheless the contradiction must always astonish. Thus a powerful joke 
has often put folly right. 'How can you be the Holy Spirit?' 'Because I am!' 
151 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
One can appeal to the demented person in feelings and in his affective 
life, and bring him to actions that contradict his fancy. 269 In such cases the 
cure proceeds entirely from the mental side, as in other cases it proceeds 
from the physical. As a rule, both approaches must be united; one of them 
can predominate and in cases such as those mentioned above, the physical 
aspect can precede the mental. But the cure can equally proceed from the 
mental and with this the physical is also set right. 270 
These are the points of view that occur in this condition, and it is difficult 
to judge whether the condition is incurable, whether it is cured, and even 
whether dementia is actually present. 
We proceed further in the course of our discipline. We recall its stand-
point. This was the feeling individuality, the individuality that is a totality 
123 
and a unity, the self-feeling in relation I to its determinations. We have 
considered the self-feeling as genius, as it was not yet in control of itself, 
and thus what is to be done so that it rules. Then second, self-feeling as 
such, but in relation to its specifics, so that its individual determinations are 
reduced to moments and become posited as ideal in the totality: the self-
feeling exists for itself in them. ~In passion the human being is immersed in 
a particularity, and so is not at home with itself.~ 271 This self-feeling comes 
to itself by making its particulars ideal. This process of idealization has the 
sense that the determinations are posited in self-feeling, in this pit, but as 
suspended. Illness means that a particular determination becomes fixed for 
the concrete self, with the result that it is not idealized or subordinated to 
the simple totality of the whole. 
Therefore feeling totality. 
The second is self-feeling with the negation of singularity. It is self-
determining, but in such a way that its singularity is negated. 
The third is element is the self-feeling as self-fulfilling, so that it deter-
mines itself, but at the same time transcends the determination and is 
indifferent to it. 
269. W adds: (One who believed himself to be dead was brought to a grave, street youths 
derided him on the way, and he sprang from the casket to do battle with them.-Haller and 
the glass leg). 
270. W adds: A disease must always have passed through a crisis before the physical evil 
can be considered overcome. But then an entirely small psychic stimulus (a friendly look, etc.) 
can often complete the healing process, particularly when the evil lay in the fool. 
271. W reads: In passion the human being has self-feeling; however it is immersed in a 
particularity and so not present to [for] itself. 
152 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
C. Habit 
The third is the present fulfi.llment of the self-feeling, the totality as that 
which presents itself in the particular feelings so that the totality in self-
feeling is at the same time indifferent to these particulars. This level is what 
we call habit. Individuality has determinations, I sensations, feelings; these 
124 
are at first particular. In these I am immersed in a content; I do not keep 
or preserve myself as universal in these sensings. In contrast, in habit it 
is posited that these satisfactions are directly subordinate to the universal 
that at the same time transcends them, and that preserves itself in its simple 
self-relation. We represent this abstract concept through the idea of habit. 
Habit is there not only as a particular, momentary satisfaction; rather I am 
this habit. It is my universal mode of being-what I am is the totality of 
my habits. I can do nothing else, I am this. In my individual feelings, I 
make it so one time, and another time not so. Then I do not say, 'I am so,' 
"'but I am so in.....,272 a general feeling that belongs to my self as such, as a 
simple self-relating unity. Such habit is something posited by me. Through 
this self-positing, habits are distinguished from natural qualities to which 
I have contributed nothing. 273 Sleep and waking occur in me without my 
agency. Habit is also one such universal quality or mode, that is manifest 
in all particulars, but it is posited by me and made my own. Habit is a 
quality I have posited in myself as simple totality. The second [point] is 
that habit is a universal mode of my own doing; the particular [action] is 
subsumed under it. It becomes universal since I appropriate it to myself. 
This feeling that has been appropriated by me is posited in the simplicity of 
my self, and as thus having become simple, it is the universal in the form 
of simplicity. It is a posited universality. It is a universality of reflection, 
i.e., generality, I a universality, since it includes many particulars in itself, 
125 
a universal related to the many (the higher universality, the species, is not 
a universal of reflection, "'it is rather simple relation to itself)"'. 274 Here 
the universality is brought forth, produced, and proceeds out of particular 
cases. This [process] contains the determination that what is supposed to 
become habit for us, is a repetition of feeling. Habit is acquired through 
repetition so that the individual is appropriated to a universality. Thus it is 
272. W reads: but I distinguish the particular feeling from me, as universal feeling. 
273. W adds: for example, that I am a European. 
274. W reads: for the universality of thinking is simple self-relation, without reflection on 
the many. Here on the contrary the universality is brought forth; it proceeds from individual 
cases and raises itself accordingly. Therein lies the determination that what is supposed to 
become habitual for us must be a repetition of feelings and activities. 
153 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
a universality arising out of many individual cases that are repeated. This 
is the determination of habit in contrast to natural determinations. Habit 
resembles a natural quality, but it has been posited. So in one of its aspects 
habit resembles natural qualities. But habit also has an aspect that is related 
to the will as such, and from this perspective it appears as a necessity in 
relation to freedom. According to the first perspective in reference to the 
natural determinations and particular feelings, habit is a liberation. 275 But 
in reference to the will, habit is a necessity. The expression 'another nature' 
[second nature] is entirely correct: on the one hand, habit is an 'other' than 
nature, and so it is a liberation [from nature]; it is a second nature in contrast 
to immediate, uncultivated nature. 276 On the other hand, habit is [a second, 
cultivated] nature, it is a being-1 am thus-this is my habit. This latter 
quality preserves this aspect of natural immediacy in itself. 
When we consider habit in its special forms, it is said that self-
consciousness is no longer empty being-for-self; it rather makes itself objec-
tive. It is the inherent determinate being of the soul that is determined by 
its own activity. In this determinacy, the being [of the determination] is its 
126 
own. "'Habit is the subject and being is the predicate"-'277, I and both have 
their stability [Halt] in habit so that the subject is no longer dominated by 
drives. 
There are two more explicit aspects of habit; it involves first a hardening 
[of the disposition] and second an adroitness and dexterity. We have seen 
that affection belongs to feeling. We distinguish affection as follows: it is 
the inner made outer, the inner determination made into a corporal one. 
The mode of immediacy, the inner determination embodies itself, and both 
belong to feeling. Feeling is the process of uniting inner and outer. Habit 
means that this unity becomes itself inwardly posited, becomes posited in 
the self, so that the self takes possession of its feeling. Only insofar as it has 
taken possession of its feeling is it at home with itself, simply relating to 
itself. The first unity, namely, feeling, is always a particular, a now, but now 
this particularity is suspended. 
What is called a hardening of the disposition generally occurs when what 
is in feeling is [also] at home with itself, and is not simply immersed in 
feeling, but remains free in feeling. For example, thinking for us has become 
habitual; thinking, the pure being at home with self, also must belong to the 
self. Thinking exhausts (the body), and what is called mental exhaustion is 
275. W adds: liberation from the particularity of the drive. 
276. [Ed.] Cf. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §151. 
277. W reads: So the self is the universally pervasive soul in its feeling and in its life for 
itself, both subject and predicate. 
154 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
only this embodied feeling. Habit means that one does not become tired so 
soon; the fatigue is postponed and deferred. Practice produces this, for it is 
implicit in practice that corporeity is no longer independent, but rather the 
unity of the body and inwardness which is my own, is relaxed and subjected 
to the independence of being. 
Thus the moment of corporeity is posited in me and thereby loses its 
externality and materiality. I To this aspect belongs the habit of satisfaction 
127 
of needs. Here my corporeity, my existence, is made to correspond with how 
my existence is supposed to be, [namely] with the drive. 278 This satisfaction 
is an enjoyment, a feeling. Habit consists in the fact that in this satisfaction I 
remain at home with myself. In habit the satisfaction belongs to myself. The 
satisfaction of desire is a deadening of desire, and it includes the liberation 
from desire, being satiated. But habit means that we are satiated with being 
satiated and are indifferent to achieving satisfaction itself. 
Satisfaction merely helps against an expression of the drive. Habit implies 
that the satisfaction is already mine, something that has become part of my 
self-feeling, and is then a new enjoyment of what I already possess and 
is familiar to me. Habit is essentially a reproduction of enjoyment out of 
myself as this enjoyment is a feeling. This feeling is something that I already 
possess and is nothing new to me. I have interest only as long as I am in 
an opposition, so long as I do not possess what my drive demands. 279 In 
habit it is not merely the drive that is satisfied, but I already possess this 
satisfaction in such a way that I am not simply immersed in it when getting 
a new satisfaction. In contrast, I transcend it, I relate to this satisfaction as 
to something I already possess, and so I am related therein only to myself. 
I am present, not in this limitation, but rather my 'I' is at home with itself, 
this determination is something I have appropriated. There has been much 
talk about the liberation of the drive, and generally one can regard that as 
something superior (for in concrete cases the non-satisfaction is indeed very 
important). I 
128 
"'-'Since he can liberate himself from the drives without their being satis-
fied, the human being can come into an [internal] struggle. The drives are 
necessary, [they are] the system of determinations of vitality."'280 Vitality is 
278. W adds: drive. Satisfaction gives me enjoyment. Drive is a volition to which my 
determinate being at first fails to correspond; corporeity as not adequate to its needs. 
2 79. W adds: Interest has the difference and contrast in itself; it includes activity: subjec-
tivity wants to free itself from itself, wants to become objective. 
280. W reads: The liberation is achieved only through the non-satisfaction of the drives. 
Thereby the human being falls into a great struggle with himself.-But the drives are at first 
natural needs, necessary conditions of our living organism. Our self-feeling, according to its 
vitality, is a system of conditions that constitute the natural needs. 
155 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
essentially a process and first becomes actual when it is satisfied. The natural 
drives are essential. However it is just as essential to free oneself from them. 
This liberation consists not in the particular satisfaction, but rather in this 
"'Satisfaction of being self-related."'281 Since I possess the satisfaction, the 
satisfaction only reproduces my possession, and only in it do I return to 
myself. In this particular feeling [of satisfaction], I am only my own self-
feeling, and thus transcend the limitation and am at home with myself. 
Thus habit includes the cardinal point that one is liberated from what one is 
accustomed to. (One eats and drinks and yet one is not present in the matter 
itself.) 
Hardening is directed against the need itself, against the need without its 
satisfaction. But this hardening is also a habit, i.e., that I maintain myself 
in my self-feeling against this negation present in me. Hardness means a 
firm holding oneself together, so that I do not become disunited in myself, 
but rather my self-feeling preserves itself in its identity, which to be sure 
has negations present in it, but excludes them from itself. One does not 
think about these negations but rather about something else that is stronger, 
129 
namely, the holding together, the coherence, of one's self-feeling.282 I 
Hardness consists therefore in not giving into disunion, cleavage, but 
holding to the abstraction of the self and persevering in oneself. The other 
aspect of habit is adroitness. Adroitness refers to activities that are the 
embodiment of an inner determination. Adroitness consists in the fact that 
such embodiments, such doings, are appropriated by me, so that every new 
doing is only something reproduced, something repeated. I reproduce and 
repeat the activity that is already my own. These activities, embodiments, 
have their deeper ground, as we have seen, in the fact that sensible separa-
tion is something ideal, 283 and offers no resistance. I embody it directly; this 
power essentially belongs to me, and it is supposed to be also for me and 
must be appropriated by me, posited in me so that, when I again intend this 
activity I do not need to accomplish it with any special will or attention. 
It belongs to me and thus becomes a possibility for me, and the activity 
becomes a capacity or resource. If I do it again it becomes a reproduction 
and I am fully in control over it. This appropriation of my corporeity is 
something that extends quite far. That a human being stands upright has 
281. W reads: satisfaction, not the satisfaction of momentary aspect of the drives, but of 
them as drives,-in their satisfaction to be at the same time independent of them, to be free 
from them, to relate to oneself and to be only at home with oneself. 
282. W adds: of self-feeling.-Feeling remains-only it does not appear.-The defeated 
element allows itself to sink into negation and disunion. Death can often be a matter of 
indifference to the person immersed in this negation and disunion, which creates despair. 
283. W adds: has no truth in spirit. 
156 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
become a habit acquired through his own will. It is a continuous will that I 
stand, but I no longer need to will standing as such, because it has become 
an enduring determination of my self-feeling. I have posited this embod-
iment in my self-feeling and every repetition is only a reproducing. The 
series of movements are simplified in my self-feeling and the adroitness in 
execution is completely immediate in spite of the great series of mediations 
(e.g., playing according to notes). The self is the simple bond of all these 
mediations. The will pushes as it were, only on the self-feeling, and in 
the latter the embodiment is executed without any express willing being 
necessary. This is the nature I of habit and its special determinations. Habit 
130 
indeed can include particular content, but it is one of the most difficult 
topics. 
What one does out of habit, one does without thought, mechanically. 
Habitual action proceeds independently of our conscious will like a neces-
sity. This doing belongs to being, the being of my [trained] self. Habit 
is the greatest power in the individual; it is the individual himself-! as 
necessity. But habit is also a liberation, as noted previously. Adroitness no 
longer requires attention in the exercise of particular activities. Habit means 
I am already prepared; I have the capacity and am master over it. That is 
the nature of habit, and the human being is ready, so far as he is habitu-
ated, [to be] what he is. It only then that there is the quiet enjoyment of 
being. 
Youth is the period of interests that are supposed to be attained but are 
not yet attained. The old man is finished; he possesses everything peacefully 
as habit. The human being perishes of the habit of living. Sweet habit 
"'Of existence, says Egmont of life,"-'284 but [sweetness of habit] is also a 
peaceful death. The conduct of life becomes simpler, with less opposition 
and conflict, but the vitality of life consists precisely in this conflict. To the 
extent that life gradually coincides more and more with habit and custom, 
it also disappears because its intensity disappears and lifeless living arises. 
That is the sphere of habit. We speak about animals and ascribe habits 
to them, or rather adroitnesses. Animals are trained to do some things, 
and this training consists in an affection of some sort being produced in 
them and connected with this activity. The animal is capable of this sort of 
connection because it is a self. The simplicity of the animal is the bond 
between feeling and activity in it. But it does not make this connection 
apart from its instincts. Ordinarily the stimulation of the connection occurs 
by means of a feeling coming from without, namely the training. This 
284. W reads: life, says Goethe's Egmont. [Ed.] Goethe, Egmont, Werke 4, 450, 8-10. 
157 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
training can go pretty far in approaching the miraculous, even the human 
131 
sphere. 285 I Their clever stunts occur not through signals of their owners, of 
that one can easily convince oneself. If one speaks a word to such an animal, 
it must be able to distinguish the wounds, i.e., spell the word. That [training] 
can take several years, but whether difficult or easy, it is the same operation. 
3. THE ACTUAL SOUL 
The actual soul is the third to the natural soul and the dreaming or sen-
tient soul. Natural soul is the totality existing as external nature for our 
consciousness and developed as being in itself, [or implicit being]. This 
natural soul was the first. The second is the sentient soul, the natural 
soul as existing for itself, as self in general. This develops itself and makes 
itself exist as sentient soul, and actively seeks self-realization. This includes 
doubled determinations. First of all, feeling already includes the immediate 
determinateness, [namely] affection. This affection must be recalled, posited 
as feeling, and conversely, the inwardness determined in it is the immedi-
ate affection. The other aspect is that the inward determination becomes 
embodied. So we have the unity of the inner and the outer: sentience. 
The sentient totality is what we have generally called genius. The second 
element in this respect was that this totality develops itself into self-feeling. 
This means that it makes itself manifest as an existent feeling, the genius 
expresses itself, negates its restrictedness and becomes a self. Reproduction 
was a further fact. This point is essential. There is a negation of immediacy 
and a reproduction of the unity of the inner and the outer. These connections 
themselves have to be connected, namely unified by the self so that in its 
feelings and embodiments it is now related to itself. In feeling it is also for 
itself, but these first feelings, as imperfect, can be compared with a chemical 
process. So the actualized soul is also the unity of the inner and the outer, 
132 
but this is said only superficially. Nature is also I such a unity [of inner and 
outer]. Such determinations are one-sided and superficial; they lack more 
precise definition. This unity is itself only an external one, a restriction of the 
self that is inherently universal. These unities are themselves to be posited 
as inner, and this is what we regard habit to be. The soul in respect to its 
actuality is in itself precisely this ideality of all the multiplicities that exist 
285. W adds: When written and spoken words are presented to animals, they assemble 
these out of an alphabet and also out of dissimilar letters. Further, there are dogs that can 
calculate. 
158 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
in externality or in nature in general. In the concept this mutual externality 
has no truth. This ideality is the soul, the difference inherent in externality is 
not independent. This ideality, this basic concept is posited in the actuality 
of the soul; the [independent] being-for-self of the soul has here come to 
existence. Consequently habit is reduced to possibility. Previously it stood 
higher as containing independent differences, but now it is simply posited, 
and since I will it, it is also brought about. The whole series of activities 
acquires a completely simple determination. There is no longer any mutual 
externality, but everything is posited in the simplicity of my inwardness as 
it is according to the concept. This is the process of the speculative concept. 
It is the actual soul as the indwelling totality of custom. 
So the soul is subject existing for itself; it is substance whose corporeity 
is no longer due to being, rather corporeity is only a moment in the soul. 
The soul existing for itself is this ideality which has pervaded corporeity 
and immediacy; corporeity is now posited as a moment in the soul. This 
[corporal] externality is only a sign of the soul, only represents the soul. 
The soul is actual as this kind of identity of inner and outer. Embodiment or 
corporeity is thus only the soul's work of art and constitutes the shape of the 
soul in which it feels itself. It is actual, effective, and something other than 
mere existence (what is rational is actual and vice versa286 ). A bad soul has 
existence, but no actuality. The bad soul is not an expression or the image 
of the idea; it does not reveal the inner as substance of the soul. It does not 
represent the idea but something other, the non-idea, the appearance on its 
way towards truth. What is actual is the soul existing for itself, the soul that 
has transformed its corporeity into an ideal moment and is the dominant 
power therein. I The actual soul has no other externality than the one that 
133 
mirrors its own inwardness. The soul is the effective ability and capacity in 
the process of mirroring. Thus the soul has its very self in its externality, not 
simply a condition of its being [passively] affected. The soul is at home with 
itself [in its externality], and has attained to a unity of itself with ideality. 
This is the ideality of the soul, what it is according to its concept, and [in] 
this ideality the soul is at home with itself. The actual soul is the self that has 
come to rest in itself. In this actual soul immediacy is manifest as something 
natural, but [the natural is only] an expression of the soul. 
The actual soul is the individual become stable and constant in itself, the 
accomplished genius that has objective existence and is simply present as 
such; but where this presence is only an expression of the soul. It is the soul 
286. W adds: cf. the Philosophy of Right: only the rational is actual. Actuality is here to 
be distinguished from existence. [Ed.] Philosophy of Right, Preface, trans. Nisbet, 20. 
159 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
in this quiescent shape that is revealed only in this externality. It has human 
expression, pathognomic and physiognomic expression, the human being as 
a total individual, but in such a way that its humanity can be seen in this 
totality. This is how the human being distinguishes itself from the animal. 
Much effort has been expended in determining this distinction. Some have 
sought the difference in anatomy, but the human organism is not essentially 
different from the animal (the human has earlobes). 287 Here one has the 
dark suspicion that the essential determination has not yet been found. It 
has also been said that the animal has the os intermaxillare [intermaxillary 
bone]. ""Goethe found this also in humans.""288 The truth in all this is 
that indeed in humans the feeding organs [Fref.?organe] are more recessed. 
These anatomical differences are not striking. What constitutes the human 
is what the soul places in the body, for example, the upright posture is the 
primary gesture of the human being. 289 The human being gives to itself 
its orientation in space, and this orientation is a matter of its willing. This 
willing to stand becomes habit, but the habit always depends on the will to 
stand. 
The human hand, the absolute tool, is entirely different from the animal 
134 
paw. 290 The hand is the element wherein one essentially recognizes I the 
human. The human activity reveals itself corporally in the hand. Gestures 
[of the hand] can be distinguished from idle, dormant expressions. They are 
expressions by movement, and through gesture the soul expresses some sort 
of affection, reflection. Gesture is different from the embodiment of feeling. 
The embodiment of feeling is supposed to be a sign; the bodily element is 
here only a sign whereby I represent myself. For example, the expression 
of anger is an immediate anthropological embodiment. But gestures as such 
are something different. They are symbolic; they reveal an action, but this 
[action] is not yet complete. Rather the soul only presents what sort of 
action it intends to commit. Gesture is a restricted action. But the animal 
287. [Ed.] According to Blumenbach the human being distinguishes itself from the animal 
in respect to its earlobes. De generis humani varietate nativa (Gottingen, 1795), §12. 
288. W reads: (bones in the upper lip).-ln accordance with his great sense, Goethe did not 
waste time on nebulous concepts; he has investigated this condition, compared it, and found 
that these bones also are present in humans. He discovered this at a churchyard in Geneva. [Ed.] 
Goethe, Morphologie, Werke 13, 184-6. Others, including P. Camper, S. T. Sommering, and 
J. F. Blumenbach disputed this, claiming that humans differ from other vertebrates by lacking 
an independent intermaxillary bone. See also Goethe, Berliner ]ahrbucher fUr wissenschaftliche 
Kritik, 1830, 52 f.; Goethe, Werke 13, 219-50. 
289. [Ed.] The upright position as distinctively human was asserted by Blumenbach, op. 
cit., § 17, and J. G. Herder, Ideen zur philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit, Samtliche 
Werke, 12 (Riga and Leipzig, 1784-91), 110-14. 
290. [Ed.] Cf. Aristotle, De Anima, 432alf; Herder, Ideen, Samtliche Werke 13, 137. 
160 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
passes immediately into action. The symbolism of gesture lies in a similarity 
to action--e.g., a threatening position. Many such gestures are not so easy 
to figure out, but we understand them immediately, for example, affirming 
and negating with [movements of] the head. Laughter is a human element 
that is modified in a variety of ways. The 'long face' separates people; but 
it is soon over, past. Throwing one's hands up in the air means something 
that goes beyond me; shaking hands, etc. 291 There is a great multiplicity [of 
gestures] and the connection with what each signifies is not always easy to 
say, particularly where finer organs dominate the discourse of gestures. 
More education and less use of gestures go together. The Italians have 
many antics. Gestures refer especially to face and posture. The educated 
person has speech, the absolute gesture. The ancients used to have masks in 
theater. With us much importance is placed on the so-called play of facial 
expressions. The calm expression in the face and posture is cultivated. Eye 
and mouth, particularly the mouth, is the seat of facial gestures. The mouth 
dominates the lower half of the face. Orientals cover the lower half of the 
face with beards; with us one can view the varied outlooks and musculature. 
The self-driven spirit has an elaborately composed lower half of the face. 
The statues of the ancients have been praised because they were naked, but 
only ten percent were naked. Their modesty covered this nakedness because 
it was not the expression I of spirit. Consequently the human being covers 
135 
itself and is ashamed of the purely animal in a beautiful way. Neither posture 
nor spiritual expression are lost with clothing; on the contrary, both gain 
much from clothing. 
Every human being has, either by nature or by education, a physiognomic 
instinct, and his judgment falls accordingly. This can be more or less correct, 
and any incorrectness can fall to the faculty of judgment or to the physiog-
nomy as such. The pathognomy refers more to the expression in the move-
ment of passion. Physiognomy considers the calm expression insofar as it 
relates particularly to the intellectual. Lavater raised the issue and sought to 
make stable determinations. 292 Consciously or unconsciously everyone lets 
himself be led by the human figure, and one's first judgment, which belongs 
to particularity, falls accordingly. One can look at a physiognomy that all 
the passions have engraved on a human being, but its truth is confined to the 
universal, whether a spirit has worked, whether its inclinations were vital or 
indolent. It has been said that humans in death revert to the physiognomy 
291. [Ed.] Similar examples can be found in Kant's Anthropologie, Schriften, VII, 301. 
292. [Ed.] Johann Casper Lavater, Von der Physiognomik (Leipzig, 1772); Physiogno-
mische Fragmente zur Beforderung der Menschenkenntni{J und Menschenliebe, 4 vols. 
(Leipzig, 1775-8). 
161 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
of childhood. This means: the human physiognomy is animated by spirit, 
directed by the indwelling activity of character so far as the latter has formed 
itself for life. The human being makes itself known through its action. The 
deeds make manifest what the person is. The person is his deeds. There 
is nothing else in him except his deeds; what he is he shows in his deeds. 
Physiognomy belongs to the external in general, to the corporal. The human 
being, spirit, is essentially for itself in its body, but also against its body. 'The 
inner and the outer correspond to each other' is an abstract proposition. 
The inner is character. The 'outer' of character is not the human figure, but 
rather its actions. 
With figure anthropology concludes. The totality is that the soul relates 
to its immediacy, corporeity, that the soul is sentient. This determination has 
its immediacy; in its determinations it is at home with itself. Further, the soul 
makes its feeling ideal, so that the soul, the simple-in relating itself to the 
136 
immediate as something ideally posited, negated, I superseded-relates only 
to itself. Anthropology considers the soul, spirit in its immediacy and the 
movement of spirit, the end of which is that this simple [soul] relates to the 
immediate in its affections so that they are transformed into the simple itself. 
(The soul is implicitly the concept, the universal simple self-relating.) The 
soul relates to the affections as to a simplification, no longer as immediate, 
but as a suspended simplification. 
Anthropology considers the immediate natural determination, corpore-
ity, according to the phenomena mentioned. We have not had to do with 
the corporal as material, because in the sphere of spirit matter has lost its 
truth. We dealt with the simple determinations of the soul that are simple, 
immediate, but not material. Only in the figure do we come to something 
that has existence for an other, for something external, and thus that is 
itself external. The soul is present in the immediate so that it reveals itself 
therein. This yields the determination that the soul expresses itself and this 
expression is to be comprehended as something in itself external that falls 
into the determinacy of materiality in general. The totality as figure is this 
simplicity with itself in immediacy. This immediacy exists as suspended; it 
does not represent itself, but is a sign. The soul is indifferent in regard to 
this immediacy because it has been rendered ideal. Thus the moment of 
immediacy does not disappear but is posited as indifferent. Through the 
fact that the soul is posited as indifferent to its immediacy, the moment of 
immediacy is self-posited as an external existence. In figure, the soul has 
external existence; it is the soul that appears so that it is indifferent to its 
eternality. For the sake of indifference the soul is external existence. 
162 

ANTHROPOLOGY 
The unfree man has slaves and makes slaves of others. The man who is 
inherently free lets the others be free. The soul that is inherently free lets 
the immediate be free as external. The soul is indifferent (relating to itself), 
relating itself to an other, but this other is ideally posited. The soul is posited 
as relating to itself in this indifference. The point of the transition is the 
simple determination that the soul relates to itself through the negation of its 
immediacy in it, that the soul I is not merely a being, an affirmative relation, 
137 
but rather that the soul is relation to self through negation and rendering 
the immediate ideal. It is therefore negative relation to itself (it is infinite), 
it is the self-relating, simple negativity. Through the fact that the soul is 
negative relation to itself, it is exclusive. The external towards which it is 
indifferent is not something to which the soul simply relates indifferently, 
but something that is excluded by the soul and is put in opposition to it. The 
external occurs as idealized. The soul is the being-for-self of the universal, 
the universal that is for the universal. 
The other determination of the immediate is that it is posited as external. 
Insofar as it has made itself free through the suspension of the immediate, 
it lets its immediacy go free out of itself, but as infinite negativity so that it 
excludes the immediate, it is not simply indifferent to it. The soul exists as 
the subject of the concept that is for itself, that possesses itself in determinate 
existence. In what is for the concept, the concept possesses its determinate 
existence. The universal that is for the universal, is-1. The I excludes the 
external from itself, and this excluded externality in its totality is the world, 
the totality of the natural soul. The natural soul in itself-the universum. 
The natural soul represented as external is nature, the world. Here is the 
awakening of the soul to consciousness. Here we give up the name 'soul' 
and have not yet to do with spirit, but with the I, abstract spirit. Soul, 
I, spirit. Animals also have souls but not consciousness. Existing freedom 
begins with consciousness. With consciousness there is the I and the world 
that stands over there confronting me, of which I say that I find it before 
me-the act of creation considered from this perspective. The concept is 
what has been explicated here. The explication is the withdrawal of the 
soul into its simplicity through the suspension of its immediacy, as we have 
seen. We know that our process thus far is one-sided. The I proceeds out of 
the natural soul; the I is the truth of the natural soul. The result is always 
this, that the I is the true. But the natural soul is the merely untrue existence 
that suspends itself in order to come to its truth. The higher [view] is that 
it is spirit that resolves itself on the one side to the I, and on the other, to 
nature. 
163 


PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
I The transition from necessity to freedom has this sense, that the natural 
138 
has been reduced to freedom as its truth. With consciousness we don't need 
to consider the necessary idea, but what we know directly from conscious-
ness itself. In consciousness we have first of all: I. What do we mean by I? 
This meaning must agree with what is determined according to the concept. 
This is the one necessary determination, and the question arises whether the 
term I is rightly ascribed to this level. 
The I is the universal, the simple: it distinguishes and also suspends the 
distinction, and has only the universal, the simple itself for its object. The 
I is wholly pure and empty, perfectly simple self-identity, entirely without 
determinations. (Universality is not a common element present in many, 
for that is only the universal of reflection. Rather we have to do with this 
abstract self-identity [Sichselbstgleichheit].) I am the universal, but when I 
say '1', I have myself as object. I am this movement in myself, being-for-
self. I relate to myself, universal to universal. There is a complete absence 
of difference, and yet there is a difference. It is a difference that is no 
longer a difference, namely a suspended difference. Thus we have correctly 
designated the determination to which we have come as 'I'. The I and that 
to which the I relates itself is also 'I'. But more closely considered, there is 
posited in the I a different determination. On the one hand I am entirely 
universal, on the other hand, when I say 'I', I mean absolutely only this I to 
the exclusion of all others. The I is the universal in an infinite singularity. 
The I is the simple [universal], but at the same time the I is the absolute 
singular. Thus there is difference present within it. 
The understanding holds that universality and individuality are opposed. 
However the I is the absolute example that the two are posited as identical 
and united in a single determination. The infinite is the universal. The I is 
infinite and at the same time it is this finite point. The differences are dis-
solved, even the highest ones. This return to self, wherein the simple relates 
165 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
139 
to the simple, I has thereby come about. The result includes the following: 
that the return to self has become simple by negation of immediacy and of 
the differences that emerged in [the self's] simple immediacy. This activity 
of the simple originated from the negation of the immediacy-self-seeking 
[Selbstischkeit], the condition of self-seeking. This implies the negation of 
the immediate; the immediate is something other than the simple. The soul 
in its natural condition is not true, and thus it must posit itself as it is in 
itself. The soul is immediate. This is the most tremendous contradiction; 
the soul suspends this contradiction. The soul is the negation of negation, 
that is, the absolute negativity, or what we call particularity, which is not 
an immediate sensible individual, but the single individual that is subject, 
and that we have in being-for-self [Fursichsein]. The relation of the univer-
sal to the universal, of the simple to the simple includes the negation of 
negation. 
This contradiction is not a disadvantage for the concept. [On the con-
trary] all speculative concepts contain contradiction in themselves, the 
developed negation, the difference that is brought into relation. Everything 
is a contradiction, but a contradiction that has been resolved. I am the 
whole, pure, simple, and universal, and at the same time I am immediately 
the opposite, an individual, a 'this'. I am the resolution of this contradiction. 
The simple abstract identity of the understanding is death. The vitality 
of spirit, the concept, is the eternal resolution of the contradiction that 
produces itself eternally in this resolution in order to become resolved again. 
The universal that has come to its existence in freedom is the universal in the 
form of universality. The I has the universal for its object, the universal is 
for an other and so has determinate existence [Dasein]. The determination 
through which it posits its existence is itself universal, since the universal in 
its determinacy is itself universal, the simple in the form of the simple. This 
appears to be a simple abstraction that is everywhere and anywhere. It does 
not appear to be so important. It appears that with the I-the simple root 
of our self-consciousness-nothing of importance is expressed. 
In nature we find plenty of universals-space, time, the process of becom-
ing self-identical, becoming as a universal, so for example, blue is a 
140 
universal- I but none of these [yet] exist in the form of universality. 
Universals [in nature] do not exist for themselves. Universal space cannot 
be presented. Only in the I does space come to that existence in which it 
has the form of universality. Likewise, the animal exists only as this isolated 
individual. It is not evident to the animal that its species, its substantial 
universality-namely being an animal-is itself this universality. There is 
blue; there are animals etc., but the form of their existence is only that 
166 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
of isolated particular facts, not the form of universality itself. Animals are 
capable of feeling each other, but they exist only as individuals for each 
other. Insofar as the animal-one such universal--comes to existence, it 
comes to [such an] existence [qua universal] in us, in the I. The superiority 
of the I lies in the fact that the universal exists for the universal. The I is the 
infinite simple for itself, however otherwise one may wish to express this. 
Consciousness includes this I, but the I is related to an object in general. 
The I is this difference in itself, this repulsion that relates this universal to 
the universal. In general the I relates to itself as the universal to the singular, 
the infinite to the finite, so that these [contrasts] are one simple unity. 
The relation of infinity to finitude appears to be entirely different than 
the relation of universality to particularity, but this particularity is itself 
the entirely abstract finitude, or singularity. Because it is entirely abstract 
singularity, it is also the entirely universal particularity, the infinite finitude. 
The finite explicates itself, for I am finite in many aspects. This is the expli-
cation of my singularity, but as singularity the explication is itself wholly 
universal. Everyone is a 'this'. Singularity, subjectivity, is itself this absolute 
negativity. Negation of negation, the return of universality to itself, [is] the 
self-equalizing of universality with itself, which makes the determinacy in 
which it exists into an indeterminate universal. Singularity is self-relation-
as negation of negation,-this is a negative relation, a relation of negation 
but [of] a negation directed at itself. The one [i.e., qua universal] relates 
itself to the other [i.e., qua singular], and both are the same. This negation 
is therefore relation to itself and thus itself universality. Thus singularity 
is itself [a] self-relation and therefore equivalent to universality; theirs is 
a I difference that, as soon as it exists, cancels itself. The I is the existent 
141 
concept, otherwise it never exists; as I it exists as free concept. All things are 
concept, but only implicitly; they do not exist as concept, as free concept. 
The concept exists in nature in the mode of externality. This reality is in 
space, in this wood, but this is not the concept that exists freely by itself. 
Such is the misfortune of nature, that the concept is not at home with itself 
in freedom, but has fallen into externality. In consciousness we have the I 
and relation to an object. We call this consciousness in general. The I is 
exclusive; this relation of the simple to itself which we had in the self of the 
figure, is exclusion. The I is the self-relating negativity, being-for-itself. This 
negativity is negative towards itself; negativity is relation to itself; thus it 
repels itself from itself, and thus there is posited the exclusion of itself as the 
negation of itself. Thus there is an other. The I relates itself to itself, but in 
such a way that this relation has the determination of an other, that is, an 
object that stands over against it. 
167 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
What we find is the immediate. The I in its immediacy includes everything 
we have treated as the soul in the Anthropology. The I is for itself, is free, 
through the fact that it excludes this immediacy from itself. The freedom of 
spirit means that it knows, it has this totality in itself, it acquires this totality, 
makes it its own possession; it means that it is its own representations, 
thoughts, determinations. But at first the I is the abstract; the I is the act 
of excluding, and takes what it excludes as the negative of itself. This 
is consciousness; an other is and has the significance of being something 
discovered [Vorgefundsein]. This determinate being is independent, it is 
excluded from me, and I relate myself to the existent. Its content is the 
determinations that belong to sense in general. Red, which we consider 
142 
only in sensible form, I is a determination of the soul. But that the red 
is something red, is the objectivity of consciousness. ""'The higher stage, 
since it has the preceding stage as its object, is here the determinacy of the 
soul, the negative of the I, the not-1."' 1 This totality-soul-is the content 
of the consciousness of the I, and the I is at the same time the relation 
to this object. It is for me. As consciousness I have determinate existence 
(Dasein); I have determinate existence, that is, I exist for an other, and 
the other exists for me. The being of spirit is the soul; it is something 
for me.2 
The phenomenology is the appearing spirit, spirit in its determinate 
existence; it must be apprehended in its contradictions, and thus this [con-
tradictory] determinate existence is only appearing spirit. I am free, and 
as absolutely free I am existing only through myself and not through any 
other. The other side of this contradiction is that I have an object opposed 
to me, my other, the excluded that [nevertheless] exists, and I relate myself 
to this object, this negation of myself. But relation means identity, [which is] 
community in the poorest form. This object is my determination; it exists in 
me as my representation, if this expression may be used here. It is ideal;3 I 
am the subject, and this object does not belong to itself, but to me. It exists 
in me. This is the contradiction in a doubled way: (a) The object exists, 
but as object here it is not independent, but essentially related to me. In 
consciousness it has no other sense. Whether it is otherwise still something 
[more] belongs to spirit. (b) These opposing determinations are in me, I am 
1. W adds: What the I has for its object is the soul; the lower level always becomes object 
for the higher. The object is the negative of the I; therefore, according to Fichte, it is the not-I 
(non-moi). 
2. W adds: something for the same; so it is consciousness. This means §414, that con-
sciousness is the standpoint of the posited contradiction. Therefore I have called this part the 
phenomenology of spirit. 
3. W adds: ideal, not independent. 
168 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
this free [being]4 and exist in relation to the negation of myself, thus I am 
outside of I mysel£.5 The object is and is not mine. I stand in relation to 
14 
myself, and, because I stand in relation to myself, I do not stand in relation 
to myself. Thus spirit is divided against itself, not reconciled to itself. The 
appearing spirit is the posited contradiction, the posited relation. 
Every relation is constituted by two independent [beings], and each of the 
sides has meaning only in its relation. The cause is a cause only when it does 
not remain by itself in relation only to itself, but refers to its negative, the 
effect. The consciousness which philosophy gives us, is that such relations 
where we have nothing bad, are nevertheless contradictory in themselves. 
Thus here I am free, relating [only] to myself, but in the very fact that I 
am independent, I am independent as a conscious [being] and this means 
that I do not relate myself to myself. The soul is this immediacy, where the 
contradiction is not [yet] posited. The second [moment] is always the posit-
ing of the contradiction, the difference in relation. The aim is to solve the 
problem of "'Consciousness"'. 6 This is spirit, the resolved contradiction, 
the contradiction as reconciled. Thus the way to reconciliation, wherein 
the I frees itself from this its relation to its other, from its unfreedom, 
is determined thus: the object undergoes an alteration, and the alteration 
appears to take place first in the object. (§415) This object alters itself so that 
it determines itself to become an I. This is the transition of consciousness to 
self-consciousness: I am related to an object, the negative of myself, but 
this object is itself I. 7 There the contradiction is canceled, at least on one 
side: the I relates itself to a negation of itself, but this negation is itself I. 
Self-consciousness is then itself still abstract; as self-consciousness it is still 
affected with the difference. I 
144 
Third, the I determines itself as universal self-consciousness. First it 
was I, being in general, abstract being. Second, [it is} I, an abstract self-
consciousness, that has an I that is likewise independent, for its object. I 
have myself in this object, but at the same time as personal, as negation of 
myself, and this negativity is only a moment. I have therein an affirmative 
relation as an I. Insofar as it is my negative relation, there are individuals, 
but insofar as the truth of my self-consciousness is determined as universal, 
I am in the third place: reason, a knowing of all content, knowing that it is 
mine, mine at the same time as this particular I, and knowing further that 
the particularity of my self disappears. I do not exist as this particular I, but 
4. W adds: free, in that everything is only ideal. 
5. W adds: to me, I am not free. 
6. W reads: of the contradiction [of consciousness]. 
7. W adds: so I am self-consciousness [Ed.] Self-consciousness is mediated by an other. Self 
and other are equiprimordial. See below n. 12. 
169 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
as universal I. Self-consciousness as inherently universal is reason. It is both 
the realization of the I and the superseding of its one-sided determination 
as relating to a being that is the negation of itself. In the process this one-
sidedness is suspended. This abstraction negates itself, negates this negation. 
But this is also the realization of the concept. 
The I = I as such for itself, that is, this freedom, this identity with itself in 
the ideality of its other being such that the other exists only as suspended; 
thus it is at home with itself. We have in the I simple idealiry, th~ ideality 
of other-being, and the id<~Jl~.o£.-tmse-tw-0. This is the concept of the I. 
The process of consciousness that we are considering is the realization of 
the concept. What is posited in the concept in its simplicity-the ideality 
of the other and the unity of the two-is the abstract. The reality is that 
each of these moments obtains a concrete meaning, that each of these 
moments itself is the concept as a whole. ~Thus in friendship the two 
145 
sides I constitute this whole.~ 8 Each [is] I, and I in such a way that the I, 
since it is not merely an unyielding individual but suspends and supersedes 
itself, has negated itself and has its conscious relation to itself in the self-
consciousness of the other. Each is therefore the whole, each is the entire 
concept of the 1.9 This is the realized self-consciousness, here all moments 
are the entire I. The totality of this totality is such that the relation of these 
two Is to each other is itself I. I am consciousness as the consciousness 
of the identity, the unity of these two. This reality of the concept is the 
aim that the I, the concept, constitutes itself as idea. 10 This universal self-
consciousness or reason, is the idea, the concept, that relates itself to its 
reality. This concept is the idea itself, and the whole is the unity of concept 
and reality, such that this distinction is suspended. ~he I determines itself 
(§415). The form of this determination appears as a change of the object. I 
am consciousness; the way my consciousness is determined depends on the 
object I have. I am a rational consciousness insofar as I know of something 
rational. Insofar as I have myself for my object, I am self-consciousness. The 
determination of the I, whether it is self-consciousness, appears in the object. 
The manner and way in which consciousness is determined falls in the 
object. 
8. W reads: In friendship and love, I exist not simply for myself but am in an other and 
yet independent. Here therefore are two, so that both are no longer the abstract moment of the 
whole concept, 
9. W adds: Each is an I, and each is [also its] relation to the other I. This is manifest in 
feeling, love, and friendship. This constitutes the reality of the I. 
10. W adds: makes, reason. The realized concept itself is the idea. The I is supposed to 
become universal self-consciousness, reason. 
170 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
If the object remained the same, I would remain a consciousness deter-
mined in just one way. If the truth of the world were merely sensible, I would 
remain a sensible consciousness. However, the truth of the world is that the 
sensible has an inner, its substance, the law, the universal; the species is the 
truth of sensible being. The object has different determinations, but these 
do not exist [haphazardly] next to each other. Rather the differentiation of 
these determinations is a necessary one. There is an essential connection 
between these determinations such that I the object alters itself in its essen-
146 
tial connection with its determinations and proceeds from its immediate 
(untrue) determinations to its true ones. 
Consciousness itself shows how the object is determined. The latter alters 
its determinations and this alteration is a necessary progress, a necessary 
change, a dialectical movement. The sensible alters itself, and the necessity 
of this alteration is called dialectic. Since the object necessarily alters itself 
and has the dialectical movement in itself, "'Consciousness likewise alters, 
and thus the dialectic is [self-]moving"'11, because the forms of conscious-
ness fall into the object. The progression is such that the I becomes real in 
its object, and has itself in its object (reality of the concept), and thus is 
I--idea. 
The aim of spirit ~s_ consciousness is to make its appeara.n~ntical 
to its essence, and to raise --its self-CertaintY -io _ truth. The self-certainty 
constitutive of consciousness in general [merges] with the reflection that 
something is in our immediate consciousness. I know something, have seen 
something, whether this content be an inner object or an external one. 
Consciousness is a knowing of something in general, and certainty means 
that it is in my consciousness, that this content is connected to me. I see this, 
and it is certain for me that it is. Consciousness means that I relate myself to 
an object, and this relation is likewise the certainty that I am so related to the 
object, because it is posited in unity with me, is identical with me. I know the 
object with as much certainty as I know myself. 12 This is self-certainty. This 
certainty is to be raised to truth. What is known thus is not yet true. This 
is the difference between concept and reality. Consciousness in its concept, 
namely I, is the concept itself in its free but yet abstract existence. Truth 
is the idea, that reality corresponds to, is adequate to, is identical with its 
concept, or that what is in the concept also exists. The object is the concept; 
the closest realization of the concept is self-consciousness, namely, that the 
I has itself for its object, the higher I truth, or reason. When we know such 
147 
11. W reads: also consciousness according to its determinacy is this dialectical movement. 
12. W adds: This is the immediate unity of the object with my I. 
171 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
things in life, as e.g., the light burns, so we also know that such 'truths' are 
indifferent to spirit, and do not deserve the name of truth. 
The existence that spirit has in consciousness is first finite, and finitude 
is formal. 'Formal' means that only the concept is at first existent to my 
consciousness. A thing, or a something, is not yet the concept. Thus what I 
know in my consciousness is only something, a thing, not yet the concept. 
Objectivity insofar as it is my own and I know it, is a determination of my 
consciousness. But it is still only abstractly mine; "'I do not yet have the 
concept of it"'. 13 
The defect of consciousness is that my object is a negation of me, that 
it has, so to speak, too much objectivity. In self-consciousness the object is 
the I itself, and here there is too little objectivity. In self-consciousness, the 
content is entirely mine, but the difference is not yet present and identity 
is predominant. 14 Both elements belong to the truth: the unity of con-
sciousness (self-consciousness) wherein the concept is I, and the difference 
of consciousness. The third is the principle of spirit, the freedom of spirit, 
intuition of itself, reason. In every object as it is, reason has itself and at the 
same time knows that it is object, that the object exists. "'The process of 
148 
consciousness is set forth in the phenomenology of spirit."'15 I 
Here we consider only the relation that we call consciousness. Beyond 
this there is nothing but the logical determination, the determination of 
the abstract I. Since spirit goes beyond this relation of consciousness and 
becomes spirit, its determinations become an entirely different type. Right, 
ethical life belong to further determinations of spirit; but also in these 
[determinate shapes] spirit is conscious. 16 Consciousness is everywhere, but 
it is only a form of spirit, one that is subordinate to higher determinations. 
Ethical life is the content, the law of willing reason. My spirit is this rational 
will, and when I personally act unethically, and am punished by the law, I 
am punished by my own law. I know of this ethical substance, because 
it is mine. I know that it is, and that it exists in and for itself. 17 The 
character of the spiritual is that it has the determination of being at once 
subjective-!, mine-and also objective-it is. In the relation constitutive of 
13. W reads: The further content of the thing is not yet the concept; I do not yet have the 
concept, do not yet have myself as concrete consciousness, but only the abstraction that the 
thing is my object. 
14. W adds: The I must be both I and object. 
15. W reads: There are three levels that we have to pass through briefly. In the Phenom-
enology I have given a complete account of this process of consciousness. 
16. W adds: But consciousness is a form of spirit in itself, there spirit is consciousness. 
17. W adds: without my contribution, eternal in and for itself. 
172 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
consciousness, the law is negatively opposed to me. "-'In ethical life this 
contradiction, characteristic of consciousness, is suspended,""18 but it also 
falls in this higher sphere that I know this suspension of the contradiction. 19 
In phenomenology we treat not only consciousness, but also the further 
content of spirit, so far as it falls into consciousness. 20 I 
149 
1. CONSCIOUSNESS AS SUCH 
First we have to consider consciousness as such. The concept is the whole, 
the universal, and the latter reduces itself to be only one of two sides, consti-
tutes itself an abstraction, as only a particular. In general terms conscious-
ness is (1) immediate sensible consciousness, (2) perceptual consciousness, 
(3) rational consciousness. 
Consciousness is the universal, but still completely abstract; [it is] the 
universal in its merely simple, immediate relation to itself. The concrete 
universal is self-mediating through particularity into individuality and sin-
gularity. The abstract universality is immediate; thus consciousness is imme-
diate, sensible consciousness. This immediate consciousness has its object 
immediately before itself as an existing object, as a thing, as particular 
object that exists on its own. We call immediate consciousness the imme-
diate knowing of an object. I am immediately related to this object. It is 
identical in me, its content is posited in me. Consciousness includes only 
the determination that the object is the negative of myself. Consciousness 
is this [negative] judgment. I, the subject, am this abstraction, consequently 
the object is also abstract and particular, is reflected into itself, it exists. 
That is, the object does not exist only in relation to me, but exists on 
18. W reads: The further content of spirit is distinguished by the fact that the contradiction 
present at the level of consciousness is dissolved, for example, in ethical life. 
19. W adds: But all this content occurs also in the form of consciousness.-coercion, 
ethical life come into my consciousness; I have then to appropriate these, to posit them in 
my determinate existence. 
20. [Ed.] The Encyclopedia Phenomenology has a different significance and function than 
the Phenomenology of Spirit of 1807. Hegel calls attention to this difference in Encyclopedia 
§25. The Phenomenology of Spirit ( 1807) was the introduction and first part of the system, and 
began with the most elementary and simple shapes of consciousness and proceeded to show 
how these developed into philosophical science. In the Encyclopedia, the phenomenology is 
already part of the system, and so loses its introductory function. As part of the system it is 
guided by Hegel's conviction that questions concerning concrete cognition in all the spheres of 
life 'are reducible to simple thought-determination&, which only get their appropriate treatment 
in the logic.' 
173 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
its own. It is not merely for an other, it is for itself, an individual. The 
object has no other determination than that it is. Individuality is the same 
as what I am, namely, subjectivity but as the negative of my [subjectivity]. 
The sensible consciousness is the richest of all. With all these senses we 
are open [to the world]; in every moment we have an entire great picture 
before us. But these riches contrast with the poverty of the determinations 
constitutive of [sensible] consciousness. This wealth is nothing more than 
that the soul, when it becomes I, excludes itself from itself. The soul includes 
150 
the totality of all determinations I that belong to sensible soul. This content 
is excluded, we have expelled the entire content of sentience. The I is this 
pure free [being] and has separated the content from itself. The I is exclusive, 
and what it excludes is its immediate natural existence, its soul and the 
determinations of this natural immediacy. 
The Kantian critique has grasped spirit as consciousness. It has to do 
only with "'phenomena,"'21 not with the philosophy of spirit. It deals only 
with the examination of the appearing spirit. Kant thus begins with the view 
that in our consciousness we have two elements, the one belonging to sensa-
tion, (subjective) and the other which is objective-the distinction between 
phenomena and noumena.22 My sensation (for example of hardness), is 
subjective affection, but the beginning of liberation occurs when, having 
expelled the content of sensation, I express it: 'This is hard, something hard.' 
The one content of these riches belongs to the soul, while the second is 
a determination23 of a different kind. To the latter belong determinations 
such as being, individuality, cause, and effect. These determinations are 
objective. The wealth of sensible consciousness is a wealth of sensation, but 
it is the poorest in thought-determinations because the I in its immediate 
consciousness is still abstract. Ordinary consciousness does not know that 
the object has the determinations it possesses as noumenon, only through 
and in relation to me. Ordinary consciousness does not know that the 
I is the determining [basis]. The object of ordinary consciousness is not 
consciousness itself, i.e., the relation of the I to the object, but only the 
object as such. 
The first level is consciousness in general which includes the immediate 
consciousness. There I relate myself to being, I know of being, I am the 
knowing that is, and this knowing is still immersed in an external or 
151 
internal I determination of sense. The object is an immediate being. In its 
first determination it is not yet the whole, but only the simple immediate, 
21. W reads: determinations of the phenomenology. 
22. [Ed.] Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason 8294-315. 
23. W adds: determinations of pure abstraction. 
174 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
only one side of consciousness. The whole is consciousness, the I in relation 
to the object. More closely considered, the object is a being, a thing, a 
particular. 24 The object contains the determination that it is something that 
exists for itself, is internally reflected; the being as reflected into itself is 
something, a thing, or an individual. Thus what stands over against us is this 
entire knot of logically different determinations. 25 It is something that exists 
for itself, thing and individual. 26 All other wealth [of content] belongs partly 
to our further determinations of thought, and partly to the multiplicity of 
sense. 
What we have to consider here is this fundamental determination and 
the further progression. "'We have to run through briefly the progression 
of this category."'27 The object is a singular. In our intuition this singular 
means a 'here' and 'now'. 28 Sensible objects are such that they exist for us 
through our senses. What determinations do such objects have? The deter-
mination of the sensible is in general immediate singularity. 29 The forms 
of this singularity are space and time; "-'the object [ Objekt, Gegenstand] is 
here I to be taken only as something external to the I. But the object is also 
152 
external to itself. The most immediate determination of the object is that it 
is."'30 This freedom of the object to be for itself, to be in itself this totality, 
it gains for the first time only when it is "'related to spirit. Space is the self-
externality of the object in itself."'31 That which exists in time is external to 
itself, but not at rest or quiescent. Rather its being is essentially connected 
with the determination of not-being. 32 This form of the sensible belongs 
more narrowly to intuition. What is present in the world, exists, but it is not 
something enduring. Rather it undergoes change and becomes other. The 
thing has many attributes; being other in itself thus appears as its attribute. 
24. W adds: but independent, outside of me. 
25. W adds: In logic we have to keep these forms distinct; here we do not. 
26. W adds: This is the first understanding of the objective, that it exists; 
27. W reads: concerning this we can be brief: (the progression of these categories, etc., 
belongs to the logic as such). 
28. [Ed.] See Encyclopedia §418A. 
29. W adds: plurality. 
30. W reads: These belong to intuition (where they occur).-With now and here, the given 
is to be taken as external to consciousness. The object exists, that is the next determination. If 
the given [object] is assumed to be present in space and time, it is taken as an object which is 
in itself external. 
31. W reads: related to spirit, raises itself to a higher freedom of spirit in itself.-Here it is 
now something external in itself because space is a being external to itself, the externality of 
the object in itself, so that there is an infinite multiplicity posited here and every aspect thereof 
is posited as independent.-
32. W adds: not-being. Being begins through not-being the other, and this being is bound 
equally to the determination of the not-being. For example, this moment exists only through 
the past of what preceded it.-

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
The thing is this simple self-existent, different from the differences that we 
call attributes. The immediate particular (not as subject) has its difference in 
itself. This difference, attributes, content are the sensible matter that belongs 
to sensation, the content of sensation that is posited in this form. Sensations 
are nothing other than the relation of sensible matter to the I. 
The determinations of sense are now posited in the I itself. 33 The I thus 
liberates itself from its immediacy, from its sense-predicates. 34 In sensible 
153 
consciousness we have already I transcended the sensible, for when we say 
that we have a thing before us, a something [etwas], these are thought 
determinations, qualities of the something that one can bring before one's 
eyes, but not the something itself. For the animal there is no something, 
no thing, no particulars. 35 The sense determination is for me, i.e., I do this 
to the sensible, by positing my determinations in it, the determinations of 
the abstract I. Reflection, which transcends the immediate, is at the same 
time the content of that which we have before us. We are reflected, and the 
object of consciousness is likewise reflected in its breadth. This is no longer 
immediacy, but relation, mediation. The sensible determinacy is posited, 
not for itself, but as belonging to the thing, as gaining hold by means of the 
thing, i.e., as having the thing as its bearer. The thing is thus not immediate, 
but mediated by the I, in the sense that I relate myself to it. 
The first determination is being, entity, something. But an entity [exists] 
as relation, because it exists through an other, and because we have media-
tion and relation. Consequently, the sensible determinations do not exist for 
themselves but by means of an other, and have their subject in the thing. So 
we have before us mediation and relation, no longer the immediate wherein 
there are two aspects; the one is the essential, and the other has its being 
only by means of the other. The latter belongs to sensation. Consciousness, 
since it has the preceding situation as its object, is here called perception. 
Consciousness has altered itself. The question is, whether the result of 
this alteration means perception. Perception means this: to exert oneself 
in examining an object, to take from it its truth, and not merely to know it 
[passively] as a sensible immediate. 
§§420-1 In perception we proceed from experience, for if one wants 
154 
to have the object in consciousness as I it actually is, one must not remain 
33. W adds: things exist; these have attributes, there is a sensible matter, and it is subordi-
nate to thought; 
34. W adds: The soul, as it has determined itself to I, has posited matter as suspended, as 
having no validity for the I. So it appears in the explication of the sensible.-In the relation, 
the predicates come to be attributes in the thing; the thing is independent. Thus the object of 
consciousness is determined in this necessary way. 
35. W adds: for these are determinations of thought. 
176 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
with the immediacy of consciousness but rather take the objects as they are 
mediated and reflected into themselves. The object as internally reflected (1) 
contains different determinations which (2) stand in relation to each other. 
Then the immediacy has disappeared, for since they stand in relation, the 
one needs the other; the one determination is reflection into itself, the other 
is a reflection into another. The thing is for itself, reflected into itself, but the 
attribute is a distinguishing feature or determinacy that has its inner reflec-
tion in another. For example, color is reflected not into itself, but in an other, 
[namely] the thing mediated by the thing, and the thing is independent. 
The content of perception is in this way a connection of determinations of 
immediacy, 36 [namely] sensation, and thought-determinations. [It is] some-
thing, and the type and manner of the relations of these determinations. We 
know that something is determined thus and so. 
Kantian philosophy has as its object especially the activity of the I in 
consciousness, not what spirit is in and for itself. Of all the determina-
tions [of the object] only the categories remain to consciousness. These 
determinations are supposed to belong to thought, to the I. Thus Kant's 
philosophy is called idealism, particularly in opposition to the Lockean 
philosophy. Here misunderstandings are prevalent. For example, 'I posit 
the object, thus whatever I have before me depends on my will.' This is the 
usual misunderstanding of idealism, which everyone rightly regards as folly. 
The things themselves in and of themselves find themselves just as we find 
them, and thus we are unfree in this matter. The one aspect of the object 
belongs to sensation, and is in this respect subjective, but only in the sense 
that determinations of sense in general are subjective. They are in us, but 
since we exist only as soul, so the determinations are immediate; we are 
so, and the thing is so, and not made so by us. The forms of subjectivity 
and objectivity have nothing to do with this. In sensation we are generally 
determined I so, and this is the aspect of our specific determination. That 
155 
we are determined in an immediate way is the aspect of externality in 
relation to our freedom, the field of external necessity and unfreedom. Here 
there is no positing by us. 
The other aspect is that of the category, according to which the object is 
a noumenon, i.e., a system of thought-determinations. These are relations 
of thought; consequently they concern us because we are thinking. We refer 
ourselves to the object, and this is the relation of the object to us: i.e., that 
which is not our own is [nonetheless] in us and thus determined through 
36. [Ed.] There are no additions or variants from Ferdinand Waiter between pp. 154-216 
of the German edition. The reason is that Waiter was unable to attend the lectures because he 
was called away from Berlin. 
177 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
us. We are active in these determinations, because they are ours. However, 
they are not arbitrary but belong to the necessity of thought. This necessity 
is the objective necessity as Kant also designates it. 37 It is objective in itself, 
without any contrast to the subjective. To find the noumenon requires that 
we are the determining activity, otherwise it is not possible to find it. 
This necessary activity is usually confused with arbitrary positing. [But] the 
positing is an objective one. This insight is very important, an insight 
that Kant opposed to Lockean philosophy and to the so-called ideology 
according to which in thought, just as in sensation, we are supposed to be 
only externally affected. 38 
Therefore this is the relation for Kant. His philosophy groups these 
thought-determinations under the category of universality and necessity, 
and designates both of these the objective, while that which belongs to 
sensation is called the subjective. This is correct; the contingent and acci-
dental are subjective. Universality is primarily identity with self. But this 
is not the case in sensation. Necessity is rather a judgment, a difference 
included in universality, namely, the essential inseparability of differences. 
Thus crime and punishment are inseparably connected, space and time are 
inseparable. Necessity does not reside in sense perception; in the latter there 
is posited only a connection of before and after, and this [temporal sequence] 
is completely different from necessity. Universality and necessity first exist 
on the first level of consciousness. 
That with which we have to do at present is the level of perception. 
Through perception we make experiences. Perception is the combination 
of sensible determinations with thought-determinations, i.e., experience in 
156 
general. Perception is not yet experience. Here we demand I that there 
should be a perception that is also universal, and this experience should have 
necessity. In experience both determinations should always show themselves 
as connected. And precisely this constitutes experience. It is essential to 
have this insight, that experience is not reducible to having sensations. For 
example, a narrative of particular sense perceptions is never physics. To 
physics belongs universality. If the sciences of empirical experience want to 
be only perceptual, they do themselves an injustice, for on mere seeing and 
37. [Ed.] Hegel refers to Kant's transcendental deduction, Critique of Pure Reason B 138, 
§§17-18. 
38. [Ed.] Ideology is the designation for a tendency of philosophical psychology, namely, 
the sensualistic philosophy connected with Etienne Bonnot de Condillac (1714-80). See 
Condillac's Essai sur l'origine des connaissances humaines (Paris: Editions Alive, 1998), 1777. 
ET. Essay on the Origin of Human Knowledge, trans. Hans Aarsleff (Cambrige: Cambridge 
University Press, 2001). See also Treatise on the Sensations (Manchester: Clinamen, 2000). 
178 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
hearing no science can be constructed. Science means to have thought above 
and beyond sensible particulars. 
The domain of philosophy begins wherever thought is present. The fact 
that thought is present in all empirical sciences authorizes and justifies the 
existence of philosophy. The dispute is only whether this or that thinking 
that is used is also correct. To determine whether this is so, philosophy must 
investigate thought-determinations. If the sciences speak of causes, sim-
plicity etc., philosophy critiques this usage. The entire distinction between 
philosophy and science turns on the application of categories. The natu-
ralistic use of the categories must be strictly and directly upheld, but the 
empirical sciences contain more metaphysics than they believe. So much for 
the general nature of perception. 
§421 includes the transition from perception to understanding. Per-
ception is the combination of the sensible and spiritual, of particu-
lar and universal, in general a mixture. This mixture consists of het-
erogeneous elements, and contradictions emerge between these cate-
gories themselves, contradictions of which the empirical sciences in 
their naivete have no consciousness. The development of these contra-
dictions in the categories belongs to logic. Here the contradiction is 
that we say (1) things are singulars, objects, and (2) the thing has 
attributes. These many attributes are the manifold aspects of the thing, 
that is nevertheless one. But the attributes are not independent, only 
the thing itself is. Thus the attributes or qualities become accidents. 
Nevertheless these are found only within sensible perception, not in 
the I thing itself. But what is found in sense perception is supposed to 
157 
constitute the ground of experience and to be the substance of the thing. The 
attributes must therefore be expressed as fixed, and thus they receive the dis-
tinction of being matters, particular stuff. All attributes thus become fixed. 
This is a [further] contradiction, because now the attributes are the enduring 
element and not the thing. Perception, since it contains both sensible percep-
tion and thought-determinations, shows itself to have internal contrasts and 
contradictions-thing, multiplicity, difference. Attributes, which are distinct 
from the simple unity of the thing, are taken by themselves as different, 
independent, and thus signify matter. 
The question becomes how this multiplicity relates to unity, how the 
one relates to the other (for therein lies the unity}. Unity remains entirely 
superficial, it includes manifold determinations. Philosophy in its entirety 
is nothing but the exhibition and clarification of different types of unity. 
One must know that matters are nothing [except] what one derives from 
perception. To be sure, in perception I have brightness, cold, heat, etc., but 
179 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
I don't have light or heat as something independent before me, but only the 
heat of a particular body. That heat is something self-subsistent I cannot 
experience. Plainly I encounter it only in a complex of others. These matters 
are determinations prepared through thinking, which representation con-
siders in isolation. It is said in physics that such assumptions are necessary 
otherwise no explanation is possible. But this is an inner assumption of 
reflection. Take for example, the perception of gold. Where one matter is, 
another cannot be, so the heating stuff is inserted into the pores. But this 
matter is again porous, so electrical elements are inserted into it. 39 Since 
these elements are bound up with each other, the unity need not exist, 
because where one matter exists, the other cannot be. But pores are merely 
thought-constructs; they are reflections that do not actually exist. This is the 
contradiction. The immediate consequence is that this sensible thing, when 
reflection is applied to it, is expressed as something that is not in itself-as 
158 
appearance. The I immediate result is that the object of perception is self-
contradictory, self-canceling, not self-subsistent, but only appearance. 
But we cannot give up the [idea of] self-subsistent determinacy. I have a 
being in opposition to me; I make myself objective, I posit it as out there. 
This is a thought that presupposes itself as the negative of itself, the not-1. 
This appearance is not the true, but nevertheless the true exists. The true 
is different from the appearance, but nevertheless it is. Here we have the 
following doubling: (1) this matter as non-being, as appearance; (2) the 
matter as being, which is different from the immediate sensible. This true 
is called the inner [nature] of the thing, and the other in contrast is called 
appearance. This amounts to a third determination (1) consciousness, (2) 
the interweaving of reflection in this sensible matter, (3) the separation of 
the inner from this matter. 
This consciousness is what is usually called the understanding. The inner 
is called the simple quiescent substance, but it is essentially connected with 
this appearance. The process was that the logical content separated itself 
from the determination of appearance. The result is the inner. Insofar as it 
is result, this inner of the thing is a determinate content. The inner occurs 
especially in the form of force and law. The appearance is essentially a man-
ifold, but it is reflected into the inner, an internal difference. This internal 
contradiction is a stabilized contradiction; it is a necessary connection, or 
a law. But this law does not reside on the surface of phenomena; rather it 
takes great effort to discover this law. These laws are present in phenomena, 
and phenomena must contradict them. They have at first a simple existence 
39. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia Philosophy of Nature §296A. 
180 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
as law; these laws are not behind the appearance, but rather direct the 
appearance. Nothing can happen in the appearance that is not in the law. 
Perception contains the contradiction; the law is the first contradiction. The 
two determinations are inseparable from each other. This inseparability of 
differences constitutes necessity. I Such a law is found in magnetism: where 
159 
there is a north pole, there is also a south pole. The being of the one is the 
being of the other; the one is immediately connected with the other. Thus 
the being of the north pole is equally its non-being, or the being of the south 
pole; the being of positive electricity is equally its non-being, the being of 
negative electricity. The law or essence that would not be in the appearance 
would not be a law or essence at all. What presents itself in appearance 
is the law; phenomena are manifestations of the law. Sensible existence is 
nothing but the self-externalization of the law. 
Thus has the object of consciousness determined itself; it is the logical 
advance of necessity. The logical development is from abstract immediacy 
to necessity; in this way the object determines itself. The object is rational, a 
determination and movement of its determinacy. The law is a particular 
one, and has another contrasting law as its condition. Thus we seek to 
comprehend the phenomenal world as a realm, a systematization, and so 
[to comprehend it by means] of laws. This is the third level. From this we 
make the transition in §423 to the concept of self-consciousness in itself, or 
for us, namely, that consciousness is essentially self-consciousness. When we 
consider what we have in lawful necessity, we have found two differences 
inseparably connected. The unity of these differences is not abstract or 
empty, but a determinate unity. Determinacy is difference. The concept as 
such is the unity of differences. Contradiction is thus included in this unity, 
but it is a suspended contradiction. This unity is entirely different from the 
previous unity of the multiplicity. Here there is a unity that consists only in 
immediate difference, which in its determination is this difference differing 
[from] itself, and is only this disunion, in which the difference both is and yet 
is suspended, so that the result is just this inseparability itself. Difference is 
suspended in unity, and the unity [is a unity] of differences that require unity. 
If we consider the previous standpoint, consciousness depended only on 
the I and an other, the negation of the I. Now we discover that the inner dif-
ference, i.e., the true I difference, is no difference. The understanding is hard 
160 
pressed to fathom that the difference is nothing independent. It is well to say 
that positive electricity refers to negative, but experience always presents the 
inseparability of the two. Rightly understood, experience shows what the 
concept is. There is also a level of the reflection of the difference as such; this 
shows itself also in space-where differences [exist] alongside each other. But 
181 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
also here [difference] comes to this form of true existence. Consciousness 
persists in the belief that both the I and the object are independent. But now 
it is implicit in the determination of the objective, of the object, and implicit 
in the determination of consciousness, that the difference [between these] 
is no difference; thus the difference between consciousness and object has 
disappeared. 
Since consciousness remains and is the I as this active excluding, it 
still has an object, but this object is determined otherwise, namely as 
immediately identical with the I. To be sure, the object is an other, but 
in such a way that its difference is no difference. For us this form-the 
difference that is no difference-is the truth. It occurs as a particular mode 
of consciousness among others (if we can call these modes). This is self-
consciousness, that I distinguish myself from myself, I have an object, an 
other, but it is immediately taken back that this is other. The object of which 
I know is not different from that which knows itself. 
2. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
§424 The truth of consciousness is self-consciousness. In humans this 
occurs in an empirically graded way. Children speak of themselves often in 
the third person. 40 When they conceive themselves as 'I' this is an important 
level [of development]. When Fichte's son said 'I' for the first time, he 
set in motion a great celebration. Thought as thinking activity is 'I'. It is 
immediately implied that the 'I' is for itself. In each object we distinguish the 
substance. Attribute is not a suitable expression for this. 'The body is heavy.' 
This is its substantial nature. With the designation 'attribute' we envi-
sion something murkier. Likewise with self-consciousness: this relation to 
161 
self is I freedom. Self-consciousness is the [abstraction] 41 of freedom in 
humans. 
I have consciousness; in self-consciousness I am no longer related to 
an other. I can withdraw my I from all objects and make myself object. 
The substance of self-consciousness is freedom, I = I. I know myself; this 
is a tautology; no determinacy, no distinguishing feature, is posited. This 
substance is still completely abstract, and this freedom is also abstract. I am 
40. [Ed.] That children often speak in the third person was noted by Kant, Anthropology, 
Schriften VII, 127. 
41. [Ed.] Gap in the original; completed according to W: Self-consciousness is abstract 
freedom in humans. 
182 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
not content to be only I, human actuality has to transcend and go beyond 
this [abstract] substance to realize it. The difference of consciousness is not 
satisfied in this [abstract] substance. There must also be a difference. The 
absence of difference in substance is its abstraction and deficiency. The more 
precise elaboration of how the difference is posited constitutes the further 
explication of the levels of self-consciousness. 
Self-consciousness is at first only identity. How can the world proceed 
from this determination [of abstract identity]? The task of philosophy is 
to proceed from something certain, and if anything is certain, it is self-
certainty. How the I = I determines itself negatively would be a logical deter-
mination from which we are exempted by our procedure. We come to self-
consciousness through the negation of consciousness. Self-consciousness 
is this abstraction, or freedom, but this is a completely formal freedom, 
because freedom, as much as it expresses itself as being absolute and uncon-
ditioned, nevertheless comes to be through and out of consciousness. Free-
dom [as unconditioned] nevertheless comes to be through an other, which 
is its condition. All abstraction is an abstraction from something, and this 
something is itself necessary for the abstraction. The abstraction cannot be 
without that from which it is abstracted. This is the idea that is concrete in 
itself, wherein the 'something' is already included in this universal. The idea 
includes this something, this distinguishing feature, in its relation to itself. 
The distinguishing feature of the something is no longer opposed to it. In 
what has been pointed out the one-sidedness of the standpoint is included: I 
=I. The I= I, since I it is abstract, is a form, a distinguishing feature, a limit; 
162 
consequently it is not freedom. Freedom is not something limited. Therefore 
we have to assume the self-consciousness in relation to the consciousness. 
Self-consciousness thus exists as the contradiction between itself as free-
dom and itself as consciousness. It is not yet free, for it relates to an object 
and is dependent [on it]. Self-consciousness is itself the consciousness of this 
contradiction of its consciousness. Self-consciousness is free in itself, and 
at the same time consciousness. It is entangled in this contradiction. Self-
consciousness is conscious of the contradiction of its consciousness. Further, 
self-consciousness is the certainty of itself in contrast to consciousness. We 
see that consciousness means to cancel and suspend itself, to turn back 
into self-consciousness. Consciousness is not merely for self-consciousness; 
rather in the concept of self-consciousness there also is the fact that what 
self-consciousness relates itself to (its consciousness), is a negative aspect. 
Thus there is still only the appearance of the contradiction, and the move-
ment of self-consciousness is to suspend this contradiction, as was also the 
case in the process of development of consciousness. More precisely, the 
183 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
development of self-consciousness has this significance: to be the suspen-
sion of the appearance of a contradiction. More closely considered, self-
consciousness is the drive to become what it implicitly is, to posit itself as 
that of which it is already certain. 
Consciousness is relation to an object. Self-consciousness-in desire we 
relate ourselves to an object, this is the aspect of consciousness, but at the 
same time, desire is not a theoretical, peaceful, consciousness of an object; 
rather it is the conviction that what for consciousness is an existent is at the 
same time implicitly a nullity in itself. Consciousness is the drive to suspend 
this appearance of its relation to an other, and to posit this other in identity 
with itself, to know itself as that in relation to which this object is no longer 
an other, but is suspended in self-consciousness and united with it. The drive 
163 
is an inner unrest; I am certain of myself, but in this certainty I there is at the 
same time a negative lack, and needs. This deficiency exists both in me and 
at the same time as an object external to me. This negation is a contradiction 
to my self-consciousness. I have the conviction of my freedom, of my infinite 
being at home with myself. This is the truth, my relation to myself. In this 
way it is certain that this object which remains external to me is no longer 
something independent, no longer a being over and against me. I have the 
certainty of the truth of my identity with myself in contrast to the appear-
ance that I am dependent. Thus I realize my truth. I suspend the difference 
that is present in my consciousness and satisfy myself in myself. This is 
self-consciousness as we have it in our representation. Self-consciousness 
is essentially a process initiated by the contradiction of consciousness that 
is bedeviled with a negation, with an other. This is the realization of self-
consciousness. Self-consciousness as such is an empty freedom. Through this 
process it gives itself content, coincides with itself, gives itself objectivity 
and makes itself actual. Self-consciousness proves its freedom in relation 
to its consciousness, and this is at the same time realization, since it gives 
itself an objectivity that is identical with subjectivity. Self-consciousness 
realizes the formalism of its freedom, the I = I, appropriates the implicit 
objectivity, and makes the latter its own. Such is the process and drive of 
self-consciousness to realize itself and suspend the disunion constitutive of 
consciousness. The drive is the certainty of its infinite identity with itself and 
the certainty of the disunion constitutive of consciousness, against which 
self-consciousness brings about its truth, [namely] to be identical with itself. 
As we saw, the existent shows itself not to be different; this difference is 
what consciousness knows. There is an object, but this object is something 
null in itself. Consciousness has only itself in its object; it knows that the 
determination of the object is only to be fo~ it. 
184 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
Self-consciousness has three forms (1) desire, (2) relation of mastery and 
servitude, (3) the determination of self-consciousness as universal. First, 
an object exists immediately for I the self-consciousness; self-consciousness 
164 
is an individual, and is confronted by an object in general. The second 
moment is that the object is also a self-consciousness. There are two self-
consciousnesses, both free, and free in relation to each other, but in such a 
way that they have not yet recognized each other, and so each in its own 
existence does not yet know the other as itself. The third moment is that the 
[mutual] recognition is brought about. Each in its personality is for itself, 
but at the same time in its conduct shows that the other counts likewise as 
a free self-consciousness. 
The concept of self-consciousness is at first immediate. The universality 
of the concept exists at first in the form of immediacy. The universality of 
the concept is itself only form-thus it is immediate. It is self-consciousness in 
its particularity and immediacy. It is desire, because it is this contradiction 
between itself as infinite certainty of itself, and itself as consciousness that 
is mediated in and by something other. I am free, self-consciousness in 
relation to my consciousness. Consequently this negation, which appears 
as an external object, is annulled. The lack in me appears as an external 
object. The latter is only something that is not an end in itself and has 
no absolute independence. The object has thus proven itself to be without 
independence in self-consciousness. This is the standpoint of desire. In desire 
there is drive, and drive still appears in the form of consciousness as object. 
We appropriate this to ourselves so that it does not exist any more and 
no longer is for itself. The object is posited together with us, but not in 
a chemical fashion. We are the enduring, abiding, self-preserving element. 
But the object is not preserved. Here the third is the first. Acid in salt is 
no longer present, no longer has the quality of being acid, but here [in self-
consciousness] the one is the free self that preserves itself, that remains in 
its identity with itself. The other loses its independence, it must subject itself 
and coincide with us. 
This is what occurs even in animal desire; the animal has the feeling that 
it can become master over external things. It does not believe in the being 
and independence of external things, rather it believes that they have their 
being relative to it. The concept of the thing is that it is something to be 
used, negated, worn out. Things exist; this is in consciousness, but even 
animals have the feeling that these things are not absolutely independent 
beings. Desire proceeds from this conviction, namely that things are null 
in themselves. If I believed I that things have as strong and independent a 
165 
being as I have in my self-feeling, it would be folly to apply myself to things. 
185 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
§427 The object can offer no resistance to this activity; I am self, I 
am free, and this is something entirely different than the being of external 
things. The progressive determination of consciousness is that the object 
reduces itself to appearance and to an inner in which consciousness finds 
itself. This is the negative nature of things. This concept, which was our 
concept, exists in desire. Things are implicitly such as to make themselves 
into [mere] appearance. Now I fulfill in them what their own judgment 
is. This negative self-referential negativity is freedom. This determination 
of the things is what they are in themselves, their end, their concept, their 
truth. Thus external things receive what is due them. Desire is the first and 
lowest level of self-consciousness (I am restricted therein; I cannot consume 
the sun). 
The movement, the process of immediate self-consciousness. Through 
the suspension of the external object, self-consciousness is at home with 
itself, related to itself. It has posited consciousness as identical with itself 
through the suspension of the immediacy of the object. The product of this 
process is that the subject has preserved itself, the object is suspended, as is 
the one-sidedness of the subject that was its defect. Self-consciousness has 
preserved itself. Preservation means its bringing itself forth by means of the 
suspension of negation. It has preserved itself only as particular, and thus it 
reverts to the determination that we previously saw, [namely] desire. This 
determination of being an individual self-consciousness is desire. Desire, 
considered in this relation to object and from the perspective of the object, is 
the negation of the object, the negation of a selfless, null, mere appearance. 
This being of the object counts in the concept only as appearance. There 
remains nothing of the object, it is consumed. Desire is in relation to the 
object self-seeking and destructive; it goes only after the preservation of 
166 
itself as a singular. I 
But there is a further transition. I, the self-consciousness, coincides with 
itself and thus is for itself an actual self-consciousness. For us this certainty 
was first of all. With this certainty self-consciousness is concerned with the 
object. Now this certainty of the unity of itself and the objectivity, exists for 
itself as a determinate [certainty], not only as the objectivity constitutive of 
abstract certainty. [However] in A = A, the difference does not receive its 
due, [for] the difference, as soon as it is supposed to be posited, has disap-
peared. The self-consciousness is for itself a unity that is also objective. The 
objectivity is posited in self-consciousness for self-consciousness. It is for 
itself [ ... ]42 and since now the determination of consciousness enters, the 
42. [Ed.] Gap in the original. 
186 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
object is posited henceforth also as self-consciousness. Self-consciousness 
is satisfied; it is for itself this unity of subjectivity and objectivity. In 
this determination it is two consciousnesses. The difference, that which is 
distinguished from it, is an object. But the foundation, the fundamental 
determination of this level is that the object is identical with the subject. 
It is identity, but no longer abstract identity like A = A. Insofar as self-
consciousness is consciousness, there is an object [ein Gegenstand] some-
thing that stands over against it, an object [ein Objekt]. But the object 
now has the determination of being identical with and inseparable from 
the subject, of being united with it, objectivity connected with subjectivity. 
The object is now determined so that it is another object that is likewise a 
being that is opposed to an other-the form of consciousness. This object 
has so determined itself that it is in itself subjective, i.e., a self-consciousness. 
The self is satisfied and free in this objectivity. Peace is established. It 
excludes its own concept, its own distinguishing feature, from itself, and 
therefore relates itself to a free object (§429). In this free object the I has 
itself for its object, and this I is at the same time a free subject, a person. 
On this second level of self-consciousness I have myself affirmatively in 
the object. On the [previous] level of desire, the determination of the object 
is negative against me, an other to me. Now the determination of the content 
is [another] freedom, I, so I have myself I affirmatively therein. The concept 
167 
of self-consciousness is now realized. There are two real, independent beings 
confronting each other. I have the [other] I as object. This infinite self-
relation that is the I, is my object. However, this perfect undifferentiatability 
[Ununterscheidbarkeit] is equally the most perfect difference. The I is an 
existent, another self and person. It is universal, and yet exclusive, negative, 
self-relating. It is a personal being, but the being of personality is the 
hardest. The I is impenetrable, to which no resistance is equal. In this 
identity, this undifferentiatability, both are nevertheless absolutely distin-
guished from each other. They are both personally, absolutely independent, 
and nevertheless they are for each other. Thus I know that the other is 
an I, but in its appearance it confronts me like a thing, like something 
completely external to me. This is the highest contradiction-the most 
perfect indifference towards each other, and [yet] perfect unity and identity. 
The suspension of the contradiction-for it cannot remain a contradiction-
is the process of recognition. 
§430 I am for myself, and the other is also free, an I. I know this, this 
is certain, but I do not yet know the other I as free, and do not recognize 
the other's freedom. To recognize something is to know it in its determinacy 
and development-that as concrete it is free (in itself). But such knowing 
187 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
requires that the other manifest his freedom in a concrete way, that his 
freedom be developed and made explicit. This development of concrete 
freedom, wherein freedom first becomes actual, is being for myself through 
the negation of immediacy. Mediation occurs through self-relation, that I 
suspend my immediate being and exist for myself through the negation of 
immediacy. If I am to recognize the other as free, I must have before me 
the other in his development and process, which is freedom itself. Then I 
allow the other to count as free, I express myself thus: 'that is free'. But the 
other is equally an I, and nothing counts more for me than it does for the 
other. Recognition is therefore two-sided, mutual. Mutual recognition is the 
realization and suspension of the contradiction that the other [appears] to 
be opposed to me as an immediate being, and that I likewise appear to the 
other as immediate. Therein I appear as something sensible, as a thing, and 
not as free. 
This contradiction is suspended through the negation of immedi-
168 
acy. I Through this negation of immediacy there arises a distinction of 
my freedom from my life, from the particularity that constitutes my self, 
from the immersion in the sensible, and from self-seeking. Since two Is are 
related here, the I is implicitly the universal. This universality is different 
from my immediate particularity and life wherein all these peculiarities and 
corporeities are comprehended. This universality that I have is supposed 
to suspend this contradiction, which as particularity is absorbed in desire 
through the negation of its immediacy. This is the general determination. 
A self-consciousness is for another self-consciousness (universality), and 
each is immersed in corporeity and is sensuous. Through such immersion 
in particularity they are distinguished from each other. The mediation is a 
process of the relation of two self-consciousnesses that exist for each other 
as immediate, and that do not yet recognize each other. 
§431 This relation of two self-consciousnesses is a struggle. I know 
myself immediately in an other, [but] I cannot know myself immediately 
as myself so far as the other is a body immersed in its desires and has a will 
and interests different from my own. I am directed towards the suspension 
of this immediacy different from me. My immediacy is connected with me; I 
am immersed in it, I hold on to my immediacy and am directly bound to it. 
Insofar as I am directed towards an immediacy, I am directed towards the 
immediacy of the other. But in recognition I proceed through the negation 
of my immediacy, I must also be recognized. This process must be mutual. 
In immediacy I am directed towards the suspension of my immediacy, not 
directly, but indirectly, through going after the death of the other. But at 
the same time I place my own life in jeopardy. I cannot will to give up my 
188 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
own life because it is my life, my body. Rather the negation of immediacy is 
something alien, an other opposed to me, and a process of being compelled. 
I coerce, but it is equally the case that coercion is directed against me. 
This coercion must likewise be voluntary, that is, I must voluntarily place 
my life in danger. My self-consciousness and self-certainty, my freedom-
and the fact that my life is here distinguished from these I provides proof 
169 
of my freedom-become thus uncertain, just as I make the life of the other 
likewise uncertain. But since I know myself to be free, the uncertainty of 
my life is posited in me. If both mutually annihilate each other, recognition 
would not come about, [although] the dead person gains freedom [in the 
sense] that whoever falls in battle, dies as a free man. But this would only 
show that both were indifferent to life. The superiority of freedom over life 
would be realized, but the basic condition on which recognition depends 
would be lost. 
§433 gives one solution, which is the proximate resolution of this 
contradiction. The free will is supposed to demonstrate in its determinate 
existence that it is a free will, so that it can be recognized as such. The 
freedom of the will is to be demonstrated, and the distinguishing feature 
of this demonstration is the placing of one's immediate existence in danger. 
The negation, placing oneself in danger, carried out to the end, is death. 
However, life, wherein freedom is supposed to show and prove itself, is 
also entitled to recognition. Freedom is supposed to have a determinate 
existence, that is, freedom is supposed to be recognized. But for recognition 
life itself is required; the one element is just as essential as the other. The 
mediation in which these determinations receive their due, is given in §433. 
One of those engaged in struggle prefers life to death, and gives up his 
attempt to prove himself as free will and to be free for himself in his 
consciousness. The other self-consciousness holds on to its freedom, to its 
free self-consciousness, and is recognized by the other, who is subdued. Thus 
we have the state of being recognized of a person who has placed his life 
in danger and shown himself to be indifferent to his own life, his own 
immediacy. He is recognized as free by the other. The other is the one in 
which the other determination-the preservation of life-is affirmative, and 
is posited not in a negative way, but rather, as an essential moment. In this 
relation both moments are posited, but in such a way that they are divided 
between the two self-consciousnesses, so that the totality does not exist on 
each side. This constitutes the relationship of mastery and slavery. 
This is the external manner in which states have arisen. The one custom-
ary way that is originally at the same time natural is [through] the family, 
namely, the patriarchal mode of living together. Although the [patriarchal] 
189 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
family is a moral person, it is nonetheless simply one person against the 
170 
others, for whether it is one person I or a particular self-consciousness 
is a matter of indifference. The original element is that they come into 
community, and the first way in which they arrive at community is through 
force. 43 (We have acquired our insights from the states; we ourselves would 
prefer to unite in an alternative way.) All states have originated in force, 
and this subjugation, domination, whose course we have seen, is thoroughly 
necessary, legitimate, and just. This struggle must take place because the self-
consciousness must be for another self-consciousness, and the individual 
must come into relation to another. This has been called a social drive, 44 
but in fact it is reason, the unity of self-consciousness. 
The fundamental point is that this unity must be realized, and it can 
be realized only in the self-consciousness of other individuals. The mate-
rial in which the I, freedom, can be realized, can only be another self-
consciousness. The latter self-consciousness is the reality, objectivity, and the 
externality of the I and its freedom. Self-consciousnesses, when they come to 
themselves, are free, but only implicitly. If they are to preserve this freedom 
in their relations, and count as free, they must both have demonstrated their 
freedom: they must present their freedom as actual and concrete through 
this struggle, and they must prove their indifference and preparedness to 
sacrifice their capability, their immediacy, existence. This is the state of 
nature. Insofar as self-consciousnesses confront each other as immediate, 
force is what counts. In principle, in themselves they are free, but they relate 
to each other only externally because they are not yet recognized. Their 
relation is such that they are merely immediate particulars confronting each 
other, alien in their existence, and force arises when the implicit necessity 
comes to me as something alien. Inwardly they are free, but they are not yet 
free in their relationship. 
The origin of states is nothing historical: to history belongs education 
and cultivation, which first occur in the progressive development of states. 
43. [Ed.] The claim that all states historically developed through force is found in nearly 
all modern philosophies of right. Cf. Hobbes, Leviathan, Bk Ill; John Locke, Two Treatises 
on Government, Second Treatise §103; Kant, Appendix of Explanatory Remarks on the 
Metaphysical Foundations of Right, Schriften VI, 370-2. 
44. [Ed.] For social drive, cf. Hugo Grotius, De iure belli ac pacis, Prolegomena §§6, 8 
(ET: The Law of War and Peace (Birmingham, AL: Gryphon, 1984)); Samuel Pufendorf, De 
Jure Naturae et Gentium, Lib. 11, Cap. Ill, §15, in dependence on Cicero, DeLegibus I, Kap. 
5. [Pufendorf, ET: Of the Law of Nature and Nations, ed. Leonard Lichfieldand Basil Kennett 
(Oxford: Printed by L. Lichfield for A. and J. Churchil, R. Sare, R. Bonwicke, W. Freeman, T. 
Goodwyn (and 7 others in London), 1710). Cicero, ET: The Republic; and The Laws, trans. 
N. Rudd, J. G. F Powell, and others (Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 1998)]. 
Hobbes strenuously disputed this thesis, De cive. 1.2. 
190 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
But as far as the origin of extant states is concerned, we discover that the 
origin includes a patriarchal element, and the other element that belongs to 
it is force. The immediate self-consciousness is self-seeking in its desire, and 
desire is directed towards its immediate particularity. Under such conditions 
struggle is justified. Reason demands that reciprocal recognition be the 
result. But violent struggle constitutes only the phenomenal45 I origin of 
171 
the state, not its substantial principle. On the contrary, whatever pushes the 
state towards the establishment of force and arbitrariness gradually makes 
itself superfluous through the development of reason. We must distinguish 
between the apparent beginning [of the state] and its genuine originating 
principle. We find the relation of mastery and slavery in the patriarchal 
condition. In earlier times those who were subjugated became the slaves of 
others. There is a [kind of] community posited here-the master has only 
property and the slave has none. The slave is not even his own owner. The 
slave is not his own, not free for himself; he has subordinated his freedom to 
his life and has no will of his own. He has recognized the will of the other, 
and is a thing for the other, and so belongs to the other-this is a community 
based on needs and their satisfaction. 
This is not a universality that would be recognized in and for itself, 
[namely a community based on] right or justice, but [merely] a commu-
nity [based on ownership]. The slave is a means, and indirectly for the 
preservation of such means slaves must be cared for; and thus the slave 
becomes a relative end. An interest to form objects arises which provides 
the possibility of satisfying desire. Concern to preserve this activity is what 
holds master and slave together. The slave's end is his own self-preservation, 
he has preferred life [to freedom]. The slave's direct end is an indirect 
end for the master. The feature of this community is that only one will 
is present, namely, the subjugation of the slave to the will of the master. 
This sort of community is an external universality. Concern for many needs 
introduces the understanding of having the possibility of satisfying the needs 
[via the slave]. This possibility [also] rests upon objects that produce general 
satisfaction, not just for the present, but for an extended period of time, 
thus land, agriculture, and the like. This is the manner in which universality 
intrudes into the sphere of needs, desire, of individual will, for the universal 
is the substance of the I. 
The master has his self-consciousness and his recognition in others, such 
that he has certainty; he is known as free subject. However, the intuition 
of this freedom in an other is still incomplete [because] it is a one-sided 
45. W adds: external. 
1 Q1 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
recognition. The master is known by the other as free, as independent will, 
172 
but he is known only by a self-consciousness in a formal sense, I not one 
that is a free or independent will in itself. Thus only a formal recognition 
is attained, but this is not a substantial recognition by an independent free 
consciousness as free self-consciousness [as such]. 
The slave suspends his inner immediacy, which consists of desire and 
of self-seeking; these are concerned only with his immediate particularity. 
With this suspension, the slave makes the transition to the universal self-
consciousness. The essential element of this transition falls on the side of 
the slave. Desire and the satisfaction of desire comprehend the whole of 
life, but desire has yet another dimension, namely it exists at the same time 
as will. The will as a desiring will is only sensuous, particular and self-
seeking. The bravery of the master, the freedom that he demonstrates, is 
only a demonstration at the level of the natural immediacy of desire, since 
the master puts his life at stake. However the master does not negate desire 
in its inner dimension, nor does he negate self-seeking or the particularity of 
the will. The suspension of the self-seeking particularity of the will occurs 
in the slave, who fears the master. This fear has an inner dimension: it is 
the consciousness of powerlessness, the dependence of my external partic-
ular existence. [Such powerlessness extends to] everything that belongs to 
natural desire and the dependent dimension of the human being. All this 
can be taken from me; my life itself can be taken from me. When I will 
this dimension and am immersed in it, I become conscious that it does not 
belong to my independent side, that there is nothing fixed or stable in it, 
but rather it can be made independent against me. This consciousness of 
negativity is freedom, and the fear of the lord as higher is the beginning 
of wisdom. 46 Thus the particular will toils in service of the master. It 
can endure all possible deprivations, but this strength relates only to the 
transitoriness of immediate individuality. In service the immediate will of 
desire and of satisfaction toils, i.e., the will purifies itself. This is what the 
slave has endured. 
Through obedience one learns to command. This means to acquire power 
173 
over the contingency of one's desires, and the I true command consists in 
what is just and rational-in such rational and just commands one receives 
obedience from others. [In this obedience] there is a negation of inner 
self-seeking, and with this negation of particularity the will emerges as a 
universal. 
46. [Ed.] Cf. Psalm 111: 10. 
192 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
The self-seeking will of the slave is thus checked and restrained. This 
restraint appears at first as something effected by an [alien] power, as obedi-
ence to an alien will. The restraint of the self-seeking will is obedience. States 
have started with despotism, tyranny, but this initial period is followed 
by a time where force makes itself superfluous. After Solon had given his 
laws, Pisistratos set himself up as a tyrant, but without overturning Solon's 
laws. Precisely because the Athenians under him had to obey these laws they 
became accustomed to them. Obedience is thus at first negative, but then it 
becomes something affirmative. The affirmative [element] is self-knowledge. 
That which is now known is something immediate and habitual; it no longer 
has the determination of being desire or self-seeking. Rather it is a self-
knowledge in which the immediacy of desire has been worked off. It is 
a self-knowledge in which the condition of sensuous individuality or self-
seeking is negated. In this higher self-knowledge there is a correspondence 
with the concept, namely the I = I. In the realization of self-consciousness, 
the other I has done away with its self-seeking. Thus the other is there 
not as a mere particular, but as a universal free [being]. On the one hand 
the subjugation of the will appears to be unfreedom. However this is the 
unfreedom of a subject that is itself implicitly unfree, and conscious of 
its unfreedom. True freedom does not mean that the arbitrary will is let 
loose or allowed free rein. The will in the determination of universality is 
now the other will, which self-consciousness obeys. The self-consciousness 
obeys another will, but this will is a free will liberated from particularity. 
Through obedience, the negation of the particular self-seeking will, the will 
achieves the determination of being a universal will. The self-consciousness 
now knows itself no longer as a particular and has the determination of 
universality immanent in it. To educate an individual means nothing other 
than to cultivate him through obedience, I so that he no longer obeys any 
174 
external will. A child still has the arbitrary will of self-seeking particularity; 
in obedience this self-seeking is checked and restrained. Beyond self-seeking 
there is the universal lawful will. Through obedience the particular will 
becomes this universal will. 
Likewise, peoples must first pass through a great oppression until they 
acquire sufficient power and ability to be free themselves. Then they know 
that they are inherently free. This is the determination to which we have 
come. This determination is again present as consciousness, that is, that 
another self-consciousness is object, but in such a way that I am free in the 
consciousness of the freedom of my self-consciousness, so that I obtain and 
preserve my freedom in the other self-consciousness. Thus in order for me to 
have self-consciousness, it is necessary to know myself in an other. I lose my 
193 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
self-consciousness in an other, but I also know myself affirmatively precisely 
in the other. Here the limit or restriction that previously was immanent in 
desire and self-seeking is canceled. 
Self-consciousness thus reaches beyond itself; it continues in an other 
self-consciousness so that there are no longer two self-seeking individuals 
opposed to each other; rather there is a single self-consciousness, and thus 
it is a universal self-consciousness. Insofar as it is a particular it is separate 
from the other. These abstract determinations are present in much more 
concrete forms. The substance of this self-consciousness is the universality 
of a self-knowledge that leaves behind self-seeking [particularity] and that 
continues itself in union with the other. This condition is found in love. 
I exclude all others, and precisely because I am this singularity, I am no 
longer a self-seeking I but a free self-consciousness that knows itself in an 
other, and since I know this, I know myself to be identical with myself. 
All the virtues have this foundation, as does love. Goethe says, if obedi-
ence is in the heart, love will not be far away, 47 which means that if the limits 
of exclusive self-seeking particularity are suspended, then self-consciousness 
[exists] in the determination of universality and as an individual is free. 
Obedience is the negative determination directed against self-seeking. Since 
175 
the human being appears to lose himself, I he cannot endure in his isolation 
but is in need of another consciousness. Thus he loses himself [in another]. 
But precisely in this condition of self-externality [Aussersichsein], of being 
outside himself, he gains his substantial self-consciousness. 
This [condition of self-externality, of being beyond oneself] is the condi-
tion of being recognized. In an ethical totality such as a family or a state, 
all are recognized. Thus the struggle for recognition has disappeared. In the 
family, the child that is weak and without desert is nevertheless recognized. 
In society all citizens are recognized and count as free. The freedom of 
every individual exists only insofar as he is recognized as free by the others, 
and the others have in him the consciousness of their own legitimacy, [that 
they count for him]. In a rightful situation, every person counts, because he 
allows everyone else to count as free. I am free insofar as the others are free, 
and I let them count as free just as they let me count as free. In love and 
friendship this [counting] is more at the emotional level, but in civil society 
I count as an abstract person without regard to my subjective peculiarities. 
This is the realization of consciousness as self-consciousness, and then 
the realization of immediate self-consciousness as universal consciousness, 
47. [Ed.] A literal citation from Goethe, Der Gott und die Bajadere, Werke, I, 274,11.40-1. 
ET: Goethe's Collected Works (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994). 
194 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
namely, that I as I absolutely exist as free, not according to my self-seeking, 
but according to my universal nature. My knowledge of my universality is 
realized, since I know the other as free, not only in the comparison my self-
consciousness has in others, but in the other I know myself, and in the other 
I have my self-consciousness concretely. This is the self-consciousness that is 
objective, the universality existing in and for itself. There is a mediation, but 
one that has suspended what was [previously] one-sided in the mediation. 
For the other self-consciousness is no longer other; I know myself therein by 
means of the other, and this mediation is suspended, for in the other I know 
myself. 
3. REASON 
The definition of reason is as follows: [to be] subject, but [without being 
merely subjective]. Reason is subject in such a way that it has an object 
[Gegenstand], but this object is the I itself. I This object [Gegenstand] is 
176 
an other, an object [Objekt], but this object [Objekt] is the universal that 
includes all determinations in itself. Consequently in all this content I have 
myself and am free therein. The object is universal and as such it includes 
the content of my self-consciousness, the subject. I am the certainty of the 
subject in its development within itself, such that this development of itself 
is objective, and that these determinations are determinations of my being. 
The things are just as my thoughts are. I do not have this certainty as a par-
ticular self-seeking subject, but as a subject that has raised itself to universal-
ity in itself. Spirit is nothing other than reason under the form of knowing. 
Spirit has objects, but knows with certainty that these objects allow of being 
known. The being that things have is not true; but I can penetrate their 
surface. When I recognize and know them, they are my determinations, and 
my determinations and my thoughts are immediately objective. This is the 
certainty possessed by spirit, when it sets out to know things. 
The spirit is first soul, then I. The final determination is that the subject 
is not only this particular subject, but the unity of both particularities-the 
subject and the object, or spirit. The I or the subject is thus determined as 
universal; the object is universal in itself, and this is its truth. Spirit knows 
this object does not merely exist but is rational. This relation has two 
aspects that coincide: I relate myself to the object, which is determined as 
object in contrast to the subject, for the object is different from its other. 
The substantial universality of reason has the determination of being this 
unity, such that in the relation of the subject to the object, the particularity 
195 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
of the subject in opposition to the object falls away. Thus the subject is free 
in the object. The object has the same content that the subject has. This is 
the freedom of spirit in general. The object is determined, and the subject, 
consciousness also has a particular content. According to its content, 
particularity is opposed [to consciousness]. But since self-consciousness 
determines itself to universality, it is thinking in general. Since the I has 
also raised itself to the form of universality by negating its particularity and 
177 
self-seeking, its content is likewise of a I universal nature. This universality 
of the nature of the object and of spirit means that universality is the 
concept, that its content includes immanent self-determination, which 
[in turn] includes reason and self-consciousness. This means that the 
content includes difference, that the content is in itself different, yet in this 
difference the diverse elements are utterly interconnected and inseparable. 
The rationality of the content as such means that the particularities-
previously subject and object, now particularities in general-are at the 
same time no longer [merely isolated particulars] and that the differences are 
equally identical. The content [still] includes particularization, but in such a 
way that the difference of particularization is only a suspended difference. 
The rationality of spirit is certain of finding its content in the world, of 
having nothing alien or impenetrable before it. Spirit says to the world: you 
are reason of my reason. 48 It knows that it encounters nothing in the world 
besides its reason, its universality, that its content is the object. From this 
perspective, [the certainty of] spirit is the relation of freedom [towards the 
world]; it is the certainty that the content of the world is likewise implicitly 
rational. The will determines itself; it gives itself a content, and this content 
is the determinacy of reason. Spirit determines itself, this is the content of 
the rational, and with that the content is itself also rational. The rationality 
of the content means that the content is the concept and that its aspects are 
only moments within a coherent whole, a system; that they are moments 
of a system means necessity. The content is, to be sure, determinate, but its 
determinacy is posited of through a diremption of the unity. 
Spirit is soul, consciousness, and the fact that spirit is these, exists as spirit 
for spirit, so that in all differences spirit preserves itself in the object. This 
confidence is rooted in its consciousness of its universal rationality. Spirit 
is the knowing of the totality, which is equally subjective and objective 
in it. Such differences belong only to the appearing spirit that has not 
yet triumphed over this object about which consciousness is confused. As 
rational, spirit is originally and essentially reconciled in itself. 
48. [Ed.] A paraphrase of Genesis 2: 23. 
196 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT 
The I is soul, and as such it is feeling. Since I am feeling, I am also 
consciousness and make this object objective, but as spirit I regard this 
object as a moment of the totality, I of the entire nexus which is reason, and 
178 
reason is my very nature. With spirit we do not begin with an immediate 
affection; we do not have an abstract external object, nor do we begin with 
self-consciousness, the abstract I = I. [Rather] spirit is the evolution of rea-
son, and this [evolving] rationality is what spirit is. Or rather, since reason 
appears as something out there [in the world], spirit is the consciousness 
that this world is rational, that spirit finds in the world its own thought-
determinations and the system of its thought. It is with this confidence and 
certainty of [the world's] rationality that spirit begins. 
197 


PSYCHOLOGY 
I Spirit is essentially infinite in that it has suspended the opposition. It no 
178 
longer has a limit in its object because it knows the object as rational. But 
spirit is also finite, insofar as spirit, as consciousness, does not grasp what 
it implicitly is, namely its reason. It has not yet made its reason into its 
object, does not yet realize that the world is rational, and has not developed 
reason as its object in its totality. The finitude of spirit consists in the non-
equality between what it is in itself and what it is for itself, or what it is 
[implicitly as] consciousness, and what it is explicitly as [its own] object. 
Reason is the substance of what becomes the material, the content of its 
knowledge. Reason is the difference: The one [aspect of reason] is that 
reason exists in the form of being. Reason is eternally at rest in itself, 
absolute truth, peaceful, unclouded clarity. The other [aspect of reason] 
is the [act of] differentiation itself, and the being of this difference, this 
activity, is knowing. By knowing we understand the pure form, the pure 
activity wherein knowing and its content are distinguished. Herein lies the 
finitude of spirit. 
[Ho~ever] the infinite form of reason is that both elements are implicitly 
identical. Reason is the activity of distinguishing itself in itself, of differenti-
ating itself into a system of totality, to I a plenitude where differences do not 
179 
become [utterly] free but remain moments in the unity. The differentiation 
is in the substance, but the leading [of difference] back to unity and pre-
serving it in unity is the form; this self-relating form is knowing. This is the 
particularity that in spirit is totality. Spirit in its difference is the absolute, 
highest difference, the difference in the pure form that relates itself to itself. 
But spirit likewise eternally suspends this difference. 
We first grasp spirit as immediate; what is true, is true only insofar as 
it returns to itself, and in bringing itself forth, spirit becomes for itself 
[returns to itself]. It is negation, self-determination, self-differencing, and 
the negation of this negation; this is the affirmation that has been brought 
199 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
forth as affirmation. Thus spirit must oppose itself to itself as soul; the 
final [phase] is the true wherein spirit first exists-to distinguish itself from 
itself, to differentiate itself as soul-spirit is true only as this process of 
distinguishing itself from itself, opposing itself, and positing reason as its 
own. Spirit is first of all immediate spirit with an opposition constituted 
thus: knowing posits the rational in opposition to itself; the rational is 'out 
there'. The aim of spirit is to posit this rational 'out there' as its own. It has 
the faith that this [external] reason is its reason. Its doing is to posit this 
reason initially distinguished from it, as its own [als das Seinige], so that 
the rational is what it brings forth opposite itself as its own. Here lies the 
distinction between theoretical spirit and practical spirit. 
When spirit begins, it is not yet reason conscious of itself. It is not 
cognition in the beginning; it is true spirit only in the end. In its beginning 
spirit possesses only the faith [that the world confronting it is rational]; 
it has reason confronting it, and regards truth as something yet different 
and separate from it. Thus arise'!> the theoretical spirit; it has a world 
opposite itself, but it approaches the world with the faith that the world 
is rational. Spirit is a drive that includes determination and content in itself. 
This content is reason, but reason has not yet taken shape for spirit and 
is still not yet posited as identical with spirit. An ignorant human being 
is [still capable of] knowing; he knows and yet in himself knows nothing. 
He is a contradiction, and yet because he is a unity he has the drive to 
180 
suspend this contradiction. An ignorant human being is theoretical I spirit 
that wants to become acquainted with reason, and to the extent that he 
becomes acquainted with reason, he possesses it. 
Spirit is objective reason, reason in and for itself. Now it is reason as 
consciousness, knowing, but the opposition has disappeared. Reason that 
knows [itself] is spirit. Knowing is the infinite form. Spirit is intelligence as 
knowing. The movement of spirit is thus: it posits its concept as identical 
with itself to make knowing substantial, to fill itself with reason, or con-
versely, to make a determinate existence into something known, something 
that has determinate existence and exists as reason. Reason, which is spirit 
in and for itself, and of which spirit is conscious in its existence, is the 
concept. Its [self-] knowledge constitutes the actuality of reason existing in 
and for itself. This is the highest mode of existence, the absolute form, the 
pure relation-infinite relation to self, the being-for-self of the universal, or 
the relation of the universal to itself. The reality of reason is knowledge. 
The laws, the ethical in and for itself, are reason that realizes ethical 
life and exists in the citizens. The latter are the matter-the material-
in which reason gives itself existence. Citizens exist truly only when they 
200 

PSYCHOLOGY 
fill themselves with the substantial. The law is inert without the subject in 
which it achieves actuality. The intelligence is the infinite form in which 
reason gives itself existence and through which certainty becomes truth. 
§442 The progress of spirit is development. Development is different 
from alteration or change. In change something disappears; an other is 
posited in its place, and both elements are opposed to each other. In con-
trast, spirit develops itself, and in this development nothing alien enters. 
Thought involves a change of representation, but this is merely a super-
ficial, external way of regarding the matter. Spirit develops itself; thus its 
particularity, limitation, and determinacy change, but spirit itself does not 
change when it advances, but preserves itself in the process. Spirit is the 
activity of producing, and what it posits is its own. When we consider spirit 
as knowing, then knowing in itself is identical with reason. In its progress 
spirit produces only itself in order to become objective for itself, in order to 
know, and I what it knows is its reason. This bringing forth of spirit is not 
181 
the doing of the particular subject, as if reason were a matter of its arbitrary 
will or its talent; rather the idea of the arbitrary will must disappear. 
This development is a bringing forth of what is in itself necessary. It is 
reason itself that undergoes development. Spirit has the certainty of reason, 
but this certainty is at first implicit; it must become worked out and explicit. 
What positing and producing are, appears likewise as an act of taking in, 
so that spirit is filled out in its development, so that the development-[the 
positing, the producing and the taking in]-is explicit for spirit itself. This 
is the first form-namely, that it is filled-that this comes about. But we are 
already beyond the opposition of something standing over and against us 
as a being. The two determinations are one and the same: spirit has the cer-
tainty of ~eason, and does not need to overcome either of the finitudes with 
which it begins. The finitude [of knowing] means that spirit is only implicit, 
that it possesses only the certainty but not yet the truth of rationality. This 
rationality is implicitly its own rationality. What is implicit is the inner, and 
the activity is to make it external, to set forth the development, so that spirit 
knows this implicit inner, and so that it is object for spirit itself. 
The implicit is the inner, and becomes posited for spirit itself. Being-
in-itself [Ansichsein] also has in itself the form of immediacy: what is 
implicit appears as something external. Therefore this rationality is the 
inner, but this is supplemented [suppliert] by the opposite one-sidedness, 
namely that reason is something given, something present in existence. If 
we start with the determination of knowing, this is the other side, namely 
that the development of spirit appears thus: spirit is something found, 
discovered, [Gefundenes], transformed into being [das Seiende]. Spirit is a 
201 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
being, an existent, but not as in consciousness; it is an existent with the 
certainty that actual being [das Seiende] is not a being [ein Sein], but rather 
has the determination that it is rational. Being can be filled with any possible 
content, because it is abstract. When it is so filled, it is concrete, reason itself. 
This is the sense of this development and the form that this advance takes. 
What happens is only a translation, the formal transition into manifes-
tation, that reason exists for me, such that I know about it, that I know 
182 
that it is, and the human being has the faith that reason is actual. I When 
he recognizes reason's presence he obtains truth. He has nothing else to 
do but to appropriate this recognition as his own, and thus he comes into 
possession of a truth that is existent. 
What is the end, the aim of this production? The knowledge of rational-
ity, that reason becomes known. Therein lies the universal end of spirit to 
be free, because it knows the objective world as its own, and thus spirit 
relates not to something alien but to its own [das Seinige]. The world 
stands over and against spirit. At first the world is alien to spirit. The 
highest end of spirit is to be at home with itself. Spirit wants to know 
the world, to know that it has pervaded the world. According to this end, 
we have to consider the activity of spirit, the moments of this process of 
liberation. This activity is process, development, mediation. We consider 
these activities of spirit only as moments and stages of this end. This 
determination gives the activities of spirit entirely different conditions. We 
know that we have understanding, imagination and the like. What is the 
end of memory? It is useful to preserve knowledge and experiences (remark 
to §442). This usefulness need not be denied; the use of this capacity is 
essential to us. But we have to consider spirit first of all for itself and indeed 
as intelligence; further interests will arise in the consideration of objective 
spirit. 
We have to consider spirit as intelligence in general, spirit as spirit. 
Here the capacities and faculties are not to be regarded as if they were 
present externally or in isolation, but rather essentially as determinations 
of this end: that spirit becomes rational knowing, or that reason as it is in 
itself becomes explicit knowing. Thus the faculties are to be considered as 
moments of this process [of cognition]. Philosophy is concerned to become 
acquainted with what is familiar; so here the faculties are to be considered 
according to the stated end. First we speak of intuition [Anschauung], then 
of representation [Vorstellung] insofar as it is directed at intuition; then 
we speak of the imagination [Einbildungskraft] as it is directed to the 
representing activity. The latter is altered by spirit. Next we speak of mem-
183 
ory [Gediichtnis], where this is directed to the representation I of images. 
202 

PSYCHOLOGY 
What is present in representation is transformed by memory. Memory is 
the transformation of representation. We consider all these activities not as 
they proceed outwardly, influencing this or that, but as moments directed 
towards each other, such that the development of spirit passes over from 
one activity to another, and so that an as yet unfree immediate activity is 
raised to a higher level of freedom. This is the sense of this advance, the 
end according to which we consider these activities. If we speak of spirit's 
powers we think of something isolated, by itself-the electrical power is 
completely different than the magnetic. But spirit is no [external] aggregate 
or collection. If we say activity, this is more correct, but the activities can 
be isolated again and held apart. Then they will not be considered from the 
perspective that the doing of spirit is a system of its own doing. In fact they 
exist only as moments in this system. This is the point of view from which 
we consider spirit. 
In the beginning spirit does not yet know that truth is its own. This 
is the theoretical spirit, but only in its beginning. With this beginning 
is immediately connected the process of making the abstract its own, of 
working up what it has received so that it becomes rational, and finally 
that it becomes concept. This content does not come into consideration, but 
rather the fact that it becomes conceived. 
The practical spirit is the suspension of the other one-sidedness. Spirit 
that has advanced to the concept, is free. It is a free intelligence that is 
for itself, that has itself in the concept. Thus spirit is will. Will is for itself 
and by itself, i.e., the content and determinations are its own from the 
beginning. Spirit removes from them the one-sidedness of being [merely] 
its own determinations, and spirit's doing is to give its determinations 
objectivity. · 
§443 
Only then does it exist as free will and objective spirit. Since spirit 
is that which gives itself objectivity, considered formally, this means that 
the determinations lose their one-sidedness as spirit's own, I but also their 
184 
status of being merely accidental determinations is equally superseded. Thus 
spirit achieves a form in which it is genuine spirit. This is the fundamental 
determination of objective spirit, even though for the present we remain at 
the level of subjective spirit. 
§444 Theoretical and practical spirit are not distinguished as passive and 
active. This distinction is a formal one. Theoretical spirit appears as pas-
sive, but it is also immediately active. Its activity is to cancel this form 
of immediacy and make these determinations its own. Practical spirit is 
also passive; it knows its determinations as its own, but these are at first 
contingent, this and that drive. Subjective spirit remains indifferent to its 
203 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
content and to this extent is formal. It starts with being. The content 
ascribed to this determination is not important [since] it is given [to spirit]. 
Only the objective spirit gains the content as genuine. As we will see later, 
the form becomes itself the content. Here theoretical spirit has the aim of 
comprehending the content, and practical spirit has the aim of coming to a 
rational content. These are the counter-currents, so to speak: the one is that 
what spirit knows is rational, and the other is that spirit gives its knowing 
immediacy and objectivity in general. 
1. THEORETICAL SPIRIT 
The first is the theoretical spirit. The intelligence finds itself determined, 
but this is only an appearance and not merely for us, but for intelligence 
itself. The world is inherently rational. I have to appropriate this rational 
element for myself and thus come into the possession of truth. First, it 
appears merely as an acceptance or taking in [of a given], but in order 
that this content be rational, the intelligence must work on and process 
the given [das Gefundene]; the intelligence must be active. The immediate 
intuition that one has of the world must be processed, it must be produced 
to rationality [zur Vernunftigkeit produziert werden]. The intelligence is 
185 
thus a drive, it is active and wants to satisfy the drive; I it wants to cancel the 
contradiction between the content that is in it only as a certainty, and 
the fullness of rationality. It knows that truth exists in the world and has 
to be discovered. This is its vocation, and what it discovers is rational. 
Insofar as this rationality is its possession, its thoughts are rational, not 
merely subjective. They actually exist just as they are its possession. (The 
intelligence knows that the world is inherently, implicitly rational, that its 
concept is to be rational.) It is only an appearance that rationality is at first 
something existing 'out there' and is not the intelligence's own rationality. 
This appearance is to be worked off [in the process of cognition]. 
The intelligence has a drive. There is a vocation in the intelligence 
which wants to realize itself. The human being has the drive to know, to 
understand. The intelligence is immediately the act of willing, and [what it 
wills is] that rationality be for it and be its possession. Knowledge is the 
infinite form, certainty. This form of knowledge needs to be filled, and it 
has the drive to become filled, to become totality, rationality. Conversely, 
this knowledge should be realized. The reality of reason consists in being 
rational knowledge. 
204 

PSYCHOLOGY 
As a rule we distinguish understanding and the heart; this distinction 
is an abstraction of the empirical understanding. When one appeals to 
experience, one is correct. For example there is a legal intelligence without 
heart, and a heart without cultivated intelligence. The empirical world and 
empirical individuality are caught in this difference. These are one-sided 
existences. Their ability to be is conceded, but it is another question whether 
this ability is the true. The truth is that there is no authentic higher cultivated 
intelligence without good will, and likewise no cultivated heart without 
intelligence. The human being does not act out of instinct, he is good 
because he wills what is universal. Universal determinations of freedom are 
not subjective fancies. The universal must be known and this is possible only 
for thought. Consciousness and knowing are present in the poorest action. 
The drive to recognize reason is a drive towards both rationality and good 
will. 
The stages of the movement of theoretical spirit are 
(1) Intuition, spirit in immediate determination, again as feeling. Feeling 
is subjective, and intuition is the relinquishment I of subjectivity. Spirit 
186 
makes the existent subjective, but this is not abstract subjectivity; rather 
it is itself rational and objective. Intuition is the immediate relation of spirit 
in its immediate determination; this is essentially a relation of spirit. 
(2) Representation in which the content of intuition is made subjective 
and inward, so that spirit simultaneously possesses and expresses this con-
tent. At this level we have the inwardness of the content, which is still 
conditioned by an intuition, such that the latter is necessary to remind 
me to subsume the immediate under my subjective representation. The 
other [element]' is the reproductive representation, the imagination. Spirit 
connects the images, brings them under its determinations, gives them an 
inner soul, so that the content of this representation no longer has the 
concrete in the immediacy of intuition, but rather the content belongs to 
spirit. 
This is the consummation of the distinctive feature of representation, [to 
be] a totality of representations that is itself only subjective. This [consum-
mation] requires that these representations be expressed and manifested by 
spirit. The word is this unity. Sign and language belong here. 
(3) The third element is memory. Spirit makes this relative unity into an 
absolute unity in itself, into an abstract unity; it immediately subjects this 
word, this intuition, to itself so that the meaning itself becomes the thing 
[Sache]. In memory the subject in itself makes itself into a thing, into an 
object of itself. Thus the subject in itself is objective, the substantial thing. 
This is the transition to thinking. Memory and thought are related already 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
in language. What brings forth memory is the principle of thinking, which 
187 
has to become rational. I 
A. Intuition 
§446 The first point is that spirit is again in the mode of immediacy, such 
that this immediacy is at the same time its own. As soul, spirit is naturally 
determined, and in consciousness it exists in relation to this determination. 
In feeling as spirit, spirit is likewise immediately determined; it finds itself 
therein. Spirit is aware that feeling is only immediate determination, and 
that this immediate determination is a lack, a defect. Spirit is a being at 
home with self; as such it is immediately subjective. However, the fact 
that it is immediately subjective is for spirit a defect. Self-feeling is the 
highest point of the soul's [development], but now spirit exists in the mode 
of feeling, and it is explicit for spirit that this immediate determinacy is 
only immediate, is only subjective. The spirit is feeling, is self-feeling, but a 
further determination is that it is this for itself, that it separates itself from 
feeling, which is for spirit a limit, one-sided, something defective. So far as 
self-feeling is for spirit subjective, spirit has a drive to take this restriction, 
this defect and to make it objective in general. In consciousness we began 
with an object, with an immediate determination of an objective; at our 
[present] standpoint the first determination is the immediate condition of 
the subjective. The I is self-relation and in the I the determination exists as 
object. Here we are in spirit; here spirit is as spirit only self-relating, existing 
abstractly in itself, therefore this restrictedness is something subjective for 
spirit. Spirit begins with the subjective restriction. This is the beginning, 
the form of feeling in general. In feeling, everything exists, everything that 
becomes representation, concept, etc. '0 man, out of thine own passions 
and feelings thou hast created thy gods.' 1 The entire matter [Stoff] is here, 
but it does not yet possess the proper form. The infinite form is knowledge, 
and knowledge in its truth is rational knowledge. This content which spirit 
possesses in itself belongs in principle to reason and has reason as its root. 
But it does not yet have rational form. Herein lies the possibility that the 
content of the heart may also be evil or bad. It becomes evil through the 
1. [Ed.] Cf. Aesthetics: 'For man does not ... carry in himself only one god as his "pathos"; 
the human emotional life is great and wide; to a true man many gods belong; and he shuts 
up in his heart all the powers which are dispersed in the circle of the gods; the whole of 
Olympus is assembled in his breast. In this sense someone in antiquity said: "0 man, out of 
thine own passions thou hast created the gods."' (Aesthetics, vol. I, 236-7). The difference is 
that the Aesthetics circumscribes this view by confining it to ancient Greek culture, whereas 
the Philosophy of Spirit seems to assert it without such restriction. 
206 

PSYCHOLOGY 
restriction, through some sort of one-sidedness that it establishes. In feeling 
there exists all the content of spirit, but in such a way that this content 
belongs to the nature of spirit itself; spirit is its own I matter. Ordinarily 
188 
one assumes that the matter is something externally given. 
It is customary to say that there is more in feeling than there is in thought. 
All contingencies exist in feeling; everything externally sensible belongs to 
natural immediacy, corporeity, to the immediate determination of spirit in 
which spirit does not yet exist in its genuine way. But this 'more' that feeling 
has is the temporal, finite, and the bad. So far as feeling contains the true, 
it has the genuine content [of truth] only through reason. Feeling has been 
purified from contingencies by rational determination and reduced to what 
is truthful in it. Spirit is feeling and it finds itself in these determinations. It 
is of the highest importance that I in myself, I as this particular, find that 
this truth is for me also as immediately existing with me, as being in unity 
with me. 
When we anticipate that spirit is in itself rational, full of knowledge, 
cultivated, its feeling has a cultivated content, its feeling is cultivated. In 
feeling there immediately appears what the human being owes to, and has 
acquired through, experience and reflection. So far one is entirely correct. 
The human being who in his feeling has the entire totality before him, 
and who sees rightly in his intuition, is to be called thoughtful [sinniger]. 
There is a rationality in feeling. But this felt rationality must be lifted 
up to consciousness through education and reflection-although it does 
not need to be educated to philosophical consciousness. There is no more 
thoughtful human being than Goethe in whom the idea of reason is the 
animating and ruling power; this is present in his immediate consciousness, 
but he has acquired it through education and reflection. A thoughtful human 
being will conduct himself sensitively in his feeling, and will make correct 
distinctions that others fail to make. Delicacy of feeling and sense are 
acts of distinguishing that require attention. Only a cultivated spirit has 
a cultivated feeling. All cultivation, including the highest education of spirit 
through knowledge, experience, and science is present in the subject, and 
also in feeling. Feeling for itself as such, where the content, the matter, 
is still only in feeling and has not gone through the further processing of 
spirit, I remains on the level of the category of immediate being. The content 
189 
is restricted, limited. Reflection is what first determines the sense. For this 
sense, [reflection determines that] feeling is in one respect essential, and in 
another, unessential. 
There has been much talk about the inexpressibility of feeling, of what 
exists only in the subjective mode of feeling. Language has for its content 
207 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
only the universal, the true, the concrete. What language cannot conceive 
is the trifling, the bad, the merely subjective, the abstract 'mine'. What is 
true in feeling is the rational, and what is rational can be expressed. Spirit, 
the intelligence as feeling, finds itself determined. Since its immediate deter-
mination is present to it, it immediately transcends this determinacy and 
likewise is immediately directed towards this immediate determination. This 
directedness is the simple identical direction of spirit to this determinacy. It 
is a recollection; the spirit, in this immediacy determination that is feeling, 
that exists as free, simple, infinite relation to itself, has withdrawn into itself 
against this finitude, limitation. Spirit is within itself; this means for us a 
recollection, a being-in-self, a being-in-self of spirit. In feeling spirit makes 
itself inward and relates to itself. This determination we call attention in 
general, the formal self-determination of the intelligence. The first abstract 
determination of the object in consciousness is being, this identity that is 
the I: this is what being means, its attention, its recollection, its original, 
entirely simple, identical direction to its determination [on the part of the I]. 
This direction is abstract, a simple direction of the intelligence towards itself 
and its immediate determinacy, a direction towards this identical that is at 
the same time attention. This inwardness, and its directedness to restricting 
itself to what is in it, to restricting itself to the present, to what stands before 
it-all this requires a cultivated intelligence. Then one allows the thing itself 
on which everything depends, to be itself. The intelligence has this intensity 
in itself. The imperturbable intelligence which is present in what is before 
it-this is the substantial relation, to hold to the thing itself-is opposed 
to having deviations [Heraussein] from the thing, is opposed to subjective 
whims and fancies. 
The direction to the determination is the self-determination of 
190 
the I intelligence, as yet abstract and formal, to restrain others and to con-
cern itself with the present and the determinate. This determinacy is what 
intuition contains in itself. This intuition has a doubling in itself, namely, the 
determination that in sensation we had as content [Stoff], and the various 
modes of this determination, constitute the differentiation of the inner sense 
and the outer sense. As immediate determination this content is present in 
its entire explication as nature. Insofar as spirit itself is soul in a natural 
way, the senses are in it, and this totality constitutes the determination. We 
have already considered the senses in their system. 
Paragraph §449 discusses what essentially pertains to this determination, 
namely, intuition. Attention is the remembrance of and direction towards 
the immediate, this self-determination. Since it orients itself towards this 
self-determination, it distinguishes this immediate determination from itself. 
208 

PSYCHOLOGY 
In feeling this distinction as such is not present. In feeling, the I and its 
determinacy do not fall asunder. They are distinguished only in recollection, 
a turning within that is at the same time a differentiation. This distin-
guishing is the negative, being-other, no longer as in consciousness but the 
abstract other-being in itself, the external in itself (more precisely space and 
time). Intuition is the going into self of the intelligence, orienting oneself 
towards this determination and also separating from this determination, 
projecting it in space and time outside of its inwardness. In consciousness 
we had the diremption into I and object. In consciousness, the object had 
only the abstract determination of being. Spirit is there only as appearing; 
consciousness is only relative; the reference of consciousness to the object 
is only relation, relativity. For this reason the object is only determined as 
being and for consciousness; more precisely as particular object, as plurality 
and multiplicity. Indeed this belongs to the concept, but it depends on 
how the unity of this [particular] unity and this particular multiplicity 
is determined. In consciousness, this generally exists only in an entirely 
general, relative way, [as] a particular content and manifold determination 
of objectivity I at first in immediate consciousness. In intuition the being 
191 
of the object is not only a relative one, the object is not only object. The 
intelligence as intuiting opposes itself to the object, so that the object is in 
itself an other. The intelligence is reason, the certainty of reason. What exists 
for the intelligence is immediately rational-in and for itself, not merely 
determined as relative (in consciousness the content exists only as opposed 
to me and relative to me). Now the intelligence posits the content as totality 
in itself, and removes from it this relativity, so that the content itself is this 
totality. 
In intuition the following are to be distinguished. ( 1) Real content, deter-
mination of the sensed as such, sensible matter [Materiatur], stuff [Stoff]-
these may also come from the spiritual. This stuff is at first this given. In the 
intuition it contains only the general determination to be implicitly rational. 
There is only the faith, the presentiment, that it is rational, totality. This 
is only an abstract rarionality, not yet posited as rational. (2) From this 
real the ideal is to be distinguished, space and time. The real appears to 
have priority over the ideal, the content as such over the form: space and 
time. We distinguish both of these in the intuition: the manifold content, 
and the content in space and time. That the distinction between real and 
ideal totality exists, is due to the fact that the intelligence, as intuition, acts 
initially as abstract immediate. Since that is the case, the rationality that 
occurs in this determination is itself still the spatial and temporal abstract; 
it is in itself only the yet abstract and therefore formal totality. Since the 
209 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
genuine totality is always present, the formal totality is also present, but 
only initially as the belief that it is rational, totality in itself. 
The content of the intuition is at first a felt content, a content in its 
contingency; only it is supposed to be implicitly rational. But the intelligence 
is active in this felt content as well as determining for this determinacy. In 
this determinacy, what is for the intelligence is also present in its determining 
so that it has shaped this content, and this formation is spatial and temporal. 
192 
This formation is still abstract; a formal I production of rationality because 
rationality is the first. This formation we call (outer or inner) intuition, 
namely, to have such content before one, [a content] that is no longer 
opposed to consciousness but is supposed to be totality. In this formation 
there is the belief that this content is totality, which, processed by the 
intelligence, at the same time includes an ideal aspect, time and space. This 
is the form and this form is the activity of the intelligence. Sight, the ideal 
sense, is the transition into this ideality itself-and intuition derives from 
seeing. This content is an external one, not only in relation to me; rather it 
is posited as external in itself. The intelligence is free, and its content is also 
posited as free and with it as totality. 
We have to consider more closely what falls to intelligence-space and 
time. Recently it has been said that one must possess the philosophical 
intuition that understands the intelligence as a totality. What one demands 
of the intuition that contrasts with reflexion and with the understanding 
is the following: In [studying] living beings I must have some intuition of 
life; in history I must have an intuition, an image of time and occurrence 
[event]. In intuition one has before one the view that the totality is included 
in intuition, that the intuition is [of] totality. The truth in this view is this: 
the sound, healthy spirit has the whole before it, whereas the understanding, 
in the vanity of its point of view, isolates and emphasizes only particular 
aspects. In contrast to such particulars one calls the whole an intuition, 
since one has the whole before one. The whole, the certainty of the whole, 
must always rule. The consideration of a single individual can acquaint 
one with the dimensions in a natural object; similarly, in skills a whole 
series of particulars are correct and completely necessary, but all of this 
must be related to the whole, because one has the sense of this whole, 
this totality. We call those examinations spiritless, which, when considering 
works of poetry, grapple only with these isolated particulars. One must 
feel all particular beauties and characteristics, and one cannot feel these 
in intuition if one has no knowledge of these, but these particular charac-
teristics must be grasped together in a single image, the whole. Knowledge 
becomes spiritually significant insofar as spirit is present, so far as intuition 
210 

PSYCHOLOGY 
governs I the knowledge of these particularities so that they are subject to 
193 
this totality. 
Poetic philosophical intuition occurs when all particulars constitute a 
whole, so that the substantial element rules and subordinates the partic-
ularities to itself. This sense of totality, this holding fast to an object in 
general, [in order] to have the certainty of an object in its totality-this has 
been rightly upheld against the merely critical analytical dismemberment. A 
sense is called healthy, sound, so far as it possesses the ability to distinguish 
particularities while holding fast to the substantial and only subordinating 
all particulars to the whole. In general intuition includes this totality. If this 
totality, so far as it is the totality of the content, is not yet developed, it 
belongs only to the sense of intuition. The other [point] is that this content, 
the external, which is external not only relative to the intelligence, but 
in itself, is equally totality. It is ideal and thus formal because it derives 
from intelligence. So it is posited as space and time. The intelligence expels 
this content; this content is for the intelligence that which is external to 
itself, and not only external to intelligence. What exists in space exists in 
juxtaposition, what exists in time exists in a before and after series, or, if 
simultaneous, differs spatially. Both are utterly discrete. Externality is still 
an abstract difference, not an objective difference. All heres and nows are 
like one another, the difference derives from me. The now is; thus it is the 
immovable, the always now of the present. There are infinitely many units, 
absolute separateness, but just for that reason they constitute merely a single 
identity. The absolute opposites, the abstractly opposed elements are thus 
united in an entirely immediate way. The here has no abyss around it, it 
is connected with others and constitutes an identity, an undifferentiability. 
There are points, but it is equally the case that since there are points, there 
are none. This point of time excludes all others, and precisely because it 
is exclusive, it is not exclusive, and coincides with all others. I can posit 
everywhere a limit, and equally there is no limit. There are differences, 
but differences that make no breaks and cause no interruptions between 
themselves. 
This is the activity of the intelligence, to bestow the totality of the concept 
on this content. The nature of the concept, the abstract rationality, is imme-
diately communicated by the intelligence; these are, in their determinacy, 
posited as external. The two moments of I discreteness and continuity 
194 
exist in inseparable unity in space and time; discreteness passes over into 
continuity and vice versa. Here we have an example of the concept in which 
one-sidedness is overcome. Space and time are different from each other; 
these are two different forms of the concept. This derives from the fact 
")11 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
that the concept in its externality is external to itself, and thus exists in a 
doubled way. The entire concept is posited under its own determinacies. But 
the specific forms of the determinations in which it is posited, fall apart as 
different. Space is the concept in the form of rest, the abstract identity of 
continuity. The totality of discreteness and continuity is posited under the 
form of one determination, namely, continuity. To be spatial and to endure 
spatially are, in respect to the sensible object, the same. The spatial is a 
determination of the identical self-relation and continuity. Moreover, time 
will come into the picture; time is the same unity in the form of negation, 
discreteness, the negative being of one against the other. In time the whole 
is posited under the determination of negation. It is exclusive, but in such 
a way that it is the negation of its other. The being of time is such that 
it immediately passes over into the negative. The present is being and the 
being of an other. Being, as negatively posited, is the past, and the negation 
itself is existing. Under the form as existing, time is the present, but under 
this existent form, it has the determination to become negated, i.e., future. 
The present is the simple union of being and nothing. One can only say of 
the present: it is, for what is past exists no more, and what is future does 
not yet exist. 
Space and time are the forms of the sensible, forms of intuition. They are 
not the real [element] in intuition, i.e. determinations of feeling; rather space 
and time are the intelligence as form. They are the sensible externality that 
is at the same time non-sensible, i.e. they are ideal forms and do not belong 
to determinations of feeling as such. This is the activity of the intelligence, 
195 
attention to self, the act of distinguishing that posits this content I outside 
itself in order to make itself free. This is the first form of the liberation, that 
it separates the content from itself. But equally, as the intelligence projects 
this content externally, it remains in itself. This is the other element. In 
intuition we are immersed in the content, and this immersion consists in 
the intelligence being outside of itself in its externality. This immersion, 
immediate union with the matter, is what one calls intuition in general. 
This means to allow the object to hold sway, to find oneself in the objective 
development of the object, to allow the object to present itself as nothing 
other but what it is. The inspiration of the poet is this immersion; the 
activity of productive imagination [Phantasie] is effective in this matter. 
The intelligence, as intuiting, is this immediate unity with its content, and 
being filled with its content. But the intelligence is the form of conscious-
ness; in this form the intelligence distinguishes [the content] from itself 
and is immersed for itself in the content so that this content is for the 
intelligence. 
212 

PSYCHOLOGY 
The other aspect is that the intelligence is the act of knowing. Intelligence 
as the form of infinite reflection into itself, remembers itself in this material. 
The intelligence awakens to itself in this material, and since the intelligence 
recollects itself in this material, the content is posited as its own. This is 
representation, namely, out of intuition to be simultaneously recollected in 
oneself. According to this determination intelligence is representation. 
B. Representation 
§451 The intelligence that posits intuition as its own, so that intuition, 
this content, is for it as its own, is representation in general. Representation 
is the mean (middle) between the immediacy of knowing, between thought 
finding itself immediately determined, and its freedom. It is the synthesis of 
both. The content of the representation is given, it is something immediately 
found [Vorgefundenes]. But considered according to its form the content 
belongs to the (intelligence). The intelligence, posited as such, is immediately 
infected with universality. In representation there is a sensible, immediate 
givenness, and the element of freedom, namely, that this content is my 
representation. This representation belongs to me; I have it in possession 
and am active in order to have this representation. However I have not made 
this content. The content possesses an element of I immediacy, givenness, 
196 
of not being posited through my freedom. This element is the outwardly or 
inwardly objective. Even if it were also in the nature of my spirit, it would 
still be something given, not yet produced by my freedom, not yet posited 
by my freedom. 
Representation is different from intuition and feeling. But it is also 
essentially different from concept and thought. It is essential to make this 
distinction in speculative philosophy. Most philosophizing means to make 
appropriately good and suitable substantial assertions; but to comprehend 
(Begreifen) and prove such assertions is another matter. In whatever is 
spoken of according to representation, the content is always a given. One 
reasons about God, right, ethical life and the like, but it nevertheless can be 
the case that these matters are discussed only in the mode of representation. 
These determinations about God are likewise in me, and I comport myself 
according to these representations; I bring them together and go further. 
But the foundations on which everything is based are presupposed and 
are represented. I have a representation of something; this means that I 
do not yet know the object in its specificity. Definition requires that I 
state the species, the universal, and also state the determinacy, the essential 
determination. In so doing, I have gone beyond the form of representation to 
213 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
the determinations of the concept. These conceptual determinations belong 
to the free process of thought determining itself, [whereas] in representation 
there is always the moment of givenness. In representation there is a foun-
dation that is present to me; this representation of God has been imparted 
to me, it appeals to my conscience, but it is always a representation insofar 
as it is for me in my thought something presupposed, something given. 
The following distinction occurs in reference to such representations: 
[the 'that' and the 'what']. God is such and such-which is entirely in 
accord with the representation that God exists-and only subsequently is 
the question addressed what God is. This distinction implies that I do not 
possess the representation of God. I contradict what I know, and instead 
produce a definition in order to know what this is. The representation is 
197 
not enough. On the contrary, the representation is I the criterion and rule 
for what I now represent to myself in the predicate, what I represent to 
myself as God. Representation [is] for me an internal or external given. 
Everything enters into my representation as a convolute, a non-structured 
totality. There it has the character of authority, [simply] because it is. We 
have now to consider the representation more closely. 
Representation is the content that was present in intuition, as mine, as it 
was in me. Thus it exists in the other form of one-sidedness, it is a subjective 
relation. In intuition I was immersed in immediate being, now I am in the 
disjunction that this content is mine. The representation is mine and has a 
determinate content, and to the latter belongs relativity and difference in 
general. We have to consider the representation in relation to its other, the 
intuition that is its immediacy. The first relation is the immediate relation of 
a representation to outer intuition. This is in a narrower sense a remember-
ing; something appears before me, and I know that I have already seen it. 
Second, representation is posited as relation in itself. It is my represen-
tation, and as [mine] it must be posited by me. This is the inner processing 
of the representation by me. The representation thus processed by me, is 
posited as a relation and more precisely, as totality. This is the reproductive 
imagination [Einbildungskraft]. I bring the representations into a relation 
that I put into them. This latter relation is the product of the productive 
imagination [Phantasie]. 2 
2. [Ed.] The term 'imagination' has two opposed meanings. On the one hand, it is a 
subjective power to reproduce, arrange, and combine images. This is reproductive imagination, 
which remains dependent on givens for the materials it reproduces and arranges. On the other 
hand, imagination is also productive, the power to create and form images independent of 
any given, to project what is factually unthinkable, to create and explore possibilities; in this 
sense imagination is the highest creative power of the mind. It is a transcendental power that 
both creates and re-orders images. Where English has only a single ambiguous, equivocal term, 
214 

PSYCHOLOGY 
This representation as relation in itself, must also be brought to intuition; 
it must be expressed, formal immediacy must be given to this representation 
of mine. But this intuition is an essence given by me; it is not immediate as 
something that has been discovered. This is the sign, the root of language. 
In the word, I give my representation the capacity to be intuited. This form 
of immediacy is a unity of a representation and an immediacy, an intuition 
that I have produced. 
The third is that I make this intuition itself, the totality of 
my I representation and the intuition I have produced, into something 
198 
inner. This is memory; in myself I give myself this objectivity. In word and 
speech, the meaning, the representation, and the intuition, the objectivity, 
are completely separated. [But] in memory these become one. The intelli-
gence, in the determination that its determination is at the same time both 
the content and the thing itself, is the transition to thinking; moreover, the 
objective, that which exists in and for itself, is equally the determination of 
the intelligence, and vice versa. Thinking is the subjective-! am free, but 
thought is also the thing itself. That the concept is also the thing itself-this 
must be posited and brought forth in the existing intelligence itself. Thought 
that conforms to the necessity of the thing is objective [thought]. That this 
[necessary] concept is also realized in the existing intelligence is the further 
development. The difficult and only interesting point is the self-reproduction 
of the intelligence in the concept of thinking. 
(1) Recollection (2) Imagination (3) Memory. Each is in itself relation, 
the totality of the concept. The intelligence, as positing intuition inwardly, 
posits the content of feeling in itself, in its own space and time, and so the 
content [of feeling] becomes an image. Image = when the given, which is in 
the form of immediacy, has a sensible content. The representation of God, 
right, etc., is not an image. However, God represented in human form is an 
image, a sensible intuition. 
Every stage of spirit is a special individual form and every stage con-
tributes to the concreteness of spirit. If one wants to speak of the concrete 
more determinately, one anticipates a form that is not yet produced but 
when it is produced, also appears in this form. We have representations of 
God, of the sensible, although the latter is not a content that is produced in 
this sequence. 
German has two terms Einbildungskraft and Phantasie. The reproductive imagination noted 
above corresponds to Hegel's term reproduktive Einbildungskraft. In contrast, Hegel uses 
Phantasie to designate the productive imagination (produktive Einbildungskraft). I have trans-
lated Einbildungskraft as imagination. See further discussion below, p. 222. 
215 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The image exists in a time and place, but when this intuition exists as 
an image, it is taken [abstractly] out of the space and time in which it was, 
and now exists in my space and my time. The intelligence is at home with 
itself in the intuition. The content belongs to intelligence as its own, so 
the image belongs to intelligence, posited in its own space and time. I can 
represent this image in any time. It is past, but I can represent it as now. The 
content occurred in a place, but now it exists in my space. The intelligence 
199 
makes the perishable I imperishable, it makes a mummy out of the past 
and preserves it. This event is, in the intelligence, imperishable, preserved in 
the time of the intelligence. The content that was posited in universal time 
becomes enduring thereby; what Mnemosyne3 does not record is lost. The 
image, torn from its space and time, is made abstract; its space and time 
are its content and connection with other things. The image is determinate, 
stands in multiple connections and is relative. When something is made into 
an image, it is torn out of all these conditions, out of the great system of 
the world in which it has its position as a member of this network and is 
considered by itself. It is supported [no longer by its context but] by itself. 
At the same time it no longer possesses the complete determinacy or the 
uniqueness determined by all points [of context] that are possessed by the 
intuition. Since the content is posited in me, this is a darkening, an effacing 
of particular details, for the intelligence is the universal that emphasizes 
the content over the infinitely plural singularities and determinacies. The 
content is distinguished in us from the time posited in the intelligence. In 
general we know about time, space, and about the filling of time and space. 
This separation of the image in itself, the separation of the content from 
time-this can be in me completely without content. Then one says that one 
is bored. Boredom is the consciousness of time when that which fills the 
time fails to interest us, when one has the consciousness of this empty time. 
As subject, I am also corporeity, and to the latter belongs changes and 
alterations. Life is not a peaceful duration, but rather a not remaining 
[the same] that is in itself change and process. I am naturally in time and 
have feeling, consciousness and intuition of this time. If I know merely 
of this abstract change and process, I know of abstract time-for time 
always passes away-the consciousness of time is present for me, and this 
does not itself pass away. If on the contrary, I am earnestly engaged in 
something, I know about the content and its own succession, not about 
abstract succession. Therefore the judgment whether time is long or short 
is in remembrance opposed to the judgment about time in intuition. A day 
3. [Ed.] Cf. Plato, Theaetetus 191d. 
216 

PSYCHOLOGY 
in which I have been occupied with many important matters and passed 
through many interests, appears in recollection to be much longer because 
it is a rich portrait of the content. The time that has become long to me, I is 
200 
in recollection quite brief, and a day utterly without interest is in recollection 
equivalent to nought. In my representation I have an objective spatial 
ground. When this is empty, then I am bored. Time and space are a drive in 
me; they want to be filled. The intelligence knows that time and space are 
only abstract, and when they are empty abstractions the intelligence is not 
satisfied; it wants a content, a filling. Image means that the intuition is mine. 
The intelligence is the active time of the image. The intelligence allows the 
image to pass, to disappear, or it can preserve the image. Attention is time 
itself for the content of the intelligence. But the intelligence is the 'in itself' of 
its particularities; it is the universal space. Since these belong to intelligence 
and the intelligence is the enduring universal, these its particularities and 
images likewise endure, and become fixed. The intelligence is the concrete 
universal, the universal that is particularized. The particular, posited in this 
universal, belongs to the universal and endures along with it. The retention 
of images is connected with conditions of disorder. This was the side of 
being [the ontological aspect of the image]. 
The intelligence is also existent; this is its natural aspect. Since the 
intelligence has its images in itself, they are contained in it equally as exis-
tents. This is the anthropological dimension [of the image]. This enduring, 
preserving, and reproducing are now determined differently than in the 
anthropology. Recollection proper includes the inwardizing of the image 
in the intelligence, not the disappearance from, but the complete immersion 
of the image in the intelligence and its connection with an intuition that 
belongs to me. The image buried in the pit of my consciousness is the uni-
versal image in contrast to the immediate image, the intuition as such. The 
immediate image is restricted to a particular time and place; in contrast, the 
image that belongs to me has acquired the determination of the universal. 
My bringing both together is the subsumption of a particular image under 
the same content, insofar as it is universal, a judgment, I apply my image 
now to the present. Then I say, 'I have seen it.' This means that what is 
past in the intelligence, I is now present. 'Have' signifies here what 'having' 
201 
really means, namely to possess. I have it as something seen; it is something 
that has happened and I possess it. 
Intuition is already my own; in it I am already inward. In immediate intu-
ition, I am outside myself, occupied with something that is not characterized 
as the universal. In it I am in myself; it is inward to me. The cultivated 
human being finds nothing new; it is only a recollection, a point of view 
?17 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
that he already knows and possesses; it has only been connected with a 
new relation. The intuition is for me already something inner. Conversely, 
my inner representation acquires a determination through this intuition, 
namely that my inner representation agrees with this intuition, or that my 
representation is proven in this immediate intuition. This external intuition 
is already mine, and my inner representation agrees with the intuition. 
This agreement is called truth. If my representation is constituted like the 
intuition, my representation is correct. In recollection I confirm my represen-
tation; it is not merely subjective, but has the same content that the intuition 
does. My representation is thus posited as true, is confirmed. This implies 
that for the inner representation the intuition itself has become superfluous 
because I possess already in my representation what the intuition can give 
me. I have all that I need in the representation. The intuition is to this 
extent dispensable as far as the intelligence is concerned. The cultivated 
human being possesses enough in the verified representation, and is no 
longer curious like children who need to see everything once again. The 
representation is now posited as separate, distinguishable from intuition. 
The intuition now falls away. The intelligence abandons the intuition. In 
recollection as such the representation is still conditioned by the intuition. 
The representation must preserve the determination that it is the unity of 
itself with intuition. Since the representation thus includes the determination 
of the intuition in itself, namely, the external, the immediate, the given, the 
intelligence possesses in itself the condition of externality. The immediate 
is in me, but as something that can be freely brought before me again 
202 
and expressed without an external intuition being necessary. I But one 
forgets something again if one has not confirmed one's inner representation 
through an intuition. That the representation is in me something external, 
immediate, this is a determination that is now supplied by the representation 
itself. One can for the first time repeat the intuition as it were. This is 
attention. 
Thus the representation is posited with the determination that it is capa-
ble of being expressed, and this ability is the reproductive imagination. 
The intelligence active in the image and in possession of the image, is 
imagination [Einbildungskraft]. There are three determinations in the imag-
ination: (1) The reproduction of images. (2) This connection is a connection 
posited by imagination; it transforms the content that is first given to it into 
a proper idea or representation; this is productive imagination in general. 
(3) Productive imagination gives the content the capacity to be intuited. It 
posits the completion of the process as intuitable, and transforms imagina-
tion into a sign-inventing intelligence. 
218 

PSYCHOLOGY 
( 1) The intelligence active in this possession is reproductive imagination 
that calls forth these images out of its inwardness. The intelligence is the 
power over these images, an independent calling them forth by its own 
power, without being occasioned by external intuition. That is, the occasion 
is for us merely an occasion; through this occasion another content is called 
forth independently. The material is the image, but (2) the intelligence holds 
these images together, it is the unity, the subject, the connection, the relation, 
that wherein these manifold images have their subsistence, it is their bond. 
Its evocation is a binding one, it becomes objective as the connecting element 
in this evocation. An object, image, intuition, is something concrete. It 
is present, it is one, it relates to itself and through its self-relation it has 
individuality. The stone, like the living, is an individual, a concrete subject. 
However since this content belongs to the intelligence, the subjectivity of 
the image is canceled, the organizing point is no longer objective, but the 
intelligence is the subject of this content, the content is borne by the subject; 
the particular soul of this content is killed, and the intelligence becomes its 
soul. This implies that the subject is the supporting foundation and binding 
tie of this content. Through this, I the representation (image) reproduced by 
203 
the intelligence becomes objective to the intelligence, and so the intelligence 
knows of the object it has reproduced. 
This process of determining and the relation of determinations of intu-
ition has been called the association of ideas. 4 Ideas are not associated; 
consequently these modes of relation are not laws, although much has been 
claimed concerning laws of association of ideas. A situation in which there 
are so many laws, and I am at liberty to do thus or so, does not deserve the 
name of law. The modes of relations which the intelligence applies are of 
multiple types. The next mode of relation is that that which is contiguous 
in space or which follows successively in time is reproduced by me. If some-
thing has no objective connection except a merely temporal one, the other 
does not fail or lack in reproduction. This is an act of association according 
to which the imagination focuses more on how this content is already bound 
together. The intelligence relates here passively as it were. But outside of 
this type of connection there are many others. The categories (universal 
4. [Ed.] Cf. Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, book 2, eh. 33, §§5 ff.; 
Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, vol. 1, book 1. In Germany the doctrine of the association 
of ideas was spread by Michale Hissman, Geschichte von der Lehre der Association der Ideen 
(Gortingen, 1770); C. G. Bardili, Ueber die Gesetze der Ideenassociation (Ttibingen, 1796). 
The laws of the association of ideas were thoroughly treated in the manuscript of the lecture of 
Flan (cf. GW 1, 588 f.); in this manuscript there was a debate with Hissmann (589). Hegel did 
not take up the concept in his manuscript, but the concept itself was treated under the rubric 
'the reawakening of ideas treated according to laws' (GW 1, 175, 1 ff.). 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
determinations) enter as further determinations, for example, similarity and 
dissimilarity. We can attend to this or that aspect of the content, we take a 
point of view, and a similar case comes to mind, or we pass over from this 
case to ground, cause, and condition. These are entirely different relations 
than those that exist merely according to the connection of intuition; the 
former differ from the connection as it is produced in the intuition. These 
modes of associations and relations are arbitrarily determined according 
to contingent, accidental ends. It is the passions, sensations, interests that 
determine and shape the connection of representations. 
The mental mood [ Gemutsstimmung] is especially a determining factor 
in the way representations are brought together. A serious man attends to 
the causes, reasons, results. [But] humans differ especially in the way that 
they bring representations together. A bright, cheerful mind will easily know 
how to gain something cheerful from everything; whereas a dark, gloomy 
204 
mind, when it considers things, will be attentive to defects. I Mental mood 
also plays a role in wittiness and jokes, where something is connected to 
a prior given idea that is quite heterogeneous in content and appears to 
be far removed from it. The calembours [pun] also belongs here; it is a 
completely different idea or sense that is connected through similarity of 
sound or of the word. A clever wit brings what is remote, but essentially 
and inherently connected, into relation; if the connection is superficial, so 
is the wit. The facility with which the pun comes to mind, the suddenness 
with which it strikes one, are ways human beings are especially different; 
this is a very wide field of differences which are entirely accidental and con-
tingent. Passions, deeper interests are essential elements in this connection. 
A person who is consumed by a passion finds only references to his passion 
everywhere and in everything. This is the association of ideas in general. 
More precisely, what is to be noted concerning this association is that 
one idea is bound to another by a condition that constitutes the connection, 
a common bond, between them. The connection is their unity, universality 
as such. In the case of concrete objects it is possible to make a transition to 
countless others; a concrete object (the image) has a mass of aspects from 
which a transition to other aspects is possible. What concerns us here is 
only the bond, the connection between the objects. In this connection the 
intelligence singles out, emphasizes, and lays hold of one particular aspect. 
The intelligence is attentive to the images that are present before it, but since 
it is the subject of this content, the content itself is no longer internally con-
nected; rather, the intelligence itself holds it together, and can equally allow 
it to fall apart. The intelligence can pull apart the concrete image, and since 
it thus dissolves the concrete images, it has particular determinations before 
220 

PSYCHOLOGY 
itself, and so one particular representation is singled out for emphasis, which 
the intelligence makes into the connection with another representation. This 
attention to one determination is abstraction, or the method of forming 
universal representations. This universal, since we called it the associating 
link, appears first as the connecting element, the universal common to both 
[representations]. The formation of abstract ideas is immediately connected 
with this act of association. I The dissolution and destruction of the image 
205 
of intuition, and the attention of the intelligence to isolated particulars, are 
immediately connected with this abstracting activity of association. 
The intelligence isolates, singles out a particular; it abstracts. This act 
of isolation constitutes abstraction. The isolated factor, (e.g., the yellow 
of the gold) is posited as self-relating. The yellow of the gold is tied to 
a specific gravity. The intelligence singles out this yellow that in fact is 
tied to and bound up with other features; consequently this singling out 
isolates the yellow, and constitutes it as [abstractly] self-relating (the yellow 
is only as yellow). The determination thus becomes universal, an abstract 
representation. The content is taken from the given, but the form is a 
process of analysis, the determination is isolated (the concrete unity is 
suspended), self-related, and with this, made abstract. What gets connected 
are therefore abstract representations in general. Thus abstraction and 
association go together. There is a subsumption of many representations 
under one that appears as the tie between the others. The subsumption 
is an activity of judgment that proceeds from the universal and posits the 
particular in the universal. This is the imagination, and this reproduction is 
essentially a connecting, associating imagination [Einbildungskraft]. In this 
connecting and associating imagination there are [acts of] abstraction and 
subsumption. The act of subsumption is merely a superficial connection; 
the content appears as the same, it is merely brought into a different con-
nection. The determination that I single out is its own; that through which 
it is connected is the proper determination of the content. The substantial 
[act of] connection is productive imagination, which can be symbolizing, 
allegorizing, or poetic. The intelligence as productive imagination is the 
power over this stuff, this material, the storehouse of representations and 
images. This possession the intelligence can use according to its own proper 
determination and through this material it can make its own representations 
knowable, impressionable. 
The formation of representation as such in and from images. Representa-
tion is the general name for the fact that the object is mine, in my possession, 
and that I am the subject of the object. Image is also a representation but 
the I representation is an abstract content, a content in the form of 
206 
??1 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
universality. Image in contrast is the concrete external reality-if image 
and representation are supposed to be distinguished. What sort of relation 
do these two have to each other-the singling out of particular images in 
contrast to the totality of the image? The determination is: the image is an 
externality in contrast to the specific feature of the intelligence; with this, 
the image is the non-essential in contrast to the construct of the intelligence. 
The construct produced by the intelligence and belonging to it is the sub-
stantial element in contrast to the particularities of the image, and this given 
manifold is only material that can be used by the intelligence. This is the 
relation of the substantial product of the intelligence to the matter itself. 
It is the activity of intelligence that cancels this differentiation, posits it as 
identical, and gives to its abstract inner peculiar content this externality and 
presentation that befits the image. Thus the imagination [Einbildungskraft] 
is productive imagination, a free connecting of representations, a presen-
tation that connects the image to the explication of its proper sense-its 
proper sense is the universal-as processed representation. 
The essential element is whatever constitutes the true and proper content, 
for whose expression and explication the intelligence employs images. It is 
driven to make it imaginable through the application of the given material. 
We have two elements, the proper construct of the intelligence or the 
universal, and the given, the particular, the image. The former is the inner, 
substantial, the essential, and the latter is the sense. There is a dual content: 
(1) the significance, the sense, the substantial and essential; (2) what has 
no sense for itself, what should only give the significance, and is used only 
for the explication of the significance, namely the symbolizing imagination. 
The intelligence forms and shapes the given material-reproductive imag-
ination. The intelligence imagines its own peculiar characteristic in this at 
first merely given material; in these images it obtains its inwardness. Thus 
intelligence is productive imagination [produktive Einbildungskraft]. The 
preceding was the reproductive imagination, the evocation of images out 
of myself. The productive [imagination] images the universal; the pictorial-
207 
figurative [imagination] receives from the intelligence I a soul, the signifi-
cance; the sense, the image for itself no longer counts. 
Symbol is an image, the content of an intuition, but it no longer has a 
simple, natural sense; rather it has a second sense. The one is the immediate 
sense of intuition, the second is the [symbolic] sense. In the symbol as such, 
the intuition as such according to its proper essential content, is the same as 
what the meaning, the sense is. The symbol is the following: the intelligence 
singles out the essential, the substantial; this universal needs an intuition to 
represent itself. Symbolizing belongs to poetic productive imagination and 
222 

PSYCHOLOGY 
art generally. Speaking is already essentially a symbolizing action. The eagle 
for example is a symbol of strength. The soul of this intuition is strength; 
the eagle is merely an example [Beispiel], a by-play [Beiherspielendes]. (This 
expression is connected to the disposition of the German language towards 
thinking. The concrete image counts as a by-play on what it is about, 
namely the [abstract] universal sense.) The immediate intuition is used only 
as material. The intuition is merely the housing for the psychic sense, the 
inner. In Aesop's Fables5 there is an intuition of nature, a story to the effect 
that the raven or the fox does something according to its [natural] instinct or 
manner that can occur [only] contingently according to the circumstances 
of the animal. For example, the eagle carries coal to its nest. Therein a 
universal is projected, a universal meaning (the ravens cry out when they 
see something-on this point the well-known fable depends). Such natural 
phenomena, nature stories, that can occur contingently, are, in Aesop's 
Fables, taken in such a universal sense-not as in modern fables. 
Allegory is as it were a detailed, complex symbol; it is prosaic. A general 
representation, e.g., justice, and its explication, is contrived by various 
and sundry attributes and symbols. On the whole allegory is somewhat 
prosaic. Attributes are attached to personality in an external way; there 
is no authentic individualization, no poetry. Poetic imagination is an inner 
meaning. Spirit, when pressed to explain itself, uses sensible material, its 
images, in order to make these known, since this material is by nature 
something external. I 
208 
§457 The intelligence comes thus to this internal completion, to recollec-
tion, in which it has its own peculiar meaning and it is the drive to express 
this meaning. The first stage is an expression that is something formed by 
productive imagination. But the intelligence goes farther in the unfolding 
and explicating of its inwardness. The intelligence is implicitly reason; it is 
the drive of reason (the unity of the subjective and the objective). Thus it is 
the drive of recollection to posit the objective as subjective. It exists as the 
activity that makes itself rational and for which reason itself is supposed to 
be, so it is the drive of recollection to posit the immediate, external, and 
given as inner. In the universal representation it has, as it were, completed 
on this level the inwardizing, the recollection of the external. The universal 
representation is the highest way of forming the given. 
Just as the intelligence is the drive of recollection, it is also the drive 
of externalization [Entiiusserung] that posits the inner as an outer; the 
s. [Ed.] Hegel means the fable of the Fox and the Eagle, and the Fox and the Raven. Hegel 
owned Aesop's Fables in the edition of Joachim Cammerarius (Leipzig, 1544). 
223 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
intelligence integrates its subjectivity through the objectivity. This external-
ization is a forming of imagination, expression through images, but at this 
level its inner is not yet posited as the complete totality of inwardness and 
externality. This requires that the externalization sharpen this fantasy image 
to the immediacy of existence of the intuition, in the mode and form of 
something immediately present at hand. This is the intelligence as produc-
tive imagination, which proceeds to these formulas to give this inwardness 
existence, so that its constructs have the form of immediate existence. 
Here we have come to signs, which are connected with language, the 
intelligence as self-expression. This sign-making productive imagination 
can be called Mnemosyne, the productive memory. One uses memory in 
ordinary life for the recollection of signs. Since they are intuitions, the 
signs have to be made inner, just as much as the first immediate intuition. 
Memory as such is the inner appropriation of signs in connection with 
their significance. Mnemosyne is the mother of the Muses. Memory is the 
production of images and signs, the recollection of signs. The drive of 
intelligence, to make intuitable what it has shaped in itself, is here still 
formal objectivity, externality in general. The higher objectivity is found in 
209 
thought and concept. Here we have a unity of the I inner image and of the 
external image that has now become intuitable. The one is the meaning, 
the sense of the sign, that which is represented; the other is that which 
represents. The sign is itself a determinate mode of intuition, a determinate 
representation; the other is the essential representation. 
The sign is an intuition: of a sound, a tone, a color. This is something 
external, sensible, and is arbitrarily connected by the intelligence with a 
representation. The blue cockade according to its nature has nothing to do 
with Bavaria. The sign as a sign is no symbol. The sign is an external means 
posited by the intelligence. The intelligence uses an external immediate 
[means]: so far as it uses such means, the latter is a thing that the intelligence 
comes upon and that it uses, or it activates its corporeity to posit something 
intuitable. The representation is the essential, and the external is used as 
material. The sign can itself be spatial or temporal and can have both forms 
of externality. 
§459 The sign whose externality is time, namely, sound and language, is 
the sign that is much more appropriate to intelligence. This externality does 
not possess a being; it exists essentially as suspended and has its soul in 
the representation. This negation is also actually existent, namely the sound 
disappears. The sound is determinate, articulated, contingent as a whole, 
arbitrary. This determinate sound represents something, has a signification, 
and this is its representation. 
224 

PSYCHOLOGY 
Immediate things acquire a second existence in and through language. 
Language is also a determinate existence of the content. The thing acquires 
this existence from me-the name. [Language-giving things a name] is the 
rebirth of the content out of the intelligence. Through language the content 
gains a higher existence, created by the conscious intelligence. The other 
[natural] existence is for it not irrational, but a non-mental existence. The 
human being gives names to things; these are taken up by the intelligence 
into the realm of representation and are there guaranteed [by the intelli-
gence]. The content has an existence for the representing intelligence; this is 
its origin, the rationality and foundation of language. 
The details concerning the formation of particular languages can be 
treated I as a science of how the special characteristics in the language 
210 
originated. The material of language, the lexical basic stuff, is the object 
to be considered. The objects, which are acoustic in nature, are imitated in 
language; a similar sound is evoked. This has been called the pictorial ele-
ment of language, the direct relation to the natural. This elementary natural 
[element] has no specific advantage. The other elements can be designated, 
the gesture of the sound is the determining, particularizing [element]. The 
intelligence as determined in itself, since it is also corporal, embodies these 
determinations, sounds in general, and when these are articulated, they can 
signify gestures. There are letters for the lip, teeth, and tongue. 
A further merely spiritual means of inventing names is symbolizing, 
namely that expressions of a sensible content are used as symbols for the 
mental. The form of language is the main point; this includes what belongs 
to mind, representation, and thought in expressions of ideas and relations 
between ideas. Declination, conjugation, syntax [grammatical] combina-
tions: connecting and binding all these elements together is the rational, 
and a cultivated language proves its cultivation and rationality on this basis. 
The more excellent a language is, the more cultivated it is in representations 
and expressions for the mental and spiritual. This constitutes the logic of 
language. The more cultivated a language is, the more regularity there 
is in it, 6 and the more freely the understanding deals with the merely 
material. It is pedantic not to use 'mouth,' 'breast', and similar words in 
the plural. 
With written language [we have] signs in space. This writing can be 
twofold, an alphabetic writing or a hieroglyphic writing. First is spoken 
language, gestures formed through sound. Then there is a need to make 
6. [Ed.] Cf. Encyclopedia §459, where Hegel refers to Wilhelm von Humboldt's Essay on 
the Dual (Ueber den Dualis I. 10, 11, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. VI, 4-30) in support of his 
view of the increasing uniformity of language. 
225 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
the sound an enduring one; this is the written language in spatial figures. 
Alphabetical writing characterizes the sounds; the sound is a sign of an idea 
[Vorstellung]. The sign of this sign is the letter; thus the sign for the sound 
is further removed from the idea itself. In contrast, hieroglyphic writing 
designates the idea more closely. It seems to be advantageous to designate 
211 
the idea I as such. Hieroglyphic signs are of great convenience and on this 
account we also make use of them, e.g., +, -, =, that designate not only 
a sound, but also a certain determination. When it has been demonstrated 
that letters originated out of painting, 7 these letters in their abbreviated 
form [e.g., +, -, =] are made hieroglyphic anew, as it were. Also inner 
objects, relations of ideas themselves, are hieroglyphically presented, and 
this proceeds to symbolizing. Ciphers are hieroglyphs; with these spatial 
determination continues further, whether a cipher has another behind it or 
not. Merely through these different positions in space unity is signified; for 
example, here belong also the signs for metals and apothecaries. But this is 
a restricted use. Spoken language is the first, and if one wants to determine 
its [specific signs], it is natural that written language has reference only to 
the basic spoken language. It is a great advantage for spoken language to 
be written; it gains in determinacy and purity. Language can be analyzed 
into a very few sounds, individual articulations, shaping of the mouth. 
This is an abstraction, an attention of the highest importance. Through this 
abstraction tremendous simplification is produced; the entire multiplicity 
[of sounds and vowels] is reduced to around twenty, and the sounds that 
we produce in language can be reduced to nearly as few. To be sure there 
are modifications, for example, the E and the A. On the whole, the sounds 
of a language reduce to a smaller number. Also there are peculiar signs for 
whose sounds our signs are insufficient. Written language becomes simple 
and more cultivated through such measures. Understanding and abstraction 
belong to the intelligence. Animals also have many voices that we cannot 
characterize, e.g., the crowing of the rooster. 
Reading and writing are by themselves immediately educative. Children 
become obliged to direct their attention to the sounds in isolation, and to 
note the particular sign for each sound, and to record the different abstract 
moments themselves. 
The Chinese have a hieroglyphic written language and a vocal spoken 
212 
language. I The vocal language, because it has no direct relation to the 
written language, is very little cultivated. Our cultivated language as a 
7. [Ed.] Cf. J. Hug, Die Erfindung der Buchstabenschrift (Ulm, 1801), who expressed 
the view that alphabetical letters may be transformations of an older picture-writing or 
hieroglyphics. 
226 

PSYCHOLOGY 
spoken language, makes all distinctions by various articulation of words. To 
be sure, for truly different significations a sound is often used where what is 
meant must result from the context, but on the whole difference is posited 
in the objective [elements] of particularizing and articulating. In Chinese, 
the difference falls not merely on the sound, but occurs in a manner difficult 
for Europeans, namely through loud shouting. This is the imperfection that 
clings to a spoken language when it is not formed through a letter alphabet. 
If there is a hieroglyphic writing, then it is the case that one must learn two 
languages. 
The system of our spoken language is ready-made. We are familiar with 
this system of language. If it is written, the spoken language is reduced 
to very few signs, and all lexical elements of spoken language are merely 
elements in the alphabetic language, merely combinations of these simple 
elements. The easy transition from spoken language to alphabetic language, 
is extremely difficult for hieroglyphic writing. The consequence is that 
peoples who have hieroglyphic language remain behind others. In Egypt 
hieroglyphic writing was restricted to the priests; in China it is restricted to 
officials. The more simple spoken language comprises only a few objects. In 
contrast we have the means to become familiar with the whole wealth of 
thought of a people. 
A principal circumstance that has been cited as an advantage of hiero-
glyphics, which also caught Leibniz's attention, 8 is that nations can come 
more easily into relation. The words of nations with different languages 
are themselves different; each makes its own peculiar spoken language, 
every people cultivates the communal element in a distinctive way. Nations 
are naturally concerned above all to designate spoken language through 
writing. 
Experience shows that when a nation had a hieroglyphic language and 
came into contact with another, the latter did not learn the former hiero-
glyphics, but rather I made it into a written language. In Macartney's travels 
213 
to China9 it is reported that in Canton,where Europeans wanted to come 
together with the Chinese, the latter turned to alphabetic writing. There the 
8. [Ed.] Leibniz, Opera Omnia, Nunc primum collecta, in Classes distributa, praefation-
ibus & indicibus exorntata, studio Ludovici Dutens, in Sex Tomos distributa (Geneva, 1768), 
vol. 5, 7-10; Lettres de Mr. G. G. Leibniz a M. M. Remond de Montmort. Lettre I. D'une 
Langue universelle. Cf. also Leibniz, Die philosophischen Schriften, ed. V. C. J. Gerhardt 
(Berlin, 1875 ff.) vol. 7, 185-9; vol. 3, 605-8. 
9. [Ed.] A journey of an English legation to the emperor of China in 1792-3: Reise der 
englischen Gesandschaft an den Kaiser van China, in den ]ahre 1792-3. Aus den Papieren des 
Grafen von Macartney, aus dem Englischen iibersetzt von Johann Christian Hiittner, vol. 2 
(Zurich, 1799), 636 ff. 
227 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Chinese use the signs of their vocal language in such a way that the words 
begin with the signs with which the hieroglyphic writing characterized the 
object. This process was initiated by the Chinese, and this can be considered 
generally as a transition from hieroglyphic to alphabetic writing. It was 
similar with the Phoenicians. The symbol 'gimel' is the hieroglyph for kamel 
[camel].10 Since the hieroglyph begins with G, it designated the letter G. The 
same circumstance occurred in China. 
In the case of the [ancient] Egyptians, it is difficult to decipher the hiero-
glyphic alphabet, because their vocal language is not known to us. Trans-
lations from hieroglyphics to Greek have been discovered.U Then Young12 
discovered that the nomina propria [proper name] must be expressed on the 
other side [of the Rosetta Stone], and that the hieroglyphic signs here signify 
a sound. He discovered: 'Ptolemy', 'Berenice', 'Cleopatra'. The 'l' occurred 
in Ptolemy and in Cleopatra. Now one reads several hundred names. The 
proper names are usually inscribed in an elongated quadrangle or oval. 
Through a knowledge of Coptic, the common language of the Egyptians, 
whose mother tongue is Old Egyptian, we have come much further because 
we have become acquainted with the spoken words. But we have not yet 
been able to decipher the authentic hieroglyphic written language. However, 
it is an advance to find that the hieroglyphs themselves are used for the signs 
of sounds. These phonetic hieroglyphs have been deciphered and read. It is 
possible that many sounds can begin with the same hieroglyphs because 
many words begin with the same letter; one finds six or eight signs for a 
single sound. 
10. [Ed.] The Erdmann manuscript contains a crude drawing of what appears to be the 
Phoenician hieroglyph 'gimel'. In correspondence with the translator, Franz Hespe, the German 
co-editor, observes that 'gimel' means 'camel' in the Phoenician system. Thus, while the 
hieroglyph as written by Erdmann is difficult to decipher, the above passage contains Hespe's 
latest and best conjecture, which corrects a misprint in the German edition that resembles 
a Gothic's'. Hegel was working with C. F. C. de Volney, L'Alfabet Europeen applique aux 
Langues Asiatiques (Paris, 1818). He became aware of the book through a discussion in the 
Edinburgh Review, no. 62 (March, 1819), article 6, 369-75. 
11. [Ed.] A reference to the discovery of the Rosetta Stone in 1799, that refers to a decree of 
a priest of Memphis to the honor of the Ptolemies, and that was expressed in two alphabetical 
languages and three pictographicallanguages. 
12. [Ed.] Thomas Young (1773-1829), an English physician, physicist, and Egyptologist, 
who, together with Jean-Fran~ois Champollion of France, deciphered the Rosetta Stone. The 
hieroglyphic text on the Rosetta Stone contains six identical cartouches (oval figures enclosing 
hieroglyphs). Young deciphered the cartouche as the name of Ptolemy and proved a long-
held assumption that the cartouches found in other inscriptions were the names of royalty. By 
examining the direction in which the bird and animal characters faced, Young also discovered 
the way in which hieroglyphic signs were to be read. The work of Champollion and Young 
established the foundation for translating all Egyptian hieroglyphic texts. 
228 

PSYCHOLOGY 
Memory. Here we mention an element in the relation of the type of 
sign to its retention, memory as such. But before this, a further word: 
When we have proficiency in reading, we have the sense immediately in 
the letters. We do I not recollect the sound, but with the letters we are 
214 
immediately reminded of the content itself, so that alphabetic writing is for 
us an expression in space, not of the sound, but of the content; therefore 
it becomes so to speak hieroglyphic for us through the long custom of 
reading. This production, which is called a word, is an immediate product, 
a particular and something transitory, an ideal expression, but it is only an 
expression, not yet what we call a name. All words are names of something, 
but names are expressly words so far as they remain tied to a specific 
representation. The specific representation has its existence only in this 
specific mode of expression. The word is particular and transitory, and 
the next action of the intelligence is that this word become an enduring 
[sense]. It is one and the same representation that the intelligence presents. 
It is only one representation, and therefore the mode of expression and 
of existence must be one and the same. The intelligence does this, since 
it is recollection of this externality. The intelligence has a representation 
and has an intuition of it. This connection the intelligence makes its own, 
posits it inwardly, and thus makes the mode of expression universal for this 
representation, so that the word is only a sign for this specific representa-
tion. This is the unity of subjectivity and objectivity, and the intelligence 
has to make it its own, to know it. The unity thus becomes the content 
of the intelligence and an enduring, universal connection. This does not 
imply an agreement, as though humans had a discussion and agreed that 
they wanted to use this expression for that idea. That would be arbitrary, 
and in order Jor such a discussion to occur, language would have to be 
already in existence. That language is gradually formed and developed is 
self-evident. But this does not concern the inner necessity in the advance of 
the intelligence itself. Great nations can have one and the same language 
for their foundation. In America there is a far greater quantity of languages 
than in the old world; every little tribe has its own language and manages 
arbitrarily with it. There it is considered high treason under a new regime 
even to retain the same name for an idea that was used under the previous 
regime. 
I The intelligence connects its intuition with its representation, verifies 
215 
its representation in this intuition, and appropriates this connection as its 
own. Since it thus appropriates this connection, the indifference of the two 
towards each other is suspended. Thus the connection has the character of 
universality and is an enduring, universal connection. This is memory. 
229 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Memory. Memory retains the names, [to wit] that the intuition belongs 
to this word, and that this word belongs to one and the same representation. 
The intelligence has to recall this intuition that is produced and posited by 
it, just as it has to recall the immediate intuition. This is the name-retaining 
memory. The significance of the name is the representation, and the repre-
sentation is essential to the word and to existence. That is the name, and this 
name is the substantive matter itself as it has validity in the realm of ideas. 
This mode of the relation of the human is a mental one; its representations 
are supposed to have determinate existence relative to each other, because 
it exists for other intelligences. The realm of the intellectual world has this 
theoretical existence in the mode of names and their connections. The name 
is the determinate existence of the representation; the name is how this 
substantial matter exists, not in an immediate sensible way, but in the realm 
of the intelligence. The names are thus the existence of the representation, 
and the reproductive memory possesses in the name the matter itself without 
image or intuition. 
First the object is preserved in the intelligence as image. Like the object, 
the image has an immediate sensible quality. The name is a second mode 
[of existence] of the sensible as it has been produced by the intelligence. 
The name is the determinate existence of the content so that we do not 
need the image at all; we do not need to bring the image of the content 
before us. Caesar is long dead, but as a name he has been preserved. 
Cicero speaks about Mnemonik, in ad. Herenn, Lib. II/. 13 This matter was 
investigated approximately twenty-five years ago; it was also investigated 
in the Middle Ages. Mnemonics is nothing but the skill of transforming 
names into images, a reversion of memory to imagination. The name is the 
216 
superior as I a determinate existence that is produced by the intelligence. 
The distinction between hieroglyphs and alphabetical writing consists in 
the fact that the latter is thought in names, not in images. One establishes 
a picture in imagination, a series of images; to this series is connected 
whatever I am supposed to learn by heart. I have to transform it into images 
that are connected in an established order. The sequence of these images 
must always be the same. Cicero calls this tableau of images Loci. One such 
mnemonics-artist had twenty-five such images which were alphabetically 
ordered, five vowels in succession, and for each he had five names, the 
second vowel of each of which was equally of the same series: Aaron, 
Aeneas, Abimelech, Apollo, arbustum. First he has images before him. Then 
he must learn something by heart: The first is Aaron; then Aaron must be 
13. [Ed.] Hegel refers to Pseudo-Cicero, Rhetorica ad Haerennium, book Ill, chs. 17-24. 
230 

PSYCHOLOGY 
fitted out with attributes, for example, that he reminds one of an admiral. 
This becomes something thoroughly absurd. He goes through it a couple of 
times so that he remembers how it is connected. The second, this decorative 
outfitting, Cicero calls the imagination, but he does not say anything about 
its connection with the tableau. 
The second is the reproductive memory, a reproduction of the name 
as a representation, so that the latter is identical with the meaning. That 
word we call a sign; it is identical with its content. This is an identity of 
subjectivity and objectivity within the intelligence itself. Here there is an 
objectivity produced by intelligence in which there is a stuff, a matter-
the word comes from the activity of intelligence-but while the word is 
an expression of the activity there is at the same time an indifference of 
this matter to the meaning, to the representation. The name still retains 
the contingency of the content. On the one hand it is identical when I 
reproduce the name; I have the content, the sense, but it is an identity 
encumbered by this distinction I of the indifference of the material towards 
217 
the meaning. Therefore it does not yet contain the genuine objectivity of 
the content. The name appears here as a contingency in contrast to the 
significance and the sense. It is as if the name has lost its connection with its 
origin, the intuition, since it has been produced as intuition. As name, this 
origin has disappeared. It is further reflection, further consideration that 
again discloses what is elementary in this connection. But the name is in 
language a more or less dry sign. In this sphere contingency acquires a great 
realm of free play. "'The contingency of the composition of sounds belong 
here."' 14 
Where the name has lost its vitality and has become a non-vital sign, 
arbitraFiness arises. In reflection one seeks a rational connection between 
word and sense. Name-a representational sign that has no connection 
with representation, e.g., the name Schmidt. In regard to this level, it is 
easy to note that the name is something universal. The name expresses a 
representation and thus something universal. Blue, red are sensible contents, 
but, taken by themselves they are posited abstractly as something universal 
in the form of universality. When an individual is supposed to be designated, 
it so happens that on the whole names are made that proceed from the 
universal: Muller, etc. A number of names of rivers and mountains are 
not proper names. For example, a people calls its river simply 'the river'. 15 
14. W reads: The contingency ofthe connection of words, sounds enters here, which merely 
have this connection in the sense, not in the origin of gesture and articulation. 
15. w adds: So with mountains and the like. Scheideck (mountain pass). These proper 
names are first of all something universal, and thus reveal themselves as not proper names. Thus 
231 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The name for itself, so far as it has become a proper name, has no closer 
218 
connection I to the thing itself. Recently it has been demanded that the name 
have such a connection to the thing that the name should be a definition; the 
name of the species should be used with a specific determination. Instead 
of vitriol one says that the metallic is the basis and, bound to the acid, 
something neutral is formed. This drive to discover such a nomenclature 
comes from the fact that one has forgotten what a name is. The name is 
precisely this, that this sign has no relation to the content. Sulphuric copper 
is a definition, not a name. 16 
The reproductive memory means that in the name the intelligence has the 
content immediately, and in the content of the intelligence the external mode 
of existence is prior. We think essentially in words, names, for thinking is 
a knowing; to me, who thinks, this content that I think is present; it has 
objectivity, externality for me. 17 I do not now know of all other content. 
This mode of externality that it has for me means that the content has 
a name. This mode of externality is the highest type of inwardness of 
intuition. Names are not images and yet we have the entire content while 
we have the name before us. 18 It has often been said that the correct, 
true thinking is without words. 19 For example, Mesmer in his memoirs 
concerning magnetism reports that "'-'he nearly went mad in his attempt to 
219 
think without words"'. 20 I However, knowledge means that I have the word 
before me and proceed mindfully in words. Herder has many declamations 
to the effect that philosophizing is a making and combining of words. 
By doing this one thinks that one has the thing itself while one proceeds 
through words, and that this movement through words is only an illusion 
in which we believe we have the thing itself before us. Cf. Herder's Ideen 
zur Geschichte der Menschheit, and his Metacritique, where he attacks the 
names of families deriving from classes designating something universal, that become proper 
names-and so become meaningless. He is called Laplace, because he was no official place, 
Miiller, because he was not a miller. 
16. W adds: The name is precisely what is fixed and meaningless, and is supposed to be 
exactly this because this sign has no relation to the content. 
17. W adds: [it] is not in this pit, in which infinitely many things lie. The content is taken 
out of this inner pit, I know of it. 
18. W adds: Without words one cannot think. 
19. W adds: But it lies in the thing itself that thinking is knowing, and the manner and 
mode of having before oneself the object of knowing lies in words.-
20. W reads: He attempted to imagine himself in the pure power of inwardness, and 
attempted to think without words. He continued it nearly to the point of madness. [Ed.] Franz 
Anton Mesmer, Precis Historique faits relatifs au Magnetisme Animal (London, 1781), 22-3. 
232 

PSYCHOLOGY 
Kantian philosophy in this way. 21 Names are conditions of thought itself: 
thinking is consciousness, and so must have an objective [reality] in itself. 
The content that we possess with the name is what we call the sense (we do 
not need the image) of which we are conscious, and which we have entirely 
before us. 
The third is memory as such. The I, the intelligence, is in general this 
unity, and in its manifold it is the unifying element, that which relates the 
many to each other. These many names, representations, are a dispersed 
manifold. Their truth, as the truth of every multiplicity, is that they are 
posited under a subject as belonging to a concrete whole in which this many 
are only one aspect, so that the many are combined into something concrete. 
As in the case of imagination the intelligence produced concrete represen-
tations that are unified so that they constitute only moments of the subject, 
so here the intelligence is the unifying element for the many representations 
along with their names. A sentence is a complex of words; it is only one 
meaning, but we interpret its sense in this complex of words. Since the intel-
ligence has such a complex of representations that are connected to their 
names, it is memory as such. The intelligence is the tie that binds the repre-
sentations to these names, as well as the tie that binds the names as such. 
This is mechanical memory. We call that mechanical, wherein a plurality 
of things stand in relation to each other, and are related, but in this relation 
remain at the same time external to each other. The intelligence is the power 
over the signs; as mechanical memory it is this center, I this subject that 
220 
holds the signs merely as signs, as words without meaning, as, for example, 
a unity like a house of stones. The connection of stones with the house is 
not at all determined by the nature of the stones [themselves], and so their 
connection is a, mechanical one. 22 If the end, the soul, no longer lives, then 
every member ceases to be a member-something it can be only in relation 
to the vital center. 23 
These signs are meaningless. I can learn a series of names and numbers 
by heart, but so far as this is mere rote memorization, there is no meaning 
and no significance in it for me. The intelligence is the space in which these 
determinations exist; the intelligence is what holds them together and knows 
21. [Ed.] Herder, Ideen, Samtliche Werke, 13, 358-9; Eine Metakritik der Kritik der reinen 
Vernunft, Zweiter Teil: Vernunft und Sprache, Samtliche Werke, 21, 191 ff. 
22. W adds: The unity of the spiritual and living is of an entirely different sort. In this case 
the members are not merely parts. The member, taken outside of relation to and with the other 
members is nothing, no longer a member, something dead. 
23. W adds: the memory is mechanical as preserving a relation of signs. 
233 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
them in this vital connection. ~The anantapodoton24 in recitation signifies 
a meaning, a sense that acts specifically according to the nature of the 
context. If one knows it entirely by rote memorization, then one recites it in 
an entirely meaningless sound. Meaning interrupts the mere mechanism of 
221 
memory.~ 25 It appears miraculous that the spirit, I this essential freedom 
at home with itself, relates to itself externally in its [own] inwardness in 
an entirely mechanical way. This condition is of the greatest importance in 
relation to thought. In our German language this relation also expresses a 
deep and meaningful ascent to thought. 
Reason is the unity of subject and object. Such one-sidednesses as 'only 
subject' or 'only object' are not true. The truth is rather that the subject, 
the inwardly subjective activity of thought, this inwardness, this being at 
home with self of the intelligence in itself, is the most objective. As reason 
the intelligence approaches the world in order to posit that which is at first 
external to it subjectively; spirit believes itself to be capable of knowing 
the world. Spirit has a presentiment that it is in itself identical with the 
objectivity in its truth, i.e., in its universality. Previously the process of 
intelligence was to posit the immediate, the external as its own, but the 
converse direction is equally true. With that this unity is fully realized. The 
other aspect is that the intelligence posits itself as objective, as the external 
in itself, [so that] in its highest inwardness it is mechanical, related to itself 
as this space in which stands a series of signs that are merely juxtaposed 
or entirely meaningless. 26 Therein the transition to thought is expressed. 27 
The process of the intelligence is that it is implicitly the unity of subject 
and object, that this unity is for it, that it knows this unity, that in this 
inwardness it is in itself the absolute opposite, the objective, the objective 
24. [Ed.] In propositions with two membered conjunctions, an error in the proposition 
introduced by the second conjunction. 
25. W reads: With mechanical memory one knows something by rote memorization; one 
has no idea of what the words mean. The recitation of what is known by rote happens by 
itself automatically without accent. Children, when they are supposed to recite something by 
heart, have a sing-song school sound, and this is the correct tone for a recitation known by 
heart. If one recites with accent, this implies that one has a meaning, a significance, that one 
orders the particular determinations according to the nature of their connection-the accent 
depends on sense-if on the contrary one knows something purely by rote, then one speaks it 
in this entirely meaningless tone. What is recited by rote is spoken without meaning. To speak 
meaningfully is to speak with accent. The sense comes into the picture and breaks through the 
mere mechanical memory. Memory is the most wonderful power insofar as the intelligence, 
this inwardness, has this complete externality. 
26. W adds: the fact that intelligence makes itself into such a mechanism includes the 
determination of externality of spirit in itself. 
27. W adds: This moment of memory is something that has been previously completely 
misunderstood.-Intelligence is reason. 
234 

PSYCHOLOGY 
wholly in the sense of externality. I For us, or in itself-it is not yet posited 
222 
there in the object, but is still the inner-the intelligence is reason. But what 
is implicit or in itself cannot remain hidden; everything must enter existence, 
and precisely here is the place where the intelligence is the knowing of 
this objectivity in itself. That the objectivity is in the intelligence as such, 
is contained in the intuition, that what is immediately given I also posit 
in myself. The other side of this is that the intelligence posits itself as the 
objective, and thus intelligence exists in memory in a mechanical fashion, 
but at the same time it is the power of this mechanical mode, of this 
mechanical connection, of this senselessness itself. The place of memory in 
this is to be the moment in which the unity of the subject and the object is 
not only implicit in the intelligence, but is also posited in the intelligence 
itself, to wit, that the intelligence is this externality. So the intelligence 
realizes that that which is in it is also something external, that the objectivity 
is not something different from the intelligence, but is identical with it. 
Usefulness means something exists for a definite end, and the higher, the 
more excellent something is, the more universal and substantial it is, so that 
all particular ends receive their support from it. The end is multifaceted 
and in a certain sense it is true that right and ethical life are ends. But 
the absolute end of memory is that intelligence be real, that the unity of 
subjectivity and objectivity comes to be. Memory is also debased as though 
the imagination were more excellent, but the word, the name, is a far greater 
mode of existence than the image. The word is something28 that is created 
by the intelligence, a representation made external in a [certain] way; the 
externality is created by the intelligence itself. rvin memory I one can place 
223 
everything next to everything else"-'29; for memory is just this universal 
abstract power that holds everything together. In memory the intelligence 
has given itself objectivity, and it is thus abstract externality, this abstract 
space. With this the intelligence has given itself the determination which is 
thought, an inwardness that in itself is externality. 
C. Thought 
These are the moments that pertain to thought, but there is a further 
determination to be added, which falls within our consideration, namely 
that this determination is present in memory. The intelligence has become an 
28. W adds: a second existence. 
29. W reads: Words are therefore higher than intuition, than image, and so memory 
according to its content, and as activity, and this pure space (in which one can place everything 
next to each other as in space). 
235 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
inwardness which is utter externality as such; the intelligence is absolutely 
in itself externality. The further relation, determination, is consequently 
the suspension of the opposition that exists between immediacy, external-
ity, and inwardness; it is not merely an opposition between immediacy, 
givenness, and inwardness, being at home with self, but at the same time 
a difference between particularity and universality. The intelligence is the 
simple, pure being at home with self of the universality; that which is 
opposite to intelligence, as opposite to the universal, being in general, 
has the determination of singularity, of multiplicity, of the particular. This 
opposition has suspended itself, and through this suspension the intelligence 
is essentially determined as thought. The intelligence [is both] the simple 
being at home with self and the externality; this is the opposition; but since 
the intelligence in itself is this sensible mode of externality, the difference [of 
the externality] from intelligence, [as well as the difference of] the universal 
224 
from particularity, has fallen away. "'So far as the general difference I is 
still present, this difference is in general the particular. Since this difference 
has suspended itself, the intelligence is a concrete universal that has posited 
the singular and particular in the universal itself. The intelligence, as the 
unity of both, is the overgrasping30 of the other, the unity of the previously 
different. 
So posited, intelligence is the universal. Previously the universal itself was 
not yet a genuine universal but in fact itself merely a particular in opposition 
to other particulars. When the intelligence is [the overgrasping of the other] 
the inwardness that is in itself this externality, then intelligence is the unity 
of the two, the true universality. Thought contains this determination, that 
what I think is the thing itself; and what this means, what the truth of 
the matter is, must be determined in reflection and contemplation. The 
thing itself first comes to be for me through thinking, and only when the 
thing is thought, noumen, is it the thing itself. Everything else is only 
30. [Ed.] I follow H. S. Harris in translating uebergreifen as overgrasp, rather than over-
reach. Uebergreifen expresses the positive result of the Aufhebung. The concept that results 
from speculative comprehension reaches back and overgrasps the preceding opposition of 
opposing moments, transforming them and preserving them on a higher level, a third term. 
Harris tracks this metaphor of overgrasping to Zeno and the Stoics. Zeno used the five 
fingers to represent the differing 'apprehensions of the five senses; then, closing his fist, he 
called that gesture 'comprehensive sensation'. To express the comprehensive power of thought, 
he grasped the closed fist with his other hand, i.e., overgrasped it. Hegel retrieved Zeno's 
metaphor of overgrasping. It has nothing to do with 'overreach' or its negative connotations. 
See Harris's comments, 'Translating Hegel's Logic' in G. W. F. Hegel: The Encyclopedia Logic 
(lndianapolis: Hacketr, 1991), xxvi. The above passage, which concludes with Hegel's use of 
overgrasp to express the comprehensive unity of inwardness and externality, universal and 
panicular, illustrates the point. 
236 

PSYCHOLOGY 
existence, opinion, nothing objective; only in thinking does the thing acquire 
its objectivity; thinking is therefore the objective.~ 31 
Youth has a good memory because it does not yet relate to itself reflec-
tively. The images are still lively, the retention of objects is stronger in 
youth, but with maturity the universal becomes powerful. Wise maxims 
and experiences are [now] the interest, and for this reason one no longer 
retains the particular [as vividly]. The human being dies of this universality, 
this self-coincidence, this ceasing of difference. 
Immediate existence, intention, feeling have been recalled; the intelli-
gence determines them as its own. The other is just as essential, the fact 
that the intelligence relinquishes its subjective determination, that its own 
determination is likewise not subjectively posited, but exists generally in 
the mode of immediacy. With this the difference [Differenz] which was 
present in representation is suspended. I In representation the external, 
225 
the given and the certainty of belonging to the intelligence are different. 
In thought it has been realized that the external is the intelligence's own. 
Through this realization, unity and truth have come into being. What is, 
~is only so far as it is thought, and what thought thinks is the thing 
[Sache] itself. Thought is also empirical. The exercise of memory implies 
that inwardness is leveled into pure space. Intelligence makes itself into an 
abstraction within itself, through which this inwardness, for the sake of 
abstraction, is made into a mechanism. Inwardness is made into a thing-like 
reality. This inwardness means that the intelligence exists as thinking.~ 32 
31. W reads: For the difference in general is only suspended through this (the fact that 
intelligence is both, inwardness and externality]-and so the intelligence is the concrete 
universal, not merely the abstract universal that still has the particular over and against 
it. Therein the intelligence has posited itself immediately as the universal,-and with this, 
thinking. The intelligence is the unity of the two, the overgrasping of the other; since it is 
this, it is the universal, for the universal is precisely this overgrasping: for a universal that 
stands in opposition to a particular, is itself only a particular.-The intelligence is thus the 
unity of subject and object and is the genuine universal-thus the intelligence is determined as 
thinking.-
The meaning of thinking is: that which I think, is the thing itself, and I first attain 
this thing itself in its truth (when I reflect on it) through thinking-and insofar as I have 
thought objectivity in general, so far is objective thought the thing itself. Everything attains its 
objectivity only in thinking, and thinking is therefore the objective. 
32. W reads: is that truth [is] thought. The thought is the object thought. What is thought 
is, and is, insofar as it is thought. Conditions of thinking. The human being empirically runs 
through the various levels: sensation, intuition, etc., memory. The exercise of memory implies 
the leveling of the ground and preparation of the way to pure being. The compulsion of 
rote memorization is torture. Rote memorization is the torture of turning oneself into this 
abstraction and of consolidating oneself in this abstraction. In this abstraction will is the inner 
that is made into something mechanical in itself. This preparation of the soil of inwardness [is 
necessary] to constitute thinking as such in the form of intelligence. 
237 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The thinking of intelligence is for itself, a having of thoughts [Gedanken 
habend]. Here thought does not exist as immediate activity. The intelligence 
wants to think; it exists as the drive to think, so that thinking is its end. 
Thinking as an activity, but not as the end of intelligence, is pure mental 
activity in general. This is the view that one acquires through the knowledge 
of spirit, that intelligence relates to itself thoughtfully, and is the activity 
of thinking. The intelligence in part makes the immediate, the external, 
into its own, and with this determines it to universality. Intuition becomes 
image, cut out of the infinite context with which intuition is connected, and 
allows determinations of intuition only in an indefinite, purely general way. 
There the intelligence is active as thinking in general; it is active as judging, 
226 
so far as it employs its distinguishing feature I of being presentation, of 
being reality. The act of intelligence is the word. Here [in judgment] it is 
reversed, namely to determine the universal to singularity. This is a raising 
of the immediate to the universal, and a setting out of the universal to make 
it an externality. Here judgment is implicitly the syllogism. The judgment 
determines the universal as particular, dividing it again; and to undertake 
the division again is to judge. The intelligence as action is thinking. The 
various modes of the activity are in thought, but here the intelligence has 
to think the drive, the end, so that it is determined for itself as thinking. 
The absolute inner end of intelligence is to exist as thinking. The end is the 
concept; the concept should be realized and come to existence, and this very 
concept has been realized in the intelligence. Insofar as it is for itself as the 
act of thinking, the intelligence is conscious of its own vocation and end. 
This exposition of thinking, namely that it gives itself as thinking, has 
been set forth in the previous account. Thinking, the posited thought; 
thinking is posited, it is for the intelligence that thinking is no longer an 
immediate activity, is no longer merely implicit, thus it is the inner concept. 
The intelligence no longer exists in the form of immediacy, immediate 
activity-there it is intuition, feeling, representation. The one-sidedness of 
being and the one-sidedness of subjectivity have been suspended. Thus 
thought is posited for the intelligence not merely as one-sided, but as 
its essence. The intelligence has thus attained its concept, that this is its 
vocation; it now wills to think. It wills that its intuitions, representations 
become thoughts. Another point: the intelligence has the drive to know, to 
have representations that are valid and true. 
"'That the intelligence knows this as thought, that it transforms its 
experience into thought, means here that the intelligence transforms the 
227 
given into something I free. The process of the intelligence is then explicit 
for the intelligence, that it is and that it does this. The intelligence wills 
238 

PSYCHOLOGY 
to think, and what it is, is its end. It has the following representation of 
thinking: that the thought is the thing itself; that what is thought exists, and 
that what is exists only as thought. In order to know what the heart of a 
matter is, I must reflect. That is an ancient prejudice of which humans are 
convinced. In order to know the thing itself, reflection is necessary, the most 
rigorous reflection. This is the meaning of the assertion that the true is the 
unity of thought and being. 
First, thinking is formal, abstract universality and abstract reflection. 
Such thought is not yet I the thing itself. Being is this utter abstraction; 
228 
it is so far as the subject thinks and raises itself to this pure void or 
emptiness. There one represents being as an existent thing; everything exists 
in this sense, but this is not the thing itself or as such, rather it is nothing 
substantial. What is true, the truth, the eternal, exists only for thought. 
Conceptual thought is thinking in its totality, its total specificity and deter-
minateness. But even when I take being and thought in the correct sense, 
this is expressed as the 'unity of being and thought', as though they were not 
[also] different. But thought divides itself, distinguishes itself, and only when 
thought proceeds out of this process of distinguishing itself [from itself] and 
of coinciding with itself, is it true thinking. The true sense that thought is the 
reality itself, is something altogether ancient, and not eccentric, paradoxical 
or crazy. 33 Reason does not concern itself with imaginings or with represen-
tations; rather reason is the developing consciousness of true being."'34 The 
33. [Ed.] Cf Encyclopedia §465 Zusatz: 'Those who have no comprehension of philos-
ophy are astonished and become speechless when they hear the proposition that thought 
is being. Nevertheless, the presupposition of the unity of thought and being underlies all 
our actions ..• But it is a good idea to distinguish berween only being thinkers and knowing 
ourselves as thinkers. We are the former always and in all circumstances; but the latter happens 
completely only when we have risen to pure thinking. Pure thinking knows that it alone, and 
not feeling or representation, is capable of grasping the truth of things, and that the assertion 
of Epicurus that the true is what is sensed and felt, must be explained as a complete perversion 
of the nature of spirit.' 
34. W reads: to transform the immediate and individual into thought. The intelligence 
wills to think; the concept is the end, intelligence wills to fulfill its vocation-which is that the 
intelligence has the image of thought that thought is the thing itself, and that that which is, 
is thought. This is the eternal prejudice of humans, that what occurs in my intuition, etc.-in 
order to know what is present there, the truth, I must reflect. This is the prejudice of which 
human beings are convinced. But what the thing itself really is, that one does not have at one's 
fingertips, as the thing itself. It has this sense when one now says, the true is the unity [of being] 
and thinking. But thought and being are poor expressions! People believe that thinking means 
representation. But even as thought in general, this representation remains at first formal. 
Now the representation can be entirely other than the thing itself. Similarly, a formal thinking, 
ratiocination, does not need to be the substantial thing itself. Being is utter abstraction. Being 
is not sensible, it is purely abstract. The same is true of pure thinking: since the subject thinks 
it goes forward and advances into this reason. But it does so as utterly abstract being.-One 
239 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
intelligence, as thought which has come to itself, is free, at home with itself. 
This objectivity, which was first determined as externality, is intelligence 
in itself. But this inwardness and objectivity have determined themselves 
reciprocally in relation to each other such that they have suspended their 
one-sidedness, particularity, and finitude. Thus thought is determined as the 
one that is the unity of the two and [as such] is the universal. 
Everything that is untrue in the world consists in the fact that the 
objectivity does not correspond to the concept. A bad man can exist, but 
what exists in the world does not correspond to its concept, and this non-
coincidence is its finitude. But what is true in the man's existence consists in 
the agreement of his reality with his vocation [Bestimmung]. 
The intelligence is now active as thought; it wills to have thoughts; it does 
knowingly what we have previously seen, namely it reconstructs intuitions, 
representations into thoughts, "'and if it has the very idea of something, 
intelligence is convinced that it is right, that it possesses the thing itself."'35 
The thing itself must exist essentially as being for the human [being], as 
229 
something known explicitly in I words. This is the action of the intelligence, 
that what it knows in itself it knows in words, that it expresses itself and 
thus determines itself. The intelligence exists now as thinking; it wills to 
have thoughts. What constitutes the content of thought appears initially as 
something given, as that from which intelligence derived. Intelligence looks 
back at its activity, the intuition, but this is not yet the correct doing. So far 
as there is a stuff, a matter, set before thought, which thought works on, we 
say that thought is applied to this material, i.e., the particular is subject to 
rules and laws. Thought as applying itself to this stuff that appears external 
to it is what we call thinking knowledge-when thought as such transforms 
a matter into thoughts. But we have to consider thinking, not as applying 
itself to externals, but rather as thinking in its own form, in general as 
also imagines that being is an existent thing. A thing is an accidental, contingent existence 
without concept-This everything is, but not everything is genuine and substantial.-Thus 
being exists in thought-but in thought it is no longer such [a] contingent, conceptless being.-
One then says 'is'; this 'is' is supposed to be the substantial. But the substantial exists only for 
thought, not however, for formal abstract thought, but for conceptual thought, for thought 
in its totality.-Even if one takes thinking in the sense of reason, concept, as the thing itself, 
and as the substantial, it is not yet correct to say 'the unity of thought and being'. For unity 
implies that the difference of the two is suspended. Only when thought coincides with itself in a 
syllogism is it the essence, the concrete thought. This self-coincidence is other than a mere unity 
or abstraction. Therefore 'the thing itself is the unity of thought and being'. [This assertion] is 
entirely something ancient and universal. 
35. W: the substantial thing itself and being. In opinion being is on the one hand something 
accidental. The substantial is the opposite. 
240 

PSYCHOLOGY 
self-explicating, self-determining, self-specifying, positing the particularity, 
judging and coinciding with itself. But thoughtful knowledge first involves 
the application of thought and its form to its existent matter. So the process 
of knowledge is as follows: we begin with intuition and perception, we make 
this perception into something universal, and we transform the particular, 
the singular, into the universal. 
We call this procedure the analytical method of induction: by means of 
the particular we seek the [universal] thought. In induction we omit from 
the individual what is not common, the special features through which it 
distinguishes itself from others, and hold fast to the universal. The common 
element is only the universal of reflection; we bring the various elements 
together under the point of view that this is the same in all; however, this 
does not concern this object itself. ""The human being remains what he is, 
whether he is large or small, or whether another exists or not."" 36 But the 
higher universality is the species, the inner nature that essentially constitutes 
the nature of an object. A tree that ceases to be a plant: I one no longer 
230 
knows what that is. ""The universal is nothing other than what is contained 
in the object. The universal is only in the subject, and the question has arisen 
whether the genera are in nature or only in the subject."" 37 The universal 
has the advantage for the subject in that it is easier to retain; the plurality is 
here reduced to a unity. But the end of the retention, the act of collecting for 
the subject, this subjective end, is something only relative. ""The universal 
is the true element in the object.""38 'To give distinguishing features in a 
definition,' it is said, 'is necessary only for a subject.' But the distinctive 
feature that differentiates one type of species from another type, must be the 
essential feature that is the root of the other determinations. In the external 
world where, determinations are indifferent-namely in inorganic nature, 
the determinations are external to each other. "-'In the case of the specific 
gravity of a metal one well notes that there is an essential determination. 
So: the human being is rational. The I distinguishing feature is that human 
231 
being is thinking, and from this capacity for thought follow all others 
36. W reads: The house and the tree remain a house and tree, whether they are similar to 
another or not. 
37. W reads: The end of the intelligence therefore is to raise matter to the form of 
universality. On the one hand subjective, the intelligence makes something universal out of 
this; on the other hand, the universal is only the objective dimension of this object, that in the 
object which is the thing itself. [Universal] determinations stand out in an object, but in such 
a way that they are essentially for the subject. Linneus in his Systema Planetarum contended 
that genera are to be regarded as natural. 
38. W reads: the universal is for itself also objective. The species in the object is itself the 
true. 
241 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
of which the human being is capable. Religion and science etc., follow 
from this single capacity, namely thought. Thought proceeds to find the 
universal, the species, the law. This is the analytical method."'39 The reverse 
is the synthetic method. This begins with the definition (the universal) 40 and 
proceeds to special features. Here one allows as it were the special features 
to be added, and accepts them from without. One can also begin analytically 
by analyzing the universal; the determinations that are contained within the 
universal are then expounded. The first analysis is an abstraction, where 
one proceeds from particulars. One omits what is peculiar and special in 
order to obtain the universal. If one analyzes the universal, one distinguishes 
determinations such that one does not omit these; rather they count because 
they belong to the universal. 
232 
§467 "'In thought spirit is at home with itself, and its essence is I thought. 
Thought develops itself, analyzes itself; it is the concrete, this absolute neg-
ativity that develops through the suspension of subjectivity and objectivity. 
233 
Thus it is the self-determining I activity. The immediate, which we have 
treated as affirmative, and the subject, are both one-sided and abstract. The 
result is the negation of the objective and the subjective. The result is in 
itself the infinite. 
Thought as this activity is self-differentiating, the positing of that which 
thought implicitly is, and the third [step] is drawn back to the first unity 
which is what the difference implicitly is. This is the concept [of the process 
of] thinking itself. There are three determinations which we distinguish 
as understanding, judging, and syllogism. The first two modes of thought 
are one-sided; these are first, immediacy, second, the difference. The two 
234 
together constitute understanding (the third is reason). I Understanding 
applies itself to a content insofar as this form is first the form of univer-
sality. But this universal is abstract and not developed. The understanding 
establishes and holds fast to some determination for itself. It has been 
called the concept, but not in the speculative sense. Indeed one must possess 
39. W reads: But this is the gravity in external corporeity, where the determinations appear 
external to each other. For example, a metal has a specific gravity. Indeed one deals with this 
specific gravity prior to color or crystallization. Specific gravity is an impressive feature that 
does not show that it is a determination of a higher condition than the others. This higher must 
be shown by the essential determination that the others are only [dependent] consequences or 
effects of it.-The human being is rational. The character of reason is thought, from which 
results everything else that constitutes the human. This is a determination that is not to be 
regarded merely as an external convenience, but rather the innermost essence, so that it is 
the universal essence of the object in itself. Thus the universal species, laws, etc., must be 
discovered: we call this the analytical method, namely from the particular to discover the 
universal. 
40. W reads: in right, what right is, in geometry, what the point is, etc. This is the universal. 
242 

PSYCHOLOGY 
understanding; one must establish the object in its determinacy. A human 
being must also have a definite end and pursue it. Thus the human being 
possesses character. 
The other element is judgment [Urteil]. When we consider judgment 
in relation to knowledge it is called explaining, conceiving, i.e., [placing] 
something in its connection with others. In nature one demonstrates the 
power, the universal of which this or that is the expression. One subsumes a 
particular case under a [general] law. The dependence of one particular on 
another particular is then called comprehension. This explanation is an act 
of judgment. There are particular cases, and their relation to the universal or 
the species must become known. By judgment we mean something not only 
subjective, but also objective; for example, we mean that the tree in itself is 
thus differentiated. It is this [particular] tree, and has a species immanent in 
it, i.e., that it is a plant. 
In finitude judgment is [objectively present]; the finite is judged [con-
demned (verurteilt)] because in it species and individual, soul and body are 
separable. The soul is the species, the body a singular individuality. If I 
know how to specify the substantial nature of an object, this is completely 
different than if I know only its individual attributes. In this knowledge one 
advances to a conclusion, but not properly to a rational conclusion. The 
existing object is the particular, the type. This type undergoes qualification 
and particularization through the fact that it distinguishes itself from its 
species. The rational syllogism would be that this particular is grounded 
in the universal of the species, that the particular is posited by the species 
itself. As a particular it is grounded in the species, and is only an appearance, 
an image of the species. The planets move about the sun; this law is their 
universal nature; the particular would be the particular planet. The one is 
this far, and the other is that far distant. This distance must yet be deter-
mined from the general law of motion. This would be the rational syllogism 
[Vernunftschlufn The particular would be I itself the revelation of the law, 
235 
of the universal. Thought is thus initially in the form of its universality. 
Judgment is the differentiation of the universal into its particularities, and 
the third is the uniting of the particular with the universal, the gathering 
together of the particulars in the universal. This is the concept in general; 
the judgment and conclusion are nothing other than this explication of the 
concept. In the syllogism the concept exists as the developed concept, the 
universal and self-identical that determines itself and preserves itself in its 
determinations. In this way it is rational. Everything is in itself a syllogism, 
and the true existence of the syllogism is found in the life-principle, in 
spirit. 
243 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
Intuition and understanding are judgment. To remain self-identical in this 
particular, to preserve self and be self-coincident in the conclusion-this 
is spirit. The concept is first in the form of universality, and if thinking 
remains in this universality, it is the formal understanding."'41 Thought 
41. W reads: Thinking is the free universality; there the spirit is at home with itself (reason 
is with thoughts and thought is its essence). Reason develops itself and thought develops itself, 
analyzes itself. Reason is this: to be concrete within itself. This absolute negativity-activity 
of negating and affirmation, which is eternally in itself the result of negation. What we at first 
have treated as affirmative, the subject against the object: both of these are one-sided, both 
particulars, negation.-The immediate, the subject and the object, are negated by the activity 
of the intelligence, and so the intelligence is the active unity in itself, thinking. As this activity 
in itself, thought is self-differentiating. This negation as negation, as simple self-relation-the 
positing of the difference; (3) to posit itself as what it is, as what the difference is,-to ascribe 
this self-referential negative process as due to the unity, this is the concept of thinking. These 
are the three determinations that we distinguish as understanding, judgment, and syllogism. 
At first understanding and then reason. The first two one-sided modes of thought (form of 
universality, self-relation, and second, the form of difference and negation) are united in the 
third, reason. This distinction between understanding and reason [is] important. 
So far as the content of the understanding is at first the form of universality, this is the 
abstract universal of the understanding. Understanding seeks to hold fast to a determination 
for itself. It relates this determination to itself in the form of universality. This is the non-
speculative form of the concept. Understanding means to determine [something]. One must 
have the understanding: one must conceive in a determinate way. In action one must have 
understanding, have character, remain true to an end. 
The understanding in general. How the understanding is also in the concept, it determines 
first of all for itself. The other to the understanding is the judgment. Judgment also means 
explanation, comprehension. To comprehend something means to understand it in its context. 
'I don't understand it, explain it to me', that is, show me its context and connection, the 
power of the universal of which this particular is the expression. To comprehend the orbit of 
the planets, one explains these from the perspective of the [universal] power, and then one 
comprehends it. That through which one comprehends something is the law, power, universal 
determination, or one explains an occurrence through its causes or motive. The condition has 
for its cause another finite condition. There one also says [it is] explanation. 
The general dependence of particulars on one another-to see the particular in its neces-
sity. This is judgment. One has here particular cases and recognizes their relation to a law. 
Explanation in general is judgment. By judgment we generally understand that this is nothing 
merely subjective. When I speak of a tree, [saying] there is a plant; this is a judgment. But this 
judgment is not only in me. The tree is in itself this judgment. It is this tree, but it is also at 
the same time a plant and a species. When a tree is cut down, the plant remains. The tree is no 
longer a tree, it is merely wood, but the [tree's species] and plant do not burn. Infinitude these 
[determinations] are separable.-Soul and body are separable. They are the judgment, and 
thus a judgment that they are sentenced [condemned (verurteilt)].-In this knowledge there is 
an advance to judgment; this means that the object is considered according to its power, law, 
and universal features. 
In ordinary life we distinguish type from judgment. 'The painting is colorful' is a judgment; 
it has by itself no power of judgment.-The judgment counts as something formal, but more 
precisely it is the nature of the predicate that is determinative for thought. 'Gold is yellow', 
'gold has a specific gravity'. The second judgment is equally determinative for thought. That 
which thought focuses on [is] the universal particularity of this object, in which the other 
particular has its basis. From judgment we pass on to conclusions, inferences that are formal, 
244 

PSYCHOLOGY 
however is essentially differentiation, determination, judgment, negativity. 
The intelligence in itself is exactly like this: it differentiates itself within 
itself. In addition to its implicit internal differentiation, the intelligence 
intuits and feels, it divides itself in this universality to be feeling and intu-
iting. We proceeded from an immediacy that is not the true original, but is 
likewise something posited, and the judgment means that intelligence exists 
as being, finds itself self-determined. The intelligence is feeling, intuiting, 
the connection, the copula is the identity of both; it is feeling and intuiting. 
This identity is not yet posited in judgment; it is an implicit identity; it 
is the syllogism. That the differentiation is at the same time one and the 
same is included in the copula 'is'. But it is not yet posited as identity. The 
two sides of judgment do not yet constitute the fulfillment of the 'is', the 
identity. The concrete identity is first posited and realized in the syllogism. 
This concrete identity is such that in the case of the intelligence-which after 
the judgment [differentiation] exists in a condition of particularity, intuiting 
and representing-this particularity is posited as the I itself, as its proper 
being, the action of the intelligence. We observed this process: that the 
intelligence assimilates its feelings, intuitions, representations, I posits them 
236 
as identical with itself, so that it is at home with itself in this particularity, 
but not properly rational syllogisms. These are not such that in them the objective existence 
in the species coincides with itself. The existent is object, is the particular; object is a type. 
This type befits the particular. What one knows of this object is a judgment. Rational syllogism 
would be: that the particular is grounded in the species in a universal way. That the species 
advances to particularization, but in this particularization the species coincides with itself. 
Movement of the sensible body. Planets move themselves around the sun. Essentially planets 
are these movements. The specific planets: (a) thus far distant, (b) thus far distant etc. This 
specificity of the instances [is] that they develop and become out of this universal context, out 
of the laws of their movement. The particular would be posited, not as something [accidental] 
added to the universal context and law, but rather as revealing and manifesting these. This 
would be the rational syllogism. 
1. 
Abstractly considered, thought is this self-referential activity, thought is the form of 
universality. 
2. 
Judgment = differentiation, in the form of its particularity 
3. 
the integration of the particular. The particular is gathered into the universality, so that 
the particularity shows itself as posited in the universal, as only the particularity of the 
universal. 
This is the rational concept, and judgment and conclusion are only the explication of the 
concept.-The concept implies that it is concrete, the universal identical to itself, that deter-
mines itself so that in this determination it preserves itself-and this is the rationaL-
Just as everything is an implicit judgment, so everything in the rational concept is a 
syllogism. The things are syllogisms in themselves. The freedom of the spirit is this: to be 
identical with itself in particulars, or in intuition, therein to preserve itself, therein to be 
coincident with itself. This is the existing spirit, in which other things are only implicit. 
245 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
this particular determination. Thus it does not exist in an immediate identity 
with itself, it does not exist in immediate freedom, but is free only in that it 
has opened itself to difference and has suspended this difference, positing it 
in identity with itself. This is the [process of] mediation through which it is 
this concrete affirmative being for self. This is the syllogism. 
The intelligence as thinking, is concrete thinking, and as such it is con-
cept. Then it is reason in general. The syllogism is the activity of the rational 
in general. In ordinary life one designates as rational that which is in and for 
itself, something firm; a self-standing essential end, an end existing in and 
for itself, that which expresses an essential end. When something is firm 
and secure, it is so because it is not abstract, one-sided, but something that 
stands the test. Since it coincides with itself, it is not finite but infinite. 
"'What relates itself to another, a particular, is finite. But when the 
particular is overcome, it is not something whose relation to itself is defined 
237 
as otherness.l Reason is the process of self-mediation, judgment [ differenti-
ation], of distinguishing itself from itself, determining itself, and through the 
negation of this difference has joined and integrated with itself, has posited 
itself as identical. 
The formal syllogism means that something has combined with an other. 
In the rational syllogism there is a negative element which is not present in 
the ordinary syllogism of the understanding, namely, that it posits its modi-
fication as its own, so that it remains at home with itself in its modification, 
and thus has joined and integrated with itself in its modification. This is 
thinking as concrete, the concept, reason. Syllogism and concept are the 
same. The concept implicitly includes the syllogism, and the syllogism is the 
developed concept. This is thought as reason, and the latter is immediate 
will ........ 42 
§468 The end of the intelligence is to posit the immediate and the given 
as something mediated by the intelligence, as its own, and thereby to be at 
home with itself, infinitely reflected in itself. The intelligence is the universal 
42. W reads: The intelligence or the subject which has overcome the modification, etc., 
and made it its own, does not relate to these modifications as if they were an other-being of 
itself. Rationality = infinity. Returned into self; what is rational has mediated itself with itself; 
it has differentiated itself and through negation of its determination it has joined together with 
itself. This is the authentic syllogism. In the formal syllogism the subject joins with an other (a 
particularity). There one says of the subject: it is also this other. There it remains finite, bound 
to its end. In the rational syllogism there is a negation that does not occur in the syllogism of 
the understanding. The rational syllogism suspends this its modification, posits it as its own, 
is at home with itself, and [in this negation of negation) has joined together with itself. This 
is thought as concrete. Thought as concrete is the concept, is reason and the syllogism is the 
concept. This is thought as reason. This constitutes an immediate transition to the will, as 
immediate will. §468 Transition to will, that thought exists as free concept. 
246 

PSYCHOLOGY 
that specifies itself, and is at home [in its determinacy] and thus is free. 
As reason, thought is free, and the will is free. Rational thought and will 
have freedom in common, but the will is yet wider in scope. The will is to 
realize this freedom, which the intelligence is in itself, so that the content, 
the determinations that are the intelligence's own, are to be posited in the 
form of immediacy as not the intelligence's own. Theoretical and practical 
spirit, intelligence and will, both are one-sided. The intelligence begins, it 
finds itself, and its activity is to make this immediate into its own posit, so 
that it does not remain external, but becomes its own activity, its own self-
determination. The intelligence posits the immediate as its own, and it has 
completed this process, so that its posits have the determination of being 
objective in general. I 
238 
2. PRACTICAL SPIRIT 
§469 Practical spirit brings its determinations into existence so that there 
is a world present at hand. Practical spirit is concrete thinking that coincides 
with itself, passes over into the determination of the immediate, with an end. 
This determination of immediacy, from which intelligence has liberated 
itself and now unfolds itself in its pure ether, has been attained; it is at 
the same time an immediate passing over into immediacy. The intelligence 
that has digested the world, has, by means of negation of the existing 
determinations, coincided with itself, and is free. This result is a return to 
simple unity with self and therewith a return to being. The intelligence has 
determined itself as immediate, or to individuality. In the concept there are 
three determinations, universal, particular, individual. The individual means 
that the universal appears as existing by means of particularity as it initially 
is, and that the universal, through the negation of particularity, coincides 
with itself through this medius terminus. So the universal is first subject 
or individuality. Through particularity, the difference, and the negation 
of particularity, the universal is determined as equality with itself, as an 
affirmation that is a negation of negation. The universal, determined as 
negation of negation, is specified as individuality, as subject. "'-'As syllogism 
the intelligence passes over into thought through assimilation and negation, 
into the determination of immediacy, individuality. I Thinking activity [as 
239 
free] is therefore in itself an individual subject, an actual individual.""'43 
43. W reads: The intelligence therefore proceeds as syllogism in thought, to the universal, 
the intelligence assimilates all particulars to the universal. Through this assimilation and 
247 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
The determination of immediacy that the intelligence has overcome, 
nevertheless comes in where intelligence has overcome it and in this way 
is included in intelligence. But the intelligence has another relation to 
immediacy; it comes into this immediacy as end, and is active as end. The 
will means nothing else but the end that is active. End and reason are 
immediately connected; what is rational is an end. For the intelligence, 
rationality resides primarily in theory. But the intelligence as such is 
still one-sided. Theory should be realized; it is supposed to acquire and 
preserve the determination of immediacy, of being. Thus the concept has 
this determination: it suspends the one-sidedness of its subjectivity and 
gives itself the determination of being, of immediacy and of objectivity in 
general; thus it is end. "'The concept of end has been badly handled."'44 
The intelligence is a syllogism in itself. But at the same time intelligence 
posits this syllogism, which it implicitly is, as existing. Thus reason is end. 
The idea, the true, the unity of the concept and reality, the concept that 
realizes itself, is the end that in reality coincides with itself, so that that by 
means of which the end coincides with itself is immediate being, existence in 
general. This immediate existence is posited through the concept, so that the 
concept has itself therein, this is its objectivity, the reality is in accordance 
with the concept-this is the idea. The concept, end, is the fundamental 
condition in everything, and where the concept exists in a higher, freer 
way in the mode of unity, it exists as natural vitality or as spirituality. The 
living [being] is subject, and as subject it is the concept of itself. This is 
its soul, its simple vitality, and as subject it realizes itself. "'It is active, 
240 
and its activity is to realize itself. I Its realization is its self-preservation by 
means of the negation of its needs, of its external condition, its inorganic 
nature; through this negation it coincides with itself, thereby preserving 
itself. Its self-preservation signifies that the end, by means of its activity, 
coincides with itself. This living process produces nothing new; it only 
preserves itself. The determinations of the intelligence in pure, true thought 
are objective; these constitute the thing itself. What in the intuition and 
sensation is external to thought is appearance, i.e., not the essential."'45 
negation of particulars, the intelligence is individuality posited in the determination of imme-
diacy. This is the transition from free thinking, that liberates thought. Through this [liberation] 
thinking is a particular subject, a particular individuality.-This is the dialectical transition, the 
difficult, the entire speculative. 
44. W reads: In recent times the concept of end has been badly handled, [because] no one 
knew what to make of it. 
45. W reads: It is active in self-realization, and its realization is activity that preserves itself 
by means of the negation of the external organic nature, which it assimilates and through this 
248 

PSYCHOLOGY 
Practical spirit also makes its determinations objective for itself, so that 
its determinations are not only implicitly objective but are objective as 
posited by spirit through its activity. As intelligence begins with the faith that 
it can understand the world, and that it will find its reason in the world, so 
practical reason is certain that it is capable of giving the determinations an 
immediate existence and putting them into effect. It has been shown how 
the determination of immediacy that is for us lies in free intelligence. We 
must distinguish this [immediacy] from what is explicit for free intelligence 
itself. It is only implicit insofar as intelligence has passed over to immediacy. 
According to one side, it finds itself thus. But since intelligence is free and 
has coincided with itself, it is to be distinguished from its immediacy. It 
is implicitly the immediacy and is distinguished from this immediacy as 
free [intelligence], and consequently the immediacy is other for it. So it is 
this, it suspends this difference of immediacy from itself, and it produces 
immediacy through its activity, so that immediacy is something posited by 
it, but at the same time it possesses the mode of immediacy. Since it is 
implicitly I immediacy, it is thus end. 
24 
To posit this immediacy, so that it is brought forth through intelligence, 
constitutes practical spirit. Practical spirit first becomes actual spirit, so far 
as actual spirit is actual in an immediate way. Here finitude arises for it. 
"'The intelligence, as coinciding with itself, is free therein, but with this 
immediacy through which it is actual, it enters into finitude. There intel-
ligence exists in a restricted condition, dependent. The singularity relates 
itself to freedom, so it is at first opposed to freedom. But freedom now 
has this determination in itself, namely that all determinations are its own. 
Therefore in this immediacy freedom is supposed to have itself. So far this 
immediacy is posited and brought forth by spirit-an existence that for itself 
is only appearance, and has only freedom for its soul, its substance."-'46 
Practical spirit has the 'ought to be' [Sollen] of its freedom in contrast to 
assimilation it preserves itself. The living [being] preserves itself, that is, in its activity the end 
coincides with [the living being] itself. We have said that in thought, the intelligence knows 
that the determinations are objective. What the intelligence thinks is the substantial thing 
itself, the objective. The other aspects [manifest] in intuition, feeling, etc., are transitory. The 
determinations of thought are the substantial thing, the objective. 
46. W reads: So having arrived at immediacy it is at the same time without freedom. 
This is separated from immediacy; immediacy-so determined-means that it is posited by 
the intelligence. Being, which exists through the intelligence, is to be brought forth by the 
intelligence. Intelligence has begun with a presupposition, a self-discovery, a feeling. The 
practical spirit is as follows: it is free, but at the same time exists in immediacy, but this 
immediacy is only posited by spirit. Spirit is free in this immediacy, and in this immediacy 
spirit knows itself. This is mediated, not immediate, and yet it is at the same time immediate, 
249 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
immediacy; the existent condition is one posited by freedom and is the end. 
The higher imperative is the 'ought' of the concept in itself: freedom wills to 
242 
construct and implement a content; the content is contingent, I [it] has not 
yet acquired any more precise determination or formation. 
The higher imperative is that the universality and rationality in that 
which is willed by intelligence be realized. This is the inner 'ought' of 
the idea. The next imperative is that freedom bring about and realize its 
determinations, give them the mode of immediacy so that the immediate is 
something posited by freedom. The intelligence has the faith it can attain the 
immediate, it appropriates the existent, and thus directs itself according to 
appearance towards the given. The existent appears as the rule for the cor-
rect method of the intelligence so that it comes to truth and exists in truth. 
But since the intelligence is this appropriation, the appropriation is essen-
tially a transformation of the given. "'Here the standpoint is reversed.""47 
The proper determinations of the intelligence that it posits from itself are 
its end, they count for it as its end so that they are the essential in contrast 
to the immediate [given] that it finds, and in the corresponding immediacy 
[produced by intelligence] they are made as the intelligence wills. Here are 
the proper determinations of the intelligence in its knowledge, which the 
intelligence puts into effect. The inner element in this execution, what is 
inherently carried out, is that the determinations are raised to universal 
determinations existing in themselves; the will [of the intelligence] becomes 
rational in regard to the content; what intelligence wills is rational. This is 
the standpoint of practical spirit. There are three points to be considered: 
(1) The intelligence as will determines itself in itself; this content, which is 
essential, substantial, and is supposed to be realized, is the way immediacy 
243 
is to be preserved. I The practical spirit is in itself again this immediacy, 
but such that this immediacy has practical spirit's proper form; as in the 
simple relation to self that has only the mode of immediacy that is nothing true in and for 
itself.-The practical spirit therefore, as implicitly free, is not satisfied by this implicit freedom. 
This freedom is the concept in itself. The determinations are ideal. But they are not supposed 
to be only ideal but also immediate. The moment of immediacy proceeds to the form of 
particularity. This particularity refers to freedom and is thus at first opposed to freedom. But 
freedom possesses every determination as its own: thus even immediacy is something brought 
forth by freedom.-Freedom has itself therein-and that is only insofar as the immediacy 
is posited through spirit. The soul has only the free spirit for its substance.-This is the 
determination of the will. 
47. W reads: This standpoint is the opposite. Here it is no longer the case that the given 
and the immediate are the essential, such that the intelligence has to conform to them. 
250 

PSYCHOLOGY 
intelligence so it is with the form that intelligence wills, and so intelligence 
is practical feeling. 
(2) This content is realized, carried out. Feeling becomes drive. What is 
initially present in feeling becomes proper end; the intelligence is satisfied. 
In this realization these drives and determinations come into collision with 
each other. They come into the difference when they are put into effect 
against the existence that each lacks and that is supposed to be given by 
intelligence. In this difference which is immediately and formally overcome, 
the will can put itself into effect in the existence that is only an empty 
covering for it. The higher collision is that the drives come into opposition 
to the actual, not as external [actuality], but rather as the [actuality] of the 
subject itself. The realization [of the drive] means that the subject comes to 
enjoyment and satisfaction; that what is at first only an inner determinacy is 
posited as existing, and to be sure as existing through the subject. This is the 
proper actuality of the subject: within this unity of the subject that unites all 
the streams of the drives in itself, these opposing drives come into collision 
with each other. If the drives existed simply as particulars for themselves, 
they could be realized, but they come into collision because they exist in a 
subject. These collisions dissolve when the drives are united under a single 
end that is the universal. Within this sphere the end is 
(3) Happiness, the satisfaction of the drives, but in such a way that an 
undisturbed, pure satisfaction results, and the single satisfaction I of the 
244 
subject in these many particular [satisfactions] is happiness. The union of 
the drives is universal. The higher universality, the substance of spirit itself 
is freedom, spirit's concrete, immanent universality. However, instead of 
this universality that still has the drive for its content, freedom becomes 
its own end. This is the universal absolute end, constituting the transition 
to objective spirit that forms the limit of this inquiry. 
§4 71 
The first is the practical feeling. Spirit is free in itself, but is at first 
still entirely formal, the [process of] self-determining and self-division. These 
are determinations of its inwardness in general. Since they are in and for 
spirit, they are first of all the practical feeling. Spirit is individual as subject, 
and this individual is a concrete subject that determines itself; spirit analyzes 
its concrete being, posits the determinations that are immanent therein and 
they are at first only immanent. These determinations are immediate, they 
exist as such in this subject. Consequently they are felt, but they also belong 
to the essence of the subject itself, arising out of the essence of the subject 
itself and not merely externally found; they are rather grounded in the 
proper nature of the subject-practical feeling. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
These are inner feelings in general. The human being has a feeling of 
right. 48 These feelings are still within it as a simple subject, and the content 
is felt as the content of feeling in itself. This is not the same situation as 
intuition, where spirit finds itself as an existent, rather these determinations 
of feeling are spirit's own modifications. This is the first way that the 
determinations are in themselves, which we call the nature of the will. It 
is said that God has planted these in the heart. The heart is the human being 
himself, and these determinations are not external; rather this determinate 
content is my own from the ground up. These are determinations; therefore 
245 
there I is a specific content. 
The question is, what sort are these feelings? What is their system? For 
they must constitute a totality together. It has been said that the human 
being should follow the heart, not the understanding; the latter is one-sided, 
hard, etc. This statement is just as correct as it is false. A heart that is pure 
and correctly ordered in its feelings (for the heart must be educated to do 
this), feels instinctively, so it appears, what is right in an immediate way. 
Since I myself am just, I do what I find in my heart. The understanding 
divides the several aspects from each other and holds fast to a particular 
case; since every aspect is isolated [from the rest], each counts as valid in 
and for itself, and the understanding can give this or that aspect priority 
as the essential. There the heart can have great superiority, but feeling can 
also be determined in a one-sided way, and can be bad. The heart is the 
totality of determinations of practical feelings. It can be asked, What are 
these special feelings? What is their system, what relation do they have to 
each other, which order and priority, what are essential and what are non-
essential? All of these questions are about the content and determinations 
of the feelings. This is the content of the heart, and everything depends on 
which content, which determination, this feeling has. This content exists in 
a particular subject, heart, and in this "'Confusion and chaos it exists in this 
subjective unity with itself.""49 In order for this content to be the truth, the 
intrinsically true shape, it is necessary that it emerge from this mixture50 and 
become known in its objectivity, and that its objectivity be a determination 
of the will. This form of objectivity is what we generally call right, duty. 
The same content that is feeling then exists as drive; these determinations 
which we have in us are also posited in my existence as an immediacy 
attained by me and in me. We have the same content in morality as virtue, 
48. W adds: of right, wrong, hate, shame and religious feelings. All of these feelings are 
certain in content and determination. 
49. W reads confusion, not yet a system. Feeling is subjective unity and content in chaos. 
50. W reads: subjective form. 
252 

PSYCHOLOGY 
in the proper ethical I actuality as the right and duty of the individual in the 
246 
state. What right is must also be a duty and vice versa. Duty and right in the 
ethical sphere are not something one-sided but one and the same. A person 
who has no rights also has no duties, like the slave. Feelings, provided that 
they are of "'a truthful sort, are the same as what virtues and duties are. 
As the latter, feelings exist in their genuine style and objectivity.rv51 These 
feelings form a system of determinations, the objective determinations of 
freedom, the system of ethical life. Actualized, these are life in the state. 52 
If one asks about the content of the feelings, this content, when it is 
explicated, means nothing other than what in a totally objective determi-
nation the duties are, [namely] essential determinations and relations. But 
in the form of feeling they exist in the form of an individual subjective 
particularity. Duty and right appear as something cold from the perspective 
of feeling; people prefer feeling and prefer to keep themselves in the sphere 
of feelings. The heart can indeed constitute a totality against the one-
sided understanding, but it is equally one-sided [in its own way]. Whether 
a content is essential, or right, cannot be decided within the sphere of 
feeling. 53 Everything willed, in general everything in us must be present 
in the mode of feeling, i.e. in my proper, immediate subjectivity, and must 
belong to me in this way. I But feeling does not exclude having a specific 
247 
consciousness of what my feeling is and what it is supposed to be. Nor does 
it exclude that my will is firmly determined and resolved as an insightful 
will that has insight rvinto rightrv54 • There is more in the heart than the 
objective [elements of right and duty], namely, a particular subjectivity that 
wants to be comforted and satisfied. However, right and duty require an 
indifference towards oneself. What is true in these determinations can be 
determined only from the thinking intelligence. The human being must act 
with consciousness; and that this content should be true requires that it be 
grasped in the form of universality, for only thus is it a purified content, a 
content purified by thought and reflection. "" The heart is good by nature; 
51. W reads: true order. The form of feeling is the poorest and worst form of this content. 
This content must be known in its true form. 
52. W adds: The practical feelings belong to the conditions of the nature of spirit, and are 
manifest as our conditions that are present in us, that are our interests. 
53. W adds: In the remark it is said that it is foolish to believe that in the transition 
from feeling to right and duty, the content is diminished or loses its excellent character. This 
transition brings feeling to truth for the first time.-[To say] that one has the feeling of right 
etc. is entirely correct. 
54. W reads: concerning the nature of what right and reason are. What is merely in feeling 
[is contingent], can be so and so. It is more than suspect to hold on to heart and feeling instead 
of holding on to rationality in thought. 
253 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
i.e. the willing human being is implicitly good; however, so far as the 
248 
heart is only natural, it exists in its I natural state and is evil. The heart is 
supposed to develop to the form of universality and systematic totality, i.e., 
to the idea."'-'55 Here we consider only the form; the content in its objective 
development is the organization, the system of duties. 
§473 Practical feeling contains an 'ought to be'; that is, a certain deter-
mination in me is my self-determination. From the perspective of inner 
self-determination, it emerges that inner determinations have my existence 
as their correlate. This establishes a comparison between this inner deter-
mination and my immediate state or condition. This feeling, so far as it 
is part of my existence, compares itself with the condition immanent in 
me, the 'ought to be', the essential. The external condition is supposed to 
correspond to what ought to be. When both agree, I feel this agreement and 
I say, 'It is pleasant.' "'-'This is an entirely superficial agreement between 
my singularity and a determination in me in general. But where higher 
objective points of view are concerned, we cannot leave the matter with 
the relation between the pleasant and the unpleasant.""'56 The content, in 
order to be of a true and objective sort, must emerge in another form and 
be transformed into another shape so that it has the form of a duty, the 
ethical. In the examination of the form of ethical life, much still remains 
undetermined, and is more or less left to subjectivity. This accidental aspect 
has and retains its place in feeling. "'Outside of this sphere that corresponds 
249 
to the good, I there is also a dimension of the not-ethical. What is opposed 
to the will as genuinely free is the sphere of the particular."'-'57 Evil occurs 
when the human being attaches itself to a particularity in such a way that 
this particularity is opposed to the ethical. This evil is at home in feeling, 
55. W reads: The human heart is evil by nature; therein dwell evil thoughts says the Bible; 
[on the other hand] the heart is good. Both are correct. The heart, the spirit that wills, is 
implicitly good. There reason is implicit. But that which is only implicit amounts to nothing; 
it must be for itself, <the> rational element therein must be known. But the heart in the state 
of nature has not yet attained rationality; it is the evil nature of spirit, i.e., implicit spirit; a 
natural state where reason has not yet achieved its truthfulness and integral totality. There the 
heart exists in the natural state and is evil. The will should be thoughtful. The content, when 
thought, acquires the character of universality etc., its true condition. [In contrast] the [merely 
factual] determinacy of practical feeling as such constitutes its [limitation]. 
56. W: pleasant-and its opposite, the unpleasant. The former means pleasure and enjoy-
ment; the latter means pain etc. In reference to something significant to say it is 'pleasant' is 
superficial because the pleasant itself is superficial.-[ Conversely] in the face of great danger 
we do not say 'unpleasant'. The insipidity of the word soon becomes apparent.-The entire 
consideration of the subjective is thus properly concluded. 
57. W reads: Moreover, [there is] also an aspect of unethical life, [namely] evil. Evil is 
opposed to the ethical, i.e., opposed to the rational will. The particular, on the other hand, is 
opposed to the genuinely free will. 
254 

PSYCHOLOGY 
and retains the form of feeling. Benevolence refers to legal and ethical duties 
towards others, but it refers more to what is left to the contingency and 
arbitrariness of the individual. Laws, determinations cannot be prescribed 
for this sphere. 
In the case of friendship, the relation of one individual to another, it is left 
entirely up to me which individual I wish to be interested in. This concerns 
the particularity of my character and my being. These are contingent, 
and friendship itself is something contingent, ""for no acquaintance with 
a rational mind will deprive me of his advice.""58 Why is friendship not 
among the virtues prescribed by Christ? Christ had a circle of friends about 
him, but this was not what is called a friendship of the heart, but rather a 
similar orientation of interest towards an objective, true, divine matter. 59 
""With the Greeks we find a few exemplary friendships which, precisely 
because they are rare, are so outstanding.""60 Pleiades is not bound to 
Orestes through objective interests, but rather has made interest in Orestes' 
person and personality his end. 61 I Sympathy, compassion, gratitude refer 
250 
to such [friendship] relations that cannot be settled by ethical determina-
tions, but they generally relate to the ethical so that they include an interest 
in the welfare of others, but in such a way that the type and extent of 
the interest remains more a matter dependent on special circumstances and 
occasions. 62 In all these matters, particularity enters to a greater or lesser 
extent, according to which things are left to contingency, particularity, and 
arbitrariness. 
Further, feelings of a nasty sort have a content that not only does not 
belong to ethical life, but is opposed to it. These are the feelings peculiar 
to this sphere. ""An unjust content is one that belongs to my person in 
its particularity that is in opposition to my universal rational person. This 
constitutes the evil heart, and the latter is peculiar to me, in contrast to 
the objectivity of the will."'-'63 If one could look into the human heart it 
58. W reads: Cultivated rational humans respect each other and share an objective interest 
that they communicate to each other. Or it is a particular interest (need, advice etc.). Thus I can 
turn to an acquaintance of honest character who will help me without being a special friend. 
59. W adds: the true friendship. 
60. W reads: With the Greeks we find outstanding friendships: Orestes and Pleiades, etc. 
but these friendships are counted as something rare, and as rare, they are exceptional 
61. W adds: which means that an end that does not concern or affect the duty of ethical 
relations among humans but is part of this [interpersonal] side [of friendship], and is more 
particular. This is left to feeling and remains in feeling. 
62. W adds: That I am sympathetic, helpful, warm-hearted, requires the time and resources 
to take care of such marters. 
63. W reads: and where the content, the determination of these feelings cannot occur in any 
further objective determination of what is right and true in the heart and feeling. Feelings of the 
255 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
would be entirely other than it appears. But when the human being is ethical 
and just, the ethical and the just have the upper hand in him. Indeed there 
can also be feelings in him that express the satisfaction of his universality 
in relation to the universal. The demented manifest feelings of arrogance, 
vanity. Then one says that this passion has made them demented. But these 
passions are universal in humans; however, it is only self-possessed persons 
who control them, suppress them. In part this means that they do not allow 
these passions to arise in them, do not allow them to determine their will. 
In part they control the passions so that they do not become evident exter-
nally. Reflection and especially comparison lead to such feelings. "'Envy, 
251 
anger, jealousy are I such feelings. Envy demands equality. When abstract 
understanding holds to the view that all persons are equal, this is essentially 
envy, phthonos, Nemesis, to whom the ancients ascribed the idea that it 
makes everything the same (equal)."'64 
The second are the drives. The pleasant and the unpleasant already 
constitute a judgment, a comparison of the condition in which I immediately 
exist with the determination that is inner, an 'ought to be'. The drive is also 
an inner, a sense of a determination accompanied by a feeling of the non-
conformity of my existence to the inner demand. The non-conformity is 
bound up with a defect, a lack, and the drive is the demand that this negative 
of the positive side of my nature be suspended. The non-conformity is 
necessary insofar as I am a spiritual and living nature. What I am is supposed 
to be something brought about by me. Spirit must know what it is, and it 
knows this only when it has posited itself as such. In this 'ought to be' that 
spirit is for itself, it is implied that feeling passes over to drive, so that the 
will is for itself. Accordingly, the conformity of the inner determination and 
the immediate existence should be posited by the will-drive, inclination, 
passion. Passion is also drive, but is so designated when the totality of the 
individual is put into this particular, and the latter is made into the whole. 
The individual suffers there because such a content is merely a particular, 
personality that contradict the objective will are unethical. Every individual is struck by such 
pulsations of subjective determinations that oppose the universal. But these pulsations are 
temporary. 
64. W reads: Feelings of the spirit, revenge, jealousy, envy etc. are feelings that count for 
our (affairs) and against the perception of the others. For example, envy is such a feeling 
based on reflection. Envy is the desire or demand for abstract equality. The ancient Nemesis 
was a nemesis because it sought to make everything noble into something base and to reduce 
everything to an abstract equality. Envy is the demand of the understanding that feels itself 
repressed because another appears to be higher or better. This is the general point of view 
concerning feelings. 
256 

PSYCHOLOGY 
and through this the whole suffers violence because the particular does not 
conform to it. I The expression pathos has a comprehensive meaning: some 
252 
particular content becomes for the individual the whole, the great undertak-
ing itself. This content can be entirely ethical. By passion we understand the 
unethical, which is a general overdoing that is not present in pathos. 
§475 Passions and inclinations are equivalent with respect to their con-
tent. Their content is the same as that of the practical feelings, namely, to 
be satisfied; it is only that the drive turns this into the determinacy of its 
existence and satisfies itself therein. The drive is a lack; what is lacking to 
me does not depend on the content as such. Rather it lies more in my self-
determination and "'this subjective determination is supposed to become 
objective."'65 Passions and inclinations have the rational determinations of 
spirit for their content. "'The living being is already rational, and spirit 
is so much more rational."'66 These determinations are supposed to be 
not only natural determinations [but also spiritual]. Further, I can preserve 
determinations in me that are wholly objective rational determinations of 
the will; on the other hand, drives and inclinations still belong to the 
particular subjective will. Insofar as the content is still drive, it is not yet 
purified and has not yet obtained rational determination. For itself, passion 
is neither good nor evil. The form of passion expresses only that the subject 
has placed all his interests in some special determination and that this special 
interest claims his whole individuality. 
§476 "'This cause, for example, the state, or [on the other hand] the piety 
of Antigone [namely the family], insofar as it is her cause, is her interest. 
We also understand I interest to be something wrong and self-seeking."'67 
253 
65. W reads: and the demand is that the drive be transformed from the form of sub-
jective self-determination into the form of an objective self-determination-Feelings that are 
connected with the unpleasant become drives. 
66. W reads: The original self-determination is rational. Determinations of the heart are 
generally universal determinations of spirit, rationality; 
67. W reads: Then a passion is a pathos. If the content is entirely identical with individ-
uality, then it is pathos, and if it is identical with ethical content it is the highest pathos. The 
pathetic element in tragedy. Orestes, who had to carry out justice for the death of his father, 
and become the murderer of his mother. This justice that only he had to carry out, is his pathos 
(not a passion). Or Antigone, who as the sister had to provide the final rites of honor for her 
brother and bury him against the passion of the ruler. This love of brother (what the brother is 
in the eyes of the state does not concern Antigone) in which she places her entire individuality, 
is her pathos.-Creon has to carry out what is the interest of the state--that the traitor to the 
state should not receive an honorable burial-Creon acts out of the interest of the state. This is 
his pathos to which he sacrifices the happiness of his son, [and] his son's relation to Antigone.-
We have no other the unsuitable word except term 'passion' to express the fact that a human 
being places his entire interest, fate, condition, in a special circumstance and particularity. 
257 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 182 7-8 
When its motive is only a particular satisfaction, use, or enjoyment, an 
action has no moral worth. But when it is said that one should act without 
interest, that is an abstract requirement. I can never act without interest. If 
a human being does something, this must be his affair, it must belong to his 
own will, "'even if it is the purest cause. So far the cause is his interest (for 
the good). The cause, taken abstractly, is the content; so far as it is supposed 
to become actual, it must occur through the activity of the individuals and 
so far they are present in the cause"'68-interest mea causa. 
Insofar as a cause is mine, there is interest in it, and it is a misunderstand-
ing if it is said that one should act without interest. Rather it depends on 
whether it is a true interest or a bad one. Nothing great can be accomplished 
without passion. When a human being wills something great-of whatever 
sort it may be-he must put his will into the cause, and subordinate every 
other cause to this one. Insofar as he places himself entirely in the cause it 
is his cause. This is his interest and he acts out of passion. 69 
254 
I In respect to the more precise content of the drives and inclinations, 
what has been said about feeling is also true. The formal rationality of 
the drive means that the content of the drive does not remain merely 
subjective, but is made to be something immediate in me and that I make 
my determinate existence conform to the content of the drive. When I attain 
what I have willed, I have enjoyment. The known, which is determined 
as true, is brought about, and I am satisfied-both the cause and I are 
satisfied. It would be folly if a human being were supposed to receive no 
satisfaction, no enjoyment from what he accomplishes. I have made my 
existence conform to the inner determination, my drive. In life the human 
being has to see to it that he enjoys himself, that he brings forth a true 
end and takes pleasure in what he has done. How others take this is an 
external contingency. This [self-satisfaction] is a higher satisfaction than 
satisfying others, where one takes it one way and another takes it another 
In drives and passions the cause lies in my interest. For Creon the cause is the state, for 
Antigone [family] piety is her cause and interest. Interest expresses pathos better than passion; 
however it has at the same time the defect of making it appear as though the cause were mere 
narrow self-interest or untrue. 
68. W reads: The cause must belong to his will, the cause must be his interest. Thus the 
determination of the content is always present. The cause as such does not bring itself about. 
The cause is an idea, a substantial end. The activity of individuality is necessary for this end 
to be realized. In order for individuality to be active, the cause must be present, it must be 
somebody's cause and somebody's interest. 
69. W adds: In history nothing is more vulgar or absurd than to reproach great men that 
they have acted out of passion. Without passion they cannot act.-To sacrifice other things and 
to make a cause one's own, means to realize a cause with passion. 
258 

PSYCHOLOGY 
way. One must have the insight oneself, that one does the right thing. Drives, 
enjoyment belong only to a form that can have a rational content or a bad 
content. But these are determinations that are present in the most ethical 
and most juridical content. What concerns this content itself belongs in the 
examination of objective spirit. 
One aspect of the drive is to objectify itself, to suspend subjectivity 
and inwardness and give itself a determinate existence. I The drive aims 
255 
at enjoyment. This aspect of the drive, that the drive has the property of 
suspending the one-sided determination of subjectivity, concerns us here 
only for the sake of the general determination. In the realization of the drive 
still other determinations occur than in this determination of immediate 
existence, in which the drive is supposed to be realized, splitting itself into 
subjectivity in itself and the objective world. But this is the standpoint of 
consciousness and self-consciousness. Consciousness is conditioned by the 
external world, the material that is used as a means and in which the drive 
is satisfied. This aspect belongs to the sphere of consciousness as such. The 
self-feeling that consciousness attains its end in this feeling, belongs indeed 
to our standpoint, but this is only the formal aspect of the drive in general, 
to wit that in all that I accomplish, I can satisfy myself and enjoy myself. 
More narrowly considered, the point is that the drives have a content, 
and so they are particulars in contrast to each other. Where this particularity 
comes from has already been discussed, namely that these are determina-
tions of thinking, willing spirit. The drives here are only a transitory special 
content and this is what proceeds to its satisfaction. The drive as such does 
not intuit but proceeds to its satisfaction; the drive is blind, therefore like 
passion. If the drive is blind, the intelligence is not blind; it is the subject 
to which the drives belong. The drives in their indeterminate multiplicity 
belong to the simple subjectivity of the will, belong to one subject, and this 
is here determined as thinking. It has the form of universality in itself and 
under this form it relates to the particular drives. So it appears as the will 
in general. The drives and their content have the form of particularity for 
this subject, and the universal drive of the individual-to satisfy itself-is 
not only to satisfy the drive, but to satisfy the subject itself in the drive. This 
is the difference between self-enjoyment as universal, and self-enjoyment as 
this particular. In animals drives are blind. The subject as intelligence thus 
stands I above his drives, and wills his own satisfaction. But his satisfactions 
256 
in these particularities can contradict each other. 
§477 The will, because it is thinking, has the content of the drive before 
it and the specification that here occurs with the realization of the drive. 
The same drive can be realized in manifold ways, and likewise, among the 
2'i9 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
drives that are particular, one or the other can be satisfied. The intelligence 
is reflective will in general; the will is thus arbitrary as choosing. To consider 
will and thought as separated is irrational. Insofar as the will is will, 
thought is present therein. If it is not abstract pure thought but relates to 
particularity, it is nevertheless a reflective will. Choosing presupposes the 
will as universal before which stand the particular drives. Thus the will is the 
possibility of abandoning itself to one drive or another. The choosing will 
has not yet decided, i.e., it has not yet put itself into one of these particulars 
and adopted it for its own; it has not yet coincided with itself as a whole 
subject. In contrast, that the will has resolved means that the will has taken 
up this particular and excluded the others. Since the will declares one [drive] 
as being essential to it, it coincides with itself in this particular, or it makes 
this type of particular its end, and gives itself this content as the content of 
its subjectivity. 
The unifying of inwardness and externality constitutes actuality. The will 
is actual only when it makes one such particular its own, only when it so 
determines itself. The will that has not resolved itself is only a possible will. 
The decision and resolve constitute its actuality. "'This is an important 
257 
matter, I since the human being uses the drives as an excuse, but this 
does not clear him of responsibility or guilt, for this drive is a particular, 
and in order for it to be satisfied, he must first make it his own. He can 
satisfy the drive or not; for he stands above it as universal. If the human 
258 
being I commits an action and one says that the drives have seduced him 
and led him astray, this ignores his freedom. The particular was his own 
only because he has made it his. This is the standpoint of ancient tragedy. 
Individuals are taken to be guilty and they assume responsibility for their 
action. The human being has willed the act, and is guilty, or else he must 
acknowledge himself to be an animal and then be treated like one. This 
standpoint is not yet the will free in and for itself, for what the human being 
has to do with here is only a particular content, not an absolute content 
such as right, duty. The intelligent will can only will itself, its innermost 
being, and its being, the being of the human being, is freedom. The true free 
will is that will that wills nothing but freedom. The arbitrary will as such 
does not yet have as its end freedom itself; rather the content of arbitrary 
will is at first the drives, and it can choose among the drives. Merely giving 
up the drives is simple negation; but the particular drives are affirmative. 
The intelligence restrains the particular drives; it is the higher, the negation 
of the particular, [so] the particular is not its sole content. 
§4 77 Since the arbitrary will takes as its end the universality of the 
drive and its satisfaction in opposition to the restricted particularity of the 
260 

PSYCHOLOGY 
drive, it becomes the drive towards I [the third element of practical spirit], 
259 
happiness, the proper judgment, the will as intelligence against the partic-
ularity of the drive. For the intelligence the allness [Allheit] of the drive 
results from its particularity. The particular has the universal as its truth; 
the will passes over to a satisfaction that has the character of universality 
and this end stands above the satisfaction of the particular drive. Here 
we are at the standpoint of eudaimonism.,,JO Prior to Kant the principle 
of eudaimonism was dominant in ethics, as it had been the principle of 
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, although in the latter it was eudaimonism 
with a higher end. Happiness is something ancient. In no theory of morals or 
70. W reads: There the will is in a state of conclusion. The other is that the will unites the 
other, the external side of objectivity, with itself.-That is choice, that the will [is] a particular 
only when the will resolves itself to be a particular, when the will posits the particular as its 
own. This is an important matter, so far as humans take drives as excuses. This does not get rid 
of guilt. The human being is intelligent and as a thoughtful being could equally well have not 
chosen or concluded as he did.-The human being is not without guilt. It is a higher honor for 
the person when he considers himself as guilty than when he considers himself innocent. To be 
innocent, not to have committed evil, is out of the question. In an action that he commits, if the 
human being says he is innocent, he declares himself to be not in possession of his freedom. To 
be guilty of something means that what drove him, what provoked him, all this had relation 
to him only in the particular, and that he had willed what he had done, that the guilt was his 
only because he had made it his. For this reason in ancient tragedy there is a higher standpoint 
which takes individuals to be guilty, and not this commiseration with being led into temptation 
so that guilt is not to be imputed. That guilt can be imputed is the height of intelligence. 
§4 77 This standpoint of the reflective will is still arbitrary, not yet the will in and for 
itself, because this will has to do only with the particular content of the drive, not yet with 
the absolute content, the content of duty as such. Arbitrary will is distinguished from free will 
in that arbitrary will deals with a particular content, not absolute; whereas the free will has 
to do with absolute content. It can only will itself, and its essence is freedom. The genuine 
free will wills nothing but the explication of duty, right, ethical life as the objectivation of 
freedom. Arbitrary will has only the drive for its content, so that it may choose, but since it 
rejects this drive, all other content is [for it] only another drive or another way of satisfying a 
drive. Mere giving up is negation, but affirmation requires an affirmative content. Here there 
is no affirmative content other than the particular. Arbitrary will is free abstractly. Its content 
is a finite particular. The reflective will is then comparative, restraining against the particular 
content. The universal in relation of the subject to itself, as universal in the subject.-There 
stands no other content than a particular content. On this point the transition turns itself into 
the end, which is happiness. [Ed. Break in manuscript] ... makes its end the universality of 
satisfaction, so it is the drive for happiness 
In the drive judgment is present, of the subject against the object. The proper judgment is 
the will as the will of intelligence against particularity and for intelligence. This results from 
the particularity of the universaL-Pure logical transition that the particular has its truth in the 
universal, and in its dialectic passes over to the determination of the universal. This transition 
is necessary, passes over to a satisfaction that has the character of universality, and this end 
stands above the particular drives. This end, with which enjoyment is universal, is what we call 
happiness, eudaimonia. Here we are at the standpoint of the eudaimonistic will, that happiness 
is the end.-
261 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
justice is it given as the end or final determination. Nevertheless it is always 
an interesting standpoint and is necessary in the progress and development 
of spirit. This standpoint is also found in Solon's time. 71 The history of 
Croesus is familiar; Croesus had a need to be happy. Solon replied to him, 
not from a higher standpoint, but completely accepted Croesus' position. 
He answered within this framework, and did not place himself above it. 72 
He replied: The happiness of the individual requires his entire life. This is 
Solon's standpoint; the truth in it is the totality of satisfaction. With Plato 
and Aristotle eudaimonia is the highest, namely, that it goes well for the 
daimon of the person, that the human being in its totality is well, that the 
whole of the human being in itself is satisfied. The concern is precisely for 
this whole, this end, that is supposed to be satisfied. 
§4 79 Desire is restrained; the drive is taught to consider the other, the 
whole prior to considering its own desire. [The universal point of view] 
260 
has come between the decision of desire as the restraining negative. I In 
happiness the universal satisfaction is the end, but this is indeterminate; 
and the satisfaction, if it wills to be actual enjoyment, is dependent on a 
particular, singular content. 
§480 There is a contradiction in the fact that the actualization of a 
satisfaction is found only in a particularity; and in contrast to universal-
ity, the particularity is not something satisfying precisely because it is a 
particularity. Consequently satisfaction disappears again if it is sought or 
is found in a particular way. It is a contradiction to find satisfaction in 
a particularity when for the will only a universal satisfaction counts. The 
will finds its satisfaction in something, and immediately transcends this 
something. This contradiction displays itself as a progression into infinity. 
This standpoint of the dissatisfactions that are found in the satisfaction 
is what we repeatedly experience and find portrayed. There is a circle of 
German and French writings from a certain period whose content and end 
is 'wisdom for living'. There it is portrayed in the style of a novel or a 
story that the individual sees satisfaction only in this social position in this 
or that way. Then the experiences are portrayed. Klinger73 made a series 
of such stories which attest from great life-experience the transitoriness of 
such satisfaction and the bitter harshness of self-sacrifice connected with 
71. [Ed.] Cf. Herodotus, Histories, I, 30-3. See also Hegel's handwritten notice to §21 of 
the Philosophy of Right, MM 7.73. 
72. W adds: one can praise no one for being happy until after his death, that is, until one 
can determine whether the entire course of his life was happy and whether the death itself was 
not unhappy. He cites many who died an easy, quick, and uncomplicated death so that even in 
their final moments they experienced no contrary unpleasant feeling. 
73. [Ed.] Friedrich Maximilian Klinger (1752-1831). 
262 

PSYCHOLOGY 
these satisfactions. The result is the so-called 'wisdom for living': one has 
to find satisfaction for oneself only in peace, quiet, and solitariness of life. 
Anything else will not make one happy. The satisfaction is an enjoyment; but 
the fact that this is not genuinely satisfying proceeds not from an assurance 
but from experience, and this experience must be my very own. That fame 
and honor are not satisfying proceeds from experience and must be felt. 
But feeling is entirely subjective. The experience of others is lost to the 
individual so far as it is not had by the individual himself, and if one 
has had such experience, then it is too late to orient oneself according to 
the experience of others. A circle of writings-essentially French-revolves 
around these images, I [namely] one can be happy only through deception; 
261 
there comes a time when the illusion disappears, and what one regarded as 
real and affirmative is determined as a deception. These reveal a burned-out 
reflection, vacuity of spirit, a longing for deception in order to be happy, 
and, because one has experienced that even this view is a deception, one 
shrinks back [from it]. Happiness requires the satisfaction that is universal, 
but it is at the same time a universal that is yet rooted in particulars and has 
no other content but the particular. Here the arbitrary will dominates: 'To 
me that is no enjoyment, others may make of it what they wish.' Happiness 
has a determination in itself, [namely] that of having no fixed determinacy. 
This [principle] is above and beyond universality and reflection. In this sense 
Plato treats pleasure, this standpoint of satisfaction, by bringing pleasure 
under the determination of the boundless [apeiron].74 Since pleasure is 
boundless, Plato shows that it could not be an end, and he rejects this 
[teleological] standpoint as a nullity. 
What we have before us is the will, this universal, but one that is essen-
tially said to have a determination, a content, in itself. This determination, 
the immediacy of the drive, is a content not suitable for the category, the 
form of the universal. The particular content is at the same time suspended 
as a particular; it is negated through the universality that is the end. Thus 
a determination results that is negated. In the negation, the universal deter-
mination remains a determination, particularity in its universality. But the 
determination that allows and includes the determination in itself, and at 
the same time is this universal determination, is freedom. The will that as 
arbitrary will is implicitly free has for its content the proper determination 
of the intelligence, of the [rational] will. In this result the will has come to 
the point of having freedom, that is, having itself, for its substantial content. 
Freedom thus comes to the point of I having itself for its end. Thus freedom 
262 
74. [Ed.] Cf. Plato, Philebus 27c-28a. 
263 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 1827-8 
is the idea, the concept of spirit that for its reality no longer has immediacy, 
drive, a possession in itself, but rather has freedom itself, its own being, its 
own concept. What is to be brought forth by freedom should be posited by 
freedom. This is the objective, the substantial matter; the substance of spirit 
is freedom. 
Subjective freedom is formal, as the freedom of the subject. But the 
freedom that is object exists in its universality; its end is supposed to be 
universal. In happiness there was only the universality of reflection. There 
the universal is not yet this determination in itself. The universality that 
was only sought after in happiness, was only an 'ought to be,' cannot be 
attained, because it is not the true universal in and for itself. Only in the 
latter does spirit attain to its true idea, where the concept is identical with 
its reality and identical for itself. ......, Everything is implicitly idea......, 75 , that 
is, [exists] in our reflective consideration, but there [in happiness] reality is 
not being-for-itself or concept; for this reason nature is not free. But reality 
now corresponds to its concept for spirit; however, it corresponds to the 
concept only insofar as it is the concept itself. Everything else is merely 
forms of external realization. That its concept (the end of spirit) is its reality, 
constitutes objective spirit. 
The formal freedom that may or may not make the rational its concept is 
arbitrary freedom. Arbitrary freedom has not yet found its purpose, has not 
yet discovered that it can only have itself for its end. Objective spirit means 
263 
that the concept has only its I freedom for its object, has only freedom for 
its substantial end; this then is rationality. The concept of spirit is the thing 
in question, it is the rational that is in and for itself, the substantial. Since 
spirit wills nothing but freedom and has no other end than its freedom, 
""the state is only the mirror image of spirit's freedom, wherein it has its 
freedom as actual, as a world before itself ....... 76 This is the concept with 
which we began, the universality that is at home with itself, returned out 
of the externality of nature, that has overcome the externality of nature 
and has come to itself. A science can have no other conclusion than that to 
which the concept has led so far, and has been realized; the result is that 
the subjective has disappeared and the concept thinks itself and has itself as 
its object, content, and purpose. In this conclusion we have arrived at the 
beginning: the conclusion is the coincidence of spirit with itself. The natural 
spirit has arrived at its concept in this way. The faculties of spirit can be 
75. W reads: process of formation in nature is also idea, 
76. W reads: so in addition spirit is to be recognized according to this determination, and 
it must be recognizable, that what it does (legally, ethically, etc., as spirit)-is nothing other 
than to bring forth a world that is a reflection of its freedom. 
264 

PSYCHOLOGY 
considered as serving this or that. Intuition, recollection have an immediate 
satisfaction in themselves, but the vocation that these faculties have is none 
other than to bring spirit to itself, to recognize the immediate affection of 
the world as its own, with the result that its own being is universality in 
general, the concreteness of the end. 
(1) The natural spirit, spirit implicit in its concept; it exists immediately 
in a natural way. 
(2) Spirit's abstract being-for-self is consciousness, here it is also rational 
self-consciousness, but here also reason is for spirit only as something 
existent. 
(3) Spirit is the eternal, true, concept of itself. "'The most important 
aspect is that spirit know itself: gnothi seauton. I This is the call that was 
264 
issued to the Greeks.""77 Spirit has only to know what it is. The purpose of 
these lectures has been to contribute to this knowledge. 
77. W reads: spirit in this way is the most worthwhile of all. 
265 


GLOSSARY 
The glossary contains a selection of frequently used and/or technical terms, 
especially those posing problems in translation. It has served as a guide, 
not an inflexible rule. When more than one English word is given, the 
generally preferred terms are listed first, while terms following a semicolon 
may be suitable in certain contexts. 'Cf.' indicates related but distinguished 
German terms, which generally are translated by different English equiva-
lents. Adjectives are listed without endings. 
Abhartung 
Absicht 
allgemein 
Allgemeine 
Allgemeinheit 
and ere 
And ere ( das) 
Andere (ein) 
Anderssein 
Anerkanntsein 
anerkennen 
Anerkennen 
Anerkennung 
Anlage 
Anschauung 
an sich 
Ansich, das 
Ansichsein 
an und fur sich 
Arbeit 
hardening 
intention 
universal, general; common 
the universal 
universality 
other, else (cf. Veranderung) 
the other 
another 
otherness 
(fact of) being recognized, recognized status 
recognize, acknowledge (cf. 'erkennen') 
recognize, act of recognition 
recognition 
disposition, tendency 
intuition 
in itself, implicit (cf. 'in sich') 
the in-itself 
being-in-itself 
in and for itself 
labor, work 
267 

aufheben 
Aufhebung 
Aufmerksamkeit 
aussereinander 
Aussereinander (das) 
ausserlich 
Ausserlichkeit 
aussern 
Aussersichsein 
Ausserung 
Bedeutung 
Bediirfnis( se) 
Befriedigung 
Begierde 
begreifen 
Be griff 
bei sich 
Benutzung 
Berechtigung 
Beschranktheit 
Besitz 
besonder 
Besonderheit 
besonnen 
Besonnenheit 
bestehen 
Bestehen 
bestimmen 
bestimmt 
Bestimmtheit 
Bestimmung 
Betatigung 
betrachten 
bewahren 
GLOSSARY 
suspend, supersede, sublate, transform, 
suspension, sublation, supersession 
attention 
mutually external 
mutual externality 
external 
externality 
utter, externalize (cf. 'entaussern', 
'veraussern') 
self-externality 
utterance, externalization 
(cf. 'Entausserung', 'Verausserung') 
significance, meaning 
need, needs (cf. 'Not') 
satisfaction, contentment 
desire 
to conceive 
concept 
with self, present to self, at home 
use, employment 
justification, entitlement, authority 
restrictedness 
possession(s) 
particular (cf. 'einzeln', 'partikular') 
particularity (cf. 'Einzelheit') 
self-possessed, level-headed, reasonable 
self-possession, composure, 
reasonableness, level-headededness, 
presence of mind 
to subsist, consist 
subsisting 
to determine, define 
determinate, definite 
determinateness, determinacy, 
distinguishing feature 
determination, vocation, destination, 
definition, condition 
activity, exercise 
regard, consider 
validate 
268 

beweisen 
Bewusstsein 
Beziehung 
Bild 
bildlich 
Bildung 
Blodsinn 
Boden 
Burger 
biirgerlich 
darstellen 
Darstellung 
Dasein 
Denken 
Depression 
Differenz 
Diremption 
Ehre 
Eigenschaft 
eigentlich 
Eigentum 
Eigentumlichkeit 
Einbildungskraft 
einfach 
Einzelheit 
einzeln 
Einzelne 
Element 
empfinden 
Empfindung 
entaussern 
Entausserung 
Entfremdung 
Entschliessen 
GLOSSARY 
prove 
consciousness 
relation, connection, reference 
(cf. 'Verhaltnis') 
image 
imaginative, figurative 
education, cultivation, formation, training, 
culture 
imbecility 
soil, ground, territory 
citizen, burgher 
civil, ci vie 
to present, portray 
presentation, portrayal, exposition 
(cf. 'Vorstellung') 
(determinate) existence (cf. 'Existenz', 'Sein') 
thinking, thought 
depression 
difference (cf. 'Unterschied') 
disunion, rupture, division, diremption 
honor, dignity (cf. 'Wiirde') 
property, feature, attribute 
proper 
ownership, property (cf. 'Vermogen') 
peculiarity 
imagination (cf. 'Phantasie') 
simple 
individuality, singularity 
(cf. 'Individualitat') 
single, individual 
(single) individual 
element (cf. 'Moment') 
n. sentience, sentient, v. to feel, to sense 
sentience, sensation, feeling (cf. 
'Gefuhl') 
to alienate, divest, externalize 
(cf. 'aussern', 'veraussern') 
alienation, divestment, externalization 
estrangement 
resolve, decide 
269 

Entwicklung 
Entzweiung 
ergeben 
erheben 
errinern (sich) 
Erinnerung 
erkennen 
Erkennen, Erkenntnis 
erscheinen 
Erscheinung 
etwas 
Erziehung 
Existenz 
existieren 
Faselei 
Forderung 
form ell 
Fortbestimmung 
Fortgang 
Fortschreiten 
Freiheit 
fremd 
fiihlen 
fiir sich 
Fiirsichsein 
Gang 
Gattung 
gebildet 
Gebot 
Gedachtnis 
Gedanke 
Gedankenbestimmung 
gedankenlos 
Gedankenlosigkeit 
Gefiihl 
Gegensatz 
GLOSSARY 
development 
rupture, disunion, cleavage, division 
follow from, result from 
raise, elevate 
recollect, remember 
recollection, reminiscence 
to recognize, to know (cf. 'anerkennen', 
'kennen') 
cognition, recognition, knowledge 
(cf. 'Wissen') 
to appear (cf. 'scheinen') 
appearance, phenomenon 
something 
education, upbringing 
existence (cf. 'Dasein') 
to exist; to become really existent (cf. 'sein') 
twaddle, gibberish 
requirement, demand 
(merely) formal 
process of further determination 
advance, progression, course 
advance, advancing 
freedom 
alien 
feel, feeling 
for (by, of) itself, on its own account, explicit 
being-for-itself 
course, path, procedure 
species, genus 
educated, cultivated, refined 
precept, commandment 
memory 
thought 
determination of thought, 
thought-determination 
thoughtless 
thoughtlessness 
feeling (cf. 'Selbstgefiihl', 'Empfindung') 
antithesis, opposition, contrast 
270 

Gegenstand 
Gegenstande (pl.) 
gegenstandlich 
Gehalt 
Geist 
Gemeinde 
gemeinsam 
Gemeinsame 
Gemeinschaft 
Gemiit 
Gemiitlichkeit 
Genesung 
gerecht 
Gerechtigkeit 
Geschaft 
Geschichklichkeit 
Gesellschaft 
Gesetz 
gesetzlich 
gesetztsein 
Gesinnung 
Gesundheit 
Gestalt 
Gestaltung 
Gewalt 
Gewalttatigkeit 
Gewerbe 
Gewissen 
Gewohnheit 
Gleichheit 
Gliederung 
Gliick 
Gliickseligkeit 
Grund, Griinde 
Grundsatz 
giiltig 
Giiltigkeit 
GLOSSARY 
object 
objects, affairs, matters 
objective 
content, import 
spirit, mind 
community 
common 
the communal, community 
community (cf. 'Gesellschaft') 
emotion, disposition; soul, heart 
(cf. 'Gesinnung') 
congeniality 
recovery 
just 
justice (cf. 'Recht') 
business, occupation 
adroitness, skill 
society (cf. 'Gemeinschaft') 
law (cf. 'Recht') 
legal 
posited, positedness 
disposition (cf. 'Gemiit') 
health 
shape, figure, form 
configuration, formation 
force, power, violence (cf. 'Kraft', 
'Macht') 
violence 
trade, business, industry 
conscience 
habit, practice, custom (cf. 'Sitte') 
equality 
articulation 
fortune (good) 
happiness 
ground, reasons 
principle, maxim 
valid 
validity 
271 

Gute 
handeln 
Handlung 
Heilung 
herabsetzen 
herauskommen 
heraussetzen 
hervorbringen 
Hochmut 
Hohlheit 
Hypchondrie 
Ich 
Ideal, Idealitiit 
Idee 
ideell 
Individualitiit 
Inner, das 
innerlich 
Innerlichkeit 
in sich 
Insichsein 
intellektuell 
Intelligenz 
Interesse 
kennen 
Korper 
korperliche 
Kraft 
Krankheit 
Kur 
Lebendigkeit 
Leiblichkeit 
leiblich 
Leidenschaft 
Lehre 
Macht 
Mange! 
mannigfaltig 
GLOSSARY 
good 
to act 
action, act, transaction (cf. 'Tatigkeit') 
treatment, therapy, cure 
reduce 
come forth, result 
set forth 
bring forth, produce 
pride, high-mindedness 
shallowness, vanity, emptiness 
hypochondria 
(the) I 
the ideal, ideality 
idea 
(merely) ideal 
individuality (cf. 'Einzelheit') 
the inner, the inward 
inward 
inwardness 
within itself, into self, internal 
(cf. 'an sich') 
being-within-self 
intellectual 
intelligence 
interest 
to know (cf. 'erkennen', 'wissen') 
body 
corporal, physical, somatic, bodily 
force, strength (cf. 'Gewalt', 'Macht') 
illness, disorder 
cure 
vitality, life-principle, organism 
corporeity 
corporal, physical, somatic 
passion 
doctrine, teaching, theory 
power (cf. 'Gewalt', 'Kraft') 
defect 
manifold 
272 

Masstab 
Material 
Materie 
Melancholie 
Mensch(en) 
Menschheit 
Mittel 
Moment 
moral 
Moralitat 
Narrheit 
Nachdenken 
Nacheinander 
naher 
Nation 
Naturgeist 
N atiirlichkeit 
Naturrecht 
Naturzustand 
nebeneinander 
Neigung 
Nichtigkeit 
Not 
Objekt 
Objektivitat 
Ohnmacht 
partikular 
Phanomen 
Phantasie 
Plattheit 
raisonnieren 
real 
Real 
Realitat 
Recht 
re ell 
Reflexion 
Reich 
GLOSSARY 
criterion 
material 
matter 
melancholy 
human being(s), humans 
humanity, humankind 
means, commodity 
moment, element (cf. 'Element') 
moral (cf. 'sittlich') 
morality (cf. 'Sittlichkeit') 
folly, foolishness 
thinking over, reflection 
succession 
more precisely 
nation (cf. 'Volk') 
nature spirit, spirit in nature 
uncultivated natural condition, natural 
immediacy 
natural right, natural law 
state (or condition) of nature 
side by side, juxtaposed 
inclination 
nullity, nothingness 
need, necessity, want (cf. 'Bediirfnis') 
object 
objectivity 
powerlessness, impotence 
private, particular (cf. 'besonder') 
phenomenon 
productive imagination 
banality 
argue abstractly 
real 
the real 
reality (cf. 'Wirklichkeit') 
right, law, justice 
(merely) real 
reflection 
empire, realm 
273 

Reichtum 
Sache 
Schein; Scheinen 
scheiden 
scheinen 
schlecht 
schlechthinnig 
Schlechtigkeit 
schliessen 
Schluss 
Schmerz 
Schuld 
Seelenhaftigkeit 
seiend (part., adj.) 
Seiende, das 
sein (verb) 
Sein (noun) 
selbstandig 
Selbstandigkeit 
Selbstgefiihl 
Seligkeit 
setzen 
Sinn 
sinnlich 
Sinnlichkeit 
Sitte 
sittlich 
Sittlichkeit 
Sollen 
Staat 
Stoff 
Subjekt 
Talent 
Tapferkeit 
Tat 
Tatigkeit 
Tatsache 
GLOSSARY 
wealth 
the thing itself, cause, substantial, subject 
matter, 
semblance, show; seeming 
divide, separate 
to seem (cf. 'erscheinen') 
bad, wicked 
utter, simple 
wickedness 
conclude, decide 
syllogism 
anguish, sorrow, pain 
responsibility, obligation, guilt 
ensoulment 
having being, subsisting 
being, what is 
to be; to exist, to occur (cf. 
'existieren') 
being (cf. 'Wesen') 
self-sufficient, self-subsistent, 
independent 
independence, self-sufficiency 
self-feeling (cf. 'Gefiihl') 
blessedness, bliss 
to posit 
sense, meaning 
sensible 
sensibility 
custom, ethics 
ethical (cf. 'moral') 
ethical life, ethics (cf. 'Moralitat') 
obligation, 'ought' 
state 
stuff, material 
subject 
talent 
valor, bravery, courage 
act, deed 
activity (cf. 'Handlung', 'Wirksamkeit') 
fact 
274 

Tauschung 
Teil 
teilbar 
teilen 
Teilung 
Tollheit 
Torheit 
Triiumerei 
Trennung 
Trieb 
Ubergang 
iibergehen 
iibergreifen 
iiberhaupt 
Ubung 
unangemessen 
unendlich 
Unendlichkeit 
Ungerechtigkeit 
Ungliick 
Unmittelbarkeit 
Unrecht 
unselbstiindig 
unterscheiden 
Unterschied 
Ununterscheidbarkeit 
unveriiusserlich 
Urteil 
urteilen 
Veriinderung 
Veranstaltung 
Verantwortung 
veriiussern 
Veriiusserung 
verb in den 
vereinzeln 
GLOSSARY 
deception 
part 
divisible 
divide 
division 
madness 
folly 
daydreaming 
separation, division 
drive, instinct 
transition 
pass over 
overgrasp 
generally, on the whole; altogether, after 
all, in fact, etc. 
exercise 
inadequate, incongruous 
infinite 
infinity 
injustice 
misfortune 
immediacy 
wrong, wrongdoing, violation of right, 
injustice 
not independent, dependent 
distinguish, differentiate 
difference, distinction, differentiation 
undifferentiatability 
inalienable 
judgment 
judge, divide 
alteration, change 
arrangement 
accountability, responsibility 
to alienate (goods or property) 
(cf. 'entiiussern') 
alienation (of goods or 
property) 
link, bind, connect 
isolate 
275 

Verhalten 
Verhaltnis 
Verhaltnisse (pl.) 
verkehrt 
verkniipfen 
Verlauf 
Vermogen 
vermitteln 
Vermittlung 
Vernunft 
verniinftig 
Verrucktheit 
Verschiedenheit 
verschwinden 
Versicherung 
Verstand 
Volk 
Volksgeist 
Voraussetzung 
Vorgefunden 
vorhanden 
vorhanden sein 
vorstellen 
Vorstellung 
Vorurteil 
Wahnsinn 
wahr 
wahrhaft(ig) 
Wahrheit 
Weltgeist 
Wert 
Wesen 
Widerschein 
Wiedererkennen 
Wille 
Willkiir 
willkiirlich 
Wirken 
GLOSSARY 
conduct, attitude 
relationship, relation 
conditions, circumstances 
inverted 
connect, combine, link 
course, journey 
faculty 
to mediate 
mediation, means 
reason 
rational 
dementia 
diversity 
disappear, vanish 
assurance 
understanding 
people, nation (cf. 'Nation') 
folk spirit, national spirit 
presupposition 
the found, the given 
present, at hand, extant 
to be present, to be at hand, to exist 
(cf. 'sein') 
to represent; to imagine, to envisage 
representation, image, idea 
prejudice, assumption 
madness, insanity 
true 
true, genuine, authentic 
truth 
world spirit 
value, worth 
essence, essential being, being (cf. 'Sein') 
reflection 
recognize (reflective) 
will 
arbitrariness, caprice, arbitrary will, 
free will, free choice 
arbitrary, capricious 
efficacy, effective action 
276 

wirklich 
Wirklichkeit 
Wirksamkeit 
Wirkung 
wissen 
Wissen 
Wissenschaft 
Wohl 
Wollen 
Wiirde 
Wut 
Wutanfall 
Zeitgeist 
Zerstreutheit 
Ziel 
Zufall 
Zufalligkeit 
Zufriedenheit 
Zusammenfassung 
zusammengehen 
Zusammenhang 
Zustand 
Zweck 
zweckmi:issig 
GLOSSARY 
actual 
actuality (cf. 'Realitat') 
activity, agency, efficacy (cf. 'Tatigkeit') 
effect 
to know (cf. 'kennen') 
knowledge, knowing (cf. 'Erkennen') 
(philosophical) science, scientific 
knowledge 
welfare 
volition, willing 
dignity (cf. 'Ehre') 
rage 
fit of rage 
spirit of the age 
absent mindedness, distraction 
aim, end 
chance 
contingency, chance 
satisfaction 
comprehensive whole 
go together 
connection, nexus, continuum, complex 
condition, state, situation 
purpose, end; goal, aim 
purposive, purposeful 
277 


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY ON 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT 
I. Works By Hegel 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse 1817, 
Gesammelte Werke, vol. 13, ed. Wolfgang Bonsiepen und Klaus 
Grotsch in collaboration with Hans-Christian Lucas (t) und Udo 
Rameil (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 2000). English translation: Ency-
clopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline, trans. S. Taube-
neck. The German Library, ed. Ernst Behler (New York: Continuum, 
1990). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse 1827, 
Gesammelte Werke, vol. 19, ed. W. Bonsipien and H. C. Lucas 
(Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1989). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse 1830, 
Gesammelte Werke, vol. 20, ed. Wolfgang Bonsiepen and Hans-
Christian Lucas in collaboration with Udo Rameil (Hamburg: 
Meiner Verlag, 1992). English Translations of the 1830 edition: 
Hegel's Logic, Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, trans. W. Wallace 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1873, 1975). Hegel's Philosophy of 
Nature, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970). 
New translation: The Encyclopedia Logic, trans. T. F. Geraets, W. A. 
Suchting, and H. S. Harris (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1991). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, Werke, vols. 8-10, 
ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl M. Michel, Theorie Werkausgabe 
(Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften (1830), ed. Friedhelm 
Nicolin and Olto Poggeler (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1959). 
Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Werke, vol. 7, Theorie Aus-
gabe (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970). English Translation: Elements 
279 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Alien W. Wood, trans. H. Nisbet 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991). Older translation: 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1952). 
Phi:inomenologie des Geistes, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 9, ed. Wolfgang 
Bonsiepen and Reinhard Heede (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1980). 
Phi:inomenologie des Geistes, ed. J. Hoffmeister (Hamburg: Meiner 
Verlag, 1952). English Translations: Phenomenology of Mind, trans. 
J. B. Baillie (New York: Macmillan, 1910), and Phenomenology of 
Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977). 
Wissenschaft der Logik, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 11: Die objektive Logik 
(1812/13), ed. Friedrich Hogemann and Waiter Jaeschke (Hamburg: 
Meiner Verlag, 1978); vol. 12: Die subjektive Logik (1816), ed. 
Friedrich Hogemann and Waiter Jaeschke (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 
1981). English Translation: Hegel's Science of Logic, trans. A.V. 
Miller (New York: Humanities Press, 1969). 
II. Selected Lectures and Manuscripts of Hegel 
Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, ed. and trans. M. J. Petry, 3 vols. 
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978). 
Vorlesungen uber die Asthetik, Theorie Werkausgabe, vols. 13-15 
(Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970). English translation: Hegel's Aesthet-
ics: Lectures on Fire Art, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1975). 
Hegels Vorlesungen uber die Geschichte der Philosophie, part 4 (vol. 9 
of G. W. R Hegel: Vorlesungen: Ausgewi:ihlte Nachschriften und 
Manuskripte), ed. Pierre Garniron and Waiter Jaeschke (Hamburg: 
Meiner Verlag, 1986). English Translation: Hegel Lectures on the 
History of Philosophy 1825-6, ed. and trans. Robert F. Brown 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990). There is an 
older translation of the second, Michelet German edition, Hegel's 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 3 vols., trans. E. S. Haldane 
and Francis S. Simson (London and New York: Humanities Press, 
1955). 
Hegels Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie des Geistes 182718, ed. Franz 
Hespe and Burkhard Tuschling, with an introduction by B. Tuschling 
(Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1994). 
Hegels Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie der Religion, ed. Waiter Jaeschke 
(Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1984). English Translation: Lectures 
on the Philosophy of Religion, trans. Robert F. Brown, Peter 
280 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
C. Hodgson, and Michael Stewart (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1984). 
ill. Selected Works on Hegel's Philosophy of Spirit 
Berthold-Bond, Daniel, Hegel's Theory of Madness (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press, 1995). 
Crites, Stephen, Dialectic and Gospel in the Development of Hegel's Think-
ing (Pennsylvania, PA: Penn State University Press, 1998). 
deVries, Willem, Hegel's Theory of Mental Activity (lthaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1987). 
Diising, Klaus, Hegel und die Geschichte der Philosophie, Ertdige der 
Forschung (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1983). 
Eley, Lothar (ed.), Hegels Theorie der subjektiven Geistes 
(Stuttgart: 
Frommann-Holzboog, 1990). 
Alfredo, Ferrarin, Hegel and Aristotle (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000). 
Fetscher, Iring, Hegels Lehre von Menschen (Stuttgart: Frommann, 1970). 
Greene, Murray, Hegel on the Soul (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970). 
--'Review of M. Wolf£: Das Korper-Seele Problem: Kommentar zu 
Hegel', Owl of Minerva, 27/1 (Fall1995): 67-77. 
Halbig, Christolph, Objectives Denken: Erkenntnistheorie und Philosophy 
of Mind in Hegels System (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 2002). 
Harris, Errol, 'Hegel's Anthropology', The Owl of Minerva, 25/1(Fall 
1993): 5-14. 
Henrich, Dieter (ed.), Hegels Philosophische Psychologie, Hegel-Studien 
supplement 19 (Bonn, 1979). 
Hespe, Franz, and Tuschling, Burkhard (eds.), Psychologie und Anthro-
pologie oder Philosophie des Geistes, Spekulation und Erfahrung 
(Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1991). 
Houlgate, Stephen, 'Hegel, Derrida, and Restricted Economy: The Case of 
Mechanical Memory', Journal of the History of Philosophy 3411 
(January 1996): 79-93. 
Ikiiheimo, Heikki, Self-Consciousness and Intersubjectivity: A Study 
of Hegel's Encyclopedia Philosophy of Subjective Spirit (1830) 
(Jyviiskylii, Finland: University of Jyviiskylii Publications in Philos-
ophy 67, 2000). 
Lucas, Hans Christian, 'The "Sovereign Ingratitude" of Spirit toward 
Nature', The Owl of Minerva, 2312 (Spring 1992): 131-50. 
Peperzak, Adriaan, Selbsterkenntnis des Absoluten (Stuttgart: Frommann-
Holzboog, 1987). 
281 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Peperzak, 
Adriaan, 
Praktische 
Philosophie 
(Stuttgart: 
Frommann-
Holzboog, 1991). 
Pillow, Kirk, 'Habituating Madness and Phantasying Art', The Owl of 
Minerva, 2812 (Spring 1997): 183-216. 
Schnadelbach, H., Hegels Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissen-
schaften: Ein Kommentar (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2000). 
Williams, Robert R., Hegel's Ethics of Recognition (Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 1998). 
Winfield, Richard, 'Identity, Difference and the Unity of Mind, Reflections 
on Hegel's Determination of Psyche, Consciousness and Intelligence', 
in Philip Grier (ed.), Identity and Difference: Studies in Hegel's Logic 
and Politics (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2007). 
Wolf£, M., Das Korper-Seele Problem: Kommentar zu Hegel (Frankfurt: 
Klostermann, 1992). 
282 

GENERAL INDEX 
abstract identity 38-40, 187; see also 
universal 
abstraction 8, 9, 17, 19, 24, 27, 34-5, 
38,46,47,63-7,81, 102, 165-70; 
self-negating 170, 182-3, 194, 
226,237 
actual soul 158-63; stability of 159; as 
genius 158; as sentient 
totality 158 
actuality 10, 12, 13, 26, 66n, 99, 102n, 
126n, 130,136n, 141-2,146,147, 
158-9, 183; of law 201; of 
reason 200; of soul 82; of 
state 253; of subject 251; of 
will 260 
actualization 12, 16n, 26 ff., 43-6, 60, 
190-5 
Africa 87 
Africans 91 
America 87; culture 90 
animal 85 
animal magnetism 15-16, 70, 82, 
132-6 
anthropology 57, 81; divisions of 
82f. 
Antigone 257 
Aristotle 7-12, 65, 77, 262; Hegel's 
retrieval of 11-12, 18, 39, 42-6 
Asia 87 
Asians 91 
autonomy 26, 40; abstract 44; 
mediated 26 
Boerhaave, Hermann 151 
Boumann, Ludwig 4-5, 54 
Caucasians 91-2 
childhood 96-8 
coercion 188-91 
color 119-20 
community 190-5; external 191; and 
justice 191; founded on 
love 194-5 
concept 23, 63, 66n, 67-8, 71, 74; 
liberation of 75; 
self-conceiving 77, 162-3, 165-7; 
realization of 170, 173; unity 
of 181, 193, 196, 200, 204, 212; 
asend 238,240-2,246,248,264 
concrete 246; universality 76, 173 
Condillac 178 
consciousness 60, 165-7, 169-82; as 
awakening of soul 163; as form of 
spirit 172; as relation to 
object 184 
contradiction 165-6, 168-9, 179, 
180-1, 187-8 
corporeity 158; see also embodiment 
deduction 36-9 
dementia 16-18, 141-52 
desire 24, 32, 40, 46, 50, 51, 73, 91, 
98,104,155,184,186-8,191, 
192, 193,194,262;as 
disunion 100, 141; and drive 103 
283 

GENERAL INDEX 
deVries, Willem 15n 
difference 181-7, 199 
disease 128-9, 131, 141; see also 
dementia 
disunion 100-1 
dreams 105-8 
Driie, Hermann 7, 20 
drive 43-6, 99, 184-5, 256-61; 
rationality of 43-6, 258; 
satisfaction of 258; and 
passion 256-7; suspends its 
subjectivity 258-60 
ego 165-71; as abstract 176; truth of 
natural soul 163; as both universal 
and particular 165-6; as 
resolution of contradiction 
165-6; as existent concept 167; 
as ideality of other-being 170, 
176, 182 
embodiment 121-4, 158 
end 7-8,10,28,39,41-5,50,60,64, 
91,99, 100,186,191,200,238-9, 
246,248,251,263 
entelechy 9 
Erdmann, Johann Eduard 1, 6, 
52-3 
ethical life 22-4, 27, 40, 48, 59, 79n, 
101-2, 122, 172, 173, 194-5, 
200,235,253-7 
eudaimonism 261-3 
Europe 87, 91-2 
experience 62, 63, 69, 70, 178, 205, 
207,227 
faculties 30, 43, 204-5; as moments of 
cognitive process 202 
feeling 43-5; 110-15; abstract 116; 
pre-subject-object 112; distinct 
from sensation 112 f.; of 
right 252-3; and evil 254-5; and 
heart 252-4; becomes drive 251; 
see also self-feeling 
Ferrarin, Alfredo 7-9, 39, 41 
Fetscher, !ring 23 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 93, 182 
Findlay, J. N. 3 
finite 165-7 
formalism 43, 45, 46-8, 184, 204, 209, 
251 
freedom 10-12, 39, 42-6, 65-9, 71-3, 
250; as existent concept 66-8; 
formal freedom 65-7, 72n, 264; 
abstract freedom 67, 74; and 
negation 67-8; at home with self 
in other 67; and ideality 73-4; as 
liberation from nature 68, 182; 
actualization of 190-5; its own 
end 251,264-5 
friendship 23-4, 93, 130n, 170, 194-5, 
255 
geography 87; influence on humans 87 
gesture 160-2 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 44-5 
Greeks 92-3 
habit 18, 153-8 
heart 205 
Hespe, Franz 21, 51, 53, 56 
Honneth, Axe! 24 
Houlgate, Stephen 37-8 
hypnotism 15, 132-6 
idea 170-1 
idealism 69-70, 177 
ideality 73-4, 158-9; truth of 
materiality 77, 169-71 
identity 165-71, 182-6; 
abstract 165-9 
images 105-6 
imagination 33, 218-21; 
productive 221-2 
immateriality 75-7 
immediacy 81, 161-3; as 
abstraction 81 
284 

GENERAL INDEX 
individuality 45, 76, 82-5, 93-4, 100, 
102-4, 125, 138-40, 153, 165; 
abstract 140; opposed to 
university 165; mediates 
universal 173,247-8,258 
infinite 165-7, 184-5, 199-201, 204, 
206, 242, 246; spurious 109; 
negative self-relation 163 
intelligence 200-5, 208-40 
intuition 206-13 
judgment 178, 243, 244n, 245; as 
differentiation 245 
Kant 9-10,36-41,42-6,64,93,174, 
177-8, 182 
Langermann, Johann 145 
language 225-8; giving things a 
name 225 
Lavater, Johann C. 161 
Leibniz 83, 227 
life 10, 13, 14, 19-24, 57, 73, 75, 
84-5, 157, 189, 191-2; planetary 
life 87; stages of 96-100 
Locke,John 177,178 
love 23-4,45,98,100-2,120,122, 
128, 148, 170, 194 
madness, see dementia 
man 100-2; and disunion 102 
master 19-20, 22, 40, 124, 146, 157, 
187-95 
materialism 68-70 
matter 13, 31, 64, 69-70, 71, 75, 77, 
84,117-18,162,176,180,207, 
231, 240; misfortune of 75 
meaninglessness 233-5 
mediation 19,21-2,70, 81, 117, 128, 
136,157,176,188-9,195,202, 
243-6 
memory 33-6, 37-9, 202-3, 229-35; 
mechanical memory 34-6, 233-5 
Mesmer, Franz Anton 131-2, 134,232 
metaphysics 64, 179 
Modernity 10-11, 42 
monad 9, 83 f., 124 
morality 41, 46 
names 225, 231-3; as condition of 
thought 232-3 
Nature 57; and spirit 72-3; 
self-externality 73, 74, 77; untrue 
existence of the idea 7 4; natural 
soul 83 f. 
Naturgeist 13-14; and passive 
Nous 13; and soul 71 
necessity 8, 28-30, 72-3, 154, 165, 
178,181,196,215 
negation 38, 43, 66-7, 76n, 156, 163, 
166-70, 181, 183-6, 192, 199, 
212,244,246-8,260,261,263 
Nous 13,77 
object 170-1, 175; as system of 
thought determinations 177, 
186-7 
organism 13, 16, 75, 86, 142, 
199-200 
other 19-24, 26-7, 76, 133, 150, 
184-8, 190-5 
particular 165-8 
passion 45, 152 
Peperzak, Adriaan 3 n7, 20-1, 39, 44 
perception 31, 1 7 6-9 
phenomenology 165-8 
philosophy 62-3, 65, 93-4, 169, 179, 
202; and types of unity 71, 179 
Philosophy of Spirit 7-14; and De 
Anima 7-8; unity of 48-50, 51-2· 
divisions of 12-14, 57; relation to' 
empirical disciplines 61-3; relation 
to metaphysics 70-71; 
285 
speculative 68; division of 
philosophy 73 

GENERAL INDEX 
physiology 89-90; spiritual significance 
of 90 
Pinel, Philippe 17, 145-8, 150 
Plato 64, 135, 262, 263 
pneumatology 64 
positing 29-32; and mediation 81 
psychology 7-9, 27-9; considers spirit 
as finite 27; critique of rationalism 
and empiricism 28, 61-4 
race 87-9 
reason 23, 40, 41, 43; as drive to self 
actualization 43-6, 195-7; as 
end 248; as subject without being 
subjective 195; 199-204; as 
organic unity 199-200; 
actual 202; as drive towards 
totality 204; as syllogism 243; as 
self-mediating 246; suspends 
finitude 69 
recognition 19-22, 23; as genesis of 
spirit 22-4, 26 ff., 186-95 
Reil, Christoph 145 
relation 11, 16-17,21,23-4,26,45, 
49,58,64, 71, 76,82-3,96, 
100-4, 126, 153, 163, 166-70, 
173-8,184-8,199-200,205-6, 
214-15,219-20,225,233,243-4, 
252,255-6 
representation 204-5, 213-18; 
association of images 218-21 
right 22, 191-5; deduction of 24-5 
Schnadelbach, Herbert 3 
self 26; self-relation 26; 
self-actualization 4, 190-5 
self-consciousness 169-70, 182-95; as 
contradiction 183; as 
universal 194-5 
self-feeling 139-41; as abstraction 
139 
sensation 112, 115-19; inner 
sensation 121 
sentience 75, 82-3, 108-18, 124-32; 
passive totality of 124-7; 
immediacy of 125; illness of 128; 
as genius 126-8 
sex 96, 100-2 
sign 223-5 
slave 19-20, 186-95; powerlessness 
of 192; liberation of 191-4 
sleep 104-10 
solar system 84 
somnambulism 132-3, 135-9 
soul 70-1, 158-63; as Naturgeist 
71; as immateriality of nature 76; 
as slumbering spirit 77; relation 
to body 77-8; awakening of 
78-9; immersion in nature 81 ff.; 
dreaming soul 124 ff.; of 
world 85; dependent on natural 
conditions 85; natural soul 
83-5; see also embodiment, 
sentience 
space 38, 74, 175, 190-5,210, 
212, 217, 233-5, 237; inner 
space 38; abstract space 202-5, 
217 
spirit 11-12, 19, 65-8, 190-7, 
199-204; finite 57; infinite 57, 
246; freedom of 65-9; vocation 
of 13, 60; opposed to 
nature 13-14; liberation 
of 12-14, 19, 57-9; for itself 
(psychology) 29-32; anti-formalist 
corrective 50; science of 59; and 
matter 68-71; slumbers in 
nature 77; posits its 
conditions 81 f.; development 
of 166, 168, 200-1; practical 
spirit 247-65; theoretical 
spirit 204-4 7 
state, origin of 190-4; external 191 
superstition 85-6 
syllogism 243, 246-8; and concept 246 
symbol 223-5 
286 

GENERAL INDEX 
teleology 12, 39, 44-6, 246-51 
temperament 94-5 
theoretical spirit 204-4 7 
therapy 17, 18, 150-2 
thought 182, 235-46; abstract 
239; concrete universal 236; 
formal 239; objectivity of 
236-7; and true being 239; 
transforms given 238; 
self-determining 241-2; without 
words 232 
time 74, 84, 175,210-12,215-16 
truth 64-5, 68, 74, 75, 78, 
108, 163, 170-2, 184, 195, 
199,201,204,207,210,218, 
233-4,239,250,252,261; 
of matter as ideality 77; 
untruth 74 
Tuschling, Burkhardt 24-5, 37-8, 53, 
56 
understanding 179-82, 205, 242-3; 
and finitude 69; as nemesis 256 
universal 7, 26, 62, 66, 153, 165-71; 
abstract 39-40, 173, 188, 191-6, 
223, 242; consciousness 13, 14, 
19, 20, 22-4, 25-7, 50; soul 76; 
intelligence 217-18, 236; 
will 50-2, 263 
virtue 10, 23, 24, 48, 194, 252, 253, 
255 
vocation 13; of spirit 13, 60, 240 
whole 170, 173, 194-6, 201 
will 40, 193, 259-61; objective 249; 
possesses its determinations 249; 
arbitrary 261; see also freedom 
woman 100-2; plant-like unity of 
spirit 102 
Wood, Allen 25 
2R7 

