
G. W. F. Hegel 
Faith & Knowledge 
Translated by Walter Cerf 
and H. S. Harris 
State University of New York Press 
Albany 1977 

Originally Published in 1802 as Glauben und Wissen 
Published by State University of New York Press 
99 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12246 
Translation © 1977 State University of New York 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
Faith and Knowledge. 
Translation of Glauben und Wissen published in 
the Critical Journal of Philosophy, v. 2, pt. 1, 
1802. 
Bibliography: pp. 193-7 
Includes index. 
1. Kant, Immanuel, 1724-1804. 2. Jacobi, 
Friedrich Heinrich, 1743-1819. 3. Fichte, Johann 
Gottlieb, 1762-1814. 
4. Faith and Reason 
I. Title. 
B292l.E5 
1976 121 
76-10250 
ISBN 0-87395-338-X 
ISBN 0-87395-339-8 microfiche. 
ISBN 0-88706-826-X (pbk.) 

Contents 
Translator's Preface 
vii 
Speculative Philosophy and 
Intellectual Intuition: 
An Introduction to Hegel's Essays. 
xi 
Walter Cerf 
Introduction to Faith and Knowledge 
1 
H. 5. Harris 
Note on the Text and on Conventions 
51 
FAITH AND KNOWLEDGE 
1 
G. W. F. Hegel 
Introduction 
55 
A Kantian Philosophy 
67 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
97 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
153 
Conclusion 
189 
Bibliographic Index 
193 
Analytic Index 
199 

Translators' Preface 
The occasion for the initial attempt to translate Hegel's essay on Faith 
and Knowledge {1802-3) 1 into English, was the giving of graduate 
courses on "The Young Hegel" and on "Post-Kantian Philosophy" by 
Walter Cerf at the University of the City of New York and the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin during the 1960s. Our first thanks must go to 
the students in those courses, who never tired of suggesting improve-
ments, and to the City University of New York, which contributed 
$100 to help cover the expense of typing and mimeographing that 
first draft. 
The mimeographed translation was duly registered with the Trans-
lation Center of the University of Southern Illinois. We owe a great 
debt of gratitude to Professor Fritz Marti whose brainchild this Center 
is. He never wavered in his interest in, and encouragement of, our 
translation and he put at Walter Cerf's disposal certain pages of his 
own translation. Had it not been for Marti's Translation Center, it is 
very doubtful that H. 5. Harris (at Glendon College of York Univer-
sity in Toronto) would ever have learned of the existence of the Cerf 
translation, and Cerf is certain that without the cooperation of Harris 
the translation would not have reached the stage of publication. 
Harris became involved during a sabbatical leave from York Uni-
versity in 1971-72. Thanks are due both to York University and to 
the Canada Council for providing the leisure that made his participa-
tion possible. The research grant that went with his Canada Council 
Leave Fellowship also paid for the typing of the final draft of the 
translation. 
Our cooperative effort was from beginning to end under a lucky 
star of complementarity. Translating Faith and Knowledge fitted in 
nicely with Harris' research for the second volume of his Hegel's De-
velopment.2 Cerf's interest in Hegel, on the other hand, has been mo-
tivated more by his studies of Kant. The reader will find therefore, 
that Harris' introduction to the essay seeks both to connect it with 
the earlier and later thought of Hegel, and to offer explanatory com-
1. As likewise Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philoso-
phy (1801), Albany: State University of New York Press, 1977. 
2. The first volume-Toward the Sunlight, 1770-1801-was published by the 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, in 1972. 

viii 
Translators' Preface 
ments on the detail of the rather difficult text. Cerf's introduction, on 
the other hand, is directed to readers who may not be too familiar 
either with Kant's Critical Idealism or with Schelling's Philosophy of 
Identity. He deals in the main with the difference between reflective 
and speculative philosophy and with the concept of intellectual intui-
tion.1 We have each studied and criticized the other's contribution, and 
both of us have profited greatly (though of course we have not always 
agreed perfectly). 
Harris is a native speaker of English, but his knowledge of German 
is by no means perfect. Cerf is a native German whose forty years of 
sojourn in the United States have not prevented German from remain-
ing in the full sense his mother tongue. Cerf must therefore bear the 
main responsibility for mistakes in the rendering of Hegel's text. But 
Harris assumes a full share of the responsibility for any errors of inter-
pretation, since he will not allow the fault to rest with Hegel (though 
Cerf maintains, and Hegel's own first audience agreed, that Hegel's 
German offers difficulties frequently insurmountable even to a native 
German). 
We were agreed on making a translation that would be as faithful 
to Hegel's German as could be reconciled with its readability in Eng-
lish. Harris was more inclined to sacrifice readability to faithfulness, 
Cerf faithfulness to readability. Moreover, while Harris believed he 
could detect in the language of the Essays a consistency and precision 
commensurate to their content, Cerf tended to detect in it specula-
tive insouciance and even simple carelessness, the latter no doubt due 
to the extraordinary speed with which Hegel wrote the Essays. The 
translators hope that they have hit an acceptable balance in trying to 
reconcile their divergent tendencies. Our paragraphing generally fol-
lows that of Lasson rather than Hegel. The frequently monstrous sen-
tences of the original, some of which cover more than a full page of 
small print, were ruthlessly cut into manageable pieces. But Hegel's 
actual language has been rendered with a sort of flexible rigidity. That 
is to say that although there are many cases where the same German 
expression is rendered by two different English expressions, there are 
1. Cerf wrote two introductions: one inquiring into ways of making the Hegel 
of the Essays interesting to contemporary analytic philosophy, the other putting 
the accent on existentialism's relation to Hegel. The first one-of which there 
was only one copy-was lost in transit between Toronto and Brandon. But as 
the second introduction was also meant to be useful to readers having little 
acquaintance with either critical or speculative philosophy it was decided to print 
it with each of the two Essays. 

ix 
Translators' Preface 
almost no cases where the same English word is used for two differ-
ent words in German. Our desire to maintain this much consistency 
has led us to adopt the artificial expedient of marking three breaches 
in it with daggers. The English words "formal," "ideal," "real" are, 
in most contexts, the only possible representatives of the three pairs 
of terms formal/ formellt, idealt I ideel and realt I reell. For the most 
part Hegel appears to use these pairs as synonyms; but there are oc-
casions where we suspect that he intends some distinction of meaning 
between them. We have therefore marked the occurrence of the less 
frequent member of each part with a dagger (i.e., the daggers in our 
translation indicate the German words here marked). We must draw 
the reader's attention to our using "Reason" for the peculiarly He-
gelian conception of what Kant called Vernunft, and "intellect" for 
his conception of what Kant called Verstand. 
For both of us, the labor of translation was far greater than we had 
expected at the outset. The work had to be relegated to hours that we 
could spare from other assignments; and our lucky star was often hid-
den behind the clouds of a postal service that ranged from dead slow 
at the best to dead stop during the Canadian postal strikes. We are all 
the more grateful therefore to Caroline Gray, who helped with the 
Bibliography, and to Lawrence Lyons, who did much of the dullest 
work for the analytical Index. Nor should the labor of several willing 
and able typists be forgotten, though their names are not here re-
corded. Above all, we wish to thank our respective spouses whose love 
and patience sustained us over the years. 
Finally, acknowledgment is due to Professor Marvin Farber, editor 
of the series Modern Concepts of Philosophy, and Warren H. Green, 
the publisher of the series. After years of patiently waiting for our 
translation they very graciously permitted us to transfer the publica-
tion to the State University of New York Press whose director, Nor-
man Mangouni, and editor, W. Bruce Johnson, have been most coop-
erative and helpful. 
Brandon and Toronto, Lady Day, 1976 
Walter Cerf 
H. 5. Harris 

Speculative Philosophy and 
Intellectual Intuition: 
An Introduction to Hegel's Essays. 
I. SPECULATIVE PHILOSOPHY: A FIRST SKETCH 
"Speculation" is a bad word nowadays. On the stock market specu-
lators are peo.ple who, wanting to get rich fast and without work, 
invest their money in untested stocks or on the basis of information 
that gives the prediction of success only a hazardously low degree of 
probability. And so, when we believe that a scientific hypothesis or a 
presumed psychological insight or indeed even a statement claiming 
to be "factual" has no evidence or hardly any evidence that could 
serve as foundation of its truth claims, we say: "This is mere specu-
lation." 
Yet when the congressional committee investigating the wild gi-
rations of the stock market asked Bernard Baruch what he did for a 
living he is supposed to have answered proudly, "I am a speculator." 
Rather surprisingly, old Bernard Baruch and the young Hegel of these 
Essays have one thing in common: they were proud of being engaged 
in speculation. Of course they meant two different things by "specu-
lation"-even though the latter-day use of the word is connected in 
some bizarre way with the earlier meaning. 
The term "speculation" comes from "speculare," which is taken to 
be synonymous with "intuire" (from which comes "intuition"). In a 
very preliminary way we can describe what the author of the Essays 
meant by speculation as the intuition or vision of the true nature of 
the relations among God, nature, and self-consciousness or reason. 
"Self-consciousness" and "reason" are interchangeable on the basis 
of the Kantian "I think" -"1 think the categories" -rather than on 
the basis of the Cartesian "cogito," which comprises acts other than 
those of thinking, let alone "pure" thinking. It was Schelling who 
tried to articulate this vision of the true nature of the relation of God, 
nature and self-consciousness in his Philosophy of Identity-so called 
because the relation was to be one of identity, a basically simple 
design trying to hold together a complex composition. The vision was 
of course not a sensuous intuition, but an intellectual intui-

xii 
Walter Cerf 
tion.1 When Hegel speaks of speculative philosophy he has the 
Philosophy of Identity in mind and its intellectual intuition of the all-
comprising and ultimate whole of God, nature, and self-consciousness. 
The Philosophy of Identity had to have the form of a system 
whose organic wholeness, reflecting the wholeness of the vision, was 
to be the test of the truth of the vision. The system consisted of two 
parts: the Philosophy of Nature and the Transcendental Philosophy, a 
division obviously at odds with the Kantian as well as the pre-
Kantian divisions of philosophy. At the time when Hegel wrote the 
Essays Schelling had published several drafts of the Philosophy of 
Nature 2 and one of the Transcendental Philosophy.3 Although Schel-
ling was forever revising his system, the holistic vision behind it is 
clear. It was a singularly beautiful vision. If ever the time should 
come when philosophy is judged in terms of ~sthetic criteria, the 
general scheme of the Philosophy of Identity (rather than the detailed 
execution) would surely be among the crowned victors. Its vision of 
the whole is the vision of an unconscious God (Spinoza's natura 
naturans) revealing Himself in the ever ascending levels of nature 
(natura naturata) until self-consciousness emerges in rational man. 
This is the story the Philosophy of Nature tells. The Transcendental 
Philosophy, on the other hand, claims to trace God's coming to know 
Himself in a sequence of stages that culminate in art, according to 
Schelling; in religion or rather, a re-union of art and religion, ac-
cording to the young Hegel; and in philosophy, according to the ma-
ture Hegel. For although Hegel's mature thought and system became 
more complex and subtle, they never completely lost their connection 
with the basic vision and division of the Philosophy of Identity. His 
Philosophy of Nature, like Schelling's though critical of it, was still 
meant, if not to replace the natural sciences altogether, at least to pro-
vide them with the basic framework without which they lose them-
selves in the infinite chaos of experience and remain atomistic and 
mechanistic instead of becoming holistic and dynamic. And Hegel's 
Logic, his Philosophy of History, and perhaps even his Phenomenol-
ogy, may be said to explicate themes that Schelling's Transcendental 
Philosophy was unable to shelter and develop in its relatively sim-
plistic frame. Further, Hegel could integrate these themes into the 
total vision. 
In any case, the Hegel of the Essays, following Schelling though 
not without reservations, is convinced that philosophy has finally 
come into its own as speculative philosophy envisioning the inner 
unity of God, nature, and self-consciousness, and it has gained its 
systematic presentation in the Philosophy of Identity with its two 

xiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
organic parts, the Philosophy of Nature tracing the emergence of self-
consciousness, and the Transcendental Philosophy tracing the emer-
gence of God's knowledge of Himself. 
None of this is likely to sound convincing to a reader with an 
analytically trained intellect. I shall try in Section III of this Introduc-
tion to make the conception of speculative philosophy appear less 
strange by pointing out how speculative philosophy takes care of 
objections which non-speculative philosophy raises against it. Nor 
will speculative philosophy make sense to any historian of philoso-
phy who knows that "speculation" is just another term for "intellec-
tual intuition" and is aware of what Kant did to that concept. In 
Section IV I hope to show where in Kant's work the speculative phi-
losophers believed to find justification for reintroducing intellectual 
intuition into the cognitive enterprise of philosophy. In Section II, 
however, I shall try my hand at an entirely different approach to the 
Philosophy of Identity, an approach by way of the human or, to use 
a fashionable term, existential motivations that drove Hegel into the 
arms of Schelling's Philosophy of Identity. 
But first we must return for a moment to the term "speculation." 
It was of course precisely its Philosophy of Nature that brought 
speculative philosophy into disrepute. The triumphant march of the 
natural sciences throughout the nineteenth century turned specula-
tion qua intellectual intuition into speculation qua unwarranted by 
any acceptable evidences. In their Philosophy of Nature Schelling and 
Hegel were like two brave medieval knights fighting a division of 
tanks. The battle was lost before it began. Yet the thought is perhaps 
not without some twilight charm that someday the sciences them-
selves will feel a hankering after a unity that could not be satisfied 
by the logical reconstruction of the language of science and to which 
the holistic passion that shaped these now forgotten Philosophies of 
Nature may be congenial. To be sure, the fuzzy-heads that make up 
the small but noisy army of today's anti-science and anti-technology 
prophets may joyfully return to the speculative Philosophy of Nature 
and claim it as an ally. But its sound re-appropriation, if there is to 
be another one after the debacle of B·ergson's elan vital, will have to 
arise from a need within the sciences themselves. 
II. HE G E L A N D T HE P H I L 0 S 0 P H Y 0 F I D E N T I T Y 
In his introduction to the Difference essay Hegel writes that philoso-

xiv 
Walter Cerf 
phy becomes a need in times when the simple and beautiful harmony 
of existence is sundered by the awareness of basic dichotomies and 
antinomies, when the believers become alienated from the gods, man 
from nature, the individual from his community. In historical situa-
tions of this sort philosophy is born and re-born in order to prepare 
through its systematic thought the revolution through which civiliza-
tion's many-dimensional alienation will be overcome in a higher 
cultural synthesis. 
We can see by inference from his early theological writings4 and by 
what we know of the circumstances of his first thirty years that these 
views reflect Hegel's own existential situation. On the level of values 
he was torn apart by clashing loyalties, loyalties to Greek Apollo, 
Christian Jesus, and Judeo-Prussian Kant. Liberated in mind by the 
French Revolution like every young German worth his salt, he yet 
remained in political bondage to the absolutist Duke of Wiirttem-
berg. He was tied down to the study of dogmatic theology, although 
there was probably little that interested him less at the time. He who 
later drew the wide panorama of human history and civilizations into 
his philosophy lived as a young man in exceedingly narrow condi-
tions of financial, social, and sexual deprivation as stipendiate in 
Tiibingen and as tutor in private homes of the moderately wealthy 
in Bern and Frankfurt. Only an iron self-discipline can have kept him 
from exploding and going mad as his friend Holderlin did. His was a 
thoroughly alienated existence in which the clash between the life he 
led and his aspirations, between what was the case and what should 
and could be the case drove him, as it drove so many of his genera-
tion, to dream the idealizing dream of the Hellenic age and of the 
Christian Middle Ages and to trust in philosophy to prepare the revo-
lution of the German situation. It is important to be aware of the 
personal urgency in Hegel's commitment to philosophy. What moti-
vated and energized his philosophical beginnings were not at all 
intellectual puzzles, but the deeply felt disturbances of the situation 
in which he found himself and his generation, with the clash between 
Apollo, Jesus, and Kant the most articulate of these personal aspects 
of the general malaise. At least that much the young Hegel and our 
own existentialists have in common: rna tters of personal urgency 
rather than an interest in intellectual puzzles motivated their philoso-
phizing. And when Kierkegaard compared the later Hegel's Logic 
with a dance of skeletons he was not aware-and in fact could not 
have been aware-of how similar the personal problems behind his 
Either-Or were with the clash of value constellations that split the 

XV 
Speculative Philosophy 
young Hegel. Although their motivational situation was similar they 
took off in very different directions indeed, doing so on the basis of 
the sort of decision which is not exactly made by men, but which 
rather makes men: Kierkegaard to explore, and lead his public into 
what, in this time and place of his, it should mean to be a Christian 
in Christianity, and Hegel to explore and finally present what, in this 
time and place of his, the system of philosophia perennis is. 
How did the existential situation of the young Hegel lead him in 
the Essays to embrace Schelling's Philosophy of Identity? 
To be sure, Hegel might never have become a Schellingian if the 
accidents of life had not brought him together with Schelling in 
Tiibingen and made them good enough friends to remain in contact 
even after they went their different ways from Tiibingen, Schelling 
to fame and professorship in Jena, Hegel to the obscurity of a private 
tutorship in Bern and Frankfurt. Nor must it be forgotten that Schell-
ing, in making Hegel his neighbor and his colleague at the University 
of Jena, freed Hegel from the social and financial-if not sexual-
frustrations of the preceeding decades. It is not cynical to ascribe 
importance to biographical data of this sort. On the other hand, there 
must have been something in Schelling's Philosophy of Identity that 
made it look attractive to Hegel as philosophy from the perspective 
of his own existential travail. 
Kant's Critical Idealism lay before the public in its whole extension 
and depth. There was Fichte's philosophy as Wissenschaftslehre. He-
gel was familiar with both. In the rich firmament of Goethe's Ger-
many there was a multitude of other philosophers, now known only 
to specialist scholars but then quite visible stars, a few of them 
generally believed at the time to be stars of the first magnitude. What 
Hegel could see in Schelling's philosophy and in none of the others 
was the construction-or at least the sketch for it-of a harmonious 
whole in which Hegel's own basic conflicts, though expressed in the 
most abstract terms, found their solution. He was able to project the 
longing after harmony that was energized by his personal turmoil 
into Schelling's philosophy, a philosophy which aimed at overcoming 
and bringing into systematic unity the basic conceptual dichotomies 
and antinomies that had evolved in modern metaphysics from Des-
cartes to Kant around the relation between the infinite and the finite 
(God and His creation) and between the subject and object (man and 
nature, the knower and the known). It was not at all impossible to 
project one's own alienations into these and connected dichotomies 
and to consider the Philosophy of Identity, with the interdependence 

xvi 
Walter Cerf 
of its two parts and their intrinsic relation to the Absolute, as the 
vehicle of one's own reconciliation with God, nature, and society. 
Thus Hegel, quite unlike Kierkegaard, took the first and decisive 
step away from his existential motivations and moved toward the 
grand tradition of modern philosophy-whose Plotinus he was des-
tined to become. His Essays are the documents marking the begin-
ning of his career. Without this first step Hegel rather than Kierke-
gaard might have become the father of existentialism. His gifts-
among which ordinary logical thinking was conspicuously absent 
-might have well prepared him for this; and the influence which 
parts of the Phenomenology had, for example on Sartre, corroborate 
it. 
III. SPECULATIVE VERSUS REFLECTIVE PHILOSOPHY 
Our excursion in the preceding section was intended to aid in an 
understanding of how the general scheme of Schelling's system-
with its view of the Absolute revealing itself in nature and rational 
self-consciousness and revealing itself to itself in the two parts of the 
Philosophy of Identity-found a ready response in Hegel. The 
schisms characteristic of his situation and that of his generation, 
when expressed in philosophical dichotomies such as those of the in-
finite and finite and of subject and object, could find their harmonious 
solution in the Philosophy of Identity, which seemed to offer on the 
academic level a view of the whole uniting in harmony all sorts of 
opposites. As such, it could serve as a philosophical basis for the 
revolution that would turn modern civilization, sick from and of its 
schisms, into a truly integrated culture to be described in metaphors 
taken from the romantic conception of nature: a living whole of 
which the individuals were organs rather than atoms. As each part 
was sustained and enriched by the whole, so each part functioned to 
sustain the whole. 
But here a problem arises. If speculative philosophy, having its 
sight on that final whole of God, nature, and self-consciousness, is 
philosophy as it has finally come into its own truth, then what about 
all those philosophical efforts that cannot be said even by the most 
tolerant historian to anticipate speculative philosophy at least germi-
nally? That is, what about all non-speculative philosophy? And what 
about the interrelations, if any, between speculative and non-

xvii 
Speculative Philosophy 
speculative philosophy? These questions are among the questions 
which Hegel himself takes up in his Introduction to the Essays. 
The Essays have a name for non-speculative philosophy: reflective 
philosophy. The term has here only an indirect connection with the 
various uses Kant assigned to 'reflection' and 'reflective' in The 
Critique of Pure Reason and The Critique of Judgment. Basically, 
Hegel uses it as Schelling had done in his System of Transcendental 
Idealism (1800), where reflection was what the second of the three 
"epochs" in the "history of self-consciousness" led to, reflection go-
ing hand in hand with analysis, both being opposed to the "productive 
intuition" and "synthesis" that characterize the first epoch. And 
Kant's philosophy was taken to be the typical culmination of the 
epoch of reflection. (The third epoch was that of "the absolute act of 
will.") But as no concept remained quite the same when Hegel took 
it up in his own thought, we can understand what Hegel meant by 
'reflective philosophy' without discussing Schelling's view. 
The distinction between reflective and speculative philosophy is 
not meant to be a distinction between different schools of philosophy. 
To Hegel, English empiricism from Locke on as well as continental 
rationalism (with the exception of Spinoza) were reflective pl\iloso-
phies. The whole philosophy of the Enlightenment was reflective. 
And so was most of Kant's transcendental idealism. Reflective phi-
losophy is philosophy that has not come to the true conception of phi-
losophy, philosophy that is not really philosophy-inauthentic phi-
losophy over against authentic philosophy which is, and cannot but 
be speculative. In terms of the Kantian faculties, reflective philoso-
phy is philosophy of the intellect (der Verstand), speculative philoso-
phy is philosophy of Reason (die Vernunft), but of a Reason which 
has been allowed to trespass on territory Kant believed to be inacces-
sible to finite man. It is typical of reflective philosophy, though it does 
not exhaust its nature, that it relies on arguments, proofs, and the 
whole apparatus of logic, that it insists on clear-cut dichotomies in 
terms of abstract universals, dichotomies such as those of the infinite 
and the finite, subject and object, universal and particular, freedom 
and necessity, causality and teleology, etc., etc.; that it tries to solve 
intellectual puzzles rather than give the true conceptual vision of the 
whole; that it sticks to the natural sciences as the source of the only 
reliable knowledge of nature, thus committing itself, in the first place, 
to a concept of experience reduced to sense perception and to a con-
cept of sense perception reduced to some causal chain, and in the 
second place, to a pervasive atomism that reduces the whole to the 

xviii 
Walter Cerf 
sum of its parts, and to a mechanism that excludes teleology from a 
positive role in cognition. No reflective philosophy need have all of 
these characteristics although any one of them would be the indica-
tion of a philosophy that has not reached the one authentic concep-
tion of philosophy. 
Hence, any assault that reflective philosophy directs against specu-
lative philosophy can be taken care of simply by pointing out that it 
is a reflective assault. Answering it by counterarguments would turn 
the speculative philosopher into a reflective one. What is wrong with 
the attack is that it is reflective; it is made in a style of doing philoso-
phy that is not truly philosophical. Whatever the argument may be 
which a reflective philosopher uses against speculative philosophy, 
his very arguing shows that he is not really a philosopher. Contempt 
is the only answer to all reflective assaults. No dialogue is possible. 
We shall soon observe that this is only one side of Hegel's attitude 
toward reflective philosophy. But before we come to the other side 
we may want to illustrate this conception of the relation between 
reflective and speculative philosophy by way of a contemporary paral-
lel. I mean the relation between existentialism and analytic philoso-
phy. 
There can be no doubt at all that our own contemporary analytic 
philosophy, in its narrowest as well as in its widest meaning (which 
excludes only the existentialists, the Whiteheadians, and the Tho-
mists), would be judged by Hegel to be a very typical reflective phi-
losophy. There must be considerable doubt, however, whether or not 
Hegel would acknowledge existentialism to be speculative philosophy. 
From the viewpoint of the Philosophy of Identity, existentialism 
spoiled its chance of being authentic philosophy by concentrating 
not just on man but on man as condemned to finitude. And from the 
viewpoint of existentialism Hegel spoiled his chance of being the first 
modern existentialist when he permitted the urge that drove him into 
philosophy to find satisfaction in the more or less traditional appa-
ratus of the Philosophy of Identity. Yet there are several aspects of 
existentialism in which the Hegel of the Essays could recognize him-
self. Besides the already mentioned motivational factor (one does not 
do philosophy to solve intellectual puzzles, though a positive version 
would have to have recourse to some colorless formula such as 
searching for meaning in a world become meaningless, which fits nei-
ther Hegel nor existentialism), Hegel would recognize his contempt 
for the philosophy of the intellect in existentialism's contempt for a 
civilization in which the empirical sciences and technology have be-

xix 
Speculative Philosophy 
come predominant and where philosophy has very largely become the 
handmaiden of science. He would recognize, as we already did, his 
distinction between reflective and speculative philosophy in the dis-
tinction so dear to existentialists, the distinction between what is 
authentic and what is inauthentic, between eigentlich and uneigent-
lich. And speculation itself, intellectual intuition as vision of the 
whole, has its analogue or rather, its subjective caricature in the cog-
nitive function existentialists ascribe to moods, the mood of boredom, 
for example, being said to reveal the Whole of Being or Being as a 
Whole. In any case, whether or not existentialism is what speculative 
philosophy would have come to be in our own day, it is quite certain 
that the reaction existentialism has shown towards even the most 
devastating attacks launched against it by analytic philosophers is 
very much the same as the reaction of speculative philosophy towards 
reflective attacks. These attacks are attacks that need not be answered 
except by classifying them as analytic, that is, as basically unphilo-
sophic, as philosophically inauthentic. From the side of existentialism 
no dialogue is possible between it and analytic philosophy, just as 
from the side of speculative philosophy no dialogue is possible be-
tween it and reflective philosophy. (From the side of analytic philoso-
phy as from the side of reflective philosophy in general, the situation 
is of course quite different as they are committed to the idea of ra-
tional discourse. It seems to them incomprehensible that there are 
philosophies which in principle refuse to argue or, if they condescend 
to argue, know that they are lowering themselves to a pseudo-
philosophical level.) 
We had mentioned that the contempt for reflective philosophy will 
turn out to be only one side of Hegel's attitude toward reflective phi-
losophy. To the reader of the Essays it may appear to be the most 
prominent part, as they abound with ferocious sarcasms directed at 
reflective philosophy in general and at this or that reflective philoso-
pher in particular. Yet there is something authentically inauthentic, 
so to speak, about the very dichotomy of reflective and speculative 
philosophy. For like all the other dichotomies mentioned before, the 
dichotomy of reflective and speculative philosophy is itself typical of 
the style of reflective philosophy, and not at all typical of speculative 
philosophy, in which the reflective dichotomies are overcome in a 
vision of the organic whole that builds up its richness of harmony 
out of the tensions between its constituents. To be sure, unlike the 
reflective dichotomies separating the infinite from the finite, subject 
from object, freedom from necessity, etc., the dichotomy separating 

XX 
Walter Cerf 
reflective from speculative philosophy is not a dichotomy in phi-
losophy, but a dichotomy about philosophy, a second-level dichoto-
my. But this should make no difference at all; for meta-philosophy is 
itself an essential part of philosophy and the meta-philosophical di-
chotomy is philosophical-although Hegel should have called it a 
reflective philosophical dichotomy, a dichotomy which sets specula-
tive philosophy the task of overcoming it as it is to overcome the 
first-level dichotomies that reflective philosophy prides itself of. 
Here we reach the positive side of Hegel's attitude toward reflec-
tive philosophy. It is historical or at least, it is historical in a way. 
Only after reflective philosophy has gone through all its paces and 
realized its major possibilities can philosophy come into its own as 
speculative philosophy. The analytic gifts of the intellect must have 
bloomed and so made all the dichotomies of the time explicit before 
the bud (ever present?) of speculation can open up in its full glory. 
In particular, reflective philosophy must have reached the stage where 
it sees itself split into unsolvable antinomies and is forced into scep-
ticism concerning the very problems that form its traditional core. It 
is at this historical point when philosophy despairs of metaphysics 
-as it does in Kant's Dialectic of Pure Reason-and forbids pure 
Reason to have any but a methodological ("regulative'') role in cogni-
tion, that philosophy can and must come into its own as speculation. 
In Hegel's style of speculative philosophy this necessity is at once 
historical and conceptual-without much awareness of this reflective 
distinction. Rather it is taken for granted that the logical dependence 
of the concept of speculative philosophy-the overcoming of the di-
chotomies-on the concept of reflective philosophy is eo ipso a tem-
poral sequence or, to express it in a somewhat different way, as if 
the teleological unfolding of philosophy is identical with the causal 
chain of historical events. (It needs no stressing that this sort of 
identification as it occurs in the Essays, is at the very heart of the 
later Hegel's elaborate and subtle historical dialectic.) 
(In the Essays Hegel's view of the history of philosophy is rather 
ambivalent. At times he does seem to view the history of philosophy 
as leading "necessarily" in its last stages from reflective philosophy 
t:l speculative philosophy. At other times he seems to think that any 
philosophy which deserves the name is germinally speculative, but 
kept from knowing itself as such by the cultural situation in which 
it makes its appearance. Yet there is Spinoza, the great inspirator of 
the Philosophy of Identity. It seems difficult for either of these views 

xxi 
Speculative Philosophy 
to account for Spinoza's system appearing at the time when it did 
appear.) 
There are two images that the Essays occasionally use for the re-
lation between reflective and speculative philosophy, and they show 
how ambiguous Hegel's concept of this relation is. In one image, 
what philosophy is about is compared with a grove. To speculative 
philosophy the grove is where the god dwells. To reflective philoso-
phy, the grove is a number of trees. In the other image, philosophy 
is compared with a temple. Speculative philosophy dwells in it, but 
reflective philosophy remains in the forecourt. 
The first image appears to make the difference between reflective 
and speculative philosophy so radical as to exclude all relation, let 
alone dialogue, between them. Yet in his earlier theological writings 
Hegel also uses the image of the hallowed grove for the youthful or-
ganic and holistic culture of Hellas, in which nature and the divine 
were not yet split one from the other nor the individual from his 
community. If we remember this, then we may also interpret the hal-
lowed grove image with respect to speculative philosophy in a dialec-
tical way: reflective philosophy had to separate the sacred grove into 
its component trees so that in speculative philosophy the divine, the 
natural, and the rational could achieve consciousness of their unity. 
Exactly the opposite holds for the other image, that of the temple 
and its forecourt. Obviously, if there is a forecourt one cannot enter 
the temple of speculative philosophy without passing through the 
forecourt of reflective philosophy. On the surface, then, the second 
image seems to be that of a necessary connection between reflective 
and speculative philosophy. But why does there have to be a fore-
court at all? And in fact, Hegel stresses that there is no approach to 
speculative philosophy but a salta mortale, a corps perdu, by a jump 
that must be lethal to reflective philosophy if it is to be resurrected 
as speculation. 
Besides the rather hedged-in admission that reflective philosophy 
had to run its full course before the true conception of authentic phi-
losophy could arise, the Essays contain a second positive appraisal of 
reflective philosophy. For it would seem that Hegel concedes that the 
very language of speculative philosophy must for purposes of com-
munication be to a large extent the language of reflective philosophy 
and even the language of ordinary discourse. There are certain indi-
cations that the writer of the Essays had already given considerable 
thought to the problem of how to communicate speculative philoso-

xxii 
Walter Cerf 
phy. He is convmced that it should not be done more geometrico, 
not even in the very attenuated form in which it occurs in Fichte's 
Science of Knowledge and Schelling's publications up to 1801. This 
logical apparatus is hopelessly reflective. Nor would Hegel's own in-
clinations and logical gifts be appropriate to it. But then, how can 
speculation, extra-ordinary and extra-reflective as it is, be communi-
cated at all? How can ordinary language and reflective philosophical 
discourse be made to do an extra-ordinary and non-reflective job? 
There is quite a similarity here between the speculative philosopher 
and Kierkegaard. Kierkegaard focused in on this sort of problem very 
early and his whole literary style is a deliberate answer to it, an an-
swer full of astonishing deviousness. Even the most prejudiced He-
gelian will have to admit, I think, that in this respect Kierkegaard 
was much the greater craftsman of the two. Hegel found the full 
measure of his style only in the Phenomenology (1807) when he was 
37 years old, and it consisted mainly in various singular ways of 
adapting the grammar and terms of ordinary and reflective discourses 
to the presentation of an ever ongoing movement of concepts fed by 
dialectical tensions. Kierkegaard was an artful spider weaving intri-
cate nets to catch his readers, Hegel a busy bird bravely bending 
and stretching the available material to build a fine nest for his dia-
lectical eggs, and the reader be damned. Some of this bending and 
stretching can already be observed in the Essays. Hegel's style in the 
Essays was unlike that of anybody else then writing in German phi-
losophy. This is not necessarily a praise, least of all in Hegel's own 
judgment, which condemns the idiosyncratic in philosophy. I am 
somewhat inclined to agree with those critics who say that the main 
stylistic rule of the Essays is this: the more complex the grammatical 
construction of a sentence and the less clear its meaning, the more 
speculative it will be. In any case, the uniqueness of his style in the 
Essays seems due less to any clear insight into how speculative phi-
losophy should and could be communicated than to a rather tentative 
groping in many divergent directions of adapting the linguistic me-
dium to speculative purposes. The reflective dichotomy, for example, 
of subject and object is overcome linguistically with Schelling's aid 
by way of the awkward formulas at the heart of the Philosophy of 
Identity: "the subjective Subject-Object" and "the objective Subject-
Object." The latter is dealt with in the Philosophy of Nature, the 
former in the Transcendental Philosophy. The same procedure might 
have been used for the reflective dichotomy of the Infinite and the 
Finite, but neither Schelling nor Hegel does so, though they use "the 

xxiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
finitely Infinite" and "the infinitely Finite," neither of which would 
indicate what it should: the overcoming of the dichotomy in the 
"identity" of the Infinite and the Finite. To speak of God in episte-
mological terms as Subject-Object must have seemed less iconoclastic 
and objectionable than to speak of Him as the Finite-Infinite. One 
shudders to think of Schelling and Hegel extending the symbolization 
of the identity of subject and object to other dichotomies such as 
those of freedom and necessity or causality and teleology. 
Parenthetically we may note here that Hegel is rather flexible in 
relating these two basic dichotomies of subject and object and of the 
infinite and the finite to one another. Sometimes it is the subject that 
is infinite and the object finite, sometimes the other way around, a 
flexibility that only a philosophy contemptuous of reflective philoso-
phy could allow itself. 
In any event one has to keep in mind the whole glorious scheme of 
the Philosophy of Identity to give to the 'objective and subjective 
Subject-Object' the flesh and blood it seems to lack in the Essays. 
One must keep in mind, moreover, that these abstract identity for-
mulas were alive with the existential agony felt by Hegel and his 
contemporaries and that the holistic passion at the living core of the 
Philosophy of Identity was fed by the alienation of the individual 
from nature, community (das Volk), and God. 
Speculative philosophy, in sum, defends itself against the attacks 
of reflective philosophy by labelling the attacks reflective, and not by 
arguing with them-because it would then abandon itself as specu-
lation and surrender to reflection. On the other hand, reflective phi-
losophers, cupidi rerum novarum, see in the speculators an interest-
ing new sort of monkey they would like to get better acquainted 
with. In fact, if the monkey could convince them that his system is 
not just another cage but what he claims it to be, the ultimate whole 
as known in the only sort of knowledge that deserves the name, the 
reflectors might in the end want to share the cage with him. But in-
stead of trying to convince them in the style they expect from a 
philosopher, the monkey develops his salta mortale rhetoric which 
ls as convincing as telling a healthy man that he must go through 
cancer of the brain in order to enjoy true health. So what can specu-
lative philosophy actually do to convince reflective philosophy (as 
well as common sense and the general public) that it is what it claims 
to be? 
Perhaps this is one of the problems, taken in its most catholic 
scope, that the Phenomenology, as the prolegomena to Hegel's sys-

xxiv 
Walter Cerf 
tern, was later intended to answer. In the Essays the answer is an 
inaudible sigh of regret joined with an affirmation of hope. The sigh 
of regret: if only THE speculative system existed, not in fragments 
and sketches as in Schelling, but as an organic whole detailed in its 
totality! The affirmation of hope: once this system exists, the spirit 
of the time will reach out toward it, its time will have come, es wird 
sein Glueck machen.5 For civilization is longing to be cured of the di-
chotomies that rend it and that reflective philosophy had the task of 
bringing into the open. 
And the spirit did reach out toward it. However, it was not in the 
Philosophy of Identity that the spirit recognized itself, not in Schell-
ing and not in the Hegel of the Essays. It recognized itself in the 
Hegel of the Phenomenology, the Logic and the Philosophy of His-
tory. In them, speculative philosophy, though greatly changed, ful-
filled its promises, and died (except in England, where religion found 
a strong ally in it, and in Italy, where liberalism was the ally and 
where national pride could claim Vico to be St. John the Baptist to 
Hegel, the savior). 
After all is said and done it must yet be admitted that the Essays, 
notwithstanding Hegel's unwillingness to let speculative philosophy 
descend to the level of reflective philosophy, give not only a specu-
lative judgment on reflective philosophy, but also a reflective ap-
proach of sorts to speculative philosophy. Contemptuous of the fore-
court of the temple, the Essays manage just the same to spend much 
time and effort in it-just as Michelangelo did in la bella rusticana, 
the little Quattrocento church on the hills of Florence whose simple 
static harmonies he was in need of as a foil for the complex dynamic 
tensions of his own revolutionary style. 
IV· I NT E L L E C T U A I. 
I N T U IT I 0 N 
We might begin in a cavalier fashion by saying that intellectual intu-
ition furnishes the evidences on which the Philosophy of Identity is 
built. In saying this we are, however, already victims of reflective 
philosophy. For the concept of "being based upon ... " involves some 
logical relation pertaining to induction or deduction, as if intellectual 
intuition either furnished the evidences that could verify or falsify 
the truth claims of statements, or were some set of self-evident axi-
oms at the basis of a body of theorems. In the former case the Phi-

XXV 
Speculative Philosophy 
losphy of Identity would be an empirical science with an exceedingly 
strange sort of evidence as its experiential ground. In the latter case 
it would be like geometry as traditionally conceived, and hence sub-
ject to the threat of the Kantian question whether the apriority of 
the axioms is analytic or synthetic; and if synthetic a priori, the pos-
sibility of their objective reference would have to be made intelligible. 
But this whole apparatus remains of course in the forecourt of the 
temple of philosophy and is, or should be, foreign to speculative 
philosophy-which dwells in the temple itself. 
We have already suggested that intellectual intuition became, in 
Schelling and Hegel, the vision of the whole, a vision in which God, 
nature, and self-consciousness (or reason) come into their truth. Spi-
noza's scientia sub specie <Eternitatis becomes scientia sub specie to-
talitatis atque harmoni<E. (In the following generations this vision of 
the whole will be degraded to Weltanschauung, leading to the rela-
tivization not only of moral and <esthetic standards but also of the 
basic theoretical categories, emerging as sociology of sorts in France, 
and in Germany as Dilthey's typology of Weltanschaungen.) Kant, 
however, had surely meant by intellectual intuition something, quite 
different from this vision of the whole. And he had clearly and deci-
sively disallowed intellectual intuition to have any positive role in 
human cognition. How was it then that intellectual intuition turned 
into this holistic vision and organized itself into something that 
claimed to be THE system of knowledge under the name of the Phi-
losophy of Identity? 
I shall let Schelling and Hegel speak for themselves, letting them 
talk univoce without drawing a line between what Schelling said and 
what Hegel said. Nor shall I draw a line between what they did say 
and what they might have said. It must of course not be assumed 
that the way they understand Kant is my own way. 
What the speculators said and might have said to Kant is this: 
"You admit that the concept of an intuitive intellect or intellectual 
intuition harbors no logical contradictions and that therefore there 
could be such a thing as intellectual intuition; but you also assert 
that as a matter of fact human beings do not possess it. For the basic 
way in which anything can be knowable to us as an object of expe-
rience is by its being given to us, and the only way in which it can 
be given to us is by its becoming a datum to our senses: it must 
cause a sensation in us. Having sensations, however, is very different 
from having knowledge. So you bridge the gap between having sen-
sations and having knowledge by an impressive analysis of the ap-

xxvi 
Walter Cerf 
paratus which our sensibility and the reason (der Verstand) con-
tribute on their own account to the objectivity of possible objects of 
experience. We say 'our sensibility' and 'the reason' because you do 
play with the idea of non-human subjects whose sensibility might 
have forms different from those human sensibility has. And you do 
not play with the idea of rational beings whose forms of judgment 
and therewith categories might be different from those of man. This 
is part of your Stoic background, about which more later. Sensibility 
contributes (the forms of) space and time; reason contributes twelve 
basic concepts in accordance with the twelve forms of judgment and, 
dependent on the categories and their schematization, your twelve 
'principles of the pure understanding.' In consequence, what you 
allow us to have knowledge of in our experience are not the things 
as they are in themselves but only as they affect us, that is, as they 
appear to us. You revel in the dichotomy of things in themselves-
which are unknowable to us-and their appearances-which are all 
we are ever permitted to know. Even what you call our synthetic 
a priori knowledge such as mathematics does not reach beyond the 
possible objects of experience. 
"If we examine the nature of your prejudice against intellectual 
intuition more closely we find it to be rooted in dubious psychology, 
theological dogma, and the procedures of the natural sciences. To 
begin with the last, you state that the knowledge claims of the na-
tural sciences are well founded to the extent that their judgments, 
from statements of observation to the most general theories, can be 
tested empirically, that is, by perception; and perception, according 
to the causal theory of perception which you unquestionably accept, 
has as its basic stratum visual, acoustic, and similar sensations. So 
the triumphant course of the natural sciences since Galilee and New-
ton over against the debacle of the metaphysical knowledge claims 
of the rationalists leads you to assert that we must claim no knowl-
ege of any object, ourselves included, that cannot be related in certain 
prescribed ways to something that is given to us either in externally 
or in internally perceptual experience. (The prescribed ways in which 
any object we claim to know must be related to what is sensuously 
given to us are spatial, temporal and those formulated in your prin-
ciples of the pure understanding.) 
"The lesson which the natural sciences taught you goes beautifully 
hand in hand with your theological bias. This is your conviction of 
the inescapable finitude of rational man. You find the index of this 
finitude in the fact that objects can be known to us if and only if 

XXVII 
Speculative Philosophy 
they (a) affect our sensibility and (b) conform to the spontaneously 
imposed conditions of our intellect. Our sensibility is merely passive 
and our spontaneity is limited to the mere forms of objectivity. Over 
against this doubly finite relation of the human subject to the objects 
of his cognitive experiences you conceive of a kind of knowledge 
which is spontaneity all through. There would be no receptivity in it 
at all and spontaneity would not be limited to the mere forms. This 
is what you call intellectual intuition. It is divine creativity seen in 
the perspective of your epistemological and psychological presuppo-
sitions. 
"Your psychological presuppositions have already come to the 
fore. Man has the capacity to receive sensations, and you call this 
receptivity sensibility. This is one psychological stem from which 
knowledge grows. The other is the faculty of freely forming concepts, 
combining them in judgments, and combining judgments in syllo-
gisms. This is reason. What sort of psychology is this? If it were 
rational psychology a Ia Wolff and Baumgarten, you yourself would 
have destroyed it in the Paralogism section of your Dialectic of Pure 
Reason. If it were empirical psychology you would seem to have 
founded, at least in part, your explanation of the possibility of em-
pirical knowledge on empirical knowledge and this is hardly a con-
vincing foundation. 
"Besides, there is the basic contradiction that you got yourself into. 
Jacobi summed it up when he said that without the thing-in-itself 
one cannot get into The Critique of Pure Reason and with the thing-
in-itself one cannot stay in it. What is it that causes the sensations 
in us? This cause of our sensations cannot be found in the objects 
of our experiences, whether we mean by the objects of our experi-
ences ordinary objects like trees and houses or scientific objects like 
gravity and atoms. 6 The objects of our experiences cannot be the 
causes of our sensations, for according to your own theory the possi-
bility of any object is rooted in the forms of our sensibility and the 
forms of the intellect having shaped the sensuous material. So the X 
that causes the sensation must be the thing-in-itself unknowably 
hidden behind the veil of appearances. But in making the thing-in-
itself the cause of our sensations you have done what is verboten by 
your own Critique. You have applied one of the categories, the cate-
gory of causality, to the thing-in-itself. It is inconceivable in terms 
of your theory that the thing-in-itself causes sensations. One could 
more easily receive a letter from outer space, even one written in 
English. 

xxviii 
Walter Cerf 
"Now what would you say if we show you that you yourself un-
knowingly make intellectual intuition the ultimate basis of all knowl-
edge claims that you consider soundly grounded? We are of course 
referring to your transcendental apperception, the 'I think,' of which 
you say that it is the highest point to which must be fastened the 
applicability of the categories to time (and space), therewith the 
possibility of experiencing objects and therewith the possibility of 
objects of experience. For according to your first Critique the unity 
of nature as the totality of all possible objects of experience depends 
in the last analysis on the unity of the I in its synthetizing categorial 
acts of thinking. But precisely in making the thinking I the highest 
point you give it the characteristic that is definitory of intellectual 
intuition. To think oneself as thinking-pure self-consciousness-is 
to give oneself existence as pure I. Your transcendental appercep-
tion lives up to your own concept of intellectual intuition. You have 
overcome your dichotomy of receptivity-in which objects are given 
-and spontaneity-in which they are thought. The pure Ego gives 
itself to itself in the pure act of thinking itself as thinking. This is 
how it exists. Naturally, 'existence' does not have the meaning it 
ordinarily has. It does not have anything to do with being localizable 
in t~:ne and space, which is the reason why the I must not be said 
to create itself. Fichte prefers to speak of the Ego 'positing' itself. 
We use 'constructing,' others 'constituting.' 
"Your transcendental apperception, however, does not only over-
come your dichotomy of receptivity and spontaneity. It also is the 
beginning of a synthesis of your two most radical and basic oppo-
sites, that of the subject and object and that of the infinite and the 
finite. 
"As to the dichotomy of subject and object, it is seen at once that 
the 'I think' of the pure apperception-the I that thinks itself as 
thinking-is at the same time both subject and object, or as we pre-
fer to say, the identity of subject and object. Nous noei heauton. This, 
though, is Aristotle. The Greek roots of your philosophy are Stoic 
rather than Platonic or Aristotelian. So were those of Rousseau, 
whom you so admired. The light that gave the Enlightenment its name 
was the lumen naturale, the Stoic spark of reason, the representative 
part of divine reason in all rational beings making them all free, 
equal, and brothers, as the French Revolution concluded. 
"The metaphysical ::-ationalism of Stoicism also forms the hidden 
background of your transcendental apperception. For the 'I' of your 
'I think' is not at all that of any !-saying individual, who is no less 

xxix 
Speculative Philosophy 
appearance than the objects he experiences. One might rather say 
that the I of the pure apperception is that of the Leibnizian monad 
which, as the l-in-itself, is hidden behind the subject as it appears to 
itself. This monadological background of the pure apperception 
would seem to be undeniable. Yet it must not ever be forgotten that 
the monadic subject-in-itself is given, in the spirit of the age, the 
features of the Stoic spark of reason, the same divine reason in each 
rational individual. So there is occasion for a secret tug-of-war be-
tween the Leibnizian and the Stoic background. In any event, at the 
bottom of your Critique there is the Stoic philosophy of identity. It 
is a very limited one in comparison with ours. It excludes all of na-
ture. For though divine reason is said by Stoic metaphysic to rule 
over nature, the laws of nature being decrees issued by it, Stoicism 
does not allow divine reason to be present inside nature as the un-
conscious urge driving it toward the emergence of self-consciousness. 
Thus your Stoic identity is limited to the divine reason ruling the 
universe and its representative sparks residing in human individuals, 
and through that very residence standing in constant danger of being 
infringed and becoming polluted. To this extent, then, and only to 
this extent, your transcendental apperception is also the overcoming 
of the finite-infinite dichotomy. Without this Stoic identity between 
infinite and finite reason, each monadic subject would have its own 
world and you would have to appeal to the hypothesis of a pre-
established harmony to explain the illusion of a world shared by all. 
You would not be able to explain that our experience, instead of be-
ing a flux of private sensations, gives us knowledge of a common 
world. On the other hand, your monadological background might 
have permitted you a more subtle way of accounting for the pre-
personal individuation of the sparks of reason-of the indexing func-
tion of the I of the transcendental apperception-than Stoicism itself 
would have been able to do. In either case, though, for either monad 
or spark of reason the use of language, in any of the customary 
senses of 'language,' is a disquieting problem, though not within the 
Philosophy of Identity as it knows God's becoming man. 
"Here we must return for a moment to what we have said about 
your overcoming of the subject-object dichotomy. For the 'I think' 
of your transcendental apperception is not just the Ego's thinking 
itself as thinking-and thus in this very narrow sense the identity of 
subject and object. Your 'I think' is an incomplete expression. You 
yourself stress that what the I thinks are the categories and through 
them the twelve principles of the pure understanding to which the 

XXX 
Walter Cerf 
objectivity of the objects of our experience is due. 'I think the cate-
gories' is, in terms of our Philosophy of Identity, a formula for the 
identity of that part of the subject which you call Verstand and the 
form of objectivity. In claiming that the twelve principles are the con-
ditions furnished by reason which allow our experience to be of 
objects you may also claim, as we would express it, the identity of 
the rational self with the form of objectivity. 
"In sum, then, your transcendental apperception is indeed intellec-
tual intuition unilaterally defined from the perspective of the dichoto-
my of receptivity and spontaneity as the overcoming of this dichoto-
my. At the same time, however, and again without your recognizing 
the fact, the transcendental apperception is the very limited over-
coming of the dichotomies of the subject and object and of the 
infinite and the finite that your philosophy allows. And intellectual 
intuition does all this right at the most crucial point of your phi-
losophy, where you deny the possibility of intellectual intuition to the 
finite beings men are. From all this we conclude that your concept 
of intellectual intuition is much too narrow. Intellectual intuition 
must be conceived as the construction of the identity underlying all 
the dichotomies you reflectors have been proud of establishing, and 
particularly the subject-object and infinite-finite dichotomies. It is 
this enlarged concept of intellectual intuition which we call specula-
tion and which thus becomes the holistic vision of the complex iden-
tity of subject and object and of the infinite and the finite or-in 
terms that join these basic dichotomies-of God, nature and self-
consciousness. 
"Transcendental apperception as intellectual intuition, however, is 
not the only motive in your Critical Idealism that leads directly into 
the speculation of our Philosophy of Identity. We have always been 
fascinated by an aside of yours that you let slip in an unguarded 
moment. This is your remark that perhaps the two stems of our cog-
nitive faculties, sensibility and reason, have the same root. 7 You must 
have had in mind something like an unconscious intellectual intuition, 
an identity of receptivity and spontaneity prior to their reflective 
separation. We think we are justified in seeing this as an anticipation 
of the unconscious God revealing Himself in nature. For one inspired 
moment you came close to our philosophy of nature. 
"We also like to connect this aside of yours with your equally 
inspired conception of the role of productive imagination in your 
Transcendental Deduction of the Categories. The role productive 
imagination is given in your Deduction is that of synthetizing the 

xxxi 
Speculative Philosophy 
pure manifold of time in accordance with the rules as which the cate-
gories function in the objectification of experience. Pure imagination, 
as the great synthetizer, is the mediator between time and the cate-
gories. It does not seem to us far-fetched to see in the role you 
ascribe to imagination an anticipation of the speculative construction 
of the identity of these opposites. Productive imagination, instead of 
merely putting two different pieces in an external unity, is their inner 
unity, their 'common root' raised from its unconscious pre-reflective 
status to post-reflective awareness. 
"The role you ascribe to productive imagination in your Deduction 
anticipates our speculative philosophy, or is at least a step in the 
right direction, also with respect to the finite-infinite dichotomy. For 
in overcoming through productive imagination your own rigorous 
confrontation of receptivity and spontaneity, you are also undoing, 
however cautiously and limitedly, your stubborn insistence on the 
finitude of man. And at the same time you are advancing beyond the 
Stoic philosophy of identity with its restriction to the sparks of rea-
son as the only divine element in man. To be sure, you still exclude 
the sense data from the Ego's productivity. It was Fichte to whom 
we owe this giant step. But in making productive imagination the 
great synthetizer you have given to the pure Ego, at least within the 
cognitive sphere, a spontaneity that goes far beyond the mere think-
ing of the categories. The Ego is now coming close to being a 'finitely 
infinite.' By the same token you have transcended the limitations of 
your Stoic background. To the Stoic reason which is pure thought 
you have added productive imagination to do the work which reason 
cannot do, the work of synthetizing the pure manifold of time. 
Thcugh there is no labor involved in this sort of work, it is at least 
doing something while the pure manifold of time, on the left of pro-
ductive imagination, and the pure thinking of the categories, on its 
right, are in one sense and another not doing anything at all. You 
have gone beyond the contemplative god of Stoicism; yet you have 
not come closer to the active God of Christianity. 
"In your theoretical philosophy God functions as a merely meth-
odological rule in the ongoing business of exploring the world: do 
not ever stop exploring. In your practical philosophy God is a postu-
late, though a necessary one, to guarantee justice in distributing bless-
ings according to deserts. Your Stoicism turns Judaic in the moral 
sphere. You totally separate reason and the universal moral law 
grounded in it from the beautiful sphere of human passions. More-
over you are unable to explain how the universal moral law can 

xxxii 
Walter Cerf 
actually function as such in human life and you admit that even if 
it does no one can ever be sure that it is doing so. This is what the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit have come to in your philosophy. 
Your hidden metaphysical Stoicism is Hellas' revenge on Christianity. 
"We regret to have to say this. Our Philosophy of Identity has as 
much of the Christian God as any metaphysic can possibly have 
that claims to be knowledge. You must not suspect us of being friv-
olous when we see the total relationship of God, nature and self-
consciousness in analogy with the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit.8 
"But quite apart from this somewhat esoteric analogy taken from 
the tradition of Christian theology-not for nothing did we spend 
years in the Stift in Tiibingen-speculation achieves its overcoming 
of all the basic reflective dichotomies in the organistically conceived 
vista of THE WHOLE as presented in the Philosophy of Identity. Its 
Philosophy of Nature deals with the objective Subject-Object, whose 
unconscious self-revelatory dynamics replaces your dichotomy of the 
thing-in-itself and its appearances. The Transcendental Philosophy 
deals with the subjective Subject-Object and solves the problems, 
unsolvable within your Critical Idealism, of the relation of the pure 
apperception to God on the one hand, and to the (logico-historical) 
development of rationality in man on the other. The God who reveals 
Himself in nature is not, as such, the God who comes to know Him-
self as having revealed himself in nature. That God He becomes only 
in the evolution of human rationality. Man's re-construction of God's 
creativity in nature is thus itself a chapter-the last one?-of God's 
creation of Himself. 
"It surely cannot be said against our system with its superb bal-
ance of idealism and realism that there is still a vestige of an ideal-
istic imbalance in it because the Philosophy of Nature was not written 
by nature itself but had to wait for the birth and development of 
rationality in man. One could just as well talk about an imbalance 
in favor of realism in that the whole ascending chain of God's un-
conscious revelations in nature was needed to bring forth that ration-
ality in man which becomes the instrument of God's knowledge of 
Himself. 
"To use an analogy which is not at all congenial to us but may 
become fashionable someday, your Critique sets new rules for the 
game of METAPHYSICS. Yours is a game somewhat like tennis. The ball 
must always pass above the net of empirical statements. The game 
begins with a rally in which the ball must hit the ground in the nar-

xxxiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
row part of the area that you call the synthetic a priori, namely, that 
part of the synthetic a priori that gives 'the conditions of the possi-
bility of objects of experience.' This is the rally of meta-metaphysics. 
Once this rally is over and the properly metaphysical part of the 
game begins, the ball must hit the ground in the area of analytic 
judgments and logical inferences and, strangely enough, also in an 
area adjacent to the synthetic a priori but having certain empirical 
ingredients-as in your Metaphysische Anfangsgrunde der Natur-
wissenschaft (1786) and Die Metaphysik der Sitten (1797). We say, 
'strangely enough,' for after you had drawn a line of absolute oppo-
sition between the empirical and the a priori you yet proceed as if 
there were a gradual transition from one to the other. This may very 
well serve as another example of your overcoming your own dichoto-
mies; but it is not of the same interest to us as the examples of the 
transcendental apperception and productive imagination. 
"Our game is quite different: it is rather like doing a jigsaw puz-
zle. Directed perhaps by what we retain from the picture when we 
first saw it before it was taken apart, we reconstruct it by finding the 
proper place for each part within the whole, the only rule bein& that 
we have to follow faithfully the outline of each part so that they fit 
together as their maker meant them to. There is only one solution to 
the jigsaw puzzle, and it is ours. 
"From the viewpoint of our system as a whole your Critique of 
Judgment with its discussion of the role of teleology in cognition is 
almost as important to us as your first Critique. For the process as 
which we see the whole cannot but be teleological, and so we had to 
undo your typically reflective position with respect to teleology in 
your Critique of Judgment. However, as we aim in this speech of 
ours to show the germs of true speculation in your philosophy, we 
have no reason t.> go into your treatment of teleology where you 
stubbornly insist on the finitude of human cognition. (Just the same, 
we wish to advise anyone who wants to understand our Philosophy 
of Identity from the inside out to study carefully the Critique of the 
Teleological Judgment-Part II of the Critique of Judgment-and par-
ticularly§§ 74-78.) 
"However, there is one famous remark of yours that we wish to 
comment on. You are convinced that there never will be a Newton 
able to explain as little as the origin of a blade of grass according to 
laws of nature that were not arranged by design (Absicht) 9• In other 
words, you believe the biological realm to be ultimately impervious 
to that atomistic-mechanistic approach that is celebrating triumph 

xxxiv 
Walter Cerf 
after triumph in physics and chemistry. And yet at the same time 
you seem to resign yourself to the fact that biology as science has no 
choice but to use the methods of physics and chemistry as far as 
they can go, and beyond that point there is no knowledge that is sci-
entific. This is absurd. To us biology in its largest sense is truly the-
agony and instead of reducing it as much as possible to physics and 
chemistry we extend to the subjects of physics and chemistry the 
holistic and dynamic vision of theogonic biology. 
"May we now talk to you about Fichte, your erstwhile disciple and 
our erstwhile mentor and friend. Knowing how he annoyed you with 
his interpretation of your first Critique, we shall talk about him only 
for a moment, though we have much to say about him in the Essays. 
"We have already mentioned the importance of his translating 
your 'I think' into 'The Ego posits himself.' This translation made it 
clear to us that your transcendental apperception is intellectual intui-
tion. Prompted by us, Fichte accepted this. The ultimate basis of your 
Critique and his Science of Knowledge is intellectual intuition. His 
second important merit was his radical elimination of the thing-in-
itself, although others had seen its paradoxical role in your idealism 
before him. He eliminated it, in the first place, through the Ego's 
second Tathandlung: the Ego posits the non-Ego. However, this 
would not take him any further than your own grounding of the 
form of objectivity in the subject. The step that leads him radically 
beyond your 'formal' idealism is his showing that the sensations 
themselves, far from being caused by the thing-in-itself, as well as 
their spatial and temporal relations, are doings, though unconscious 
ones, of the Ego. The historical merit of this doctrine is that it is so 
paradoxical. Thinking our way through the paradox greatly assisted 
us in bringing to birth the true system of philosophy. The paradox 
as presented from the side of the object of knowledge, that is, from 
the side of nature, consists in the fact that Fichte's doctrine totally 
de-naturalizes nature so that nature becomes even less than it is in 
your philosophy. In the Critique nature is mere appearance, but it is 
the appearance of something that Is, the thing-in-itself, even though 
it is unknowable to us and not even definable as to the sense in 
which it can be said to be. The paradox from the side of the subject 
is that the Ego has lost your index of its finitude, for it is all spon-
taneity. Yet it is not allowed to be God nor is The Science of Knowl-
edge allowed to be a text about God's acquiring knowledge of Himself. 
Fichte's third Tathandlung posits the definite finalization of the Ego: 
the Ego's aspirations to become one with God will be fulfilled only 

XXXV 
Speculative Philosophy 
in the infinitely distant future, that is to say, they will never be ful-
filled. 
"Over and against the Fichtean idealism, completely one-sided and 
perhaps rightly denounced as atheistic, we plead with you to see the 
profound balance and harmony, based on the speculative viewing of 
the relations among God, nature and self-consciousness, of our Phi-
losophy of Identity, in which nature is as truly existent in God as 
God is subsistent in self-consciousness." 
Kant had received his guests in his bedroom, seated in a chair by 
a closed window. When Schelling and Hegel finished with their plea 
Kant appeared to be asleep. The year is 1803 and he is sick and a lit-
tle senile. He will die the following year, two years after the publica-
tion of the second of Hegel's Essays. (Post hoc, but not propter 
hoc-although if Kant had read the Essays, they might have shortened 
his life.) The silence continues. Hegel turns rather brusquely toward 
the door. He finds the stale air in the room oppressive. (Kant did not 
allow windows to be opened as he believed that bed bugs, which had 
been torturing him for years, fly in through the window.10} Schelling 
bows elegantly in the direction of Kant. It is then that Kant gets up 
from his chair with great effort, holding himself by the table next to 
his chair and, slowly returning the bow, mutters, "I honor humanity 
in you."11 Schelling, quite touched, answers with a charming smile, 
"Sir, we honor divinity in you." He rushes to help the faltering Kant 
into his chair. But the old man does not want help. And Schelling, 
bowing once more, follows Hegel into the hall, leaving the great re-
flector to his bugs. 
1. Cf. below, pp XXIV ff. 
2. ldeen zu einer Philosophie der 
Natur als Einleitung in das Studium 
dieser Wissenschaft (1797). Von der 
Weltseele (1798). Erster Entwurf eines 
Systems der Naturphilosophie (1799). 
Einleitung zu dem Entwurf eines Sys-
tems der Naturphilosophie (1799). 
3. System des Transcendentalen 
Idealismus (1800). 
4. First published by H. Noh! in 
Walter Cerf 
1907 and in large part translated by 
T. M. Knox and R. Kroner in 1948 (see 
Bibliographical Index). 
5. See below, p. 55. Also Difference, 
p. 82. 
6. These two sorts of objects, the 
ordinary and the scientific, were at 
that time not yet so different from one 
another as to cause much of a prob-
lem concerning their relation. 

xxxvi 
Walter Cerf 
7. Critique of Pure Reason, A15, 
B29. 
8. See H. S. Harris' Introduction to 
the Difference essay, p. 22. 
9. Critique of Judgment, § 75. 
10. Hermann Schwarz, Immanuel 
Kant, Ein Lebensbild (Halle a.S., 1907), 
p. 269. 
11. Ibid., p. 378. In the spirit of this 
imaginary scene I have taken some 
liberties with the passages in Prof. 
Schwarz' book. 

Introduction to Faith and Knowledge. 
1. HEGEL AND THE Critical Journal 
Hegel's essay Faith and Knowledge was published in July 1802 as 
Volume II number 1 of the Critical Journal of Philosophy. Hegel was 
co-editor of the Critical Journal with Schelling. Both editors' names 
appeared on the title page of the Journal, and nothing in the Journal 
itself was signed. The first issue of the second volume was the largest 
of the six that appeared.1 Because it contained only this one essay it 
was furnished with a distinctive second title page. No one was ever 
in doubt about its authorship.2 
The essay was written under great pressure during the spring and 
early summer of 1802. Schelling was away from Jena for an extended 
period during these months, and he left his struggling coadjutor, 
already desperately overburdened with his own work, to edit the 
Critical Journal unaided. As a result, the manuscript of Faith and 
Knowledge was ready for the printer before the final copy of Volume 
I number 3 (all of which was written by Schelling). Faith and Knowl-
edge was too big to be substituted for that issue, because the size of 
each volume (three issues) was fixed in the contract with Cotta. So 
Volume II number 1 appeared before Volume I number 3. 
Faith and Knowledge was Hegel's most important contribution to 
the proclaimed agenda of the Critical Journal. His own short title for 
it was "The Kant-Jacobi-Fichtean Philosophy."3 But according to its 
own title page it purported to deal with "the reflective philosophy of 
subjectivity in the complete range of its forms as Kantian, Jacobian 
and Fichtean Philosophy." Before we consider the meaning of this 
subtitle, however, we must briefly characterize the programme of the 
Critical Journal itself. 
It was quite probably the publisher Cotta who gave the first impe-
tus (at Easter 1798) to the many plans for a new literary-philosophical 
journal which were bandied about among an ever-increasing 
circle of potential contributors from that time onwards. Schelling had 
become involved even before he arrived at Jena in October 1798. 
Fichte was still at Jena then, though his days there were numbered 
because the controversy about his supposed "atheism" had already 
begun. There is no doubt that Fichte and Schelling influenced each 

2 
H. S. Harris 
other's ideas about the proposed journal, and for this reason there is 
just one incident in that wider story that is of special interest to us 
here. In describing his plans for a new journal to Schiller in Decem-
ber 1800, Fichte wrote: 
Science must be subjected to a vigorous examination as soon as 
possible, if the few good seeds that have been sown are not 
shortly to be brought to nothing by the abundantly flourishing 
weeds. In the realm of the first science, philosophy, which must 
help all the others out of confusion, folk are prosing on in the 
same old way as if no objections had ever been made to it ... 
I consider it to be quite possible to reduce the philosophical 
chatterers to silence by a rigorous critique maintained over two 
or three years, and so make room for something better.4 
This anticipates exactly the campaign upon which the Critical 
Journal of Schelling and Hegel embarked a year later. In June 1800 
Schelling had proposed to Cotta that the new journal should be a 
purely philosophical one,5 rather than a general review, and in Au-
gust 1800 he proposed to Fichte that they should edit it together. He 
promised Fichte that he would do a "survey of the present state of 
philosophy as a whole" for the first volume-claiming that he already 
had this "partly worked out" -and he suggested that Reinhold and 
Bardili ("perhaps also Jacobi") should be analysed in an appendix. 6 
But Fichte hung back from the proposed collaboration-probably be-
cause he already felt that a break with Schelling was inevitable-and 
Schelling finally turned to the unknown newcomer Hegel for assist-
ance.7 Hegel was by that time engaged with his own "examination" 
of Fichte, in the Difference essay, and the "taking to pieces" (Zerl~~ 
gun g) of Reinhold and Bardili formed an appendix to that. 8 ~~ 
'' 
The first thing that the collaborators wrote for their new/ journal 
was a programmatic introduction. This was drafted by Hegel in Au-
gust and revised-no doubt, quite extensively-by Schelling. 9 The 
philosophy of criticism set forth in it rests on the claim that there 
must be a basis for mutual recognition between aujhor and critic. In 
spite of Schelling's assertion that the Hauptgedariken of the "Intro-
duction" are his, this is unmistakeably a Hegelian position. It is the 
"Idea" (of philosophy or of Reason) that provides the required 
objective foundation, and any conception of philosophical discus-
sion which does not acknowledge this, but regards philosophical 
differences as matters of personal opinion and attitude-as Rein-
hold did-is "unphilosophy." The attitude of a genuinely philo-

3 
Introduction 
sophical critic towards "unphilosophy" can only be negative. Where 
a position lacks an objective point of reference in the Idea, all that can 
be done is to show up its unphilosophical character. The "Introduc-
tion" claims that the principal result of Kant's critique of our mental 
capacities in its sceptical aspect, was to raise this "unphilosophy" to 
the dignity of philosophical form, by making it appear that a merely 
subjective, and hence quite unresolvable conflict of opposed views 
is the inevitable lot of human Reason. But in spite of its "subjective" 
aspect, Kant's philosophy offers much more than this justification of 
scepticism-indeed even Reinhold offers more than that.10 "Con-
sciousness has not developed beyond subjectivity" in the Critical Phi-
losophy-for if it had, then the existence of a way out of the dialectic 
of pure Reason would be perceived and acknowledged. But 
though criticism cannot allow what has been achieved and done 
to be valid as shape of the Idea, still it cannot mistake the 
striving. The properly scientific concern here is to strip off the 
shell that still prevents the inner effort from seeing the daylight; 
it is important to be aware of the manifold reflections of the 
spirit, of which each must have its sphere in philosophy, and 
also of the subordinate and imperfect forms. 11 
In the first two issues of the Journal Hegel did not find much op-
portunity for this sort of critical development and appreciation. He 
wrote at some length about the work of W. T. Krug, but that was 
"unphilosophy" pure and simple; and although his long review of 
G. E. Schulze's Critique of Theoretical Philosophy contained an im-
portant positive revaluation of scepticism, it was mainly the ancient 
sceptics who were thus revalued-the scepticism of Schulze himself 
came off rather badly. 
In Faith and Knowledge the program was put into effect, over its 
whole range. The candidates for critical evaluation here were among 
the best minds that the age had produced, and in the case of Kant, at 
least, there was and is no dispute about his being in the front rank 
among the philosophers of all time. By placing Kant in a veritable 
gallery of younger contemporaries Hegel contrived both to set off the 
magnitude of his achievement, and to show what was lacking in it. 
In this way he managed to illustrate "the manifold relations of the 
spirit" and to exhibit the connection between several "subordinate 
and imperfect forms" in the process of "stripping off the shell that 
still prevents the inner effort from seeing daylight." The technique, 
which he here uses for the first time, of making a series of partial 

4 
H. S. Harris 
visions criticize and supplement one another, is a still immature but 
nonetheless recognizable form of the method that is so impressively 
deployed in the Phenomenology. 
And it is not only the method but the matter which makes Faith 
and Knowledge a first sketch for that still unthought of major work. 
Faith and Knowledge is Hegel's first attempt to survey the culture of 
the time, and to place all the signs of the advent of "absolute knowl-
edge" in an ideal context which would cause them to reveal their 
meaning. The introductory pages even offer us a foretaste of the 
frustration that besets every serious student of the Phenomenology 
because he cannot always be certain just what "signs" of just what 
"time" Hegel is talking about. Also the unbalance, the unevenness of 
treatment, the seemingly distorted perspective that characterizes so 
much of the Phenomenology is illustrated in Faith and Knowledge. 
But in Faith and Knowledge it is perhaps a bit easier to decide how 
much to ascribe to the haste of the writing. 
We can see how far Hegel's ideas of critical method have devel-
oped in a single year, if we compare his comments in the introduc-
tory pages of the Difference essay with his procedure in Faith and 
Knowledge. In the Difference essay the sheep of the true speculative 
tradition, the story of the "one eternal Reason," are separated sharp-
ly from the goats of finite reflection, and just as Virgil is excluded 
from the company of the true poets (D 89}, so Kant is sadly but 
firmly banished from among the speculative saints: "even the Kan-
tian philosophy had proved unable to awaken Reason to the lost 
concept of genuine speculation" (D 118). 
In practice, of course, Hegel did not rest content even then, with 
this "Last Judgment" view of the history of philosophy. He could 
see the folly of it quickly enough, when someone like Reinhold in-
dulged in it. Thus, when he defends the Systeme de la Nature as an ex-
pression of genuine speculation (D 177), Hegel makes it quite clear 
that he does not mean to ascribe greater speculative insight to D'Hol-
bach than to Kant. His real position is that the work of every major 
thinker has two aspects, and the goatskin may very well be upper-
most, so that we cannot recognize the lost sheep. His own analysis 
of Fichte's weaknesses by comparison with Schelling would have 
forced him to admit this: 
Notwithstanding the sharp difference between transcendental 
philosophy and dogmatism, the former is apt to pass over into 
the latter, when it constructs itself into a system .... Thus in 

5 
Introduction 
Fichte's system Ego= Ego is the Absolute .... The speculation 
at the basis of the system demands the suspension of the op-
posites [Ego and non-Ego], but the system itself does not suspend 
them (0 116-7). 
But the explicit assumption that is basic to Hegel's position in the 
Difference essay is that only the "speculative" aspect of a given phi-
losophy really matters. In spite of the way that he was himself using 
Fichte's weaknesses to demonstrate the superiority of a "system" 
whicn had not yet really been worked out, the idea that the nonspec-
ulative, abstractly reflective, aspect of a theory may contain something 
valuable is not explicitly recognized in the Difference essay. 12 When 
we turn to Hegel's treatment of Fichte in Faith and Knowledge we 
can see at once how different the situation is. For whereas in the Dif-
ference essay Fichte's philosophy is sharply contrasted with Kant's 
as "the most thorough and profound speculation" (0 118; cf. 0 173), 
it is treated in Faith and Knowledge as the logical culmination of 
Kant's "critical" labours, and as the "reflective" solution of the prob-
lems left by Kant. 
One might think, indeed for a long time I did think, that this con-
trast is just an accidental result of the changed relations between 
Fichte and the Identity theorists. The publication of the Difference es-
say itself caused an open breach between Schelling and Fichte. Once 
the finality of the breach was accepted there was no point in empha-
sizing Fichte's speculative achievement, and every reason to concen-
trate attention on the failings of his "system." It is clear, anyway, that 
Hegel does not mean to withdraw any of the speculative claims made 
on Fichte's behalf in the Difference essay. According to Hegel it is 
Fichte himself who wants to escape from his "speculative" achieve-
ment (p. 167 below). The apparent conflict between Hegel's two esti-
mates of Fichte's achievement is quite done away with in his lectures 
on the history of philosophyY Of course, those lectures were pre-
pared several years later (assuming that this part of Michelet's text, 
at least, dates from 1805/6). But when we see how the estimates of 
both the Difference essay and Faith and Knowledge are reasserted 
side by side, in the lectures, we can hardly doubt that both estimates 
were formulated in a perfectly consistent way in Hegel's mind from 
the first. 
But if we take the view that in Faith and Knowledge Hegel simply 
moved from the role of guardian angel to the role of devil's advocate 
vis-a-vis Fichte for reasons of academic policy, so to speak, we shall 

6 
H. S. Harris 
lose sight of the main critical purpose of the essay, and so of one of 
the principal reasons for its enduring signficance. For if we view it 
in this way Faith and Knowledge becomes simply a polemic; and the 
contrast between the properly appreciative criticism of Fichte in the 
Difference essay and the treatment of Fichte here is just what gives 
the game away completely. 
It is easy enough to fall into this mistake. The highly polemical 
tenor of the Critical l ournal as a whole invites this misunderstand-
ing, and even the most perceptive readers in Hegel's contemporary 
audience fell into it. It is not to be wondered at, that a lesser man such 
as Koeppen should report to Jacobi that a "mighty scorn" would pre-
vail in the new journal.14 Koeppen had not then received the rough 
handling that Hegel bestows on him in Faith and Knowledge; but 
polemic was something that he understood, and about all that he 
could appreciate in the work of the Identity Philosophers.15 But even 
A. W. Schlegel complained to Schelling that Hegel ought not to have 
dealt with Fichte's Vocation of Man as if it had been written for phi-
losophers.16 
But no matter how natural and attractive it may be, the view that 
Faith and Knowledge is destructive polemic rather than constructive 
criticism is a mistake. What we have to recognize is that the attack 
on Fichte here is part of Hegel's constructive evaluation of Kant. 
He feels able to use Fichte in this way precisely because he has al-
ready done a constructive evaluation of Fichte's achievement in the 
Difference essay. It is as a balance sheet of what speculative philoso-
phy owes to the founder of the Critical philosophy that Faith and 
Knowledge is critically important. 
The overriding character of Hegel's concern with Kant shows itself 
most plainly in the fact that Hegel spends so much time overthrow-
ing Jacobi's critique of Kant, and contrasting Jacobi's own efforts 
unfavorably with Kant's work. The Jacobi section is the longest in 
the essay, yet Jacobi's positive contribution to "reflective" philosophy 
is in Hegel's view rather slight, and his discussion of Jacobi's own 
philosophy is correspondingly brief. Schleiermacher's work is fairly 
explicitly declared to be of greater philosophical significance than 
Jacobi'sP Yet Schleiermacher is dealt with in an appendix, and Her-
der is dismissed in an interlude! 
Of course the fact that Herder appears at all, constitutes something 
of a puzzle. He seems to have got in only because of his contribution 
to the Spinoza controversy. And one reason for the prominent role 
and the lengthy treatment accorded to Jacobi is that Jacobi was the 

7 
Introduction 
great commentator on Spinoza. Antipathy to Spinoza forms a bond 
between Jacobi and Fichte. But Spinoza is only a looming presence in 
the background of Faith and Knowledge, just as he was in the Differ-
ence essay. There it was Fichte who was in the foreground, here it is 
Kant throughout. If we read the whole of Faith and Knowledge as a 
commentary on Kant we shall see how the highest aims of the Criti-
cal Journal's announced programme are fulfilled in it. 
2. THE 
I IRE F L E c T I v E pH I L 0 50 pH y 0 F 5 u B J E c T I vI T y I 
I 
Just as he does not change the estimate of Fichte already given in the 
Difference essay, so Hegel does not depart from the verdict there given 
on Kant either. The Critical Philosophy is not treated as a specula-
tive philosophy, but as a systematic exposition of the highest "reflec-
tive" position that is achievable. In the Critical Philosophy it is as-
sumed as axiomatic that there is a gulf between "what is," and all 
thought about it, or awareness of it. Consciousness, even at its furth-
est reach, its most "objective" and rational limit, can only reflect on 
a reality that is independent of, and indifferent to, its presence or 
absence. Knowledge, so far as it occurs, is an accident in the scheme 
of things. But it follows from this assumption that the understanding 
of the scheme of things claimed by the philosopher is itself not really 
a matter of knowledge but of faith. If our knowing is an accident in 
the scheme of things, then we cannot absolutely know that there is a 
scheme of things. What is called the "theory of knowledge" is ac-
tually a matter of articulating and explicating rational faith. 
This was not quickly or easily recognized by those who first devel-
oped the critical "theory of knowledge." They saw themselves as 
defenders of knowledge against the tyrannical claim of faith. It re-
quired the genius of Kant to systematize their position so that the 
real relation of their finite knowledge to faith could become visible. 
Against Kant's sceptical and "problematic" conclusions, Jacobi reas-
serted the immediate certainty of the religious principle of faith; and 
finally Fichte systematized and completed the reconciliation of finite 
reason with religious faith already suggested in principle by Kant 
himself. 
This is, in the briefest possible compass, the thesis of Hegel's essay. 
He is concerned to interpret, and to show the relation between, the 
history of "Protestant" thought and the history of "Protestant" reli-

8 
H. S. Harris 
gion. The critical theory of "knowledge" begins with Locke, and the 
"faith" of Kant, Jacobi and Fichte goes back to Luther. Hegel makes 
one or two explicit references to the medieval "age of faith," and 
more numerous though more covert allusions to the classical "age of 
Reason" before that. But it is the world-view of Protestantism that 
is the focus of his interest. 
In this "modern" world, philosophy is no longer the "handmaid 
of faith." That is to say that-except in the backwaters of the The-
ological Faculty at Tiibingen18-no one now thinks of the explication 
of a set of authoritatively "revealed" truths as the proper task of 
human Reason. But this revolution has come to pass partly because 
faith has changed its appearance and its dwelling place, and partly 
because both Reason and Faith have perished. This is another of He-
gel's main themes: that the reconciliation of faith and reason in the 
rational religion of Protestant philosophy has involved a "transvalu-
ation of values." The knowledge that reflective philosophizing can 
justify is the finite knowledge of our mundane experience. So when 
we seek to develop a "rational faith" we are inevitably bound to pro-
ject the values and standards of that experience into the "beyond" of 
our faith. 
This "bringing of Heaven to earth" in the sense of corrupting all 
sacred values into profane ones, exchanging all divine promises for 
a mess of worldly pottage, is the direct outcome of "the Enlighten-
ment."19 "The Enlightenment" was essentially the determination to 
make the knowledge of this world, and the life of this world suffi-
cient for man. It was a conscious renunciation of any attempt to 
share in God's life or God's knowledge. This renunciation is the 
"death" of speculative philosophy, and since the Enlightenment made 
this renunciation, it could have no proper philosophy at all. It could 
produce only "imperfect" philosophies, for which a sociological ex-
planation can be given, but not a rational justification. Only when 
we put all the finite pieces of the puzzle together does the movement 
of the empirical tradition from Locke to Kant become an intelligible 
whole, something that can be rationally comprehended in spite of its 
strictly "negative relation to the Absolute" (i.e., the renunciation of 
all claims to absolute knowledge). 
It was probably through the teaching of "logic" according to his 
initial conception if it, that Hegel arrived at this view that even em-
pirical, and hence fragmentary and unsystematic, philosophies could 
be ordered into a systematic relation with one another, so that they 

9 
Introduction 
would reveal a totality of which their authors remained unconscious. 
Just after Faith and Knowledge appeared, the Catalogus of the Uni-
versity of Jena was sent to press with all the courses offered for the 
winter semester of 1802. Hegel undertook to lecture on "Logic and 
Metaphysic according to the book that will appear within a few 
weeks (nundinis instantibus proditurum)."20 The book never did ap-
pear, and the manuscript on "Logic and Metaphysic" that survives 
was written two years later. But Rosenkranz has preserved for us a 
fairly lengthy excerpt from the opening lecture of a winter course 
which cannot be later than October 1802 and was probably delivered 
then. Here Hegel gave the following account of his intended syllabus: 
"I shall ... begin from the finite in order to proceed from it 
to the infinite when and so far as the finite has been nullified. 
Lecturing on philosophy has traditionally been in the form of 
Logic and Metaphysics. I too shall follow this form in my lec-
tures, not because it has long authority behind it but on account 
of its utility. 
To be precise, philosophy as the science of truth has infinite 
cognition, or the cognition of the Absolute, as its objective con-
cern. Finite cognition, or reflection, stands opposed to this [infi-
nite] cognition, or speculation. But not as if they were each the 
absolute opposite of the other; finite cognition abstracts only 
from the absolute identity of that which in rational cognition is 
connected to another or posited as equal to another-and only 
because of this abstraction is it finite cognition. So in rational 
cognition or philosophy, the forms of finite cognition are posited 
as well, but at the same time their finitude is nullified in virtue 
of the way they are connected with each other.- Thus the ob-
jective concern of a true logic is this: to set up the forms of 
finitude not just bundled together empirically, but just as they 
come forth from Reason, but being robbed of Reason by the 
intellect, they appear only in their finitude- Hence the efforts 
of the intellect to imitate Reason in the production of an identity 
must be set forth, showing how its copying can bring forth 
only a formal identity. And to recognize the imitative character 
of the intellect, we must always keep the original (Urbild) that 
it copies, the expression of Reason itself, before QY~s.-In 
fine, we must suspend the forms of understanding themselves by 
Reason, we must show what meaning and content these finite 

10 
H. S. Harris 
forms of cognition have for Reason. The cognition of Reason, so 
far as it appertains to logic, will therefore be a negative cogni-
tion of Reason. 
I believe that, inasmuch as it fixes the finite forms as such, 
logic can serve as an introduction to philosophy only from this 
speculative side, where it cognizes reflection completely and 
gets it out of the way, so that it puts no hindrances in the way 
of speculation, and at the same time keeps the pattern [Bild] of 
the Absolute before us as it were a mirror image so that we 
become familiar with it. In accord with this general conception 
of logic I shall proceed in the following order (the necessity of 
the order will show up in the science itself) : 
I. 
The universal forms, or laws, or Categories of finitude, in 
their objective aspect as well as their subjective one (i.e., in 
abstraction from this difference): to set forth these forms as a 
reflection of the Absolute, whether they be subjective or ob-
jective on their finite side. 
II: 
The subjective forms of finitude, or finite thought, the 
intellect: to treat this similarly and in its series of stages, con-
cepts, judgments and syllogisms. With respect to the last it 
must be remarked that although the rational form expresses 
itself more clearly in syllogisms, so that they are commonly as-
cribed to Reason as being rational thought, we deal with them 
here only as formal syllogism, as pertaining to the intellect. 
III: 
Lastly, the suspension of this finite cognition through 
Reason must be demonstrated. This is the place to give the 
speculative meaning of the syllogism, the foundations of a scien-
tific cognition in generaL-It is the usual thing for an applied 
logic to be appended to this pure logic. But on the one hand 
what is usually dealt with under this head is too general and 
trivial to deserve any notice at all; and on the other hand the 
genuinely scientific content of applied logic is brought out in the 
third part under rational cognition. 
From this third part of logic, namely the negative or nullify-
ing side of Reason, we shall make the transition to genuine 
philosophy or metaphysics. Here we have, above all else, to 
construct for ours~lves completely the principle of all philoso-
phy. From the true cognition of this principle, there will arise 
the conviction that there has only been one identical philosophy 
at all times. So not only am I promising nothing new here, but 

11 
Introduction 
rather I am concentrating my philosophical efforts precisely on 
the restoration of the oldest of old things, and on freeing it from 
the misunderstanding in which these recent times of unphiloso-
phy have buried it. It is not long now since the very concept 
of philosophy was discovered in Germany, but it is only for our 
times that the discovery is a new one."21 
The business of logic, as we see, is to "cognize reflection complete-
ly and get it out of the way"; and to this end the forms of finitude 
must be set up in their rational order; "not just bundled together 
empirically."22 It was a favorite complaint of the idealists from Fichte 
onwards, that Kant had "bundled the categories together empirical-
ly" because he gave no justification for using the table of the forms 
of judgment just as he found it in traditional logic. But Kant was the 
philosopher who has made the most sustained effort to "imitate 
Reason" at the level of the intellect, so any proper survey of such 
efforts must necessarily deal with him. In Faith and Knowledge as 
we shall see, Hegel tries to present Kant's theory of the mind in a 
more organic, less "empirical" order than that adopted by Kant him-
self. I take what Hegel does in his structural presentation of the 
Critical Philosophy to be an example of how one should use the Ur-
bild of Reason to recognize the "copy." 
But the "efforts of the intellect to imitate Reason in the production 
of an identity" were mentioned in the Differenzschrift23 and the 
demonstration that "its copying can bring forth only a formal iden-
tity" is there given for the particular case of Reinhold and Bardili's 
"reduction of philosophy to logic" (D 179-83, D 186-8). One can see 
how Hegel may have used the Reinhold/Bardili "reduction of phi-
losophy to logic" as a jump-off point for his first course in Logic. 
But if he did so, he could not help being intensely aware of the arbi-
trary, ad hoc character of his procedure; for Reinhold with his se-
quence of philosophical "conversions" and his final arrival at a posi-
tion which he had expounded himself years earlier, but now greeted 
as a revelation from the mouth of someone else, is the paradigm case 
of an "imperfect" philosophy that "pertains to an empirical necessi-
ty." The desirability of a finite starting point for "logic" that was it-
self capable of rational justification would inevitably present itself to 
Hegel's mind very forcefully. 
The obvious starting point was the Critical Philosophy, since it was 
the historic point of origin for the Identity Philosophy, and marked 

12 
H. S. Harris 
the moment of rebirth for speculation. Faith and Knowledge is He-
gel's attempt to provide the rational justification that is needed. In his 
initial approach to the problem Hegel gives two grounds for believ-
ing that a "rational" justification is possible. First, the "subjective 
principle" of Kant, Jacobi and Fichte "is by no means a limited ex-
pression of the spirit of a brief epoch or of a small group" (57). And 
secondly "the mighty spiritual form that is their principle achieved 
in them perfect self-awareness, perfect philosophical formation and 
definite self-expression as cognition." The main body of the essay is 
devoted to the establishment of this second contention; but how the 
first contention, which needs no establishing can constitute a valid 
ground for Hegel's position is not easy to understand. Hegel seems to 
have undermined its evidential value already by declaring that the 
whole of the Enlightenment "was a hubbub of vanity without a firm 
core" (56). The Enlightenment, after all, is neither a "brief epoch" nor 
a "small group"; and if it can be thus summarily dismissed, the 
weight of any argument for the rational importance of its principle 
based on its prevalence in the "spirit of the age" would seem to be 
slight. 
But if we look more carefully, we see that it is the "positive aspect" 
of the Enlightenment (i.e., its consciousness of the Absolute) that 
Hegel has thus dismissed. Now the "sub~ctive principle" of the "phi-
losophy of reflection" is not the "positive aspect" either of the En-
lightenment or of the Reformation. It is the principle both of Protes-
tantism in religion, and of the Enlightenment in philosophy, but with 
respect to the Absolute it is strictly negative because it is essentially 
finite. In his religious feelings the tz:qe Protestant is aware of God, 
but no intuition of God as an objective presence is possible for him, 
precisely because his "flight from the world" makes the reverent 
worshipper ever conscious that all finite experience is evil. This world 
is delivered over to mortality and damnation. The "principle of 
subjectivity" is expressed as the axiom that all human knowledge is 
finite. God is felt as "beauty" (the ideal quality of sense-intuition); 
but the beauty must not be expressed, for to give it any natural ex-
pression would be to fall into the "idolatry" of the old "pagans." 
Hence the religious reformers were iconoclasts. They would not tol-
erate either prayers for the intervention of the saints, or "idolatrous" 
statues and pictures in the churches. Protestantism, at its farthest 
reach, is itself a cult of inward or subjective "beauty" -as Hegel will 
argue in the crucial few pages on Schleiermacher. But the divine 

13 
Introduction 
beauty is never objectively intuited. Thus the age remains "without 
a core" on its positive side. 
Because of its subjectivity, Protestant religious consciousness was 
a "yearning" for the Absolute that is not present, and a flight from 
the finite, the present reality of now and here. The Protestant princi-
ple of subjectivity is a negative one both for-itself because the sub-
ject knows that it is not the Absolute, and in-itself, because its whole 
being is a "yearning" for what is not present, and a continual denial 
and negating of the things and concerns of the present world. But 
"when the time had come'" the Protestant Reformation gave birth to 
the Enlightenment. Then the reconciliation of the finite subject with 
its finite world, the renunciation of its yearning for the Absolute, be-
gan. The old "yearning" now took the form of what we call "the 
Protestant ethic." The enlightened man turned his back on God, but 
he was still anxious to walk righteously in God's sight. His determi-
nation to preserve a "good conscience" was the only redeeming aspect 
of his resolute "pursuit of happiness." Unfortunately (as we shall see 
when we reach the analysis of Fichte's ethics) this sort of good con-
science is the one thing that one cannot preserve when one becomes 
systematically concerned about the doing of one's duty. Conscience 
is still the voice of the absent God, and it remains true that "in 
God's sight shall no man living be justified."24 
Any achievement of moral happiness would require a "specula-
tive" breakthrough, with a consequent escape from a "purely nega-
tive relation to the Absolute" whether in the form of religious 
yearning or enlightened renunciation. But to begin with, the hope-
lessness of the situation is not apparent. The "pursuit of happiness" 
is a right of every individual, and the "law of nature" is that we 
should maximize the enjoyment of this right, and take care only 
that our pursuit of happiness does not interfere with the equal 
rights of others. Utility is the absolute value and "the empirical 
happiness of the individual" is the one and only goal of Reason. 
"The infinite, the concept ... receives its content from ... its oppo-
site" (60). Heaven is just this world made happy, and if men cannot 
achieve it, they have no one to blame but themselves. In the world 
itself there are no sacred things-how could any finite thing be 
"sacred" once we have understood it properly?-only the "law of 
nature" must not be broken. 
Above the actual order of nature, and the ideal or moral order of 
Nature's law, there is, of course, the "Author of Nature." But He is 

14 
H. S. Harris 
only the supreme Being of Deism-" an unknowable God beyond the 
boundary stakes of Reason."25 
I have outlined "eudaemonism" with catchwords borrowed from 
Locke, even though Hegel means his audience (then and now) to 
think rather of Wolff. There is a better reason for this than the fact 
that most of my readers (like myself) will be more familiar and more 
comfortable with Locke. The reason is that, as Hegel himself admits, 
Locke was the authentic voice of this "enlightened view." Hegel may 
say scornfully that the Enlightenment is a "hubbub of vanity without 
a firm core." But as we have seen, this only refers to the hollowness 
of all religious consciousness in the period. The "enlightened prin-
ciple of subjectivity" had a definite philosopher to speak for it. Hegel 
mentions "Locke and eudaemonism" as the two "earlier philosophical 
m<'nifestatwns of this realism of finitude" (63). But that only reflects 
the fact that, while he was familiar with Locke's Essay, he had per-
haps not read Locke's political treatises. The very a!Jt quotation ( 68) 
from the Introduction to the Essay with which Hegel begins his 
analysis of Kant shows that he knew very well where the fountain-
head of the "reflective philosophy of subjectivity" was. 
But what has this utilitarian eudaemonism to do with Kant, Jacobi, 
and Fichte? They are at the opposite pole from it. However, just by 
being at the opposite pole from it, they show us the other side of it. 
They show us the meaning of that quest for "good conscience" which 
is its last link with the Protestant yearning that it has turned its back 
on. They set forth the infinity, the ideal aspect of the perfect recon-
ciliation with the finite in eud<Emonism. Every extreme in the eud<E-
monist account is complemented by its opposite so as to make an 
infinite whole. Pessimism takes the place of optimism, striving takes 
the place of satisfaction, duty takes the place of pleasure, law the 
place of inclination, domination the place of freedom. But it is always 
just a matter of the other side of the coin, the endlessness of all 
finite ends. 
In the eudaemonist phase no philosopher looked hard at the "in-
finite" aspect of existence: "the concept is not posited in purity" 
(61). The exceptional case here was Hobbes; and Hegel may have 
Hobbes in mind when he remarks that "when the concept is posited 
negatively, the subjectivity of the individual is present in empirical 
form, and the domination is not that of the intellect, but is a matter 
of the natural strength and weakness of the subjectivities opposed to 
one another" (61). For his point here seems to be that, in the Kant-

15 
Introduction 
ian perspective the only alternative to the tyranny of the categorical 
imperative is the terror of the war of all against all. But except 
in Hobbes, the euda>monists never "abstracted the concept."26 Their 
"infinity" was just an incfefinite projection of the synthesis of concept 
and intuition in finite satisfaction. They did not contrast a present 
state of being (i.e., satisfied existence) with the infinite concept as a 
particular intuition. Separated from its empirical content the infinite 
concept was for them simply the unthinkable, incomprehensible "Su-
preme Being." In the euda>monist ideal of perfect bliss "the empirical 
is ... an absolute something ... for the concept" (62) because one 
could not think the concept (of "happiness") at all without relying 
on it. 
This is the limitation that is overcome in the German thinkers. In 
their work, the phenomenal character of finite exi-stence is explicitly 
recognized, and hence the opposition between finite and infinite be-
comes "objective." There are two realms, the phenomenal and the 
noumenal, the sensuous and the supersensuous: "the empirical is ... 
an absolute nothing for the concept." This "perfect abstraction" is 
achieved at the cost of admitting that our "phenomenal" experience 
is not a knowledge of what is at all. Locke naively assumed that 
although his knowledge was limited it was real knowledge as far as 
it went. But Kant insists that we have no knowledge of "things-in-
themselves"; Jacobi adds that we must therefore conclude that all 
our so-called knowledge is nothing but the organization of our ignor-
ance.27 As Hegel puts it "in theoretical philosophy knowledge of the 
empirical is nothing" (62). But all this is lost to us on the theoretical 
side is restored to us in the practical philosophy of Fichte.28 There 
we shall see, in due course, how "the empirical has absolute reality 
for the concept." 
Each of the three thinkers contributes something vital to the com-
plete philosophy of subjective reflection. Kant completed the critique 
of our finite cognition which Locke was the first to attempt, and thus 
established the phenomenal/noumenal distinction. But his great 
advance was the establishment of the autonomy of practical Reason, 
as against the instrumental use of Reason in the older eudaemonism. 
Jacobi expressed the subjective meaning of this successful "abstraction 
of the infinite." The longing of Protestant faith and the "infinite 
grief" of God's death become, in Jacobi, the focal experience of 
Reason. Fichte overcame the antithesis between the objective auton-
omy of Reason and the subjective experience of despair, by postulat-

16 
H. S. Harris 
ing an "infinite progress" of feeling objectified as striving in accord-
ance with duty. Thus the infinite antithesis to the finite thesis of 
eud~monism finally achieved perfect expression. 
But the infinity that the three philosophies express is only the 
'(bad infinite" that was present, though implicit, in the thesis. The 
endlessness of striving was always there, but it was not previously 
perceived as the endless treadmill of moral obligation. The yearning 
and grief of Jacobi, since it is not the reflective development of a con-
ceptual ideal, is simply the finite life of the enlightened utilitarian, 
looked at from the point of view of its hopelessness and futility. And 
the content of the moral striving, by which Fichte escapes from this 
despair, all comes from finite experience. The service of the moral 
law is "finite ideality" because, although the infinite ideal is pro-
claimed, we can never reach it. The infinite kingdom of ends is de-
clared to be what is truly real but it is the striving of the finite self 
against its finitude that remains the one absolute certainty. Kant and 
Fichte "rise to the concept, but not to the Idea" (63). Jacobi does not 
even get that far. 
The Idea is the true infinity of life, an infinity that is not, like the 
concept (the moral law, or the "law of Nature" in the earlier tradi-
tion), essentially opposed to the finite. It does not exist simply as a 
thought or concept to be reflected on by the finite consciousness. It 
is an infinity that contains the finite, a concept that involves exist-
ence, an ideal that is the life of the real. This is the "Bild of the Abso-
lute" that we must see in the mirror of reflection, if all of our logical 
efforts are to prepare us for real speculation. All of us do have the 
intuition of the divine life, which is what we need if we are to over-
come the opposition of concept and existence in reflection. This intui-
tion is the element that Jacobi contributes to the intellectual "copy." 
But in its immediacy Jacobi's intuition is absolutely alien to reflection, 
so he can only be hostile to the conceptual efforts of Kant and Fichte. 
The intuition is also present in both Kant and Fichte, but only as the 
faith in a "beyond" which their conceptual structures can never com-
prehend because their concept of man is essentially finite. They 
accept the "fixed standpoint" of the Enlightenment. Like someone 
who complains that he is no longer able to see the feet properly when 
he is shown the whole body, they cannot recognize the true integrity 
of man's spiritual existence (the "Idea") when it is put before them. 
But their achievement was the making of an abstraction which com-
pleted the pattern of previous abstractions. It is no wonder, there-

17 
Introduction 
fore, that they cannot finally let the abstractions go back into the 
living unity of the whole. That is the task of speculative thought. 
3. KANT 
One of the worst difficulties that faces the reader in seeking to under-
stand Hegel's critique of Kant arises from the fact that Hegel uses 
so much terminology that derives from Kant, and uses it very freely, 
but in ways that contrast sharply with Kant's own interpretation and 
usage. "Concept," "Reason," "Idea" are all Kantian terms, in the 
sense that Hegel's usage of them derives in some sense from Kant. 
But the earnest student of Kant's "Transcendental Dialectic"-upon 
which Hegel's attention is largely focused-will find himself contin-
ually rubbing his eyes in bewilderment at the things that Hegel says. 
It is necessary to know what Kant thought, in order to understand 
what Hegel says; but it is even more necessary to grasp that Hegel 
begins from a flat rejection of some of Kant's most fundamental as-
sumptions. 
Take the word "Idea" for example. I have endeavoured to charac-
terize what it means for Hegel above. Since Hegel's "Idea" is a con-
cept that directly involves existence, we can understand why he says 
that "on the lower levels" of Kant's Critique "an Idea truly does pro-
vide the basis," for he is here referring to the a priori synthesis of 
concept and intuition in empirical kn!>wledge. But this directly vio-
lates Kant's definition of an "Idea of Reason": 
I understand by Idea a necessary concept of Reason to which no 
congruent object can be given in sense-experience ... the pure 
concepts of Reason are transcendental Ideas. They are not arbi-
trarily invented; they are imposed by the very nature of Reason 
itself, and therefore stand in necessary relation to the whole em-
ployment of understanding. Finally, they are transcendent and 
overstep the limits of all experience; no object adequate to the 
transcendental Idea can ever be found within experience.29 
Hegel denies this last claim; and having denied it he goes on to turn 
Kant's whole position upside down, by pointing out that if, contrary 
to Kant's belief, the Ideas of Reason are necessarily "objective" (i.e., 
instantiated in experience) then all empirically instantiated concepts 

18 
H. 5. Harris 
have a good claim to be regarded as Ideas precisely because the syn-
thesis of intuition and concept is a necessary condition of experience. 
In the Difference essay Hegel claims that Kant's philosophy is "au-
thentic idealism" "in the principle of the deduction of the categories" 
(i.e., in the "transcendental unity of apperception"). Now he says 
that Kant's philosophy "has the merit of being idealism" because of 
his doctrine of then przor' syntl1esis (68). 
It is because of Kant's doctrine of the highest Ideas of Reason, on 
the other hand, that Hegel stigmatizes the principle of his philosophy 
as "formal thinking."'lo Kant's Ideas are "pure concepts" (acts of the 
subject) without obiects. Or, as Kant says, their "objective employ-
ment ... is always transcendent." Now, Kant does allow the employ-
ment of the Ideas of Reason in a practical context. The Idea of God, 
for example, has a fundamental role in rational ethics. But it remains, 
for him, a tnmscendent concept (i.e., it is beyond the limits of pos-
sible experience), and to complete Kant's "system of reflection" bv 
resolving all the "antitheses" of the Ideas in a system of "practical 
faith," as Fichte does, is not the proper business of philosophy. If the 
rational concept is "empty" without an intuitive content, then it will 
be just as empty for practical purposes as it is for theoretical ones. 
And because it is empty any use of it in thought will be "formal." 
Because Kant recognized the true nature of the Idea, the identity 
of thought and being, in his account of the a priori synthesis of con-
cept and intuition in sense experience, Hegel regards the theory of the 
"productive imagination" that produces this a priori synthesis as a 
genuine achievement of speculation. But when we study this doctrine 
we must not make-and Hegel thinks that Kant did not make-the 
typical "reflective" error of assuming that the "synthesis" is a put-
ting together of heterogeneous components, the uniting of a concep-
tual form with a sensible matter. Far from being a separate facult~t, 
the intellect (which according to Kant, furnishes the forms or con-
cepts), is just the higher "potency" of the productive imagination. 
Once it has achieved sense and intuition-which already involves an 
a priori synthesis of matter and form-the intelligence can advance 
to pure concepts. Having arrived at "red," brown," "green," etc., it 
can advance to "color."81 The "identity" of the visual field is "color," 
the "difference" of the visual field is "colors." Thus the identity dis-
covered by the intellect is the same as the differences discovered by 
the visual sense. There is, of course, an evident antithesis which does 
not disappear, between the abstract universal "color" and the particu-
lar colors of the field. As Aristotle would have said, the universal 

19 
Introduction 
"color" exists in one way in the mind, and in another way in the 
different colors of the field. Sense and intellect are thus two forms of 
"intuiting." Intellectual intuition is the thinking that fills time, and 
sense intuition is the being that fills space. But we should say rather 
that "the Ego" exists in these two ways. If I think of the red, brown, 
green, etc., that I perceive, as "colored patches," then "the synthetic 
unity" which is what makes them a "visual field" "steps outside" of 
the colored field "and faces it in relative antithesis"-it becomes the 
abstract universal "color." This is an "empty" identity. It is not an 
"intuition," for there is no universal color, there are only particular 
colors; but when we turn all this into its proper idealist form, we 
realize that although there is no "abstract Ego," no "empty" form of 
the "unity of apperception," no self without some definite thoughts 
and intuitions, still the thinking and intuiting nctiv,"ty of the Ego is 
the concrete universal which is the "principle" of experience. Think-
ing and intuiting are quite "heterogeneous." But intelligent cmi.scious-
ness is "the original absolute identity of the heterogeneous." 
Just as the universal concept of color is "immersed" in the differ-
ences of the perceived colors, so at the higher level where concepts 
have been abstracted, the category, the constitutive principle by which 
Reason unifies experience is "immersed" in the variety of the phe-
nomena that are conceptualized in judgments. The rational principles 
involved only become apparent when we begin to reason syllogistical-
ly from our conceptual judgments. The categories have to be ab-
stracted then, because the ultimate major premises of scientific syl-
logizing are formations of categorical principle. But we are not 
normally conscious of the legislative function of our intelligence, 
when we constitute our sense-intuitions into a world of objects. It is 
this activity of our own Reason-and at its most primitive level the 
activity of the "productive imagination" that produces the synthesis 
of sense-intuitioP-which is the "sole In-itself" (73). The reflective 
split into subject and object, self and world, is logically posterior to 
this original unity. Kant himself did not recognize this, he did not 
perceive that the thing-in-itself must be the necessary origin of ap-
pearing and being appeared to as an n priori synthesis, not the prob-
lematic origin of the objective appearance. Thus "he turned the true 
n priori back into a pure unity, i.e., one that is not originally syn-
thetic." 
Because of this mistake, the rational (necessary) and the empirical 
(accidental) aspects of experience were reflectively separated at their 
point of origin. As a result only "relative identities'' of the pure con-

20 
H. S. Harris 
cepts (the categories) and empirical data were possible. Reason lays 
down categorical laws which "govern" the "relations" of phenomena, 
but the categories and the intuited data remain obstinately hetero-
geneous. Hence Kant simply does not realize that in the "Transcen-
dental Dialectic" he is investigating the nature of the "In-itself." In-
stead, he takes the organizing activity of Reason in experience to be 
the contribution of the human mind regarded as if it were something 
separate from the objective world which it organizes for cognition. 
The empirical aspect of experience is assigned one problematic origin, 
the rational aspect another. 
Speculation puts the two problems of origin together into the one 
absolute certainty (the ground of the a priori synthe~is} and accounts 
for the dialectical character of pure Reason (the one reality-in-itself) 
by a sort of "principle of complementarity." Thus gravity has an 
intuitive (subjective or particular) aspect as body and a conceptual 
(objective or universal) aspect as motion. This is an example from the 
philosophy of Nature. In transcendental philosophy, the activity of 
imagination has an intuitive (subjective, particular) side as the Ego, 
and a conceptual (objective, universal) side as experience. 32 The sub-
jective side is the finite and existential side, the objective side is the 
infinite (hence conceptual) side. The existing source or "center" of 
gravity is a physical body. Bodies are seen to move. But motion is 
the conceptual or universal side of gravity because the resting equi-
librium of a gravitational system of moving bodies is only compre-
hended in thought. It is not abstracted like "color" but grasped as a 
"periodicity of motion." On the transcendental side, the Ego is the 
existing source of Reason, and the infinity of experience is its ,realized 
(or "immersed") concept. As soon as we stabilize the infinity of pos-
sible experience-for example, by considering a color-wheel instead 
of the indefinite play of color, light and shade in our primitive sense 
experience-the "universal" (or conceptual) character of the "infinite" 
even at this "immersed" level of imagination, becomes obvious 
enough.33 
Having given us these examples of the subjective side as particular 
(intuitive) and the objective side as universal (conceptual), Hegel now 
makes one of those switches of perspective that renders his discussion 
of the Identity theory so hard to follow. Within either one of the "phi-
losophical sciences" the "subjective" side is particular and the objec-
tive side is "universal." But when we consider the ultimate specula-
tive "identity" of the two sciences with one another, the situation 
is reversed: Natural philosophy, the science of the object, is the 

21 
Introduction 
sphere of reality, where the moment of particular existence, of intu-
ition, is dominant; and transcendental philosophy, the science of the 
subject, is the sphere of ideality, where the universal, the concept, is 
no longer "immersed" in the manifold.34 Having shown that Kant 
got his transcendental theory right, Hegel now moves on to discuss 
his failure to grasp the identity of self (the concept) and nature (the 
empirical particulars). The "rational identity" which Kant has un-
covered in his theory of the synthetic a priori judgment, is the "sub-
stance" of the world just as much as it is the "necessity" of the 
judgment. This identity Kant did not recognize. Or more precisely, he 
had an inkling of it in his doctrine of the use of the "Ideas" as regu-
lative principles of teleological judgment. But this "regulative" use 
only preserves the "identity," the rationality of the transcendental 
science. Kant's "thing-in-itself" on the side of nature is the "com-
posite" king in Goethe's allegorical presentation of the different phi-
losophies of Nature, Das Miirchen. 35 
Kant's deliberate restriction of perspective to the "transcendental" 
side springs from his initial commitment to the psychological stand-
point of Locke, the standpoint of "reflective subjectivity." In his dis-
tinction of the "secondary" from the "primary" qualities of bodies, 
Locke had advanced to the recognition of the "productive imagina-
tion." By regarding "secondary" qualities as "subjective," Locke 
"transfers perceiving ... into the subject" (78). Kant developed 
this fundamental insight into a complete theory of subjectivity. But 
he ignored the fact that he was accepting human finitude as if it were 
an absolute unconditioned reality. The upshot of the Critical Philoso-
phy is that we know absolutely (rationally) that our experience is phe-
nomenal, etc. This absolute knowledge of finitude has its "infinite" 
side. But Kant prefers not to pursue his occasional intimations of that. 
His "formal idealism" rests on an uncritical dualism. The Ding-an-
~ich is Locke's substantial "something I know not what." 
We might object here that it is unfair to charge Kant with retain-
ing an uncritical, dogmatic, conception of the Ding-an-sich. He con-
sistently maintains that its status is problematic. Thus, for example, 
it cannot be numbered either as a singular falling together lump or as 
a falling apart many. We cannot ask how many there are, or whether 
there is more than one type. Hegel generally recognizes and admits 
this. The Kant of the first Critique is, in his view, a consistent scep-
tic because of his strictly problematic conception of the Ding-an-sich. 
But in Faith and Knowledge Hegel is concerned ultimately with the 
"rational faith" for which Kant explicitly claims to have "made 

22 
H. S. Harris 
room." This faith does make an absolute out of finite human indi-
viduality, for the law of duty is laid upon me, the hope of immortali-
ty is mine, and I am an autonomous member of the Kingdom of Ends 
-a Kingdom which is "beyond" the order of Nature that has the 
Ding-an-sich so problematically behind it. In Kant's philosophy as a 
whole the "In-itself of Reasf>~'~oes get distinguished from the "In-
itself of things" precisely because ~proves to be capable of this prac-
tical development. But this distinction of the two sides (the practical 
faith and the theoretical problem) violates or is false to Kant's orig-
inal comprehension of experience as an a priori synthesis. 
Thus Kant's theory of the synthesis of imagination is a truer ex-
pression of his speculative genius, than the "deduction of the cate-
gories." The "deduction of the categories" was the speculative com-
pletion of his transcendental science, as we have seen. But he only 
half grasped the significance of the "deduction" because he did not 
grasp the true import of his "necessary Idea" of an "intuitive intel-
lect" at all. 
Of course, if all "universals" are conceived reflectively as possibili-
ties or ranges of possibility for experience and existence, their func-
tion can only be regulative. Thus, within his own perspective, Kant 
is quite consistent and correct in regarding the Ideas in this way. The 
trouble is that, within that perspective, the autonomous development 
of practical Reason cannot be justified. In his practical philosophy, 
the pure Reason which, qua theoretical, is condemned as "dialetictical" 
and allowed only to "regulate" our phenomenal experience, is per-
mitted to constitute the noumenal realm. The "pure form" of the 
"transcendental unity of apperception" becomes a "rational being" 
which imposes the law of duty upon itself, etc. This is inconsistent 
with Kant's critique of the "paralogisms," just as the postulate of 
immortality and the "infinite progress" violates his theoretical solu-
tion of the "I'I'lathematical antinomies." But the way to this "practical 
faith" is opened by his theoretical solution of the "dynamic antino-
mies." Here he momentarily abandons his sceptical stance, and at 
least suggests the dogmatic acceptance of two distinct worlds, the 
phenomenal and the noumenal, the realm of necessity and the realm 
of freedom. Hegel admits that in the first Critique Kant only asserts 
his solution of the antinomies in a properly "critical" fashion. But he 
claims that in his attack on the Ontological Argument Kant emerges 
as a dogmatic dualist. I confess that I cannot see why he says this. 
The reflective separation of thought and being is evident enough in 
Kant's argument; but this only gives rise to "dualism" when we have 

23 
Introduction 
admitted that Reason is an "In-itself." Now, even if it be true that 
the first Critique shows this, Kant certainly did not recognize it. So 
he is, at most, an unconscious dogmatist. 
Hegel deliberately postpones discussion of Kant's practical philoso-
phy, because it is in Fichte that we shall see "rational faith" deyel-
oped systematically. For this reason, he can pass straight to the 
Critique of Judgment and preserve his consistent image of Kant as a 
purely "critical" (i.e., sceptical) thinker. The polemical imputation of 
dogmatism is a distortion of this image, called forth by Kant's 
critique of the Ontological Argument, because of Hegel's emotional 
overreaction against Kant's failure of historical comprehension with 
respect to the great tradition of speculative rationalism. Kant over-
throws Mendelssohn; and he thinks that, in doing so, he has over-
thrown Spinoza. 
The two sections of the Critique of Judgment, aesthetic judgment 
and teleological judgment, deal with "beauty as conscious intuition" 
and "beauty as non-conscious intuition" (86). This characterization 
of Kant's theory of organism is very puzzling, because it is not at all 
evident what a "non-conscious intuition" can be. But if we remember 
the "non-conscious rational" in the synthetic a priori judgment ear_lier, 
we have the clue that we need. Just as "the rational" was the neces-
sary, a priori element in sense-experience,~- the "beauty" of it is the 
aspect of freedom in it. An organism is a self-determining, self-
maintaining individual entity. Thus to perceive something as an or-
ganism, is to make "unconscious" use of the category of freedom, to 
"imagine" or be sensibly aware of a practical concept "immersed" in 
intuition. But this practical concept is one which, according to Kant's 
theory, cannot be "immersed" in intuition as "color" or "causality" 
is, because no "demonstration" of it in intuition could possibly be 
adequate. Hence Kant regards the conscious intuition of beauty as 
non-cognitive; and he restricts the employment of "free" organic 
categories in our cognitive science to their use as "regulative maxims." 
Actually the conceptual exposition of the "Idea of Reason" in the 
Transcendental Dialectic has its intuitive demonstration in our aes-
thetic experience. This is Hegel's version of Schelling's dictum that 
"Art is the organon of philosophy." The best illustratio~ of what 
he means by it is his claim in the System of Ethical Life, that the "in-
tuition" of "ethical life" is "das Volk."36 Unfortunately it is very 
difficult to unpack the "speculative" meaning of that claim. But, at 
least, the relation between Athens and Athena provides a simple 
illustration of the function of art as an intuitive expression of the 

2.J 
H. 5. Harris 
"absolute indifference point" in religious experience. We shall return 
to the problem of "speculative demonstration" later.'17 
Of course, this "intuition" is not finite; that is why an adequate 
exposition of it is so difficult. But this exposition is the task of spec-
ulative Reason, not of the intellect as it is (correctly) delimited by 
Kant. We have the "intuition" before us in objective form in the liv-
ing organism. But the natural organism is not conscious of itself, 
and for an intellect which is conscious of itself, but only as finite, the 
necessary ground of explanation for the unconscious system of or-
ganic nature can only be another problematic noumenal entity, the 
"intuitive intellect" of the Creator. This Idea is therefore subjectively 
necessary for us, we can only unify and organize our science of na-
ture, living and non-living, by regarding nature as a whole ns if it 
were the creation of such an intellect. But, of course, we cannot dog-
matically assert that any such intellect exists. Here, at least, Kant is 
right in his restraint, for the intuitive intellect does not need to be 
postulated; it only needs to be discovered, raised to consciousness in 
his own doctrine of the productive imagination. By returning to this, 
he could have found the clue through which he could have compre-
hended Nature and Intelligence as an organic whole, thus escaping 
from the mechanical determinism which was all that he could recog-
nize in Spinoza. 
"Kant himself recognized in the beautiful an intuition other than 
the sensuous" (91). This is an acknowledgement that in their abiding 
concern about art, the Identity philosophers were following a clue 
provided by Kant. Their "speculative" theory was intended as the 
completion of Kant's critical theory. Behind Hegel's brusque con-
demnation of Kant for not doing what Schelling and he have done, 
there lies a clear consciousness that Kant provided the foundations 
for what they have done. 
In sum, then, Kant's philosophy is a "formal" theory, i.e., it is the 
theory of Reason as an empty concept, whether we "run along the 
thread of identity" (the necessary a priori synthesis in the Critique of 
Pure Reason) or the "thread of causality" (the free causality of the 
rational being in the Critique of Practical Reason). The "pure con-
cept" A needs to be complemented by the "sensible manifold" B, in 
either case. This manifold which supplies the "matter" of experience 
remains an absolute mystery. The "copying of Reason by the intellect 
brings forth only a formal identity"38 in Kant's great critical system, 
just as it does in the work of the epigones Reinhold and Bardili.39 
But unlike these lesser thinkers, Kant did begin from the very "point 

25 
Introduction 
of union" between form and content, concept and manifold. His 
theory of the original synthesis of the manifold contained the ''mid-
dle term" that he needed; Reason itself was here "immersed" and 
hence unrecognized. 
Because he did not recognize it, Kant had to replace Reason by 
"practical faith" in a "noumenal world." The unity of thought and 
being became an ideal, a Sol/en. Although the systematic develop-
ment of this solution was Fichte's contribution, Hegel ends his recon-
structive account of Kant's philosophy very properly with a brief 
summary of Kant's theory of the summum bonum. Even here, as he 
emphasizes, Kant remains tentative. His "practical faith" is not pro-
posed as the ultimate ground and explanation for the very existence 
of finite consciousness-as it is by Fichte-but as a regulative use of 
the "Ideas of Reason" like the employment of the concept of organ-
ism in the life sciences. Just what this "subjective" faith amounts to, 
remains unctear. But the objectivity of the law of Reason admits no 
doubt at all. This is the "formal" (i.e., empty universal) aspect of 
speculative Reason, the infinity which is opposed to the finite. We 
shall see in the theory of Fichte, how disastrous the consequences of 
this reflective opposition between the infinite "concept" and the finite 
"intuition" are. 
4. J A C 0 B I 
The discussion of Jacobi forms the longest section of Faith and 
Knowledge and the one that has the smallest positive content. Many 
pages are here devoted to the ironic exposure of "unphilosophy." 
Here Hegel deploys a sarcastic wit and a polemic gift which become 
in the end repellent because they are so unrelieved by that apprecia-
tion of positive achievement which he had himself declared to be the 
first essential of genuinely philosophical criticism. Yet Hegel did ap-
preciate Jacobi's positive contribution. He always continued to allot 
to Jacobi a place of prominence in the development of the specula-
tive viewpoint, a prominence which Jacobi has not managed to retain 
in the general history of philosophy. In the introduction to the En-
cyclop<Edia Logic (an introduction which remaps much of the ground 
first traversed in Faith and Knowledge) Hegel repeats his critical ap-
preciation of Jacobi without the interminable polemic.40 We shall 
endeavour to do the same here, and further to explicate, as far as 

26 
H. S. Harris 
possible, the occurrence of the interludes concerning Herder and 
Schleiermacher in this section of the essay. 
Jacobi accepts the basic position that "all our knowledge is derived 
from experience"; and the further view that all our so-called "sci-
ence" is a rational construction based on the comparing and relating 
of sense impressions. With respect to all this "finite" knowledge he 
was in essence a disciple of Hume, a radical empiricist of a distinctly 
pre-Critical type. But his account of the "immediate" knowledge 
from which the comparing and relating activity of empirical reflec-
tion begins, though it was inspired by his study of Hume, was quite 
distinctive. He regarded all "immediate" knowledge as a direct "reve-
lation" of being. The mark of this "revelation" was an unshakeable 
fait11, a feeling of immediate certainty, an inescapable conviction of 
real existenceY 
According to Jacobi, we should therefore turn away from all the 
constructions of abstract argument, which can never be more con-
vincing, or even as convincing, as their intuitive foundations. It is 
these foundations that we must seek out. Now, among the certain-
ties of faith, some "rational" principles are found, notably the "laws 
of thought" and the principle that "the whole is prior to the part.'· 
This latter axiom is fundamental to "speculation" as the Identity 
philosophers understood it, and the importance that Jacobi gave to 
it is one of the main reasons for Hegel's continued interest in him. 
Jacobi derived our a priori certainty of causal necessity in experience, 
from this deeper certainty of the "ground." 
Jacobi's conception of immediate sense-experience as revelntion 
abolishes the barrier between "appearance" and "reality," or between 
phenomena and things-in-themselves, without any formalities of 
argument and discussion. But the "things" that are thus "revealed" 
are "in-themselves" finite and transient; and no use of the "principle 
of sufficient reason" can enable us to reach the infinite unconditioned 
whole by linking these conditioned, finite things in causal chains. 
Here in its simplest "dogmatic" form we can recognize the criticism 
which the Identity philosophers raised against the "copying of Rea-
son by the intellect." 
· 
Thus Jacobi asserts that faith has cognitive value and that it is, 
indeed, the only source of true cognition. In this way he forms the 
bridge between Kant's appeal to a non-cognitive faith at the limit of 
knowledge, and-Fichte's firm declaration that practical faith is not the 
limit but the ground of knowledge. But because of his pre-Critical 
dogmatism, Jacobi himself cannot find any path from finite cognition 

27 
Introduction 
to the cognition of the absolute or unconditioned reality, like the one 
that practical "postulation" opened up for Fichte. Hegel's critique 
consists essentially in the direct exposure of the pre-Critical charac-
ter of Jacobi's thought. 
Thus Hegel's discussion continues almost all the time to be as much 
concerned with Kant as it is with Jacobi. But Jacobi had also been 
the great critic of Spinoza from the standpoint of finite reflection. So 
it was inevitable that Hegel should devote some attention to this 
aspect of Jacobi's philosophical work. Indeed, the hints that Hegel 
gives in this connection, about his own interpretation of Spinoza, 
and so about the character of his own debt to Spinoza are among the 
most valuable precipitates of the whole Jacobi section. 
Jacobi believes that Spinoza had to move illicitly from an infinite 
causal sequence in time to an infinite eternal relation of whole and 
parts (this is the transition from an "empirical" to a "logical" use of 
the principle of sufficient reason which is never possible in human 
cognition). The crux of the Spinoza discussion, therefore, concerns 
the place of time in Spinoza's system. Hegel scornfully rejects Ja-
cobi's claim that the ''infinite finitude" of a temporal sequence of 
causes is present in Spinoza's system (except at the level of imagina-
tion). But Jacobi's problem about the relation of temporal sequence 
to eternity remained one of the most important growing points of 
Hegel's own speculation. Time is, after all, the "form of inner intui-
tion." Hence it is necesssary that it sfiould be conceived as a "true 
infinite" and not just as the "bad infinite" of imagination. If that was 
the only concept of time that Spinoza had, then Spinoza was defi-
cient, even if not in the way that Jacobi claimed. For the moment, 
however, it is Hegel's defence of Spinoza's system that is important. 
According to Hegel, Spinoza grasped the true or speculative concept 
_of the infinite, as the identity of thought and being, or of the abstract 
infinite and the finite. The "pure Reason" of Kant is only the ab-
, stract infinite, the empty form of thought (the infinity of "possible 
experience") which is just one of the opposed terms of this identity. 
This "nothing" of the empty concept, is thought as negative. Both 
of these infinites-the "full" infinite of speculation, and the "empty" 
infinite of "pure Reason"-are to be distinguished from the empiri-
cal infinity of an infinite series (the "infinite finitude" which is the 
o.ply form of infinity that Jacobi can conceive). This last is what Hegel 
later calls the "bad" infinite. 
Jacobi himself can only admit immediate intuitions, not rational 
expositions, of the true infinite. Thus speculative Reason is reduced 

28 
H. S. Harris 
in his work to flashes of insight. With respect to "absolute knowl-
edge" he is in the position of a "common sense" philosopher. Every 
attempt that he makes to explicate his momentary "intuitions" con-
tradicts what is asserted in the intuition itself. Thus he claims to 
intuit human nature undivided, but he tells us that what he intuits 
is a fundamental division between the finite (sensible, cognitive) as-
pect and the infinite (rational, intuitive) aspect of man's nature. This 
"identity of opposites" is just what the Identity Philosophy seeks to 
expound rationally. Thus although Hegel pokes a lot of very sar-
castic fun at Jacobi's "flashes of insight," we should not overlook 
the essential soundness of some of the most important ones-for 
instan~e, "Unity is therefore both beginning and end of this eternal 
circle and is called-individuality, organism, object-subjectivity" 
(117) 
At the opposite pole from Jacobi, as far as the interpretation of 
Spinoza was concerned, stood Herder, who ascribed to that severe 
rationalist a romantic sense of life that is quite alien to Spinoza's text. 
Jacobi called Herder's God "Spinozistic froth"; and this harsh ver-
dict seems to me better grounded than Hegel's own attempt to "unify 
opposites" by portraying Herder's work as J "slight modification" 
of Jacobi's intuitivism. The "intuitive" character of Herder's method 
of presentation is undeniable. But even though Herder does leap from 
"insight" to "insight," leaving the reader to do a lot of the arguing 
for himself, there is no mistaking his systematic urge, or the argu-
mentatively connected character of his thought. According to Hegel 
himself Herder "puts a reflective concept in the place of rational 
thought" (118). This seems to me to be very different from "veiling 
the rational" in "the expression of feeling, subjectivity of instinct, 
etc.," as Jacobi does. So the little interlude about Herder must, I 
think, be adjudged a superfluous excrescence upon the outer surface 
of Hegel's argument.42 
Hegel was, no doubt, led to include it because Herder had pub-
lished a second edition of God in 1800; and during 1801 Hegel prom-
ised to review it for the Erlanger Literatur-Zeitung. He had still not 
finished the review at the end of March 1802 (because he needed his 
copy of the first edition for comparison). He certainly did finish it, 
for Rosenkranz saw the manuscript after Hegel's death. 43 But for 
some reason-perhaps because it was so late-the review was never 
published; and it is now lost. It must, however, have been fresh in 
Hegel's mind, when he wrote Faith and Knowledge; and Herder's 
God was more nearly current than most of the literature surveyed in 

29 
Introduction 
the essay. The Spinoza connection made it marginally relevant, and 
this tempted Hegel to exaggerate the stylistic affinity between Jacobi 
and Herder into a deeper affinity which does not really exist.44 
After this not very relevant interlude comes something obviously 
relevant, yet far easier to dispense with than the critique of Herder: 
a long polemic discussion of Jacobi's essay on Kant. Hegel mentioned 
in the "announcement" of Faith and Knowledge that he would deal 
with Jacobi's "characteristic polemic against Spinoza and also with 
that against Kant (Reinhold's Contributions, no. 3)."45 The article in 
the Contributions, together with the article in the Pocketbook for 
1802, edited by Jacobi's brother, is the most completely current lit-
erature that is touched on in the essay. But they do not merit critical 
notice on the scale that Hegel accords to them; and no articles of 
this type could deserve to be savaged at such length. Hegel has al-
ready said everything important that needed saying about Jacobi's 
interpretation of Kant in side references before he begins his formal 
critique. Except for the evidence it supplies of Hegel's positive com-
mitment to the Critical Philosophy-which one might sometimes lose 
sight of when he is talking directly about Kant-there is little to 
interest us in this diatribe. Fortunately there is not much here that 
will cause difficulty either. Hegel's own exposition of Kant will be 
found much easier to follow here than his systematic reconstruction 
of Kant's position in the previous section; for Jacobi had at least the 
merit of buttressing his misunderstandings with copious references, 
so that Hegel's task was reduced to the quotation and explication of 
definite texts. 
Unluckily, Jacobi was prevented by ill health from completing the 
Kant essay himself. He handed it over half-finished, with a mass of 
notes for the continuation, to his enthusiastic follower Friedrich Koep-
pen. Koeppen was a young man-five years younger than Hegel-
and, like Hegel, he was a candidate for an academic career. For him, 
Hegel has nothing but contempt, tinged perhaps with an envious fear 
that he may get his foot on the ladder first,46 and with an angry 
consciousness that many people classed Koeppen and himself to-
gether as the servile dependents of more original minds.47 So his 
irony at Koeppen's expense overflows without any conscientious 
checks or scruples. 
The Pocketbook-which Hegel delights to call by its earlier title 
Superfluous Pocketbook-was intended for a popular audience. So 
we might expect that the philosophical articles in it would indeed be 
superfluous. But behind Hegel's sarcasm here, we can catch a glimpse 

30 
H. S. Harris 
of the ultimate "ground" of Jacobi's intuitive philosophy. The most 
fundamental "revelation" of immediate feeling is the direct aware-
ness of God. This is the revelation of Reason in us-though it is a 
Reason which cannot become discursive, because all discursive con-
sciousness belongs to the sphere of the intellect. Hegel criticizes this 
immediate consciousness of God formally at some length in the Intro-
duction to the Logic. In Faith and Knowledge he simply ridicules it, 
but there is a certain embarrassment about the ridicule, because 
Jacobi's intuition of God is also the "intellectual intuition" of the 
Identity Philosophy. What Hegel objects to is Jacobi's claim that the 
intuition cannot be expressed without being turned into a "univer-
sality cut off from the particular" (136). By reducing all intuitive 
knowledge to faith, Jacobi muddies everything together and obscures 
the essential task of speculation, which is precisely to build a bridge 
between intellectual and empirical intuition. For Jacobi all the efforts 
of critical Reason to distinguish the different forms of certainty-by 
insisting, for example, that empirical intuition is objective but phe-
nomenal, while practical faith, though noumenal is "subjective" and 
not properly cognitive-is a tissue of sophistries that seeks to deprive 
us in one way of the real world, and in another way of our real con-
tact with God. To Jacobi, all this is quite simply intolerable; the 
remedy for it is to clarify our awareness of what really is for us im-
mediate and undubitable, and then to keep this intuitive certainty 
unsullied by intellectual elaborations. But this means that Jacobi's 
faith in the Absolute, when it is purified and set beside the intuitive 
certainty of our own finitude, is the conscious awareness of our own 
impotence. The undivided humanity, that Jacobi boasts of compre-
hending, is a hopeless yearning to know or to have what it cannot, 
to be what it is not. The unreflective faith of the old time might suffer 
from a sense of being cut off from God by sin; but it had the hope 
and the promise of redemption. Jacobi's rational man is cut off from 
God by metaphysics, by Reason itself, in virtue of that very finite-
ness of experience which Jacobi obstinately refuses to surrender to 
the hell-fire of the Critical Philosophy. 
This is a topic to which Hegel will return in li.is final note on 
Schleiermacher. But before he can come to that he has to deal briefly 
with Jacobi's ethics. Jacobi's ethics, again, can only be comprehended 
through the contrast with Kant. Hegel is therefore obliged to antici-
pate some of the points that belong properly to the Fichte section. In 
Kantian ethics, reason and feeling, law and impulse are rent apart 
and set in opposition to one another. Jacobi rebels against this reflec-

31 
Introduction 
tive opposition, and against the moral tyranny of the Categorical 
Imperative. His is the ethics of noble feeling, which can dignify even 
an act that is formally immoral such as lying, or a violation of the 
sacred, like the Sabbath-breaking of Jesus. Hegel had himself rebelled 
in the same way in earlier years.48 But Hegel was always conscious 
of the excesses of the beautiful soul,49 and from the moment that he 
comprehended Schelling's breakthrough to the speculative standpoint, 
his attitude towards all ethics of feeling and "the heart" became pre-
dominantly negative. "Beauty" is an ethical standard, but ethical 
beauty is an "Idea," i.e., it consciously contains the law of Reason, 
the pure concept. It is not the sort of intuitive "particular" experience 
that can be reflectively opposed to the command of duty. Jacobi sim-
-ply overlooks the objective aspect of ethical beauty in his examples, 
or worse still, he downgrades it into something accidental-for in-
stance he has no real understanding of what "Sparta" means for 
Spertias and Bulis (145-6). In Hegel's view the purely subjective 
consciousness of the beautiful soul is the speculative equivalent of 
religious damnation. Thus there is "original sin" in Jacobi's i~me­
diate feeling, corruption where he least suspects it. Man is already 
out of Eden, and any sense of contentment with himself that he may 
feel is sinful. Thus "Jacobi's principle tarnishes the beauty of indi-
viduality ... through reflection on personality" (148-9). 
"Jacobi's principle" also tarnishes the "beauty of individuality" 
(the ethical Idea) in other more theoretical ways. His reduction of all 
"intuitions" to the same level, effectively abolishes the Protestant 
opposition between the things of this world and the things of God. 
But it does so without opening any way by which the things of this 
world can be made holy. Since-as we saw in his critique of Spinoza 
-,-Jacobi does not admit the possibility of viewing Nature as a whole 
sub specie <Eternitatis, there cannot be any Jacobian intuition of Na-
ture as "universe." Any "reconciliation" of the finite spirit with God 
must therefore be of the old eud<Emonist "reward" type. But the 
"Protestant principle" itself is capable of something higher than this. 
In the midst of this discussion of Jacobi's religion, Hegel suddenly 
feels it incumbent upon him to explain why he chose Jacobi to repre-
sent the religious consciousness of Protestantism generally. This is 
because he is about to go on to show that the "Protestant principle" 
has achieved its highest expression in the thought of Schleiermacher. 
The reason why Jacobi is, nevertheless, the most appropriate spokes-
man for the "Protestant principle" is that Jacobi has given the most 
comprehensive exposition of the principle: "the same emphasis is 

32 
H. S. Harris 
also evident in other philosophical efforts, but in some it is more 
feeble and in others less ambitious" (148). Schleiermacher is less 
ambitious because he has offered no critique of finite Reason. But 
then, of course, Schleiermacher's expression of the "Protestant prin-
ciple" is higher largely because he is a genuinely post-Critical think-
er, and could not be guilty of the dogmatism of Jacobi, or of the 
"common-sense" philosophers (who are, perhaps, Jacobi's "more fee-
ble" brethren?). 
Protestantism is essentially a private religion (according to Hegel, 
at least). "It makes communion with God and consciousness of the 
divine into something inward" (148). But although it "does not admit 
... a consciousness of the divine ... in which this nature and this 
universe are enjoyed in the present," Protestant sensibility can rise 
to an intuition of "the universe." This it does in Schleiermacher's 
Speeches. Here we find a genuine intuition of nature as an organic 
whole-an intuition which Hegel calls "infinite love" (150} 50 Just as 
the Greek artist created an "intuitive" focus for the religious emotion 
of the community in "the saturating objectivity of a cult" (148) so 
Schleiermacher's ideal Protestant minister is a "religious artist" who 
by his "virtuosity" creates a focus in inward consciousness for his 
whole congregation. But this artistic creation must remain inward, in 
order not to violate the "Protestant principle" of subjectivity. Hence 
it can only be evanescent at best. Schleiermacher's religious art is 
"forever without works of art" (151), and it is the bond only of a 
small group for a brief period. Such a Church as this can hardly rise 
to the intuition of the universal spirit of Christian tradition, for it is 
inevitably concerned about the definition of its own distinctive (i.e., 
particular) identity. The contrast with the absolute universality of 
the rational community in Kant and Fichte is quite stark. 
5. FICHTE 
In Fichte's philosophy, as we have several times said, practical faith 
becomes the explanatory ground of finite cognition. This is made 
fully explicit in The Vocation of Man, where, as Schelling told A. W. 
Schlegel, "Fichte has expressed his whole universe."51 Schelling was 
only repeating the argument of Hegel himself, who said in his an-
nouncement that he would take Fichte's exposition in the Vocation of 
Man as the basis for his discussion "because this both unveils the 

33 
Introduction 
essence of [Fichte's] philosophy most completely for a popular audi-
ence, and is also the only one among all his expositions that sets forth 
his philosophy in its totality as a system."52 This was slightly disin-
genuous because The Vocation of Man does not set forth the specu-
-lative philosophy of absolute self-positing, oppositing and their 
synthesis. In The Vocation of Man Fichte's speculative Reason is first 
given the mythic form of a conversation between the author and a 
"Spirit," and then carried on as an inward but very personal medita-
tion. One can very properly say therefore that Fichte has chosen 
here to present his views within the confines of "subjective reflection." 
This was what made the work peculiarly suitable for Hegel's present 
purpose. 
In Kant's philosophy the "absolute identity" makes two appear-
ances, one at the unconscious level of the synthesis of imagination, 
and one at the level of "subjective" consciousness-as something 
"conceivable" but not known to be real. The "ant~thesis" of1infinite 
reality (God) and finite reflective awareness (man)~ does not become 
"objective" in Kant, because we are nowhere permitted to affirm 
God's existence categorically. Even "practical faith" is "subjective." 
In Jacobi, on the other hand, "faith" is the basic mode of all "objec-
tive" experience. All the "objectivity" that Kant carefully explains by 
means of the synthesis and the categories, Jacobi regards as belong-
ing primitiyely to sensation as such, which is itself an immediate 
"revelation." This means that, for Jacobi, human consciousness is 
just the antithesis, the placing against one another of the two modes 
of immediate revelation, the empirical revelation of self and the 
world, and the revelation of Reason or the Absolute. The "yearning" 
that arises from this "undivided" division must look for solace to a 
"beyond" which cannot be articulated at all. Fichte provides an ar-
ticulation for it which depends on the Kantian theory of objectivity. 
But it is the yearning, the unsatisfied consciousness, that is "objec-
tified," i.e., it is admitted to be quite real and quite unsatisfiable. The 
Ego (of the finite revelation) ought to be equal to the Ego (of the 
infinite one). This ought is the end of the matter conceptually, and 
the existence of the ought is the endlessness of an infinite progress. 
The conceptual side is a grasping of the "pure" infinite, the infi-
nite abstracted in thought, and opposed altogether to the finitude of 
existence. Thus Fichte's "idealism" is formal because it is concerned 
with this abstracted concept (the "absolute" Ego which does not have 
experience but is the condition of the experience had by the finite 
Ego). In the account of finite experience there is an unresolved resi-

34 
H. S. Harris 
due of realism, in the shape of the Anstoss, the "impact" in which the 
self-positing of the Ego encounters its own oppositing of the no~­
Ego. T'he "in_t_ellectual intuition" of which Ficbte speaks is just an 
immediate awareness of the absolute Ego as "activity-.''ll:lTSirrturrion 
remains quite distinct from all intuition of the content of experience 
which arises from the "impact" or shock with which that activity 
meets itself. As far as the "impact" is concerned, the absolute Ego is 
just the postulated cause of it; and the Ego causes the shock for the 
sake of having a sphere for its free causal agency. Thus "the only 
identity here is the relative identity of the causal nexus." 
Kant was confident that his "Copernican revolution" had solved 
the problem of defining the "limits" of our knowledge as posed by 
Locke. That we do have knowledge, and that it is finite, was for him 
(as for Locke) an indubitable fact. But he showed that this indubita-
bility arises from the structure of the mind itself. Thus it appeared 
that philosophy could afford to forget about the order of the natural 
world, the order of the reality within which we come into being as 
finite consciousness. Fichte's theory of the absolute Ego merely gives 
a definitive warrant to philosophy to forget about this, and so turn 
away from its original and proper task. In the Difference essay Hegel 
presented Fichte's theory as the opening for a return to the specula-
tive task by way of Kant's work. But even there he focussed atten-
tion on the unsatisfactoriness of the "deduction of nature" as the 
growing point for future speculation. Here, he treats Fichte as the 
culmination of reflective philosophy, the final closure of all possibility 
of speculation, precisely because of the consistent formal character 
of that same "deduction of nature." Even our own "nature," the 
immediacy of feeling on which Jacobi's rebellion was based, is treated 
formally by Fichte (i.e., the differentiation of the content is regarded 
as entirely accidental and arbitrary, as having no rational signifi-
cance). 
Thus theoretical knowledge has, in Fichte, the two sides of "abso-
lute identity" -.-;;the intuition of our own activity- in sensing, feeling, 
thinking, etc.-knd the endless difference of sense-content, emotional 
mood, thought process, etc. "The one self-certifying certainty ... is 
that there exists a thinking subject, a Reason affected with finitude." 
(64) This is now conceptualized as "the knowingr'o( all knowledge, 
pure consciousness ... [which] shows itself immediately to be the 
principle of deduction only because it is strictly incomplete and 
finite." (158). 
But this argument from incompleteness presupposes an immediate 

35 
Introduction 
or intuitive knowledge of what completeness is. This is Jacobi's 
"principle of sufficient reason" -the principle of the priority of "the 
whole." Thus Fichte ought to find out where this intuition of perfec-
tion comes from, and then make that source into his philosophical 
foundation. Jacobi finds the intuition of perfection everywhere, Fichte 
finds it nowhere. But Jacobi cannot relate the absoluteness of being 
(its perfection) to its transitoriness (or imperfection). Fichte can show 
the relation, and by doing so, he justifies the postulation of the per-
fection that he cannot find. But in showing the relation, Fichte turns 
Jacobi's simple faith in the finite "revelation" of being into a practi-
cal faith. Our finite experience is shown to be necessary because finite 
existence is an infinite progress toward a moral ideal. This infinite 
progress is existence with a minus sign, it is the perpetual perishing 
of finite being. Jacobi's "empirical revelation" is "finite" and hence 
transient too, but he takes the sense-world as a revelation of being 
while it lasts, i.e., it is the endurance of the finite that reveals to 
Jacobi the eternal perfection of being. So for Jacobi existence has a 
plus sign. 
Fichte has grasped the transience, the perishing, of existence as 
the existing concept of the infinite-"the Nothing." But the concept 
needs to have an empirical content (which is the plus that Jacobi 
hangs on to). So Fichte's theory begins "in the atmosphere [of 
thought] where the very same thing [empirical content] is encoun-
tered, but only negatively and ideally" {160). As soon as Fichte 
moves from the theoretical sphere to the practical sphere the signs 
change, for in moral experience it is the content which does exist 
(and so has a plus) while the concept (the moral imperative) is for 
ever striving to exist (and getting a minus). This switching of ::igns 
according to one's point of view is the only totality that Fichte has to 
offer. This is the way things are bound to be as long as "the one 
self-certifying certainty ... is ... a Reason affected with finitude." 
The true starting point is the actual infinit~. 'Existence, nature, the 
infinite moral progress, or the infinite causal sequence, must be rec-
ognized as the concept,_ji§ped~s a totality thaLthinks itself. This 
was "the cube of Spinoza'' which neither Jacobi nor Fichte could in-
vzrt as they claimed to do because (according to Hegel at this stage 
of his development) it cannot be inverted. He did change his mind 
about that, but not about the failure of Jacobi and Fichte to do the 
trick. 
The movement from the finite "self-certifying certainty" to "prac-
tical faith" is displayed by Fichte in the second book of the Vocation 

36 
H. 5. Harris 
of Man. Hegel summarizes the argument straightforwardly, adding 
only a comment which highlights the reduction of the natural world 
to a flux of im_!!lediate r;ense-impressions (163). When he resumes 
the--discussion in his own terms he points up the superiority of Kant's 
Critique of Judgment in this respect (164). 53 But this sup~riority is 
bought at the expense of the "purity" of Kant's idealism. 
Because of the "purity" of Fichte's idealism, the "identity" of 
"pure" and "empirical" consciousness in Fichte's view is always "rela-
tive," i.e., causal (whereas Kant does at least formulate the "Idea" of 
the substantial identity of the organism). Form and content, Ego and 
non-Ego are related in the infinite causal chain on the side of necessi-
ty, and in the "infinite progress" of free causality on the side of ac-
tion. But the absolute identity of thought and existence is beyond 
cognition altogether. Hegel has already criticized the hypothetical, 
provisory character of Fichte's procedure in the Science of Knowledge 
in the Difference essay. The same criticism is repeated briefly in Faith 
and Knowledge (166-7; compare D 123-6). Now, however, the 
claim is made that Fichte does not really get beyond the position of 
common sense, which knows that "there is no smoke without fire" 
or that "murder will out." In passing, Hegel refers to his own view 
expressed in the Difference essay, as the "prejudicial" verdict that 
Fichte had produced a "speculative" system. He takes the appear-
ance of the Vocation of Man as conclusive evidence that that was not 
what Fichte meant to do. Jacobi had given the same "prejudicial" 
interpretation of Fichte two years earlier (in the Letter to Fichte, 
1799). This provides the occasion for another brief attack on Jacobi 
at this point. 
Hegel's polemic (167-171) is unfair to all three of them, for Fichte's 
starting point in the Science of Knowledge was not the finite "I" of 
The Vocation of Man. We are bound here to agree with A. W. Schle-
gel's complaint to Schelling.54 Hegel ought not to treat the Vocation 
of Man as if it superseded Fichte's systematic works. Hegel does, 
though, rather grudgingly, admit in his lectures on the history of 
philosophy that the starting point of the Science of Knowledge is 
speculative.55 I find it impossible to doubt that he recognizes the dif-
ference between Fichte and Jacobi all along. He expects us to recog-
nize the exaggeration in his claim that "Fichte's philosophy is in full 
agreement with Jacobi's" (167). Fichte's philosophy does abstract 
"the absolute nothing" in a way that Jacobi's does not; so Jacobi has 
some right to despise Fichte from his point of view. But I see no 
point in prolonging the discussion of this. 

37 
Introduction 
Fichte's "faith" is that the opposite signs will be made coincident, 
that the law of Reason will finally have the plus in mundane experi-
ence, that it always has in the heaven of the intellect. Then we shall 
have "+ 1 = + 1" which would express the coincidence of self-
positing and oppositing, instead of "+1 -
1 = 0" which represents 
the opposition between self positing and oppositing on the part of the 
Ego. For our theoretical consciousness, the absolute Ego is the zero 
in the middle of this second equation, it is the nothing that abides 
in the transience of the finite. But through the changing of the signs, 
the transi.ence would become illusory, and what abides at all times 
would be visibly and tangibly the same "law of Reason." Transience, 
the nothing, would then become conscious freedom, the absolute 
something. In practical experience, however, freedom continues to 
involve the abolition of one visible and tangible situation, and the 
establishment of another. The absolute stability never becomes visi-
ble. Heaven is not brought to earth; and the awful thing is that, if 
it were, there would be nothing left to do. The activity of the Ego, 
its self-positing, would abolish itself if it achieved perfect self-
equivalence. Instead of"+ 1 = + 1" we would have "0 = 0."56 
To escape from this impasse we have to see the task of Reason as 
the establishment of a finite system of stability. We need an account 
of the moral life as a systematic pattern of coherent virtuous activi-
ties. We need an empirical image of the Kingdom of Ends, for that 
is the only form in which "freedom" can be made visible and tangi-
ble. In his endeavours to make his ethics into a systematic theory of 
the ideal society, Fichte is thus taking the only way out of the "bad 
infinity" of his "infinite progress." Unluckily for him the- relation 
between form and content, law and life, is too labile to allow his kind 
of "system." Fichte would have to approach the "hallowed and strict 
necessity" of our natural existence in quite a different spirit from 
that which he actually adopts in order to find a viable answer. This 
is what Hegel does for the Identity Philosophy in his System of Ethi-
cal Life.57 
_The third Book of the Vocation of Man actually contains an appli-
cation of the theory of the infinite progress to nature conceived as 
purposive and organic, even though Fichte, unlike Kant, has not 
given any justification of this aspect of nature. Here Fichte appears 
as a kind of latter-day Wolff, deducing the purposes of animate or-
ganisms generally from the needs of the rational organism, and form-
ing a picture of the whole earth evolving toward the perfect harmony 
of the Kingdom of Ends. The assumed purpose of everything in 

38 
H. S. Harris 
Wolff's Eud~monism was human happiness; in Fichte's scheme the 
end is rational morality. I am not sure that the status of the organic 
world really is (as Hegel claims) worse in Fichte than it was in Wolff 
-for in the Vocation of Man nature does not "fall in ruins" ulti-
mately (177-8)-but it is certainly not in principle different. The 
Lisbon earthquake and Candide stand equally against Wolff's Rea-
son and Fichte's "faith." 
When I said that the relation of concept and life was too labile to 
allow the creation of a reflective system of ethics I was anticipating a 
little. But Hegel's earliest criticisms of Kantian ethics were directed al 
this point. In those early days he complained that Kant's reinstate-
ment of casuistry in the Metaphysics of Ethics was the index of his 
failure. 58 Here it is taken rather as the index of Kant's good sense. 
For Kant is now seen as the consistently critical thinker who does 
not transgress the bounds of subjective reflection. It is Fichte now, 
who is mired in the multiplicity of aspects that any situation has, and 
the corresponding multiplicity of duties that can be generated from 
different but equally accurate descriptions of it. (The criticism of 
Fichte's philosophy of law as a totalitarian dictatorship has already 
been given at greater length in the Difference essay. In Faith and 
Knowledge it is the moral experience of the individual that is the ap 
propriate focus of attention because it is in the "inner heart" tha;\: 
the "Protestant principle" is to be found.) 
From the point of view of genuine ethical life the evil of this re· 
flective situation is twofold. In the first place, to the extent that he is 
reflective, a genuinely ethical individual who wants to do his duty i~ 
thrown into a state of doubt and anxiety. For insofar as he is sensi-
tively intelligent the moral man will be aware of how many ways of 
viewing his situation there are, and will recognize the impossibility 
of giving rationally decisive grounds for choosing among them. In 
the second place, the hypocrite will be provided with a ready means 
of justifying whatever he wants to do as done for the "good cause." 
The naive self-satisfaction of Jacobi's intuitive morality develops in 
Fichte into these more complex forms of moral evil. The way to es-
cape from this morass of subjective motives and descriptions would 
be to begin from the ethical "whole" of which the "intuition" is the 
Volk. For then we can know whether an action is objectively good or 
not; though even then the threat of death-the "Nothing" in its un-
mistakable existential form-is needed to decide whether the agent 
is "noble" or not.59 
The "Kingdom of Ends" is the "reality of the Ideal" (186). In the 

39 
Introduction 
phenomenal world, however, a perfectly moral action may be frus-
trated of its intended effect; or it may even become the occasion of 
unhappiness, its overt effects may be bad. Hence the unachievable 
"Ought" has its true realization in the noumenal realm. The noumenal 
world becomes a kingdom of immortal but finite spirits. The will of 
God is done in a heaven which is just a projected image of this world 
as it ought to be. This realm of faith is the ultimate triumph of the 
bad infinite over the speculative Idea. God, the absolute Identity, 
disappears from view altogether by being thus "splintered" into the 
"moral order." Hegel seems to agree (though from a point of view 
far removed from that of "common sense") that Fichte was properly 
accused of atheism. But the proof of this in Hegel's eyes is a "presen-
tation" of Fichte's view that was both meant to be, and was, entirely 
acceptable to all orthodox religious opinion. 
6. C 0 N C L US I 0 N : THE SPECULATIVE R ELI G I 0 N 
The Vocation of Man completes the transformation of the old "dog-
matism of being" (by which Hegel means not the rationalism of 
Spinoza and Leibniz but that of Wolff and his followers) into the 
"dogmatism of thinking." The whole process is a cultural one, not 
properly "speculative" like the rationalism of Spinoza and Leibniz, 
or even the materialism of D'Holbach. But if we take the manifesta-
tions together, eudremonism from Locke to Wolff on one side, and 
the philosophy of duty in Kant, Jacobi and Fichte on the other, we 
can see in the latter the cultural reconciliation of two great spiritual 
movements, the flight from the world of the Protestant reformers 
and the acceptance of the world by the enlighteners. Now that the 
whole movement is complete it can be expressed speculatively by a 
different kind of "reflection"-one which does not set thought in 
opposition to existence, or abstract the infinite from the finite. 
This philosophical reflection "suspends" all the particular phenom-
ena that have perished to reveal their finiteness, in a thinking that is 
their own "inwardizing," or the revealing of their immortal essence. 
This is a process of conceptualization ( ein Be griff) which compre-
hends (begreift) the particulars. Speculative philosophy cannot pos-
sibly be "abstract," it cannot be independent of, or indifferent to, 
particular existence, because it is a special kind of remembering (He-
gel plays on the German word Erinnerurzg). The infinite that is within 

40 
H. S. Harris 
the finite, and reveals itself negatively in the perpetual perishing of 
the finite, reveals itself positively in the resurrection and perpetuation 
of the finite as a pattern of "inwardized" or "remembered" concep-
tual significance. Thus "out of this nothing and pure night of infinity, 
as out of the secret abyss that is its birthplace, the truth lifts itself 
upward." The Ego is both the "nothing" of present sense-
consciousness which is the perpetual perishing of being, and the 
speculative memory, the thought in which all being is essentially 
preserved. But it is necessary to become conscious of the "nothing" 
in abstraction, no longer "immersed" in sensation but opposed to it, 
before we can properly "comprehend" the All. 
And the "nothing" itself, having been abstracted as the "concept" 
of the infinite substance that abides in all transience, must be ac-
tually "intuited"-i.e., it must be lived and experienced as the nega-
tive, as universal mortality, as death. That is why, although the sub-
title of the essay directs us to expect a philosophical treatise, the title 
itself indicates that the essay is about the relation of philosophy to 
religion. Religion is, for Hegel in 1802, still the absolute mode of ex-
perience, or the mode in which we consciously have experience of the 
Absolute. In his introduction Hegel sketches for us the hyper-religious 
Reformation and the irreligious Enlightenment. The body of the 
essay shows the reconciliation of the two, and it is the "protestant 
principle" that predominates throughout, even though Kant with his 
scrupulous respect for the bounds of finite experience emerges as the 
true prince of the Enlightenment. Each section of the essay concludes 
with a discussion of religious experience; and since Fichte's religion 
is found to be a degeneration back into the "external teleology" of 
"enlightened" eud<Emonism, it is Jacobi (or more accurately Schleier-
macher) who emerges as the true voice of the "protestant principle." 
Speaking of the philosophical connections, Hegel remarks with evi-
dent truth, that the link between Jacobi and true speculation is more 
defective than that between the criti.::al philosophers and speculative 
thought. Hegel's continual polemic against Jacobi, which even in-
vades the Fichte section, is the testimony of this. But on the religious 
side, i.e., with respect to what it aims to comprehend, I hope that my 
analysis has shown how close the affinity of Jacobi with the Identity 
Philosophy is. 
The comprehensive intuition of the negative infinite, of the Noth-
ing, is the "infinite grief." This is what is imaginatively portrayed 
in the story of God's "Incarnation and Passion." That God himself 

41 
Introduction 
should become a man, suffer and die, underlines the absolute neces-
sity and the universal significance of suffering and death. Nothing 
can be resurrected in the spirit, no finite particular can be "resumed" 
into the speculative infinite, until it has passed away into a remem-
bering consciousness which values it, and hence mourns for it and 
grieves over it. 
In Greece before the philosophers came, there was a religion of 
nature, which knew nothing of this grief for the things of the spirit. 60 
Their artist portrayed for them an eternally beautiful, eternally en-
during image of life as a natural cycle. With the advent of philosophy 
as the quest for human self-knowledge, this world view fell before 
the might of the One God who became a man and died. This is the 
experience that was conceptually "abstracted" by the cultural move-
ment from the Reformation to Fichte; and it is now time for this 
"abstraction" to be speculatively comprehended. It must be intuited, 
it must be a lived experience, part of the living history of the remem-
bering consciousness. The function of art is to make the living intui-
tion of it possible. 
Schleiermacher, who understood this, was still obsessed by the 
need to fly from the world. Hegel said in the Difference essay, that 
Art was the comprehension of the "point of indifference" from the 
non-conscious side (0 171-2). In Faith and Knowledge this becomes 
"the Idea of Reason [has] its demonstration in beauty"-demonstra-
tion being "the presentation of a concept in intuition" {86-7). The 
real contrast betwen "nature" and "spirit" is now replaced by the 
ideal contrast between "intuition" {existence) and "concept" (think-
ing). "Intuition" can be an inward experience-for how else could it 
be "intellectual"? Schleiermacher has an inward "intuition" of the 
"Universe." But this inward experience is inadequate because an in-
tuition of this sort cannot be truly communal. Thus there must be a 
"presentation of the concept in outward intuition," through a reli-
gious art that is public. 
We cannot say much more than this about the <Esthetic aspect of 
Hegel's "absolute religion." In his lectures he laid out the historical 
experience that is to be "speculatively resumed" in it, and it appears 
from the summary we have that he found the <Esthetic reconciliation 
of the "infinite grief" in the Catholic tradition. 61 But from a quota-
tion, preserved by Haym we know that something more "political" 
than the art and literature of "Catholic Christendom" was wanted for 
the new speculative religion: 

42 
H. S. Harris 
This idealistic sphere forms an adventurous realm without rules; 
it has tumbled together at random from the histories and the 
imagination of all peoples and climates, without significance 
or truth for nature which is placed in subjection to it, and 
equally without allowing that the spirit of the individuals of a 
people can maintain their right within it; it is without person-
alized (eigentumlich) imagination, as it is without personalized 
consecration. 62 
About the task of "reconstruction" on the speculative side, Hegel 
does tell us something in Faith and Knowledge. The reconstruction 
must first "expound how nature reflects itself in the free spirit. Na-
ture takes itself back into itself and lifts its original unborrowed real 
beauty, into the ideal realm, the realm of possibility" (182). This is 
the theological aspect of natural philosophy. Nothing is said now 
about there being an exact parallelism between nature and spirit (a 
point which was firmly insisted on in the Difference essay). Of 
course, the parallelism may still be there, but it looks rather as if the 
developmental exigency has triumphed over the mirror-image one. 
The "original, unborrowed, real beauty" of nature is the internal 
teleology of the living organism. The association of the terms ("beau-
ty" and "teleology") comes from the Critique of Judgment. 
"Thus nature rises as spirit. This is the moment which-when the 
identity as the original fount, is compared with the totality-appears 
through the comparison alone as movement and disintegration of the 
identity and as its reconstruction." This moment of comparison be-
tween the "indifference point as unity" and the "indifference point 
as totality" is the religious experience of "infinite grief" and the 
philosophical discovery of thought, the concept, as the "absolute 
nothing." The apex of natural philosophy is the rational organism 
that is aware of its own mortality, and the mortality of all life. But 
the totality which thus dissolves itself is reconstituted in philosophi-
cal memory. 
Now we come to the level of communal life. For the reconstruction 
must show "how ... spirit has enjoyment of itself as a living Ideal 
in visible and active reality." This is what Hegel attempts to demon-
strate in the System of Ethical Life. That work, like his description 
of the "reconstruction" here, breaks off before the level of religious 
experience is properly reached. Hegel is content, at this point, to de-
scribe the two forms of the "real spirit," unconscious and conscious, 

43 
Introduction 
which are finally "resumed" into the Idea through religious experi-
ence.63 
But he has spoken of religion just a little earlier: 
Religion offers a possible reconciliation with nature viewed as 
finite and particular. The original possibility of this reconciliation 
lies in the original image of God on the subjective side; its 
actuality, the objective side, lies in God's eternal Incarnation in 
man, and the identity of the possibility with the actuality through 
the spirit is the union of the subjective side with God made 
man (181). 
Now, it is true that this is a statement of the orthodox faith of 
Christianity as against Fichte's heresies. It still needs speculative in-
terpretation. But the interpretation is not hard to supply. "The image 
of God on the subjective side" is the "pure Reason" that Kant has 
so exactly mapped on its subjective side. "Nature viewed as finite" 
includes both the unconscious and the conscious world of "real spirit" 
-this is evident from the way the Incarnation dogma is employed. 
We know that at some stage during the Jena period Hegel definitely 
regarded the whole of nature as the "incarnation of the Logos."64 But 
we do not need to import this rather heretical doctrine here, since 
man is the "indifference point as totality" for natural philosophy as 
such. 65 Hence the reconciliation of God with a particular man is rec-
onciliation of God with nature as "finite and particular." In the pecu-
liar perspective of Faith and Knowledge, the whole of nature, spread 
out in space would not be "finite and particular." It would be the "con-
cept immersed in intuition." Whereas man who as a subject is "the 
image of God," is objectively "nature as finite and particular." This 
"particular," mortal, organism is "the original fount" of Reason which 
Fichte did not recognize (J 81). Thus full human self-knowledge and 
self-comprehension would be "the union of the subjective side with 
God made man." 
What Hegel objected to in the traditional religion was the fact that 
"consecration" and "grace" were thought of as coming from a divine 
source that was alien and transcendent. The existence of man in the 
world is a "speculative" Good Friday. That is the "infinite grief." 
The "speculative" Easter must come from man's own triumph in the 
effort to "know himself." Rosenkranz reports Hegel's hope thus: 
Once the alien consecration has been withdrawn from Protes-

44 
H. S. Harris 
tantism, the spirit can venture to hallow itself as spirit in its 
own shape, and reestablish the original reconciliation with itself 
in a new religion, in which the infinite grief and the whole bur-
den of its antithesis is taken up. But it will be resolved purely 
and without trouble, when there is a free people and Reason has 
found once more its reality as an ethical spirit, a spirit which 
is bold enough to assume its religious shape on its own soil and 
in its own majesty. Every single man is a blind link in the chain 
of absolute necessity, on which the world develops. Every single 
man can extend his dominion over a greater length of this chain 
only if he recognizes the direction in which the great necessity 
will go, and learns from this cognition to utter the magic word 
that conjures up its shape. This cognition, which can both em-
brace in itself the whole energy of the suffering and the anti-
thesis that has ruled the world and all the forms of its develop-
ment for a couple of thousand years, and can raise itself above 
it all, this cognition only philosophy can give.66 
1. The issues of the Critical Journal 
varied in size. Subscriptions were for 
the volume {three issues). Two volumes 
a year were promised. Only two vol-
umes were in fact published over a 
period of about eighteen months (De-
cember 1801-May 1803}. The Glauben 
und Wissen issue contained 192 pages. 
The next longest was the first issue 
with 158. The final issue was also the 
shortest, with only 64 pages. 
2. Jacobi wrote to Reinhold on 10 
August 1802: "Because of the bad 
style I am certain that he [Hegel] and 
not Schelling has been the pen-pusher 
here" {Nicolin, report 65). We know 
from Hegel's curriculum vitae of 1804 
{see the next note) that Jacobi's hy-
pothesis was correct. 
3. This is how he designates it in 
the curriculum vitae of 1804 which 
includes a list of his contributions to 
H. S. Harris 
the Critical Journal. See N.K.A. IV, 
541 or Briefe IV, 92. 
4. Letter 459, 2 December 1800 
(Schulz II, 302). 
5. See Schelling to A. W. Schlegel, 
6 July 1800 {Fuhrmans I, 197). 
6. Letter 439, 18 August 1800 
(Schulz, 11, 255). What happened to 
any part of the critical survey that 
Schelling had already "worked out" it 
is difficult to say. Reinhold is "taken 
to pieces" in his dialogue "On the A b-
solute Identity-System" in the first 
issue of the Critical ]ounral. But the 
occasion for that was an article in the 
third issue of the Beitriige which did 
not appear until September 1801. 
7. We cannot say exactly when this 
was. Schelling was still hoping to 
collaborate with Fichte at the end of 
May 1801 (Letter 475, 24 May 1801, 
Schulz II, 321-2) and may have gone 

on hoping till he received Fichte's 
long delayed reply in August (ibid., 
Letter 476). 
8. We cannot suppose that Schell-
ing actually contributed to this 
(though he may very likely have sug-
gested it). For he confessed to Fichte 
in May that he had never read Bar-
dili's philosophical work and had 
read Reinhold "only cursorily" (Schulz 
II, 321). (Fichte himself "took Bardili 
to pieces" in the Erlanger Literatur 
Zeitung in 1800.) 
9. Hegel claimed the "Introduction" 
as his in the curriculum vitae of 1804. 
In 1838 Schelling wrote that "many 
passages, which at this moment I 
could not precisely identify, are mine, 
along with the main ideas; there is 
probably no passage that I did not at 
least revise" (cited in N.K.A. IV, 
542). 
10. Hence the showing up of Rein-
hold's conception of the history of 
philosophy as "unphilosophical" at 
the beginning of the Difference essay 
is balanced in the last pages of the 
same essay by an attempt to estimate 
the positive significance of his (and 
Bardili's) "reduction of philosophy to 
logic." (I have indicated in my intro-
duction to the Difference essay that I 
do not believe Hegel's effort is suc-
cessful, but his object is clear enough.) 
11. N.K.A. IV, 120. 
12. The first hint of this recognition 
is at the very end, in Hegel's final 
disposition of Reinhold and Bardili's 
"reduction of philosophy to logic": 
"The founding-program aims to reduce 
philosophy to logic. In it one side of 
the universal need of philosophy ap-
pears and fixes itself; and as an ap-
pearance it must take its necessary, 
definite, and objective place, in the 
manifold of cultural tendencies which 
are connected with philosophy, but 
which assume a rigid shape before 
they arrive at philosophy itself At 
45 
Introduction 
every point on the line of its develop-
ment, which it produces until it 
reaches its own completion and per-
fection, the Absolute must curb itself 
and organize itself into a pattern; and 
it appears as self-forming in this 
manifold" (0 192). 
13. See the discussion in the intro-
duction to the Difference essay, pp. 
7-'J, 33-37. 
14. Jacobi to Bouterwek, 22 March 
1802 (Nicolin, report 58). 
15. In 1803 he published: Schell-
ing's Doctrine, or the whole philoso-
phy of the absolute Nothing. So he 
took his revenge on Hegel as Schell-
ing's "assistant." 
16. Schlegel's letter is lost, but see 
Schelling's reply, 19 August 1802. 
Schelling dissented from this com-
plaint saying "In the first place he has 
at least shown that from a philosophi-
cal point of view it is really of no 
account; in the second place it de-
serve~ this critique ... because as 
yet Fichte has only expressed his 
whole universe in this book" (Fuhr-
mans II, 421). For a partial justifica-
tion of Schlegel's view-in spite of 
what i~ argued here-:;ee p. 36 
below. 
17. "Yearning thus reflected in itself 
could find a higher level than Jacobi 
expounds ... Jacobi's principle has in 
fact attained this highest level in the 
Speeches on Religion" (167-8). The 
"Announcement" which Hegel wrote 
for this issue of the Critical Journal 
specifically mentions this discussion of 
the "higher level (hohere Potenzirung) 
which the Jacobian philosophy has 
reached in the Speeches on Religion" 
(see N.K.A. IV, 505). 
18. There may be a glancing refer-
ence to the theology of G. C. Storr 
in Hegel's remark that "a struggle of 
philosophy against the positive, 
against miracles and suchlike, is now 
regarded as obsolete and unenlight-

46 
H. 5. Harris 
ened" (1). For he had spent several 
years of the previous decade in a 
"struggle against the positive" repre-
sented by Storr's theology of prophe-
cies fulfilled and wonders performed. 
(It was Schelling who first insisted 
that all that was a waste of time. See 
Toward the Sunlight, pp. 186-7 and 
Briefe I, 14). 
19. The opening pages of Faith and 
Knowledge should be compared with 
the longer analysis of "the Enlighten-
ment" in the Phenomenology (Hoff-
meister, pp. 383-413; Baillie, pp. 559-
98). 
20. Hegel-Studien IV, 53. 
21. Rosenkranz, pp. 190-2. 
22. For the Summer Semester of 
1802, Hegel's course was advertised as 
"Logic and Metaphysics, or the Sys-
tem of Reflection" (Hegel-Studien IV, 
53). 
23. "The entire totality of limita-
tions is to be found in [the intellect], 
but not the Absolute itself .... The 
Hobbes puts the intuition of this 
"ceasing" at the foundation of this 
theory of rational life. Death is al-
ways intuitively present to the rational 
man's mind in Hobbes (i.e., not the 
idea of death generally, but his own 
death): "and the life of man, solitary, 
poor, nasty, brutish and short." The 
felt imminence of our own death is 
what brings us to (Hobbesian) Reason. 
The ceaseless campaign to refute 
Hobbes and "Hobbism" is the best 
illustration of what Hegel means by 
"the concept is not posited in purity." 
27. See his open letter "To Fichte," 
Werke III, 29; compare Difference, p. 
00. 
28. We should notice that in Faith 
and Knowledge Hegel does not discuss 
Kant's practical philosophy independ-
ently at all; and he hardly admits 
that Jacobi has a practical philosophy 
worthy of the name. 
29. Critique of Pure Reason, A 327, 
B 383-4. 
intellect copies Reason's absolute 
30. For Kant's own distinction of 
positing and through the form it gives 
the "formal" and the "real" use of 
itself the semblance of Reason" (D 
Reason see Critique of Pure Reason, 
89-JO). I suggested in the Introduction 
A 299, B 355. 
there (D 19-20), that the principal ref-
31. Compare Kant: " ... intolerable 
erence of the whole discussion at this 
to hear the representation of the 
point is to Kant's characterization of 
color, red, called an idea [as it is by 
experience as "phenomenal." 
Locke]. It ought not even to be called 
24. I take this to be the meaning of 
a concept of understanding, a notion" 
the cryptic remark "Only the objec-
(Critique of Pure Reason, A 320, B 
tivity of the intellect can attain the 
377). Looking at this in Hegel's per-
co~cept" (59). Reection can produce[Reactron?J ~pective we must say that the pro-
the "law of reason," but it cannot 
ductive imagination organizes our 
show us how to deserve happiness by 
visual field into reds, browns, greens, 
obeying it. 
etc.; then we reflect on the "visual 
25. This is an echo of the Difference 
field" as a whole and ask what the 
essay, p. 172. 
abstract "identity" of it is, and so 
26. Hobbes does "abstract the con-
discover that it is all "colored." But 
cept" of the eudaemonist life: for he 
we must remember that the "visual 
defines the natural life not as "satis-
field" was not there as an unorganized 
faction" but as "power": "a perpetua I 
field to begin with. The organization 
and restless desire of power after 
into red, brown, green, etc., is the 
power [this is life abstracted as con-
genesis of the field itself as a total 
ceptl that ceaseth only in death"; and 
"field" The subsequent move from 

imagination to intellect is a new mode 
of being for this whole. The "identity 
which in intuition is totally immersed 
in the manifold [of red, brown, green, 
etc.], now simultaneously sets itself 
against the manifold [as the concept 
of 'color']" (70). 
32. I have borrowed the opposition 
of "intuition" and "concept" from the 
System of Ethical Life (almost con-
temporaneous with Faith and Knowl-
edge) because the peculiar usages are 
obviously related and I think that 
they throw light on one another. 
33. Knowing from these examples 
what "the rational" is we can readily 
see how "the rational is immersed 
in the judgement" as its "unconscious" 
side. When we say "the earth is a 
moving body," or "I am an imagina-
tive power," the "rational identity" is 
not conscious. In one case we are apt 
to think we are classifying the earth 
within the universal category of 
"bodies"; in the other case we tend 
rather to the view that we are stating 
an "accidental" property of the "sub-
stantial" self. (Thus the second case 
also illustrates the thesis that the 
"speculative relation" is the substance-
accident relation [D 116]. In the first 
case "gravity," which is the "sub-
stance," does not "appear" in the 
judgment at all.) 
34. This creates problems for the 
translation. Thus the opposition be-
tween intellektualisiert and realisiert 
on page 00 is not simply that of 
"concept" and existence, but of an 
empty concept and a filled or "real-
ized" concept. But the empty concept 
is the concept that exists for itself, it 
intuits itself as intelligence; and the 
filled or "realized" concept is intuited 
as Nature, the objective world. 
35. See pp. 76-7, where Hegel's 
"tenacious memory" has let him down 
slightly. Hegel earlier suggested that 
we must think Kant's "manifold" as 
47 
Introduction 
"falling to pieces"' (74); here he 
suggests that we must "think" the 
thing-in-itself as "falling-together." 
But either way we are illicitly employ-
ing one of the categories of "reality." 
The lesson of his two examples taken 
together is that we can only "think" 
the thing-in-itself as an "identity of 
opposites"-neither a "falling to-
gether" unity nor a "falling apart" 
plurality but a "dialectical" totality. 
36. System der Sittlichkeit, p. 54. 
37. See pp. 39-44 below. 
38. See the passage quoted from 
Rosenkranz on pp. 9-11 above. 
39. Compare the analysis of Rein-
hold's Versuch and Bardili's Grundriss 
at the end of the Difference essay 
(D 183-92). 
40. Encyclopaedia, sections 61-78 
(Wallace, pp. 121-42). There is also 
an interesting essay by Croce, trans,-
lated in Philosophy, Poetry, History, 
pp. 145-69. 
41. The fountain-head of this highly 
original development of Hume's 
theory of belief was apparently Ha-
mann. In a letter to Jacobi he wrote: 
"I was full of Hume when I wrote 
the Socratic Memorabili:1. and the 
following passage of my little book 
has reference to that: 
Our own existence and the exist-
ence of all things outside us must 
be believed, and cannot be deter-
mined in any other way. What is 
more certain than the end of man, 
and of what truth is there a more 
general and better attested knowl-
edge? Nevertheless, no one is wise 
enough to believe it except the one 
who, as Moses makes clear, is 
taught by God himself to number 
his days. What one believes does 
not, therefore, have to be proved, 
and a proposition can be ever so 
incontrovertibly proven without on 
that account being believed. 

48 
H. S. Harris 
There are proofs of truths which 
are_ of as little value as the appli-
cation which can be made of the 
truths themselves; indeed, one can 
believe the proof of a proposition 
without giving approval to the 
proposition itself. The reasons of a 
Hume may be ever so cogent, and 
the refutations of them only as-
sumptions and doubts; thus faith 
gains and loses equally with the 
cleverest pettifogger and most hon-
orable attorney. Faith is not the 
work of reason, and therefore can-
not succumb to its attack, because 
faith arises just as little from rea-
son as tasting and seeing do. 
(O'Flaherty, pp. 167, 169). 
42. Many modern students have 
emphasized the anti-systematic charac-
ter of Herder's thought. His insistence 
on the historical uniqueness of every 
culture might be appealed to in de-
fense of Hegel's verdict. But I do not 
think that the subsumption of Herder 
under "Jacobian philosophy" can be 
justified by this line of interpretation. 
If Herder did belong in the same 
camp as Jacobi, then he was neither 
"more feeble" nor "less ambitious" 
than Jacobi (few writers have been 
more ambitious, except perhaps Hegel 
himself). So if we take this line we 
must ask why Hegel did not choose 
Herder, rather than Jacobi, to repre-
sent the antithetic moment of the 
"reflective philosophy of subjectivity." 
Kant's view of Herder is, in this 
respect, instructive. In his 1785 re-
view of Herder's Ideen (Part 1) Kant 
wrote: 
His is not a logical prec1s1on in the 
definition of concepts or careful 
adherence to principles, but rather 
a fleeting, sweeping view, an adroit-
ness in unearthing analogies in the 
wielding of which he shows a bold 
imagination. This is combined with 
cleverness in soliciting sympathy 
for his subject-kept in increasingly 
hazy remoteness-by means of 
sentiment and sensation. Further 
suspicion is stimulated as to 
whether these emotions are effects 
of a prodigious system of thought 
or only equivocal hints which cool 
critical examination would uncover 
in them (Akad. VII, 45; On History, 
ed. Beck, 27-28). 
This verdict-which seems to me fair 
-brings out very clearly the affinity 
between Herder and Jacobi; and it 
may very well be the origin of Hegel's 
view. But Kant goes on to show how 
Herder's purpose is to provide an 
empirical argument for human immor-
tality through his chain of analogies : 
"The spiritual nature of the human 
soul, its performance and progress 
toward perfection, is to be proved by 
analogy with the natural forms of 
matter, particularly in their structure, 
with no recourse to metaphysics" 
(Akad. VII, 52; On History, p. 36). 
Kant criticizes the argument in two 
ways. In the first place, the "great 
chain of being"-if it exists-does not 
imply human immortality, but rather 
the existence of higher, more spiritual, 
beings. In the second place, "the unity 
of organic force . . . is an Idea which 
lies wholly outside the field of 
empirical natural science. This Idea 
of organic force belongs solely to 
speculative philosophy ... " (Akad. 
VII, 54; On History, p. 38). Unlike 
Herder, Jacobi understood, and ac-
cepted, this last point. It was the basis 
of his sharp distinction between the 
causal and the logical employment of 
the "principle of sufficient reason"; 
and because he accepted this bound-
ary line of empirical knowledge, Jacobi 
is the proper representative of the 
reflective philosophy of subjectivity. 
But no one can properly say that 
Herder's refusal to accept it, was 

merely a "slight modification of Ja-
cobi's manner of doing philosophy." 
Hegel cannot have meant that. To give 
Hegel's comments on Herder any 
plausibility at all, we have to empha-
size the word "manner," and con-
centrate our attention on the style of 
Herder's work (as characterized by 
Kant in my first quotation). But when 
we do that, we are obliged to recog-
nize that what Hegel says does not 
apply to Herder's concept of the aim 
and object of philosophical specula-
tion, or to his beliefs about its feasi-
bility. Herder, we must conclude, does 
not rightly belong within the sphere 
of the "reflective philosophy of sub-
jectivity" at all. With all his logical 
naiveties he was a speculative thinker. 
43. Rosenkranz, p. 223; compare 
Briefe I, 63, 66 (all the relevant testi-
monia are gathered in N.K.A. IV, 
517). 
44. We should add, perhaps, that 
Hegel's debt to Herder may well be as 
great, or greater than his debt to 
Jacobi-though it is very difficult to 
document (see Hegel's Development, 
pp. 271-2 n.) Also that Schelling 
(whose first publication-On Myths, 
1794-was influenced by Herder) was 
extremely contemptuous of Herder 
from the time of his public adherence 
to Fichte's Critical Idealism. Herder, 
like Jacobi, had attempted to over-
throw the Critical Philosophy. 
45. N.K.A. IV, 505. 
46. Koeppen gained a professorshio 
at Landshut in 1807, just when Hegel 
had finally been driven to abandon 
his professorial aspirations. For 
Hegel's comments at that point, see 
his letter to Niethammer, 30 May 
1807, Briefe I, 166. 
47. Schleiermacher wrote to K. G. 
von Brinkmann, 26 November 1803: 
"The slavery [involved in discipleship] 
seems to me equally hard on both 
sides. Do but look how Schelling is 
49 
Introduction 
hung up with Hegel, A. W. Schlegel 
with Bemhardi, Jacobi with Koeppen" 
(Nicolin, report 53). Friedrich Schlegel 
wrote to his brother on 20 March 
1804 that he could no longer be both-
ered to read Hegel-his time was too 
valuable (Nicolin, report 83a). Hegel 
can hardly have known Schleiermach-
er's opinion-but since A. W. Schlegel 
was in regular correspondence with 
Schelling he probably had some notion 
6-END notes 8 on 10 Palatino ..... 
of the Schlegels' feelings. He was 
certainly outraged when he was pub-
licly designated as Schelling's "stout 
warrior from home" by K. A. Bettin-
ger (see the Introduction to Difference, 
p. 00). 
48. The influence of Jacobi on 
Hegel's own ethical reflections at 
Berne and Frankfurt is shown by his 
borrowing of Jacobi's examples. Com-
pare further Toward the Sunlight, pp. 
98, 335, 508-9. 
49. Compare Toward the Sunlight, 
pp. 353-5, 381. 
50. This usage is no doubt influ-
enced by Spinoza's doctrine of the 
"intellectual love of God." 
51. Fuhrmans II 421 (compare 
further note 16 above). 
52. N.K.A. IV, 505. 
53. Hegel recurs to this theme 
several times. See for instance (175-
6), (179), (182). 
54. See above, p. 6. 
55. See the introduction to the 
Difference essay, p. 8; and Haldane-
Simson III, 483). 
56. Hence "being one with the eter-
nal . . . would have to be the bad" 
{182). 
57. He gives a hint here of how 
speculative ethics is founded on the 
Philosophy of Nature in his echo 
from Plato's Timaeus (180). 
58. See "The Spirit of Christianity," 
Nohl, p. 294 (Knox-Kroner, pp. 244-
5); and Toward the Sunlight, pp. 336-

50 
H. S. Harris 
41. Compare also Nohl19-20 (Toward 
the Sunlight, p. 497) where there is, 
however, no explicit reference to 
Kant. 
59. Hegel makes one or two explicit 
references to genuine Sittlichkeit (see 
especially 183-4). But they can only 
be securely interpreted by reference 
to the System of Ethical Life. 
60. Hegel was certainly aware of 
the general nature of the Eleusis cult, 
and he probably knew of the Adonis 
cult. But I assume he would have said 
that this was not a portrayal of the 
"infinite grief" for spiritual things. It 
was not God as such, or Man as 
such, who died with Persephone or 
Adonis, but only Nature in the cycle 
of the seasons, or the beauty of 
youth in the coming of manhood, etc. 
61. "In Catholicism this religion 
has come to be a beautiful one" 
(Rosenkranz, p. 139). 
62. Haym, p. 165. 
63. See the "structural outline" of 
his system at this time, given in the 
Difference essay, pp. 59-60. 
64. Compare his attempt to lay out 
his whole philosophy of Nature as a 
"divine Triangle" (Rosenkranz, pp. 
101-2). The date of this endeavour can-
not be precisely fixed-Kimmerle be-
lieves it was later-but it seems to me 
to be in perfect accord with the refer-
ences to the dogma of the Trinity in 
those two essays. I think, therefore, 
that the "Divine Triangle" belongs to 
1801 (or even 1800) and represents 
the earliest form of Hegel's independ-
ent speculation about natural philoso-
phy. 
65. See the exposition of the "indif-
ference point" theory in the introduc-
tion to the Difference essay, p. 42. 
Compare Difference p. 172 and Faith 
and Knowledge, pp. 24, 41. 
66. Rosenkranz, p. 141. 

THE TEXT: 
Note on the Text 
and on Conventions 
Two editions of the text were used in making this translation: that of 
Georg Lasson (Philosophische Bibliothek, Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1928; 
reprinted, Hamburg, 1962), and that of Hartmut Buchner and Otto 
Poggeler (Gesammelte Werke, Band 4, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968). The 
latter was taken as basic, and the pagination of this authoritative 
critical edition is indicated in square brackets in the translation. 
THE TREATMENT OF HEGEL's QUOTATIONS 
When Hegel quotes from other authors, he rarely uses quotation 
marks. We have added quotation marks wherever we were able to 
trace the quotation (a task which has generally been made easy by 
the editors of the two German texts that we have used). In the rela-
tively rare cases where Hegel himself used quotation marks we indi-
cate this in the footnotes. 
But whether they are marked by him or by us, Hegel's quotations 
from other authors are apt, like those of most other (German?) au-
thors of the period, to fall short of perfect scholarly precision. He 
rarely marks his omissions. We have marked his unacknowledged 
elisions by inserting "[ ... ]". Also, Hegel's emphases are almost al-
ways different from those of the original text quoted. Here, we have 
not tried to be precise ourselves. Instead of noting every change in 
emphasis we rest content with a general warning to the reader that the 
emphases in quotations are usually Hegel's, and not those of the au-
thor quoted. Other major deviations are indicated in our footnotes. 
0-::casionally we have also furnished a translation of the original text 
from which Hegel's quotations and summaries are taken. 

52 
Note on the Text and on Conventions 
Abbreviations and References: 
The following abbreviations are employed regularly: 
D=The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's System of 
Philosophy, translated by H. 5. Harris and Walter Cerf, Al-
bany: State University of New York Press, 1977. 
N.K.A.=Hegel, Gesammelte Werke, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968 ff. 
Akad.=Kants Gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben von der Ko-
niglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin. 
Other references in the notes are usually confined to the author (edi-
tor, translator) and short title where needed. The Bibliographic Index 
supplies the full details of the work cited. 
Concerning the use of the dagger (f), see the Translators' Preface. 

Faith and Knowledge 
or the Reflective Philosophy of Subjectivity 
in the complete range of its forms as 
Kantian, Jacobian, and Fichtean Philosophy 
by Ge. Wilhelm Fr. Hegel 
published in the Critical Journal of Philosophy 
edited by F. W. J. Schelling and G. W. F. Hegel 
Volume II, part 1, Tiibingen 1802 

Introduction 
[315] Civilization has raised this latest era so far above the ancient 
antithesis of Reason and faith, of philosophy and positive religion that 
this opposition of faith and knowledge has acquired quite a different 
sense and has now been transferred into the field of philosophy itself. 
In earlier times philosophy was said to be the handmaid of faith. 
Ideas and expressions of this sort have vanished and philosophy has 
irresistibly affirmed its absolute autonomy. Reason, if it is in fact 
Reason that appropriates this name, has made itself into such an au-
thority within positive religion that a philosophical struggle against 
the positive, against miracles and suchlike, is now regarded as obso-
lete and unenlightened. Kant tried to put new life into the positive 
form of religion with a meaning derived from his philosophy, but his 
attempt was received poorly, not because it would have changed the 
meaning peculiar to_these forms, but because they no longer appeared 
to be worth the bother. 1 The question arises, however, whether vic-
torious Reason has not suffered the same fate that the barbarous na-
tions in their victorious strength have usually suffered at the hands 
of civilized nations that weakly succumbed to them. As rulers the 
barbarians may have held the upper hand outwardly, but they sur-
rendered to the defeated spiritually. Enlightened Reason won a glo-
rious victory over what it believed, in its limited conception of reli-
gion, to be faith as opposed to Reason. Yet seen in a clear light the 
victory comes to no more than this: the positive element with which 
Reason busied itself to do battle, is no longer religion, and victorious 
Reason is no longer Reason. The new born peace that hovers tri-
umphantly over the corpse of Reason and faith, uniting them as the 
child of both, has as little of Reason in it as it has of authentic faith. 
Reason had already gone to seed in and for itsel£2 when it envisaged 
religion merely as somethihg positive and not idealistically. And 
after its battle with religion the };Jest that Reason could manage was 
1. Hegel is here referring to Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone 
(Konigsberg, 1793; Akad. VI, 1-202); English translation by T. M. Greene and 
H. H. Hudson, 1934 (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1960). 
2. An und fur sich: this may here have the meaning that it usually has now-
adays in ordinary German. In that case the sentence should be translated: "Rea-
son, though, had already gone to seed when .... " 

56 
Faith and Knowledge 
to take a look at itself and come to self-awareness. Reason, having 
in this way become mere intellect, acknowledges its own nothing-
ness by placing that which is better than it in a faith outside and 
above itself, as a beyond [to be believed in]. This is what has hap-
pened in the philosophies of Kant, [316] Jacobi, and Fichte. Philoso-
phy has made itself the handmaid of a faith once more. 
According to Kant, the supersensuous is incapable of being known 
by Reason; the highest Idea does not at the same time have reality. 
According to Jacobi, "Reason is ashamed to beg and has no hands 
and feet for digging."3 Only the feeling and consciousness of his 
ignorance of the True is given to man, only an inkling, a divination 
of the True in Reason, Reason being something subjective, though 
universal-an instinct. According to Fichte, God is something in-
comprehensible and unthinkable. Knowledge knows nothing save that 
it knows nothing; it must take refuge in faith. 4 All of them agree 
that, as the old distinction put it, the Absolute is no more against 
Reason than it is for it; it is beyond Reason. 5 
The Enlightenment, in its positive aspect, was a hubbub of vanity 
without a firm core. It obtained a core in its negative- procedure by 
_grasping its own negativity. Through the purity and infinity of the 
negative it freed itself from its insipidity but precisely for this reason 
it could admit positive knowledge only of the finite and empirical. 
The eternal remained in a realm beyond, a beyond too vacuous for 
cognition so that this infinite void of knowledge could only be filled 
with the subjectivity of longing and divining. Thus what used to be 
regarded as the death of philosophy, that Reason should renounce 
its existence in the Absolute, excluding itself totally from it and re-
lating itself to it only negatively, became now the zenith of philoso-
phy. By coming to consciousness of its own nothingness, the En-
lightenment turns this nothingness into a system. 
In general, imperfect philosophies immediately pertain to [i.e., arise 
from] an empirical necessity just because they are imperfect. So it 
is through and in this empirical necessity that their imperfect aspect 
is to be comprehended. The empirical is what is there in the world 
3. Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Letters on tl1e Teaching of Spinoza (1786); see 
Werke, IV, i, 214: "Reason has no hands and feet for digging and is ashamed 
to beg." The metaphor comes from Luke 16, 3. 
4. See especially The Vocation of Man (1800) in Siimmtliche Werke II, 254-
5 (Chisholm, pp. 89-90). 
5. The locus classicus for the "old distinction" is Thomas Aquinas, Summa 
contra Gentiles, Book I, chapters 3-8. 

57 
Introduction 
as ordinary existence (Wirklichkeit). In empirical philosophies it is 
present in conceptual form, as one with consciousness, and there-
fore justified. [But] on the one hand, the subjective principle shared 
by the philosophies of Kant, Jacobi and Fichte [does not pertain to 
empirical necessity because it] is by no means a restricted expression 
of the spirit of a brief epoch or a small group. [And] on the other 
hand, [these philosophies taken together are not empirical or imper-
fect because] the mighty spiritual form that is their principle achieved 
iiLt\"tem perfect self-consciousness, perfect philosophical formation 
and definitive self-expression as cognition. 
The great form of the world spirit that has come to cognizance of 
itself in these philosophies, is the principle of the North, and from 
the religious point of view, of Protestantism. This principle is sub-
jectivity for which beauty and truth present themselves in feelings 
and persuasions, in love and intellect. Religion builds its temples and 
altars in the heart of the individual. In sighs and prayers he seeks 
for the God whom [317] he denies to himself in intuition, because of 
the risk that the intellect will cognize what is intuited as a mere thing, 
reducing the sacred grove to mere timber. 6 Of course, the inner must 
be externalized; intention must become effective in action; immedi-
ate religious sentiment must be expressed in external gesture; and 
faith, though it flees from the objectivity of cognition, ~~t become 
objective to itself in thoughts,. concepts, and words. But the intellect 
scrupulously distinguishes the objective from the subjective, and the 
objective is what is accounted worthless and null. The struggle of 
subjective beauty must be directed precisely to this end: to defend 
itself properly against the necessity through which the subjective be-
comes objective. That beauty should become real in objective form, 
and fall captive to objectivity, that consciousness should seek to be 
directed at exposition and objectivity themselves, that it should want 
to shape appearance or, shaped in it, to be at home there-all this 
should cease; for it would be a dangerous superfluity, and an evil, 
as the intellect could turn it into a thing (zu einem Etwas). Equally, if 
the beautiful feeling passed over into an intuition that was without 
grief, it would be superstition. 
That it is subjective beauty which grants this might to the intel-
6. An echo of Horace (Epistles I, 6, 31-2); the theme recurs more than once 
in Hegel's early manuscripts-first in 1794 (Nohl, p. 37); and again, with refer-
ence to stone statues, in 1798 (Nohl, 300-1; Knox-Kroner, p. 252). It recurs 
also in the Phenomenology (Baillie, pp. 571-2) Compare p. 145 note 157 below. 

58 
Faith and Knowledge 
lect seems at first glance to contradict its yearning which flies beyond 
the finite and to which the finite is nothing. But the grant is as much 
a necessary aspect [of its relation to the intellect] as is its striving 
against the intellect. This will be brought out more fully in our ex-
position of the philosophies of this subjectivity. It is precisely through 
its flight from the finite and through its rigidity that subjectivity 
turns the beautiful into things-the grove into timber, the images 
into things that have eyes and do not see, ears and do not hear. 7 And 
if the Ideals cannot be reduced to the block and stones of a wholly 
explicable (verstiindig) reality, they are made into fictions. Any con-
nection with the Ideals will then appear as a play without substance, 
or as dependence upon objects and as superstition. 
Yet alongside of this intellect which everywhere sees nothing but 
finitude in the truth of being, religion has its sublime aspect as feel-
ing (Empfindung), the love filled with eternal longing; for it does not 
get hung up on any transitory sight (Anschauung) or enjoyment, it 
yearns for eternal beauty and bliss. Religion, as this longing, is sub-
jective; but what it seeks and what is not given to it in intuition, is 
the Absolute and the eternal. For if the longing were to find its object, 
then the temporal beauty of a subject in his Sfitgularitf would be its 
happiness, it would be the perfection of a being belonging to the 
world; but to the extent that religion as longing actually singhlarized 
beauty it would be nothing beautiful [as far as the longing itself is 
concernedV But [what the longing does not recognize is that] when 
empirical existence is the pure body of inward beauty, it ceases to be 
something temporal and on its own. The intention abides unpolluted 
by its objective existence as an action; and neither the deed nor the 
enjoyment will be built up by the intellect into something that is 
opposed to the true identity of the inner and the outer. The highest 
cognition [318] would be the cognition of what that body is wherein 
the individual would not be single [and separate], and wherein long-
ing reaches perfect vision and blissful enjoyment. 
When the time had come, the infinite longing that yearns beyond 
body and world, reconciled itself with existence. 9 But the reality with 
7. See the preceding note; and compare Psalm 115, 4-8 
8. The text reads simply: "a her soweit als sie wirklich s1e vereinzelte so 
wiirde s1e nichts Schi:ines sein" (our italics). 
9. Hegel deals with this "reconciliation" at length in the Phenomenology. The 
whole section on "Enlightenment" is relevant to his discussion of the general 
principle of "eud<£monism" here, and the section on "the moral view of the 
world" is a proof of the "eud<£rnonism" of Kant, and Fichte (Baillie, pp 559-
98, 615-27) 

59 
Introduction 
which it became reconciled, the objective sphere acknowledged by 
subjectivity, was in fact merely empirical existence, the ordinary 
world and ordinary matters of fact (Wirklichkeit). Hence, this recon-
ciliation did not itself lose the character of absolute opposition im-
plicit in beautiful longing. Rather, it flung itself upon the other pole 
of the antithesis, the empirical world. Although the reconciliation 
was sure of itself and firm in its inner ground because of the abso-
lute and blind natural necessity [of empirical existence] ,it was still 
in need of an objective form for this [inner] ground. Being immersed 
in the reality of empirical existence this reconciliation has an uncon-
scious certainty which must, by the same necessity of nature( seek 
to securejustification and a good conscience. At the conscious level 
it was the doctrine of happiness that brought about this reconcilia-
tion. The fixed point of departure here is the empirical subject, just 
as what it becomes reconciled with is ordinary life (Wirklichkeit): 
the empirical subject is allowed to confide in ordinary life and sur-
render to it without sin. The utter crudity and vulgarity that are at 
the bottom of this doctrine of eudremonism are redeemed only by its 
striving toward justification and good conscience. But Reason cannot 
achieve this justification and good conscience through the Idea, since 
the empirical is [here] absolute. Only the objectivity of the intellect 
can attain the concept, which has presented Use!f m its most: hignly 
abstract form as so-called pure Reason. 
So the dogmatism of the Enlightenment flurry and of eudremonism 
did not consist in declaring virtuous happiness and enjoyment to be 
the highest good; for when happiness is conceived as Idea, it ceases 
to be something empirical and contingent, and it ceases to be some-
thing sensuous. In the highest being (Dasein) rational action and 
highest enjoyment are one. Only if we isolate the ideal aspect of the 
highest being, can we then call it rational action. And only if we 
isolate the real aspect can we call it enjoyment and feeling. It does 
not matter whether we wish to apprehend the highest being from the 
side of its ideality or from the side of its reality; [for] if highest bliss 
is highest Idea, then rational action and highest enjoyment, ideality 
and reality, are equally contained in it and are identical. Every phi-
losophy sets forth nothing else but the construction of highest bliss 
as Idea. In Reason's cognition of the highest enjoyment, the possi-
bility of distinguishing them [rational action and enjoyment] vanishes 
immediately; concept and infinity which dominate action, and reality 
and finitude which dominate enjoyment are absorbed into one an-
other. Polemics against happiness will be dismissed as empty chatter 

60 
Faith and Knowledge 
when this happiness is recognized to be the blissful enjoyment of 
eternal [319] intuition. But of course what is nowadays called eud<E-
monism refers to a happiness that is empirical, a sensual enjoyment, 
not the bliss of eternal vision. 10 
Infinity or the concept is so directly opposed to this absoluteness 
of the empirical and finite being (Wesen) that they condition one 
another and they are one with each other. 11 Since the one is absolute 
in its being-for-itself, so is the other; and the third, which is the true 
first, the eternal, is beyond this antithesis. The infinite, the concept, 
being in itself empty, the nothing, receives its content from what it 
is connected with as its opposite, that is, the empirical happiness of 
the individual. What is called wisdom and science consists in positing 
everything under the unity of the concept whose content is absolute 
singularity, and in calculating [the worth of] each and every form of 
beauty and ~pression of an Idea, wisdom and virtue, art and science 
from this point of view. That is to say, all this has to be treated as 
something that does not exist in itself, for the only thing that is in 
itself is the abstract concept of something that is not Idea but abso-
lute singularity. 
The fixed principle of ~y~tem_C>_f_s:ul~_!e_is that the finite is in 
and for itself, that it is absolute, and is the sole reality. According 
to this principle, the finite and singular stands on one side, in the 
form of manifoldness; and anything religious, ethical and beautiful 
is thrown onto this side because it can be conceived as singular by 
the intellect. On the other side there is this very same absolute fini-
tude but in the form of the infinite as concept of happiness. The infi-
nite and the finite are here not to be posited as identical in the Idea; 
for each of them is for itself absolute. So they stand opposed to each 
other in the connection of domination; for in the absolute antithesis 
of infinite and finite the concept is what does the determining. How-
ever, above this absolute antithesis and above the relative identities 
of domination and empirical conceivability, there is the eternal. Be-
cause the antithesis [between the infinite and the finite] is absolute, 
the sphere of the eternal is the incalculable, the inconceivable, the 
empty-an incognizable God beyond the boundary stakes of Reason. 
It is a sphere that is nothing for intuition since intuition is only al-
lowed to be sensuous and limited. Equally, it is nothing for enjoyment 
10. Literally "not eternal intuition and bliss." 
11. In context "eins mit dem andern" may mean no more than "they are to-
gether." 

61 
Introduction 
since only empirical happiness exists, and nothing for cognition since 
what is here called Reason consists solely in calculating the worth of 
each and every thing with respect to the singularity, and in positing 
[i.e., subsuming] every Idea under finitude. 
This is the basic character of eudremonism and the Enlightenment. 
The beautiful subjectivity of Protestantism is transformed into em-
pirical subjectivity; the poetry of Protestant grief that scorns all 
reconciliation with empirical existence is transformed into the prose 
of satisfaction with the finite and of good conscience about it. What 
is the relation of this basic character to the philosophies of Kant, Ja-
cobi and Fichte? So little do these philosophies step out of this basic 
character that, on the contrary, they have merely perfected it to the 
highest degree. Their [320] conscious direction is flatly opposed to 
the principle of eudremonism. However, because they are nothing but 
this direction, their positive character is just this principle itself; so 
that the way these philosophies modify eudremonism merely gives 
it a perfection of formation, which has no importance in principle, no 
significance for Reason and philosophy. The absoluteness of the finite 
and of empirical reality is still maintained in these philosophies. The 
infinite and the finite remain absolutely opposed. Ideality (das Idea-
lische) is conceived only as the concept. And in particular, when thi~. 
conc~pt is posited affirmatively, the only identity of the finite and 
infinite that remains possible is a relative identity, the domination of 
the concept over what appears as the real and the finite-everything 
beautiful and ethical being here included. And on the other hand, 
when the concept is posited negatively, the subjectivity of the indi-
vidual is present in empirical form, and the domination is not that of 
the intellect but is a matter of the natural strength and weakness of 
the subjectivities opposed to one another. Above this absolute fini-
tude and absolute infinity there remains the Absolute as an emptiness 
of Reason, a fixed realm of the incomprehensible, of a faith which 
is in itself non-rational (vernunftlos), but which is called rational 
because the Reason that is restricted to its absolute opposite recog-
nizes something higher above itself from which it is self-excluded. 
In the form of eudremonism the principle of an absolute finitude 
has not yet achieved perfect abstraction. For on the side of infinity, 
the concept is not posited in purity; because it is filled with content 
it stays fixed as happiness. Because the concept is not pure, it has 
positive equality with its opposite; for its content is precisely the 
same reality, which is manifoldness on the other side [the side of 
finitude]-but on the side of infinity it is posited in conceptual form. 

62 
Faith and Knowledge 
Hence, there is no reflection on the opposition, which is to say that 
the opposition is not objective: the empirical is not posited as nega-
tivity for the concept nor the concept as negativity for the empirical 
nor the concept as that which is in itself negative. When abstraction 
achieves perfection, there is reflection on this opposition, the ideal 
opposition becomes objective, and each of the opposites is posited as 
something which is not what the other is. Unity and the manifold 
. now confront one another as abstractions, with the result that the 
·:opposites have both positive and negative aspects for one another: 
t)-le empirical is both an absolute something and absolute nothing-!or-
the concept. In the former perspective the opposites are the preceding 
empiricism;12 in the latter they are at the same time idealism and 
scepticism. The former is called practical philosophy, the latter theo-
retical philosophy. In practical philosophy, the empirical has absolute 
reality for the concept, that is, it has absolute reality in and for itself; 
-~in theoretical philosophy knowledge of the empirical is nothing. 
-[321] The fundamental principle common to the philosophies- of 
Kant, Jacobi and Fichte is, then, the absoluteness of finitude and, re-
sulting from it, the absolute antithesis of finitude and infinity, reality 
and' ideality, the sensuous and the supersensuous, and the beyond-
ness of what is truly real and absolute. Within this common ground, 
however, these philosophies form antitheses among themselves, ex-
hausting the totatity of possible forms of this principle. The Kantian 
philosophy establishes the objective side of this whole [subjective] 
sphere: the absolute concept, existing strictly for itself as practical 
Reason, is the highest objectivity within the finite realm, and it is 
absolute as ideality postulated in and for itself. Jacobi's philosophy 
is the subjective side. It transposes the antithesis and the identity, 
postulated as absolute, into the subjectivity of feeling, into infinite 
longing and incurable grief. The philosophy of Fichte is the synthesis 
of both. It demands the form of objectivity and of basic principles 
as in Kant, but it posits at the same time the conflict of this pure 
objectivity with the subjectivity as a longing and a subjective identity. 
In Kant the infinite concept is posited as that which is in and for 
itself and as the only thing philosophy acknowledges. In Jacobi, the 
infinite appears as affected by subjectivity, that is, as instinct, im-
pulse, individuality. In Fichte, the infinite as affected by subjectivity 
is itself objectified again, as obligation and striving. 
So these philosophers are as completely confined within eudremon-
12 Compare pp. 58-9 above. 

63 
Introduction 
ism as they are diametrically opposed to it. It is their exclusive, their 
only articulate tendency, their programmatic principle, to rise above 
the subjective and empirical and to justify the absoluteness of Reason, 
its independence from common existence (Wirklichkeit). But since this 
Reason is simply and solely directed against the empirical, the infinite 
has a being of its own only in its tie with the finite. Thus, although 
these philosophies do battle with the empirical, they have remained 
directly within its sphere. The Kantian and Fichtean philosophies 
were able to raise themselves to the concept certainly, but not to the 
Idea, and the pure concept is absolute ideality and emptiness. It gets 
its content and dimensions quite exclusively in, and hence through, 
its connection with the empirical. In this way their pure concept is 
the ground of that very same absolute moral and philosophical (wis-
senschaftlich) empiricism for which they reproach eud<emonism. J a-
cobi's philosophy does not take this detour. It does not first sunder 
the concept from empirical reality and then let the concept get its 
content from this very same empirical reality because outside of it 
there is nothing for the concept but its nullification. Instead, since 
the principle of his philosophy is straightforward subjectivity, Ja-
cobi's philosophy is straightforward eud<emonism, except that it is 
tinged with negativity. For whereas to eud;emonism thought is not 
yet the ideal realm, the negative of reality, Jacobi's philosophy does 
reflect on thought and holds it to be nothing in itself. 
The philosophy of Locke and the doctrine of happiness were the 
earlier philosophical manifestations (Erscheinungen) of this realism 
of finitude (to which the non-philosophical manifestations, all the 
hustle and bustle (322] of contemporary civilization, still belong). 
Locke and the eud<emonists transformed philosophy into empirical 
psychology. They raised the standpoint of the subject, the standpoint 
of absolutely existing finitude, to the first and highest place. They 
asked and answered the question of what the universe is for a sub-
jectivity that feels and is conscious by way of calculations typical of 
the intellect, or in other words, for a Reason solely immersed in 
finitude, a Reason that renounces intuition and cognition of the eter-
nal. The philosophies of Kant, Jacobi, and Fichte are the completion 
and idealization of this empirical psychology; they consist in coming · 
to understand that the infinite concept is strictly opposed to the em-,; 
pirical. They understood the sphere of this antithesis, a finite and an·· 
infinite, to be absolute: but [they did not see that] if infinity is thus 
set up against finitude, each is as finite as the other. They under-
stood the eternal to be above this [sphere of] opposition, beyond the 

64 
Faith and Knowledge 
l. 
concept and the empirical; but they understood the cognitive faculty 
and Reason simply to be that sphere. Now a Reason that thinks only 
the finite will naturally be found to be able to think only the finite; 
and Reason as impulse and instinct will naturally be found not to be 
able to think the eternal. 
The idealism of which these philosophies are capable is an idealism 
of the finite; not in the sense that the finite is nothing in them, but 
in the sense that the finite is received into ideal form: they posit 
finite ideality, i.e., the pure concept, aS'tn.finity absolutely opposed to 
finitude, together with the finite that is realt and they posit both 
equally absolutely. (In its subjective dimension, that is, in Jacobi's phi-
losophy, this idealism can only have the form of scepticism, and not 
even of true scepticism, because Jacobi turns pure thinking into 
something merely subjective, whereas idealism consists in the asser-
tion that pure thinking is objective thinking.) 
The one self-certifying certainty (das an sich und einzig Gewisse), 
then, is that there exists a thinking subject, a Reason affected with 
finitude; and the whole of philosophy consists in determining the 
universe with respect to this finite Reason. Kant's so-called critique 
of the cognitive faculties, Fichte's [doctrine that] consciousness can-
not be transcended nor become transcendent, Jacobi's refusal to 
undertake anything impossible for Reason, all amount to nothing but 
the absolute restriction of Reason to the form of finitude, [an injunc-
tion] never to forget the absoluteness of the subject in every rational 
cognition; they make limitedness into an eternal law and an eternal 
being both in itself and for philosophy. So these philosophies have 
to be recognized as nothing but the culture (Kultur) of reflection 
raised to a system. This is a culture of ordinary human intellect 
which does, to be sure, rise to the thinking of a universal; but be-
cause it remains ordinary intellect it takes the infinite concept to be 
absolute thought and keeps what remains of its intuition of the eter-
nal strictly isolated from the infinite concept. [323] It does so either 
by renouncing that intuition altogether and sticking to concept and 
experience, or by keeping both [intuition and concept] although un-
able to unite them-for it can neither take up its intuition into the 
concept, nor yet nullify both concept and experience [in intuition]· 
The torment of a nobler nature subjected to this limitation, this ab-
solute opposition, expresses itself in yearning and striving; and the 
consciousness that it .is a barrier which cannot be crossed expresses 
itself as faith in a realm beyond the barrier. But because of its peren-
nial incapacity this faith is simultaneously the impossibility of rising 

65 
Introduction 
above the barrier into the realm of Reason, the realm which is in-
trinsically clear and free of longing. 
The fixed standpoint which the all-powerful culture of our time 
has established for philosophy is that of a Reason affected by sensi-
bility. In this situation philosophy cannot aim at the cognition of 
God, but only at what is called the cognition of man. This so-called 
man and his humanity conceived as a rigidly, insuperably finite sort 
of Reason form philosophy's absolute standpoint. Man is not a glow-
ing spark of eternal beauty, or a spiritual focus of the universe, but 
an absolute sensibility. He does, however, have the faculty of faith 
so that he can touch himself up here and there with a spot of alien 
supersensuousness. It is as if art, considered simply as portraiture, 
were to express its ideal aspect (ihr Idealisches) through the longing 
it depicts on an ordinary face and the melancholy smile of the 
mouth, while it was strictly forbidden to represent the gods in their 
e~altation above longing and sorrow, on the grounds that the presen-
tation of eternal images would only be possible at the expense of 
humanity. Similarly philosophy is not supposed to present the Idea 
of man, but the abstract concept of an empirical mankind all tangled 
up in limitations, and to stay immovably impaled on the stake of the 
absolute antithesis; and when it gets clear about its restriction to the 
sensuous-either analyzing its own abstraction or entirely abandon-
ing ie3 in the fashion of the sentimental bel esprit-philosophy is 
supposed to prettify itself with the surface colour of the supersen-
suous by pointing, in faith, to something higher. 
Truth, however, cannot be deceived by this sort of hallowing of a 
finitude that remains what it was. A true hallowing ·should nullify 
the finite. If an artist cannot give true truth to what actually exists 
by casting an ethereal light upon it, and taking it wholly up therein; 
if he is only able to represent actuality in and for itself-which is 
what is commonly called reality and truth, though it is neither the 
one nor the other-then he will take refuge in feeling, in yearning 
and sentimentality as his remedy against actuality, spreading tears 
on the cheeks of t~ulgar and bringing an "Oh Lord" to their lips. 
Thus [324] his _fjgu!Y' will indeed look away beyond the actual situ-
ation toward heaven, but they will do so like bats that are neither 
bird nor beast, and belong neither to earth nor to sky. There cannot 
be beauty of this sort without ugliness, nor a moral ethos of this 
13. The text could also mean: "either analysing its own abstraction or leaving 
it intact [i.e., unanalysed] ." 

66 
Faith and Knowledge 
kind without weakness and perfidy, nor such intellect as here occurs 
without platitude; good fortune cannot come to pass without mean-
ness, nor ill fortune without fear and cowardice, nor any kind of 
fortune, without being contemptible. In the same way, when phi-
losophy after its own fashion, takes up the finite and subjectivity as 
absolute truth in the form of the concept, it cannot purify them [i.e., 
the finite and subjectivity] by connecting subjectivity with an infinite 
[the concept]. For this infinite is itself not the truth since it is unable 
to consume and consummate finitude (die Endlichkeit aufzuzehren). 
In philosophy, however, the actual and the temporal as such dis-
appear. This is called cruel dissection destructive of the wholeness of 
man, or violent abstraction that has no truth, and particularly no 
practical truth. This abstraction is conceived of as the painful cutting 
off of an essential part from the completeness of the whole. But the 
temporal and empirical, and privation, are thus recognized as an 
essential part and an absolute In-itself. It is as if someone who sees 
only the feet of a work of art were to complain, when the whole 
work is revealed to his sight, that he was being deprived of his de-
privation and that the incomplete had been in-completed. Finite cog-
nition is this sort of cognition of a part and a singular. If the absolute 
were put together out of the finite and the infinite, abstracting from 
the finite would indeed be a loss. In the Idea, however, (inite and 
infinite are one, and hence finitude a5sucn, i.e., as something that was 
supposed to have truth and reality in and for itself, has vanished. Yet 
what was negated was only the negative in finitude; and thus the 
true affirmation was posited. 
The supreme abstraction (Abstractum) of this absolutized _negation 
is the Ego-concept, just as the thing is the highest abstraction (Ab-
straction) pertaining to position [i.e., to affirmation]. Each of them is 
only a negation of the other. Pure being like pure thinking-an ab-
solute thing and absolute Ego-concept-are equally finitude made 
absolute. Eudremonism and the Enlightenment fuss belong to this 
same level-not to mention much else-and so do the philosophies 
of Kant, Jacobi, and Fichte. We shall now proceed to a more detailed 
confrontation of these three philosophers with one another. 

A. Kantian Philosophy 
Because the essence of the Kantian philosophy consists in its being 
critical idealism, it plainly confesses that its principle is subjectivism 
and formal thinking. Secure in its stanqpoint, which makes the unity 
of reflection supreme, it reveals what /t is and aims at, by telling its 
story quite frankly. The name of Reas'on which it gives to the Con-
cept may, at the worst, impede the disclosure or mask it. On~ lower 
levels, in cases where an Idea truly does provide the basis, the con-
fused way in which the Idea is expressed makes it difficult to recog-
nize it. in the first place; and secondly1, .the rational ground is soon 
transformed back into something conditional that pertains to the 
intellect. But, for the rest, when the Kantian philosophy happens 
upon Ideas in its normal course; it deals with them as mere possi-
bilities of thought and as transcendent concepts lacking all reality, 
and soon drops them again as mere empty thoughts. The highest 
Idea which it encountered in its critical business [i.e., the Idea of God 
in the Ontological Argument] it treated at first as if it were empty 
musing, nothing but an unnatural scholastic trick for conjuring reality 
out of concepts.1 Then in the final stage of its development,2 Kant's 
philosophy establishes the highest Idea as a postulate which is sup-
posed to have a necessary subjectivity, but not that absolute objec-
tivity which would get it recognized as the only starting point of 
philosophy and its sole content instead of being the point where phi-
losophy terminates in faith. 
The Kantian philosophy remains entirely within the antithesis. It 
makes the identity of the opposites into the absolute terminus of phi-
losophy, the pure boundary which is nothing but the negation of 
philosophy. We must not, by contrast, regard it as the problem of the 
true philosophy to resolve at that terminus the antitheses that are 
met with and formulated perchance as spirit and world, or soul anq 
body, or self and nature, etc. 
1. Compare Critique of Pure Reason, A 603; B 631. 
2. Hegel probably means to refer to Religion within the Bounds of Reason 
Alone (1793), Book II, Section 1, subsections B and C (Akad. VI, 62-78). But 
compare also Critique of Practical Reason, 1 (1787), Book II, Chapter II, Sec-
tion V (Akad. V, 124-32). 
• 

68 
Faith and Knowledge 
On the contrary, the sole Idea that has reality and true objectivity 
for philosophy, is the absolute suspendedness of the antithesis. This 
absolute identity is not a universal subjective postulate never to be 
realized. It is the only authentic reality. Nor is the cognition of it a 
faith, that is, something beyond all knowledge; it is, rather, philo~o­
phy's sole knowledge. Philosophy is idealism because it does not 
acknowledge either one of the opposites as existing for itself in its 
abstraction from the other. The supreme Idea is indifferent against 
.both; and each of the opposites, considered singly, is nothing. The . 
Kantian philosophy has the merit of being idealism [326] because it 
does show that neither the concept in isolation nor intuition in isola-
tion is anything at all; that intuition by itself is blind and the concept 
by itself is empty;3 and that what is called experience, i.e., the finite 
identity of both in consciousness is not a rational cognition either. 
But the Kantian philosophy declares this finite cognition to be all that 
is possible. It turns this negative, abstractly idealistic side [of cog-
nition] into that which is in itself, into the positive. It turns just this 
empty concept into absolute Reason, both theoretical and practical. 
In so doing, it falls back into absolute finitude and subjectivity, and 
the whole task and content of this philosophy is, not the cognition 
of the Absolute, but the cognition of this subjectivity. In other words, 
it is a critique of the cognitive faculties. 
For I thought that the first step towards satisfying several in-
quiries the mind of man was very apt to run into, was, to take 
a survey of our own understandings, examine our own powers, 
and see to what things they were adapted. [ ... ] Thus men, 
extending their inquiries beyond their capacities and letting their 
thoughts wander into those depths where they can find no sure 
footing, it is no wonder that they raise questions and multiply 
disputes, which, never coming to any clear resolution, are proper 
only to continue and increase their doubts, and to confirm them 
at last in perfect scepticism. Whereas, were the capacities of 
our understanding well considered, the extent of our knowledge 
(Erkenntnis) once discovered, and the horizon found which sets 
the bounds between the enlightened and dark parts of things; 
between what is and what is not comprehensible by us, men 
would perhaps with less scruple acquiesce in the avowed igno-
3. Critique of Pure Reason, A 51, B 75: "Thoughts without content are emp-
ty, intuitions without concepts are blind." 

69 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
ranee of the one, and employ their thoughts and discourse with 
more advantage and satisfaction in the other. 
With these words, Locke expresses in the Introduction to his Essay4 
the goal of his undertaking. They are words which one could just as 
well read in the introduction to Kant's philosophy; for it similarly 
confines itself to Locke's goal, that is, to an investigation of the finite 
tp. tellect. 
-:'Within these bounds, however, and notwithstanding its ultimate 
r~sults which are quite different, the Kantian philosophy expresses 
the authentic Idea of Reason in the formula, "How are synthetic judg-
ments a priori possible?" Kant reproaches Hume for thinking of this 
task of philosophy with far too little definiteness and universality. 
This is exactly what happened to Kant himself; and like Hume he 
stopped at the subjective and external meaning of this question and 
believed he had established that rational cognition is impossible. Ac-
cording to his [327] conclusions all so-called philosophy comes down 
to a mere delusion of supposed rational insight. 
How are synthetic judgments a priori possible? This problem ex-
presses nothing else but the Idea that subject and predicate of the 
synthetic judgment are identical in the a priori way. That is to say, 
these heterogeneous elements, the subject which is the particular and 
in the form of being, and the predicate which is the universal and in 
the form of thought, are at the same time absolutely identical. It is 
Reason alone that is the possibility of this positing, for Reason is 
nothing else but the identity of heterogeneous elements of this kind. 
·one can glimpse this Idea through the shallowness of the deduction 
of the categories. With respect to space and time one can glimpse it, 
too, though not where it should be, in the transcendental exposition 
of these forms, 5 but later on, in the deduction of the categories, where 
the original synthetic unity of apperception finally comes to the fore. 6 
Here, the original synthetic unity of apperception is recognized also 
as the principle of the figurative synthesis/ i.e., of the forms of intui-
tion; space and time are themselves conceived as synthetic unities, 
and spontaneity, the absolute synthetic activity of the productive 
4. Hegel quotes from the German translation by H. E. Poleyen (Altenburg, 
1757). We give the text from Book I, chapter 1, section 7 (ed. Yolton, London, 
Everyman, 1961, I, 8-9). 
5. Critique of Pure Reason, Transcendental Aesthetic, sections 3, 5. 
6. Ibid., B 131-9 (compare A 115-25). 
7. Ibid., B 150-3, 16Q-l. 

70 
Faith and Knowledge 
imagination, is conceived as the principle of the very sensibility which 
was previously characterized only as ~eceptivity. 
This original synthetic unity must be conceived, not as produced 
out of opposites, but as a truly necessary, absolute, original identity 
of opposites. As such, it is the principle both of productive imagina-
tion, which is the unity that is blind, i.e., immersed in the difference 
and not detaching itself from it; and of the intellect, which is the 
unity that posits the difference as identical but distinguishes itself 
from the different. This shows that the Kantian forms of intuition 
and the forms of thought cannot be kept apart at all as '{:b:~ particular, 
isolated faculties which they are usually represented as·. On_e and the 
same synthetic unity-we have just now determined what this means 
here-is the principle of intuition and of the intelled. The intellect 
is only the higher potency; in it the identity which in intuition is 
totally immersed in the manifold, simultaneously sets itself against 
the manifold, and constitutes itself within itself as universality, which 
is what makes it the higher potency. Kant is therefore quite right in 
calling intuition without form [i.e., concept] blind. For in [mere] intui-
tion [without form] 8 there is no relative antithe~s, and hence there is 
no relative identity of unity and difference. This relative identity and 
-antithesis is what seeing or being conscious consists in; but the id.¢n-
tityn is completely identical with the difference just as it is in the mag-' 
~t. The antithesis is not suspended in sensuous intuition, as it is in 
intellectual intuition; in the empirical intuition qua sensuous the anti-
thesis must emerge; so it keeps its standing even in this state of im-
mersion. Hence, the antitheses step apart as two forms of intuiting, 
the one as identity of thinking, the other as identity of being, the one 
as intuition of. time and the other of space.10-Similarly, the concept is 
empty [328] ~ithout intuition. For the synthetic unity is only concept 
because it binds the difference in such a way that it also steps outside 
of it, and faces it in relative antithesis. In isolation the pure concept 
is the empty identity. It is only as being relatively identical with that 
which it stands against, that it is concept; and it is [thus] plenished 
8. I.e., the pure intuitions of space and time considered in separation from the 
functions of the intellect. 
9. Hegel clearly means "the unity" here. The opposite poles of the magnet 
are its essential nature. Thus when it is broken they are not separated but dup-
licated 
10. Hegel appears here to sketch an explanation of what Kant asserted to be 
incapable of further explanation: "why space and time are the only forms of 
our intuition" (Critique of Pr~rc Reason, B 145-6) 

1 
71 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
only through the manifold of intuition: sensuous intuition A = B, 
concept A2 = (A = B)Y 
The main point is that productive imagination is a truly specula-
tive Idea, both in the form of sensuous intuition and in that o_L~~ri­
ence which is the comprehending of the intuition. For the expression 
"synthetic unity" might make the identity look as if it presupposes 
the .antithesis12 and need the manifold of the antithesis as something 
independent and existing for itself; the identity might look as if it 
was by nature posterior to the opposition. But in Kant the synthetic 
unity is unde~iably the 
a~l!!_~and.....9!~gJ!!_al_ identity of self-
consciousne~s, which of itself posits the judgment absolutelY "cmcf 
a· priori. or-rather, as identity of subjective and objective, the original 
identity appears in consciousness as judgment. This original unity of 
apperception is called synthetic precisely because of its two-sidedness, 
the opposites being absolutely one in it. The absolute synthesis is ab-
·solute insofar as it is not an aggregate of manifolds which are first 
picked up, and then the synthesis supervenes upon them afterwards. 
If we sunder the absolute synthesis and reflect upon its opposites, 
one of them is the empty ego, the concept, and the other is the mani· 
fold, body, matter or what you will. Kant puts it very well (Critique 
of Pure Reason [second edition, 1787], p. 135): "through the empty 
Ego as simple representation nothing manifold is given."13 The true 
synthetic unity or rational identity is just that identity which is the 
connecting of the manifold with the empty identity, the Ego. It is 
. from this connnection, as original synthesis that tl].e Ego as thinking 
subject, and the manifold as body and world first detach themselves. 
Thus Kant himself distinguishes the abstract Ego or the abstract 
11. This formula says that the judgment is the second "power" (A2) of pro-
ductive imagination, the first "power" being sensuous intuition (A = B). In its 
appearance as judgment the intellect is the reflective awareness of the identity 
of Subject and Predicate in their difference. Hegel's present paradigm of judg-
ment is the subsumption of a particular under a universal (cf. above p. 69). As 
he takes the particulars to have the form of being and the universals to have the 
form of thought, he can now say that the judgment is the reflective awareness 
of the identity of being and thought in their difference. The next step would 
lead from particular beings to objects and from concepts to the subject. So we 
get judgments as the reflective awareness of the identity of object and subject 
in their difference. 
12. Hegel here uses the Kantian term A11tithesis, not his own Gege11satz. 
13. Kant says: "through the I as simple representation, nothing manifold is 
given" 

72 
Faith and Knewledge 
identity of the intellect from the true Ego, the absolute, original syn-
thetic identity, which is the principle. 
This is how Kant truly solved his problem, "How are synthetic 
judgments a priori possible?" They are possible through the original, 
absolute identity of the heterogeneous. This identity, as the uncon-
ditioned, sunders itself, and appears as separated into the form of a 
judgment, as subject and predicate, or particular and universal. Still, 
the rationaT or, as Kant calls it, the a priori nature_ QfJhis_jud~m~nt, 
the absolute identity as the medi~ting concept (Mittelbegriff) mahi-
fests itself, not in the judgment, but in the [syllogistic] inference. 1!, 
In the judgment the absolute identity is merely the copula "is," with-
out consciousness. It is the difference whose appearance prevails in 
the judgment itself. Here, tJ:!~ {329]_!._atio~al is-.~ fqr. cogni!ion, just as 
much iiDw.ersed in the antithesis· as the identity is immersed in intui-
tion for consciousness in general. The copula is not something 
thought, something cognized; on the contrary it expresses precisely 
our non-cognizance of the rational. What comes to the fore and en-
ters consciousness is only the product, i.e., the subject and predicate 
as terms of the antithesis. Only these terms are posited as object of 
thought in the form of judgment, and not their being one. In sensu-
.ous intuition concept and real thing do not confront each other. At 
the same time in the judgment the identity extricates itself as the uni-
versal from its immersion in the difference, so that the difference 
appears as the particular; the identity confronts this immersion as its 
opposite. Yet the rational identity of identity as [the identity] of the 
universal and the particular15 is the non-conscious in the judgment, 
and the judgment itself is only the appearing of this non-conscious 
identity. 
The whole transcendental deduction both of the forms of intuition 
and of the category in general cannot be understood without distin-
14. The Critique of Pure Reason (A 298-309; B 3S5-66) relates the pure 
principles of understanding, i.e., of the "intellect" to the forms of judgment, 
and the Ideas of Reason to the forms of syllogism. 
15. This is a literal translation. Perhaps we should read "die vernunftige 
ldentitat als die Identitat des Allgemeinen und Besonderen": "the rational 
identity as the identity of the universal and the particular." Or else, "die ver-
nunftige ldentitat der ldentitat und der Differenz (des Allgemeinen und Be-
sonderen)": "the rational identity of the identity and the difference (between 
the universal and the particular)," which would agree with formulations on p. 
74 below, and in the Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's System (com-
pareD 156). 

73 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
guishing what Kant calls the faculty of ~he original synthetic unity 
of apperception from the Ego which does the representing and is the 
subject-the Ego which, as Kant says, merely accompanies all repre-
sentations. [Secondly,] we must not take the faculty of [productive] 
imagination as the middle term that gets inserted between an existing 
absolute subject and an absolute existing world. The productive 
if!lagination must rather be recognized_as what is primary arid original, 
as that out of which subjective· Ego and objective world first sunder 
themselves into the necessarily bipartite appearance and product, and 
as the.....,sole In-itself. This power of imagination is the original two-
sided" identity. The identity becomes subject in general on one side, 
and object on the other; but originally it is both. And the imagination 
is _9othing_ but Reason it!:leJ.f, the Idea of which was--determined 
--
-
above. 16 Butj!...is....onhL!~son -~sit appears in the sphere..of.empiri-
c~~cigusnE:~. There are those who, when they hear talk of the 
power of imagination, do not even think of the intellect, still less of' 
Reason, but only of unlawfulness, whim and fiction; they cannot free 
themselves from the idea of a qualitative manifold of faculties and 
cc;pacities of the spirit. It is they above all who mus-t ~rasp that .the 
Trt::itselPof the empirical consciousness lS· ltlm$'on ·ft5eJt; that produc-
tive imagination as intuition, and productive imagination as experi-
ence are not particular faculties quite sundered from Reason. They 
must grasp that this productive imagination is only called intellect 
because the categories, as the determinate forms of the experiential 
imagination, are posited under the form of the infinite, and fixated as 
concepts which, also, form a complete system within their [or its] 
own sphere. Productive imagination [330] has been allowed to get 
by easily in the Kantian philosophy, first because its pure Idea is set 
forth in a rather mixed-up way like other potencies, almost in the 
ordinary form of a psychological faculty, though an a priori one, and 
secondly because Kant did not recognize Reason as the one and only 
a prio!}2 whether it be of sensibility, of intellect, or what have you. 
-rn.stead he conceived of the a priori only under formal concepts of 
universality and necessity. As we shall now see, he turned the true 
a priori back into a pure unity, i.e., one that is not originally syn-
thetic. 
Thus the In-itself was established in the power (Potenz) of imag-
ination, but the duplication of this power was conceived as a reflected 
16. See pp. 69-70. 

74 
Faith mzd Knowledge 
one, namely as judgment, and the identity of this power was likewise 
conceived as intellect and category, that is, as similarly reflected and 
relative. Because the relative identity was fixated as the universal 
or the category and the relative duplication as that of the universal 
and the particular, their absolute identity-that is, the identity of the 
relative identity and the relative duplication-was also bound to be 
cognized in reflected form, that is, as Reason. Imagination, however, 
which is Reason immersed in difference, is at this level raised only 
to the form of infinitude and fixated as intellect. This merely relative 
identity necessarily opposes itself to, and is radically affected by, the 
particular as something alien to it and empirical. The In-itself of both, 
the identity of this intellect and the empirical, i.e., the n priori as-
pect of judgment, does not come to the fore; philosophy does not 
go on from judgment to a priori inference/ 7 from the acknowledge-
ment that the judgment is the appearing of the In-itself to the cog-
nition of the In-itself. It is for this reason that the absolute judgment 
of idealism as expounded by Kant [i.e., the synthetic judgment 
n priori] may, and, on this level [the Potenz of Reason as intellectl, 
must be grasped in such a way that the manifold of sensibility, em-
pirical consciousness as intuition and sensation, is in itself something 
unintegrated, that the world is in itself falling to pieces, and only 
gets objective coherence and support, substantiality, multiplicity, even 
actuality and possibility, through the good offices of human self-
consciousness and intellect. All this is an objective determinateness 
that is man's own perspective and projection. Thus the whole deduc-
tion gets the easily grasped meaning that the things in themselves 
and the sensations are without objective determinateness-and with 
respect to the sensations and their empirical reality nothing remains 
but to think that sensation comes from the things in themselves. For 
the incomprehensible determinateness of the empirical consciousness 
comes altogether from the things in themselves, and they can be 
neither intuited nor yet cognized. In experience, the form of intuition 
belongs to the figurative synthesis, the concept to the intellectual 
synthesis. 18 No other organ remains for the things in themselves but 
sensation; for sensation alone is not a priori, or in other words, it is 
not grounded in man's cognitive faculty for which only appearances 
exist. [331] The objective determinateness of sensations is their unity, 
and this unity is merely the self-consciousness of an experiencing 
17 Compare p. 72 note 14 above 
18 Crifit]H<' of Pure Renson, B 151 

75 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
subject. So it is no more something truly a priori and existing in itself 
than any other subjectivity. 
It would seem, then, as if critical idealism consisted in nothing but 
the formal knowledge that the subject and\_the things or the non-Ego 
exist each for itselfl9-the Ego of the I think, and the thing in itself. 
They do not, however, exist for themselves in the sense of each being 
a substance, one posited as soul-thing, the other as objective thing. 
Rather, the Ego of the I think is absolute qua subject, just as the 
thing in itself beyond the subject is absolute, without any further 
categorical determinateness in either case. Objective determinateness 
and its forms first come in with the connection between them [the 
Ego and thing-in-itself]; and this identity of theirs is the formal one 
that appears as causal nexus; the thing in itself becomes object inso-
far as it obtains from the active subject some determination which 
for this reason alone is one and the same in both of them. Apart from 
this they are completely heterogeneous, identical only as sun and 
stone are in respect to warmth when the sun warms the stone.20 The 
absolute identity of the subject and the object has passed into this 
formal identity, and transcendental idealism into this formal or more 
properly, psychological idealism. 
Once subject and object have been separated, the judgment re-
appears doubled on the subjective and the objective side. On the 
objective side it appears as transition from one objective [fact] to 
another, these objectivities themselves being posited in the relation 
of subject and object, and in that of the identity of both; and [on 
the subjective side] it appears likewise as a transiti<;m ,from one sub-
jective phenomenon to another. Thus, gravity is' fhe 'dbjeetive [fact] 
which qua subjective, or particular, is body, but qua objective or uni-
versal is motion. Or imagination is the subjective which qua subjec-
tive or particular is Ego and qua objective or universal is experience. 
On their objective side Kant has set up these relations of appe-ar=:-
ance, as judgments in the system of the principles of judgment.21 This 
must be recognized as true idealism inasmuch as the identity of what 
19. Fur sich does not here have the special sense that Hegel gives to it; it is 
simply Kant's an sich. 
20. See Kant's Prolegomena, section 20. (Akad IV, 301n); compare alsop. 93 
below. 
21. Hegel must be referring either to the whole "System of all Principles of 
Pure Understanding" (Critique of Pure Reason, A 148-23S; B 187-294) or to 
that part of it which is called "Systematic Representation of all the Synthetic 
Principles of Pure Understanding" (A 158-235; B 197-294). 
' 

76 
Faith and Knowledge 
appears as heterogeneous in one of these relations of judgment is a 
necessary identity; or in other words, it is an absolute and ther~fore 
transcendental identity. For example, the cause is posited as neces-
sarily, i.e., absolutely bound to the effect. However, this whole sys-
tem of principles makes its own appearance as conscious human 
intellect and so belongs to the subjective side; and the question now 
arises: what sort of relation does this judgment, i.e., this subjectivity 
of the intellect have to objectivity? They are identical, but only for-
mally so, since the heterogeneity of appearance has here been left 
out: the form A is present as the same in subject and object. It is not 
simultaneously posited in a heterogeneous way, i.e., on one side as 
something subjective, and on the other side as something objective, 
here as unity, there as manifold, which is the one and only way in 
which [332] oppositeness and appearance must be cognized; it is not 
posited as 1=2, here as point, there as line. Rather, if the subjective 
is point, then the objective is point; and if the subjective is line, then 
the objective is line. The same thing is regarded, first as idea, then as 
existing thing: the tree as my idea and as thing; warmth, light, red, 
sweet, etc. as my sensations and as qualities of a thing, and the 
category, similarly, is posited once as a relation of my thinking and 
then again as a relation of the things. It is the essence of formal or 
psychological idealism to regard a distinction of the kind here repre-
sented as being just distinct aspects of my subjective viewpoint, and 
not to regard them in their turn as objectively posited, in the positing 
of opposites as cognition of appearance, but to allow .that formal 
identity to appear to be the main thing. This sort of idealism can no 
more cognize the appearance of the Absolute in its truth than it can 
cognize the absolute identity, the one being completely inseparable 
from the other. Kantian, and more particularly Fichtean philosophy 
are forever sliding into this psychological idealism. 
Identity of this formal kind finds itself immediately confronted by 
or next to an infinite non-identity, with which it must coalesce in some 
incomprehensible way. On one side there is the Ego, with its produc-
tive imagination or rather with its synthetic unity which, taken thus 
in isolation, is formal unity of the manifold. But next to it there is an 
infinity of sensations and, if you like, of things in themselves. Once 
it is abandoned by the categories, this realm cannot be anything but 
a formless lump, even though, according to The Critique of Judg-
ment, it is a realm of beauteous nature and contains determinations 
with respect to which judgment cannot be subsumptive but only re-

77 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
flecting. 22 Objectivity and stability derive solely from the categories; 
the reaim of things in themselves is without categories; yet it is 
something for itself and for reflection. The only idea we can form of 
this realm is like that of the iron king in the fairy tale23 whom a 
human self-consciousness permeates with the veins of objectivity so 
that he can stand erect. But then formal transcendental idealism sucks 
these veins out of the king so that the upright shape collapses and 
becomes something in between form and lump, repulsive to look at. 
For the cognition of nature, without tli.e veins injected into nature by 
self-consciousness, there remains nothing but sensation. 
In this way, then, the objectivity of the categories in experience 
and the necessity of these relations become once more something con-
tingent and subjective. This intellect is human intellect, part of the 
cognitive faculty, the intellect of a fixed Ego-point. The things, as 
they are cognized by the intellect, are only appearances. They are 
nothing in themselves, which is a perfectly truthful result. The ob-
vious conclusion, however, is that an intellect which [333] has cog-
nizance only of appearances and of nothing in itself, is itself only 
appearance and is nothing in itself. But, on the contrary, Kant re-
gards discursive intellect, with this sort of cognition, as in itself and 
absolute. Cognition of appearances is dogmatically regarded as the 
only kind of cognition there is, and rational cognition is denied. If 
the forms through which the object exists are nothing in themselves, 
they must also be nothing in themselves for cognitive Reason. Yet 
Kant never seems to have had the slightest doubt that the intellect 
is the absolute of the human spirit. The intellect is 
(for him) the 
absolute immovable, insuperable finitude of human Reason. -
In dealing with the problem of "explaining the community of the 
soul with the body" Kant correctly loc~tes "the difficulty"-which is 
not one of explanation but of cognition-"in the assumed heteroge-
neity of [ ... ] the soul and the objects of the outer senses." The diffi-
culty would disappear [according to Kant] "if we considered that the 
two kinds of objects thus differ from each other, not inwardly but 
only as one outwardly appears with the other, and hence that what, 
as thing in itself_ underlies the appearance of matter perhaps, after 
22. See Critique of Judgment, Introduction (especially sections IV and V, 
Akad. V, 179-86). 
23. The reference is to Goethe's Das Miirchen (published in Die Horen 
1795). It is the "composite" king, not the "iron" one in the story, which supplies 
the appropriate model. See Werke, Berlin edition, xii, 379. 

78 
Faith and Knowledge 
all, may not be so heterogeneous. The only remaining difficulty would 
then concern the general possibility of a community of substances 
(it was superfluous to shift the difficulty?4 and the solution of this 
problem lies without doubt beyond the field of human knowledge."25 
As can be seen, it is for the sake of dear mankind and its cognitive 
faculty, that Kant so little esteems :his thought that maybe the two 
kinds of things are not so heterogeneous in themselves, but only in 
appearance. He regards this thought as a chance idea about a maybe 
and not as a rational thought at all. 
A formal idealism which in this way sets an absolute Ego-point 
and its intellect on one side, and an absolute manifold, or sensation, 
on the other side, is a dualism. Its idealistic side-which claims for 
the subject certain relations, called categories-is nothing but an ex-
tension of Locke's view. The latter allows the concept and forms to 
be given by the object, and transfers only perceiving (Wahrnehmen) 
in general, a universal intellect, into the subject. In Kant's idealism, 
on the other hand, the perceiving as immanent form is further de-
termined; and it certainly does make an infinite gain thereby. The 
emptiness of perceiving (Percipieren) or of a priori spontaneity is 
filled with content absolutely: the determinateness of form is nothing 
but the identity of opposites. As a result the a priori intellect becomes, 
at least in principle, a posteriori as well; for a posteriority is noth-
ing but the positing of the opposite. Thus the formalt concept of 
Reason is obtained; Reason has to be a priori and a posteriori, identi-
cal and not identic~!, in absolute unity. [334] This Idea, however, 
remains intellect and only the product .of the Idea is recognized as a 
synthetic judgment a priori. Inwardly, then, the intellect is, and 
should be, a speculative Idea, inasmuch as universal and particular 
'are one in it. For the positing of the opposites in the judgment should 
be a priori, i.e., necessary and universal, which is to say that the op-
posites should be absolutely identical. But the matter comes to rest 
with the "should." For as opposed to empirical sensibility, this think-
ing [as conceived by Kant] is once more [only] an [activity of] intel-
lect. The entire deduction is [merely] an analysis of experience and 
it posits an absolute antithesis (Antithesis) and a dualism. 
There is, then, a double meaning to the proposition that the intel-
lect is something subjective and that there are only appearances for 
24. But it was in the tradition of the rational cosmologies of Wolff, Baum-
garten, etc. 
25. Critique of Pure Reason, B 427-8. Where Hegel has "as one outwardly 
appears with the other," Kant wrote "as one outwardly appears to the other." 

79 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
it, and not things in themselves. There is the quite correct meaning 
that the intellect expresses the principle of opposition and the ab-
straction of finitude. But there is also the other meaning according to 
which this finitude and appearance are an ·absolute in man :26'lt is not 
the In-itself of things, but that of cognitive Reason. The intellect is 
supposed to be absolute as a subjective quality of the spirit. But in 
general, simply by being posited as something subjective, the intel-
lect is acknowledged to be nothing absolute. Even for formal ideal-
ism it must not matter whether the intellect which is the necessary, 
and the dimensions of whose form have been cognized, is subjec-
tively or objectively posited. If the intellect is to be considered for 
itself as abstraction of the form in i~s triplicity,27 it is all one whether 
it be regarded as intellect of consciousness or as intellect of nature, 
as the form of conscious or of non-conscious intelligence: just as in 
the Ego the intellect is thought of as conceptualized,28 so in nature 
it is thought of as realized. Suppose the intellect existed altogether in 
itself, then it would have as much reality in nature, i.e., in a world 
outside of intellectual cognition, yet intelligible in and for itself, as 
it would have in an intellect thinking of itself in the form 'of intel-
lectuality outside of nature. It would be experience taken subjec-
tively as the conscious system, and experience taken objectively as the 
non-conscious system of the manifoldness and coherence of the 
world. The world, however, is nothing in itself, not because a con-
scious intellect first gives form to it, but because it is nature, i.e., it is 
exalted above finitude and intellect. In the same way, conscious intel-
lect is nothing in itself, not because it is human intellect, but because 
it is intellect at all, or in other words, because there is an, absolute 
being of the antithesis in it. 
So, then, we must not place _Kant's merit in this, that he put the 
forms, as expressed in the categories, into the human cognitive fac-
ulty, as if it were the stake of an absolute finitude. We must find it, 
rather, in his having put the Idea of authentic a priority in the form 
of transcendental imagination; and also in his having put the begin-
ning of the Idea of Reason in the intellect itself. For he regarded 
thinking, or the form, not as something subjective, but as something 
26. The text could also be translated: "the intellect and appearance in man 
a~e an absolute." 
27. Compare Critique of Pure Reason, B 110-111; compare also pp. 71 ff. 
above. 
28. Irztellektualisiert. See note 36 below. 

80 
Faith and Knowledge 
in itself; not as something formless, [335] not as empty appercep-
( tion, but as intellect, as true form, namely as triplicity. The germ of 
,1 S_Peculation !~~s in this triplicity alone. For the. root judgment, or 
Nuality, is.'•in it' as well, and hence the very possibility of a posteri-
'Drity-;-w"hich in this way ceases to be absolutely opposed to the 
a priori, while the a priori, for this reason, also ceases to be formal 
identity. We will touch later29 on the still purer Idea of an intellect 
that is at the same time a posteriori, the Idea of an intuitive intellect 
as the absolute middle. 
Before we go on to show how this Idea of an intellect that is also 
a posteriori or intuitive hovered very clearly before Kant, how he 
expresssed it and consciously destroyed it again, we must consider 
what Reason can amount to, if it refuses to pass over into this Idea. 
Because of this refusal nothing remains for Reason but the pure 
emptiness of identity. It considers identity only in the judgment and 
conceives 1vas the pure universal existing for itself, i.e., as the sub-
jective which, in a state completely purified of the manifold, estab-
lishes itself as pure abstract unity. The human intellect is the linking 
together of the manifold through the unity of self-consciousness. 
Analysis shows that something in the subject is the linking activity. 
This spont~neity has various dimensions which yield the categories, 
and it is in this regard intellec.t. But after abstracting both from the 
content that the linking activity has through its connec1ion with the 
empirical, and from its immanent peculiarity as expressed in the di-
mensions, tne empty unity [that remains] is Reason. The intellect is 
unity of a possible experience whereas the unity of Reason relates 
to the intellect and its judgments.30 In this general determination Rea-
son is raised above the sphere of the intellect's relative identity, to 
be sure, and this negative character would allow us to conceive of it 
as absolute identity. But it was raised above intelleGt only to let the 
speculative Idea-which came out most vividly in imagination and 
had already been degraded as intellect-finally sink down completely 
to formal identity. Kant is quite correct in making this empty unity 
a merely regulative and not a constitutive principle31-for how could 
something that is utterly without content constitute anything?-and 
he posits it as the unconditioned. But to consider how he does this 
29. See pp. 86 ff. below. 
30. Critique of Pure Reason, A 302, B 359. 
31. Critique of Pure Reason, A 508 ff., B 536 ff.; A 616-17, B 644-5; A 642 ff., 
B 670 ff.; A 644 ff., B 692 ff.; A 671 ff. 

81 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
would really be of interest from the following perspectives only. For 
one thing it would be interesting to see how far Kant will go in his 
polemic against Reason in order to constitute this emptiness-how 
he roots out again the rational elgmenf_ acknowledged as transcen-
p~nt_~l __ synthesis in the i;teTiect ·;nd its Deduction; how he roots-it 
out-just so far as it should now be recognized as Reason, and not 
only qua product or in its appearance as judgment. [336] It would 
be of more particular interest, for another thing, to see how this 
empty unity, as practical Reason, is nonetheless supposed to become 
constitutive again, to give birth out of itself and give itself content;32 
how, moreover, the Idea of Reason is in the end re-established in its 
purity only to be brought to nought once more and placed in the 
irrationality of faith as an absolute Beyond which is a vacuum for 
cognition;33 and how subjectivity, which had already come onto the 
stage in the account of the intellect-though in a way that looked 
more innocent-thus remains the absolute and the principle. 
Kant always and everywhere recognizes that Reason, as the dimen-
sionless activity, as pure concept of. infinitude is held fast in its oppo-
!iifum tO-the-finite. He recognizes that in this opposition Reason- is 
an absolute, and hence a pure identity without intuition and in itself 
empty. But there is an immediate contradiction in this: this infinitude, 
strictly conditioned as it is by its abstraction from its opposite, and 
being strictly nothing outside of this antithesis, is yet at the same 
time held to be absolute spontaneity and autonomy. As freedom, 
P..eason is supposed to be absolute, yet the essence of this freedom 
consists in being solely through an opposite. This contradiction, 
which remains insuperable in the system and destroys it, becomes a 
real inconsistency (reale Inkonsequenz) when this absolute empti-
ness is supposed to give itself content as practical Reason and to ex-
pand itself in the form of duties. Theoretical Reason, on the other 
hand, lets the intellect give it the manifold which it has only to regu-
late; it makes no claim to an autonomous dignity, no claim to beget 
the Son out of itself.34 We must leave ,if) to its own emptiness and the 
( 
32. Critique of Practical Reason, Part I, Book I, Chapter I, sections 1-7 
(Akad. V, 19-33). 
33. Ibid., Book II, chapter II, sections IV-VIII (Akad. V, 122-46); compare 
also Religion, Book II, section 1, subsection C (Akad. VI, 66-78). 
34. This is a reference to the dogma of the Trinity. The Son, or Second Per-
son of the Trinity, has always been identified with the Logos or Word referred 
to in the first chapter of the Gospel of John. According to the Creeds, God the 
Father created the world, but the Son was "begotten, not made" and "begotten 

82 
Faith and Knowledge 
unworthiness that comes from its being able to put up with this dual-
ism of a pure unity of Reason and a manifold of the intellect, and 
from its. not feeling any need for Jhe middle and for immanent cog-
nition. The Idea- of Reason occurs in the Deduction of the Categories 
as original unity of the one and the manifold. But instead of lifting 
it entirely out of its appearance as intellect, Kant makes this appear-
ance permanent with respect to one of its terms, unity, thereby also 
with respect to the other [the manifold]: finitude is made absolute. 
We get wind of the Rational again, to be sure, the word "Idea" is 
dragged up out of Plato once more, .qnd virtue and beauty are recog-
nized as Ideas. But this Reason cannot even get to the point of being 
able to produce an Idea. 
The polemical side of Reason, as expressed in the Paralogisms [of 
Pure ReasonP5 has no other concern save that of setting aside (auf-
heben) the concepts of the intellect [i.e., the categories] as predi~ 
of the Ego. The Ego is to be raised up into the intelligible realm (Intel-
lektualiti:it)36 out of the sphere of the thing, and of objective, finite 
of the Father, before all worlds." John, however, says of the Logos "by him (it) 
all things were made, and without him (it) was not anything made, that was 
made." Hegel seems to have been influenced by John rather than by Genesis 
or the Creeds. We know that sometime between 1800 and 1804 he attempted to 
lay out his philosophy of Nature schematically as a "Divine Triangle" based 
on the Trinitarian dogma (see Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, pp. 101-2). The pres-
ent passage clearly shows that he did not interpret the distinction between the 
"begetting of the Son" and the "creation of the world" in an orthodox way. By 
treating the "creation" as the "moment of difference" in the "begetting" he 
could legitimately assert "all things came to be through the Logos and apart 
from it not even one thing came to be that did come to be," (which is what 
John asserts in the most literal translation possible). Also he could avoid the 
philosophical inconvenience of a creation of the world in time (which does ap-
pear to be implied by the priority which the Nicene Creed gives to the beget-
ting of the Logos). For the way Hegel himself distinguished "the Son" from "the 
world" at this time see Rosenkranz' reports of his lecture-manuscripts of Sum-
mer 1802 (Rosenkranz, pp. 131-41). Compare further p. 181 n 59 below, and 
Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's System, p. 171. 
35. Critique of Pure Reason, A 341-405, B 399-432. 
36. As we regularly use "intellect" to translate Hegel's Verstand, we now 
have recourse to the Kantian "intelligible" and "noumenal" (over against "sen-
sible" and "phenomenal") to translate Hegel's "intellektuell." Hegel uses intel-
lektuell here in two closely related senses He refers, in the first place, to the 
operations of Reason as conceived by Kant, i.e, not Hegel-Schelling's own Rea-
son which is intellectual intuition, but a Reason which Kant accuses of illicitly 
applying the intellect's categories to entities of which in principle no sensuous 
intuition can be had. In the second place, intellektuell refers to the whole realm 

83 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
determinations. On this level, what is to be predicated of spirit is the 
abstract form of finitude itself, not a determinate dimension and par-
ticular form of the intellect. The "I think" is to be transformed into 
an absolute noumenal (intellektuell) [337] point-not a real existing 
monad in the form of substance, but a noumenal monad, as a fixed 
noumenal unit conditioned by infinite opposition, and absolute in this 
finitude. Thus the Ego is changed from a soul-thing into a qualitative 
noumenal entity, a noumenal and abstract unit which, as such, is 
absolute; absolute finitude, which had formerly been a dogmatic ob-
ject, becomes now a dogmatic subject.--\ ~ t 
L v / ,v~ ,;,,.~ · · · · ~ ,.: 
The mathematical antinomies37 deal with the application of Reason 
as mere negativity to something reflection has fixed. This application 
immediately produces empirical infinity. A is posited and at the same 
time it is not to be posited. A is posited in that it remains what it 
was. It is suspended in that there is a transition to something else. 
This empty requirement of another, and the absolute being of that for 
which another is required, together give rise to this empirical infini-
tude. The antinomy arises because being-other is posited as well as 
being, i.e., the contradiction in its absolute insuperability. Hence, one 
side of the antinomy must consist in positing the determinate point, 
and the refutation in positing the opposite, the being-other-and 
vice versa for the other side of the antinomy. Kant recognized that 
of those entities (including the Ego of the "I think") of which in principle no 
sensuous intuition can be had. This is the realm which Kant's Dissertation of 
1770 distinguished as the intelligible or noumenal world from the sensible or 
phenomenal world and which his Critique of Pure Reason proved to be unknow-
able to the understanding (intellect) and the source of the paralogisms (rational 
psychology), antinomies (rational cosmology) and of illusory proofs of the ex-
istence of God (rational theology) to Reason. As to the paralogisms, Hegel con-
fronts Kant's teachings on the "I think" as subjective dogmatism with the ob-
jective dogmatism of Leibniz" conception of the monad. (This confrontation 
offers one interesting perspective among others on how Hegel will conceive his 
philosophical task on the new level of the spirit that was reached by way of 
the Leibnizian thesis and the Kantian antithesis.) Hegel criticizes Kant for 
conceiving of the I ,that thinks purely abstractly, as a mere Ego-point (Punkt 
der Egoitiit), ~egel had expressed this earlier (cf. above p. 78). The I is 
turned into a "qualitative intellectuality." By this phrase Hegel may mean either 
or both of two things: 1) there must be some sort of qualitative differentiation 
between the Ego-points; 2) "qualitative" stands here for the first category of 
"quality," i.e., reality (and not existence, which is a category of "modality." 
Cf. A 80, B 106), so that "qualitative intellectuality" would be the same as 
"noumenal (supersensuous) reality." 
37. Critique of Pure Reason, A 426-43, B 454-71; A 515-32, B 545-60. 

84 
Faith and Knowledge 
this conflict originates only through and within finitude and is there-
fore a necessary illusion. Yet he did not succeed in dissolving the 
conflict. He did not succeed, in the first place, because he did not 
suspend finitude itself. On the contrary, by turning the conflict into 
something subjective again, he allowed it to subsist. In the second 
place, he did not succeed because he can only use transcendental 
idealism as a negative key for the solution of the antinomy inasmuch 
as he denies that either side of it is anything in itself. In this way 
what is positive in these antinomies, their middle, remains unrecog-
nized. Reason appears pure only in its ne~ative aspect, as suspension 
of reflection. It does not emerge in its own proper shape. Yet [one 
would think that] this negative aspect, would already be sufficient to 
keep practical Reason from infinite progress38 at least; for there is 
the same antinomy in it, as there is in infinite regress, and it similarly 
exists only for the finite and within its realm. Practical Reason, which 
takes refuge in this infinite progress and means to constitute itself 
as absolute in freedom, confesses its finitude and its inability to vali-
date its absoluteness precisely through this infinity of the progress. 
Kant' solution of the dynamic antinomies}9 however, did not remain 
merely negative, but confesses the absolute dualism of his philoso-
phy: it removes the conflict by making it absolute. When freedom 
and necessity are brought into connection with one another, the in-
telligible world with the sensible, or absolute with empirical necessity, 
they produce an antinomy. Kant's solution directs us not to relate 
the antinomic propositions (Gegensi:itze) [338] in this insipid fashion, 
but to think of them as absolutely heterogeneous and without com-
munion at all. And indeed, in comparison with the [usual] insipid 
and unsubstantial connection of freedom and necessity, of the intelli-
gible world with the sensible world their pure and complete separa-
tion has merit: [it is a step towards] the positing of their absolute 
identity in perfect purity. But this was not what Kant had in view 
when he separated them so sharply. To him, the separation [itself] 
was the absolute: when they are thought without any communion at 
all freedom and necessity do not conflict. 
In this so-called solution of the antinomies the possibility of free-
dom and necessity being completely separated is proposed as a mere 
38. I.e., from postulating an infinite moral progress toward the coincidence of 
virtue and happiness (see Critique of Practical Reason, Book II, Chapter II, sec-
tion IV-Akad. V, 122-4). 
39. Critique of Pure Reason, A 440-60, B 472-88, A 532-65, B 559-93. 

85 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
thought. But it is posited categorically in another form of reflection, 
namely in the celebrated critique of speculative theology.40 This cri-
tique positively asserts the absolute opposition of freedom in the 
form of concept and necessity in the form of being, and brings about 
the complete victory of nonphilosophy over the horrible delusion 
that deranged and blinded previous philosophy. Here blinkered in-
tellect enjoys, in complete self-confidence and complacency its triumph 
over Reason which is the absolute identity of the highe~t Idea and 
absolute reality. Kant made his triumph even more brilliant and com-
fortable for himself by taking what used to be called the ontological 
proof of the existence of God in the worst form it is capable of. 
which is the form given to it by Mendelssohn41 and others. They 
turned existence into a property so that the identity of Idea and real-
ity was made to look like the adding of one concept to another. 
Altogether-especially in his refutations-Kant showed a pervasive 
ignorance of philosophical systems and a lack of any information 
about them that went beyond purely historical data. 
'I · 
' 
''·. ·> 
Thus Reason is crushed completely. Intellect and finitude are quite 
properly exultant over the decreeing of their own absolute status. 
Thereafter, finitude as the very highest abstraction of subjectivity or 
of conscious finitude, establishes itself also in its positive form, in 
which it is called practical Reason. How the emptiness, the pure for-
malism of this principle is set forth in contrast to an empirical full-
ness, and how it grows into a system, we shall show in greater detail 
in [our discussion of] Fichte at whose hands the mutual integration 
of this empty unity and its antithetic opposite receives a more thor-
ough and consistent development. 
This is, finally, the place to exhibit the most interesting point in 
the Kantian system, the point at which a region is recognized that 
is a middle between the empirical manifold and the absolute abstract 
unity. 42 But [339] once again, it is not a region accessible to cogni-
tion. Only the aspect in which it is appearance is called forth, and 
not its ground which is Reason. It is acknowledged as thought, but 
with respect to cognition all reality is denied to it. 
40. Ibid., A 567-642, B 595-670. 
41. See Moses Mendelssohn, Morgenstunden (Berlin, 1785). Lecture XVII 
(Hegel used the second edition of 1786). Kant's "triumph" is in the Critique of 
Pure Reason, A 592-602, B 620-30. 
42. Critique of Judgment, Preface, and Introduction, section III (Akad. V, 167-
70, 176-9). 

So 
Fnith and Knowledge 
It is, namely, in the reflecting iudgment4:1 that Kant finds the mid-
dle term between the concept of nature and the concept of freedom. 
On one side, there is the objective manifold determined by concepts, 
the intellect generally44 ; and, on the other side, the intellect as pure 
abstractionY Neither theoretical nor practical philosophy had lifted 
themselves above the sphere of the absolute judgment ;46 the middle 
ground is the region of the identity of what in the absolute judgment 
is subject and predicate ;47 this identity is the one and only true Rea-
son. Yet according to Kant it belongs only i:u the reflecting judgment; 
it is nothing for Reason. Throughout Kant's reflections on Reason in 
its reality, that is, in his reflection on beauty as conscious intuition4~ 
and on beauty as non-conscious intuition, that is, on organization 
[in nature] 4n one finds the Idea of Reason expressed in a more or less 
formal fashion. With respect to beauty in its conscious form (die 
ideelle For111 der Sclzonl1eit) Kant sets up the Idea of an imagination 
lawful by itself, of lawfulness without law and of free concord of 
imagination and intellect00 His explanations of this sound very em-
pirical, however. When he tells us, for example, that "an esthetic 
Idea is a representation by the imagination which gives rise to much 
thought without any particular concept being adequate to it, so that 
it cannot be reached by, and made understandable in any language,"51 
there is no sign that he has even the mildest suspicion that we are 
here in the territory of Reason. 
In resolving the antinomy of taste Kant comes upon Reason as 
"the key to the riddle"; but it is still nothing but "the undetermined 
Idea of the supersensuous in us [ ... ] without any further possibility 
of its being made comprehensible""2-as if Kant himself had not given 
43 Compare p. 77 n 22 above. 
44. Compare Prolegomena, section 21 (Akad IV, 302-4) 
45. Die reine Abstraction des V erstandes, i.e., the form of universality which 
the intellect, as practical Reason (or practical Reason as intellect) prescribes as 
moral law in the categorical imperative 
46. The synthetic judgment a priori. 
47. Thought and being, or the universal and the particular, or the infinite 
and the finite. 
48 Critique of Judgment, sections 1-22 (Akad V, 203-44) 
49. Ibid., sections 61-68 (Akad V, 359-84) 
50. Ibid, General Note to First Section of the Analytic (Akad V, 241) Kant 
actually speaks of "free lawfulness" and of "purposiveness without purpose" 
For the "concord" see also section 9 ( Aknd V, 218, 219) and section 57, note I 
(!hid' 342). 
51 ltnd., section 49 (Akad V, 314) 
52 !hid, section 57 !Akad V, 341) 

87 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
[us] a concept of it in [his doctrine of] the identity of the concepts 
of nature and freedom. 53 "An esthetic Idea," according to Kant, 
"cannot become cognitive because it is an intuition of the imagina-
tion for which no concept can ever be found adequate. An Idea Qf 
Reason can never be cognitive because it contains a concept of the 
supersensuous for which no intuition can ever be found commen-
surate.";,4 The esthetic Idea is a representation of the imagination 
for which no [conceptuaifexposition can be given; the ld.e.ct_of R_ea-
son is a concept of Reason for which no demonstration can be given 
-=-demonstration in the Kantian sense being the presentation of a 
concept in intuition. 55 As if the esthetic Idea did not have its exposi-
tion in the Idea of Reason, and the Idea of Reason did not have its 
demonstration in beauty. But instead of asking for an intuition of the 
absolute identity of the sensuous and the supersensuous, Kant [once 
more] reverts to what is the very ground of the mathematical antin-
omies :56 an intuition for the Idea of Reason [340] in which the Idea 
would be experienced as purely finite and sensuous ancf simultane-
ously and contiguously experienced as a supersensuous Beyond of 
experience. And he demands an exposition and cognition pf the 
esthetic [intuition, i.e., the beautiful] in which the esthetic would be 
exhausted by the intellect. 
Since beauty is the Idea as experienced or more correctly, as in-
tuited, the form of opposition between intuition and concept- falls 
away. Kant recognizes this vanishing of the antithesis negatively in 
the concept of a supersensuous realm in general.57 But he does not 
recognize that as beauty, it is positive, it is intuited, or to use his own 
language, it is given in experience. Nor does he see the supersensu-
ous, the intelligible substratum of nature without and within us, the 
thing in itself, as Kant defines the supersensuous, is at least super-
ficially cognized when the principle of beauty is given a [conceptual] 
53. It is doubtful whether Hegel has any precise passage in mind here. He 
may well be thinking of the Introduction to the Critique of Judgment (especially 
sections II, III, IX); but the reader should also compare section 57 Note I, sec-
tion 59, and section 76 (Aka d. V, 174-9, 195-9, 341-4, 351-4, 397-401). 
54. Section 57 Note I (Akad. V, 342). 
55. In the German text, this definition of demonstration occurs in the next 
sentence, but it appears to belong more naturally here; compare Critique of 
Judgment, section 57, Note I (Akad. V, 343) and Critique of Pure Reason, A 
734 ff., B 762 ff. 
56 Compare pp. 83-4 above 
57 Critique of Judgment, section 57 (Akad V, 341) 

88 
Faith and Knowledge 
exposition as the identity of the concepts of nature and freedom. 58 
Still less does he recognize that it is only because the perennial anti-
thesis of the supersensuous and the sensuous is made basic once for 
all that the supersensuous is taken to be neither knowable nor in= 
tuitable. The rational, fixed in this rigid opposition, becomes the 
supersensuous and is absolutely negative with respect both to intui-
tion and to rational cognition. Consequently, the esthetic is given a 
relation to the faculty of judgment, and to a subj1r.ct for whom the 
supersensuous becomes the principle of nature's purposiveness with 
respect to our cognitive faculty;59 and intuition does not present the 
supersensuous for the Idea, and for cognition, nor does its Idea pre-
sent itself for intuition. So again, the supersensuous, insofar as it is 
principle of the esthetic, is unknowable; and the beautiful turns into 
something strictly finite and subjective because it is only connected 
with the human cognitive faculty and a harmonious play of its vari-
ous powers.60 
The objective side is the nonconscious intuition of the reality of 
Reason, that is to say, organic nature. 61 In his reflection upon it in the 
"Critique of Teleological Judgment," Kant expresses the Idea of Rea-
son more definitely than in the preceding concept of a harmonious 
play of cognitive powers. He expresses it now in the Idea of an in-
tuitive intellect, for which possibility .:.nd actuality are one. 62 In an 
intuitive intellect "concepts (which merely concern the possibility of 
an object) and sensuous intuition.s (which give. us something without 
allowing it to be known as object) equally disappear."63 An intuitivet 
intellect would "not proceed from the universal to the particular and 
so to the singular (through concepts); and the concordance of the . 
particular laws in nature's products with the intellect will not be con-
tingent for it."64 It is an "archetypal (urbildlich) intellect" for which 
"the possibility of the parts, etc., as to their character and [341] 
58. Compare p. 87 n. 3 above. 
59. Critique of Judgment, section 77 (Akad. V, 408-10); compare also the 
Introduction, ibid., pp. 359-61. 
60. Ibid., section 9 (Akad. V, 218). 
61. Hegel turns now from the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment" to the "Cri-
tique of Teleological Judgment" (the second part of the Critique of Judgment). 
62. Critique of Judgment, section 76 (Akad. V, 402). Sections 76-77 of the 
Critique of Judgment exercised an enormous and continuing influence on Hegel, 
for which the present passage is the earliest clear documentation. 
63. Ibid., section 76 (Akad. V, 402). 
64. Ibid., section 77 (Akad. V, 406). 

89 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
integration is dependent on the whole."65 Kant also recognizes that 
we are necessarily driven to this Idea. The Idea of this archetypal 
intuitivet intellect is at bottom nothing else but the same Idea of the 
transcendental imagination that we considered above. 66 For it is intui-
tive activity, and yet its inner unity is no other than the unity of the 
intellect itself, the category [still] immersed in extension, and becom-
ing intellect and category only as it separates itself out of extension. 
Thus transcendental imagination is itself intuitive intellect. 
The Idea occurs [to Kant] here only as a thought. Notwithstand-
ing its admitted necessity, reality must not be predicated of it. On 
the contrary, we must once for all accept the fact that universal and 
particular are inevitably and necessarily distinct. "The intellect is for 
concepts, sensuous intuition for objects-they are two entirely het-
erogeneous parts" [of cognition]. 67 The Idea is strictly necessary and 
it is yet problematic. In respect of our cognitive faculty nothing is 
to be acknowledged save the way ,·it appears in its exercise (as Kant 
calls it) 68 in which possibility and actuality are distinguished. This its 
appearance is [for Kant] an absolute essence; it is the In-itself of 
cognition-as if it were not also an exercise of the cognitive faculty 
when it conceives and knows (denkt und erkennt) that an intellect 
for which possibility and actuality are not sundered, in which uni-
versal and particular are one and whose spontaneity is at the same 
time intuitive, is a necessary Idea. Kant has simply no ground except 
experience and empirical psychology for holding that the human cog-
nitive faculty essentially consists in the way it appears, namely in 
this process from the universal to the particular or back again from 
the particular to the universaL69 Yet he himself thinks an intuitivet 
intellect and is led to it as an absolutely necessary Idea. So it is he 
himself who establishes the opposite experience, [the experience] of 
thinking a nondiscursive intellect. He himself shows that his cogni-
tive faculty is aware not only of the appearance and of the separation 
of the possible and the actual in it, but also of Reason and the In-
itself. Kant has here before him both the Idea of a Reason in which 
possibility and actuality are absolutely identical and its appearance 
as cognitive faculty wherein they are separated. In the experience of 
65. Ibid., (Akad. V, 407). 
66. Compare pp. 69 ff. above. 
67. Critique of Judgment, section 76 (Akad. V, 401). 
68. Ibid., (Akad. V, 401, 402). 
69. Critique of Judgment, Introduction, section IV, and section 77 (Akad. V, 
179-81, 406-10). 

90 
faith and Knowledge 
his thinking he finds both thoughts. However, in choosing between 
the two his nature despised the necessity of thinking the Rational, 
of thinking an intuitive spontaneity and decided without reservation 
for appearance. 70 
He recognizes that in and for itself it may be possible that the 
mechanism of nature, the relation of causality, is at one with nature's 
teleological technique. 71 [342] This is not to say that nature is de-
. termined by an Idea opposite to it,72 but rather that what from the. 
mechanistic point of view appears as absolutely sundered, one term-. 
-as cause the other as effect in an empirical nexus of necessity, ~: 
solutely coheres within an original primordial identity.n Kant admits 
the possibility of this. He admits that this is one way of looking at 
it. Nonetheless he sticks to the viewpoint from which it is [or they 
are] absolutely sundered; and what is cognizant of it [them] is thus 
strictly contingent,74 an absolutely finite and subjective cognitive 
faculty which he calls human; and he declares that rational knowl-
edge, for which the organism, as the [physical] reality of Reason, is 
the higher principle of nature and the identity of the universal and 
particular, is transcendent. 75 So he recognizes in Spinozism, too, "an 
idealism of final causes"76-as if Spinoza had wished to divest the 
Idea of final causes of all reality; and as if, without disavowing the 
teleological coherence of the things of nature, he had given as its 
principle of explanation only the unity of the subject in which they 
all inhere, thus turning a merely ontological abstract unity (this means 
a unity of the intellect like the one that Kant calls Reason) into the 
principle-for of course "the mere idea of the unity of the sub-
70. Careful reading of sections 76 and 77 of the Critique of Judgment is re-
quired for the assessment of Hegel's critique of Kant's position with respect to 
an archetypal intellect. Notice the quite un-Kantian ease with which Hegel (a) 
proceeds from conceiving (thinking) to knowing and (b) implies that the "expe-
rience" of thinking a necessary Idea is an experience of the object of that Idea. 
Compare also Difference, p 163. 
71. About Kant's use of "technique" cf. Critique of Judgment, section 72, 
(Akad. V, 389-92) As to the possible identity of mechanistic and final causality 
see, among other places, zbid., section 78 (Akad. V, 410-5) 
72. That is, by God, a non-nature making nature purposive. 
73 Ibid , sections 70, 78 (Akad V, 382, 412) 
74 Sie may here be feminine singular referring to Identitiit or plural re-
ferring to causality and teleology. The latter view is not ruled out bv the singu-
lar verb ist, since Hegel often uses ist with a plurality of subjects 
75. Critique of Judgment, section 78 (Akad. V, 413) 
76 Ibid, sections 72, 73 (Aka d. V, 391-2, 393) 

91 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
stratum cannot even ground the Idea of a merely unintentional pur-
posiveness.'177 In understanding Spinoza's unity, Kant should have 
kept his eye on his own Idea of the unity of an intuitivet intellect 
in which concept and intuition, possibility and actuality are one,78 
not on that unity of the intellect which he calls theoretical and prac-
tical Reason. He would then have had to take Spinoza's unity, not as 
an abstract one lacking purposiveness, that is, lacking an absolute 
teleological coherence, but as the absolutely intelligible and in itself 
organic unity. In this way he would have rationally and directly cog-
nized this organic unity which is by nature purposive (Naturzweck) 
and which he conceives as the determination of the parts by the 
whole, or as identity of cause and effect.79 But a true unity such as 
this, the organic unity of an intuitivet intellect must not ever be' 
thought; it must riot be Reason that here cognizes; it must be--the 
faculty of judgment that [merely] reflects; and its principle must be 
to think as if an intellect having consciousness determined natur~. 
Kant recognizes very clearly that this is no objective affirmation, btit 
something merely subjective; yet this subjectivity and finitude of the 
maxim are to stay as absolute cognition. In itself it is not "impossible 
that the mechanism and the purposiveness of nature coincide"; but 
"for us men it is impossible. The cognizance of this coincidence would 
require an intuition other than sensuous. It would require a deter-
minate [343] cognition of{the intelligible substratum of nature:,_,through 
which it would be possible even to give a ground for the mechanism 
of appearances according to particular laws. All this transcends our 
capacity completely."80 
Kant himself recognized in the beautiful an intuition other than 
the sensuous. He characterized the substratum of nature as intelli-
gible, recognized it to be rational and identical with all Reason, and 
knew that ~the cognition in which concept and intuition are separated 
was subjective, finite cognition, a [merely] phenomenal cognition. 
Nonetheless, there the matter must rest; we must absolutely not go 
beyond finite cognition. Although the cognitive faculty is capable 
of [thinking] the Idea and the rational, it simply must not employ 
77 Ibid., section 73 (Akad. V, 394) 
78 Ibid, section 76 (Akad. V, 402-3) 
79. Ibid, section 65 (Aka d. V, 372-3). 
80. Ibid, section 80 (Akad. V, 418). Hyppolite appeals to this passage in ex-
plicating the doctrine of "observing Reason" in the Phenomenology See his 
Genese et Structure I, 233-4 (English translation, pp 242-3) and compare Hoff-
meister. pp 196-8 (Baillie, pp. 296-300) 

92 
Faith and Knowledge 
it as a cognitive standard; it must regard itself as absolute only when 
it knows the organic and itself finitely, phenomenally. The truly 
speculative aspect of Kant's philosophy can only consist in the Idea 
being thought and expressed so definitely, and the pursuit of this side 
of his philosophy is the only interesting aspect of it. This makes it 
all the harder to see the Rational being muddled up again, and not 
just that, but to see the highest Idea corrupted with full conscious-
ness, while reflection and finite cognition are exalted above it. 
From this exposition we may gather briefly what transcendental 
knowledge is in this philosophy. The deduction of the categories, set-
ting out from the organic Idea of productive imagination,81 loses 
itself in the mechanical relation of a unity of self-consciousness which 
stands in antithesis to the empirical manifold, either determining it 
or reflecting on it. 82 Thus transcendental knowledge transforms itself 
into formal knowledge [i.e., knowledge of the identity of form only]. 
The unity of self-consciousness is at the same time objective unity, 
category, formal identity. However, something that is not determined 
by this identity must supervene to it in an incomprehensible fashion; 
there must be an addition, a plus, of something empirical, something 
alien. This supervening of a B to the pure Ego-concept [which is A] 
is called e_xperience, while the supervening of A to B, when B is pos-
ited first, is called rational action, .[and the formula for both is] A: 
A + 8.83 The A in A + B is the objective unity of self-consciousness, 
81. Compare pp. 69-73 above. 
82 .These terms, which derive from the Critique of Judgment (Introduction, 
section IV: Akad. V, 179-81) are now applied by Hegel to the different rela-
tions Kant conceives theoretical Reason (as "reflecting") and practical Reason 
(as "determining") to have to what Hegel calls nature. 
83. We have here transcribed what was printed in the text of the Critical 
Journal. But it is not clear to us exactly what 'A: A + B' signifies. We could 
read it as "A becomes A + B" (experience) or "A produces A + B (r<:,t\onal 
action) or "A has as correlate A + B" (neutral). However, on p . .J){l hbove 
there occurs "A2 = (A = B)." Perhaps what is here meant is that the second 
power of A is equal to A + B at the lower level. The explanation that follows 
in the text itself would fit very neatly into the hypothesis that ' :' here is sim-
ply a mistake or a substitute for '='. An alternative possibility is that " · " 
stands for a peculiar combination of "=" and "# "_ From the viewpoint of 
the "philosophy of Identity" in which A (self-consciousness) and B (nature) 
should both be constructed as manifesting the Absolute, that is, as rational, 
Kant makes the mistake of making self-consciousness the Absolute and there-
fore of recognizing only an identity of form between nature and self-
consciousness. The content or the manifold (sensations in Kant's theoretical 
philosophy, desires, urges, etc. in his practical philosophy) remains something 

93 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
B is the empirical, the content of experience, a manifold bound to-
gether through the unity A. But B is something foreign to A, some-
thing not contained in it. And the plus itself, i.e., the bond between 
the binding activity and the manifold, is what is incomprehensible. 
This plus was rationally cognized as productive imagination. But if 
this productive imagination is merely a property of the subject, of 
man and his intellect, it abandons of itself its [place in the] middle, 
which alone makes it what it is, and becomes subjective. It does not 
matter whether we picture this formal knowledge as running along 
the thread of identity or that of causality. For if A as universal [344] 
is posited in opposition to A + B as particular, it is the cause. On 
the other hand, if reflection stresses that both [A and A+ B] contain 
one and the same A which as concept binds itself up with the par-
ticular, this causal relation appears as identity relation from the side 
where the cause is joined to the effect,84 i.e., where it is cause, al-
though on this side something else must still supervene. And saying 
that the causal bond belongs entirely to the analytic judgment is the 
same as saying that in the causal bond there is transition to an abso-
lute opposite. 
Generally speaking, then, this formal cognition takes the shape of 
its formal identity being confronted absolutely by a manifold; when 
taken to exist in itself, the formal identity is freedom, practical Rea-
son, autonomy, law, practical Idea, etc., and its absolute opposite is 
necessity, the inclination and drives, ;1eteronomy, nature, etc. The 
connection that is possible between the two [formal identity and the 
manifold] is an incomplete one within the bounds of an absolute anti-
totally alien to A. A: A+ B, then, expresses the identity between the two As: 
A= A (+ B) and at the same time the absolute non-identity between A and B: 
A# (A+) B. More specifically, in Kant's theoretical philosophy "the formal 
identity" consists in the identity of the "form" of A and the "form" of B, the 
categories of the understanding (intellect) being the same as the universal struc-
ture of nature: A =A (+ B). But the wealth of content experienced is due to 
the sensations totally alien to theoretical Reason (and caused in the subject by 
the unknowable things-in-themselves "in an incomprehensible way"): A # 
(A +) B. In Kant's practical philosophy the formal identity lies in the form of 
universality prescribed by Reason to (the maxims of) our actions in all their 
manifoldness: A= A C+ B). But B (our "nature, that is, our desires, etc.") are 
as alien to Reason as the sensations are to the categories: A # (A +) B. How-
ever, whereas in theorei:ical philosophy the causal genesis of sensations is in-
comprehensible, in practical philosophy it is the causality of Reason on our 
nature that is incomprehensible. 
84 Compare p. 75 above. 

94 
Faith and Knowledge 
thesis: the manifold gets determined by the unity [in practical phi-
losophy] just as the emptiness of identity gets plenished by the mani-
fold [in theoretical philosophy]. Whether active or passive, each 
supervenes to the other in a formal way, as something alien. This 
formal cognition only brings about impoverished identities, and al-
lows the antithesis to persist in its complete absoluteness. What it 
lacks is the middle term (Mittelglied), which is Reason; for each of 
the two extremes is to exist within the opposition as an Absolute, so 
that the middle, and the coming to nothing of both extremes and of 
finitude is an absolute Beyond. It is recognized [by Kant] that this 
antithesis necessarily presupposes a middle, and that in this middle 
the antithesis and its content must be brought to nothing. But this 
is not an actual, genuine nullification; it is only a confession that the 
finite ought to be suspended. Nor is the middle any more genuine; 
again it is only a confession that there ought to be a Reason. 85 And 
it is all posited in a faith, whose content itself is empty because the 
antithesis .~hich as absolute identity could be its content has to re-
main outside it; expressed positively, the content of this faith would 
be Reasonlessness (Vermmftlosigkeit) because it is an absolutely un-
thought, unknown and incomprehensible Beyond. 
If we remove from the practical faith of the Kantian philosophy 
some of the popular and unphilosophical garments in which it is 
decked, we shall find nothing else expressed in it but the Idea that 
Reason does have absolute reality, that in this Idea the antithesis of 
freedom and necessity is completely suspended, that infinite thought 
[345] is at the same time absolute reality-or in short we shall find 
the absolute identity of thought and being. (We are here thinking 
only of Kant's doctrine of faith in God.86 For his account of immor-
tality87 has nothing original in it to make it worthy of philosophical 
attention.) This Idea of the absolute identity of thought and being is 
the very one which the ontological proof and all true philosophy 
recognize as the sole and primary Idea as well as the only true and 
philosophical one. Kant, to be sure, recasts this speculative Idea into 
the humane form: morality and happiness hanr.onize. This harmony 
is made into a thought in its turn, and the realization of this thought 
is called the highest good in the world88-something as wretched as 
85. Critique of Judgment, section 76 (Akad V, 402-4). 
86 Cntiq11e of P>actical Reaso'1, Book II, Chapter II, section V (Akad V, 124-
32) 
87 Ibid, section IV (Akad V, 122-4). 
88. Ibid, section V (Akad V, 125) 

95 
A. Kantian Philosophy 
this morality and this happiness the highest good! But then, of 
course, Reason as active in the finite, and nature as sensed in the 
finite, cannot raise themselves to anything higher than a practical 
faith of this kind. This faith is just made to measure for the state of 
absolute immersion in the empirical; for it lets Reason89 keep the fini-
tude of thought, and action, as well as the finitude of enjoyment. If 
Reason were to arrive at intuition and knowledge that Reason and 
nature are in absolute harmony and are in themselves blissful, it 
would recognize its wretched morality which does not harmonize 
with happiness and the wretched happiness which does not harmon-
ize with morality, as the nothings that they are. But what matters 
[to Kant] is that both morality and happiness be something, and 
something high and absolute. This morality reviles nature and its 
spirit, as if the order and direction (die Einrichtung) in nature was 
not itself made rational, while on the contrary this morality in its 
misery-it was not for this, surely, that the spirit of the universe 
organized itself?-existed in itself and eternally. Moreover, this mor-
ality means indeed to justify itself and do itself honor on the ground 
that it does set the reality of Reason before itself in faith though not 
as something that possesses absolute being. Yet if the absolute reality 
of Reason were truly certain, then limited being and the finite and 
this morality could not have either certainty or truth. 
It should not be overlooked, however, that Kant remains within 
the right and proper bounds of his postulates, which Fichte does not 
respect. According to Kant himself the postulates and the faith that 
goes with them (ihr Glauben) are subjective;90 the only question is 
how to take this "subjective." Is it the identity of infinite thought 
and being, of Reason and its reality, that is subjective? Or is it only 
the postulating and the believing of them? Is it the content or the 
form of the postulates? It cannot be the content that is subjective, 
for the negative content of the postulates immediately suspends eve-
rything subjective. Hence it is the form, or in other words it is 
something subjective and contingent that the Idea is only a subjective 
thing. There should in principle (an sich) be no postulating, no ought 
and no [mere] believing, and the postulating of the absolute reality 
of the highest Idea is something non-rational. Fichte did not acknowl-
89. The text has ihr which may refer to die Vernunft (as we think) or to die 
Natur or finally to die Empirie (which Mery prefers). 
90. Critique of Practical Reason, Book II, Chapter II, section VIII (Akad. V, 
145-6). 

96 
Faith and Knowledge 
edge this subjectivity of postulating and believing and ought. To him, 
this is the In-itself. Kant, on the contrary, does acknowledge that the 
postulating and the ought and [346] the believing are only a sub-
jective and finite thing. Nevertheless, the matter must simply rest 
there, just as with morality. Letting it rest there meets with universal 
approval, and what is approved is just exactly the worst thing about 
it, namely the form of postulating. 
This, then, is the character of the Kantian philosophy. The com-
mon ground which it shares with the philosophies of reflection that 
we are talking about is that knowledge is formal knowledge; Rea-
son as a pure negativity is an absolute Beyond; as a Beyond and as 
negativity it is conditioned by this-worldliness (Diesseits) and by pos-
itivity; infinity and finitude, each with its opposite, are all equally 
absolute. What is peculiar to the Kantian philosophy is the form in 
which it presents itself, its richly instructive and well-organized 
range; also its truth within the bounds that it sets, however, not only 
for itself, but for Reason in general. Then there is that interesting 
aspect of it in which it happens on truly speculative Ideas, though 
as if they were incidental ideas and mere thoughts without reality. 
Not counting all this, the uniqueness of the Kantian philosophy is 
that it establishes its absolute subjectivity in objective form, that is, as 
concept and law-and it is only because of its purity that subjec-
tivity is capable of passing into its opposite, objectivity. -Of the 
two parts of reflection, the finite and the infinite, therefore, it raises 
th~- infinite above the finite, thus vindicating at least the formalt 
aspect of Reason. The highest Idea of the Kantian philosophy is the 
complete emptiness of subjectivity, or the purity of the infinite con-
cept, which is also posited as what is objective in the sphere of the 
intellect, though there it has the dimensions of the categories; where-
as on the practical side the infinite concept is posited as objective 
law. On one side there is infinity infected with finitude, on the 
other side, there is pure infinity, and in the middle there is posited 
the identity of the finite and the infinite,91 though once more only in 
the form of the infinite, that is, as concept. The authentic Idea re-
mains an absolutely subjective maxim, partly for reflecting judgment, 
and partly for faith; but it does not exist for the middle of cognition 
and of Reason. 92 
91. In the doctrines of the Critique of Judgment concerning beauty and na-
tural teleology. 
92. The "authentic Idea" has its real "middle" when Reason comes into its 
own as intellectual intuition. In Kant, however, this "middle of Reason" takes 
the form not of intellectual intuition, but of reflective intellect and faith. 

B. Jacobian Philosophy 
Jacobi's philosophy shares with Kant's the common ground of abso-
T~te finitude, both in its ideal form, as formal knowledge, and in its 
real form as an absolute empiricism. They also agree about the inte-
gration of these two absolute finitudes by way of a faith that posits 
an absolute Beyond. Within this common [347] sphere, however, the 
philosophy of Jacobi forms the opposite pole to that of Kant. In 
Kant's philosophy finitude and subjectivity have an objective form, 
the form of the concept. J~cobi's philosophy, on the contrary, makes 
subjectivity entirely subjective, it turns it into individuality. This sub-
jective core of the subjective thus regains an inner life so that it 
seems to be capable of the beauty of feeling (Empfindung). 
We begin with the subjectivity of knowledge. Jacobi immediately 
recognizes and consciously abstracts the formal side of knowledge, 
and expounds it in its purity. He asserts positively that knowledge 
exists only in this form and he denies the objectivity of Reason in 
knowledge. 1 It is this formal knowledge therefore that he accepts as 
valid in his polemics, and he combats the science of Reason by means 
of it. 
All that Jacobi knows of throughout is this formal knowledge, an 
~dentity of the intellect whose content is supplied by experience, a 
thinking to which reality in general supervenes in some inconceivable 
way. This is one of the few points, indeed the only point, about 
which Jacobi's philosophy is objective and pertains to science; and it 
is a point which is presented in clear concepts. Thus Jacobi says 
(David Hume, Preface, p. V): "My philosophy [ ... ] limits Reason, 
considered by itself, to the mere faculty of perceiving relations dis-
tinctly, that is, to forming the principle of contradiction2 and judging 
according to it. So, of course, I [Jacobi] have to admit that only the 
affirmation of identical propositions is apodictic and accompanied 
1. I.e., he denies the possibility of speculative philosophy. 
2. Jacobi wrote: "the principle of identity." This is the one place where Hegel's 
citation is not exact. It is probably a slip of the pen, since Hegel goes on to 
call the principle of sufficient reason "the necessary counterpart of the principle 
of identity"; and he expounds it as a "principle of contradiction" in Jacobi's 
philosophy (p. 99 below). 

98 
Faith and Knowledge 
with absolute certainty."3 Similarly (Letters on Spinoza, p. 215 seq.): 
Conviction upon rational grounds4 is a second-hand certainty (first-
hand certainty is faith, of which more later). Rational grounds are 
but marks of similarity with something of which we are certain 
(namely through faith). The conviction produced by reason emerges 
"from comparison and can never be quite certain and perfect."5 One 
of the five theses that summarize his assertions (ibidem. p. 225) is: 
"We can demonstrate only similarities"-for demonstration is ad-
vance by way of identical propositions-" ... and every proof pre-
supposes something already proved, of which the principle is nothing 
but revelation."6 Cf. p. 421: "The business of Reason in general is a 
progressive tying together (Verkniipfung) and its speculative busi-
ness is a tying together according to known (erkannte) laws of ne-
cessity .... The essential indeterminateness of human language and 
notation and the changeable aspect of sensuous shapes permits almost 
all these propositions to acquire a~ external appearance (Ansehen) 
of saying something more than the mere quidquid est, illud est, more 
than a mere fact which was perceived, observed, compared, recog-
nized and linked with other concepts."7 Cf. also p. 283 and David 
Hume, p. 94.8 
[348) The necessary counterpart to the principle of identity is the 
principal of sufficient reason (Satz des Grundes), whether-following 
Jacobi's distinctions in the Letters on Spinoza, p. 4159-we mean by 
this the general principle of sufficient reason or the principle of cause 
and effect or a union of both; and considering its content, whether 
one proceeds from concepts to concepts or from the concept to its 
reality or from some objective realities to others. 
The earlier philosophical culture has deposited the testimony of its 
rational endeavours in the formulation of the principle of sufficient 
reason. The principle has swayed between Reason and reflection, and 
passed over into the latter. All this shows up very characteristically 
in the distinction that Jacobi draws between its function as logical 
principle and its function as causal relation. He uses this distinction 
both as a way to understand philosophy and as a way to combat it. 
3. Jacobi did not reprint this "Preface" in his Collected Works, Vol. II. 
4. Hegel substitutes Grunde for Jacobi's Beweise. 
5. Jacobi, Werke IV, 1, 210. 
6. Werke IV, 1, 223 (Hegel added the "nothing but"). 
7. Ibid., IV, 2, 150-151. 
8. The corresponding references for the Werke are: IV, 1, 231 and II, 193. 
9. Ibid, IV, 2, 144-47. 

99 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
We want now to follow him upon his road. Jacobi recognizes in the 
principle of sufficient reason its significance as principle of rational 
cognition: to tum parte prius esse necesse est [the whole is necessarily 
prior to the part]. (David Hume, p. 94).10 In other words, the single 
part only gets determined in the whole. It has its reality only in the 
absolute identity which, insofar as discernibles are posited in it, is 
absolute totality. In one connection, so Jacobi says, the proposition 
tatum parte prius esse necesse est is "nothing but idem est idem"11 
while in another it is not. It is essential [according to Jacobi] that 
tbese two c;:ontexts be distinguished and kept absolutely apart; and 
this is precisely the point where this basic dogmatism12 takes its be-
ginning. For Jacobi conceives the principle of sufficient reason as pure 
principle of contradiction and calls it in this sense logical-an ab-
stract unity to which it is, of course, necessary that the difference 
should supervene as an empirical content. From this logical sense of 
the principle he distinguishes a causal relation in which the hetero-
geneous element, the empirical datum that is added to the identity of 
.the concept, is reflected upon. He asserts that the causal relation is 
.__in respect of this peculiarity an empirical concept. The way in which 
he makes this out in David Hume (p. 99 seq.)13 and which he appeals 
to in the Letters on Spinoza (p. 415)14 is a remarkable piece of empiri-
cism a Ia Locke and Hume with an equally glaring piece of German 
dogmatism of the analysing kind kneaded into it. This last is even 
worse than the Mendelssohn variety,-~nd the world can never be 
grateful enough to the Gods-next to Kant-for its salvation from 
that. Specifically what.Jacobi misses in the principle of sufficient rea-
son and in the totality, is the parts, and he has to fetch them from 
somewhere outside the whole. Or, as he conceives it, all parts are 
already actually united in a whole and present in it; but such an in-
tuitive cognition of the parts within and through the whole is merely 
something subjective and incomplete, because the objective becoming 
and the succession are still lacking, and for their sake [349] the 
causal relation must still supervene to the totality. 15 Just listen to the 
10. Ibid., II, 193. 
11. Ibid., II, 193. 
12. Grund-Dogmatismus-i.e., dogmatism about the "principle of sufficient 
reason." 
13. Ibid., II, 199 ff. 
14. Ibid., IV, 2, 144 ff. 
15. Hegel is here summarizing from the same context referred to above (ibid., 
Werke II, 193-200). 

100 
Faith and Knowledge 
following series of propositions which give the deduction of what 
Jacobi calls the absolute necessity of the concept of cause and effect 
and of succession (David Hume, pp. 111 ff.): 
"For our human consciousness and I may add immediately, for the 
consciousness of every finite being, an actual thing that is sensed is 
necessary, besides the thing that senses. [ ... ] 
"Where two created beings, which are external to each other, stand 
in such a relation that one acts upon the other, there is an extended 
being. [ ... ] 
"We feel the manifold of our being knitted together in a pure unity 
we call our Ego. The indivisible (das Unzertrennliche) in a being de-
fines its individuality; it makes it an actual whole. [ ... ] In corporeal 
extension in general we perceive something that is somewhat analo-
gous to individuality; for the extended being as such is always indi-
visible, setting before us everywhere the same unity that knits a 
plurality together indivisibly within itself.16 
"If [organicP7 individuals [ ... ] also have the capacity to act ex-
ternally, they must, in order for the effect to take place, mediately 
or immediately touch other beings. [ ... ] 
"The immediate consequence of impenetrability to the touch we call 
resistance. So, where there is touch, there is impenetrability on both 
sides, and hence also resistance, action and reaction; both are the 
source18 of the successive and of time, which is the idea of the suc-
cessive. " 19 
[In sum,] this deduction of the concepts of extension, of cause and 
effect, and of succession, in other words, the deduction of the abso-
luteness of finitude results from the presupposition that "there exist 
single beings that are aware of themselves and in community with 
one another."20 At the same time the deduction shows that these 
concepts "must be common to all self-aware finite beings, and that 
these concepts have their objective correlate independent of ~he con-
16. In a footnote (ibid., II, 212} Jacobi connects this analogy between the 
wholeness of individuals and that of "the extended being" with Link's now for-
gotten book on the Philosophy of Nature; but in another context he connects it 
with the "Metaphysical Exposition of Space" in Kant's Critique of Pure Rea-
son (A 25; B 39}. 
17. That Jacobi's Individua are primarily organisms is made clear in the pre-
ceding omission. 
18. Jacobi wrote "Resistance in space, action and reaction, is the source. . . " 
19. Ibid., II, 208-213 (Hegel's quotation marks). 
20. Ibid., II, 213. 

101 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
cept in the things in themselves and consequently that they have a 
true objective significance."21 
"These concepts are concepts which must be given completely in 
any experience, and they are so basic that without their object no 
concept would have an object, and without them no cognition would 
be possible at all. Such concepts are called strictly universal or neces-
sary concepts, and the judgments and conclusions originating from 
them are called a priori cognitions." -
22 
We note that this deduction .was supposed to concern the causal 
relation in its entire scope and to deliver something more compelling 
than the Kantian deduction. This deduction of Jacobi's, however, is 
so little deserving of the name that it cannot even be called an ordi-
nary analysis of its presupposition, which is the concept of a com-
munity of single things. It is surely something [350] which all 
speculation must recoil at, to see the absoluteness of a human con-
sciousness, of a thing that senses, a thing that is sensed, and of their 
community, presupposed straight off, in the spirit of the most vulgar 
empiricism. By way of superfluous mediating concepts they [the sin-
gles in their community] are analytically messed up into action and 
reaction, and this-here even the analyzing runs olJ,t-is the source 
of the successive. One cannot see what all the elaborate artifice is 
supposed to be good for at all; for all philosophy is already driven 
from the field by the unanalyzed and absolute assumption of a thing 
that senses and a thing sensed. There is a noteworthy difference 
between Jacobi's presupposition and result, and the result of the 
Kantian deduction of the categories. According to Kant, all these con-
cepts of cause and effect, succession, etc., are strictly limited to ap-
pearance; .!he things in which these forms are objective as well as 
any cognition of them are simply nothing at all in themselves. The 
'ln.,Jtself and Reason are wholly raised above these forms of finitude 
and kept clear of them. This is the very result which gives Kant the 
immortal merit of having really made the beginning of a philosophy. 
Yet it is precisely in this nothingness of finitude that Jacobi sees an 
absolute in-itself. With this dream as his weapon he fights Spinoza 
wide awake. 
We previously located the inadequacy of Kant's annihilation of 
the intellect in his treating the intellect and its forms as something 
which, though subjective, is still positive and absolute even in that 
21. Ibid., II, 114. 
22. Ibid., II, 214 (Hegel's quotation marks). 

102 
Faith and Knowledge 
shape. Jacobi, after having so felicitously squeezed action and re-
action, succession, time, etc. out of the community of finite things, 
opines, on the contrary, that ''to become independent of experience, 
these basic concepts and judgments do not need to be turned into 
prejudices of the intellect, from which we have to be cured by learn-
ing to recognize that they are not connected with anything in itself 
and consequently have no true objective significance. For the basic 
concepts and judgments lose neither their universality nor their ne-
cessity if they are taken from what must be common and basic to all 
experiences. Rather they gain a far higher degree of unconditioned 
universality"-does the unconditioned have degrees?-"if they can 
be derived [not merely as valid for man and his peculiar sensibility, 
but] 23 from the essence and community of singular things in general. 
[ ... ] -[According to Kant] our senses teach us nothing of the 
qualities of things, nothing of their mutual relations and connections, 
they do not even teach us that, in a transcendental sense, things are 
actually there.24 This would be a sensibility that represented nothing 
at all of the things themselves, [351] a sensibility that is decidedly 
empty of objective reference. Our intellect is supposed to connect 
with this sensibility in order to give radically subjective forms to 
radically subjective intuitions according to radically subjective rules. 
[ ... ] In that case I am everything and, properly speaking, nothing 
exists outside me. I, and everything of mine, am in the end also 
nothing but a mere delusion of something or other, the form of a 
form, [ ... ] a ghost. [ ... ] A system of this sort completely uproots 
all claims to the cognition of truth and leaves for the most important 
matters only a faith more blind and utterly devoid of cognition than 
anyone ever imputed to man before."25 
We should do well to make a distinction here. Kant's view that 
faith is non-cognitive is grounded only in his misjudgment of the ra-
tional as such, and not in his great theory that the intellect cognizes 
nothing in itself. What Jacobi enriches the human cognition with, on 
the other hand, is such discoveries as the absoluteness of finite things 
a_nd their community, the absoluteness of time and succession and 
the causal nexus, each of which (Hume, p. 119) "has an objective 
23. The words here bracketed were inserted by Hegel. They are not in Jacobi's 
text. 
24. Here Jacobi wrote "do not even teach us that things are actually there 
outside of us." 
25. Ibid, II, 214-7 (Hegel's quotation marks). 

103 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
correlate independent of the concept in~the~ tbjnzs-:in-themselves."26 
J ~cobi fin as it shocking and horrifying that these absolutes of objec-
tive finitude should be negated and recognized as nothing in them-
selves, and that in consequence subjective finitude, the Ego that is 
sensuous and thinks reflectively, my whole world, should likewise be 
only an empty illusion of something-in-itself. He finds it shocking 
and horrifying that my finite world should perish in the face of Rea-
son, no less than the world of finite objects. His abhorrence of the 
nullification of the finite is as fixed as his corresponding absolute cer-
tainty of the finite; and this abhorrence will everywhere show itself 
to be the basic character of Jacobi's philosophy. If what we have 
quoted above could be called a deduction at all, it might at first be 
considered an improvement upon Kant's because Jacobi conceives of 
succession and causality as relation in general, that is, as a merely 
relative connection, restricted to finite things, and in that the deduc-
tion proceeds not merely from a conscious intellect, as Kant does, 
but also from a non-conscious intellect.27 In Jacobi, however, relation 
regarded as subjective, that is, the conscious intellect, stand:i quite 
independently and dualistically alongside relation regarded as objec-
tive, that is, as intellect and relation of things; whereas in Kant rela-
tion is one and one only-without any distinction between a subjec-
tive intellect and a separate objective intellect. For though we must 
conceive the intellect as something subjective in Kant, still there is 
no external and alien relation of things; so that there is only one 
intellect, and in this Kant expresses at least the formal aspect of phi-
losophy. But even if we pass over all that, Kant's most important re-
sult [as against Jacobi] will always remain this: these relations of the 
finite (whether they are relations within the sphere of the subject 
alone, or relations of things as well) are nothing in themselves, and 
.cognition in accordance with them is only [352] a cognition of ap-
pearances, (even though it becomes absolute because it is not to be 
transcended). The apriority of Jacobi's relations, on the contrary, 
consists in their belonging also to the things-in-themselves, which is 
to say that the finite things, both the thing that senses and, apart 
from it, the actual thing that is sensed, are things-in:-Jhemselves. Re-
lations of th~se things, relations such as succession, causal nexus, 
resistance, etc. are [in Jacobi] true rational relations, that is, Ideas. 
As a result the apparent improvement, according to which the rela-
26. Ibid., II, 214 
27. Compare Jacobi's account of "the extended being" on p. 100 above. 

104 
Faith and Knowledge 
tions are not merely subjective, belonging to the conscious intellect, 
but also something objective and non-conscious, is really the estab-
lishment of an absolute dogmatism, the elevation of the finite to an 
In-itself. 
[As we have seen] the important distinction of the principle of 
sufficient reason from the principle of causality resulted, for Jacobi, 
in a founding of the absoluteness of the finite. 28 [We shall see now 
how] he applies this result to Spinoza's system in two ways. He ar-
gues, on the one hand, that Spinoza lacks the concept of succession; 
and, on the other, that in the last analysis Spinoza does have it, but 
in the absurd form of an eternal time. 
·' ' 
As to the first point, the lack [of the concept] of time, Jacobi un-
derstands Spinoza's philosophy as meaning to achieve a "natural 
explanation of the existence of finite and successive things."29 But 
because, by the standard of the concept of Reason, Spinoza regarded 
things as present at once-"for in the concept of Reason there is no 
before and after, everything is necessary and simultaneous"30-and 
because he cognized the universe sub specie J!terni, he mistook the 
principle of sufficient reason for a merely logical principle and thus 
established "not an objective and actual succession, but only a sub-
jective and ideational one. But in fact there could not even be an ide-
ational succession if it were not grounded on an actual succession in 
the subject that produces it in thought.'131 In the logical principle of 
sufficient reason succession itself is what is inconceivable.32 
It is not worth talking about a psychological reminder of this kind 
-to the effect that a subjective and ideational succession presupposes 
an actual succession in the subject. It either says nothing or it says 
something false. The reason for this is that ideational succession is 
connected with Spinoza's mathematical similes (which we shall dis-
cuss later) ;33 and that in its truth it can only be something real be-
cause it is the absolute simultaneity of the totality and not a succession 
28. Compare p. 98 ff. above, and Jacobi, Werke II, pp. 197-217. 
29. Ibid., IV, 2, 135. Jacobi's' complaint about "eternal time" is ibid., p. 136. 
30. Ibid., IV, 2, 140. 
31. Ibid., IV, 2, 136; compare II, 198. We take the main strand of the meaning 
of Jacobi's term idealisch ("ideational") to be "pertaining to mere ideas." Thus 
"succession" as idealisch is the mere idea of succession; but this mere idea of 
succession would have to be grounded on an actual succession of ideas. Com-
pare, however, Mery, p. 306. 
32. Ibid., II, 199. 
33. See p. 110 ff. below. 

105 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
at all. Jacobi, however, <~.scribes this absolute simultaneity of the 
totality, and the cognition of things as they are, not temporally but 
sub specie <Eterni, to the principle of sufficient reason and to neglect 
of the principle of causality, the latter so understood that time is 
posited in it. Causality and time should not be neglected, the absolute 
ground for this being tha~ according to Jacobi time is in itself and 
absolute. He calls the principle of sufficient reason, that is, the totali-
ty, logical, because cause and effect are simultaneous in it, and no 
time is posited. [353] Of course, if we do not forget the principle of 
causality as distinct from the principle of sufficient reason, we are im-
movably enthroned in time,34 which is Jacobi's absolute demand. Ja-
cobi insistently admonishes us not to forget his distinctions, because 
from the rational concept in which there is no before and no after, and 
everything is necessary and simultaneous, a misfortune arises: finitude 
and time and succession perish in the highest Idea, the Idea of the 
eternal. These warnings are very much like the famous signals of that 
worthy sentry of the Town Walls, who shouted to the approaching 
enemy who was ready to fire, not to shoot because this might cause 
misfortunes-as if such misfortune was not what was intended in 
the first place. 
In the concept of Reason everything is simultaneous. From this, 
Jacobi drew the simple and correct conclusion that "we are forced to 
accept that in nature everything is simultaneous and what we call 
succession is mere appearance." Jacobi calls this proposition para-
doxical and he is amazed that Mendelssohn was the first who thought 
its admission unobjectionable,35-Mendelssohn says very rightly that 
"succession and duration are necessary determinations of a thinking 
that is restricted"36-while he, Jacobi, had to defend the thesis [that 
succession is an appearance] against the other philosophers ( !) to 
whom he submitted it.37 But he did not propound the proposition 
seriously [he says], but only as a necessary consequence of the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason. Anyway, it is quite incomprehensible how 
Jacobi can pride himself on having discovered this proposition; for 
it surely belongs to Spinoza. Can it possibly be the case that Jacobi, 
the commentator on Spinoza, understood Spinoza to have placed 
time in God, when according to Spinoza it belongs only to natura 
34. Jacobi, Werke IV, 2, 146-7. 
35. Ibid., II, 195-7. 
36. Cited by Jacobi, ibid., IV, 1, 109. 
37. Jacobi says that he has defended it "for fifteen years or longer against 
many philosophers" (ibid., II, 197). 

106 
Faith and Knowledge 
naturata? We shall in fact see in a moment that after having con-
cluded that Spinoza must really affirm time to be nothing but appear-
ance, Jacobi still manages to find it in Spinoza, and in the absurd 
form of an eternal time at that. Spinoza does talk about the sub-
ordinate form of succession incidentally in a few places-for example, 
in the second book of the Ethics and in his letters,38 where he marks 
off the infinite series of finite things under this form of abstraction. 
But the word he uses for it is 'imaginari,' not 'think,' and he calls it 
quite definitely an auxilium imagination is; now surely Jacobi is famil-
iar enough with Spinoza's distinction between intellectus and imagi-
natio? The doctrine of the absolute simul, the doctrine that God is 
not the transient cause, but the eternal cause of things, and that the 
things outside God are nothing in themselves, and hence things in 
time, and time itself are nothing-every line of Spinoza's system 
makes the proposition that time and succession are mere appearance 
so utterly trivial that not the slightest trace of novelty and paradox 
is to be seen in it. Jacobi (Letters [354] on Spinoza, p. 409) cites 
Spinoza's conviction that "everything must be considered solely se-
cundum modum quo a rebus <Eternis fluit" [according to the mode in 
which it flows from eternal things] and that "time, measure and 
number must be considered as kinds of idea abstracted from this 
mode, and hence, as entities of the imagination."39 So how could the 
proposition that succession is mere appearance not belong to Spinoza? 
Jacobi finds it so paradoxical that he not only does not entertain it 
in earnest, he simply turns this most finite form of finitude into some-
thing absolute. And he bases his whole refutation of Spinoza and 
his explanation of Spinoza's delusion about philosophy on5pinoza's 
supposed failure to formulate the principle of sufficient reason in such 
a way that it includes time. It is just on account of this finitude that 
Jacobi himself recognizes that the enterprise of Reason is impossible 
and contingent. 
Jacobi actually does find Spinoza guilty of the inconsistency of 
positing time as something in-itself. He finds that "the infinite series 
of single things where one after ( !) the other becomes real, is basi-
cally (where is this basis, this ground?) an eternal time, an infinite 
finitude." This assertion-to which there is no rhyme or reason-
38. Hegel appears to have the following two passages in mind throughout his 
discussion: Ethics, Part II, Prop. 44; Epistle XII (Gebhardt) (= Epistle XXIX in 
the traditional ordering of the Paulus edition which Hegel used). 
39. Jacobi, Werke IV, 2, 141. 

107 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
Jacobi believes impossible to push aside with any mathematical fig-
ure: here, Spinoza allowed himself to be "deceived by his imagina-
tion."40 
We first want to elucidate Spinoza's infinite series of finite things, 
and then the eternal time which Jacobi makes of it, and the [sup-
posed] inadmissibility of mathematical similes. 
Spinoza exptains the infinitum actu [actual infinite] in the 29th letter 
(which Jacobi takes into consideration too). Spinoza says of the 
infinitum actu that "it is denied by those who, because they are ig-
norant of the true nature of things, confuse the things of imagination, 
that is, number, measure and time, with the things themselves."41 It 
is precisely the actual infinite that Jacobi himself confuses with the 
infinite of imagination. Spinoza defines the infinite (Ethics, Part I, 
Prop. VIII, Sch. I) as "the absolute affirmation of the existence of 
any nature"; and contrariwise he defines the finite as partial nega-
tion. Thus this simple definition makes the infinite into the absolute 
and true concept, equal to itself and indivisible, which of its essence 
includes the particular or finite in itself at the same time, and is 
unique and indivisible. Spinoza calls this infinite, in which nothing 
is negated and determined, the infinity of the intellect. It is the infini-
ty of"5ub~nd the cognition of it is intellectual irili11tion. In 
this intuitive- cognition, the particular and finite are not excluded 
[from the infinite] as opposites, as [they arej 'from the empty concept 
and from the infinity of abstraction. This infinite is the Idea itself. 
The infinite of imagination, on the other hand, originates in an en-
tirely different way. Spinoza's way of putting it is this: "we can at 
will determine and divide the existence and duration of the modes if 
we consider, not the order of ·nature itself, but the particular essence 
[of the modes] insofar as [355] t'heir concept is not the concept of the 
substance itsel£."42 "Measure and time originate for us when we con-
ceive quantity in abstraction from substance, and duration in ab-
straction from the way it flows from the eternal things."43 In other 
words, it is only imagination, as Spinoza calls it, or, in general, only 
reflection that posits and partially negates the finite;(and this par-
tially negated thing~ which, when posited for itself and opposed to 
40. Ibid., IV, 2, 135-6. 
41. Spinoza, Opera (ed. Paulus) I, 530 (= Epistle XII in Opera, ed. Gebhardt, 
IV, 58-9). 
42. Opera (ed. Paulus) I, 528-9; or (ed. Gebhardt) IV, 55-6. 
43. Ibid. 

108 
Faith and Knowledge 
what is in itself not negated, to what is strictly affirmative, turns this 
infinite itself into something partially negated: The infinite, being thus 
brought into antithesis with the finite becomes an abstraction, the 
pure Reason, or the infinite of Kant. The eternal is to be posited as 
the absolute identity of both; and in the eternal the infinite on one 
side, the finite on the other, are once more nullified as to the anti-
thesis between them.44 It is quite another matter when the finite and 
infinite in their abstractness are to remain what they are and each is 
to be taken up into the form of an opposite. Here, the one is deter-
mined as not being what the other is, and each is posited and not 
posited, as being this determinate being and as something else. Any-
thing posited in this fashion runs to empirical infinity. Duration, 
simply as it is posited by imagination, is a time moment, a finite; 
fixed as such, it is something partially negated, something that is in 
and for itself determined as being also another moment; and this 
other moment which likewise receives its actual being through the 
imagination, is yet another moment. This negation, remaining what 
it is, and made positive through imagination, results in the empirical 
infinite, that is, in an absolute, unresolved contradiction. 
This empirical infinity is posited only insofar as single things are 
posited (Ethics, Part I, Proposition XXVIII). But, as against Jacobi 
who posits them in the deduction above as absolut~, in the form of 
a thtng that senses and a thing that is sensed, Spinoza takes single 
things to be strictly nothing in themselves. Jacobi makes Spinoza re-
sponsible for this empirical infinite with no more ado, although no 
philosopher was ever farther removed from assuming anything of the 
sort than Spinoza was; for since he regards finite things as nothing 
in themselves, this empirical infinite and time disappear at once. Ac-
cording to Jacobi, Spinoza "asserts that it is merely due to our 
imagination that we represent an infinite series of single things that 
follow one another, and actually, objectively arise from one another 
as an eternal time."45 But how could Spinoza ever have allowed such 
a series of single things that follow one another, and actually, objec-
tively arise from one another to count as something self-existent or 
seen as it truly is? The mistake is already there in this series of single 
and successive things, which Jacobi regards as an absolute, and it is 
Jacobi who introduces the single thing and time into Spinoza's in-
finity. An Idea, considered from its negative side, vis-a-vis [356] 
44. Nach ihrem Gegensatz: Mery translates, "apres leur opposition." 
45. Jacobi, Werke IV, 2, 135-6. 

109 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
imagination or reflection, is an Idea because imagination or reflection 
can transform it into an absurdity. This transformation is of the sim-
plest; [for] imagination, or reflection, is only concerned with single 
things or with abstractions and the finite-they have absolute valid-
ity for it. But in the Idea this singularity and finitude is brought to 
nought, because the opposite of reflection or of imagination, the men-
tal or the empirical opposite46 is thought as one [with the Idea]. Re-
flection can comprehend this much: that things which it posits as 
particulars are posited as identical. What it cannot comprehend is 
that in the identity they are nullified; for since it is only reflection 
that is active, its products are absolute. So, to its delight, it detects 
an absurdity: it posits both the identity of what exists for it, only 
in separation, and the absolute standing of those same separate enti-
ties in this identity. This is Jacobi's case. He posits the abstract entity 
"time" and the abstract entity "single thing," which are products of 
imagination or reflection, as existing in themselves; and then he finds 
that, if the absolute simul of the eternal substance is posited, the 
single thing and time, which only are in virtue of having been re-
moved from.ity are equally posited along with it. He fails to reflect on 
the fact that ~hen the single thing and time are restored to the eternal 
substance from which they were taken, they cease to be what they 
only are if torn away from it. So he retains time and singularity and 
[finite] actuality within infinity and eternity itself. 
The fashionable urge for explanation is not satisfied with time 
being nothing in itself and being lost in eternity; and Jacobi imputes 
to Spinoza the intention of furnishing in his philosophy "a natural 
explanation of the existence of finite and successive things."47 What 
should properly be called an explanation of time, however, emerges 
from the above: time is an abstraction made in an eternal Idea. So 
Jacobi could have made the abstraction of time directly in the totality, 
that is, in the principle of sufficient reason, and could thus have com-
prehended it through this principle. But the finding of the abstraction 
as such and in this form in the totality is immediately self-suspending. 
46. Das ideell oder empirisch Entgegengesetzte can be translated in a dozen 
different ways according to (1) how one understands ideell, (2) whether one 
takes the adverbial use of ideell and empirisch seriously or not, and (3) what 
function one asigns to oder. Perhaps the phrase stands for "whether the oppo-
sites are conceived as being mere ideas in the mind or as objects of experience" 
(Mery treats the oder as und, and gets "les opposes dus a !'imagination et a Ia 
nHiexion, les opposes idee! et empirique, sont penses comme ne faisant qu'un"). 
47. Ibid., IV, 2, 135. 

110 
Faith and Knowledge 
We obtain the abstraction of time if we do not conceive thinking 
as attribute of absolute substance (for as attribute it expresses, the 
substance itself) but isolate it from the attributes, and abstract it 
from the substance, i.e., if we fixate thinking as empty thinking, as 
subjective infinity, and place this abstraction in relative connection 
with the particularity (Einzelheit) of being. Through this abstraction, 
eternity will then truly be the basis of the cognition of time and, if 
you like, of the explanation of time, whereas its deduction from a 
community of single things will give a more natural explanation, be-
cause the single things, which are presupposed, are already some-
thing quite natural. As is obvious throughout, what Jacobi means by 
the naturalism (Natiirlichkeit) that philosophy wants to achieve in 
its mode of explanation [357] is nothing but formal knowledge, re-
flective thinking and cognition according to imagination. The passages 
that we have cited about Jacobi's concept of knowledge are relevant 
at this point.48 No philosophical comprehension is possible on the 
pattern of this kind of naturalism; and not many lines of it will be 
found in Spinoza. On the contrary, well-nigh everything is [by this 
criterion] supernatural in Spinoza, since Jacobi means by natural ex-
planation cognition according to imagination. Thus Jacobi's assertion 
that there is no natural explanation of the world49 could find its 
strongest confirmation in Spinoza who not only affirmed it but worked 
it out. But as a result all so-called naturalism vanishes entirely, and 
Jacobi's supernaturalism goes with it, too; for it is supernaturalism 
only insofar as something natural stands opposed to it. The point 
is not that, as Jacobi says (Letters on Spinoza, p. 419) 50 Reason "seeks 
to transform the extra-natural or supernatural into something nat-
ural"; nor is it that Reason "tries to transform the natural into a 
supernatural." The point is that this naturalism, that is, mechanism, 
the causal nexus and time, like the knowledge that proceeds by way 
of pure identity and by analyzing facts, just are not there at all for 
Reason. 
Finally, as to Spinoza's mathematical similes for an actual infinite: 
Spinoza set them up against the deception of imagination; but, ac-
cording to Jacobi, he must have been deceived here by his imagina-
tion. Spinoza, however, is so certain of his case that he says: "the 
mathematicians might well be the judges of how miserably those 
48. See pp. 98-9 and 101-4 above. 
49. Jacobi, Werke IV, 2, 147. 
so. Ibid, IV, 2, 148-9. 

111 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
have reasoned" who declare the actual infinite to be absurd; "for the 
mathematicians have never allowed themselves to be delayed by 
arguments of this sort in [the case of] things which they cognized 
clearly and distinctly." Spinoza's example is the space enclosed by 
two circles that do not have a common centre. This is also the figure 
which he took as his own authentic symbol and he had it put at the 
front of his Principles of the Cartesian Philosophy, because by means 
of it he had dragged the empirical infinite back from imagination's 
endless pushing on and on and conjured it into facing him. "The 
mathematicians conclude that the inequalities possible in this space 
are infinite, and they conclude this, because it is the nature of the 
thing that surpasses any numerical determination" -and not because 
of the infinite multitude of the parts, for the area is determinate and 
bounded and I can posit bigger and smaller spaces, that is, bigger and 
smaller infinities. 51 There is in this bounded space an actual infinite, 
51. The full context of Hegel's citation and reference is: "Further, as it is evi-
dent from what has been said, that neither number, nor measure, nor time, 
since they are only aids of the imagination, c;;_n -be infinite (for otherwise num-
ber would not be number, nor measure measure, nor time time); hence it can 
clearly be seen why many who confused these three abstractions with tealities, 
because they were ignorant of the true nature of things, have denied the actu-
ality of the infinite. Let the mathematicians judge how wretchedly they have 
reasoned, for they have never allowed themselves to be delayed by arguments 
of this sort in [the case of] things which they clearly and distinctly perceived. 
For apart from the fact that they have discovered many things which cannot be 
expressed (explicari) by any number; which makes the inadequacy of numbers 
for determining everything plain enough; they even have many things which 
cannot be equalled by any number, but surpass every possible number. But still 
they do not conclude that such things sur-
pass all number because of the multitude 
of their parts; but because the nature of 
the thing cannot suffer to be numbered 
without manifest contradiction. Thus, for 
instance, all inequalities of the space AB 
and CD interposed between two circles, 
and all the variations which matter moved 
in it must undergo surpass all number. 
This is not concluded from the excessive 
magnitude of the interposed space: for 
however small a portion of it we take, the 
inequalities of this small portion will sur-
D 
pass all number. Nor is it concluded as 
happens in other cases, because we do not have the maximum and minimum of 
the space, for in our example here we have both, the maximum is AB, the mini-
mum CD; but it is concluded just from this, that the nature of the space be-

112 
Faith and Knowledge 
an infinitum actu. In this example we behold the infinite, which was 
defined above as absolute affirmation or absolute concept,52 set forth 
at the same time for intuition, and hence in the particular; here the 
absolute concept is the identity of opposites actu. If these parts are 
kept apart and as parts posited as identical; if this particular qua 
particular is posited as actual and expressed in numbers, and if it is 
to be posited in its incommensurability according to the concept as 
identical, then [358] the empirical infinity arises in the infinite series 
of the mathematicians. But the incommensurability consists in this: 
[1] the particular is set free from subsumption under the concept and 
broken up into parts; [2] these parts are absolutely determinate and 
absolutely unequal [or unlike] among themselves; [3] previously, in 
the intuitivet concept they had been equal, but now, when they are 
compared, they are no longer in the identity, they are only in relation. 
In one word, all this is nothing but the transformation of geometry 
into analysis; or more precisely it is the transformation of the Pytha-
gorean theorem, which contains all authentic geometry, into the se-
ries of functions of curved lines. 
This yields the true character of thought which is infinity. For 
the absolute concept is infinity, is in itself the absolute affirmation, 
but since the concept is turned against the opposite and finite as their 
[its?] identity, thought is absolute negation;53 and this negation, 
posited as existent, as real, is the positing of opposites: + A -
A = 
0. The nothing exists as + A -
A, and is in its essence infinity, 
thought, absolute concept, absolute pure affirmation. This abstracted 
infinity of the absolute substance is the infinity which Fichte brought 
home to our more subjective modern civilization as the Ego, or pure 
self-consciousness-the pure thinking, which is the eternal act, the 
eternal producing of the difference which reflected thinking is aware 
of always and only as product. What is kept separate in appearance, 
the incommensurable, the difference as product, is self-identical in 
the ultimate relation, i.e., in the infinity which is where the opposites 
tween two circles having different centres, cannot suffer anything of the sort. 
And so, if anyone wanted to determine all those inequalities by some certain 
number he would have to bring it about at the same time, that a circle should 
not be a circle" (Epistle XXIX, Opera, ed. Paulus, I, 530-1; Epistle XII, Opera, 
ed. Gebhardt, IV, 59-60). 
52. See p 107 above. 
53. We have followed the Critical Torm1al text; the editors of the Werke of 
1832 changed es (das Den ken) to er ( = der Begriff, "the concept"). 

113 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
vanish both together. And in regard to the incommensurables, posited 
as existing for themselves (in numbers), the identity is an infinite 
one, it is a nothing. But if the incommensurables are posited, not as 
these abstractions, existing for themselves (in numbers), nor as parts 
having standing apart from the whole, but according to what they 
are in themselves; that is, if they are posited only in the whole, then 
the authentic concept, the true equality of whole and parts, and the 
affirmative infinity, the actual infinite, is present for intuitive,t i.e., 
geometrical, cognition. This Idea of the infinite is one of the most 
important in Spinoza's system. It should play a greater role in any 
exposition of the system, than that which is allotted to it in Jacobi's 
propositions,54 where it is always just an idle predicate of thinking, 
extension, etc. For in this Idea there lies just what is most crucial: 
the cognition of the point of union of the attributes. Lacking this 
Idea Jacobi expounds Spinoza's highest Ideas in a formal, historical 
fashion. In his fourteenth thesis, for example, he ascribes the attri-
butes and modes to the absolute substance as qualities, in the ordi-
nary reflective sense.55 
We will briefly bring together the forms of infinity. The true in-
finite is [359] the absolute Idea, identity of the universal and particu-
lar, or identity of the infinite and finite themselves (i.e., of the infinite 
as opposed to a finite). This [opposed] infinite is pure thinking. Posi-
_!ed as this abstraction, it is pure, absolutely formal identity, pure con-
c_:ept, Kant's Reason, Fichte's Ego. But when it is set against the 
finite, it is for this very reason, the absolute nothing of the finite: 
+ A -
A = 0.56 It is the negative side of the absolute Idea. If this 
nothing is posited as reality, if infinity itself is taken, not as subject 
or as producing-where infinity is pure identity as well as nothing-
but as object qr product, infinity is the + A -
A, the positing of 
opposites. But none of these forms of infinity is empirical infinity, 
the infinity of imagination( The first infini~X is that of absoluteJ3.ea-
son. The, infinity of pure identity or of ~ativity is that of fonnal 
or negaif~e Reason. But the infinite in its reality as + A -
A, where 
one term is itself determined as infinite and the other as finite, this 
54. Jacobi offers forty-four propositions (Werke IV, 1, 172-205) as a result 
of his resolution "to spare neither effort nor patience" in the attempt to present 
Spinoza's edifice of doctrines. 
55. Ibid, IV, 1, 183-4. 
56. Compare p. 172 below. 

114 
Faith and Knowledge 
finitude in general is the infinite of reflection or imagination. The 
infinity mentioned above57 belongs to it, in case a finite is to be posited 
as absolute, or in other words it is to be posited at the same time as 
something other [than itself]. In Jacobi, infinity occurs either as 
something otiose or as the empirical infinite of imagination, and this 
misleads him into the belief that Spinoza wanted in his mathematical 
example to present an empirical infinite as existing actu. Jacobi, for 
his part, is satisfied by the example up to a point. He does not find 
an objective and real infinity in it, to be sure, but he does find a sub-
jective, ideational one. (He speaks of 'mathematical examples,' in the 
plural but in Letter XXIX58 there is only one, and in Ethics, Part I, 
Proposition XIX Schol. the example is not Spinoza' s-he adduces it 
from his opponents.) 
"Where we perceive a linkage of ground and consequence we be-
come conscious of the manifold in an idea" (David Hume, p. 94),59 
and this occurs in time. This ideational succession is itself an actual 
succession in the subject that produces it.-On this view, Spinoza 
did more than he meant to. For he was not thinking of succession at 
all in his example, and succession is not to be seen in it. But Jacobi 
finds at least a subjective succession in it, so the example has for him 
a psychological and empirical significance, instead of a philosophical 
one. Still, he does not find enough of the empirical in it; he wanted 
to find an objective, actual succession beside the psychological one, 
even though this ideational succession is itself an actual succession 
in the subject. 
The nature of Jacobi's polemical procedure is this then: he either 
complains about the absence of succession and finitude [in Spinoza] 
and simply demands their presence in speculation, (360] or he reads 
them into Spinoza and then finds absurdities. The positive side of 
this fixation on the finite we have seen above60 in its ideal form, that 
is, with regard to knowledge: knowledge is conceived as proceeding 
by way of similarity and identity, and as being in need of a fact that 
must be given to it as an alien datum, the + B upon which the 
identity of the concept is regarded as supervening. Jacobi occasion-
ally makes remarks that are full of sense and wit about this experi-
57. Compare the analysis of the moment of time on p. 107 above. This is a 
paradigm of what the formula '+ A -
A' stands for. 
58. Compare note 51 above. 
59. Jacobi, Werke II, 193. 
60. See p. 96 above. 

115 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
ence in general; about the individuality of the sense that determines 
the scope and beauty of this experienc~; about how Reason gives to 
the experience of man a different cha~acter from that of the beast; 
and also about the empirical setting forth of subjective individuality, 
that is, of sense. In Reinhold's Contributions, Vol. lll, p. 92, however, 
we find: "Space and time are matters of fact, because motion is mat-
ter of fact; a human being who had never moved would be unable 
to have an idea of space; one who had never changed would not be 
acquainted with any concept of time; [ ... ] we could no more arrive 
at it in an a priori way than we can arrive at the pure manifold, 
the binding bond or the productive spontaneity of the intellect."61 
This sort of thing about the connection between experience and 
knowledge may perhaps belong to his assistant Koeppen, rather than 
to Jacobi. 
The utterances of experience and about experience have esprit 
because there is the allusive echo of speculative Ideas in them. The 
interest of Jacobi's writings rests on this musical consonance and 
resonance of speculative Ideas. But the music remains an echo; for 
the Ideas are refracted in the medium of reflection's absoluteness; 
the music must not blossom into Logos, the scientifically articulated 
word which is what one expects where the issue is philosophical. If 
it were permitted that the resonance of Ideas should be taken up into 
the concept as something objective, and be apprehended and held onto 
as a common good and property of thought, then one could not mis-
take the presence of an exposition of Reason in expressions of this 
kind if one concentrated only on their significance. But objectivity 
of Ideas is not to be. For example, after the passage from the Letters 
on Spinoza which we quoted above62 where Jacobi allows to Reasc.n 
only the capacity to analyze a fact and to link facts in accordance 
with pure identity, he tells us about his basic thought (p. 423). He 
says that "he takes man without dividing him, and he finds that 
human consciousness is put together out of two original ideas, that 
of the conditioned and that of the unconditioned, which are insepara-
bly linked."63 But the fact that according to Jacobi consciousness is a 
composite of two absolutely opposite ideas, is this not a division? On 
61. See Jacobi, Werke III, 172. For the ground of Hegel's surmise that Koep-
pen is the author of this passage see ibid., p. 158. 
62. See p. 98 above. 
63. Jacobi, Werke IV, 2, 152 (Hegel has tmned the citation from the first to 
the third personal form, but it is otherwise almost verbatim). 

116 
Faith and Knowledge 
the following page Jacobi says that "as long as we understand [na-
ture] we remain within a chain of conditioned conditions, i.e., within 
comprehensible nature;''64 but this nexus of concepts and of nature 
comes to an end, and absolutely [361] beyond it, hence quite out of 
its context, there is the supernatural, the inconceivable and uncondi-
tioned. How can Jacobi say, then, that he does not divide man, since 
he allows human consciousness to consist of two absolute opposites? 
Or rather, he already takes man as divided, in that he deals with him 
as he appears in consciousness. -If we actually do mean to take 
man and his consciousness with its compositeness as undivided, as 
Jacobi wants to, then we must comprehend what Jacobi calls the 
principle of cognition and Reason as the undivided identity of the 
conditioned and unconditioned; and since, according to Jacobi, the 
conditioned is the natural and the unconditioned the supernatural, we 
must comprehend the principle as identity of the natural and the 
supernatural. In this conditioned unconditionedness or unconditioned 
conditionedness we would have the same absurdity of finite infinity 
which Jacobi finds in Spinoza; but at least we would also have the 
nullification of the antithesis between the natural and the supernat-
ural, the finite and the infinite; and thus we would be free at least 
from reflection, which absolutizes the opposition and makes the op-
posites into things-in-themselves. 
In the same way, we could easily interpret the note on page 30 of 
the Superfluous Pocketbook for 180265 as a speculative Idea: "Where 
there is sense [i.e., sensation] there is beginning and end, there is 
separation and integration, there is one and an other, and the sense 
is the third." Or again in Reinhold's Contributions, number 3, page 
70: "The characteristic mark of a sense is [ ... ] this bipolarity, and 
its standing in the middle between subject and object."66 Page 95 
provides still another example: "Sensibility does not do any deter-
mining, nor does the intellect; the principle of individuation lies out-
side them. This principle contains the mystery of the one and the 
64. Ibid., p. 154. The rest of the sentence is paraphrased from p. 155. 
65. Actually Pocketbook for the Year 1802, edited by J. G. Jacobi (Hamburg). 
This publication-which did appear in earlier years as the Superfluous Pocket-
book-contained an article by F. H. Jacobi, "Ueber eine Weissagung Lichten-
bergs" (Werke III, 196-243), to which Hegel refers here. The quotation is ibid., 
p. 225 n. 
66. Hegel himself marked this quotation from an essay "On the Undertaking 
of the Critical Philosophy to reduce Reason to the Intellect and give Philosophy a 
New Aim" (now in Werke III, 58-195); see ibid., 143-4. 

117 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
manifold in their indissoluble integration; [that is, of] being, reality, 
substance. Our concepts of it are all reciprocal ones: Unity presup-
poses totality, totality multiplicity, and multiplicity unity. Unity is 
therefore both beginning and end of this eternal circle and is called 
-individuality, organism, object-subjectivity."67 The middle of this 
circle, however,-which is both centre and periphery at once and 
sustains68 the reciprocity because it will not let one disappear when 
the other steps forth-would be the Idea of Reason, the Idea of the 
absolute yet bi-polar identity of the one and the many. But an Idea 
of this kind is quite a different kind of knowledge and cognition from 
that which merely analyzes given facts and proceeds by way of simi-
larities. 
This aphoristic guise in which Jacobi raises reflection above itself 
is the sole outlet for Reason to express itself, once finitude and sub-
jectivity are made into something absolute. Presented as aphoristic 
esprit Reason guards itself against lifting itself up into the infinity of 
the concept,69 against becoming a common good, and science. [362] 
Instead, it remains affected by subj~ctivity, it remains something per-
sonal and particular. Attached to the ring, which it offers as a symbol 
of Reason, there is a piece of the skin from the hand that offers it; 
and if Reason is scientific conne~tion, and has to do with concepts, 
we can very well do without that piece of skin. Ingenuity of this kind, 
proceeding by way of the absurdity of a finite infinity, of something 
being beginning and end at the same time, of a composite of the 
conditioned and the unconditioned, etc., comes rather close once more 
to being a formalism of Reason, which can be had cheap enough. 
Since the form of this philosophizing is subjective, its object must be 
equally subjective and finite; for finitude is [here taken to be] some-
67. Ibid., 176 (Hegel's quotation marks). As printed in the Critical Journal: 
the passage read "Unity presupposes totality (Allheit), totality multiplicity and 
multiplicity totality." But it is dear this was a slip of the pen or the typesetter 
(since it is the circular return to unity which interests Hegel here). We have 
followed Lasson in correcting it. Hegel took this quote from the section of Ja-
cobi's essay that the despised Koeppen worked over. 
68. Festhalten. This word, like the more notorious aufheben, has many mean-
ings: sustain, give support, hold fast, tie together, arrest, etc. 
69. The Critical Journal reads "hiitet die Vernunft sich, das Unendliche des 
Begriffs aufzunehmen"; Buchner reads "hiitet die Vernunft sich, in sich das 
Unendliche aufzunehmen," which makes explicit the only sense the text as it 
stands will bear. Lasson reads: "hiitet sich die Vernunft, sich in das Unendliche 
aufzunehmen." We follow Lasson because his reading seems to agree with He-
gel's thought on pp. 115-6 above. 

118 
Faith and Knowledge 
thing in-itself. From the outset the exposition and the philosophizing 
are about man and are directed to man: "We find ourselves placed 
on earth, and it is there that our actions take place, so it is there that 
our cognition comes to be; as our moral character turns out, so does 
our insight in everything connected with it," etc. 70 Man is the peren-
nial focus of meditation, his rational instinct is praised, and the tale 
of his sense and sensibility is told. Against this should be set the 
manforgetful maxim of Epictetus that Jacobi quotes, in the Superflu-
ous Pocketbook (p. 22): "But since I am a rational being, it is my 
business to praise God" (and not man). "This is my vocation, I will 
fulfill it. " 71 
Herder's way of doing philosophy is only a slight modification of 
this typical pattern. The Absolute cannot be tolerated in the form 
that it has for rational cognition, but only in a game with concepts of 
reflection, or in sporadic invocations which bring philosophy directly 
to an end, just as they seem to be about to begin it-even as Kant 
ends with the Idea in practical faith. Or else the rational can only 
be tolerated as beautiful feeling (Empfindung), as instinct, as indi-
viduality. But _Herder's philosophizing has the advantage of being 
somewhat more objective. Jacobi calls Herder's philosophy Spinozis-
tic froth, a preaching that confuses Reason and language alike. 72 
But the froth and the sermonizing arise precisely from Herder~ put-_ 
ting a reflective concept in the place of rational thought. This veils 
the rational, just as the expression of feeling, subjectivity of instinct, 
etc.-which Jacobi puts in the place of rational thinking-does. 
Herder says that "when unfolded" (he means folded up) "the con-
cept of might as well as the concepts of matter and thought all coin-
cide in the concept of a basic force (Urkraft) according to the Spin-
ozistic system itself" (God; 2nd ed. p. 126) / 3 "the eternal basic force, 
the force of all forces is solely one,"74 etc., page 169. "The real con-
cept, in which all forces are grounded, but which even in their total-
ity they do not exhaust-this infinite excellence is actuality, reality, 
70. Ibid., IV, 1, 231-2. 
71. Ibid., III, 217. 
72. Ibid., IV, 1, 216-7 n. and IV, 2, 79. 
73. Hegel owned both editions but he had only the second at hand (Gotha, 
1800). The text is now in Herder, Siimmtliche Werke (ed. B. Suphan et al.), XVI, 
479-80. The English reader can also find the quotation in its context in F. H 
Burkhardt's translation (p. 198-9). 
74. Herder, V\'erke (ed. Suphan) XVI, 502; Burkhardt, pp. 140 and 202. The 
following quotation is from the same passage. 

119 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
active [363] existence; it is Spinoza's core concept."-Or on page 
245: Nature is "a realm of living forces" and "innumerable organ-
izations, each of which is not only wise, good and beautiful of its 
kind, but perfect, that is to say, an imprint of Wisdom, Goodness 
and Beauty themselves" etc. 75 "The hair that falls ouL the nail that 
is cut off, enter once more a different region of the world-context 
where they again act or suffer in perfect accord with their present 
place in nature,"76 etc. 
Is not all this in line with what Jacobi calls "the greatest merit of 
the seeker, namely to reveal and manifest existence"?77 Of course, it 
is not a revelation and manifestation appropriate for philosophical 
cognition any more than Jacobi's is. On the contrary, both authors 
share the effort to abolish the scientific form of rational cognition 
wherever it is present. Herder is fully conscious of what he is doing 
when he expounds the central thesis of the Spinozistic system as fol-
lows (God; 2nd ed., p. 77): "I do not know any substantive word 
under which the actual and operative activities, thought in the spirit-
ual world, and motion in the corporeal world, could be comprehended 
with so little constraint as they are under the concept of force, power, 
organ. With the word, 'organic force' one signifies at the same time 
the inner and outer, the spiritual and the corporeal. But it is still only 
an expression, for we do not understand what force is, nor do we 
claim to have explained the word 'body' by it."78 This is exactly Ja-
cobi's concern: to replace philosophical Ideas with expressions and 
words which are not supposed to give knowledge or understanding. 
These words and expressions may well have a philosophical meaning; 
but Jacobi's polemic is directed precisely against the philosophies 
which take them seriously and make their philosophical meaning ar-
ticulate. No one states better what it is all about than Koeppen in his 
final peroration for Jacobi's essay on critical philosophy (in Rein-
hold's Contributions, number 3): "free, immortal being, man, brother, 
full of solemn reverence, devotion, love, how can the letter of your 
philosophizing Reason teach you more effectively what lives in the 
holy of holies of your soul when you have faith, hope, and knowl-
ege; the infinite holding sway above you, virtue coming forth from 
75. Ibid., p. 546; Burkhardt, p. 172-.3. 
76. Lac. cit. 
77. Jacobi, Werke, IV, 1, 72. 
78. Herder, Werke (ed. Suphan), XVI, 452; Burkhardt, p. 195 (Hegel's quota-
tion marks) 

120 
Faith and Knowledge 
freedom, and eternal life!" etc. 70 This is the sort of chilly and insipid 
emotional effusion that comes from the "Reason as instinct," to which 
Jacobi forever appeals; and this forsooth, is worth more than any 
proposition made by philosophizing Reason, which it proposes to 
dispense with. 
We must here touch briefly on a polemical piece [by I acobi] against 
Kant's philosophy, which rests on the same basis as the polemic 
against Spinoza. It is entitled: On the Attempt of Criticism to reduce 
Reason to Understanding and to give a new Direction to Philosophy 
generally (see Reinhold's Contributions, Number 3}.80 With his in-
stinctive hostility to rational knowledge, Jacobi has, of course, fast-
ened on the very point where Kant's philosophy is speculative. Kant's 
terminology is not in itself [364] very clear. Having been borrowed 
from reflective thinking it is useless for speculative Reason; and de-
riving as it does, from a culture that is dead and gone it hinders 
Kant's exposition, which loses itself on its speculative side in the prod-
uct. Kant's terminology makes it all the easier for Jacobi to make 
fun of his philosophy, and to make nonsense of it by and for unspecu-
lative reflection. The character and principles of the philosophy of 
reflection are decisively articulated in this polemic. 
A proper critique of it wquld have to mention its empty shouting, 
how snappy and spiteful it is, and how it twists things to the point 
of sheer malice. Among these malicious twists we count a passage 
in the "Preamble" where Jacobi uses Kant's exposition of the forms 
of intuition as an example of a discord within the system, and of 
the mixture o£ empiricism.and-idealism in it}1 To this end Jacobi first 
shows by way of textual evidence that [according to Kant] space 
and time are mere forms and are "never able to became abjects."82 
He refers us to Critique a(Pure Reason, p. 347: "The mere form of 
79. Jacobi, Werke III, 194-S. 
80. Ibid., III, 59-195. This is the essay which Koeppen completed, on the basis 
of Jacobi's notes (see ibid., pp. 66-7). His part begins on p. 158. Hegel has 
touched on the essay several times already. (In translating the title we have 
bowed to established tradition by rendering Verstand as "Understanding.") 
81. Ibid., pp. 77-9. 
82. Ibid., III, 77. Jacobi emphasizes Gegenstiinde (not werden kiinnen). The 
reader should take note that Jacobi did not quote any of the passages on which 
he relies in the present context. Hegel has followed up the references given in 
Jacobi's footnotes, and is reporting what he has found. Hegel's own citations of 
Kant's text are by no means word perfect, as can be seen even from a compari-
son with the translation of N. Kemp Smith which we have cited (with minor 
adjustments) in the following notes. 

121 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
intuition without substance is, in itself, no object-pure space and 
pure time, which, to be sure, are something, they are forms for intu-
iting, but are not themselves objects which are intuited."83 There is 
not a single word here to the effect that they are not able to become 
objects (in what sense we shall see at once). "They cannot be intu-
ited, or perceived," continues Jacobi, and he refers us now to page 
207 of the Critique-where, in fact we find nothing at all about their 
not being intuitable. About perceptibility [Kant says] that they are 
not perceived in themselves because they are pure formal intuitions 
and not appearances (that is, identities of intuition and sensation}, 
not objects of perception.84 And yet, so Jacobi says, these very same, 
non-objective forms of intuition are also objects, according to other 
passages such as Critique of Pure Reason, p. 160, where it says (in 
the note, for there is nothing about 'objects' in the text): "Space 
regarded as object (italicized by Kant himself), as we are required to 
treat it in geometry, contains more than the bare form of intuition."85 
83. Critique of Pure Reason, A 291, B 347; "The mere form of intuition, with-
out substance, is in itself no object, but the merely formal condition of the object 
(as appearance} as pure space and pure time (ens imaginarium) which are, to 
be sure, something, as forms of intuiting (als Formen anzuschauen}, but are not 
themselves objects which are intuited." 
The crucial "als Formen anzuschauen" is grammatically quite awkward here 
as its primary meaning would be "to intuit as forms" or even "as forms to be 
intuited," whereas the context seems to demand "as forms of intuiting." ("als 
Formen des Anschauens" rather than Kant's "als Formen anzuschauen.") ... 
It should be noted that this passage occurs in the context of a fourfold distinc-
tion of the concepts of something and nothing, as a correction of traditional 
ontology, and this correction is itself an appendix to the Appendix on "The 
Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection" which concludes the whole Analytic 
(A 26o-292; B 316--349). 
84. Critique of Pure Reason, A 166; B 207: "Perception is empirical conscious-
ness in which there is also sensation. Appearances, as objects of perception, are 
not pure (merely formal) intuitions, like space and time (for these, as such, 
cannot be perceived at all}. 
85. Critique of Pure Reason, B 16o-1 note (not in A): "Space represented as 
object (as we are required to present it in geometry} contains more than the 
bare form of intuition. It contains unification of the manifold, of what is given 
according to the form of sensibility, in an intuitive representation so that the 
form of intuition' gives only a manifold, whereas the 'formal intuition gives 
unity of representation. In the Aesthetic I had treated this unity as belo:lging' 
merely to sensibility, ~imply in order to note that it precedes any concept al-
though it presupposes in fact a synthesis which does riot belong to the senses 
but through which all concepts 9f space and time first become possible. For by 
its means (in that the understanding determines the sensibility) space and time 

122 
Faith and Knowledge 
Here, however, Kant distinguishes between formal intuition 'as unity 
of the intuitive representation, and the form of intuition .which ap-
pears as mere manifold relative to the concept of the intellect, though 
it [the intuitively formed manifold] has unity in itself. As he remarks 
expressly in § 24, the understanding as transcendental· synthesis of 
imagination is itself the unity of space and time and first makes this 
unity possible.86 This is one of the very best points in what Kant says 
about sensibility and a priority. Now where is the contradiction in 
this: the form of intuition, as [365] a purely abstract form opposed 
to the concept of the understanding, is not an object, but it can be 
made an object, as in geometry, because of space's inner unity, which 
is a priori, though the unity does not emerge as such in space as a 
bare form of intuition?-Finally, together with the preceding contra-
diction, there is supposed to be a contradiction involved in the fact 
that space and time are not mere forms of intuition, but are them-
selves intuitions and as such they are single representations at that. 87 
"Single, individual representations" (as opposed to the concept) mean 
the same in Kant as intuition, and this can only be described as ex-
cellent and as one of his purest and most profound concepts. -Any-
way, quite apart from its truth or falsity, where is there any contra-
diction between the above and what Jacobi brings .forward as 
inconsistent with it, except the one that Jacobi introduces by giving 
false references? 
On the following page Jacobi says: "Fichte to whom it seemed 
incomprehensible how the Ego borrows its reality and substantiality 
from matter," etc. 88 Is not this a magnificent exposition of the 
are first given as intuitions; hence the unity of this a priori intuition belongs 
to space and time and not to the concept of the understanding (cf. § 24)." 
While it is true that on B 160 Kant speaks explicitly of space as object only 
in this footnote, Jacobi may have had in mind the passage in the text of B 160 
which reads "But space and time are represented a priori not merely as forms 
of sensible intuition, but as themselves intuitions which contain a manifold. 
86. In the first part of § 24 (B 15D-152) Kant develops the concept of the 
transcendental synthesis of imagination as mediating between the pure concepts 
of the understanding and the pure manifold of sensible intuition. Following 
Fichte and Schelling, Hegel sees in Kant's transcendental synthesis of imagina-
tion an anticipation of the basic principle of speculative philosophy. See pp. 
72-3, 78 ff. above. 
87. See Critique of Pure Reason, B 136 n. (Jacobi gives the reference, but 
Hegel does not repeat it here.) Compare also A 25, B 39 and A 31/2, B 47. 
88. Jacobi, Werke III, 79. 

123 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
Kantian system? And Jacobi makes it en passant, just as he disposes 
of Fichte en passant. In support of the view that [in Kant] the Ego 
borrows its reality and substantiality from matter, Jacobi refers us 
to pages [B] 277-8 of the Critique of Pure Reason. The passage ac-
tually begins on [B] 276 and continues on [B] 277: "But in the above 
proof" (Kant's refutation of idealism) "it has been shown that outer 
experience is really immediate,89 and that only by means of it is inner 
experience-not indeed the consciousness of our own existence, but 
the determination of i0 in time-possible. Certainly, the representa-
tion 'I am,' which e~presses the consciousness that can accompany 
all thought, immediately~ includes in itselt the existence of a subject; 
but it does not so include any cognition of that subject, and also 
therefore no empirical cognition, that is, no experience of it. For 
this we require, in addition to the thought of something existing, 
also i!}tuitio_I_l [and] in this case inner intuition [ ... which] is itself 
possible only mediately, and only through outer experience.90 Note 
2. With this thesis, too,91 all employment of our cognitive faculty in 
experience, in the determination of time, entirely agrees. Not only 
are we unable to undertake92 any determination of time save through 
change93 in outer relations [ ... ]94 relatively to the permanent in 
space (for instance, the motion of the sun [ ... ])95 we have nothing 
permanent on which, as intuition, we can base the concept of a sub-
stance, save only matter; and even this permanence is not obtained 
from outer experience, but is presupposed a priori as a necessary 
condition of all determination of time, and therefore also as a de-
termination of inner sense, with respect to our own existence, through 
the existence of outer [366] things. The consciousness of myself in 
the presentation 'I' is not an intuition, but a merely intellectual 
presentation of the spontaneity of a thinking subject. This 'I' has not, 
therefore, the least predicate of intuition, which, as permanent, might 
89. Kant adds here an important footnote. 
90. Thus far the quotation is from "Note 1" of the three Notes which Kant 
attached to the proof of the thesis that "the mere, but empirically determined, 
consciousness of my own existence proves the existence of objects in space out-
side me" (B 275). 
91. Hegel wrote auch where Kant has nun. 
92. The original text, which Hegel follows, has vornehmen. Many modern edi-
tors have accepted the emendation wahrnehmen. 
93. Hegel omitted the article here. 
94. Hegel omitted "(die Bewegung)." 
95. Hegel omitted "relatively to objects on the earth." 

124 
Faith and Knowledge 
serve as correlate for the determination of time in inner sense-
in the manner in which, for instance, impenetrability serves in our 
empirical intuition of matter."96 We have copied the whole passage 
so that direct inspection may reveal what a malicious fake Jacobi's 
entirely unwarranted interpretation is, according to which the Ego 
borrows its reality and substantiality from matter. Kant requires for 
experience something which, as enduring, allows the determination 
of the lapse (Wechsel) of time. This something which endures is 
matter, namely as something a priori. Substantiality, [in turn] is this 
durability in time, durability determined with respect to experience. 
Kant explicitly excludes from these predicamenta the "I am" and 
even the existence of the subject. Hence, what Kant says is toto cCElo 
different from what one finds in Jacobi where there is no explanation 
of reality, substantiality and matter. Kant gives to reality, substan-
tiality, and matter, as well as to the Ego, a quite different significance 
from that which they have when Jacobi vacuously says that the Ego 
borrows its substantiality from matter. Surely it is treating Kant 
worse than a dead dog to quote and mishandle him like this ?97 
Kant rightly represents the three moments of experience, sensation 
as well as intuition and category, as merely productive of appearance: 
they do not give any cognition of the In-itself and the eternal. Jacobi 
interprets this as meaning that "all claims to the cognition of truth 
are razed to the ground and what is left is a faith more blind and 
utterly devoid of cognition than anyone ever imputed to man be-
fore."98 This altogether spiteful way of treating Kant's position is 
comprehensible in the light of Jacobi's principle, which was brought 
out earlier, that the finite and appearance are absolute. Jacobi's phi-
losophy thus debases the expressions 'truth' and 'faith' to the plane 
of the most common and vulgar empirical facts. But in philosophical 
intercourse 'truth' deserves to be used, not of empirical fact, but 
solely of the certainty of the eternal [actuality], and 'faith' has indeed 
96. N. Kemp Smith's translation has been very slightly adapted. ('Cognition' 
replaces 'knowledge' and one interpretive insertion has been eliminated.) Hegel's 
omissions and his copying mistakes have been pointed out in the footnotes. 
(The emphases are Hegel's and rarely coincide with Kant's.) 
97. Lessing had remarked (in his conversations with Jacobi) that Spinoza's 
critics treated him like a dead dog (Jacobi, Werke IV, 1, 68). 
98. Hegel is here quoting from a footnote in Jacobi's essay on the Critical 
Philosophy which was not reprinted in his Werke (vol. III) in 1816. But this 
part of the note is very nearly a verbatim quotation from a passage in the 
essay on Hume which Hegel cited earlier (Jacobi, Werke II, 217). 

125 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
been generally so used. Jacobi becomes as abusive about the nulli-
fication of this empirical [367] truth and of faith in sense-cognition 
as if it were an act of sacrilege or a temple robbery. 
A third ingredient of Jacobi's polemical exposition that must be 
added to false references and violent invectives, is a sort of bur-
lesque verbal juggling (Galimathisieren). The trick is very simple: 
reflection gets hold of the rational and translates 'it into the language 
of the intellect, so that it becomes in and for itself an absurdity. We 
have already seen, for instance, how time was juggled into Spinoza's 
eternity and infinity. So when Kant calls synthesis an action and 
then later, speaking of its connection with imagination, says that it is 
an effect of imagination, Jacobi extracts from this the question, "how 
can this faculty be an effect?" His industrious disciple loyally repeats 
this question, and supports Kant in calling synthesis the mere effect 
of blind imagination (p. 85).99 But let us pass over perversions of this 
sort and not go into the details of this or that example; for the entire 
essay proceeds like a burlesque display and delights itself in the 
cooking up of absurdities. Let us turn rather to the main point, which 
is Jacobi's conception of the relation between the so-called faculties. 
In our exposition of Kant's philosophy we showed100 how, in this 
sphere, Kant brilliantly posits the a priori [ground] of sensibility in 
the original identity of unity and the manifold, which at the level 
where unity is completely immersed in the manifold, is transcen-
lental imagination; and he posits the intellect in the raising of the · 
a priori synthetic unity of sensibility into universality, so that this 
identity faces sensibility in a relative antithesis. Reason, in turn, be-
comes the higher level of the preceding relative antithesis, though 
only in such a way that this universality and infinity is pure formal 
infinity, and as such fixated. This is an authentically rational construc-
tion in which the misleading 'faculties' persist only in name; the 
truth is that Kant posits all of them in one identity. Jacobi trans-
forms this rational construction into the view that the faculties rest 
upon one another. "You [Kant] let Reason rest on the intellect, the 
intellect on imagination, and imagination on sensibility; the sensi-
bility in turn rests on ,imagination again as a faculty of a priori intui-
tions; and this imagination finally rests-on what? Plainly on noth-
ing. Here then is the true turtle, the absolute ground, that which 
99. Jacobi raises the question, Werke III, 129; Koeppen recurs to it, ibid., pp. 
162-3. (For the objectionable proposition in Kant, see A 78, B 103). 
100. See pp. 69-70 above. 

126 
Faith and Knowledge 
gives being to all beings (das Wesende in allen Wesen). From itself 
alone, it produces itsel£1°1 and being itself the possibility of every-
thing possible [ ... ] it produces not only what is possible but also 
-perhaps!-the impossible."102 What a beautiful bond Jacobi estab-
lishes between the faculties! The idea that there is something which 
rests on itself-though certainly it is not the imagination in so far as 
it is isolated from the totality-seems to Jacobi to be as unphilosophi-
cal as the [368] image that those foolish Indians invented, who let 
the world be carried by a being that rests on itself; and not only is 
it unphilosophical, it is also sacrilegious. Everyone knows from his 
early years and from psychology, that imagination, after all, is a 
faculty for making things up, so Jacobi would have it that philosophy 
seeks to convince us through an imagination of this sort that the 
whole of human life is actually nothing but a fabric without begin-
ning and end, a fabric made of mere delusion and deception, of phan-
toms and dreams; and that men have invented and fabricated for 
themselves religion and language, etc. He scolds and orates inter-
minably on this theme in the Pocketbook. 103 In brief, Jacobi takes 
[the transcendental] imagination and self-originating Reason to be 
something arbitrary and subjective, and he takes sensuous experi-
ence as eternal truth. 
On behalf of his burlesquing of the Kantian construction of the 
cognitive spirit Jacobi bears witness for himself on p. 52 "so that it 
may be seen that he has grasped your [the Kantian] cause well 
enough;" and he is so magnanimous as "not to accuse you [Kant] of 
conscious deception."104 The editor, Reinhold, annotates this "truth-
ful" exposition [of Kant] as follows: "If the Kantian philosophy 
wishes to preserve at least the semblance of consistency, it will have 
to acknowledge that the functions here described are the tacitly pre-
supposed principles of its theory of the cognitive faculty. Fichte's 
philosophy, on the contrary, lays down the said functions in an 
explicit way and does so with an intuiting thinking and willing of all 
of them."105 
101. Hegel omits Jacobi's "a priori." Jacobi's text would have to be trans-
lated: "It produces itself from itself in a pure a priori way." For the origin of 
the metaphor of the "true turtle" and for Hegel's use of it, see D. Henrich, 
"Die Wahrhafte Schildkrtite," Hegel-Studien II, 1963, 281-91. 
102. Werke III, 115-6 (Hegel's quotes). 
103. See especially "On a Prophecy of Lichtenberg's," Jacobi, Werke III, 218-
9, 229-30; and in his "Criticism" essay, ibid., pp. 95-102. 
104. Ibid., III, 121. 
105. Reinhold, Contributions, number 3 (Hegel's quotation marks). 

127 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
The main question asked by Jacobi is this: How does the Kantian 
philosophy arrive a priori at a judgment? How does it get the Abso-
lute to give birth to finitude, pure time to give birth to times, space 
to spaces?106 This is the eternal dilemma of reflection: if philosophy 
recognizes a transition from the eternal to the temporal, it can be 
easily shown that philosophy posits the temporal in the eternal itself 
and therefore makes the eternal temporal. On the other hand, if phi-
losophy does not recognize this transition, if it posits that for intui-
tive cognition totality is an absolute simul, an absolute together, so 
that the different [i.e., the manifold of differentiated particulars] does 
not exist in the form of [spatial] parts and temporality, then phi-
losophy is deficient, for it is supposed to have the temporal, the 
determinate, and the single before it and explain that also. It is in 
this second platitude of reflection that Jacobi believes he has the 
monkey-wrench that will break up even the Kantian philosophy. He 
conveniently misinterprets-it was just bound to happen !-the to-
tality of intellectual intuition, the a priori synthesis which includes 
the difference in itself, without residue, as an abstract unity. In this 
way, he has the parts, not in the whole, but side by side with the 
abstract unity which he has turned the whole into. So he takes it to 
be necessary that, "if a synthesis a priori is to be explained(!) a pure 
antithesis107 will have to be explained at the same time; but, we do 
not find the slightest hint of such [369] a need [in Kant] .... The 
manifold to be synthesized is presupposed by Kant as empirical; yet 
it is supposed to remain if one abstracts from everything empiri-
cal."108 As if the original synthesis were not an identity of the differ-
ent-though, to be sure, the different is not contained in it as some-
106. Jacobi, Werke Ill, 112-158. As a token of Jacobi's style we translate a 
passage which begins ibid., p. 112. "For eighteen years now I have been trying 
to understand-and with every year I have understood less-how you [KantJ 
can conceive a manifold to which the unity, and a unity to which the manifold 
merely supervenes; how you can think this pure event in any way at all. If 
you cannot do so, but if both manifold and unity presuppose or condition one 
another in such a way that they can only be thought one in the other and at 
the same time, as forma substantialis of all thought and being: what use is then 
your whole a priori web?" 
107. Jacobi's "Antithesis" (which occurs also on pp. 128 and 130 n. 120 below) 
is not unlike Hegel's Gegensatz (which is what "antithesis" usually stands for 
in this translation). But it is typically narrower in its reference: it refers to 
Kant's manifold over and against the unifying unity (Jacobi's "Synthesis") of 
transcendental apperception. 
108. Ibid., III, 79-80. 

128 
Faith and Knowledge 
thing purely finite and antithetical as Jacobi wants to have it. Original 
synthesizing would be, in Jacobi's terms, an original determining, 
and original determining would be creation out of nothing. 109 We 
have pointed out earlier110 that for reflection the nothing begins 
where there is no absolute, isolated finitude, no finitude in abstraction 
from the absolute substance; and that what is reality for reflection, 
the something as opposed to the nothing of reflection, is just simply 
this absolute opposition and absolute finitude. That synthesis is pure 
unity and therefore has not difference within it, is the one and only 
thought behind an endless battering and yelling that works itself up 
into absurdities and gives itself the wildest airs. Jacobi draws his 
idea of synthesis and of the whole Kantian philosophy out of iso-
lated passages. If Kant happens to say among other things that syn-
thesis is "the action of putting distinct representations together, and 
grasping their manifoldness in one cognition,"111 what could be clear-
er than that he already presupposes the antithesis to his identity? 
Jacobi makes a proper muddle of everything that is organic in Kant's 
construction. He makes time, space, transcendental imagination clear 
and pure as he pleases, turning them all into pure, solid units that 
have nothing to do with one another. He turns himself into the 
absolute solidity of infinite space and now asks: How will you be 
able to break into my solidity and originate just one distinct point 
in it?112 How will time, space and unity of consciousness break one 
into one another? He forgets that the purity of time, space and trans-
cendental imagination are just as fictional as the pretence that he, 
Jacobi, is the intuition without squabbles or clouds, of the infinite 
solidity of space. He is somewhat happier with time; for he finds it 
to be a bridge between the realt (Reale) and the idealt (/deale), the 
conceptual (Intellektuale) and the material, and he can take it for a 
sense: for it is bi-polar, and in some sort of mid-position, and what 
characterizes sense in general is its bi-polarity, and its standing in 
the middle between object and subject. But still, even if imagination 
gives birth to a time that has in it beginning, middle and end, it 
would not know, according to Jacobi, how to indicate whether these 
109. Lac. cit. 
110. See pp. 107-9 above. 
111. Critique of Pure Reason, A 77; B 103. Compare Jacobi, Werke III, 128 ff. 
112. Jacobi, Werke III, 146-56. Nothing here is exactly quoted and some of it 
is improvisation. But the theme is Jacobi's. 

129 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
eggs that it lays are big or little ones.113 It must determine this by 
way of space, into which Jacobi now passes. 114 He posits himself as 
its infinitude, pure, unpolluted identity and continuity; firmly placed 
in this unity, he maintains that a pure and empty imagination, if it 
were alone with space, could not, in all eternity, generate a point. 
If [370] finitization in pure space is to be conceived, as Jacobi nar-
rates very nicely, then that which posits finitization (or better, reali-
ty) must be "something which is raised above pure intuition as it 
is above pure concept, above pure concept as it is above pure intui-
tion, and above both in the same way."115 It must be something which 
falls neither under a (sensuous) intuition nor under a concept. For 
Jacobi, this leads to a partly true and partly distorted description of 
this something: it does not itself intuit and does not itself conceive 
concepts, but is the "utterly pure activity of both [intuiting and con-
ceiving] equally. As such it is called synthetic unity of transcendental 
apperception." 116 
With these words Jacobi arrives at the point where for the first 
time the argument might perhaps get at the heart of the matter (die 
Sache selbst). Instead, this is the point where his own labour of 
interpretation comes to an end. 117 So far he had talked about nothing 
but empty unities and had burlesqued intellect, imagination and Rea-
son; but at the point where the previous senseless grumbling and 
yelling might acquire some interest, he breaks off-and he explains 
this with the bulletin about his health in the "Preamble." Any hope 
that he might himself have produced something better later on is 
completely removed by his saying that he "does not see any more 
truly dangerous passages ahead, but only a short stretch that is 
rather difficult to travel, but still with the roads more than half made 
already" (Preamble, p. 5).118 If this is not understandable enough 
from the preceding pages it will become more understandable from 
what Jacobi says [to the Kantians] on page 61 especially:119 in vain 
113. Ibid., pp. 142-5. 
114. Ibid., p. 146. 
115. Ibid., p. 157. 
116. Ibid., p. 158. 
117. Hegel speaks of "die eigentliche Ausarbeitung Jacobis" here because 
Jacobi's text ends (Werke III, 158) with the note "Here begins the Ausarbeitung 
(the working up of my notes) by my friend Koeppen." 
118. Ibid., III, 65. The, "bulletin about his health" follows directly after this. 
119. Ibid., 132-134 (paraphrased). 

130 
Faith and Knowledge 
do you [Kant] try to introduce a distinction within your pure quali-
tative unities and continuities by naming one of them synthetic (as 
if it were a matter of names). I [Jacobi] tell you that the one is no 
more able to divide and add than the [two] other[sV20 Synthesis 
does not come about through it [the transcendental unity of apper-
ception] for then it would also have to contain the ground for the 
antithesis [the sensuous manifold] within itself. Hoc opus, hie labor 
[this is the task, here is the work]. But it is not possible that either 
empty space or empty time or consciousness should contain the ori-
gin of the antithesis.-In short, the matter stands as follows: the 
absolute synthetic unity, totality includes all parts and difference 
within itself; but I, Jacobi, say that it is only a name. I say that the 
absolute synthetic unity is an abstract unity, an empty unity. How, 
then, could it be itself the ground of divisibility and antithesis? 
The concept of identity and of transcendental unity becomes quite 
understandable thanks to the cordial aid of his executive [Koeppen]. 
To him, too, the terrain of the transcendental unity appears to have 
no perils and the roads to be more than half made. Jacobi conceived 
of space etc. as pure unity, and pure unity is no manifold. Koeppen 
thinks that after 81 pages of this monotony (not counting the Pre-
amble) the thought that pure unity is no manifold may still perhaps 
be in need of some explanation. The grumbling and brawling of 
Jacobi's river grows faint in Koeppen's flatlands. Jacobi broke off at 
the a priori synthesis; about this we find [in Koeppen] the following: 
"Suppose there were a pure [371] manifold, what would then make 
an integration possible? Clearly what would make it possible would be 
that it took place in a third." This clear idea Koeppen clarifies in the 
following way: "Suppose we have a differentiated manifold (ein 
Verschiedenes) in space, its integration consists precisely in its being 
situated in space." Even clearer: "Suppose we have a differentiated 
manifold in consciousness, its integration consists in its being present 
in consciousness." Even greater clarity: "Now, what integrates the 
two spatial objects? Space. What integrates the manifold of conscious-
ness? Consciousness. The whole synthesis reveals nothing more to 
us than an identity." All this is rendered still more comprehensible 
120. The "pure qualitative unities" which Jacobi discovers in the Critique of 
Pure Reason are space, time and transcendental apperception. "These three uni-
ties are your [Kant's] theses, your principles. In the third thesis, the transcen-
dental apperception, the synthesis is supposed to be already contained, but-
without antithesis [the manifold]. In the two others [space and time] antithesis 
without synthesis is supposed to be present." Ibid., 122. 

131 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
by the following comment: "Insofar as two objects are situated in 
space they are, qua spatial, completely identical (gleich); insofar as 
they are situated in consciousness, they are, qua present in conscious-
ness, completely the same (dieselben). Where is the need here for an 
additional particular action of integration? Is not the whole synthe-
sis already complete through space and consciousness, as passive re-
ceptivities? ... So the intellect does nothing but posit identities and 
in order for this to be possible the finding of identities and non-
identities is presupposed . ... Any judgment is the expression of a 
found identity of this sort .... Apart from what is not to be dis-
tinguished in a judgment [i.e., this identity] anything else that may 
be in it belongs to its matter (das Materiale) and hence it does not 
have its origin in the intellect. And this business of the intellect, this 
attending to and comprehending of a given (vorhanden) identity [for 
whose sake imagination must destroy all particularity and suspend 
all difference], this is what synthesis means?? Nay, rather, all syn-
thesis is suspended by it."121 
Thus Koeppen on the transcendental [i.e., synthetic] unity of trans-
cendental apperception or of productive imagination. He expresses 
Jacobi's conception of knowledge in an easily intelligible way: we 
human beings receive the things as matters of fact through sense 
and through the supernatural revelation122 of seeing, perceiving and 
feeling. (Men, who have superior organization and sense, have an 
experience superior to that of inferior organization and sense.) Yet 
what is taken from experience is always already synthesized and does 
not need to be first synthesized by us, nor indeed can it be synthe-
sized; for our activity as directed upon this synthetically given is the 
reverse of synthesizing, it is the analysing of the given and this ana-
lytic unity, which we find in the object, is so little a synthesis, a 
linking up of the manifold that, on the contrary, the manifold, the 
material [of experience] is shredded by the analytic unity. Space, 
consciousness, etc., objective world, nature can be conceived by us 
only according to analytic unities, we can only dissect them, and 
121. Ibid., 161-2. Hegel does not indicate the ellipses but the quotation is 
verbatim except for the clause in square brackets at the end-in which Hegel 
summarizes one of the ellipses. Nor did Koeppen print his final rhetorical ques-
tion with two question marks in 1816 (this may be-as Lasson surmises-a mis-
print in the Critical Journal-but it may also be another of Hegel's ironical 
asides). 
122. Compare p. 138 below. 

132 
Faith and Knowledge 
(Letters on Spinoza, p. 424) :123 "this opens an immense field for our 
investigations" -a field without end or totality-" that we are forced 
to work on anyway, simply for the sake of our physical [372] 
conservation. [ ... ] The things [ ... ] whose mechanism we have dis-
covered are the things we can produce if the means are in our hands. 
What we are thus able to construct, at least in idea, that we compre-
hend, and what we cannot construct, we do not comprehend either." 
The cognitive activity of the intellect is "a ceaseless positing of iden-
tities which we call linking; it is nothing but a continual reduction 
and simplification of the manifold which would, if this were possible, 
go on until the manifold was entirely discarded and brought to noth-
ing" (Pocketbook, p. 32). 1u 
rational cognition is something quite different from Jacobi's'concep-
tion.125 It does not analyse nature, it does not tear something given 
apart into an analytic unity and a manifold. But rather, being itself 
an organic, living totality, it creates the Idea of totality and con-
structs it as absolute and original identity of the universal and par-
ti,sglar. This is the identity that Kant calls synthetic, not as if a mani-
l,j1{e declare, on the contrary, that _!gnscendental imagination ..9..!" 
'fold lay before it, but because it is in itself differentiated, bi-polar· 
so that unity and manifold do not supervene each to the other in it, 
rather they detach themselves from one another within it, and are 
held together forcefully, as Plato says, by the middle.126 As for sense 
Jacobi readily concedes that it is bi-polar. Yet there seems [to him] 
to be no room for argument about its having to do with a given ob-
ject, and being mere passivity and receptivity, in spite of its own bi-
123. Ibid., IV, 2, 153. 
124. Ibid., Ill, 227. 
125. Hegel wrote, "transcendental imagination and rational cognition is .... " 
He frequently uses sentences of the ungrammatical form, "A and B is 
It is often difficult to say whether this is a matter of carelessness in the use of 
the conjunction or carelessness about the singular form of the verb. The trans-
lator must opt between changing "A and B" to "A or B" (= A, i.e, B) or chang-
ing the singular form of the verb to the plural form. In the present case-
transcendental imagination and rational knowledge-the options are wide open. 
We prefer changing A and B to A or B (A, i.e., B) in order to stress that Hegel 
and Schelling believed that the core of what Kant meant by transcendental 
imagination was "really" the same as what they meant by rational and specula-
tive knowledge. Mery, on the other hand, opts for changing the singular to the 
plural, no doubt for the good reason that, notwithstanding their supposed 
identical core, there remain enough differences between the two concepts to 
keep them from being one 
126. Tima•us, 35a. 

133 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
polarity, -as if the poles were not already contained in its being 
bi-polar and middle. 
In the superfluous127 Pocketbook of 1802 Jacobi cooks up the rum-
bling and squabbling of the essay in the Contributions for an unphi-
losophical public and for the palate of philosophical dilettantes. For 
this purpose he mixes his bitters with shots of Jean-Paul's 128 senti-
mentalism; but he also uses some of Lichtenberg's129 serio-comic 
sallies to hang his own bitter-sweet pronouncements on. This is not 
to their advantage; for the contrast with Lichtenberg's profound and 
witty good humour directly heightens the impression they give of a 
shallow and bitter ill humour. These defamatory outcries against the 
Critical Philosophy serve no instructive purpose; they can only be 
effective as a good old fire and brimstone sermon, to fill the unphilo-
sophical mass of the people with terrified horror and loathing at such 
a spectre as the Kantian philosophy. How far they are well designed 
for that is something for a critic of another kind to decide. We can 
also leave to him the problem of whether such aphorisms and senti-
mental sayings as the following are uncommonly witty and edifying 
or not: "The drive of any living being is the light of this being, its 
right and its force. Only in this light can it dwelt only with this force 
can it act. -No finite being has its life in itself and therefore not 
from itself-the flame of its light, the might of its heart."-[373] 
"The gift of life takes many forms, and the awakening to it is mani-
fold; manifold are its conduct and use. Like unto the beast man, too, 
awakens first as a sensuous creature through the merely sensuous 
nature." -"Behold him then smiling, and beginning to babble, etc."130 
Like Jacobi's philosophical essay in Reinhold's Contributions, his 
popular essay in the Pocketbook contains passages that look to the 
naive outsider as if they might have philosophical meaning. For ex-
ample the footnote on p. 40 (the emphasis here is that of the Pocket-
127. See p. 115, n. 65 above. 
128. Jean-Paul, pseudonym of J. P. Friedrich Richter, 1763-1825, poet, novel-
ist, etc. 
129. Georg Christoph Lichtenberg, 1742-1799, professor of physics at the 
University of Gottingen. His Aphorisms appeared posthumously, Gottingen, 
1800-1806. Schleiermacher's review of Vols. I and II appeared in 1801 in the 
Erlanger Literatur Zeitzmg, to which Hegel also contributed. 
130. Jacobi, Werke, 203-4 (the added quotation marks indicate the breaks). 
The final remark about the human baby, which makes little sense as an apo-
thegm in isolation is, no doubt, chosen because it expresses Hegel's opinion of 
Jacobi's own performance very aptly. 

134 
Faith and Knowledge 
book): "Sensation,-memory and imagination presuppose something 
first and original in consciousness and activity, a principle of life and 
knowledge, a being-in-itself (in sich Seiendes) which, as such, be 
neither quality nor effect nor anything that originated in some way 
and fashion in time. It [must] be self-being, self-cause" -(yet ac-
cording to the Letters on Spinoza, p. 416131 the causa sui has its ori-
gin in the ignoring the essential difference between the principle of 
sufficient reason and causality)-"something extra-temporal, and with 
this property it must also be in possession of a consciousness that 
is extra-temporal, a merely inward consciousness. This extra-temporal, 
merely inward consciousness is most clearly distinguished from an 
outward and temporal consciousness. It is the consciousness of the 
person who enters time, of course, but does not originate in time as a 
merely temporal being. The intellect pertains to the temporal being; 
and Reason pertains to the extra-temporal one."132 
One might suspect that Jacobi is now ready to consider the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason and the principium compositionis of the 
older metaphysics rather more satisfactory for Reason133 [than he had 
thought previously]; for in this passage he himself excludes from 
Reason, conceived as extra-temporal, the very succession of whose 
absence he complained earlier. One might further suspect that Kant's 
blind imagination is also contained, in principle, in this Reason which 
is an indwelling and extra-temporal consciousness clearly distin-
guished from the temporal and outgoing consciousness; for what is 
called seeing is solely in the outgoing and temporal consciousness. 
Jacobi continues: "the intellect isolates, it is materialistic and non-
rational; it denies Spirit and God. Reason isolates, it is idealistic and 
non-intellectual; it denies nature and makes itself God. The whole 
and undivided, true and actual man is both Reason and intellect sim-
ultaneously" (which cannot mean side by side or else they would be 
two pieces or parts); "he has an undivided faith and an identical 
kind of trust in God, in nature and in his own spirit."134 So we must 
comprehend [374] the undivided faith as identity of Reason and in-
tellect, that is, as a simul, of the denial of God and of self-deification, 
of the identity of the temporal and extra-temporal, i.e., of an eternal 
131. Ibid., IV, 2, 146 note 2. 
132. 
This note (which actually begins on page 39 of the Pocketbook for 
1802) was not reprinted in the Werke of 1816. In spite of his comment about 
preserving Jacobi's emphases, Hegel has omitted several and added one. 
133. Compare pp. 98 ff above and Jacobi, Werke, II, 193. 
134. Pocketbook, 1802, pp. 40-1 n. (not reprinted in Jacobi's Werke) 

135 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
time etc.; and we can do so without in the least burlesquing Jacobi's 
philosophy as he burlesqued Spinoza and Kant by carrying into the 
undivided what is characteristic of the isolated qua isolated.* Yet on 
the other hand this undivided faith must be conceived as an undi-
vided pure, pure, pure waveless Unit, as Uni-Form-lty136 without 
beginning, middle or end, without any gender, he she or it," etc. 
(Compare his essay in Reinhold's Contributions, number 3; pas-
sim).137 
Anyone who could take pleasure in twaddling along on the trail 
of nonsense and bombast would find the best possible occasion for 
it in these essays, when Jacobi discusses the undividedness of the 
extra-temporal and the temporal, or of being-in-itself (Selbstwesen-
heit) and experience, etc. For the meaning of Jacobi's composites (i.e., 
syntheses] is not that the temporal sinks to its ground in the extra-
temporal, or the empirical consciousness perishes in rational intuition, 
that all finitude is engulfed in the infinite and that just one totality 
* Jacobi concludes this footnote as follows: "This trinitarian and universally 
unphilosophical faith must be able to become a philosophical faith in the 
strictest sense, a faith confirmed in reflection." (But, if confirmation in reflec-
tion makes any sense at all, the form of faith will disappear as a result of it.) 
"And I make so bold as to say that I know faith can become philosophical and 
that I see the way by which a reflection (ein Nachdenken) gone astray can 
return and arrive at such a faith. Then only will it produce a true philosophy, 
a knowledge and wisdom that illuminates the whole man." Reinhold had called 
himself a reflector (Nachdenker).135 Jacobi thinks, then, that Reinhold in this 
present period has gone astray and he believes there will be a second meta-
morphosis, in which Reinhold will be hatched out into the sylphide of an im-
mortal philosophy whose principle combines denial of God and self-deification, 
intellect and Reason, while leaving man wholly as he is. This notice to the 
philosophical dilettante regarding the coming of the true philosophy may be 
ignored by the philosophical public until the metamorphosis comes to pass. 
135. We try in this way to give an inkling of the play on "nachdenken," 
which has here not only the usual sense of "reflecting" and "meditating," but 
also of "thinking after ... " (where "nach" has the sense as in "nachgehen" 
and "nachforschen" = in pursuit of") and "thinking through." Cf. Difference 
between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems, p. 179, where Reinhold is quoted as 
saying that he nachdachte Bardili, i.e., that he thought in pursuit of Bardili's 
thoughts and thought through them. 
136. Jacobi's word was Einfachheit (simplicity) but he divided the syllables 
for emphasis: Ein-Fach-Heit. "Uniformity" is probably the only English word 
in which the parallel with Ein-heit can be preserved. 
137 There is a fairly close parallel to the last lines of this quote in Jacobi, 
Werke III, 114. 

136 
Faith and Knowledge 
should be recognized as the In-itself which is neither isolated intellect 
nor isolated Reason. For in that case the consequences would be too 
horrible [for Jacobi]: the finite being of things would come to nothing 
and the finite things would turn into appearances and ghosts. If Rea-
son recognizes that the finite is not absolute or eternal, then man 
(Pocketbook, p. 36) "can only have existence through fancy, and 
through Reason he can only come to nothing. Yet to be robbed of 
Reason is the hardest thing for man to bear, and the fate that loss of 
Reason opens for us is a fate of the utmost horror and despair."138 
But no, according to this most strident of all syncretisms, Reason as 
cognition of the extra-temporal and of that which exists in itself (das 
Selbstwesen) must concede the rights of the intellect, [375] that is, of 
the temporal and nonessential (das Unwesentliche) [i.e., appearance]. 
And when Reason builds a temple to the Godhead, it must be hu-
mane enough to let the devil have his chapel there too. 
From what we have seen so far of both the positive and polemical 
aspects of knowledge in Jacobi's philosophy, the character of knowl-
edge as he conceives it emerges: Reason may analyse matters of 
fact, separate the universal from the particular and proceed by way 
of empty identities. If any philosophy establishes an absolute identity 
of universal and particular, this identity will at once be turned back 
into a universality cut off from the particular, and Jacobi will demon-
strate the necessity that particulars have first to be added to the 
universal, or that universality only supervenes to the given partic-
ulars. Where Jacobi himself acknowledges a bi-polarity, a subject-
objectivity, it must have the form of a sense, a thing, something 
experienced which is not allowed to lose the character of a datum, of 
being immovably opposite to the subject that thinks it. It must not 
be expressed as free Idea of Reason or as having the universal va-
lidity that belongs to scientific knowledge, but only as something 
subjectively inspired. Thinking and being, the universal which re-
mains formal identity, and the particular which remains a given, 
inspired subjectivity and the objectivity of knowledge do not flow to-
gether in cognition. The given matter of fact and the subjectivity 
thinking it are, both alike, absolute. 
We must now deal with the question of how absolute identity re-
lat~s to absolute subjectivity; for the absolute identity [according to 
Jacobi] cannot be in cognition, although at the same time it abso-
lutely must have existence for the subjectivity that posits itself as 
138. Jacobi, Werke III, 231. 

137 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
absolute. Now, this relation of an absolute finitude to the truly abso-
lute is faitn. 139 In faith, the subjectivity does acknowledge itself to be 
finite and nothing before the eternal, yet it manages this acknowl-
edgment in such a way that it saves and maintains itself as having 
its own intrinsic being outside of the Absolute. But Jacobi extends 
faith [belief] also to the non-conceptual (ausser dem Begriff) knowl-
edge of the particular, i.e., the immediate empirical representation of 
ordinary objects. For the universal, if separated from the particular, is 
not only opposed to the absolute identity of universal and particular, 
but to the particular as well. He took over this idea [of empirical 
belief as faith] from those radical arch-empiricists, Hume and Locke. 
More than anyone else, these two have immersed philosophy in all 
this finitude and subjectivity, and have put the search for the grounds 
of cognition and the critique of the powers of the human mind in 
the place of cognition itself, they have posited the particular as such 
as the Absolute. Through the analysis of sensuous experience they 
have driven out metaphysics, and their reflective approach, spun out 
more extensively and systematically upon German soil, is now called 
German philosophy, that is, the philosophy of Kant, Jacobi and 
Fichte. Quite apart from the connection between faith and philoso-
phy, Mendelssohn and others140 did not [376] dream that Jacobi 
extended the name of faith to cover the certainty of what is objective 
in the ordinary sense-for there was still a tradition as to what the 
object of philosophical cognition is. They did not dream that by this 
means Jacobi had for his part endowed the certainty of ordinary ob-
jectivity with the same importance which Hume, Kant and Fichte 
had given it in a different fashion. Jacobi affirmed this certainty, 
Hume, Kant and Fichte denied it, but both parties gave equally abso-
lute status to limitedness and finitude, and so the important point is 
one and the same for both; for it does not matter at all whether 
finitude is something objective (in the vulgar sense) or something 
subjective, as long as it is absolute. When Jacobi said (Letters on 
Spinoza, p. 92): "my religion knows no duty to remove doubts of 
this kind except by appeal to rational grounds; it commands no faith 
in eternal truths,"141 Mendelssohn took Jacobi's faith to be, not the 
139. [Or belief]. 
140. The reference is mainly to the participants in the Pantheismusstreit be-
tween Jacobi and Mendelssohn-which began with Jacobi's Letters on Spinoza 
and was concerned with the nature of Lessing's "Spinozism." 
141. Jacobi, Werke IV, 1, 116. 

138 
Faith and Knowledge 
certainty of temporal things, but the certainty of ordinary conscious-
ness without rational cognition concerning the eternal and extra-
temporal. In speaking of eternal truths as the object of philosophy, 
Mendelssohn had the idea that philosophy does not occupy itself 
with the certainty of empirical fact (Wirklichkeit) and that Jacobi did 
not mean Hume's belief in sensuous perception by his "faith" either. 
Jacobi, on the contrary, did not have eternal truths in mind at all, 
but the ordinary truth of fact, and it is to this that Jacobi's first 
declaration against Mendelssohn is directed at once (Letters on Spi-
noza, p. 215): "Dear Mendelssohn, we all are born in faith and must 
remain in faith [ ... ] Through faith we know that we have a body 
and that there exist other bodies and other thinking beings outside 
us. A genuine, miraculous revelation! For we only sense our body, 
in this or that state or with this or that quality and in so sensing its 
state we become aware not only of its changes, but also of something 
quite different that is neither mere sensation nor thought, we become 
aware of other existing things" (underlined by Jacobi himself) "and 
we do so with the same certainty with which we are aware of our-
selves: for without the Thou the I is impossible. [So it is only through 
qualities we accept that we obtain all the ideas that we have, and 
there is no other way to real cognition; for the objects (Gegenstiinde) 
to which Reason gives birth, are phantoms.] We have, then, a revela-
tion of nature which not only commands but compels each and every 
man to believe and to accept eternal verities upon faith." Here Ja-
cobi does not just include ordinary knowledge of fact, the realm of 
sense perception, within faith; [377] he limits faith and the eternal 
verities to this realm completely. Jacobi continues: "the religion of 
the Christians teaches but does not command a different sort of faith: 
a faith, whose object is not eternal verities, but the finite contingent 
nature of man."142 -As if Jacobi's eternal verities about having a 
body, about other bodies, and about the existence of other bodies 
and existing things outside us did not concern the contingent, finite 
nature of man. And what a wretched sort of nature must our nature 
be, if it is finite and contingent even in relation to [and comparison 
with] that first nature, and what sort of religion is the Christian re-
142. Hegel marks this quotation from the second edition (Breslau, 1789). The 
text in the Werke of 1816 is somewhat different (IV 1, 21Q-2). The sentence in 
square brackets is not in the Werke and its "durch Beschaffenheiten, die wir 
annehmen" allows of several renderings, none of which seems to be entirely sat-
isfactory. 

139 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
ligion if it has this lower nature as its object, this nature that is more 
finite and contingent [than the first, i.e., the realm of external exist-
ence]. 
In this declaration-which has even more weight because the par-
ticular circumstances that occasioned it guarantee that it was made 
quite deliberately-Jacobi explicitly restricts faith and eternal veri-
ties to what is temporal and corporeal. He is therefore quite consist-
ent in his abhorrence of Kant's and Fichte's philosophies, because 
these philosophies aim to show that there is no truth in the finite and 
the temporal and are especially great on their negative side: they 
show what is finite and appearance and nothing. Since the Kantian 
and Fichtean philosophies maintain a fixed antithesis between cogni-
tion and faith, they posit opposition directly and absolutely, and 
hence posit finitude itself absolutely, qua finitude. But they are dis-
tinguished [from Jacobi] in this: their finitude is an empty finitude, 
it is nothing but the pure, infinite concept of finitude, so that it be-
comes the same (gleich) as infinity; for any content or filling that is 
given and must be given to this finitude by itself, ought to count as 
nothing. Jacobi, on the contrary, desires these nothings in their whole 
length and breadth and screams blue murder over the bringing of 
this nothingness to nothing. Furthermore the philosophies of Kant 
and Fichte definitely affirm the immediate certainty of the supersensu-
ous as faith. On this point not the slightest misunderstanding is 
possibile, notwithstanding the fact that Kant denies all reality to the 
Ideas with respect to theoretical Reason; for, on his view, theoretical 
cognition is determination through the categories which have their 
reality solely in the sensuous world and experieme, or [in other 
words] it is only intellectual cognition that they make possible, not 
rational cognition. There cannot be any misunderstanding about this 
either. Kant denies all reality to the concepts of Reason [i.e., the 
Ideas], in the sense, namely, that they cannot be given in sensuous 
perception and in an experience mediated through the concepts of the 
intellect [i.e., the categories]: in the field of experience they are 
merely regulative principles143 for the employment of the intellect. 
Jacobi sees here the nullification of the Ideas themselves, because a 
temporal and corporeal existence for them is thus denied (378]. And 
in Reinhold's third issue (p. 36) Jacobi asks "every honest man upon 
his conscience if he could ever for any cause whatsoever return to 
143. Compare Critique of Pure Reason, A 642 ff.; B 670 ff. 

140 
Faith and Knowledge 
these Ideas as objectively true and real notions and place a sincere 
and heartfelt confidence in them, once he had clearly understood" 
that the Ideas have a merely problematic status for corporeal and 
temporal knowledge and experience, and for sensuous perception, 
and "have been proved once and for ever to be objectively ground-
less" (N.B. in what sense)-"/ say it is impossible!"144-0ne ought 
rather to say this: it is only possible to put trust in the Ideas when 
that kind of reality [i.e., empirical reality] has been brought to noth-
ing; it is quite impossible to put trust in the Ideas as long as the 
dogmatism of absolute finitude and subjectivity is maintained, a dog-
matism that puts the eternal verities in bodies and other matters of 
fact. 
This blind hatred of the nullification of temporality, along with the 
holy zeal for the good cause of matters of fact, results in a high de-
gree of malicious distortion. The way Jacobi cites Kant in this present 
instance is an example that we cannot pass by. (We do not mean to 
say that this quotation with the others presented above are the only 
ones of the kind; but they are the only ones that we have checked 
up on in Kant.) On pages 99-100 of Reinhold's third issue,l45 Jacobi 
or Koeppen says: "It would therefore be much more consistent if we 
did not think of any objectivity at all in respect of any representation 
of God and immortality and if we said with the author of the Critique 
of Pure Reason: everything to do with religion and freedom is a 
mere Idea of Reason, mere heuristic fiction and, apart from its use-
fulness as a guiding principle of the intellect, it is a mere thought-
thing whose possibility cannot be proved."146 As the source for this 
we are referred to Critique of Pure Reason, p. 799, which says: "the 
concepts of Reason are mere Ideas and have no object that can be met 
with in any experience. [ ... ] they are thought only problematically, 
etc."147 The discussion here concerns the concepts of Reason solely 
and exclusively in a theoretical connection [i.e., with respect to their 
cognitive employment only]. Jacobi or Koeppen extend what is said 
without any conditions or limitations to everything to do with reli-
gion and freedom: it is all mere fiction. What Kant said of the theo-
144. Jacobi, Werke Ill, 102-3 (Hegel himself put quotation marks around the 
concluding parts of this passage). 
145. The Critical Journal, has "5. Heft," a misprint which Lasson failed to 
correct. The passage is in Koeppen's "working out" of Jacobi's notes-hence the 
doubt about who is responsible. 
146. Jacobi, Werke III, 181. 
147. Critique of Pure Reason, A 771; B 799. 

141 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
retical reality of the concepts of Reason is now said of their reality 
in general. 
Jacobi, then, has pulled faith down into the realm of fact and sen-
suous experience, and this is all that he means by "faith" in his 
polemic against Mendelssohn. But, besides this faith he has still an-
other faith, a faith, not in finitude, but in the eternal. This faith, 
which has the eternal as absolute object, keeps cognition sundered 
from it and not united with it. It excludes rational cognition; for it 
acknowledges cognition only as something subjective and as formal 
knowledge. We must ask about this faith if it is not polluted even as 
faith by being transposed into the relation to reflection. 148 (379] 
The faith of a man who has not lifted himself to the level of ab-
stract reflection, is naive because it is not opposed to reflection. Such 
a faith lacks the reflective awareness that its connection with the 
eternal is confronted by rational cognition, even though they do not 
necessarily clash. The connection with the eternal in this simple faith 
is immediate certainty, that has not been made objective and given 
conceptual form by thinking. [Indeed] it has no connection with any 
opposition at all. It is a pure position without regard to anything 
else; it is not a negation either of another faith in something else, or 
even of another form for its own content. How the naivete of this 
faith might be affected by a regard of this kind [to something op-
posed to it] is not relevant at this point; only the regard itself is 
relevant. For where faith as such is bound up with an awareness of 
itself and negates formal, finite knowledge [there the question arises] 
whether a faith that has this reflective attitude to finite knowledge 
is truly able to raise itself above subjectivity and finitude, since no 
rational knowledge is supposed to be achievable. This is the negative 
and conscious shape in which faith occurs in Kant, Jacobi and Fichte. 
In true faith [however] the whole sphere of finitude, of being-
something-on-[one's]-own-account, the sphere of sensibility sinks 
into nothing before the thinking and intuiting of the eternal. The 
thinking here becomes one with the intuiting, and all the midges of 
subjectivity are burned to death in this consuming fire, and the very 
consciousness of this surrender and nullification is nullified. Similarly, 
among the religious acts in which faith is feeling and intuition, some 
are more and some less pure and objective: in song, for instance, 
consciousness and subjectivity melt to a greater degree into the uni-
148. The "pollution of faith by reflection" is another topic that recurs in the 
Phenomenology; see especially Baillie, pp. 570-80. 

142 
Faith and Knowledge 
versa! objective harmony, than when they suspend themselves in 
quiet prayer.149 
When it is introduced into philosophy, however, faith completely 
loses this pure naivete; for now it is Reason which flees from reflec-
tion into faith in order to nullify finitude and suspend subjectivity, 
-just for this reason, faith itself is affected by the occurrence of this 
opposition to reflection and subjectivity. Since it now acquires this 
negation as part of its meaning, faith preserves reflection on the nulli-
fication of reflection; it preserves the subjective consciousness of the 
nullification of subjectivity. Subjectivity has thus saved itself in its 
own nullification. In a consciousness that does not reflect on its faith, 
finite thinking and faith lie apart and because of this apartness, the 
consciousness is a non-philosophical one. Its finite doings and deal-
ings and its sense perception on one side, alternate with divine wor-
ship on the other. To the religious man everything finite and objective 
presents itself at the same time under an eternal shape as well [as 
it.; ordinary one]; and his own conduct [380] expresses an eternal 
shape, too. But this shape of eternity is here something subjective; it 
is the ethical beauty of the individual which sets itself forth. This 
beauty achieves true objectivity and universality in art and philoso-
phy, where the antithesis with respect to the Absolute of faith and 
reflection disappears. 1 ~0 Both the unconscious antithesis present in 
ordinary consciousness, and the conscious one present in the philoso-
phies of reflection disappear. As far as the unconscious antithesis in 
ordinary consciousness is concerned, faith and what springs from 
faith is capable of being pure; for subjectivity and finitude are totally 
outside it, they do not touch it, they are not connected with it. But 
faith introduced into philosophy does not remain pure. For here it 
reflects and involves negation; and in this negating it is concerned 
with subjectivity, and thereby preserves it. Faith is [thus] infected 
by the antithesis itself, just as its content, as supersensuous, has a 
stubborn sensuousness set against it, [and] the infinite faces a stub-
born finitude. And since both nullified subjectivity and saved subjec-
149. Compare Phenomenology, Baillie, p. 717. The "hymn" is thought ex-
pressed in music. Hegel has earlier compared Jacobi's piety to the music of the 
Idea without the thought (p. 115 above). In the Phenomenology medieval piety 
is similarly music without logos (Baillie, pp. 257, 263, 265). 
150. The German text would seem to allow also this translation· " ... where 
the antithesis of faith and reflection disappears in its connection with the Ab-
solute." 

143 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
tivity are present in this faith, subjectivity is justified, for it defends 
itself with its own nullification; whereas in ordinary unreflective faith 
subjectivity has truly disappeared, and is something unholy in its 
sight. 
This pollution of faith and this hallowing of subjectivity must lead 
us briefly into the practical philosophy of Jacobi. Kant's practical 
reason, being the empty concept in its unmoved opposition to nature, 
can produce nothing but a system of tyranny [of the Law of Reason 
over human nature],151 a rending of ethical integrity (Sittlichkeit) and 
beauty, or else like Kantian morality cleave to so-called duties of a 
formalistic kind that determine nothing. In their enumeration and 
exposition these duties lack scientific consistency because they yield 
to the consistency of nature. By admitting the possibility of casuistry, 
the system also admits its scientific nullity, yet it is this scientific 
consistency alone that allows the straining toward ethical Ideas to 
become visible [in Kant's "Doctrine of Virtue"].152 But in the "Doc-
trine of Right"153 definiteness is necessary and cannot be permitted 
to slide back into the indefinite; so this science [the Doctrin~ of 
Right] must, of necessity, besmirch ethical nature with the most 
shamefully evident disgraces. Jacobi, on the other hand, is hostile 
toward the concept in his philosophy, and this necessarily leads him 
to despise the concept in its objective ethical form and above all to 
despise the pure law, the formal principle of morality. Among other 
outstanding passages on this point, the following from the Letter to 
Fichte (p. 32) is beautiful and quite pure: 
"Yea, I am the atheist, the godless one, the one who, in defiance 
of the will that wills nothing, wills to lie as dying Desdemona lied, 
or to lie and deceive as Pylades did in feigning to be Orestes; to mur-
der like Timoleon, to break law and oath like Epaminondas, or John 
de Witt; who wills suicide like Otho, or temple-robbery like David 
-yes, I even will to pluck the ears of wheat [381] on the Sabbath 
for no other reason save that I am hungry, and because the law is 
made for man and not man for the law .... For I know, I know with 
the most holy certitude within me-that the privilegium aggratiandi, 
151. For the "tyranny" here referred to, see especially "The Spirit of Chris-
tianity" (1798/9) in Early Theological Writings, ed. Knox and Kroner, pp. 209-
15. 
152. See the Metaphysical Principles of the Doctrine of Virtue. This is the 
second part of the Metaphysik der Sitten {1797). 
153. See the first part of the Metaphysik der Sitten. 

144 
Faith and Knowledge 
for crimes of this sort against the pure letter of the absolutely uni-
versal law of Reason, is man's authentic right of majesty, the seal of 
his dignity, of his divine nature."154 
Jacobi is speaking in the first person: I am and I will. But this can-
not jeopardize the objectivity of the passage. The expression that the 
law is made for man and not man for the law-without regard to the 
meaning it has where Jacobi took it from-certainly acquires in this 
context a more universal meaning, but it also retains its true mean-
ing. 155 This is why we have called this passage quite pure. -Ethical 
beauty must not lack either of the two sides. It must have the vitality 
of the individual who refuses to obey the dead concept. It must have 
the form of concept and law, of universality and objectivity, -the 
side which Kant abstracted in an absolute fashion as the only one, 
utterly subjecting individual vitality to it, and killing it. Our quota-
tion deals with the other side, the side of the vitality and freedom of 
the ethical life (Sittlichkeit), and although it does not exclude objec-
tivity, it does not express it. Regarding the necessity and objectivity 
of the ethical life we shall have to look for other data [in Jacobi]. 
154. Jacobi, Werke III, 37-8. Jacobi is thinking of Kant's discussion of the 
sovereign prerogative of mercy and pardon ("Rechtslehre," Section 49, ad fin. 
Akad. VI, 337), Kant says: "The right to pardon a criminal (jus aggratiandi), 
either by mitigating or by entirely remitting the punishment is certainly the 
most slippery of all the rights of the sovereign. By exercising it he can demon-
strate the splendor of his majesty and yet thereby wreak injustice to a high 
degree. . . . he can make use of this right of pardon only in connection with 
an injury committed against himself (crimen la!sil! majestatis). But, even in these 
cases, he cannot allow crime to go unpunished if the safety of the people might 
be endangered thereby. The right to pardon is the only one that deserves the 
name of a right of majesty." (Ladd, pp. 107-8). 
It seems that "right of majesty" is a Kantian coinage, for Roman lawyers did 
not refer to the right, but only to the injury of "majesty." The crimen li!!Sil! 
majestatis was originally an offence against the sovereignty of the Roman Peo-
ple; see Ulpian, Digest, 48, 4, 1. This, rather than the later sense of "lese ma-
jeste," is clearly what Kant had in mind. 
We have not been able to trace any earlier technical use either of Kant's jus 
aggratiandi or of Jacobi's privilegium aggratiandi. For reasons of etymology the 
expression cannot be very old: the "Latin" aggratiare derives from modern 
Italian. 
(The Kant reference was pointed out to us by Prof. Klaus Hartmann; the ety-
mology of aggratiare by Prof. Peter Preuss. We also wish to thank several other 
correspondents who have endeavored to help us in this connection). 
155. Jacobi took it from Matthew 12 and/or Luke 6; Hegel had discussed the 
"true meaning" in his unpublished essay on the "Spirit of Christianity." See 
Early Theological Writings, trans. T. M. Knox, p. 208. 

145 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
Jacobi seeks to clarify his Idea of ethical life by appealing to ex-
amples of ethical characters. What he stresses in his examples shows 
up at once his neglect of the lawful and objective side. With the 
Spartans Spertias and Bulis (Letters on Spinoza, p. 240) it is their 
experience which determines their ethos. As Jacobi remarks, they do 
not tell Hydarnes who wanted to persuade them to become friends 
of the king: "you are a fool. [ ... ) They rather confess that by his 
own standard he is wise, has insight and is good. Neither did they 
try to impart their truth, [ ... ) they did not invoke their own under-
standing, or their refined judgment; they appealed only to things and 
to their liking for these things. Nor did they take pride in their virtue, 
and they had no philosophy to offer [ .... ] They merely confessed 
the way of their hearts, the way they felt. Nor were they any more 
explicit with Xerxes" than with Hydarnes to whom they mentioned 
their experience. "For to Xerxes they said: 'How could we live here, 
how could we abandon our country, our laws, and such men that for 
their sake we voluntarily undertook so great a journey to die for 
them?"156 Could the ethical really be made more explicit? Is it only 
subjectivity of experience, subjectivity of sense, of inclination that is 
visible here [as Jacobi has it? On the contrary] the two Spartans 
showed their contempt for the satrap plainly, when they spoke to 
him of his and their experience and inclination. Under the form of 
another subjectivity they confronted his subjectivity with their essen-
tial being. To the majesty of the monarch, however, they showed 
their respect in that they made themselves perfectly explicit before 
him: [382) they named what was most objective, and what was as 
holy for him as it was for them, country, people, and laws. But Ja-
cobi calls country, people and laws things; he turns what is most 
alive into something one has got used to as one does get used to 
things. He comprehends them, not as holy things, but as everyday 
things.157 Toward the holy there is no such relation as getting used 
156. Jacobi, Werke IV, 1, 232-4. Hegel has changed the sequence of some of 
Jacobi's sentences. We have indicated his omissions. He marked as a quotation 
only the speech of the two Spartans to the King of Persia in Herodotus from 
whom the story comes. (Jacobi supplies the reference: Herodotus, Histories 
VII, 129; but in the Oxford classical text, Spertias is Sperchias, and the correct 
reference is VII, 134-6.) 
157. Dinge. Hegel's preference for the word Sache-even sometimes when he 
is dealing with Kant's Ding-an-sich-is probably connected with the pejorative 
connotations that Ding acquired in the warfare of Enlightenment against su-
perstition (compare p. 57 n. 6 above). 

146 
Faith and Knowledge 
to it, and being dependent on it. What Jacobi conceives as contingen-
cy and dependence is the supreme necessity and the supreme energy 
of ethical freedom: living in accordance with the laws of a people and 
of the Spartan people at that. What is rational above all else he con-
ceives as something vulgarly empirical. Moreover, no one would ex-
pect Spertias and Bulis to fall into the petty subjectivity of invoking 
their refined judgment and understanding or glorying in their own 
virtues, and the mere absence of such pettiness is something too trivial 
to be signalized as a virtue in them.-There is even less reason to re-
gard the story of Kleomenes in W oldemar158 as emphasizing objec-
tivity; for the Spartan is introduced there not in his relations with his 
country and in the strength of his true virtue, but in his downfall 
as an individual. And for whose edification is this? for emptyheaded 
or affected females and for sentimental bourgeois. 
Since Jacobi is very hostile to objectivity and the concept in the 
interest of ethical beauty, we cannot do anything else but hold fast 
to the models (Gestalten) in which he meant to make his Idea of 
ethical beauty clear. And the key-note of these models is this con-
scious lack of objectivity, this subjectivity holding fast to itself; not 
the constancy of tranquil self-possession (Besonnenheit), but of re-
flection on one's personality, an eternally returning introspective con-
cern for the subject which puts extreme meticulousness, nostalgic 
egoism and ethical sickliness in the place of ethical freedom. This 
preoccupation with self produces the same transformation in the 
beautiful individuality that came over faith. 159 That is to say, through 
this consciousness of individual beauty one gives oneself the con-
sciousness of subjectivity suspended and egoism brought to nothing; 
whereas one has thereby set up, and simultaneously justified, the 
most extreme subjectivity and inner idolatry.160 In the poets who can 
tell what is eternal and what is finite and damned, we find Hell and 
damnation expressly identified as being bound forever to one's sub-
jective deed, being alone with what is most peculiarly one's own; it 
is a deathless consideration of this possession. Think of Dante among 
158. Jacobi, Werke V, 393-417, especially pp. 401-14. Jacobi follows Plutarch's 
account of the attempt by King Kleomenes to revive in Sparta the traditional 
Sittlichkeit of the Lycurgan constitution. 
159. Compare p. 141 ff. above. 
160. It is worth while to compare here the way "the law of the heart" de-
velops into the "frenzy of self-conceit" in the Phenomenology (Baillie, pp. 395-
9). 

147 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
the earlier poets,161 or of Goethe's Orestes who surrenders to Hell 
for a period while still alive.162 In Jacobi we can observe this very 
same torment of eternal self-contemplation in the heroes Allwill and 
Woldemar;163 but they do not even contemplate themselves in a deed, 
they contemplate themselves in the even greater boredom and 
impotence of their empty [383] being. This spiritual debauch with 
themselves is presented as the ground of the catastrophe in their not-
very-novelworthy histories, but we also see that in the final denoue-
ment this principle is not suspended, and even the virtue of all the 
surrounding characters who are not brought to catastrophe by it, is 
in a greater or lesser degree marred by the stain of that hell. 
Thus, in Jacobi Protestant subjectivity seems to return out of the 
Kantian conceptual form to its true shape, to a subjective beauty of 
feeling (Empfirzdurzg) and to a lyrical yearning for heaven. But faith 
and individual beauty now have an essential ingredient of reflection 
and of consciousness of this subjective beauty, and are thus cast out 
of that state of innocence and unreflectedness which alone makes 
them capable of being beautiful, devout and religious. 
From what has been said it emerges that, within the sphere com-
mon to both, Kant's philosophy is the opposite of Jacobi's. Kant's 
philosophy posits absolute subjectivity and finitude in pure abstrac-
tion and thus acquires the objectivity and infinity of the concept. 
Jacobi's philosophy does not take up finitude itself into the concept; 
it makes a principle out of finitude in its finiteness, out of finitude 
as empirical contingency and consciousness of this subjectivity. The 
sphere common to both philosophies is the absoluteness of the anti-
thesis between, on one side, finitude, the natural, knowledge-which 
in this antithesis is bound to be merely formal knowledge-and, on 
the other, the supernatural, supersensuousness and infinity. For both 
of them what is truly Absolute is an absolute Beyond in faith and in 
feeling; for cognitive Reason it is nothing. In both philosophies the 
161. The dearest, as well as the most celebrated example, of what Hegel 
means, is probably Francesca in Canto V of the Inferno. 
162. The Hades to which Orestes descends in a swoon (in Goethe's Iphigenie 
auf Tauris, Act lli, Scene 2) can hardly be what Hegel means here unless his 
"tenacious memory" has failed him badly. For Orestes there encounters the 
whole house of Atreus, murderers and victims alike, their deeds forgotten. 
Hegel must be thinking more of the way Orestes is pursued by the Furies for 
the murder of his mother Clyt<Emnestra. 
163. The philosophical novels Allwills Briefsammlung and Waldemar are in 
Werke I and V. 

148 
Faith and Knowledge 
speculative Idea comes to the fore. In Kant, it occurs in pure [i.e., 
uncorrupted] form in the deduction of the categories, only to become 
at once a pure [i.e., abstract] identity, a unity of the intellect; in 
other places it occurs as a merely possible thought which cannot 
acquire any reality in thinking because reflection is to be dominant 
without qualification. In Jacobi likewise the speculative Idea occurs 
in subjective form as something personal (partikuliires), as a spirited 
sally; it can no more be allowed entry into universality than Reason 
can be allowed to rise from instinct and subjective individuality to 
intuition, and so neither is allowed to become something for thinking 
[i.e., to function as it should in speculative thought]. 
Once philosophy moves in the direction of the reflective form, the 
prevalence of the subjective and finite aspect is inevitable. In Jacobi's 
philosophy the subjective and finite prevail. To be sure, the same 
emphasis is also evident in other philosophical efforts, but in some it 
is more feeble and in others less ambitious. In the form which Jacobi 
gave to philosophy theoretical and practical subjectivity and the be-
yond of faith are more clearly articulated than anywhere else. This 
is why we have chosen to expound it as the exemplary representative 
of its species. It should also be noted, however, that the side of the 
subjective and finite can be apprehended in a higher and nobler 
shape [to which we now turn]. 
On the one hand, as we have already [384] noted/64 Jacobi's way 
of doing philosophy comes close in its principle to the subjective 
beauty of Protestantism. For it exalts the individual and the particu-
lar above the concept and emphasizes subjective vitality. Protestant-
ism does not admit a communion (Umgang) with God and a con-
sciousness of the divine that consists in the saturating objectivity of 
a cult and in which this nature and this universe are enjoyed in the 
present and seen in a sight that is in itself clear. Instead it makes 
communion with God and consciousness of the divine into something 
inward that maintains its fixed form of inwardness; it makes them 
into a yearning for a beyond and a future. Although this nostalgia 
cannot be united with its eternal object, it has its beauty and its infi-
nite joy in this: its object is in truth what is eternal, and it does not 
try to trap it in order to get something back for itself. But on the 
other hand, Jacobi's principle tar_nishes the beauty of individuality 
anci its form of feeling and love and faith. For insofar as its object is 
the eternal, his faith has a polemical aspect, and therefore it inevita-
164. See p. 146 above. 

149 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
bly reflects subjectivity. Furthermore, as absolute certitude, it extends 
over the temporal and the actual so that the testimony of the senses 
is accepted as a manifestation of truth, and feeling and instinct are 
assumed to contain the rule of ethical conduct. Beauty and faith are 
also tarnished through reflection on personality, that is, through the 
reflection that man in general and the particular person is the subject 
that has sensations and love of this beautiful sort-for this reflection 
turns man's yearning into basking in his subjectivity, in his beautiful 
thoughts and sensations. But neither the truth that is in nature-the 
truth in the form of actuality and temporality, nor the consciousness 
[in man] of his absolute personality-can assuage the grief of reli-
gious nostalgia, and call it back from its beyond. For nature taken 
as something temporal and the individual taken as absolute in his 
singularity, are not nature as universe, in the intuition of which his 
yearning could find its peace; for it is the intuition [not of a beyond] 
but of a presence. Nor is the absoluteness of the subject in his per-
sonal singularity and his abiding opposition to the eternal, a Reason 
that sees, a love that is pure, or a faith that is alive. On the contrary, 
the beauty of subjective nature, its faith and its love and its feeling 
in general, can only be defiled in a reconciliation in which the yearn-
ing finds truth and certainty in the temporal, the subjective and the 
empirical. 
Jacobi's principle, then, allows the grief and yearning of Protes-
tantism to proceed to a reconciliation. But the reconciliation is of the 
general eudCEmonist type, i.e., it is by way of the finite. Here the 
finite is from the outset the reflective consciousness of feeling and of 
yearning, and this reflective consciousness [385] turns the subject of it, 
qua subject into something. When yearning proceeds to pollute itself, 
and to take ordinary actuality and temporality as a revelation [it aban-
dons the beyond for the things of this world and] finds this world 
in itself. So yearning thus reflected in itself could find a higher level 
(Potenz) than Jacobi expounds. For its deification of the subject 
could be made into a more elevated object.165 The sense as well as 
the intuition of oneself and of the world could be grasped in a more 
ideal (idealisch) way. Viewed from the other side, this amounts to 
turning the highest intuition itself into something subjective, some-
thing that remains private and personal. When this world ( das Dies-
165. The grammar of the German sentence that ends here is a Gordian knot 
which we have had to cut with some unavoidable disloyalty to the text. 

150 
Faith and Knowledge 
seits) that has truth is the Universe instead of [temporal] actuality, 
and the reconciliation with nature is identity with the Universe, then 
Jacobi's principle will have reached the highest level of which it is 
capable, and Protestantism in its quest for reconciliation in the here 
and now, will have driven itself to the highest form [it can reach] 
without stepping out of its character of subjectivity. As feeling, this 
identity with the Universe is infinite love, while as intuition, it is 
religion. But this identity must remain something strictly subjective 
and particular whether in the passive form of apprehension and in-
ner copying or in that of [active] virtuosity. The outward manifesta-
tion of the identity must not be stabilized, its living force must not be 
entrusted to objectivity. The [reconciled] Identity must maintain the 
reflection of [unreconciled] yearning upon the subject as before. 
Jacobi's principle has in fact attained this highest level in [Schleier-
macher's] Speeches on Religion.166 In Jacobi's philosophy Reason is 
conceived only as instinct and feeling; ethical conduct occurs only in 
a context of empirical contingency, and as dependence on things 
given by experience and inclination and the way of the heart; and 
knowledge is nothing but an awareness of particularities and peculiar-
ities, whether external or internal. In [Schleiermacher's] Speeches, by 
contrast, nature, as a collection of finite facts, is extinguished and 
acknowledged as the Universe. Because of this, the yearning is 
brought back from its escape out of actuality into an eternal beyond, 
the partition between the cognitive subject and the absolutely unat-
tainable object is torn down, grief is assuaged in joy, and the endless 
striving is satisfied in intuition. 
But even when the individual casts away his subjectivity, and the 
dogmatism of yearning dissolves its antithesis in idealism,167 still this 
Subject-Objectivity in the intuition of the Universe has to remain 
something particular and subjective. The virtuosity of the religious 
artist168 has to be allowed to mingle its subjectivity into the tragic 
166. [Friedrich Schleiermacher]: On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despis-
ers, Berlin, 1799. The abridged English translation by John Oman has now been 
reprinted (New York, Ungar, 1955). Friedrich Ernst Daniel Schleiermacher 
(1768-1834) was a Lutheran minister and professor in Berlin. 
167. The dogmatic antithesis is the opposition between the Beyond and this 
world. The object of yearning is this-worldly as revealed in experience, and 
idealism here stands for the double-headed identity: the identity of the Beyond 
and this world, an identity which Hegel calls on these pages the universe, and 
the identity of the Subject with the Object, that is, Subject-Objectivity. 
168. In the second edition of his Speeches (1806) Schleiermacher abandoned 
the term "religious artist" altogether. 

151 
B. Jacobian Philosophy 
earnestness of religion. His individuality must not be veiled and em-
bodied in an objective representation of great figures and their mu-
tual motion which is, in turn, a veil for the motion of the Universe in 
them-as it was in [the] epics and tragedies which artistic genius 
built for the church triumphant of Nature.169 Nor are .lyrical expres-
sions to be deprived of their subjectivity [386] by their simultaneous 
presence in the memory [of the "folk"] and their entrance into every-
one's discourse. Instead, this subjective element is supposed to con-
stitute the essential vitality and truth both in the exposition of one's 
own intuition of the Universe and in its [re]production in others; 
art is supposed to be forever without works of art; and the freedom 
of the highest intuition is supposed to consist in singularity and the 
possession of personal originality {in dem fur sich etwas Besonderes 
Haben). -What is a priest but a tool and a servant whom the con-
gregation offers as sacrifice, and who offers himself for its sake and 
for his own, in order to enact what is the bounding and the objective 
(moment] of religious intuition? All his might and strength before 
the mature congregation can belong to him only as a representative. 
But [in Schleiermacher] the congregation takes the role of immaturity 
on itself and is supposed to have the aim and intent of letting the 
priest, as a virtuoso of edification and enthusiasm, produce in it the 
inwardness of intuition. Instead of extinguishing or at least not 
acknowledging a subjective privacy of intuition-a man is called an 
idiot insofar as his life is private170-one is to give in to it so far that 
this particularity forms the principle of a private congregation. So 
it is that the little congregations and peculiarities assert themselves 
and multiply ad infinitum; they float apart and gather together by hap-
penstance; every moment the groupings alter like the patterns in a 
sea of sand given over to the play of the winds. Yet at the same time 
-as is only fair-every group regards the private and distinctive 
peculiarity of its view as something so otiose and even unremarkable 
that it does not mind whether it is acknowledged or not, and gives 
up all claims to objectivity. All these little groups can stay peacefully 
169. This is an echo of a theme from Hegel's earliest manuscripts. See espe-
cially the "Tiibingen Fragment" of 1793 (translated in Harris, Toward the Sun-
light, Oxford, 1972, pp. 481-507; compare p. 507) and the following passages 
from subsequent essays, translated by T. M. Knox in Hegel, Early Theological 
Writings (Chicago, 1948), pp. 82, 143, 147-8, 154-5, 184-5, 193, 197-8, 288 ff., 
252. Compare also Richard Kroner's Introduction to that book. 
170. Hegel here plays on the fact that idiotes is the normal Greek word for 
a citizen in his private capacity. The word here translated as privacy, private, 
is Eigenheit. 

152 
Faith and Knowledge 
side by side in a pervasive atomism; and certainly the enlightened 
separation of church and state fits in here very nicely. In this Idea of 
pervasive atomism an intuition of the Universe cannot be an intuition 
of it as spirit; for that which is spirit is not present in the Universe 
in the atomic state; and altogether the catholicity of religion consists 
[here] only in negativity and in the universality of singular being. 
So, although the subjectivity of yearning has raised itself to the ob-
jectivity of intuition, and reconciliation is effected, not with actuality, 
but with that which 'lives, not with singularity, but with the Universe, 
still even this intuition of the universe is itself transformed back into 
subjectivity. For on the one hand this intuition is virtuosity-or in 
other words it is not even the yearning, but only the search for the 
yearning; and on the other hand the intuition is not to constitute it-
self organically, nor is the authentic virtuosity to express itself prop-
erly in laws, and achieve its objectivity and reality in the body of a 
people and of a universal church. Instead outward expression is to 
have a strictly inward significance, it must be an immediate outburst 
or emulation of some singular and particular enthusiasm. The genuine 
externalization, the work of art, must not be present. 

C. Fichtean Philosophy 
In Kant's philosophy, thought, the infinite, the form of the objective is 
what comes first. The absolute antithesis between thought'> [on the 
one hand,] and being, the particular, the finite [on the other,] is with-
in the cognitive subject, but not consciously: the antithesis i~ not 
objective for the subject. Or alternatively we might say that the abso-
lute identity in which the antithesis is suspended, is purely objective, 
it is just a thought. It comes to the same thing either way, for this 
form of absolute objectivity, the identity as something beyond cog-
nition, never converges with the subjective [side, i.e., with] cognitio{\, 
to which the absolute antithesis i,s transporte~. In the philosophy of 
Jacobi it is the consciousness of the antithesis that comes first; and 
in order that it may be represented as resolved, the antithesis that is 
within cognition flees into its counterpart, i.e., into a realm beyond 
cognition, just as in Kant. There is, indeed, still a middle between this 
transition to absolute opposites, but this middle is itself something 
subjective: it is a yearning and a grief. In Fichte's philosophy, this 
yearning is synthesized with the Kantian objectivity, though not in 
such a way that the two opposite forms are extinguished in a true 
identity and indifference and the absolute middle emerges. Rather, 
Jacobi's subjective unification within the living experience of the 
individual is itself taken over in a merely objective form. In Kant's 
philosophy there is not the least sign of worry about the contra-
diction between empty universality and living particularity. In the_ 
theoretical sphere the contradiction is abs~lutely affirmed; and in the 
practical sphere, whose concept implies the suspension of the contra-
diction, a formalism of legal theory and morality emerges which is 
without vitality and truth. Jacobi's philosophy secures the identity of 
the universal ami the particular in individuality, but the individuality 
is subjective. Hence a union of this kind can be nothing but worry 
and yearning, and particularity must become something permanent, 
something hallowed and absolute. In Fichte, this subjectivity of 
yearning is itself turned into the infinite, it is something thought; it 
is an absolute requirement, and as such it is the climax of the system: 
the Ego ought to be equal to the non-Ego. But no point of indiffer-
ence can be recognized in it. 

154 
Faith and Knowledge 
We have pointed out already1 how the system rises toward the 
negative side of the Absolute, toward infinity, toward the Ego as 
absolute thinking. In this respect it is pure [388] idealism. But since 
this negative side is itself set up as what is absolutely positive, the 
idealism becomes something formalt and is confronted by a realism. 
It is able to establish the identity of the antithetic opposites [i.e., to 
achieve intellectual intuition] only in the infinite; or in other words 
it turns the abstractive thinking, the pure activity that is opposed to 
being, into the Absolute. So it does not truly nullify the antitheses. 
Like the idealism [of his system] Fichte' s intellectual intuition is 
merely a formalt affair. Thought is confronted by reality, the identity 
of the intellectual intuition is confronted by the antitheses. The only 
identity here is the relative identity of the causal nexus in the [mu-
tual] determination of one opposite by the other. 
The task of philosophy as it was determined by the tradition 
(Kultur) of Locke and Hume is to compute and explain the world 
from the standpoint of the subject. The very opposition that holds 
between the world and the subject is transferred into the world that 
is to be explained. It splits [in Kant] into an ideal side and a real 
side in such a way that the ideal side in its relative antithesis to the 
real becomes the pure identity that abstracts from reality, i.e., the 
pure concept on the one hand; while on the other hand it is also the 
identity that is connected with reality, it is time, space, categories, 
the ideality of the real. In this cleavage of the world the objective, 
universal aspect of the real now consists solely in what belongs to 
the ideal side. Hence this idealism, which aims to explain the objec-
tive world, derives objectivity directly from the principle of the ideal 
side, i.e., from the Ego, the universal which in its overall opposition 
to the world is the subject. For this critical idealism has recognized 
objectivity as the ideal factor, and has thereby suspended the being 
in and for itself of the objective. 
Fichte has highlighted this critical idealism which is quite evidently 
concerned with the form [of objectivity] only, in sharper outline. The 
universal aspect of the world that is opposed to the subject, is posited 
as Ego because it is posited as universal, as ideal, as thought. But 
the particular is necessarily left behind, so that if we accept the popu-
lar conception of philosophy and make explanation our business, the 
most interesting side of the objective world, the side of its reality, 
remains unexplained. To Kant, the real as given to sensation is some-
1 See pp. bl-65 above 

155 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
thing merely empirical which can be dismissed right away as un-
worthy of consideration. This is as unsatisfactory as Fichte's demon-
stration that sensation is something merely subjective, that the color 
red, [for example,] is first spread over a plane by the subject's hand, 
and thereby acquires objectivity.2 For the problem is not at all about 
ideality, but about reality, and it does not matter whether the reality 
concerned is an infinite mass of sensations or of thing-qualities. In 
the practical part of the Science of Knowledge to be sure, it did [389] 
look as if the reality that is absolute for the ideal side, the things as 
they are in themselves were supposed to be constructed on the basis 
of how we ought to make them. But there is nothing deduced there 
except an analysis of the concept of striving and drive in a rational 
being and some reflective concepts about feeling, such as that feel-
ings must be different. As for the task of constructing the system 
of things as they ought to be, only the formalt concept of ought is 
analysed; apart from this formal essence there is not the slightest 
trace of the construction of feeling itself as a real system or of the 
construction of the totality of the ought. For the ought admits, in 
and for itself, of no totality at all. On the contrary, the manifoldness 
of reality appears as an incomprehensible primitive fact (Bestimmt-
heit), an empirical necessity. Particularity and difference as such 
are [accepted as] something absolute. The relevant standpoint for 
2. This is Hegel's summary of the following Fichte text: 
"And this red is something positive, a simple sensation, a determinate state 
of yourself?" 
"I understand." 
"You should, therefore, see the red strictly as something simple, as a mathe-
matical point, and you do see it only as such, do you not? In you at least, as 
your affection, it seems to be a simple determinate state, without any complexi-
ty, something that should be visualized as mathematical point. Or do you find 
it otherwise?" 
"I have to admit you are right." 
"But now you spread this simple red over a broad plane which you undoubt-
edly do not see, since you see strictly speaking only the red. How do you man-
age to arrive at this plane?" 
"Strange indeed. -Yet I think I have found the explanation. To be sure, I 
do not see the plane, but I feel it when I pass my hand over it. My sensation 
through sight continues to remain the same during this [process of] feeling and 
this is why I extend the red color over the whole plane which I feel while I 
always see the same red." (Fichte, The Vocation of Man, in Werke II, 199-
212; also Roderick M. Chisholm's translation, pp. 35-47, especially p. 41. 
Wherever Hegel refers directly to The Vocation of Man he does so to its first 
edition, Berlin, 1800.) 

156 
Faith and Knowledge 
this reality [of the particular] is the empirical standpoint of any sin-
gular individual. For every such individual his reality is the incom-
prehensible sphere of common actuality in which_ he _happens_to..be 
enclosed. We do not have to remind the reader that the formal ideal-
ism which proves that the empirical reality in its entirety is only a 
subjective thing, a feeling, is quite irrelevant to the absoluteness of 
the empirical reality. For this form does not alter the common and 
incomprehensible necessity of empirical existence in the slightest. 
Whether reality appears to us as the qualities of things or as our 
sensation, we cannot think for a moment that we have here a gen-
uine idealization (ldealitiit) of actuality and of the real side [of ex-
perience]. 
We have brought out the formalism of this so-called idealistic 
[philosophical] knowledge in our discussion of Jacobi's philosophy3 
which had the most definite and candid awareness of it. So we do not 
need to clarify it further with respect to Fichte's philosophy. Fichte 
shares it with the others, because of the principle of subjectivity 
and because the absolute identity exists only for faith and not for 
cognition and knowledge. What this formalism comes down to bas-
ically is that either the pure concept, the empty thought, supervenes 
incomprehensibly upon a content, a determination of the concept, or 
vice versa: the determination supervenes incomprehensibly upon the 
indeterminateness [of the pure concept]. In Jacobi's dogmatism the 
objective, the given, is called the first upon which the concept super-
venes later. Fichte, on the contrary, makes the empty knowing, the 
Ego into the first, which is essentially one and the same as the empty 
intellect of the analysing philosophy (Wissen); or, in other words, 
Fichte's Ego is an identity upon which determination supervenes 
subsequently as something alien, something which is incomprehen-
sible since it does not originate in the Ego. But this contrast between 
Jacobi and Fichte makes not the slightest difference to the matter at 
issue. 
According to Fichte's idealism the Ego does not sense and intuit 
things; it intuits only its sensing and its intuiting and knows only of 
its [390] knowing. Thus, the one and only primordial certainty [in 
his view] is pure and empty activity, action pure and free; there is 
strictly nothing but pure knowing, and pure intuiting, and sensing: 
Ego=Ego. We shall see later how the whole world of sense that is 
3 Compare pp. 142-6 above. 

157 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
thus nullified gets its reality anyway, through the absolute act of will. 
But what is incomprehensible is the knowledge of this reality, the 
relation of the absolute emptiness and indeterminateness of the 
knowledge to determinateness and to this reality. The particular and 
the universal are alien one to the other just as Jacobi's empirically 
given determinateness is alien to the indetermina~eness, that is, to 
the concept employed by the analysing intellect. But Fichte's way of 
knowing only the knowing, his way of knowing only the bare iden-
tity preparesthrough its own formalism a road to the particular. 
Fichte acknowledges that the sole truth and certainty, that is, pure 
self-consciousness and pure knowing, are incomplete, are conditioned 
by something else; or in other words, that the Absolute of the sys-
tem is not absolute, and that for this very reason we must go on to 
something else. This acknowledged incompleteness of the absolute 
principle and the acknowledged necessity of going on to something 
else in consequence form the principle of the deduction of the world 
of sense. Because of its absolute deficiency the completely empty 
principle [Ego= Ego] from which [Fichte] begins has the advantage 
of carrying the immediate necessity of self-fulfilment immanently 
within itself. It must go on to something other [than itself] and from 
that to something else in an infinite objective world. The necessity 
rests upon the principle's being nothing but -a part and upon its in-
finite poverty being the infinite possibility of wealth.4 In this way it 
plays a double role. In one role it is absolute, in the other strictly 
finite; and in the latter quality it can serve as the point of departure 
for the entire emp_~)cal infinity. Now, how could any principle have a 
higher degree of apriority than this one which immediately entails 
the necessity of the whole? 
Looking at it on its own account, moreover, the formalism of this 
principle has the great advantage that it can easily be made compre-
hensible. The difficult requirement of intellectual intuition has aroused 
general complaint, and we have sometimes heard tell of people who 
went mad in their efforts to produce the pure act of will and the 
intellectual intuition.5 Both the complaint and the madness were no 
doubt occasioned by the name of the thing, not by the thing itself, 
4. See pp. 181 ff. below. 
5. Fichte's writings on Wissenschaftslehre (1794-97) had elicited a host of 
critical and satirical responses. The best known "complaint" was perhaps that 
of Friedrich Nicolai; and it was Jean-Paul (Richter) who told the story of the 
man driven mad. Hegel singles out Reinhold's response in the Difference essay. 

158 
Faith and Knowledge 
which Fichter; describes as common and easy enough, the only diffi-
culty being perhaps to convince oneself that it really is just this sim-
ple everyday thing. The intuition of anything at all as alien to pure 
consciousness or Ego, is empirical intuition; though the Ego too is, 
as Fichte puts it, equally given in common consciousness.' Abstract-
ing from everything alien in consciousness on the other hand, and 
thinking oneself, is intellectual [391] intuition. Abstracting from the 
determinate content in any sort of knowledge and knowing only pure 
knowing, knowing only what is purely formalt in knowing, this is 
pure absolute knowledge. Now surely, this abstraction is easy enough 
to make, and everyone knows something he could abstract from. Nor 
need anyone be bothered about what has been abstracted from; for 
it does not get lost, indeed it comes back again in its whole empirical 
extension and breadth both for knowledge and for action; except 
that philosophy makes this contingency of ordinary consciousness 
methodical without diminishing its contingency and ordinariness in 
the least. 
The methodical aspect of this knowledge, or the philosophy about 
ordinary consciousness consists in this: first that the point of depar-
ture is something absolutely true and certain, namely the Ego, the 
knowing in all knowledge, pure consciousness. But then, since pure 
consciousness shows itself immediately to be the principle of deduc-
tion only because it is strictly incomplete and finite, its truth and 
certainty are of a kind that is rejected by philosophy. For philosophy 
can only find truth and certainty in what is not incomplete, not an 
abstraction, not conditioned. 
The emptiness of philosophical knowledge becomes the principle 
of advance; for it is something radically deficient, and hence immedi-
6. Hegel is referring to the discussion of Anschauung in Book II of Tlu!Vo-
cation of Man. Fichte does not say that it is "common and easy," but he does 
speak of the critics of his position in ways which suggest that they are failing 
to comprehend it because it is too obvious. "Do not let yourself be silenced by 
sophists and half-philosophers: things do not appear to you through any repre-
sentation ... everything that you perceive outside yourself is always you your-
self. This consciousness has been very aptly called 'intuition.'" (Fichte, Werke 
II, 228; Chisholm, p. 64). "In intuition you can indeed become lost to yourself 
... it is even natural and necessary that you become lost to yourself. This is 
the observation to which those who defend a supposed consciousness of things 
existing in themselves outside us appeal" (ibid., p. 231; Chisholm, p. 67). 
7 "Even in that same consciousness where you become lost to yourself in 
the object [i.e., Hegel's "common consciousness"] there is always something 
which is only possible through an unnoticed thinking of yourself and a close 
observation of your own state" (ibid, 232; Chisholm, p. 67). 

159 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
ately in need of something other than itself, which becomes the point 
of attachment for the other that is its condition. The objective world 
supervenes. upon pure knowledge as something alien that completes it. 
It does this by way of an inference from there being something miss-
ing in the point of attachment to the necessity of what is missing, 
an inference from the incompleteness of the Absolute, which is itself 
just one part, to the other part that completes it. But the insight that 
there is a deficiency in what is posited as Absolute, that the Absolute 
is just a part, is only possible through the Idea of totality or in gen-
eral, through the awareness that for the sake of the so-called intellec-
tual intuition, for the sake of thinking oneself and of pure knowing, 
we have abstracted from the alien other which is afterwards taken 
back again. Why does not this idea of the totality itself, the measure 
against which pure knowing shows itself to be incomplete, step forth 
as the Absolute? Why is the Absolute [in Fichte] something that is 
recognized as being only a part and as deficient? No reason can be 
found for it except that this part has empirical certainty and truth; 
of course everyone knows that he knows. Empirical truth of this sort 
is given preference over the absolute truth of the totality! The infer-
ence from one part to the other parts is nothing but a picking up 
again of what was abstracted from. This is to say: deduction is noth-
ing but a transformation of signs, of the minus sign into plus sign; 
for the result of the abstraction [i.e., pure knowing] is directly but 
negatively connected with what it was abstracted from, and the latter 
is present in a negative form in the former. [392] In pure knowing, 
the world of sense is posited as a minus, the world of sense has been 
abstracted from, it has been negated. The inference to it consists in 
positing it now as a plus and in positing this plus as condition of 
pure self-consciousness. In the freedom of the rational being,the ob-
jective sphere toward which its freedom is directed, is posited as a 
minus, so that the deduction of this sphere for freecf~~ consists in 
giving the objective sphere the plus sign, or, in other words, positing 
it as being. An empty money-bag is a bag with respect to which 
money is already posited, to be sure, though with the minus sign; 
money can immediately be deduced from it because, as lacking, money 
is immediately posited. 
In and for itself cognition by way of a deduction of this sort is not 
genuine cognition at all; for cognition that is genuine begins with 
the Absolute, and the Absolute is neither a part nor incomplete. Its 
truth and certainty are not just for experience, nor are they [reached] 
through abstraction, but through genuine intellectual intuition. 

160 
Faith and Knowledge 
Fichte's cognition which proceeds from deficiency rests ultimately on 
the givenness of objects for the analysing thinking, the same given-
ness which Jacobi, Koeppen and others attribute to the manifold and 
its coherence when they happen upon it in the revealed facts of con-
sciousness that they believe in-but what Jacobi and Koeppen hap-
pen upon has a positive sign, whereas in Fichte it has a negative sign. 
Jacobi and Koeppen find the very same thing present, that Fichte 
finds absent. Hence, this idealism is the true inversion of formal 
knowledge; but it is not, as Jacobi has daimed,8 the inversion of the 
cube of Spinozism, for Spinoza's cube cannot be turned over; it floats 
in free ether and there is no above and below for it. Much less is 
there any ball or turtle on which it is grounded.9 Rather, it has its 
balance and its ground within itself, it is its own ball and turtle. The 
irregular polyhedron of formal knowledge, on the other hand, rests 
on an earth that is alien to it, an earth in which it is rooted and 
which bears it. So there is an above and below for it. The ordinary 
sort of formalt knowledge has the manifold of experience as its 
ground but it draws up many a peak of concepts from the ground 
into the ideal atmosphere. Fichte's formalt knowledge reverses [the 
pattern of] this ordinary knowledge. It begins in the atmosphere 
where the very same thing [i.e, the manifold of experience] is en-
countered but only negatively and ideally; and being aware of this 
ideality, it lets down its negatively present content with a plus sign 
as reality. 
What, now, can be said of the product of a cognition of this sort, 
which begins with the part that is certain and proceeds step by step 
from part to part wishing to express its deficiency as a totality posited 
for knowledge? It would seem as if the product not only can, but 
must be the totality. For it is only through the Idea of totality tha~ 
we can recognize that our absolutely certain First [pure knowing] is 
only a part; so the Idea does seem to be our presupposition. [393] 
8. "Strange that the thought never occurred to him [Spinoza] of turning his 
philosophical cube over; of making the upper side, the side of thought which 
he calls the objective side, into the lower side which he called the subjective, 
formal [formell] side. So he never investigated whether his cube would remain 
the same and preserve the sole true philosophical shape of the matter. Unfailing-
ly such an experiment would have changed everything for him. What had been 
substance for him, the cubic, the one matter of two totally different beings would 
have disappeared before his eyes. Instead of it, a pure flame would have flared 
up, a flame burning solely out of itself, a flame in need of no place and of no 
nourishing fuel: Transcendental Idealism." Jacobi, Werke Ill, 11-2. 
9. Compare p. 125-6 above. 

161 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
And since it is thus what is truly First it would seem that the course 
of the development [both of the argument and of experience] must 
set it forth. But precisely because something recognized as a part and 
as deficient is supposed to have absolute truth and certainty, it is 
impossible that the entire progression should be totality. Pure experi-
ence, which knows nothing of a part and has not fixed the part in 
reflection as something which has being (Wesen) in the strict sense, 
can, of course, begin with a part and describe and set forth the whole 
circle by advancing from part to part; for experience, because it is 
experience, is not caught in the_s_hackles of reflection which turns the 
part into an in-itself, and so makes it impossible to reach the whole. 
But a totality produced by, or rather found in experience does not 
exist for cognition, even if it is given as totality in presentational 
awareness (Vorstellung). For in cognition the parts must be absolute-
ly determined by the whole; the whole must be th€ First of cognition. 
Fichte's formal cognition, transforming the negatively given into 
something positive, does not begin with the whole, but proceeds from 
the part to other p~rts; so it cannot transcend its partiality_ (Teil-
wesen) either in presentational awareness generally or in cognition. 
It seems that without the absolute Idea hovering before it, [Fichte's] 
empty [i.e., formal] knowledge would not recognize itself as some-
thing incomplete; but the Idea itself signifies here nothing but the 
negativity of something else that is needed, and this something else 
is only a finite being again, a part, an other thing, and so on ad in-
finitum. The absolute Idea shows itself to be strictly something 
formal,t because [Fichte makes] the part which is the finite linking 
point [between form and content or the ideal and the real], a being 
in itself, something absolute. This completely destroys any true Idea 
of totality. So what the deduction produces, with its sleight of hand 
by which negative is transformed into positive, is, of necessity, just 
the mass of common empirical reality, a nature that is finite through-
out, a sense world. The abstraction from what is alien to the Ego was 
not a speculative abstraction, that is to say, the alien was not nulli-
fied. On the contrary, the very same formula in the very same context 
of ordinary actuality was posited again, but with a negative sign, in 
the form of a deficiency. As in the ordinary conception of experience 
(gemeine Empirismus), the mirror receives the sense-world and posits 
it ideally within itself, only to give it back afterwards just as it re-
ceived it. And this giving back, this naming of what is lacking in the 
lack is called an immanent transcendental deduction. 
The starting point is absolute, yet finite. Its finitude makes it im-

162 
Faith and Knowledge 
possible for the birth of cognition to be [the construction of] a gen-
uine whole; for a genuine whole is only possible where no part exists 
in itself. So, a true Ideal in which the finitude of empirical reality 
would disappear and [subjective] affections would become Nature, is 
strictly impossible. No other wealth of representations [or ideas] is 
possible here, save a wealth of finite ones; and nature is nothing but 
the world of the senses. Ordinary empiricism suffers this [one] 
change: it gets deduced. [394] In other words, the system or rather 
-since a system is here unthinkable-the conglomerate of ideas nec-
essary for ordinary consciousness appears first posited as a pure lack, 
and then linked up with the subject that lacks it, i.e., with the Ego. 
And it does not matter whether we wish to reflect on the subject's 
pure lack or on the mass of what is lacking. It is all the same whether 
we think always and only pure knowledge, 'emptiness, the Nothing, 
or the whole content of this Nothing as a mass of subjective affec-
tions that are no more than that. The alternatives are inseparable, the 
pure minus and what the Ego lacks in order to be a lacking. For the 
abstraction only is what it is in virtue of its connection with that 
which was abstracted from, or in other words because the latter is 
posited with a negative sign. Fichte's theoretical philosophy consists 
in the cognition of the lack and of the manifold which is lacking; 
but the latter only achieves authentic reality, the true plus, through 
the pure act of will. Still, the one never is without the other, the emp-
tiness never is without what has been emptied out of it, whether this 
content is posited as ideal or as real, as subjective or as objective. 
In the second act of The Vocation of Man10 (the exposition [of 
Fichte's system]which we would like for the present to concentrate 
on) the character "I" allows himself to be set free by a Spirit. When, 
at last, he believes that he has actually been set free, he does nojo. 
10. By "the second act" Hegel means what Fichte calls "Book II: Kno~ledge." 
Hegel uses dramatic parlance here because Fichte makes a dramatic conversa-
tion out of the central argument. Dramatis person<I! are "I" and "the Spirit." 
The Spirit is the guide who leads "I" from naive realism and empiricism to-
wards the Fichtean version of critical idealism. 
It should be noted that "Bestimmung" in Die Bestimmung des Menschen has 
very strong overtones of both "determination" and "definition" which are ab-
sent in the English word "vocation." Thus, the very title of Fichte's book in-
volves the problem of freedom and necessity: is man "determined" by nature, 
as "Book I: Doubt" avers, or does he "determine" nature and himself, as "Book 
II: Knowledge" argues? Also, the very title indicates what one may call Fichte's 
moral existentialism: the definition of what man i5 must be found in what he is 
called upon to be, i.e., in his vocation. 

163 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
think at all of his complete bondage in the chains of empirical neces-
sity nor of the incomprehensible sphere of his ordinary reality [giv-
en] in feeling. When the Spirit asks him (p. 88): "You don't just 
have general feelings [ ... ]?" the answer comes quite casually: "1: 
Not at all. Every sensation is determinate. There are never mere see-
ings or touchings or hearings, but always something definite that is 
seen, touched, heard-the red, green, blue color, the cold and the 
warm, the smooth and the rough, the sound of the violin, the human 
voice and the like. Let that be counted as settled between us."11 (This 
"and the like" surely embraces the rest of nature, the most exquisite 
things in it having supposedly been mentioned by name: the green, 
the red, the sound of the violin. But examples of definite forms 
would be more interesting and more to the purpose than these exam-
ples of what is formless.) The character "I" believes himself to have 
been freed without more ado from all these determinates and from 
the determinateness of his empirical existence generally, because he 
is convinced that they are within himself, and are only his own affec-
tions; so that the knowledge of them is an immediate knowledge of 
his own state and the whole chain of ordinary necessity is only one-
sided [i.e., in the subject]. Thus he is free because the subject is, in 
his conception of himself, through his affections and not through 
things, an absolutely [395] empirical being (Wesen)-a contradiction 
which must be counted among the most striking. On the basis of the 
conviction that the consciousness of any thing outside us is abso-
lutely nothing more than the product of our own representative 
faculty, the Spirit declares "I" to be free and delivered for ever from 
the fear that humiliated and tortured him, free from a necessity 
which exists only in his thought and from the reality of things exist-
ing outside him. As if he were not in one and the same prison of his 
own condition, subject to the same necessity as before. To be. sure, 
the necessity is no longer present in the form of his thinking of it 
as an external object. But it continues to exist with the very same 
factuality (Wirklichkeit), arbitrariness and contingency in the series 
of affections and states. 
Fichte's "I," then, is still endowed with the same wealth of realities 
as before, but in the form of sensations. So it is incomprehensible 
how "I" can get to fretting over the mode of thinghood which his 
system of affections has lost, and complain that "nothing now exists, 
nothing but representations, that is, determinations of a conscious-
11. Fichte, Werke II, 206; Chisholm, pp. 41-2 (Hegel's quotation marks). 

164 
Faith and Knowledge 
ness as mere consciousness."12 He should have lamented, not about 
his loss, for that mere mode of objectivity and corporeality of the 
sweet and bitter is not worth a tear-but about that wealth he still 
possesses. He should lament about the undamaged necessity in its 
whole length and breadth of sweet sensations and bitter ones, red 
ones ~nd so on; and about the brute fact of intuition (p. 169).13 The 
thing which is all that he has lost is first added to this sensation and 
intuition by thought. It is not for what it took away, but for the 
whole range of finitude which it left him that Fichte's ''I'' could fairly 
call the Spirit profligate. 14 
The immediate product of this formal idealism as we have seen it 
arise, has, then, the following shape. A realm of experience without 
unity, a purely contingent manifold, on one side, is confronted by 
an empty thought on the other. If the empty thought is posited as a 
real, active force, then like everything else that is objective, it must 
be recognized as something ideal. Or, in order to put the antithesis 
of the thought and the manifold realm of empirical necessity in its 
pure form, the thought must not be posited as a real active force-
i.e., in the context of reality-but purely for itself, as empty unity, 
as universality completely set apart from particularity. Kant's pure 
Reason is this same empty thought, and reality is similarly opposed 
to that empty identity, and it is precisely the lack of concordance 
between them that makes faith in the beyond necessary. But in 
Kant's philosophy the reality [that can be known and] that neces-
sarily lacks identity with [the reality postulated by] practical Reaso~ 
is not merely dealt with in the wholly and simply empirical context 
(Beziehung) where it is present as the sensation of the empirical sub-
ject. This is the only way in which reality can occur in Fichte's ideal-
ism, [396] but Kant recognizes it also [in the Critique of Judgment] 
as a higher reality, namely as an organic system and beautiful nature. 
Kant's idealism loses with respect to the purity of abstraction; for 
abstraction completely detaches the identity from _the difference and 
posits it, as one component of the antithesis, in opposition to the dif-
ference, the other being a merely empirical necessity and a manifold 
12. Ibid., p. 241; Chisholm, p. 76. 
13. Ibid., p. 243; Chisholm, p. 78-9. The demonstration that "the thing ... is 
first added to this sensation and intuition by thought" is actually given earlier 
(ibid., p. 23o-40; Chisholm, p. 66-76.) 
14. Ibid., p. 245; Chisholm, p. 81. 

165 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
lacking all identity. But Kant wins in another way as against this 
formalism, because he allows the speculative Idea to emerge at one 
more point of his system.15 
Thus the system of knowledge, in Fichte's idealism, is a knowledge 
of a completely empty knowing that is absolutely opposed by empiri-
cal reality, a knowledge of a unity that is absolutely opposed by the 
manifold, and of a relative identity of the opposed terms. For a for-
mal knowledge of this sorYwhich cannot get beyond relative identity, 
and for the absolute antithesis within it'; an antithesis which has, in 
Kant, the popular and less abstract form of a conflict between hap-
piness and morality-for such a formalism the true identity must 
stand over against it as an absolute Beyond. Rational cognition and 
the speculative Idea are directly suspended 'and impossible, because 
thought and knowledge are simply and solely formal, mere antithetic 
opposites [of empirical reality], merely relative. The supreme effort 
of this formal thought is the acknowledgement of its own Nothing 
and that of the Ought.16 Yet, because formal thought does not ever 
truly give itself up, the Ought is perennial: it is an enduring will 
which can only achieve a break-through to infinity and the Nothing; 
it remains incapable of breaking through infinity and the Nothing 
to positive rational cognition. 
Fichte's whole system 'in all of his expositions of it, beginning with 
The Science of Knowledge/ 7 expounds this triadic form: (1) position, 
thought, infinity; and then (2) being, opposition, finitude; and be-
cause these two sides [the triads (1) and (2)] remain radically dis-
tinct, there is (3) an interconnection of both for knowledge which is 
itself two-sided: a) there is an incomplete connection, the positive one 
for knowledge/8 and b) there is the absolute identity of both which 
is outside the range of this science and cognition. 
The two first parts [i.e., subtriads (1) and (2)] which make up the 
antithesis are contained in the first two basic principles of The Sci-
15. See pp. 85 ff. above. 
16. Fichte's beginning point has been shown to be "the Nothing." This is the 
Ego that thinks. On the other side of the equation is the Ego that ought to be 
equal to the non-Ego. 
17. The full title is Foundation of the Entire Science of Knowledge. Hegel 
uses the first edition (1794). See now Werke I, 83-328; and the English transla-
tion by Peter Heath and John Lachs (N. Y.: Appleton, 1970). 
18. I.e., the causal relation whether necessary (as in theoretical philosophy) 
or free (as in practical philosophy). 

166 
Faith and Knowledge 
ence of Knowledge. The first principle is Ego=Ego.19 It requires a 
second principle not derivable (erkennbar) from "Ego=Ego," but ab-
solute with respect to it. The second principle is necessary, but ex-
ternal and posterior to the first. And for this reason the first principle 
contains nothing but formal identity, nothing but infinity confronted 
by finitude. The second action is supposed to be conditioned as to its 
content: it is an acting relative to another acting.20 Still, the condition 
(Science of Knowledge, p. 18) under which the counterpart of Ego= 
Ego was posited "cannot possibly result from Ego= Ego, since the 
form of oppositing is not contained in the form of positing. On the 
contrary, the form of oppositing is itself opposed to the form of 
positing."21 [397] Let us suppose that the positing and the oppositing 
are both an act of the Ego itself. The identity here would be the same 
as that which formerly belonged to the subject, namely the soul as a 
simple substance, the sustainer common to many opposite activities. 
This is no help, for it is the most formalt identity of all, and the very 
thing that this philosophy must despise more than anything else. One 
thing about Fichte's beginning with the antithesis [of positing and 
oppositing] is that it is a preliminary, problematic way of doing phi-
losophy, one that plays around with things that are nothing, with 
empty abstractions, and first procures reality for them in the synthe-
sis that comes afterwards. Fichte himself acknowledges that if this 
pure Ego and pure Non-Ego are considered apart from and prior to 
the productive imagination, they subsist for thought only through 
an illusion of the imagination." Another thing is that this problematic 
style of philosophizing simply does not resolve into a genuine identi-
ty: it sets the infinite and thought over against oppositing and ma-
terial stuff, simply postulating the manifold stuff or the oppositing 
as an extra, picked up from experience on the ground that an op-
positing of this kind is to be found in anyone's consciousness. 
19. The "strictly unconditioned principle" of the Science of Knowledge is the 
action (Tathandlung) in which "the Ego originally posits its own being" (ibid., 
p. 98; Heath-Lachs, p. 99). But Fichte gets it from "A=A" via "Ich=lch" 
(Ibid., pp. 92, 94; Heath-Lachs, pp. 93-6). 
20. The second principle "conditioned as to content" is not initially formu-
lated as an action by Fichte (to show that it is an action of the Ego is the prob-
lem of his idealism). He says "a non-Ego is strictly opposed to the Ego" (Ibid., 
p. 104; Heath-Lachs, p. 104). 
21. Fichte here used "A=A," not "Ego=Ego." Werke I, 102; Heath-Lachs, p. 
103. 
22. Werke I, 224-5; Heath-Lachs, p. 200. 

167 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
The third basic principle establishes the connection of the first two 
in the double respect mentioned above.23 On one side [it is the rela-
tion typical] of formal knowledge, or the finite connecting [of subject 
and object] through the causal nexus. This remains entirely within 
the difference and the division [of Ego and Non-Ego]. On the other 
side, for faith the connection is the absolute identity that is beyond 
cognition. The two aspects of the connection, the form as knowledge 
and the matter of faith are quite radically incapable of becoming one. 
The emphasizing of one term of the antithesis, namely infinity, [and] 
a unilateral reflection upon the first principle, are what constitutes 
Fichte's idealism. But it is no more of an idealism than the most or-
dinary abstraction, which negates particularity and posits formal 
identity. 
On account of this formal triplicity knowledge remains [for Fichte] 
in the difference [between Ego and non-Ego J while what is without 
difference is either [mere] infinity, formal identity or else it is beyond 
cognition. Thus Fichte's system does not go beyond the bounds of 
the principle of common human intellect. However, the verdid was 
that Fichte's system was a speculative system and not a system of 
common intellect and as this false prejudicial verdict spread, he has 
naturally exerted every effort in his more recent expositions of the 
system to uproot this prejudice.24 Nothing could be plainer than the 
fact that Jacobi has misunderstood this system, when he says in his 
"Letter to Fichte," that he believes that the Fichtean way produced 
"a philosophy which is all of one piece, a genuine system of Reason, 
and indeed that the Fichtean way is the only way it can be done."25 
He opposes Fichte's philosophy on the grounds that "what I [Jacobi] 
understand by the true is something that is prior to and outside of 
knowledge."26 But on this point Fichte's philosophy is in full agree-
ment with Jacobi's. The Absolute exists for it in faith alone, not in 
cognition. Fichte is very far from sinning, as Jacobi claims (in the 
23. Cf. p. 165 above. The third "formally conditioned" principle is: "The 
Ego posits in the Ego a divisible non-Ego opposed to the divisible Ego" (Werke 
I, 110; Heath-Lachs, p. 110). This third principle is supposed to reconcile the 
first two principles and to turn the second into the one about the Ego's action. 
24. Hegel is probably thinking mainly of the Vocation of Man which is ob-
viously designed for the ordinary reader. Compare Werke II, 258-63; Chisholm. 
pp. 93-9 (speculation and the voice of conscience are there contrasted, very 
much to the latter's advantage). 
25. See Jacobi, Werke III, 19. 
26. Ibid., p. 32. 

168 
Faith and Knowledge 
Preface to his "Letter," p. viii), [398] against "the majesty of the 
place" where the true resides outside the range of knowledge, nor 
does he want to "include it within the sphere of science."27 On the 
contrary, absolute identity is, for him, quite outside of the sphere of 
knowledge, and knowledge is only formalt, just as Jacobi would have 
it, and within the difference [of Ego and non-Ego]. Fichte's Ego can-
not be identical with the Ego [as it ought to be], his Absolute cannot 
be thought. Only the subject and the object can be thought, one after 
the other, one determining the other, both only within the causal 
nexus. About the supposed impossibility of thinking the identity of 
thought and being Spinoza says: "There are some who deny that 
they have any idea of God," i.e., they have no idea of God as Spinoza 
defines him; of the being whose existence is necessarily contained in 
his idea, or whose idea and whose existence are one-"Yet, as they 
say themselves, they love and worship Him. And even if you put the 
definition of God and the attributes of God before their eyes, you 
will still achieve nothing: no more, indeed, than if you endeavored 
to teach a man blind from birth the differences between colors as we 
see them. But unless we want to treat these people as a new kind of 
animal, midway between men and brutes, we ought to pay little at-
tention to their words." (Principles of the Cartesian Philosophy, Part 
I, Prop. VI, Scholium.)28 
We have already shown why Jacobi so violently abhors the nihil-
ism he finds in Fichte's philosophy.29 As far as Fichte's system itself 
is concerned, nihilism is certainly implicit in pure thought as a task 
[to be accomplished]. But this pure thought [of Fichte's] cannot reach 
it because it stays strictly on the one side [i.e., the side of the Ego] 
so that this infinite possibility has an infinite actuality over against 
it and at the same time with it. So the Ego is for ever and ever a"' 
fected by a Non-Ego. This has to be the case because infinity, or 
thought, which is only one relatum in the antithesis, is to be posited 
as being in itself. And for this reason the correlatum cannot be ab-
solutely nullified. With inexhaustible elasticity the correlatum springs 
back; for almighty fate has forged the pair of them together with 
27. Ibid., p. 6. 
28. Hegel quotes the Latin text, probably from Volume I of the Paulus edition, 
which appeared in 1802. See now Gebhardt, Vol. I, 160; or the translation by 
F. A. Hayes in B. Spinoza, Early Philosophical Writings (Indianapolis: Library 
of Liberal Arts, 1963), p. 33. 
29. See pp. 138-9 above. 

169 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
fetters of adamant. The first step in philosophy is to recognize the 
absolute nothing. Fichte's philosophy does not achieve this, however 
much Jacobi may despise it for having done so. On the contrary, 
both of them dwell in the nothing that is the opposite of philosophy. 
Appearance, the finite, has absolute reality for both of them. Both 
agree that the Absolute and eternal is the nothing for cognition. Ja-
cobi reproaches the Kantian system for being a mishmash of idealism 
and empiricism. Of these two ingredients, however, it is not the 
empiricism, but the idealistic side, the side of infinity, which incurs 
his reproach. Although the side of infinity cannot win through to the 
perfection of the true nothing, still Jacobi cannot bear it because it 
endangers the absoluteness of the empirical, and because the demand 
for the [399] nullification of the antithesis is implicit in it. 
Jacobi says: "Either God exists and exists outside me, a living be-
ing subsisting apart; or else I am God. There is no third way."30 Phi-
losophy, on the contrary, says there is a third way, and it is [authen-
tic] philoso,phy only because there is one. For philosophy predicates 
of God not only being but also thought, that is, Ego, and recognizes 
him as the absolute identity of being and thought. Philosophy rec-
ognizes that there is no outside for God, and hence that God is not 
an entity that subsists apart, one that is determined by something 
outside it, or in other words, not something apart from which other 
things have standing. Outside of God nothing has standing at all, 
there is nothing. Hence the Either-Or, which is a principle of all for~ 
mal logic and of the intellect that has renounced Reason, is abolished 
without trace in the absolute middle [which the Either-Or excludes]. 
Jacobi's philosophy is completely summed up in this basic thought 
[that either God is outside of me or I am God, and there is no third 
way]. But we could show that he contradicts it, not only on the very 
page that precedes its first utterance-where he says, "I affirm that 
man finds God because he can only find himself in God"31-but in 
a hundred other places where he calls Reason divine, etc. But we have 
already said enough elsewhere to show that these first sparks of phil-
osophical thought should simply be taken as spirited aper{:uS and 
not as philosophy. Wherever Jacobi finds that these aper{:US of his 
30. Jacobi, Werke III, 49. 
31. What Jacobi actually says is this: "I affirm that man finds God because 
he can find himself only zugleich mit Gott, at the same time that he finds God." 
Jacobi continues: "And man is unfathomable to himself because the nature 
(Wesen) of God is necessarily unfathomable to man." Werke III, 48. 

170 
Faith and Knowledge 
have been taken up philosophically by others, and seriously set forth 
as truths for [philosophical] knowledge, he does not merely scent 
atheism etc., but dogmatically accuses the culprits of it. And wher-
ever he himself goes beyond having bright ideas, and begins thinking 
thoughts he remains within the confines of an absolute dualism. In 
any case, Jacobi's basic principle is just as much Fichte's. In Fichte 
too, the moral world order that exists in the context of faith (welche 
im Glauben ist) is strictly outside the Ego. Only through an infinite 
progress does it acquire reality for the Ego, only so does the Ego 
enter into it or vice versa. Things simply cannot become for the Ego 
what they ought to be, precisely because, if they did, the non-Ego 
would cease to be and become Ego. The Ego 'Ego, as truly absolute 
identity, would be without a second principle. The Ego would suspend 
something it had itself posited and would itself cease to be Ego. 
Thus Fichte's system of knowledge is as little able to transcend dual-
ism as Jacobi could possibly want. The reality that is not dualistic 
exists for Fichte only in faith, and the Third that is truly the First 
and the Only One32 is not to be found in his system; nor can the 
negativity which is not dualistic, infinity, the nothing, be pure in it. 
It ought to be pure, but it does not become pure. Rather, it get itself 
fixed again, so that it becomes absolute subjectivity. Jacobi, who fo-
cused his reflection on the one side of the antithesis, on infinity, on 
formal identity, felt that this nihilism of the transcendental philoso-
phy would tear the heart out of his breast. But he only needed to 
reflect on the other side of the antithesis which is present with the 
same absoluteness. [ 400] There he could find, fore and aft, all of our 
affections and states of mind, and everything empirical, which was 
[for him] a matter of revelation and of faith. 
What this idealism calls Theoretical Science is nothing but brin!JII" 
ing forth the antithesis of infinity and finitude: on one side the ab-
straction "pure knowing and thinking qua knowing and thinking" 
and on the other side the abstraction "the non-knowing and non-
thinking," or "the non-Ego." Both sides are posited only in and for 
knowledge, and each side is an abstraction and an emptiness like the 
other. The empirical side in this theoretical realm is generally speak-
ing the abstract manifold, it is a non-Ego. Since the real itself is here 
posited in an entirely formalt or ideal way,33 the whole apparatus of 
32. Das Erste und Einzige. Compare Difference, pp. 123-6 
33. I.e., as a Tathandlung of the Ego reconstructed in the pure thought of the 
philosopher. 

171 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
this theoretical idealism is nothing but the construction of logical 
forms,34 in abstraction from all content. The scientific route which 
this formalistic or logical idealism takes in its transition to reality 
(which it calls a "deduction" of reality) has already been character-
ized above.35 Its own proper content is the [sequence of] relative 
identities that link empty thinking with the abstraction "manifold-
ness." All three members [the two opposites and the relative identity 
between themJ36 themselves fall entirely within the region of empty 
knowledge. Our task at present is to consider the content with which 
this emptiness is integrated. In the theoretical idealism [i.e., the "the-
oretical" part of the Science of Knowledge] the empirical is an ab-
straction. In the practical idealism [i.e., the "practical" part of the 
Science of Knowledge], however, it comes forth as true, empirical 
reality, visible and tangible. Nature, which in theory was just a non-
Ego, something merely negative, defined as the opposite in general, 
now steps forth out of the abstraction of knowledge into the wealth 
of its reality and the glory of its full vitality-namely as something 
sour or sweet or bitter, something blue or red. 
This integration is directly present in Jacobi's philosophy because 
it is empiricism right from the outset and because the particularity 
of the subject has not been removed by abstraction. In Kant's phi-
losophy, too, the particulars which the universality of Reason needs 
-Reason insofar as it has this need is called practical Reason-are 
accepted empirically without a second thought. The presence of the 
particular, of inclinations and passions, of the pathological in general 
that is to be combated by reason, all this is presupposed as given. In 
a word, what is presupposed as given is nature, for Reason to work 
on, and to subject to its purpose; for Reason's purpose is not yet 
realized in nature, and as to its content, the summum bonum-hap-
piness according to desert, and hence universal happiness since every-
one ought to deserve it-what that happiness consists in is likewise 
empirically presupposed. Fichte's integration of ideality and reality 
happens a priori, namely, through faith, which is the general princi-
ple of the transition from lack to fulfilment, or the pure form of the 
[ 401] transformation of minus into plus and of the linking of both 
in their reciprocal [causal] influence upon each other. But it is only 
the form. For the matter itself, which was abstracted from in the 
34. I e., Ego/non-Ego, positing/oppositing, infinity/finitude, thinking/being, etc. 
35. See pp. 157-8 above. 
36. See pp. 165-6 above. 

172 
Faith and Knowledge 
minus of ideality is, as it necessarily has to be, just as empirical and 
without totality as in the preceding systems [of Kant and Jacobi]. 
The ideal is to be integrated through37 the real, empty thought or 
Reason is to coalesce with its opposite, the sense world (which is how 
nature appears in these systems). The all controlling basic principle 
of this integration consists in this: the one side is absolutely not 
what the other is, and no genuine identity emerges from any linkage 
between them. Just as for knowledge true identity and eternity are 
in a Beyond that is faith, so in the practical [i.e., moral] sphere, the 
sphere of reality, they are in a Beyond that is the infinite progress. 
And just as, in the theoretical sphere, empty thought is absolute and 
pure knowledge, i.e., as theoretical Reason, so it is absolute in the 
practical sphere as pure will, i.e., as practical Reason. And the oppo-
site of empty thought, the empirical world of sense is absolute like-
wise. The relative identities of practice which Kant did not go very 
far in elaborating will now follow in their different branches. 
The first and the most important step in the integration must be to 
re-introduce reality into both members of the antithesis each against 
the other, that is to say, to suspend the theoretical abstraction, to 
establish faith in terms of its product. The theoretical sphere consists 
in the ~_ality, i.e., in the reflection on infinity; and this infinity is 
infinity as such, empty knowing, pure thinking [or Ego] as well as 
absolute opposition [or non-Ego]. 0 = + 1 -
138 and each of the 
two [Ego and non-Ego] is defined as not being what the other is. The 
one is only insofar as the other occurs; and as the other occurs, the 
first is not. The reality of infinity or empty thinking consists in the 
+ 1 -
1, and the standing of this antithesis provides the content of 
this idealism, that is, the logical forms.39 But at the same time these 
opposites are ideal {=0) and their true truth is in the infinity, or in 
other words, in their being nothing. 
Now, in the practical sphere this ideality is to be suspended. + 1 
and -
1 shall not equal 0. The reality that they receive is this: in-
finity, empty thought, 0, which is the middle between + 1 and -
1 
wherein + 1 and -
1 vanish, steps out of the middle onto the side 
and, over against it, the world of the senses stands forth, the realm 
37. We have decided to translate the durch literally here, because it seems 
quite probable that Hegel means something more than would be expressed by 
the normal English "with." 
38. The zero is ideality, the empty thinking of infinity; +1 is the self positing 
of the Ego; -1 is the oppositing of the non-Ego. 
39. See note 34 above. 

173 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
of finite existence. Thus both are constituted as realities, and this 
constitutive act is called the pure act of will. This is the act that de-
crees that the nothing-the nothing of + 1 and -
l-is to be an 
absolute something. This is where all the popular doctrines originate; 
you exist in order to act; your action determines your worth;40 prac-
tical Reason is absolute, the absolute freedom etc. 
However, after these nothings that stand in absolute opposition 
have simply been decreed to be realities, everything that follows de-
pends forma liter on faith, [ 402] which is the expression of the re-
quired identity of both nothings [i.e., of the world of sense, and the 
world of (misconceived) Reason]. But with respect to the cognition 
and construction of the practical, faith is something wholly formal,t 
for it expresses nothing but this requirement, the pure line of a thread 
which cannot have any filling at all, any length, breadth, or depth 
at all, and only permits relative identities which will always be pushed 
further by the requirement [that Ego ought to be equal to Ego] _41 
Subjectivity, Ego, pure will is opposed to objectivity and this antithe-
sis is absolute. The task of constructing identity and integration sim-
ply cannot be performed. 
Pure will is to become real through acting. The reality which orig-
inates for it through acting is to come from the pure will, it must be 
its own. Hence, the reality must at first be present as an idea in pure 
will, that is, as an intention and end of the subject. The Ego is to 
produce the concept in strict freedom out of its own absolutely self-
sufficient power as intelligence. And the will is not to be affected by 
any other reality that it accepts as given from elsewhere and makes 
into its own end, for as pure will it must have only the end that is its 
own free project. When man determines himself to action there arises 
for him the concept of what will happen in the future as a conse-
quence of his action, and this is the formalt side of the concept of 
end. But [these Fichtean conceptions do not work; for] the will is 
pure identity without any content and is only pure insofar as it is 
something thoroughly formal and without content. It is in itself im-
40. Echoes from The Vocation of Man, Book III: Faith (Fichte, Werke II, 249; 
Chisholm, p. 84). 
41. Hegel always maintains that Fichte cannot get back to his initial Ego= 
Ego once he has left it. He could only regain .it by advancing to Schelling's po-
sition. Instead he arrives at an Ego which is eternal striving. This Ego is never 
equal to its real self theoretically, or to its ideal self practically. This ought is 
what Hegel refers to as the partial connection for knowledge. The absolute 
identity is beyond, in the realm of faith. 

174 
Faith and Knowledge 
possible that the will's concept of end should get its content from the 
will itself. So, nothing at all remains but this formal idealism of faith 
which posits the empty subjectivity of the end as an equally empty 
objectivity without the will being at all able or permitted to give any 
inner reality or content to the end; for if it did, the will would no 
longer be determining [but determined]. So there is nothing left but 
the hollow pronunciamento that the law must be obeyed for law's 
sake, duty done for duty's sake; and declamations about how the 
Ego raises itself above the sensuous and supersensuous, how it soars 
above the wreckage of the world, etc.42 
This sublime hollowness and this uniquely consistent emptiness 
must then so far yield as to take account of reality. If the content is 
to be established for the purpose of science as a system of duties and 
laws, then either idealt reality-that is, the content of the laws, du-
ties and virtues-is picked up empirically, as Kant is specially wont 
to pick it up, or else they are deduced in Fichte's fashion from a fi-
nite point of departure in a running chain of finitudes, beginning 
arbitrarily with one rational being, and one which has no body, etc. 
But reality cannot be anything but a manifold while it remains in 
opposition to ideality. Therefore no matter how the system is estab-
lished, there arises a mass, indeed an infinite plurality, of duties, laws 
and virtues which cannot constitute a totality or even achieve the 
external completeness of a system. Moreover, the duties, laws and 
virtues must necessarily contradict one another in their definiteness; 
[ 403] and no mutual limitation or pattern of precedence and subor-
dination is possible because each is posited in its ideal form, and 
hence comes forward with the pretension of absoluteness. The moral 
sciences of Kant and Fichte provide the empirical evidence for this. 43 
On one side, then, stands pure Reason, integrated. If it maintains 
and affirms itself as pure will, this affirmation is hollow rhetoric; 
while if it gives itself a content it must get it empirically-and once 
it has given this content the form of practical ideality, i.e., made it 
into law and duty, an absolute clash is posited in this content, a clash 
that suspends all science and makes totality impossible. 
42. This final declamation is an echo of Fichte's Appeal to the Public (1800); 
see Werke V, 237. The bulk of the paragraph contains echoes from the Voca-
tion of Man, Book III (Werke II, 250 ff.; Chisholm, pp. 85 ff.). 
43. "The moral sciences of Kant and Fichte" placed together by Hegel are: 
Kant, Die Metaphysik der Sitten (1797}; Fichte, Grundlage des N aturrechts 
(1796) and System der Sittenlehre (1798). 

175 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
On the other side stands nature turned into empirical reality and 
made absolute by the act of pure will. Because the idealistic side de-
crees itself to be absolute, what it nullifies must re-emerge as abso-
lute. If empirical reality, the sense-world did not have the whole 
strength of its being the opposite, Ego would not be Ego; it could not 
act, its high vocation would be gone. The supersensuous world is 
only the flight from the sensuous world. When there is nothing left 
to flee from, flight and freedom and supersensuous world are no 
longer posited. This empirical world is, then, as much in itself as the 
Ego. At the same time the relation [to the Ego] which the sensuous 
world receives in the act of will determines the way it has to be. For 
the essence of the Ego consists in acting: the absolute, empty think-
ing shall posit itself; but it is not posited, no being pertains to it. Yet 
the objective world is the being of the Ego [the absolute thinking] 
which can only attain to its true essence by nullifying this being. 
Thus nature is determined as a mere sense-world, as something to be 
nullified, and it must be recognized as such. On the other hand, if 
the Ego recognizes that it has being as well as the objective [world], 
then it recognizes itself as strictly dependent on the world a'nd as 
trapped in an absolute necessity. The Ego must only recognize itself 
as the negation of the sense-world and it must therefore regard the 
sense-world as something to be negated, that is, as something abso-
lutely bad. 
The initial cognition of the world as something realt prior to the 
act of pure will, the act in which it acquires absolute reality once 
more, but a reality that has to be nullified or, in other words, the 
worst reality imaginable-this is what is presented in the first act of 
The Vocation of Man.44 Here the character "I" recognizes himself 
as "a manifestation, determined by the universe, of a force of nature 
that determines itself. And he recognizes that it is nature which acts 
in him, that he is subject to the eternal laws of nature, to a strict 
necessity; that the best way to peace of mind would consist in sub-
jugating his desires to it [Nature], since his being is wholly [404] 
subject to it." But this rational thought "conflicts with his desires. 
Why should he conceal from himself the sadness, the loathing, the 
44. Book I of The Vocation of Man is entitled Doubt. It has the form of a 
monologue in which "I" presents himself as split between his knowledge that 
he is merely part of "the system of nature," and his desire which attests to his 
being part of "the system of freedom." 

176 
Faith and Knowledge 
horror [ ... ] which seized upon his inmost heart at such a conclu-
sion."45 
The monstrous arrogance, the conceited frenzy46 of this self who 
is horrified, filled with loathing and sadness, at the thought that he 
is one with the universe, that eternal nature acts in him-to be filled 
with loathing, be horrified and sad over the resolve to subjugate one-
self to the eternal laws of nature and to its hallowed and strict neces-
sity, to be in despair because one is not free, free from the eternal 
laws of nature and its strict necessity, to believe that one makes one-
self indescribably miserable by this obedience-all this presupposes 
an utterly vulgar view of nature and of the relation of the singular 
person (Einzelheit) to nature. This view is one which is denuded of 
all Reason, for the absolute identity of subject and object is entirely 
alien to it, and its principle is their absolute non-identity. So it can 
only comprehend nature in the form of the absolute opposite, and 
hence as a pure object with respect to which it is only possible either 
to be dependent on it, or to make it dependent upon oneself. For the 
whole view is situated in the context of the causal nexus; it is the 
view of nature as a thing in which (Vocation of Man, p. 106) the dif-
ferences between "green, sweet; red, smooth; bitter, fragrant; rough, 
sound of violin; stink, sound of trumpet,"47 have their place. What 
can the laws of nature be [on Fichte's view] apart from qualities such 
as these? We shall see later48 what other, teleological qualities Fichte 
admits in nature. So often we hear it said of the laws of nature that 
"No created spirit can penetrate into their inwardness"49-as if the 
laws of nature were something quite different from rational laws! 
As if they were laws which a moral self would be ashamed to submit 
45. Hegel prints the whole passage as one continuous quotation. But in fact 
it is a summary that contains some direct quotation. To mention one of several 
changes, Hegel heightens "Inneres" to "lnnerstes." See Werke II, 189-90 (com-
pare Chisholm, pp. 24-5). 
46. Wahnsirm des Diinkels: the "frenzy of self-conceit" in the Phenomenology 
(Hoffmeister, pp. 271-4; Baillie, pp. 397-9) is Wahnsinn des Eigendiinkels. But 
the two states of mind are not at all the same and there is no suggestion here 
that Fichte's philosophy leads to the "frenzy of self-conceit." The "conceited 
frenzy" here is directed against being part of Nature as a whole. The "frenzy of 
self-conceit" is directed against being part of an ethical whole. 
47. Ibid., p. 214 (Chisholm, p. SO). The semicolons were added by Hegel. 
48. Actually in the very next paragraph. 
49. This is an echo both of the Vocation of Man (Werke II, 189; Chisholm, 
p. 25) and of Albrecht von Haller's poem "Human Virtues": "Ins lnnre der 
Natur dringt kein erschaffner Geist." Compare further, Difference, p. 193. 

177 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
to, and as if obedience and subjection to them would make him inde-
scribably miserable and bring him to despair! 
As we saw earlier,50 in the second Act of his self-definition this "I" 
thinks that the philosophical cognition of nature makes him lose the 
nature that so horrified him.51 But he is as disconsolate and desperate 
about the loss of Nature as he was about its being. So [in the third 
Act] he establishes it-as a nature that must be nullified-by de-
termining his vocation as action, as the act of pure will.52 This view 
of nature as something which is nothing in itself, something that is 
a pure appearing, so that it has neither truth nor beauty in itself, 
becomes the basis for a teleology of nature and for a physico-theology 
which is directly opposed to the older tradition in its content, but is 
grounded in the same principles with respect to its form. For tradi-
tional teleology connected the singular items of nature to ends that 
were external to them, [ 405] so that every item was posited only for 
the sake of something else. But the whole of nature formed a system 
which, though it had the source of its life outside itself, was yet a 
resplendence of absolute beauty and of Reason; it bore within itself 
the highest, most blissful truth, the perfect law of the supreme wis-
dom. Fichte's teleology similarly expounds that which appears as 
nature as present for the sake of something else, namely to consti-
tute a sphere and provide elbowroom for free beings and to be capa-
ble of falling into ruins above which the free beings can raise them-
selves and so fulfil their vocation. 53 That Nature is something 
absolutely unhallowed and lifeless, that it is nothing in itself, and 
exists only in connection with an Other-this is the vulgar, teleologi-
cal principle which Fichte's philosophy shares with all teleology, and 
particularly with Eud<Emonism. But Fichte's teleology is directly op-
50. Cf. pp. 162 ff. above. 
51. Aided by the ambiguity of "Bestimmung" (cf. p. 162 n. 10 above) Hegel 
shifts his reference from the second Act of Fichte's Vocation to the second step 
in the "I" 's definition of himself. (See Fichte, Werke II, 240-1, 245; Chisholm 
pp. 76, 80.) 
52. Hegel wrote: " ... so stellt er sie sich durch seine Bestimmung, das 
Handeln und den reinen Willensakt her . . . ." A literal rendering would be: 
" ... so he established it through his determination, through acting and the 
pure act of will .... " But see the preceding note. 
53. A more distant echo of the "Appeal to the Public" (1800). Compare p. 174 
n. 42 above; for the rest of this paragraph compare the Vocation of Man, 
Book III, especially the last pages of Section I (Werke II, 261-3; Chisholm, pp. 
96-9). 

178 
Faith and Knowledge 
posed to the earlier teleology in its conception of what nature is 
through and for the other. 
In physicotheology nature was the expression of eternal truth, 
whereas it is only something to be nullified in the moral theology of 
Kant and Fichte. The end of Reason is forever still to be realized 
in nature. Nature is devoid of truth, it bears the law of ugliness and 
irrationality within it. The most hackneyed litanies about the evils of 
the world break in here. Kant put the pessimism of these litanies 
in the place of the optimism [of the older tradition]. Voltaire [to be 
sure] had already set _pessimism ag.•inst the optimism which had been 
pulled down by a perverted religiosity into the ordinary experience 
or daily life; and since he adopted the standpoint of experience him-
self he was quite consistent in setting the_two against one another 
in an ad hominem way. But Kant, and Fichte after him, gave this 
pessimism a philosophical form and proved it systematically. The 
consistency of Voltaire was completely lost as a result: The relative 
\ 
truth of one empirical theory as against another is treated as an 
absolute truth. Voltaire's procedure is an authentic example of sane 
common sense which Voltaire possessed in such high measure, while 
others babble about it all the time in order to pass off their insanities 
as sound sense. When a philosophical Idea is pulled down into the 
realm of appearance and bound up with the principles of experience, 
it immediately becomes one-sided. Truly sane common sense promptly 
confronts its with the other onesidedness which likewise has its place 
in the phenomenal realm, and thus shows the untruth and ridicu-
lousness of the first view.M For phenomena and experience were 
appealed to on its behalf, whereas sane common sense discovers the 
opposite in the same realm of experience and phenomena. But the 
actual application of the second view, and its truth do not, of them-
selves, go beyond this, and sane common sense expects no more of 
it. It is the pedants of the schools who make fools of themselves 
again in the same way, vis-a-vis sane common sense [406] because 
they accept what it applied only in a relative, ad hominem way, as 
absolute and cast it into a philosophical form in all seriousness. This 
is the meritorious service that Kant and Fichte have rendered for 
Voltaire's argument. It is just what the Germans generally boast 
about: they take a French aper~u and develop it; then they return it 
improved, put in its proper light, thoroughly worked out and scien-
tifically formulated. In other words, they rob the idea of the relative 
54 For Hegel's views on this topic, see further Difference. pp. 98-103. 

179 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
truth that it has by bestowing upon it a universally valid truth that 
it is incapable of. 
Because of the absolvte subjectivity of Reason and its being set 
against reality, the world is, then, absolutely opposed to Reason. 
Hence it is absolute finitude devoid of Reason, a sense-world lacking 
[internal] organization. It is supposed to become equal to Ego in the 
course of an infinite progress, or in other words it is absolute and 
remains so. Thus nature reveals its essential irrationality already at 
the physical level (Vocation of Man, p. 221 seq.): it grudges to pro-
vide sustenance-for our species so that "immortal spirits are com-
pelled to bend all their thoughts and labours, their every effort to 
the soil that brings forth their nourishment. Even today it frequently 
happens that [ ... ] hostile weather destroys" what required the labor 
of years, and "the industrious and painstaking man against whom 
nothing can be charged" (through frequently he has debts enough!) 
"becomes the prey of hunger and misery [ ... ] floods, hurricanes, 
volcanoes," earthquakes; even in the present year of grace "diseases 
still carry off men in the flower of their strength and children who 
pass from existence without fruit or trace"; then there are epidemics 
and so on. "But it ought not to remain so forever." 55 All the same, 
there is more sense in the behavior of non-conscious nature than in 
the way the human race goes on. "Even today [ ... ] hordes of sav-
ages wander through enormous wildernesses," and when they meet 
they devour one another festively; and armies kill each other on 
sight. "Armadas, furnished forth with the mightiest inventions of the 
human intellect, cut through the waves and tempests of the oceans"56 
to destroy one another. These perverted men, among whom one 
group holds another as slaves, are perpetually at war among them-
selves; but still, as soon as they catch sight of the good, which on its 
own account is ever the weaker part, they make alliance with one 
another against it. They do so quite needlessly; quite apart from the 
fact that the good is already the weaker part on its own account, the 
good men themselves do their thing (Sache) just as badly [as the bad 
55. Hegel placed -the whole passage in quotation marks although only parts of 
it are direct quotation and there are several omissions. We have indicated the 
direct quotltions as well as the omissions. For the full context see Fichte, Werke 
II, 266-7; Chisholm, p. 112. 
56. These two passages, which we have enclosed in quotation marks, come 
from Fichte, Werke II, 269 (Chisholm, p. 104). The rest is a free summary of 
Fichte's text down to the end of the same section of the Vocation of Man (ibid., 
pp 269-71; Chisholm, pp. 104-6). 

180 
Faith and Knowledge 
men]. The goal of mankind lies in the active conduct of those who 
are good, and it is their conduct which is counted upon in the moral 
order of the world. Reason itself is the warrant that the end of Rea-
son will be achieved without fail. Yet the good behave like pigheaded 
philistines in promoting it: [407] often they harbor a secret self-love, 
they censure and find fault with one another. Each of them thinks 
that the improvement he proposes is the most important and the 
best, and will accuse the others, for whom his concern is less impor-
tant, of betraying the good cause (Sache). All this and more can be 
read in greater detail in The Vocation of Man itself. In brief, a moral 
sentimentalism, directed only toward the ugly and useless aspects-
just as religious sentimentalism, on the other hand, used to be di-
rected toward the good and useful aspects-has become the rational 
view of the world. Philosophy has taken up the ordinary standpoint 
of a subjectivity which, being itself a contingency and whim, that is, 
an evil, sees only evil, i.e., contingency and whim in the object. Phi-
losophy has completely abandoned its own elevation [i.e., the higher 
level to which it belongs] even as it has abandoned the elevation of 
its view of the world from the view of an empirical necessity which 
is at one with contingency, to that of an eternal necessity which is 
at one with freedom, the necessity of the wisdom that exists in the 
course of the world.57 And it no longer recognizes the truth of what 
Plato says about the world, that God's Reason gave birth to it as a 
blessed god.58 
This view of the world in the philosophy of absolute subjectivity 
is not the religious view at all. The philosophy of absolute subjectiv-
ity conceives of the [physically] bad (das Obel) merely as contin-
gency and whim in an already intrinsically finite nature. Religion 
expounds evil (das Bose) rather as a necessity of finite nature, as 
one with the concept of finite nature: But at the same time, it ex-
pounds an eternal redemption for this necessity, which is to say that 
it is a truly present and real redemption, not one that is put off into 
an infinite progress and hence never to be realized. Religion offers 
a possible reconciliation with nature viewed as finite and particular. 
The original possibility of this reconciliation lies in the original image 
of God on the subjective side; its actuality, the objective side lies in 
57. Weltlauf. Since philosophy is here said to have fallen below the recogni-
tion that Wisdom exists as the Weltlauf, its situation is analogous to that of 
"Virtue" in the section of the Phenomenology called "Virtue and the course of 
the world" (Baillie, pp. 402-12). 
58. Timreus 34b. 

181 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
God's eternal Incarnation in man, and the identity of the possibility 
with the ~ctuality through the spirit is the union of the subjective 
side with God made man.59 Thus the world is in itself reconstructed 
and redeemed and hallowed in quite another way than the volcanoes, 
etc. which will not always remain as they now are because in the 
Ideal of the moral world order they will gradually burn themselves 
out, or the hurricanes which will become milder, the diseases less 
painful, the miasma of swamps and jungles will improve etc. In re-
ligion the world is hallowed in its essence. So it is only for limited 
cognition, empirical intuition and a selfish choice of ends that the 
world will be posited as unhallowed. Perfect intuition and eternal 
bliss will be explicitly placed beyond that realm of limitedness which 
is to be forever abiding and immanent in the moral world order [ 408] 
for the sake of which volcanoes are to burn out, earthquakes to be-
come tamer etc., nations are no longer to war against one another, 
or plunder one another etc. 60 In this philosophy61 the world is not 
original and divine nature, nor yet is it reconciled on its ethical side; 
it is something intrinsically bad (schlecht). For finitude, however, the 
evil is only something contingent and capricious; and if the physical 
and ethical world were in themselves more than the bad world of the 
senses, if the badness were not absolute, then the other Absolute 
would fall away, the realm of freedom, this pure will that needs a 
world in which Reason is still to be realized. Thus the whole worth 
of man would fall away because this freedom exists only by negating 
and it can only negate while what it negates exists. 
Just as Fichte has not truly recognized the original fount as nature, 
or absolute Reason as having being in itself, and not first coming to 
be in the infinite progress, so too he has not grasped the differential 
relation [of subject and object etc.] in its truth. For he conceives the 
difference as an in-itself, and hence as something that cannot be 
59. "So God created man in his own image" Genesis, I, 27. This "image" of 
God the Father exists as an ideal in our consciousness, even though that con-
sciousness is "fallen," being now sundered and reflective. But nature, and espe-
cially human nature, is also the creative act of the Logos, the Son of God (John 
I). When the meaning of the Christian gospel is fully grasped the human reli-
gious community will both be and know God in spirit, the union of Father and 
Son. See further the note on p. 81 above. 
60. Fichte, Werke II, 267-9; Chisholm, pp. 102-4. 
61. We have passed over Hegel's hingegen here, because the contrast with 
traditional Christianity is evident enough, and any contrasting phrase intro-
duced at this point would only confuse the reader. 

182 
Faith and Knowledge 
suspended. The bad (das Obel) is supposed to be a contingent fact 
from the viewpoint of the differential relation, though [the truth is 
that] it is only the relation itself which is bad. But if there is to be 
something bad that characteristically pertains to the differential rela-
tion and the separation from the eternal, it cannot possibly be de-
fined in any other way than as the opposite of this absolute separa-
tion. And the opposite of the separation62 is nothing but being one 
with the eternal, so that this would have to be the bad, just as we 
saw earlier63 that what is most horrifying and saddening for Fichte's 
"I" is being one with the universe, having the universe live and act 
in me, being obedient to the eternal laws of nature and to the hal-
lowed necessity. Since difference, or the bad, is so incorrectly con-
ceived, the reconstruction cannot be authentic either. For the infinite 
is posited as originally un-unified and un-unifiable with the finite, 
the Ideal (das ldeelle) cannot be united with the real or pure Reason 
with existence. 
[To be authentic] this reconstruction would have to unveil the 
essence of the spirit and [first] expound how nature reflects itself in 
the free spirit. Nature takes itself back into itself and lifts its original, 
unborrowed, real beauty into the ideal realm, the realm of possibility. 
Thus nature riseS" as spirit. This is the moment which-when the 
identity, as the original fount, is compared with the totality-appears 
through the comparison alone as movement and disintegration of the 
identity and as its reconstruction. [Secondly the reconstruction would 
have to expound] how the essence of nature, in the form of possibili-
ty, i.e., as spirit, has enjoyment of itself as. a living Idealf in visible 
and active reality; and how it has its actuality as ethical nature in 
which the ethical infinite, that is, the concept, and the ethical finite, 
that is, the individual, are one without qualification. 64 
In Fichte's formalism, however, the spirit as indifference is absolute-
ly fixed as opposed to the differentiated. Hence the ethical cannot have 
any true reality, there cannot be a true oneness of its concept and its 
[ 409] actuality. The practical Idealf [in Fichte] is the concept of the 
end posited by the pure will, which is just that pure indifference and 
emptiness, whereas the content is the particularities of the individual 
62. Here and in the preceding sentence "separation" represents Absonderung 
or absondern (not Trennung or trennen). The synonymy seems to be complete. 
63. Spe p. 176 above. 
64. Hegel attempted this "reconstruction" in his lectures on "the real spirit" 
in 1802 (see pp. 41-4 and the relevant notes above). 

183 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
or the empirical conditions of his well being. Content and Ideal+ are 
incapable of union in an ethical totality. The absolute manifoldness 
of this empirical content is taken up into the indifference, i.e., into 
the concept, in a formalistic way. The result is a manifold of rights 
in a formalistic totality, which becomes real in the legal constitution 
(Rechtsverfassung) and the State. The principle of the system is that 
the concept in this rigidified form of oppositeness is absolute. It fol-
lows that legal right and the construction of legal right as a State is 
something that has an independent being and is absolutely opposed 
to the sphere of life and individuality. It is not the living being itself 
which posits itself at the same time in the law as universal and be-
comes truly objective in a people (Volk). Rather, the universal, fixed 
apart, confronts life as rigorous law. Individuality finds itself under 
absolute tyranny. Right shall prevail; not, however, as the inner free-
dom of the individuals, but as their external freedom, which is their 
subsumption under a concept that is alien to them. The concept here 
becomes something strictly objective and takes the shape of an abso-
lute thing. To be dependent on this absolute thing is the nullification 
of all freedom. 
As for the other side [the moral as opposed to the legal theory in 
Fichte's practical philosophy] it consists in the doctrine that the con-
cept of the ena that is produced by the pure will-if that concept 
were actually capable of producing anything more than a mere for-
mality (Formelles)-is subjective and presents itself as the ethical 
character (Sittlichkeit) of a single person, or in other words, as mo-
rality.65 Here the content of the concept, the reality which has been 
posited in the form of an idea as the end and intention, is anything 
empirically given, and only the empty form is a priori. Still, it is not 
the material part of the end, but its formalt side, the pure will that is 
mine; the Ego is itself pure will. But here, too, we cannot think of a 
true ethic (Sittlichkeit), that is to say, a true identity of the universal 
and the particular, of matter and form. 66 The particular is something 
strictly empirical precisely because the emptiness of the pure will and 
the universal are what is truly a priori. So it would be contradictory 
65. Compare Difference, pp. 149-54. For the opposition of Sittlichkeit and 
Morality, see further the Phenomenology (Baillie, pp. 374-82) and H. A. Rey-
burn, The Ethical Theory of Hegel (Oxford, 1921), chapters VIII, and X. 
66. This true identity of the universal and particular is the whole-part rela-
tion conveived organically; in theoretical philosophy it is nature (see above pp. 
42-3); in practical philosophy it is das Volk (see preceding paragraph). 

184 
Faith and Knowledge 
to determine what right and duty are in and for themselves, for the 
content at once suspends the pure will, duty for duty's sake, and 
turns the duty into something material. The emptiness of the pure 
sense of duty and the content continually get in one another's way. 
And since [according to Fichte] morality, in order to be pure, may 
not be posited in anything else but the empty form of consciousness 
-i.e., in my knowing that I am acting dutifully-it follows that an 
[individual's?] ethical way of life which is otherwise pure [410] must 
generate the content of its actions from its higher, truly ethical na-
ture [i.e., the Volk] ;67 whereas addition of this consciousness [that I 
am acting. out of duty], which morality is supposed exclusively to 
consist in, serves no purpose except to taint and contaminate true 
ethical conduct. In a true ethic, subjectivity is suspended, whereas 
through moral consciousness of that kind the nullification of sub-
jectivity is conscious, so that in its very nullification subjectivity is 
held on to and saved. Virtue, in transforming itself into morality, 
becomes necessarily the knowledge of one's own virtue, or in other 
words, it becomes pharisaism. 
If we do not presuppose a genuine ethic, on the other hand, then 
since morality consists in the form [of universality], we are free to 
raise any moral contingency into the form of the concept, and thus 
to establish a justification and a good conscience for the unethical. 
As was shown earlier,68 the duties and laws in this system [of formal 
morality] make up an infinite, dispersed manifold every element of 
which is equally absolute. So the manifold makes a choice necessary. 
67. Ethical purity, so Hegel wants to say, consists, not in the consciousness 
of doing one's duty-let alone in doing one's duty for duty's sake-but in the 
higher, truly ethical nature of the Volk being the source of what the individual 
does. The individual qua individual has, in any given situation, various options 
to act; but the individual qua organic part of the Volk has no choice between 
different posible actions when the Volk needs him; and this is exactly what his 
authentic ethical freedom consists in. Paradoxically speaking, his ethical free-
dom consists in not having the freedom of choice. Thus for example, any native 
Vermonter, hearing the sound of the fire siren or seeing suspicious smoke, will 
at once interrupt whatever he is doing, fill his car with the proper utensils and 
rush to help "the neighbor" (which is a good word for what the parts of a Volk 
are to each other). The ethical character of his actions does not lie in his aware-
ness of doing his duty; his freedom does not lie in his choosing between several 
equally open alternatives. His ethical character and his freedom, consist in his 
being one with the basic persuasions of his Volk concerning what to do in situ-
ations of this sort. 
68. See p. 183 above. 

185 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
This choice [between duties] is strictly a subjective matter, for the 
objective aspect, the form of universality, is what is common to all 
[duties equally]. Now, we cannot think up any actual case of an ac-
tion that would not have several sides; for every intuition of an ac-
tual case is infinitely determinable through the concept. Some of these 
sides must constitute valid duties so that in obeying some duties, other 
duties will be violated and in violating some duties other duties will be 
obeyed. If the agent's own contingent bad (schlecht) sense deter-
mines this choice, then the sense is something unethical; but it justi-
fies itself in its own sight and gives itself a good conscience through 
the awareness of that aspect of the action that makes it a duty. On 
the other hand, if the agent's disposition is decent enough to make 
him want to act objectively, he is confronted with the contingency of 
the duties, for there are so many of them and in the mass any singular 
one becomes contingent. So he is bound to fall into the state of sad 
indecision and weakness that arises from the following dilemma: 
there is nothing but contingency [in the options] open to the indi-
vidual agent, and he cannot create any necessity by himself nor 
should he if he could. If he does decide for any one of the many 
duties, the possibility of the decision arises from his being unaware 
of the infinite mass of duties into which any actual situation for ac-
tion can, and as a matter of duty must, be resolved; for such an 
actual situation, like anything that is actual, can be resolved into an 
infinity of qualities. The knowledge of these qualities which yield the 
duty concepts is impossible because the qualities themselves are em-
pirically infinite. Yet, this knowledge is strictly required as a matter 
of duty. Since unawareness of the complete range of aspects relevant 
to the action, and [consequent] lack of the required insight are for 
this reason strictly inevitable, we are bound to have the awareness 
of the contingency of our actions, which is the same thing as being 
conscious of immorality. Thus, authentic ethical conduct is polluted 
by the addition of this kind of awareness of its dutifulness, and this 
morality makes ethical conduct as unethical as possible. 69 Unethical 
conduct [on the one hand] is provided with a justification for being 
unethical through the awareness [ 411] of some duty, an awareness 
which from the nature of the case cannot be lacking; and [on the 
other hand] men of good character straining [to do the right thing] 
are given the consciousness of being necessarily unethical, in that the 
contingency of insight [about what duty to perform] is the shape in 
69 Hegel's "womoglich" could be rendered "so far as may be." 

186 
Faith and Knowledge 
which the ethical appears here. This is exactly the shape which it 
ought not to have. This view of the ethical as morality transforms 
what is truly ethical into baseness, strength becomes weakness while 
baseness is justified as morality. This is why this image of it was 
able to pass over so easily from philosophy as science into general 
circulation, and achieve wide popularity. 
The reality of the Ideal (ldeale), which we have been dealing with 
thus far, was the content which the empty idea (ldeelle) of pure will-
ing received [in Fichte]. This is still something inward. There remains 
the external side of the concept of the end. This external side has a 
content too, and we have seen how it gets it.70 This is the side of 
formal idealism in which what was thus far the supersensuous in the 
context of practical philosophy presents itself also as an appearance. 
Its appearance is the action as a whole. On the one hand, empirical-
ly intuited [as an event], the action is stretched out in time into 
change and effects. On the other hand, the reality of the supersen-
suous concept of the end is also supposed to be a fruitful continua-
tion of the action in the super-sensuous world itself, i.e., the action 
is the principle of a series of spiritual effects. 71 This latter principle 
is nothing but experience and temporality projected onto the spiritual 
sphere, so that the spiritual sphere becomes a realm of spirits. For 
there is no series or sequence [of consequences] in what is truly 
spiritual, or in the Idea. We can only speak of spiritual consequences 
when we have first made the Idea into something finite. This is done 
by setting it up as the spiritual sphere in contrast to the sensuous 
sphere, and then splintering the spiritual sphere itself qualitatively 
into an infinite multitude of spiritual atoms, that is, subjectivities 
who are citizens of a thing called the realm of spirits. The speculative 
kernel here is that the Idea, which after all only occurs [in Fichte] 
empirically as the end of an action and as something affected by 
subjectivity, is the eternal aspect of what appears as a series of 
changes in the world of the senses. But this speculative kernel is 
needlessly and completely lost when it is expressed in the form of an 
absolute spiritual sphere, in which consequences follow [from actions] 
and which is antithetically opposed to a sensuous world that exists 
outside of it-as if the supersensuous world were not already sensu-
70. See pp. 182-3 above. 
71. Fichte, Vocation of Man, Book III, sections 2, 3 (Werke II, 264-94; Chis-
holm, pp. 99-130. 

187 
C. Fichtean Philosophy 
ous enough. In the present context the ethical Idea is the End of Rea-
son that is to be realized in the moral world order. But instead of 
holding on to the philosophical standpoint Fichte's construction of this 
Idea passes over into historical considerations of an empirical kind, 
and the eternity of the ethical Idea passes into an empirically infinite 
progress. There is no speculative element to be seen save the Idea of 
faith. Through faith the [ 412] identity of the subjective and object-
ive, of the Ideal+ and the real+ is posited, but this Idea remains some-
thing strictly formal.t It only serves us to make the leap from the 
empty pure will to the empirical [content]. What is left at the foun-
dation [of Fichte's philosophy] is the absolute finitude of subject and 
action, with a sense-world over against it that is devoid of Reason 
and must be nullified; and finally a super-sensuous world absolutely 
opposed to the sense-world and dispersed into an infinity of singu-
larized rational beings.72 Since all these finite entities are absolute, 
the genuine and fruitful identity [of this supersensuous world with 
the sensuous world] is beyond cognition; it has not emerged in any 
part of what we have seen [in Fichte] about the ethical. According 
to the system, the Ego as the Absolute acknowledges in its theoretical 
activity that it is affected by a non-Ego; whereas in the practical 
sphere it pretends to dissolve this temporality. Hence, the rational 
Idea of the identity of the subjective and objective is something purely 
formalt for [philosophic] science-it is a mere presumption. The 
only way we could prove this was by showing that this rational Idea 
does not get constructed in the practical part of the system. On the 
contrary, it is totally absent. Moreover, this practical part was shown 
to be dominated, not by a healthy intellect, but by one that has fallen 
away from health altogether, having ossified into reflective super-
stition and stuck in a formalt science which it calls its "deduction." 
We threw light earlier73 on the subordinate sphere of this intellect, 
where speculation can be found, i.e., upon the Idea of the transcen-
dental imagination in Kant's philosophy. Then we had to pursue the 
intellect into the reaches of what are for it the practical realities-the 
Ideals of the moral world order and of the End set by Reason-in 
order to show the absence of the Idea in them. 
72. Intellektuelle Einzelheiten refers to the "atoms'' into which the spiritual 
sphere is qualitatively splintered" above. Compare pp. 82-3 and note 36. 
73. See p. 69 ff. above. 

[Conclusion] 
In their totality, the philosophies we have considered have in this 
way recast the dogmatism of being into the dogmatism of thinking, 
the metaphysic of objectivity into the metaphysic of subjectivity 
Thus, through this whole philosophical revolution the old dogmatism 
and the metaphysic of reflection have at first glance merely taken on 
the hue of inwardness, of the latest cultural fashion. The soul as 
thing is transformed into the Ego, the soul as practical Reason into 
the absoluteness of the personality and singularity of the subject. 
The world as thing is transformed into the system of phenomena or 
of affections of the subject, and actualities believed in, whereas the 
Absolute as [proper] matter and absolute object of Reason is trans-
formed into something that is absolutely beyond rational cognition. 
This metaphysic of subjectivity has run through the complete cycle 
of its forms in the philosophies of Kant, Jacobi, and Fichte-other 
·forms that this metaphysic has assumed do not count, even in this 
subjective sphere. The metaphysic of subjectivity has, therefore, com-
pletely set forth [the intrinsic stages of] the formative process of 
culture1 ; for this formative process consists in establishing as abso-
lute each of the [two] single dimensions [of being and thought, object 
and subject, etc.] of the totality and elaborating each of them into 
a system. The metaphysic of subjectivity has brought this cultural 
process to its end. Therewith the external possibility directly arises 
that the true philosophy should emerge out of this [completed] cul-
ture, nullify the absoluteness of its finitudes and present itself all at 
once as perfected appearance, with all its riches subjected to the to-
tality. For just as the perfection of the fine arts is conditioned by the 
perfection of mechanical skills, so the appearance of philosophy in 
all richness is conditioned by the completeness of the formative proc-
ess of culture, and this completeness has now been achieved. 
There is a direct 'connection (Zusammenhang) between these dis-
tinct philosophical formations and [the one true] philosophy-though 
the linkage is most defective in the case of Jacobi. They have their 
positive, genuine though subordinate, position within true philosophy. -
1. "Culture," "formative process" and "formative process of culture" all repre-
sent Bildung or bilden in this peroration. 

190 
[Conclusion] 
This is clear from the results of [our discussion of] infinity in these 
philosophies. They make infinity into an absolute principle, so that 
it becomes infected by its opposition to finitude. For they recognize 
that thinking is infinity, the negative side of the Absolute. Infinity 
is the pure nullification of the antithesis or of finitude; but it is at 
the same time also the spring of eternal movement, the spring of 
that finitude which is infinite, because it eternally nullifies itself. Out 
of this nothing and pure night of infinity, as out of the secret abyss 
that is its birthplace, the truth lifts itself upward. 
In [truly philosophical] cognition, infinity as this negative signifi-
cance of the Absolute is conditioned by the positive Idea that being 
is strictly nothing outside of the infinite, or apart from the Ego and 
thought. Both being and thought are one. But, on the one hand, these 
philosophies of reflection cannot be prevented from fixating infinity, 
the Ego, and turning it into subjectivity instead of letting it directly 
somersault into the positivity of the absolute Idea. By this route 
infinity fell once more into the old antithesis, and into the whole 
finitude of reflection which it had itself previously nullified. But on 
the other hand, the philosophy of infinity is closer to the philosophy 
of the Absolute than the philosophy of the finite is; for although 
infinity or thought is rigidly conceived as Ego and subject, and must, 
in this perspective, share the same rank as the object or the finite 
which it holds over against itself, still there is the other perspective in 
which infinity is closer to the Absolute than the finite is, because the 
inner character of infinity is negation, or indifference. 
But the pure concept or infinity as the abyss of nothingness in 
which all being is engulfed, must signify the infinite grief [of the fi-
nite] purely as a moment of the supreme Idea, and no more than a 
moment. Formerly, the infinite grief only existed historically in the 
formative process of culture. It existed as the feeling [414] that "God 
Himself is dead," upon which the religion of more recent times 
rests; the same feeling that Pascal expressed in so to speak sheerly 
empirical form: "la nature est telle qu'elle marque partout un Dieu 
perdu et dans l'homme et hors de l'homme." [Nature is such that it 
signifies everywhere a lost God both within and outside manY By 
marking this feeling as a moment of the supreme Idea, the pure con-
cept must give philosophical existence to what used to be either the 
moral precept that we must sacrifice the empirical being (Wesen), or 
the concept of formalt abstraction [e.g., the categorical imperative]. 
2. Pascal, Pensees, 441 (Brunschvicg). 

191 
[Conclusion] 
Thereby it must re-establish for philosophy the Idea of absolute free-
dom and along with it the absolute Passion, the speculative Good Fri-
day in place of the historic Good Friday. Good Friday must be specu-
latively re-established in the whole truth and harshness of its God-
forsakenness.3 Since the [more] serene, less well grounded, and more 
individual style of the dogmatic philosophies and of the natural re-
ligions must vanish, the highest totality can and must achieve its 
resurrection solely from this harsh consciousness of loss, encompass-
ing everything, and ascending in all its earnestness and out of its 
deepest ground to the most serene freedom of its shape. 
3. Compare jj. 39-41 above; compare also the "Golgotha of Absolute Spir-
it" in the last sentence of the Phenomenology (Baillie, p. 808). 

Bibliographic Index 
All works referred to in Hegel's text or in the translators' introduction and 
notes are listed here (and identified as fully as possible) except classical and 
medieval authors (e.g., Herodotus, Horace, Aquinas, Dante), where the refer-
ence can be found in any good modern edition. (Where a specific edition has 
been cited-e.g., Cornford's translation of the Tim.rus-details are included.) 
Baillie, Sir James Black, see Hegel, Phenomenology of Mind. 
Bardili, Christoph Gottfried (1761-1808) Grundriss der Ersten Logik. Stuttgart: 
Loflund, 1800. 
Chisholm, Roderick M., see Fichte, The Vocation of Man. 
Croce, Benedetto (1866-1952), Philosophy, Poetry, History, an anthology of es-
says translated by Cecil Sprigge. London: Oxford University Press, 1966. 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814), Briefwecl1sel, edited by Hans Schulz. Hildes-
heim: Georg Olms Verlag, 1967 [originally published 1930]. 
---. Sammtliche Werke, ed. I. H. Fichte, 8 vols. Berlin: Veit, 1845-46. 
---. Science of Knowledge (Wissenschaftslehre, 1794, with the First and Sec-
ond Introductions), edited and translated by Peter Heath and John Lachs. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970. 
---. Appellation an das Publikum, Jena Leipzig: Gabler (and Tubingen: Cot-
ta), 1799, reprinted in Werke V. 
---. Die Bestimmung des Menschen, Berlin: Vossische Buchhandlung, 1800; 
reprinted in Werke II. 
---. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre, Leipzig: Gabler, 1794 (re-
printed in Werke I). 
---. Grundlage des Naturrechts, 2 vols. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1796, 1797 
(The Science of Rights, translated by A. E. Kroeger, Philadelphia, 1870; 
reprinted by Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970.) 
---. System der Sittenlehre. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1798 (System of Ethics, 
translated by A. E. Kroeger, London: Triibner, 1884). 
---. The Vocation of Man (translated by William Smith), edited by R. M. 
Chisholm. Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, The Library of 
Liberal Arts, 1956. 
---. Unsigned review of Bardili's Grundriss, Literatur-Zeitung, Erlangen, II. 
nn. 214-5; reprinted in Werke II. 
Fuhrmans, Horst, see Schelling, Briefe. 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832), "Das Marchen," published in Die 
Horen, 1795; reprinted in Werke, Berlin edition, Aufbau Verlag, Volume 
12 (1972), pp. 372-406. 
---. "Iphigenie auf Tauris," in Goethes Schriften, vol. 3. Weimar: Gtischen, 
1787; reprinted in Werke, Berlin edition, Aufbau Verlag, Volume 7 (1972), 
pp. 639-708. 
Hamann, Johann Georg (1730-1788), Socratic Memorabilia (text with translation 
and commentary by J. C. O'Flaherty). Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1967. 

194 
Faith and Knowledge 
Harris, Henry Silton, Hegel's Development I: Toward the Sunlight (1770-1801). 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972. 
Heath, Peter and Lachs, John, see Fichte, Science of Knowledge. 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-1831), Briefe von und an Hegel, ed. Jo-
hannes Hoffmeister and Rolf Flechsig, 4 vols. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1961 
(Briefe). 
---. Differenz des Fichte'schen und Schelling'schen Systems der Philosophie. 
Jena: Seidler, 1801 (for current editions see Hegel, Erste Druckschriften, 
Gesammelte Werke, and Siimtliche Werke). 
---. Difference between the Systems of Fichte and Schelling, translated by 
H. S. Harris and Walter Cerf. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1976 [D]. 
---. Early Theological Writings, translated by T. M. Knox with an introduc-
tion, and fragments translated by Richard Kroner. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1948. 
---. Erste Druckschriften, edited by Georg Lasson. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1928 
(the texts of this edition of Differenz des Fichte'schen und Schelling'schen 
Systems der Philosophie and of Glauben und Wissen were each reprinted 
separately at Hamburg by Meiner in 1962). 
---. Gesammelte Werke, Band 4, ]en;rr Kritische Schriften, edited by Hart-
mut Buchner and Otto Poggeler. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1968. (The pres-
ent translation is based on the text of this edition, and the pagination of 
this edition is indicated herein). [N.K.A.] 
---. Glauben und Wissen (Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, Band 2, n. 1). 
Tiibingen: Cotta, 1802 (for current editions see HEGEL, Erste Druck-
schriften and Gesammelte Werke). 
---. Lectures on the History of Philosophy, translated by E. S. Haldane and 
F. H. Simson, 3 vols. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1892; reprinted 
1955. 
---. Logic, translated from the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences by 
William Wallace, second edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1892. 
---. Phiinomenologie des Geistes, edited by Johannes Hoffmeister. Hamburg: 
F. Meiner, 1952. 
---. Phenomenology of Mind, translated by J. B. Baillie. London: Allen and 
Unwin, 1931 (paper, New York: Harper and Row, 1967). 
---. Premieres Publications, translated by M. Mery, 3rd edition. Paris: Oph-
rys, 1970. (French translation of Difference and Faith and Knowledge with 
analytical introductions and explanatory notes.) 
---. Siimtliche Werke, "Jubilee" edition, edited by H. Glockner. Stuttgart: 
Frommann, 1927-30. (This edition is based on the Werke below; see Vol. 
I for Glauben und Wissen.) 
---. Theologische ]ugendschriften, edited by Hermann Noh!. Tiibingen: 
Mohr, 1907; reprinted 1968. 
---. System der Sittlichkeit, edited by Georg Lasson. Hamburg: Meiner, 1967 
(reprinted from Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, second edi-
tion, 1923). 
---. Werke (complete edition edited by a committee of his friends). Berlin: 

195 
Bibliographic Index 
Duncker und Hum blot, 1832 ff. Vol. I: Philosophische Abhandlungen, 
edited by K. L. Michelet, 1832 (second edition, 1845). 
Hegel-Studien. Bonn: Bouvier, 1961 ff. 
Henrich, Dieter, "Die 'Wahrhafte Schildkrote. Zu einer Metapher in Hegels 
Schrift 'Glauben und Wissen,'" Hegel-Studien II (1963), 281-91. 
Herder, Johann Gottfried (1744-1803), Gott: Einige Gespriiche, first edition, 1787; 
second edition, revised, Gotha, 1800; both editions collated in Werke XVI 
(and in the translation below). 
---. God: Some Conversations, translated by F. H. Burkhardt. Indianapolis: 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1940. 
---. Siimmtliche Werke, ed. B. Suphan et a!., 33 vols. Hildesheim: Olms, 
1967. 
Hoffmeister, Johannes, see Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes. 
Hyppolite, Jean, Genese et Structure de Ia Phenomenologie de Hegel, 2 vols. 
Paris: Aubier, 1946; translated by S. Cherniak and John Heckman, Evan-
ston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 1974. 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-1819), An Fichte. Hamburg: Perthes, 1799; re-
printed in Werke III. 
---. David Hume iiber den Glauben. Breslau: Loewe, 1787; reprinted in 
Werke II, without the "Vorrede." 
---. Ueber die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendels-
sohn. Neue verm. Ausg. Breslau: Loewe, 1789; reprinted in Werke IV, i. 
---. "Ueber das Unternehmen des Kriticismus, die Vernunft zu Verstande zu 
bringen" in REINHOLD'S Beytriige (q.v.): reprinted in Werke III, 59-195. 
---. "Ueber eine Weissagung Lichtenbergs" in Taschenbuch fiir das ]ahr 
1802, edited by J. G. Jacobi, Hamburg; reprinted in Werke III, 197-243. 
---. Werke, 6 vols. Leipzig: Fleischer, 1812-25; reprinted Darmstadt: Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968. 
Kant Immanuel {1724-1804), Critik der reinen Vernunft. Riga Hartknoch, 1781 
[=A]; second edition improved throughout, 1787 [ =B] {the two editions 
collated by R. Schmidt. Hamburg: Meiner, 1930). 
---. Critique of Pure Reason, translated from R. Schmidt's collation of edi-
tions A and B by N. Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan, 1933 (the pagina-
tion of both A and B is indicated in the margin). 
---. Critik der praktischen Vernunft. Riga: Hartknoch, 1788; reprinted in 
Akad. V. 
---. Critique of Practical Reason, translated by L. W. Beck. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1949; paper, New York: Library of Liberal Arts, 
1956 (the pagination of Akad. V is indicated in the margin). 
---. Critik der Urteilskraft.'Berlin and Libau: Lagarde and Friederich, 1790; 
second edition, 1793; reprinted in Akad. V. 
---. Critique of Aesthetic Judgement, translated by J. C. Meredith. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1911 (Preface, Introduction and sections 1-60 of the 
Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1793; the pagination of Akad. V. is given in the 
margin). 
---. Critique of Teleological Judgement, translated by J. C. Meredith, Oxford: 

196 
Faith and Knowledge 
Clarendon Press, 1928 (sections 61-91 of Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1792; the 
pagination of Akad. V. is indicated in the margin). 
---. The Doctrine of Virtue, translated by M. J. Gregor. New York: Harper 
Torchbooks, 1964 (Part II of Metaphysik der Sitten; there is another 
translation, by James Ellington, in the Library of Liberal Arts series). 
---. Gesammelte Schriften, edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of Sci-
ences, 24 vols. Berlin: Reimer, 1902-38 (Akad.). 
---. On History, translated by L. W. Beck. New York: Liberal Arts Press, 
1963. 
---. The Metaphysical Elements of Justice, translated by John Ladd. Indian-
apolis: Hobbs-Merrill, Library of Liberal Arts, 1965 (abridged version of 
"Doctrine of Right" from Metaphysik der Sitten). 
---. Metaphysik der Sitten (1797), reprinted in Akad. VI, 203-493. 
---. Prolegomena, 1783, reprinted in Akad. IV, 253-383; translated by L. W. 
Beck, Indianapolis: Hobbs-Merrill, Library of Liberal Arts, 1950. 
---. Die Religion innerhalf der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft. Konigsberg, 
1793; reprinted in Akad. VII. 
---. Religion Within the Bounds of Reason Alone, translated by T. M. 
Green and H. H. Hudson (1934). New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1960. 
Kierkegaard, Soren Aabye (1813-1855), Either/Or, translated by D. F. Swenson 
and W. Lowrie. 2 vols. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor Books, 1959. 
Kimmerle, Heinz, Das Problem der Abgeschlossenheit des Denkens. Bonn: Bou-
vier, 1970 (Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 8). 
Knox, T. M. and Kroner, Richard, see Hegel, Early Theological Writings. 
Koeppen, Friedrich (1775-1858), Schellings Lehre oder das Ganze der Philosophie 
des Absoluten Nichts. Hamburg, 1803. 
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph (1742-99), Vermischte Schriften, edited by L. C. 
Lichtenberg and F. C. Kries, 9 vols. Gottingen, 1801-6 (only the firs~ two 
vols. were published when Faith and Knowledge was written); see now 
rather Aphorismen, edited by A. Leitzmann, 5 vols., Berlin, 1902-8. 
Link, Heinrich Friedrich (1767-1851), Ueber Naturphilosophie. Leipzig, 1806. 
Locke, John (1632-1704), Versuch vom Menschlichen Verstande, aus dem Eng-
lischen ubersetzt ... von Heinrich Engelhard Poleyen. Altenburg, 1757. 
---. Essay Concerning Humane Understanding, edited by J. W. Yelton, 2 
vols. London: Dent, Everyman's Library, 1961. 
Mendelssohn, Moses, Morgenstunden, second edition, Berlin, 1786. 
Mery, Marcel, see Hegel, Premieres Publications. 
Nicolin, Gunther, ed., Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen. Hamburg: Meiner, 
1970. 
Noh!, Hermann, see Hegel, Theologische ]ugendschriften. 
O'Flaherty, James C., see Hamann, J. G. 
Pascal, Blaise, Pensees, ed., Le6n Brunschvicg. Paris: Hachette, 1897 (most mod-
ern editions show Brunschicg's numbering in a concordance). 
Plato's Cosmology (The Tim<eus, translated by F. M. Cornford). New York: 
Liberal Arts Press, 1957. 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard (1758-1823), Beytrage zur leichtern Uebersicht des 
Zustandes der Philosophie, 6 vols. Hamburg: Perthes, 1801-3. 
---. Versuch einer neuen Theorie des menschlichen Vorstellungsvermogens. 

197 
Bibliographic Index 
Prague and lena: Widtmann und Mauke, 1789; reprinted Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963. 
Reyburn, Hugh Adam, The Ethical Theory of Hegel: A Study of the Philosophy 
of Right. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1921, 1967. 
Rosenkranz, Karl (1850--1879}, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben. Berlin, 
1844; reprinted Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963. 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernst (1768-1834), Ueber die Religion: Reden 
rm die Gebildeten unter ihren Veriichtern. Berlin, 1799 (abridged transla-
tion: On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers, edited by John 
Oman, New York: Ungar, 1955). 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph (1775-1854), Siimtliche Werke, edited by 
K.F.A. Schelling, 14 vols. Stuttgart and Augsburg: Cotta, 1856-1861 (the 
pagination of this edition is preserved in the reprinted Ausgewiihlte Werke, 
8 vols., Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1966-1968). 
---. Briefe und Dokumente, edited by Horst Fuhrmans. Bonn: Bouvier, 1962. 
ff. (2 vols. published to date). 
---. System des Transzendentalen ldealismus. Tiibingen: Cotta, 1800; re-
printed in Werke III (and in Ausgewiihlte Werke, 1799-1801). 
---. "Ueber Mythen," Memorabilien V, Leipzig, 1795 (reprinted in Werke I). 
Schulz, Hans, see Fichte, Briefe. 
Schwarz, Hermann, Immanuel Kant: Ein Lebensbild nach Darstellungen der 
Zeitgenossen Borowski, Jachmann, Wasianski. Halle a. S.: Hugo Peter, 
1907. 
Spinoza, Benedictus de (1632.-1677), Early Philosophical Writings, trans. by F. A. 
Hayes. Indianapolis: Library of Liberal Arts, 1963. 
---. Chief Works, translated by R.H.M. Elwes, 2 vols. New York; Dover, 
1951. 
---. Opera Omnia, edited by H.E.G. Paulus, 2 vols. Jena: Akademische Buch-
handlung, 1802-3. 
---. Opera, edited by Karl Gerhardt, 4 vols. Heidelberg, n.d. 
Wallace, William, see Hegel, Logic. 

Absolute: XVI, 33, 46, 56, 61, 76, 
94, 127, 137, 142, 147, 154, 
157,159,168,181, 189; cogni-
tion of 68, 167; and logic 10; 
and religion 58 
antithesis (Gegensatz): absolute 
62, 78, 93-94, 150; of Freedom 
and necessity 93, 94; in Kanti-
an philosophy (Antithesis) 67, 
87-88, 125; of natural and 
supernatural no, 116 
appearance (Erscheinung): 75, 
77,78,82,90,91, 101,106, 
124, 139, 186; and beauty 57; 
see also phenomenon 
Aquinas, Thomas (1225-1274): 
56n 
Aristotle (384/3-322 B.C.): 18 
art: 23, 24, 41, 65, 142, 151; for 
Schelling XII 
Bardili, Cristoph Gottfried (1761-
1808):2,24,45,47 
beauty: l19, 149; divine 12-13, 
148-151; ethical31, 142,144, 
146; for Kant 23,86-88, 91; 
beautiful soul 31; subjective 
57, 148-150; temporal and 
eternal 58 
Bergson, Henri (1859-1941): 
elan vital, XIII 
Bottinger, K. A.: 49 
Catholicism: 41, 50,152 
causality: 75, 90, 93, 99-100, 
104-105 
Analytic Index 
Christianity: 32, 43, 138; see also 
Protestantism, Catholicism 
civilization (Kultur): see culture 
cognition (Erkennen): 9, 58, 72, 
77,85,88-89,102-103,105, 
l16,137, 139, 159-161; a priori 
(see also Kant) 101, 103; of 
the esthetic 87; finite 66, 68, 
91-92; formal 94; intuitive 99, 
113; of nature 91; and Faith 
141;ration~118-119,132, 
141, 165; see also knowledge 
community (Gemeinschaft): 32; 
of things 101-102, llO 
concept (Begriff): 47, 60-63, ll7; 
absolute 112; infinite 15, 62, 
64; forJacobi99, 101,143, 
147; for Kant 18, 62, 68, 70, 
71, 87, 147; pure 63, 190 
congregation (Gemeinde): 151-
152 
consciousness (Bewusstsein): 70, 
100,123, 128,130-131, 142; 
empirical 73, 74; for Fichte 36, 
138; for Jacobi 100-101,115-
l16, 134; reflective 149 
Critical Journal of Philosophy: 1-
3,44 
Croce, Benedetto: 47 
culture (Bildung): 4, 60, 64-65, 
189-190; civilization 55; phi-
losophical 64-65, 98, 154 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321): 146 

200 
Faith and Knowledge 
D'Holbach, Paul Heinrich Die-
trich (1725-1789): 4, 39 
Dilthey, Wilhelm (1833-1911): 
XXV 
dogmatism: 39, 59, 83, 104,140, 
156, 189; German 99 
duty: 13,14,16,31,38,143,174, 
184-185; see also ethics, mor-
ality 
Ego: 19, 20, 40, 76; Ego-concept 
(Egoitiit) 66, 92; for Jacobi 
100, 122-124, 138; for Kant 
71-73, 75, 82, 92, 124; see also 
Fichte 
empiricism: XVII, 62, 97, 99, 162, 
171; philosophical 63 
Enlightenment (Aufkliirung): 
XVII, XXVIII, 8, 12-13, 16, 
39-40,46,56,61,66;and 
faith 55 
Epictetus (c. 50-138): 118 
ethics: 182; ethical freedom 146; 
Jacobi's 30-31; Kantian 38; 
Kingdom of Ends16, 37, 38; 
ethical life (Sittlichkeit) 48, 50, 
144-145, 183-184; see also 
morality 
eudaemonism: 14, 16, 39, 40, 59, 
61,63,66,149,177 
existence (Dasein, Existenz): em-
pirical 58-59; as property 85; 
see also reality 
existentialism: XVI, XVIII 
extension: see space 
experience: 19, 68, 71, 74, 75, 79, 
137, 178; for Fichte 161; for 
Jacobi 101,102, 114-115, 145; 
for Kant 92-93, 123-124 
faith: 65, 81,94-95,124,137, 
139,147,149,156, 164; for 
Fichte 156,171, 173; for Hegel 
141; for Jacobi 26, 30,47-48, 
97, 102,141-143, 148; and ob-
jectivity 57; practical 25, 26, 
30,33,94-95,118;ration~~ 
21, 23, 61; and Reason 55-56, 
64-65,94 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-
1814): 1,5-7,23,32-39,44-
45,49,126,153-187;Ego 
XXXI, XXXIV, 33-34, 112, 
153-154,156-158,162,166, 
168,170, 172-173,175,187; 
Faith 37, 39, 156, 167, 171, 
173; freedom 158; intuition 
34-35, 154, 164; and Jacobi 35, 
122-123,156,160,169;and 
Kant 25, 153; knowledge 56, 
156-157, 160-161, 165, 167, 
170-171; morality 183-186; 
nature,34,162,171,175-179; 
practical philosophy 15; Rea-
son 179-180; Science of 
Knowledge XV, XXII, XXXIV, 
36,155, 165-166; and Spinoza 
160; The Vocation of Man 6, 
32-33, 35-36, 37, 39, 155n., 
162, 173n., 174n., 175, 176, 
179-180, 186n; will173-175, 
181, 182-183 
finitude (Endlichkeit): 9, 16, 58, 
79,95, 103,107,114,117,127, 
147,170,181, 190; as absolute 
60-61,68,82,85,96,97,100-
101,104,124,128,137, 179; 
nullification of 65-66, 84, 94, 
103,139-140,142,190;Rea-
son restricted to 64 
force: basic force (Urkraft) 118 
freedom: 23, 81,84-85,140, 151, 
159, 175,183, 191; ethical146; 

and nature 86-88, 181; and 
necessity 84, 93 
God: as Creator 24; cognition of 
65; death of 190; Deism 14; 
divine beauty 12-13; for En-
lightenment 8, 60; for Fichte 
39, 56; for Hegel 43; Incarna-
tion 40-41, 181; for Jacobi 30, 
134, 140, 169; for Kant XXXI, 
18, 33, 67, 94; Protestant con-
cept of 57, 148; self-knowledge 
XXXIV; self-revelation XII, 
XXX; the Son 81; for Spinoza 
105-106, 168; Subject-Object 
XXIII 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 
(1749-1832): 21,77n, 147 
Greece, ancient: XIV, 41, 50 
grief: see religion 
Hamann, Johann Georg (1730-
1788): and Hume 47-48 
happiness (Gliickseligkeit): 61, 
94-95, 171; bliss (Seligkeit), 
58-60, 181 
Harris, H. S.: Hegel's Develop-
ment46,49-50,151n 
Hegel, George Wilhelm Friedrich 
(1770-1831): on art 41; "bad" 
infinite-see infinity; curricu-
lum vitae 44, 45; Difference 
4-7,11, 18,34,36,38,41,42, 
45, 47, 50, 176n, 183n; "Divine 
Triangle" 50; Early Theologi-
cal Writings 49-50, 143n, 
144n, 151n; Faith and Knowl-
edge 4-7, 9, 11, 12, 21, 30, 36, 
38,41,42,43,44,46,47;and 
Herder 48-49; and Kant 17-
25, 47; (see also Kant); Logic 
XII, XXIV, 25, 30; Phenome-
nology XII, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, 
201 
Analytic Index 
4,46,57n,58n,141n,142n, 
146n,176n,180n,183n,191n; 
Philosophy of History XII, 
XXIV; on religion 40, 43; Sys-
tem of Ethical Life 23, 37, 42, 
47,50 
Herder, Johann Gottfried (1744-
1803):6,28,48-49,118-119; 
basic force (Urkraft) 118; God 
118-119; Hegel's review 28 
Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679): 
14-15,46 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flac-
cus) (65-8 B.C.): 57n 
Hume, David (1711-1776): 26, 
47,69,99,124n,137, 154 
Hyppolite, Jean: 91n 
Idea (Idee): 59-61,66,69,82, 85, 
103,105,108-109,119,178, 
186, 190-191; absolute 113, 
161; esthetic Idea 86-87; eth-
ical186-187; Idea of Reason 
136-see also Kant; for Hegel 
16-17,63, 68; for Kant 17, 21, 
67, 78, 89, 92, 94, 139-140; 
speculative 71, 94, 96, 115, 
148,165 
Ideal (Ideal): 58, 162, 182, 186 
Idealism: 18, 62, 64, 75,123, 154, 
167; critical67, 75, 154; for-
mal 78-79,156,164,174, 186; 
psychological 75-76; transcen-
dental 75, 77, 84 
identity: absolute 9, 33, 68, 72, 
74, 76, 87, 99, 108, 136, 156, 
167, 168, 170; formal9, 11, 
24,75,80,92-93,166;ofop-
posites 67, 70, 112; relative 70, 
74,80,154,165,171,172;of 
subject and object 75; of 
thought and being 18, 25, 36, 

202 
Faith and Knowledge 
85, 94, 153; of l!niversal and 
particular 47, 89, 132, 136-137 
imagination: 74, 75, 86, 108-109, 
113-114,125,126,128;pro-
ductive 18, 19, 24,69-70, 73, 
76, 92-93, 166; transcendental 
125-126,132,187 
indifference, point of: 24, 41, 50 
infinite grief: see religion 
infinite progress: 16, 22, 35, 36, 
37, 84, 170,181 
infinity: 14, 39-40, 60, 61, 62, 96, 
114,129,139,154,167,170, 
172,182, 190; abstract 27, 81, 
108; actual35, 110-111; "bad" 
16, 27; empirical83, 108, 111-
113; for Kant 81, 83, 108, 147, 
153; speculative 27; for Spino-
za 27, 106-111, 113; true in-
finite, 113 
intellect (Verstand): XVII, XXX, 
10,56,57,59,70,74,77-79, 
115,167, 169; archetypal88; 
and finitude 58; intuitive 24, 
80,88-89,91;for Jacobi 102, 
125,131,134,136;inKant 
XXX, 46-47, 70, 73, 78-82, 
85-86, 101, 122; intellectual 
intuition: see intuition 
intelligible realm: see supersen-
suous 
intuition: 16, 18-19,41, 64, 95, 
141, 149, 152; empirical 30, 
158, 181; for Fichte 34-35, 
154,158, 164; intellectual XIII, 
XXIV, XXVI-XXVII, XXX, 30, 
34,96n,107,127,154,157-
159; for Kant 19, 23, 68, 70-
72, 121-123; for Schleier-
macher 150-151 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (17 43-
1819): 2,6-7,25-32,44,45, 
46, 49, 97-152; David Hume 
97-100, 102, 114; Ego 100, 
122-124, 138; ethics 30-31, 
38, 143-146; Idea 103, 105, 
108-109; intellect 102, 103, 
125, 132, 134, 136; intuition 
16, 102, 128; faith 26, 30, 33, 
97-98, 124, 138-139; and Fichte 
122-123, 169; and Herder 48-
49;God,30,134,169;and 
Kant XXVII, 6, 29, 97, 120, 
129-130; knowledge 15, 26, 97, 
110,114, 131, 136; Letter to 
Fichte 36, 143, 167; Letters on 
the Teaching of Spinoza 98-
99,106,110,115,132,134, 
137-138, 145; nature 116, 138; 
and Protestantism 31; Reason 
97-98,103,106,110,115-117, 
120, 126,134, 136; revelation 
26, 30, 138; scepticism 64; and 
Spinoza 27, 101, 104-110, 114; 
thing in itself 101, 102, 103, 
116 
Jacobi, J. G.: Pocketbook 29,116, 
118,126,132-133,136 
Jean Paul: see Richter 
judgment: 19, 75, 80, 131; facul-
ty of 88, 91; reflecting 76-77, 
86; synthetic a priori-see 
Kant 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804): 
XXV, XXXV, 17-25, 34, 67-
96, 120-128; antinomies 22, 
83-84,86, 87; a posteriori 78, 
80; a priori 79-80, 122; ca te-
gories XXVI, XXIX, 11, 19, 73, 
76-77, 89, 124; deduction of 
XXX, 18, 22, 69, 72, 82, 92, 
101, 148; categorical impera-

tive 15; concept 18, 62, 68, 87-
89; critical philosophy 7, 11; 
Critique of Judgement XVII, 
23, 36, 76, 164; Critique of 
Practical Reason 24; Critique 
of Pure Reason XVII, XXVII, 
XXVIII, 24, 71, 120-121, 123, 
140;Ego71-73,123-124;God 
33; Hegel's evaluation 6-7, 17-
23; 47; on Herder, 48-49; Idea 
of Reason 17-18, 25, 79, 81, 
86-87, 140; imagination, pro-
ductive XXX-XXXI, 18-19, 69-
70, 73, 92; intellect XXX, 46-
47,70,73,78-82,85-86,89, 
101, 122, (see also intellect); 
intuition 19, 23, 68, 70, 72, 73, 
87-89, 121-123, 124; forms of 
121-122; Metaphysics of 
Ethics 38, 143n; paralogisms 
22, 82; practical faith 25; prac-
tical reason 15, 22, 62, 81, 84-
85, 143, 164, 171; reason 20, 
24-25,56,77,80-82,108, 
139-140; reflection XVII; re-
ligion 55; scepticism 3; syn-
thetic a priori judgement 
XXVI, 21, 69-72, 74, 78, 86, 
125; synthetic unity of apper-
ception XXX, 69, 71, 73, 129-
130; theory of knowledge 7; 
thing in itself XXVI, 15, 19, 
21, 74-75, 76-77, 79, 87 
Kierkegaard, Soren Aabye (1813-
1855): XIV /XV, XVI, XXII 
Kimmerle, Heinz: 50 
knowledge (Wissen): 3-4, 95, 
147; absolute 28; and faith 7-
8, 55, 156; for Fichte 34, 160-
161,167;form~7~9~167; 
for Jacobi 110, 114; transcen-
203 
Analytic Index 
dental 92; see also Cognition 
Koppen, Friedrich (1775-1858): 
6,29,49,115,119,120n,125n, 
129n,130-131,140,160 
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott (1770-
1842):3 
law (Gesetz): 93, 145, 174, 183; 
natural13, 182 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 
(1646-1716): 39,83n;monad 
XXIX 
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph 
(1742-1799): 133 
Locke, John (1623-1704): 8, 14, 
21,34,46,63,69,78,99,13~ 
154 
logic: 8-11, 45 
logos: 43,81n, 115,181n 
Luther, Martin (1483-1546): 8 
man: 65, 79,115-116, 118,126, 
138,149,180 
manifold: 24-25, 60, 61, 70-71, 
74,76,80-82,86,92-94,114, 
122,130,155,164 
materialism: 39 
mechanism: XVIII, 110, 132; of 
nature 90-91 
mediation: mediating concept 72; 
middle term 94 
Mendelssohn, Moses (1729-
1786): 23,85,99,105,137-
138,141 
metaphysics: 10,134,137, 189 
morality: Fichtean.172-187; Ja-
cobian, 143-150; Kantian 94-
95, 143; moral theology 178; 
moral world order 170, 180-
181, 187; Ought (Sollen) 25, 
39, 155, 165; see also ethics 
Moses: 47 
nature: 19, 24, 35, 41, 43, 47, 95, 

204 
Faith and Knowledge 
105,115, 119; for Fichte 
XXXIV, 34, 37,162,171, 175-
179; and freedom 86-88, 93; 
for Hegel42-43, SO; for Jacobi 
131-132, 138; for Kant 
XXXIV, 76-77, 79, 86-88, 90; 
natural law-see law; natural-
ism 110; philosophy of, XII-
XIII; for Spinoza 90-91; as 
Universe, 149-151 
necessity: 93, 164; empirical 56-
57, 163,175, 180; eternal180; 
transcendental157, 159 
nihilism: 168, 170 
noumenon: noumenal Ego 83; 
noumenal world 15, 39; see 
also Kant, supersensuous 
object (Gegenstand, Objekt): 73, 
101; objectivity 76-77,96, 154, 
159; space and time as objects 
121-122 
ontological argument: 94; Kant's 
critique of 22-23, 67, 85 
opposition (Entgegensetzung): 
141; absolute, 153, 154, 165-
166, 173; ideal, 62; see also 
antithesis 
organism: 37-38, 117; Kant's 
theory of 23, 90 
ought (Sollen): see morality 
particular: 72,88,89,136,154, 
171, 183; of reflection 109; 
particularity 110, 135 
Pascal, Blaise (1623-1662): 190 
phenomenon: 15, 19; phenomenal 
world 65, 84, 87, 178; see also 
Kant 
philosophy: 8, 41, 59, 65, 66, 67-
68,101,126,127,138,142, 
148,154,158,169,180, 189; 
analytic XVIII, 11; critical (see 
also Kant) 3, 7, 10, 11, 21, 29, 
133; German 137; as idealism 
( see also idealism) 68; of 
identity XV, XXIV, XXV, 
XXIX, XXXV, 11-12, 30, 37, 
40; natural20; practical62; 
reflective-see reflection; spec-
ulative-see speculation; theo-
retical 62, 162; transcendental 
20, 21 
Plato (428/ 427-348/347 B.C.): 
49,82,132,180 
potency (Potenz): 73, 74, 149 
principle: of beauty 87; of iden-
tity 98; of philosophy 10; of 
sufficient reason 35, 98-99, 
104, 106, 109, 134; subjective 
(see also subject) 12 
Protestantism: 7-8, 12-13,15, 
31-32,38, 39-40, 43-44; flight 
from the world 13, 31, 58; 
Protestant ethic 13; Protestant 
subjectivity 13, 32, 57, 61, 
147-152 
psychology: 126; empirical63, 
89 
reality: absolute 85; of the Idea 
(for Kant) 89; for Jacobi 124; 
nullification of 140; of Reason 
(for Kant) 86, 88, 94; of the 
will173 
Reason (Vernunft): XI, XVII, 19, 
46,59,61-65,69,117,142, 
147,171, 189; absolute 113; 
and faith 8, 55-56; for Fichte 
179-180; formal113; and in-
tellect 9; for Jacobi 97, 103, 
110,115,117,120,134,136, 
150; for Kant 20, 24-25, 73-
74,77-78,80-82,84-91,94-
96, 125; as middle term 94; 

practical15, 81, 85, 164; pure 
20, 59, 108, 164; for Spinoza 
104-105; theoretical81 
reconciliation: 58-59, 180 
reflection:9,46,64,83,84,92, 
98,107,109,114-115,120, 
125, 128, 189; and faith 141, 
142; reflective philosophy 
XVII, XX-XXI, 7-17 
Reformation: 12, 40; see also 
Protestantism 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard (1758-
1823): 2,24,44,126,139-140, 
157n; Contributions 29, 115-
116,119-120,133,135 
religion: 32, 40,42-43, 50, 140, 
152-153, 180-181; as God's 
self-revelation XII; and grief 
39-41,43,50,57-58,149, 
190-191; of nature, 41, 151; 
positive 55; see also Catholi-
cism, Protestantism, faith 
Reyburn, H. A.: 183n 
Richter, Jean Paul Friedrich 
{1763-1825): 133, 157n 
Rosenkranz, Karl (1805-1879): 
9,28,43,46,47,49,50,82n 
scepticism: 3, 62, 64 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Jo-
seph {1775-1854): XXII, 1, 2, 
23, 31, 45, 49; and Fichte 5, 
32, 44-45; philosophy of iden-
tity XI-XII, XV; philosophy of 
nature XII-XIII; his system, 
XVI; System of Transcenden-
tal Idealism XVII; transcenden-
tal philosophy XII 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Fried-
rich von {1759-1805): 2 
Schlegel, August Wilhelm (1767-
1845): 6,36,44,45,49 
205 
Analytic Index 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel 
Ernst(1768-1834}: 6,12,31-
32, 41, 49, 150-151; Speeches 
32,45,150 
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst (1761-
1833}:3 
self-consciousness: XI, 57, 74, 
76; identity of 71, 80, 92; pure 
112, 157 
sensibility: 65, 70, 74, 102, 122, 
125, 141; sensation 74, 76-77, 
116,124,134,154-155,163-
164; sense world 172, 174, 
175,187 
space:115, 120-122,127-129, 
130-131; extension 89, 100; 
intuition of 70 
Sparta: 31, 145-146 
speculation: XI-XIII, 4, 9, 20, 30, 
80,114; in Fichte,S-6,167; 
and Kant's philosophy 92, 120; 
speculative philosophy XVI, 
XX-XXI; speculative religion, 
39-44 
Spinoza, Baruch (1632-1677): 
XXXV, 35,39, 118-119; Ethics 
106, 107, 108, 114; and Fichte 
160; God 105-106, 168; imagi-
nation 106-107; infinite 106-
111, 113, 125; intellectual love, 
49; and Jacobi 6-7, 101, 104-
110, 114; and Kant 24; nature 
90-91; philosophy of identity 
XX; Principles of Cartesian 
Philosophy 111, 168; Reason 
104; time 27, 104-110, 125 
spirit: 41-42, 79, 95, 134, 152, 
162-163; world spirit 57 
spontaneity: 69, 78, 80, 90, 123 
Stoicism: XXVIII-XXXI 
Storr, G. C.: 45-46 

206 
Faith and Knowledge 
striving: 16, 62, 64, 150 
subject: empirical 59; subjectiv-
ity 61, 63, 66, 85, 149, 152, 
189; absolute 96,136,170, 
179; Jacobian 97, 117, 118, 
136-137, 145, 147-150; Kant-
ian 67, 81, 91,123, 147; nulli-
fication of 140-143; see also 
Ego 
succession: see time 
supersensuous, the: 56, 65, 82, 
86-87,88,139,142,147,174, 
175, 186-187; see also nou-
menon 
teleology: XVIII, 42, 90-91, 177 
thing in itself (Ding an sic h): see 
Kant 
thinkin~ (Denken): and intuiting 
141; for Kant 70, 79; pure 66, 
113; and substance 110 
time: 27, 100, 102-103, 104-110, 
114-115,120-123,127, 128; 
the eternal124, 127, 138; the 
temporal66, 127,135, 139; 
nullification of 140; intuition 
of 70; succession 99-103, 104, 
114 
totality: 41, 104-105, 109, 117, 
126,132,159-161,174,189, 
191; absolute 99 
truth: 56, 102,158, 190; absolute 
161; eternal137; and faith 
124; and finitude 65; and 
philosophy 124, 158 
understanding: see intellect (in 
Kant) 
universal: 19, 22, 72, 88, 89, 136, 
183; concrete universal19 
Universe: nature as 41, 150-152, 
175-178,182 
utility: 13 
Vernunft: see Reason 
Verstand: see intellect' 
Voltaire (Francois Marie Arouet) 
(1694-1778): 38,178 
will, pure: 173-175, 181, 183 
Wolff, Christian (1679-1754): 
14,37,38,39 

An Rngllsh translation of G. W. E Hegel s 
Glauben und WlSSCfl prepared and edited 
by Wali'Rr Ceif & II. S Harris 
As the title mdtcates, Fatlb and Knowledge deals wtth the 
relation tx·tween religious faith and cognitive beliefs. between 
the truth of religion and the truths of philosophy and science. 
Hegel is guided by his understanding of the histoncal situa 
tion: the tndivtdual alienatrd from God, na[ure, and com-
munity: and ht: is influt:nct:d by the m:w philOMJphy ufSchdl 
ing, the Spinozistic Philosophy of Identity with its superb 
\'ision of the mner unity of God, nature. and rational man 
Through a brilli;mt discussion of the philosophi-.·s of Kant, 
Fichte, and other luminaries of the period, Hegel shows that 
the time.: has finally come to give philosophy the authentic 
shape it has always been trying to reach, a shape in whtch 
philosophy's old conflkts with religion on the one hand and 
with the sci~.~nccs on tP· other arc suspended om:c for all 
This is the fira English translation of this important es"a' 
Profess0r H 
Harris offers a historical and analytic com-
mentary to the text and Professor Cerf offers an introdu 
tion to the general reader which focu<>es on the concept of 
intellt'Ctual intuition and on the difference between authenuc 
and mauthentic phil0sophy. 
Walter Ct.:rf ts professor t:mentus of philosophy at the Otv 
L.niversity of New York. ll. S. I farris is professor of philos-
ophy and humanities at Glendon College, York Univcrsny. 
0-88706-826 X 

