HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY 
OF NATURE 
EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND EXPLANATORY NOTES BY 
M.J. PETRY 
M.A., D.Phi1.(Oxon.) 
VOLUME III 
LONDON· GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LTD 
NEW YORK . HUMANITIES PRESS, INC 

FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1970 
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. All rights 
are reserved. Apart from any {air dealing for the purpose of 
private study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under 
the Copyright Act, 1956, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, electrical, chemical, mechan-
ical, optical, photocopying recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the copyright owner. Enquiries sllOuld be 
addressed to the Publishers. 
This translation © George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1970 
SBN 04 10002 3 4 
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
in 12 on 13 point Bembo type 
BY UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED 
WOKING AND LONDON 

CONTENTS 
SECTION THREE 
ORGANICS § 337 
9 
Chapter One: The terrestrial organism (Geological nature) § 338 
IS 
A History of the Earth § 339 
16 
I 
The powers of the terrestrial process 
16 
2 Geognosy 
17 
3 Physical geography 
23 
B 
Geology and oryctognosy (The Earth's structural composition) 
§ 340 
24 
I 
Primitive rocks 
26 
2 
Fletz rocks 
29 
3 Alluvial terrain 
3 I 
C TheEarth'slife § 341-342 
33 
I 
The atmosphere 
35 
2 
The sea 
36 
3 The land 
38 
Chapter Two: The plant (The vegetable organism) § 343-346 
45 
A The process off ormation § 346a 
67 
I 
Formation as such 
68 
a. Leaf and root 
68 
b. Cellular tissue and vessels 
71 
c. The activity of the saps 
74 
i. The wood-sap 
77 
ii. The vital-sap 
77 
iii. The cambium 
78 
2 
Wood-formation 
80 
3 
Bud-fo~mation 
83 
B 
The process of assimilation (Process of assimilation) § 347 
83 
I 
Process with light 
85 
2 
Aerial process 
86 
3 Aqueous process 
88 
C 
The generic process (Generic process) § 348-349 
91 
Chapter Three: The animal (The animal organism) § 350-352 
102 
A Formation (Shape) 
109 
§ 353 
I 
The functions of the organism 
109 
§ 354 
2 The systems of shape 
II I 
a. The nervous system (i. The osseous system; ii. 
The nerves of sensation and movement; iii. The 
ganglionic system) 
II3 

CONTENTS 
h. The system of the blood (i. The muscular 
system; ii. The pulmonary and hepatic systems; 
iii. The cardiac system) 
lI8 
c. The digestive system 
125 
§ 355 
3 The total shape 
126 
§ 356 
4 Theprocessofformation 
131 
B Assimilation § 357 
136 
1 The theoretical process 
§357a-358 
137 
2 
The practical process (The practical relationship) 
§ 359-362 
a. Process with light 
h. Breathing, cutaneous process and thirst 
c. The digestive process 
§ 363-366 
i. Immediate injection 
ii. Mediated digestion 
iii. Excretion 
3 The nisus formativus 
C The generic process (Generic process) 
§ 367 
1 The sex-relationship § 368-369 
2 
Zoology (The genus and the species) 
§ 370 
a. Worms and mollusca 
h. Insects 
c. Vertebrata 
1. Fish 
11. Amphibia 
111. Birds 
iv. Mammals 
3 Medical science (The genus and the individual) 
a. Nosology (The disease of the individual) 
h. Therapy (Healing) 
§ 373-374 
§ 371-372 
c. The death of the individual of its own accord 
141 
148 
149 
151 
155 
161 
164 
166 
170 
172 
177 
187 
188 
188 
189 
190 
190 
191 
193 
193 
202 
§ 375-376 
209 
NOTES 
214 
INDEX TO TEXT 
384 
INDEX TO NOTES 
407 
The words in roman are those of Hegel's headings which appeared in 
the first edition of this work. The words in italics did not appear as 
headings in the text, hut such identification of these passages was made on 
the contents page of the first edition of the work. 

SECTION THREE 
Organic Physics 
(Organics) 
§ 337 
The real nature of the body's totality constitutes the infinite 
process in which individuality determines itself as the particu-
lari ty or finitude which it also negates, and returns into itselfby re-
establishing itself at the end of the process as the beginning. Con-
s sequently, this totality is an elevation into the primary ideality 
of nature. It is however an impregnated and negative unity, 
which by relating itself to itself, has become essentially self-
centred and subjective. It is in this way that the Idea has 
reached the initial immediacy of life. Primarily. life is 
10 shape, or the universal type of life constituted by the 
geological organism. Secondly. it is the particular formal 
subjectivity of the vegetable organism. Thirdly. it is the in-
dividual and concrete subjectivity of the animal organism. 
The Idea has truth and actuality only in so far as it has subjec-
15 tivity implicit within it (§ 215). As the mere immediacy of the 
Idea, life is thus external to itself, and is not life, but merely the 
corpse of the living process. It is the organism as the totality of 
the inanimate existence of mechanical and physical nature. 
Subjective animation begins with the vegetable organism, 
20 which is alive and therefore distinct from this inanimate existence. 
The parts of the individual plant are themselves individuals how-
ever, so that the relations between them are still exterior. 
The animal organism is so developed however, that the differ-
ences of its formation only have an essential existence as its mem-
25 bers, whereby they constitute its subjectivity. In nature, anima-
tion certainly disperses into the indeterminate plurality of living 
beings, but these are intrinsically subjective organisms, and it is 
only in the Idea that they constitute a single animate and organic 
system. 
A* 
9 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Addition. Let us look back at the preceding exposition. In the first section 
we saw (a) matter, as the abstract extrinsicality of space. Matter, as the 
abstract being-for-self of extrinsicality and as offering resistance, is com-
pletely individualized, and in a simple atomistic state. As this atomistic 
state is uniform, matter is still completely indeterminate, but it is abso-
5 
lutely atomistic only to the understanding, not to reason. (b) We then 
concerned ourselves with particular masses in a state of mutual determina-
tion. (c) Finally, we dealt with gravity, which constitutes the basic deter-
mination in which all particularity was subIa ted and of an ideal nature. In 
the second section, this ideality of gravity transformed itself into light and 10 
then into shape, and is now re-established. The matter there individualized 
contains:-(a) the free determinations as we saw them in the elements and 
their process; (b) its subsequent unfolding of itself into the realm of ap-
pearance, in which the self-subsistence of specific gravity is opposed to the 
reflection-into-other of cohesion; until (c) it forms itself into totality in 15 
individual shape. This ideality is now result however, for the particular 
body sublates the different modes of its existence. Like light, it is a unity 
which is serene and self-identical, but at the same time, it proceeds from 
the totality of the compacted particularizations which are taken back, into 
their primary undifferentiation. In itself, individuality is now weighted 20 
and lighted; it is triumphant, and produces and preserves itself as the + 
unifying process of all particularities. It is this individuality which is the 
subject-matter of the third section. The living body is always on the point 
of passing over into the chemical process. Oxygen, hydrogen, salt etc., 
are always about to emerge, but they are perpetually being suppressed, and 25 
the chemical process can only prevail by means of death or sickness. 
Living being is perpetually exposed to danger, and always bears something 
alien within it. Unlike inorganic being, it can sustain this contradiction. 
Speculation subsists in this resolution, and it is only for the understanding 
that the contradiction remains unresolved. Consequently, life may only 30 
be grasped speculatively, for it is precisely in life that speculation has exis-
tence. The continual action of life is therefore absolute idealism, for that 
which it becomes is another term, and yet is perpetually being sublated. 
If life were realistic, it would respect that which is external to it, but it is 
perpetually checking the reality of this other term, and transforming it into 35 
its own sel£ 
Life is therefore the primary truth; it is superior to the stars, and to the sun, 
which although it is individualized, is not a subject. As the union of the 
Notion with exteriorized existence, in which the Notion maintains itself, 
life constitutes the Idea; this is also the meaning of Spinoza's proposition 40 
10 

ORGANICS 
that life is adequate to the Notion, although this is still a completely 
+ abstract expression of course. Life is not merely the resolution of the 
opposition between the Notion and reality, but of oppositions in general. 
Life has being where inner and outer, cause and effect, end and means, 
5 subjectivity and objectivity etc., are one and the same. It is the union of 
the Notion with reality which constitutes the true determination of life. 
This reality no longer has an immediate and independent mode of being 
as a plurality of properties existing apart from each other, for the Notion 
is simply the ideality of indifferent subsistence. As the ideality we encoun-
10 tered in the chemical process is posited there, individuality is posited in its 
freedom. Subjective and infinite form now also has objectivity. This was 
not so in shape, because there the determinations of infinite form still have 
fixed determinate being as matters. On the contrary, in the abstract 
Notion of the organism, the existence of particularities is compatible with 
15 the unity of the Notion, for these particularities are posited as transitory 
moments of a single subject. In the system of the heavenly bodies how-
ever, all particular moments of the Notion exist freely for themselves as 
independent bodies which have not yet returned into the unity of the 
Notion. The first organism was the solar system; it was merely implicitly 
20 organic however, it was not yet an organic existence. The gigantic 
members of which it is composed are independent formations, and it is 
only their motion which constitutes the ideality of their independence. 
The solar system is merely a mechanical organism. Living existence posits 
all particularity as appearance however, and so holds these gigantic mem-
25 bers within a unity. In life therefore, light is the complete master of 
gravity. Consequently, living existence is the individuality which has sub-
jugated the further particularizations of gravity within itself, and which is 
immanently active. The self-maintaining Notion is first posited as self-
sublating reality. The individuality of the chemical body can fall victim 
30 to an alien power; life has its contrary within itself however, and in itself 
it is a rounded totality, or its own object. Mechanism constituted the first 
part of the philosophy of nature, chemistry constituted the apex of the 
+ second part, and teleology constitutes this third part (see §I94 Add. 2). Life 
35 is a means, but for this Notion, not for another; it is perpetually reproduc-
ing its infinite form. Kant had already determined living existence as con-
+ stituting its own end. There is change here, but it is only present on behalf 
of the Notion, for it is merely the otherness of the Notion that changes. It 
is only in the absolute negativity of this negation of that which is negative, 
that the Notion can remain in communion with itsel£ The actuality of 
40 organic being is already present in its implicitness, and is the movement of its 
II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
becoming. However that which is result, is also that which precedes the result, 
so that the beginning is the same as the end. Hitherto, this was merely 
known to us, but it now enters into existence. 
As Idea, life constitutes its own movement, and so initiates its subjec-
tification. In this way, it makes itself into its other, into its own counter-
5 
action; it gives itself objective form in order to return to itself and to have 
being as returned-into-self Consequently, life as such is only present in 
the third moment, for its principal determination is subjectivity. The 
earlier stages are merely incomplete pathways leading towards it. We 
have three kingdoms therefore, the mineral kingdom, the plant kingdom, and 10 
the animal kingdom. 
+ 
In the first instance, it is geological nature which constitutes the life 
that presupposes itself as its own other, and which is therefore merely 
the ground and basis of life. It certainly ought to be life, individuality, 
and subjectivity, but it is not the true subjectivity which leads its members 15 
back into unity. The moments of individuality, and of return or subjec-
tivity, certainly have to be present as they are in life, but because of their 
immediacy, they are necessarily separate aspects, and so fall outside one 
another. Individuality is one aspect, and its process is another. Individu-
ality does not yet exist as active and idealizing life, for it is the inert 20 
animation opposed to living activity, and has not yet determined itself 
as singularity. It also contains activity, but this activity is in part simply 
implicit, and in part external to it. The process of subjectivity is divorced 
from the universal subject itself, for at this stage we still lack an individual 
which would be implicitly active within itself Consequently, life in its 25 
immediacy is self-alienated, and is therefore the inorganic nature of 
subjective life. All exteriority is inorganic; to the individual for example, 
the sciences of his inorganic nature are inorganic in so far as he is not yet 
aware of them, and they simply function within him and constitute his 
implicit rationality, which he merely has to make his own. The Earth is 30 
a whole, and is the system of life, but as a crystal it resembles a skeleton, 
which may be regarded as being dead, for its members still seem to have a 
formally separate subsistence, and its process falls outside it. 
+ 
In the second stage, which is that of reflection, animation begins to be 
more specialized, so that the individual constitutes its activity within 35 
itself as the living process, although only as a subject of reflection. This 
formal subjectivity is not yet the subjectivity identical with the objectivity 
which is divided into a system of members. It is a subjectivity which is 
still abstract, because it merely derives from the alienation which consti-
tutes the terrestrial organism; it is unpliant, punctiform, and merely 40 
12 

ORGANICS 
individual. The subject certainly particularizes itself, maintains itself as 
subjectivity in its external relation, and forms and pervades its members. 
Its formal aspect consists in its not yet truly maintaining itself in this 
relation however, so that it is still torn out of itself Consequently, the 
5 plant is not yet true subjectivity, because although the subject differenti-
ates itself from itself and constitutes its own object, it cannot yet sustain 
the true differentiation of its members. True self-conservation requires that 
it should return into itself from this state of differentiation. Consequently, 
the main determination of the plant consists in its differentiating itself 
10 from itself in a merely formal manner, and only in this way maintaining 
its self-identity. It unfolds its parts, but as these parts, which are its 
members, are essentially the whole of the subject, it is not differentiated 
any further. Its leaves, roots, and stalk are also merely individuals. The 
real being which the plant produces in order to maintain itself is merely 
15 the complete equivalent of itself, so it also forms no proper members. 
Consequently, each plant is merely an infinite number of subjects, and 
the connection whereby these subjects appear as a single subject, is merely 
superficial. The plant is unable to maintain its power over its members, 
for they detach themselves from it and become independent. The inno-
20 cence of the plant is also an expression of the impotence which results 
from its relating itself to inorganic being, where at the same time its 
+ members become other individuals. This second kingdom is the realm of 
water and of neutrality. 
The third kingdom is that of fire, in which individual subjectivity 
25 constitutes a complete animation, and the plant and differences are 
united. This subjectivity is shape, like the primary system of forms; but 
at the same time the members are not parts, as they still were in the plant. 
Animal existence maintains itself in its otherness, but this is an actual 
difference, and at the same time there is a positing of the ideal nature of 
30 the animal's system of members. This constitutes the initiation of the 
+ living subject, soul, etheriality, the essential process of articulation into 
members and expansion. This formation is posited immediately in time 
however, and the difference is timelessly retracted into its unity. Fire 
releases itself into members, and is ceaselessly passing over into its product, 
35 which is ceaselessly led back to the unity of subjectivity, so that there is an 
immediate absorption of its independence. Animal life is therefore the 
Notion displaying itself in space and time. Each member has the entire 
soul within it, and is only independent through its being connected with 
the whole. Sensation, which is the faculty of finding oneself within one-
40 self, is the highest determination of this sphere, and first occurs here; 
13 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
it is the persistence of self-identity within determinateness, a free self-
communion within determinateness. The plant is not aware of itself 
within itself, because its members are independent and opposed individu-
alities. Animal nature constitutes the explicated Notion of life; prior to 
this there is no true animation present. These three forms constitute life. 5 
14 

Chapter One 
Geological nature 
(The terrestrial organism) 
The primary organism, in so far as it is initially determined as im-
mediate or implicit, is not a living existence, for as subject 
and process, life is essentially a self-mediating activity. Regarded 
from the standpoint of subjective life, the first moment of par-
s ticularization is that the organism converts itself into its own 
presupposition, and so assumes the mode of immediacy, 
in which it confronts itself with its condition and outer sub-
sistence. The inward recollection of the Idea of nature as sub-
jective life, and still more as spiritual life, is basically divided 
10 between itself and this unprocessive immediacy. This immediate 
totality presupposed by subjective totality, is simply the 
shape of the organism; as the universal system ofindividual 
bodies, it is the terrestrial body. 
Addition. In the chemical process, the Earth is already present as this 
15 totality; the universal elements enter into the particular corporealities 
of the Earth, and are partly causes and partly effects ot the process (§ 328 
Add. II. 185,34). This is simply abstract motion however, for the cor-
porealities are merely particular. The Earth is now certainly a totality, but 
as it is only the implicit process of these bodies, the process falls outside its 
20 perenniating product. The content of this totality cannot lack any 
determination belonging to life, but as extrinsicality constitutes the mode 
of these determinations, this content lacks the infinite form of sub-
jectivity. Consequently, as it is presupposed by life as its foundation, 
the Earth is posited as being unposited, for the positing is concealed by 
25 the immediacy. The other moment is then the self-dissolution of this 
presupposition. 
IS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
A. 
History of the Earth 
§ 339 
As this organism has being merely as an implicitness, its 
members do not contain the living process within themselves 
but constitute an external system. The forms of this system 
exhibit the unfolding of an underlying Idea, but its process 
of formation belongs to the past. The powers of this process,s 
which nature leaves behind as independent and extra-
terrestrial, are the connection and position of the Earth 
within the solar system, its solar, lunar, and cometary life, 
and the inclination of its axis to the orbit, and the mag-
netic axis. Standing in closer relationship to these axes 10 
and their polarization are the distribution of sea and land, 
the connected diffusion ofland in the northern hemisphere, 
the division and tapering off of the land masses towards 
the south, the additional separation into an old and a new 
world, and the further division of the old world into the 15 
various continents. These continents are distinguished from 
one another by the physical, organic, and anthropological 
characteristics which distinguish them once again from the 
younger and less mature characteristics of the new world. 
Mountain ranges etc., may also be considered here. 
+ 
Addition. 1. The powers of this process appear independently of their 
product, while the animal, which is a process in itself, contains its powers, 
for its members are the potences of its process. The Earth on the contrary 
is as it is merely because it has this place in the solar system, and occu-
pies this position in the planetary series. In animal existence however, 25 
each member contains the whole, so that the extrinsicality of space is 
sublated within the soul, which is omnipresent within its body. If we speak 
in this way however, we are positing a spatial relationship again and 
this is not the soul's true relationship. The soul is certainly omnipresent, 
but undivided, not as an extrinsicality. The members of the geological 30 
organism are in fact external to one another however, and they are there-
fore without a soul. The Earth is the most eminent of all the planets. 
It is the middling planet, and exhibits individuality, and it owes this kind + 
16 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
of existence solely to the permanence of its relations. If anyone of these 
relations lapsed, the Earth would cease to be what it is. The Earth appears 
as the dead product of these relations; but it is maintained by these con-
ditions, which form a single chain or whole. As the Earth is the universal 
s individual, moments such as magnetism, electricity and chemism come 
forth freely by themselves within the meteorological process. The animal 
is no longer magnetism however, and electricity is something which is 
subordinate to it. 
2. It is precisely because the Earth itself is not a living subject, that the 
10 process of formation does not reside within it. Consequently, the Earth 
is not born out of this process, as living being is; it endures, it does not 
produce itself. It is for this reason that the persistence of the Earth's 
members is not a mark of the Earth's superiority. Living being on the 
contrary has the virtue of being born and passing away. In its singularity, 
1 s living being is the manifestation of the genus, but it is also in conflict 
with the genus, which exhibits itself through the destruction of the 
singular. In so far as the process of the Earth has being for itself as a uni-
versal individual, it is simply an inner necessity, for it is merely implicit, 
and does not exist in the members of the organism. In the animal however, 
20 each member is both product and productive. Considered within the 
limits of the Earth's individuality, this process is to be seen as a past event, 
which leaves its moments behind it as independencies extraneous to the 
-I' Earth.1 Geognosy attempts to expound this process as a conflict between 
the elements of differentiation, i.e. fire and water. According to the vulcan-
2S ists, the Earth's shape, stratifications, and rock species etc. are of igneous 
origin. The theory put forward by the neptunists is equally one-sided, 
for they assert that everything is the result of an aqueous process. Forty 
years ag02 , in Werner's time, these two theories were the cause of much 
controversy. Both their principles have to be recognized as essential, 
30 but by themselves they are onesided and formal. In the crystalline form 
of the Earth, in volcanoes, springs and in the meteorological process in 
+ general, fire is just as operative as water. 
Three aspects of the terrestrial process have to be distinguished. (a) The 
1 This does not mean that the three most primary moments, which are moons and comets, as 
well as the immature and declining planets, are the empirical residua of the terrestrial process, dis-
carded by the Earth. Nor does it mean that this last moment, that of the declining planets, is an 
anticipatory pattern of the condition the Earth will attain at some time or another. As I understand 
Hegel and the subject matter, it means that the Earth has to be represented as having run through, 
and as still having to run through, the individual stages of the process, and that these stages have 
their stereotyped original in these more abstract terrestrial bodies. 
Note by Michelet. 
2 From the lectures given in the summer term of 1830. 
17 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
universal and absolute process is the process of the Idea, it is the process 
which is in and for itself, and by which the Earth is created and maintained. 
The creation is eternal however; it has not only taken place once, but is 
eternally producing itself, for the infinite creative power of the Idea is a 
perenniating activity. Consequently, we do not see the universal emerge 5 
in nature, which means that the universality of nature has no history. 
Science and government etc. have a history however, for they are the 
universal within spirit. (b) The process also exists on the Earth, but only 
in a general way, for it does not produce itself as subject. It is the general 
vitalization and fructification of the Earth i.e. the possibility which the 10 
living subject draws from this vitalized being. It is the meteorological 
process which makes the Earth the animated ground and basis of living 
being. (c) In the Scriptures it is said that, 'Heaven and Earth shall pass 
away,' and in this sense the Earth must certainly be regarded as having had + 
an origin and as passing away. The Earth and the whole of nature are to 15 
be regarded as produced; the Notion makes this necessary.1 One's second 
task is then to point out this determination in the constitution of the Earth 
in an empirical manner; this is the principal subject-matter of geognosy. 
It is immediately apparent from the constitution of the Earth, that it has 
had a history, and that its condition is a result of successive changes. It 20 
bears the marks of a series of prodigious revolutions, which belong to a 
remote past, and which probably also have a cosmic connection, for the 
position of the Earth with regard to the angle which its axis makes with 
its orbit could have been changed. The surface of the Earth bears evidence 
of its having supported a vegetation and an animal world which are now 25 
extinct (a) at great depth, (b) in immense stratifications, and (c) in regions 
where these species of animals and plants do not thrive. 
+ 
This state of the Earth, according to Ebel's description in particular, 
('On the structure of the Earth'vol. II p. 188 etseq.), is roughly as follows :- + 
Petrified wood, even whole trees, and dendrolites etc. may be found 30 
in fletz-formations, and to an even greater extent in alluvial terrains. + 
1 There appears to be a contradiction here between the assertion that the Earth has an origin and 
is passing away, and the former assertion (a) that its creation has no beginning, but is being eternally 
engendered. It may be resolved easily enough if we call to mind what was said in the introduction 
(§247 Add. 1. 206-208) about the eternity of the world. It was pointed out there, that as nature is the 
manifestation of the Idea, its having flowed from the creative activity of the Idea is certainly eternal, 
but that because of its positedness and dependence upon the Idea, the finite and individual being 
within it must also have been engendered. Consequently, the necessity of the Earth's being regarded 
as an engendered being also lies in the Notion of nature, or the being of the Idea in the form of 
otherness. Nevertheless, the empirical indications of this engendering can do no more than prove 
that the present constitution of the Earth is the result of a great revolution, they cannot demonstrate 
that it has been engendered as this general and universal individual. 
Note by Michelet. 
18 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
Immense forests, which have been flattened, lie buried below beds of 
deposit at depths of 40-100 feet, and sometimes even of 600-900 feet. 
The vegetable state of many of these forests is preserved intact; the barks, 
roots, and branches are filled with resin, and make an excellent fuel, while 
5 other vegetable material is petrified into siliceous agate. For the most 
part, the different species of wood are still identifiable. Palm-trees are 
often found for example; one might mention a fossilized forest of palm-
tree trunks in the Neckar valley not far from Kannstadt, etc. In the 
fossilized forests of Holland and the Bremen area, the trees that are found 
10 are usually intact, and lying flat, firmly joined to their root stocks. Else-
where the trunks are broken off cleanly, and separated somewhat from 
their root-stocks, which are still firmly fixed in the ground. In East 
Friesland, Holland, and the Bremen area, the crowns of these trees all lie 
+ pointing south-east or north-east. These forests have grown in these 
15 areas, but on the banks of the Arno in Tuscany, fossilized oaks may be 
found, lying incidentally beneath palm-trees, and flung together with 
fossilized sea-shells and huge bones. These immense forests occur in all 
the alluvial terrains of Europe, the Americas and northern Asia. Sea-
shells, snails, and zoophytes have pride of place in the animal kingdom 
20 with regard to numbers. In Europe, they occur wherever there are fletz-
formations, and consequently they may be found throughout the conti-
nent. They are just as common throughout Asia, in Anatolia, Syria, 
Siberia, Bengal, and China etc., in Egypt, Senegal, and at the Cape of 
Good Hope, and in America. They are to be found at great depths in the 
25 strata immediately overlaying the primitive rocks, and to an equal 
extent at the greatest heights. They occur on Mont Perdu for example, 
which is in the highest part of the Pyrenees, and rises to an altitude of 
+ 10,968 feet. The explanation Voltaire gave of this was that fish and 
+ oysters etc., had been taken up there by travellers as provisions. They 
30 also occur in the Jungfrau, which is the highest peak of the limestone 
Alps, and rises to 13,872 feet, and on the Andes in South America, at 
+ heights ranging from 12,000 to 13,242 feet above sea-level. Remains of 
this kind are not dispersed throughout the whole of the massif, but only in 
certain strata, where they occur in families in the strictest order, and are 
35 so well preserved, that they seem to have settled there peacefully. In 
the most ancient of the stratified formations, which are the immediate 
overlayers of the primitive rocks, the shells of sea-animals are on the 
whole much less in evidence, and only certain species occur. They increase 
in number and variety in the later fletz-formations however, and it is 
40 there also that fossil fish are to be found, although only very rarely. Fossil 
19 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
plants first occur in the more recent stratified formations however, and 
the bones of amphibia, mammals, and birds, are only to be found in the 
most recent of these rocks. The most remarkable bones are those of 
quadrupeds such as elephants, tigers, lions, bears, whose species are now 
extinct. All these huge animals merely lie near the surface under sand, 5 
marl, or loam, in Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia, and particularly in 
Asiatic Russia, where the tusks are excavated, and give rise to a consi-
derable trade. Humboldt found mammoth bones in the vales of Mexico, 
Quito, and Peru, always at the height of between 7,086 and 8,934 feet 
above sea level. In the River Plate he found the skeleton of a huge animal 10 
12 feet long and 6 feet high. Traces of violent revolution and exterior 
+ 
generation are not only to be found in these remains of the organic 
world, but are equally apparent in the geognostic structure of the Earth, 
and in general, in the whole formation of alluvial terrain. Within moun-
tain ranges, which are themselves configurations giving rise to individual 15 
peaks and further chains, there are whole formations consisting entirely 
of boulders or debris which have been fused together. The nagelflue 
found in Switzerland is a species of rock consisting of smoothed stones 
cemented together by sandstone and limestone. The stratifications of its 
beds are extremely regular; one stratum for example will consist oflarge 20 
stones almost all of which are six inches thick, the next of smaller stones, 
and the third of still smaller stones, and this will then be followed by a 
bed consisting of larger boulders. This breccia is composed of the most 
varied kinds of debris; granites, gneisses, porphyries, amygdaloids, 
serpentines, siliceous schists, horns tones, flints, saline and compact lime-
25 
stones, argillaceous and ferruginous stones, and alpine sandstones, are all 
to be found in it. One nagelflue contains more of one kind of debris, 
another contains more of another kind. One of these nagelflues forms a 
chain of mountains, the breadth of which varies from I to 3 leagues; it 
reaches heights of between 5,000 and 6,000 feet above sea-level (Rigikulm 30 
is 5,723 feet high), and therefore rises above the Swiss tree-line. With 
the exception of the Alps and the Pyrenees, this chain is not exceeded 
in height by any other mountains in France and England. Even the 
highest peak of the Giant's Mountains in Silesia is only 4,949 feet + 
high, and the Brocken only reaches 3,528 feet. Finally, there are the 35 
frightful signs of tremendous laceration and demolition apparent in 
all primitive massifs, and granite ranges and rocks. These formations 
are cleft longitudinally and transversally by innumerable joints and 
valleys etc., which have been superimposed upon one another by 
stages. 
20 
40 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
All this is a matter of history, and has to be accepted as a fact; it is 
not the concern of philosophy. If we want to explain this fact, we have to 
acquaint ourselves with the way in which it has to be dealt with and con-
sidered. The history of the Earth took place in former times and has now 
5 reached a state of quiescence. It is a life which once fermented within itself 
and embodied time; it is the spirit of the Earth, which has not yet reached 
opposition. It is the movement and dreams of a being that sleeps, until it awakes 
and acquires its consciousness in man, and so stands over against itself as im-
+ mobile formation. The main interest of the empirical aspect of this former 
10 state of the Earth is taken to be the determination of time by the science 
of geognosy i.e. in designating the oldest stratum of rocks etc. The 
geological organism is usually grasped mainly by determining the order 
of succession of its various formations, but this is only an external ex-
planation. The granitic primitive rocks which constitute the deepest 
15 strata, and which were formed one after the other, are said to be the first, 
and to be followed by regenerated granite, which has disintegrated and 
been deposited. The upper strata, such as fletz-formations, are supposed 
to have been deposited at a later date; solution is said to have run into the 
+ fissures etc. These are mere occurrences however, and display nothing but 
20 a temporal difference. Nothing whatever is made comprehensible by the suc-
cession of stratifications, which is in fact completely devoid of the necessity 
which characterizes comprehension. Dissolutions in water or fire are quite 
+ simple aspects of organic fermentation, and cannot express it fully. They are as 
inadequate to the comprehension of it as is the process of oxidation and dis-
25 oxidation, or the completely superficial reduction of it to the opposition of 
the carbon and nitrogen series. This whole style of explanation is nothing 
but a transformation of collaterality into temporal succession. I make use 
of it when I see a house with a ground-floor, first-floor, second-floor, and 
roof, and after reflecting, conclude very wisely that the ground-floor was 
30 built before the second-floor etc. Why is the limestone more recent? 
Because in this instance limestone overlays sandstone. This is not difficult 
to grasp. Intrinsically, this interpretation is of no rational interest. The 
process has no other content than the product. It is nothing but a vain 
curiosity, which attempts to see that which is juxtaposed in the further 
35 form of succession. Interesting conjectures may be made about the wide 
intervals separating revolutions of this kind, about the profounder 
revolutions caused by alterations of the Earth's axis, and about revolutions 
due to the sea. In the historical field these are hypotheses however, and 
this explanation of events by mere succession has nothing whatever to 
40 contribute to philosophic consideration. 
21 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
There is something profounder in this sequence however. The signifi-
cance and spirit of the process is the intrinsic connection or necessary rela-
tion of these formations, and here succession in time plays no part. The 
universal law of this sequence of formations may be understood without 
reference to its historical form, and this law is the essence of the sequence. 5 
It is only rationality which is of interest to the Notion, and at this juncture 
this consists of understanding the dispositions of the Notion within the 
law. The great merit of Werner is that he has drawn attention to this 
sequence, and on the whole assessed it correctly. The intrinsic connection + 
exists at present as a juxtaposition, and must depend upon the constitution 10 
or content of these formations themselves. The history of the Earth is 
therefore partly empirical, and partly a conclusive ratiocination from 
empirical data. The point of interest is not to determine the conditions + 
prevailing millions of years ago (and there is no need to stint on the years), 
but to concentrate upon that which is present in the system of these vari-
15 
ous formations. As an empirical science it is extremely diffuse. One is 
unable to grasp everything in this corpse by means of the Notion, for it is 
riddled with accidence. Philosophy has a similarily minimal interest in 
acquainting itself with rational and systematic legislation in the dismal 
condition of chaos, or in getting to know the temporal sequence and 20 
external causes by which this legislation has come into being. 
+ 
The production of living being is generally envisaged as a revolution 
out of chaos, in which vegetable and animal life, organic and inorganic 
being, were together in a single unity. The alternative postulate is that 
there was once a general living existence which has dispersed into various 25 
species of plants and animals, and into the races of mankind. Such prodi-
gies are the postulates of the sensuous intuition of an empty imagination 
however, for it is not permissible to assume the sensuous appearance of 
this fission in time, or the temporal existence of such a general man. 
Natural and living being is not mixed, it is not a general medley of forms, 30 
it does not resemble an arabesque. There is essentially understanding in 
nature. The formations of nature are determinate and bounded, and it is + 
as such that they enter into existence. Consequently, even if the Earth was 
once devoid of living being, and limited to the chemical process etc., as 
soon as the flash of living being strikes into matter, a determinate and 35 
complete formation is present, and emerges fully armed, like Minerva 
from the brow of Jupiter. The account of the creation given in Genesis + 
is still the best, in so far as it says quite simply that the plants, the animals, 
and man were brought forth on separate days. Man has not formed 
himself out of the animal, nor the animal out of the plant, for each is 40 
22 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
instantly the whole of what it is. Such an individual certainly evolves in 
various ways, but although it is not yet complete at birth, it is already 
the real possibility of everything it will become. Living being is the point 
at which the soul is present; it is subjectivity and infinite form, and is 
5 therefore immediately determined in and for itself The crystal already 
exhibits complete shape or totality of form as point, so that the point's 
ability to grow is merely a quantitative change. This is even more the 
+ case with living being. 
3. The particular formations of the Earth are the subject-matter of 
10 physical geography. The unity of the Earth, as the diversity of its formation, 
is an inert deployment of the independence of all its parts. It is the firm structure 
of the Earth, which has life as universal animation, and not yet as soul. It is the 
inorganic Earth, which deploys its members as the inanimate shape of a rigid 
body. Its filiation into water and land, which first unite and interpermeate in 
15 subjective being, into firm land and islands, and into the figuration and 
crystallization of the same into valleys and mountains, all this belongs to its 
purely mechanical formation. It may certainly be said in this connection, that 
the Earth is more contracted in one place, and more expanded in another, but 
the bare statement has no meaning. The concentration in the north gives 
20 rise to common products, vegetation, and animals, while in the southern 
extremities of the continents, animal forms are particularized and indi-
vidualized into various genera and species which are peculiar to those 
parts. This appears at first to be accidental, but the activity of the Notion 
consists in grasping the necessary determinations of that which appears 
25 to sensuous consciousness as a contingency. Contingency also has its sphere 
of course, but only in the inessential. The line oflands and mountains might 
also be traced back to magnetic axes passing from the north-west to the south-
east. As a linear direction however, magnetism in general is a completely 
formal moment, for its power is already suppressed in the globe, and is even 
30 more subordinate to the subject. In order to grasp the entire configuration of 
the globe, its firm stratification would have to be considered, and compared not 
only with the sea but with its currents, for they express the free and implicit 
movement of the Earth. In general, a formation which has a propension towards 
a determination opposed to that of the sphere, tends to be pyramidal. Conse-
35 quently, it forms a broadness or base within the sphere, which tapers off 
+ towards the other side. This is why the land falls away towards the south. 
This structure is scoured everywhere in a west-easterly direction by the incessant 
circular movements of the currents however. The movement might be said to 
push and press this solid mass eastwards, so that the structure bulges on the 
40 eastern side like a bent bow, while on the western side it is convex and rounded. 
23 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Nevertheless, the land in general is split into two parts i.e. the old world, 
which is shaped like a horseshoe, and the new world, the main extent of 
which is north-south. The existence of the new world became actual 
through the connection created when it was discovered, and so brought 
into the general system of peoples. This discovery was fortuitous how- s 
ever, and its recency is not the only factor in the newness of the conti-
nent, for everything within it is new. As civilization has developed there 
with neither the horse nor iron, it has lacked the powerful instruments 
of positive difference. No continent of the old world has been coerced 
by another, while America is merely a part of Europe's booty. Its fauna 10 
is weaker than that of the old world, although it possesses an exuberant 
flora. The mountain ranges of the old world generally run from west to + 
east, or from south-west to north-east, while in America, which is the 
butment of the old world, they run from south to north. American rivers 
flow eastwards however, particularly in South America. In general, the 15 
new world exhibits an incomplete division like that of the magnet, sepa-
rated as it is into a northern and a southern part. The old world exhibits a 
complete tripartite division however. Its primary part is Africa, which cor-
responds to compact metal or the lunar principle, and is stunned by the 
heat. Its humanity is sunk in torpor, it is the dull spirit which does not 20 
enter into consciousness. Its second part is Asia, which is the bacchantic + 
eccentricity of the comet, the wild middle, which brings forth only from it-
self, engenders without form, and is unable to master its centre. Its third + 
part is Europe, which constitutes the rational region of the Earth, or conscious-
ness, and forms an equilibrium of rivers, valleys, and mountains, the 25 
centre of which is Germany. Consequently, the continents are not con-
tingent, for as divisions they are not a matter of convenience, but embody 
essential differences. 
+ 
B 
The Earth's structural composition 
(Geology and Oryctognosy) 
The immediacy of physical organization does not begin with 
the simple enveloped form of the germ, but with an egression 30 
which has fallen apart into a duality. The principles of this duality 
24 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
are the concrete graniticity which constitutes the core of 
mountains, and already exhibits the developed triad of moments 
within itself, and calcareousness, which is a difference reduced 
to neutrality. The moments of the first principle progress into 
5 formations through a series of stages, the further configurations 
of which are partly transitions, of which the granitic principle 
remains the basis only as being internally more unequal 
and unformed, and partly a dispersion of its moments into 
more determinate differentiation, and into the more ab-
10 stract mineralogical moments of the metals and orycto-
+ logical objects in general. This development finally loses 
itself in mechanical stratifications, and in alluviums devoid 
of immanent formation. The development of tbe second or 
neutral principle proceeds side by side with this, partl y as a weaker 
15 transformation, and so partly as the external mixing of the two 
principles, which results from their entering into concrescent 
formations. 
Addition. Werner's mineralogy distinguishes between rock-types and 
+ types of vein: geology treats of the former, and oryctognosy of the latter. 
20 Scientific mineralogy has now abandoned this terminology however, and 
it is only miners who retain the distinction. Rock-types are now con-
sidered in their concrete mass, and geology concerns itself with the further 
formation of a form basic to them and their modifications, in which they 
remain concrete configurations. The types of vein constitute the secondary 
25 and more abstract aspect which develops out of this, and as these veins 
also form mountains, this aspect may not be sharply divided from the first. 
Abstract formations of this kind are crystals, ores, and metals, where 
differentiation has been reached. They have constituted themselves as 
neutralities, and can form concrete shapes, for it is precisely in these ab-
30 stractions that shape becomes free. The types of vein are seams consisting 
of some determinate gangue, a certain sort of stone and earth. They have 
a definite grain or inclination, so that they form an angle with the horizon. 
These strata are now traversed at various angles by veins, and it is these that 
are so important in mining. Werner thought of them as fissures filled by a 
+ mineral quite different from that of which the rock-mass is composed. 
The physical formation of the Earth is so constituted that its surface erupts into 
organic centres or points of totality, which unite the whole within themselves, 
and then allow it to fall apart, exhibiting it as a particular production. This self-
disclosing contraction passes over into the diffusion of its moments. In a way 
25 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
these centres are cores, which represent the whole in their shells and crusts, by 
means of which they disperse into the general foundation, as into their element. + 
The core and root of these formations is not a simple unity, but the developed 
totality of formation, which contains within itself the already separated 
moments. This is the existence of the organic unity as it is able to produce itself 5 
in the universal individuality of the Earth. This core is granite, which is so com-
pact, hard, and firm, that its individual parts are not easily obtained in a 
pure state. It consists throughout of an incipient crystallization. Granite is 
the innermost substance, the middle and foundation of the whole; other 
formations attach themselves initially to both sides of its ranges. Although 10 
it is the primary rock, it has three constituents. These constitute a single 
and extremely hard mass however. Granite is known to consist of (a) the 
brittle punctiformity of silica or quartz which is the absolute earth ; (b) mica, the sur-
face which develops itself into opposition, the self-disclosing punctiformity, the 
moment of combustibility which contains the germ of all abstractions; and (c) 
15 
felspar, the suggested but still undeveloped neutrality and crystallization of 
lime in silicates, for it will be found to have a two to three per cent 
potash content. It is this simple earthy triad which now develops in accordance + 
with its different aspects, and in a more determinate manner into the two direc-
tions of the process. In the one case, this whole contains the differences as its 20 
form, and remains the same, while only its content is variously modified. In the 
other, the differences permeate the substance, and become simple abstractions. 
The first is the formation of the Earth as it appears at this juncture; the second is 
difference, but it has lost all chemical signifIcance, and is simply the formation 
of simple physical bodies. More exactly, we have (a) the exterior forming of 25 
the primitive rock; (b) the effacing of the existent moment of the totality, and 
the pure segregation of this as an abstraction, or fletz-formation; to which 
(c) the 
crumbling into indifferent existence of alluvial terrain attaches 
itsel£ 
1. In primitive rocks, and throughout all further formations, the anti-
30 
theses of (a) siliceousness, (b) argillaceousness and that connected with it, and 
(c) calcareousness, are always evident. Primitive limestone stands opposed 
to granite, so that the siliceous and calcareous series constitute an essential 
antithesis. Steffens has drawn attention to this in his early writings, and it is 
one of his most valuable observations. Most of his views are the crude and 35 
undisciplined utterances of a wild and hazy imagination however. The + 
different character of the two sides is clearly apparent in primitive rocks, 
and is a determining principle. The calcareous aspect constitutes total 
neutrality, and its modifications have more effect upon exterior formation 
than upon the diversity which specifies itself internally. On the contrary, 40 
26 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
there is a more determinate difference present in siliceous formations 
where granite constitutes the basis. 
(a) The granite masses constitute the primary formation, and are the 
highest. The other rocks rest on the granite in such a way that the highest 
5 always occupy the lowest position, and the others in their turn rest upon 
these. The rock-structures closest to granite are modifications of it, for 
they are the further eductions of one of its aspects, in which the prepon-
derance of the two aspects varies from place to place. Granite rocks are 
surrounded by beds of gneiss, syenite, mica-schist etc., which are clearly lighter 
10 transmutations of it. Ebel says that, 'A species of rock constituting one flag 
shades into that of another by a gradual change in composition. It is in 
this way that compact granite passes into veined granite and gneiss. Simi-
larly, it is by a series of relationships between its constituents that the 
hardest gneiss shades off into the softest kind of mica-schist, which passes 
+ in its turn into primitive argillaceous schist.' etc. These latter rocks occur 
very close together, so that it is easy to see the transition. Consequently, the 
primary object of geological studies is to grasp the lay-out of the general masses, 
and the Notion of the moments. The thoughtless enumeration which proclaims 
a new genus or species as soon as any small difference is discovered, is to be 
20 avoided. It is most important to follow the nature of the transitions from one 
stratification to another. Although nature only keeps to this order in a general 
way, and produces numerous diversifications of it, its basic features are persis-
tent. Although nature deposits these features in indifferent juxtaposition as parts 
of the whole, it indicates necessity through the transition of the various strati-
+ fications into one another. It does not do this merely by means of a gradual 
diminution however, for even for the intuition, the variety of the species occurs 
in precise accordance with Notional distinction. Nature specifies these transitions 
as a mixture of the qualitative and quantitative, demonstrating in this way that 
it is by both that species are differentiated from one another. As the orbicules, 
30 nests, and centres of one rock begin to form another, they are partly inter-
mingled, and also partly dissevered externally. Heim in particular has shown a 
truly philosophical attitude while drawing attention to this transition, in which 
+ one rock breaks out in another. Syenite stands in close relation to granite, 
for instead of mica, it contains only hornblend, which is more argillaceous 
3S than mica, but resembles it. Mica-schist initiates determinate flattening out. 
Quartz almost dwindles into imperceptibility, and the prevalence of clay 
increases until in argillaceous schist, which is the general slate-formation and 
the next change oHorm, foliation and clay predominate completely, and the 
specific nature of quartz, felspar, mica and hornblend formations dissolves 
40 and disintegrates. This dissolution allows formlessness to predominate, 
27 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
for it initiates the progressive transformation of granite. There is 
much besides that belongs here, but only as a dwindling of the deter-
minations of granite. Mica-schist is changed into porphyry, which consists 
mainly of clay, and of other masses such as hornstone, and which still con-
tains grains of Jelspar and quartz. Primordial porphyry still belongs to the 5 
primitive rocks. Schist has various aspects; it becomes harder and more 
quartz-like in its siliceous form, while in greywack-slate and greywack it 
becomes sandier, so that clay is no longer predominant. In the Harz for 
example, greywack is an inferior reproduction of granite, looks like sand-
stone, and is a mixture of quartz, argillaceous schist, and felspar. This is + 
even more the case with greenstone, which consists of hornblend, felspar, + 
and quartz, hornblend being its main constituent. The whole of the 
further development of the trappean formation, which is however more + 
mixed, and which is the limit of these absolute rocks, is directly related to 
these formations. 
+ 
As we said therefore, the development here is from granite to the dis-
appearance of its particular constituents. Although this is a basically triadic 
development, these moments fall apart, and there is an emergence of one 
or the other. In basalt, which is the centre, the elements are once more 
completely compenetrative. Basalt contains 40 parts silica, I6 parts clay, 20 
9 parts potash, 2 parts talc, and 2 parts natron. The rest of it consists of 
manganese oxide and water. The truth in the assertion of its volcanic 
origin is that it belongs to the igneous principle, but it is no more formed by 
fire than it is by water. An inner deformation appears in basalt, and is even + 
more apparent in amygdaloid, olivine, and augite etc., which are abstract 25 
formations, and have reached a complete internal particularization. Sub-
sequent to this there is nothing but the formal mixture or formal segrega-
tion of these elements. The further details have to be classified in accor-
dance with the following principle. (a) One line of transformation is 
merely a modification of granite, in which traces of this basic triad are still 30 
constantly present. These traces are found in gneiss, mica-schist and 
porphyry, and right down the scale through greenstone, greywack, 
basalt, and amygdaloid, as far as ordinary sands. (b) The other line is the 
splitting up of the concretion into abstract forms. It is here in particular 
that the antithesis of the siliceous and calcareous series occurs: (i) in ranges of 35 
rock, and (ii) within these ranges, in what were once said to be types of vein. 
(b) So far we have mainly considered siliceous formations; but the whole 
passes over in its other aspect into the talco us form of saline earth. This is the 
igneous element, which occurs irregularly here and there as serpentine and similar 
rocks, and which has the property of bitterness. 
+ 
28 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
(c) This igneous form is then generally opposed to the neutrality of calcareous-
ness, but as it is permeated by metallicism, this neutrality has qualitative unity, 
and is therefore completely permeated by organic formation. Primitive lime-
stone is already associated with granite, and is just as compact as the granitic 
5 rocks. Consequently, the primitive rocks have ranges of limestone about 
them. This primitive limestone, which stands opposed to granite, passes 
into the less compact form of chalk by means of transition-limestone. One 
also finds formations in which granite and limestone are very intermixed. 
Primitive limestone permeates mica for example, 'Primitive limestone 
10 accompanies schist rocks, and mingles with them. Within these rocks it 
alternates in shallow layers, strata, and huge beds, and sometimes forms 
+ chunks of rock in which the schist is almost entirely effaced.'1 
2. These main formations pass over into the so-called .fletz and alluvial rocks, 
where these moments, segregated as almost pure earths, represent the com-
15 pletely decomposed totality. They pass in fact into sandstone beds, argillaceous and 
loamy stratifications, coal-seams, peat-bogs, bituminous schists, rock-salt stratifi-
cations, and fmally into chalk beds which also mix with the rock-salt beds, 
gypsum beds, and marl. As graniticity becomes more of an indeterminate 
mixture, the particular parts of the different formations emerge in greater 
20 abstraction; differences are therefore obliterated as in trap and greywack, 
which belongs to the transitional and fletz species. Yet as granite, and that 
which belongs to it, draws itself together into abstraction, so that its solidity, 
compactness, and self-tenacious totality is lost and foliated, it has affinity 
with a counter-sequence, in which there is a separation of various ores, and of 
25 the crystals which accompany them; iron separates out particularly early. 
These ores occur everywhere, interspersed throughout whole rock-masses and 
stratifications, and even more extensively in seams and layers. The interior is 
opened so that abstract formations may emerge. These various seams are 
the productions of particular elements from the more concrete principle 
30 of the various species of rock, and as they are a less entrammeled produc-
tion, they yield these multifarious crystalline formations and pure figura-
tions. In granite, they are still all but completely absent, although granite 
does contain tin. No metals are present in primitive limestone, so it is only 
when there is a further unfolding of the primitive rock as secondary lime-
35 stone, that metal occurs. Initially, it is rocks which for themselves are more 
abstract or mixed, that allow these abstractions to appear. Cavities open, 
in which rock-crystal formations have attained their special shape, and 
detached themselves from their connection with the rock. 
The lodes are regarded as nests and pockets of these species of stone, and as 
1 von Raumer 'Geognostical Researches' p. 13. 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
something diffused throughout the rock in a merely mechanical manner. 
According to the neptunists, the rock is supposed to have fissured and split 
while drying out, and the metallic magma and other solutions are supposed 
then to have oozed into the cracks. This can explain very neatly how + 
these wounds were healed, but as an interpretation it lacks thought, and 5 
the relationship is not as mechanical as this. This is in fact a physical 
relationship, in which developed determinate being is subIa ted by the parts of 
the totality which simplify themselves. It is precisely for this reason that the 
determinate being is now forced out in an abstract form. The lodes usually run 
counter to the grain of the rock; they form as it were, fault-planes, not merely 10 
of the spatial shape, but in a physical sense. According to Trebra's observations 
lodes fall in gentle slopes. 
+ 
These lodes ought not to be regarded as contingent features of rock-
types, for although contingency also plays a necessarily large part here, we 
have to recognize the essential connection between the two formations. 15 
Miners encounter many of the characteristics of this relationship, and one 
of the most important aspects of their experience consists in determining 
the series of metals and other formations which occur together. Gold is + 
always found together with quartz for example, and either occurs with 
quartz alone, or with copper and lead, silver and zinc etc. It does not occur 20 
with quicksilver, tin, cobalt, molybdenum, or wolfram. Silver associates + 
more freely, and is much more frequently found with other metals, most 
commonly with galena, and accompanied by zinc ores. Quicksilver 
occurs with quartz, calcareous spar, iron, and therefore also with sparry 
iron-ore, but rarely with copper. The various kinds of quicksilver are 25 
usually found together, and all of them occur principally in argillaceous 
formations. Copper and its various ores usually occur alone. Tin does not 
occur with silver, lead, cobalt, calcareous spar, or gypsum etc. There are 
metals such as iron, which occur in all rock-formations. Other metals such 
as molybdenum, titanium, tantalum, wolfram, uranium, and tin, are more 30 
confined to the primitive rocks. Molybdenum and wolfram for instance, 
disappear with the primitive formations. Gold occurs most abundantly 
about the equator. Some lodes yield precious metals, others base metals, 
and here there are significant relations which are indicative of a higher 
connection. The Riegelsdorf and Saalfeld cobalt formations of the 35 
Thuringian Mountains only become rich where the lodes have sunk into 
the primordial and moribund sandstone formation. At Andreasberg in the + 
Harz, schist and greywack constitute the rock-type, and the lodes yield 
base metals when they pass into the beds of siliceous schist; in Klaustal, 
this happens where they fill tapering crevices in the clay, and in the 40 
30 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
Freiberg mmmg district, the same phenomenon occurs in porphyry. 
Metals are also met at determinate depths. Horn silver and white antimony-
ore only occur at shallow depths. In the Tyrol, there is a bed of sparry 
iron-ore, argillaceous iron-stone, and brown spar, in which they occur 
s where the copperpyrites peters out. At La Gardette in Dauphine, pure 
gold lies near the surface, particularly where there is a break-through of 
crevices containing ferric ochre. The size of the fissure also influences the 
formations it contains. At Sayn-Altenkirchen, iron-glance occurs where 
the lode narrows, and iron stone of the brown, black, and spar varieties, 
+ where it broadens. 'Topazes occur in a greasy mica, which is modified 
into lithomarge, and in a friable lithomarge which is sometimes pure, and 
sometimes mixed with a good deal of ferric-ochre; this lithomarge also 
owes its formation to the mica, and is accompanied by quartz and china-
clay. On topazes as well as euclase crystals, very clear imprints of ex-
15 tremely fine flakelets of lithomarge may be seen. This ought to be 
sufficient proof of the simultaneous formation of these minerals. It is the 
same with the emeralds of the Salzburg area. In gneiss, mica detaches 
itself, and forms broad seams up to several feet in thickness. Emeralds are 
seldom found in gneiss; they may always be found in mica however, where 
20 the crystals never occur in a compact mass, but are spread about and em-
bedded in an irregular manner. Emerald-crystals also bear the imprints of 
+ the flakes of mica which surround them.'1 
3. The final moment, which is the transition from fletz-formation to 
alluvial terrain, is a mixture, and consequently complete formlessness, an 
25 abstract stratification of clay, sand, lime, and marl. These are the general 
outlines of the progression, at the basis of which lies the determining 
Notion. The primitive rock develops until it loses its mineralogical con-
stitution, and joins up with a vegetable being. Argillaceousness and coal 
formations are clearly degenerate forms of peat, in which there is no dis-
30 tinction between mineral and vegetable, for although peat is formed in a 
vegetable manner, it still belongs to an equal extent to the mineral king-
dom. On its other side, it is the calcareousness which in its ultimate 
formations develops into the osseous substance of the animal. Limestone 
is initially granular; it is marble, and its composition is thoroughly min-
35 eral. The further productions of limestone, which occur partly in fletz-
formations, and partly in alluvial terrains, pass over into shell formations 
however, and it is difficult to say whether these are mineral or animal. 
These petrified animal formations are to be found in abundance in 
1 Spix and Martius 'Travels' vol. I, p. 332. Cf. Frischholz, in Moll's 'New Annals' vol. 4, no. 3. 
31 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
limestone quarries, but although they occur in the form of shells, they are 
not to be regarded as the residua of an extinct animal world. There are also 
limestone formations which are not the residua, but merely the rudiments 
of the animal forms in which limestone formation terminates. This is 
therefore an intermediate stage falling between limestone and true petri-
5 
fications. It has to be regarded merely as a further development of con-
chyliaceousness, and as something purely mineral, for formations of this 
kind have not yet reached the consummate form of the animal. It is in this 
way that the antithesis of the siliceous and the calcareous series gives faint 
indication of a superior organic difference, for the limits of these series 10 
link up on one side with vegetable nature, and on the other with animal 
nature. Steffens has also brought out this aspect of the matter, but he has 
gone too far in his interpretation ofit by asserting (a) that these formations 
have sprung out of a vegetable and animal terrestrial process, and (b) that 
the first series is carbonaceous, the second nitrogenous. 
+ 
The organic formations which begin in the geological organism belong 
mainly to argillaceous schists and limestone stratifications. They are dispersed 
partly as the forms of individual animals and plants, but mainly in huge integral 
masses, thoroughly formed organically. They may also be found in coal-
measures, where a distinct arborescence is often recognizable. Consequently, 20 
if breccias are also taken into account, there is as much organic formation in the 
geological organism, as there is in inorganic. This certainly disposes one to admit 
that there was once an organic world there which has since been destroyed by 
water. But where did this world come from? It has arisen out of the Earth. This 
is not an historical event however, for it is perpetually doing so. It is in the Earth 25 
that it has its substance. These organic forms, particularly where they occur 
singly and do not constitute the whole rock-mass, are present where beds pass 
over into each other. It is on this boundary that the moments which are allowed 
to fall apart by processless nature, are posited in a unity. The dividing line is the 
principal site of organic formations such as petrifications, and of such formations 30 
as are neither animal nor vegetable, but pass beyond the form of the crystal as 
essays and experiments in organic formation. It is as schists and limestones that 
inorganic being opens itself most readily to these formations, for as schist partly 
transforms its terrestrial elements into sulphureousness, and partly maintains the 
principle of metallicism within itself, it sublates the fixedness of its subjectivity. 35 
Its punctiformity, unfolded by bitumen, and containing a general differentia-
tion, receives from metallicism the continuity of an absolute subject and predi-
cate. It is infinite, and falls into vacillation between organic and inorganic 
nature. Similarly, as calcareousness is the neutral principle, it contains in its 
aspects the moment of reality and subsistence, and simple metallicism occurs 40 
32 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
here by reason of the simplicity of its continuity, as the qualitative unity which 
annuls the indifference of these aspects. Calcareousness therefore has a unity 
which includes aspects of the neutral substance, and a neutral substance which has 
unity. It is in this way that calcareousness expresses the transition to 
5 organic being, for it restrains the relapse into dead neutrality on one side, and 
into moribund abstraction and simplicity on the other. These organic forms are 
still-born, and should not be regarded as having actually lived and then died. 
Some of them undoubtedly have lived, but it is not these that are being con-
sidered. Bonefibres have not existed as veins or nerves and then hardened, and 
10 neither have these forms. It is nature in its organic-plasticity which engenders 
organic being in the element of immediate being, and therefore as a moribund 
+ shape, and thoroughly crystallizes it. At this juncture nature therefore resembles 
the artist, who uses stone or a flat canvas in order to represent human and other 
shapes. The artist does not strike people dead, dry them out, pump them with 
15 petrifaction, or press them into stone (although he can also do this, for he casts 
models into moulds); in accordance with his idea, and by means of his tools, he 
produces forms which are not living, but which represent life. Nature also 
produces forms, but it does so directly, without needing this mediation. 
That is to say that the Notion is not present as something represented, and the 
20 thing as something confronting the imaginative subject which works upon it. 
The Notion does not have the form of consciousness, but is immediately within 
the element of being, and is not detached from it. It has to work upon the 
material in which the moments of organic being are present in their totality. 
This is not a question of a universal life of nature, in which the animation of 
25 nature is ubiquitous, it is a question of the essence oflife. It is this essence which 
has to be comprehended and exhibited in the moments of its actuality or 
totality, and these moments have to be demonstrated. 
c 
The Earth's life 
This crystal of life, this inanimate organism of the Earth, 
which has its Notion in the sidereal connection outside it, 
30 but has its own peculiar process pre-supposed as its past, is 
the immediate subject of the meteorological process. As the 
implicit being of the totality of life, this inanimate organism is 
B 
33 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
no longer fertilized by this process into individual formation (see 
§287), but into animation. The land, and to a greater extent the 
sea, are therefore the real possibility of life, and at every point they 
are perpetually breaking out into punctiform and ephemeral 
animation. The land breeds lichens and infusoria, the sea immeas-
5 
urable multitudes of phosphorescent points of life. It is precisely 
because the generatio aequivoca has this objective organism exter- + 
nal to it however, that it is confined to the organization of these 
points; it does not develop within itselfinto determinate members, 
nor does it reproduce itself (ex ovo). 
10 
Addition. Initially, the geological organism of the Earth was the product 
of the process in which its shape developed. As it is the productive indi-
viduality underlying that process, it now overcomes its rigidity, and un-
folds into subjective animation. Nevertheless, it excludes this animation 
from itself, and surrenders it to other individuals. In other words, as the 15 
geological organism is only implicit animation, it is not identical with true 
living existence. Yet as it is implicitly the negativity of that which belongs 
to it, and the sublation of its own immediacy, it posits the inwardness of 
that which belongs to it, while retaining this other as its own. It is pre-
cisely as the ground and basis of the individual animation which it bears, 20 
that the Earth is fertile therefore. It is merely an indeterminate mode of 
animation however, for although life certainly breaks out on it every-
where, it only does so meagrely. This universal life of the Earth has living 
parts which are the elements constituting its universal and inorganic nature. Yet 
as the Earth is also a particular body vis-a-vis its satellites, the sun and the + 
comets, this perenniating production, which is the conservation of this 
system of differentiations, is the absolute and universal chemical process. 
As the gigantic members of this diremption are free and independent 
individualities however, their relation exists in its purity as the free pro-
cess of motion, while the comets are themselves a perpetually new produc-
30 
tion of this process. The reality of the process is reached as real individual 
unity comes into the plenitude of its being through the absorption of 
apparently independent shapes. This occurs fIrSt in the individual chemical 
process, and it is precisely for this reason that this process is profounder 
and more basic than the universal process. As the universal process of the 35 
elements is the universal process of diverse matters however, the individual 
process cannot dispense with it. In their truth, the sun, comet and moon, 
which are the free independent members of the universal process, are now 
the elements; air exists as atmosphere, and water as sea, while fire exists 
34 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
as a terrestriality contained by the fertilized and dissolved Earth, and 
separated as the fructifying power of the sun. The life of the Earth is the 
process of the atmosphere and of the sea. Within this process the Earth engenders 
these elements, each of which is by itself its own life, and all of which merely 
5 constitute this process. Here the chemical principle has lost its absolute signi-
ficance and is no more than a moment; it is reflected into independent being, 
and brought under the subject, by which it is quelled and held fast. As a free 
subject, each element is related to the others through its substance; and the 
formation of the organic Earth contains the modal existence of its organic life. 
10 
I. The atmosphere is the first determinate moment of the life of the Earth. The 
meteorological process vitalizes the Earth, but it is not its life-process, for 
its vitalization is simply the real possibility of subjectivity issuing forth on 
the Earth as living existence. As pure movement, and as substance which is of 
an ideal nature, the atmosphere certainly contains the life of the celestial spheres, 
15 for its changes are connected with the motion of the heavens. At the same time, 
it materializes this motion in its element however. It is the rarefaction and pure 
tension of the Earth, the relationship between gravity and heat. It runs through 
the periodic movement of the year, as well as that of the month and the day, and 
expresses it as changes of heat and gravity. These periodic fluctuations fall into 
20 a further difference: where axial rotation preponderates, the diurnal period is 
prevalent, so that at the equator, while there is a consistent daily pattern in the 
rise and fall of the barometer, there is no annual variation within this relation-
ship. In our part of the world however, this daily rise and fall is less noticeable, 
and pattern of variation is more constantly related to the moon. 
25 
Gravity here is interior gravity or elasticity as pressure, but in its essence, it is 
variation of specific gravity. It is a movement or atmospheric fluctuation which 
is related to temperature variation. It is so related however, that these variations 
unite the opposed determinations of ordinary temperature and the temperature 
of light, the first of which is given out, and the second of which is introduced 
30 through light. The latter is generally air in its clarity and pure elasticity, and 
gives rise to a high barometer reading, while the former belongs to the moment 
of formation, and is present when elasticity passes over into rain or snow.1 It is 
precisely in the air that these abstract moments return into themselves. 
Just as heavenly motion materializes in the air, so on the other side sea and 
35 earth invade it, and evaporate into it by a processless and immediate transition. 
The air individualizes both of them within itself, partly into the universal atmo-
spheric process, in which it attains its supreme independence by dissolving water 
1 This is why rain sometimes cools, and is sometimes followed by an increase in temperature. 
Note by Miche1et. 
35 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
and earth into odours, and by discharging and changing itself into water; 
partly by individualizing itself into meteors, as transient comets, that is to 
say, into the earths which it generates, or aerolites; partly as noxious emanations, + 
miasmata, which are harmful to animals; and partly as honey-dews and mildews, 
animal and vegetable blights. 
+ 
2. The composition of the neutral Earth or the sea, owes just as much to the 
motion of ebb and flow, which is determined by the changing position of 
the sun and the moon, as it does to the shape of the Earth. The sea draws its + 
neutrality from the Earth, just as the air, which is the universal element, draws 
its tension. As sea opposed to the air, the Earth evaporates; but as opposed to the 10 
sea, it is the crystal which expels the superfluous water from itself in springs, 
which flow together to form rivers. As fresh water however, this is merely 
abstract neutrality. On the contrary, the crystal of the Earth passes over into 
the physical neutrality of the sea. Consequently, the origin of inexhaustible 
springs ought not to be explained in a mechanical and completely superficial 15 
way by means of percolation; volcanoes and thermal springs form another 
aspect, which is equally unamenable to this interpretation. Just as springs 
are the lungs and secretory glands by which the Earth transpires, so volcanoes 
are its liver, in that they represent the spontaneous generation of heat within it. 
Vicinities which are perpetually giving off dampness are to be found everywhere, 20 
particularly in beds of sandstone. Consequently, I do not regard the hills as 
collectors of rain-water, which infiltrates into them. Like Naiads, the 
genuine springs which engender rivers such as the Ganges, the Rhone and 
the Rhine, have an inner life, endeavour, and activity. The Earth excretes + 
the abstractness of its fresh water, and in these outpourings this water 25 
hurries towards its concrete animation, which is the sea. 
+ 
The sea itself is an animation which is superior to that of the air. It is the 
subject of bitterness, and of neutrality and dissolution. It is a living process 
which is always on the point of breaking out into life, but as water contains all 
the moments of the process, this life is always falling back into it. These 30 
moments are the point of subjectivity and neutrality, and the dissolution of the 
subject into this neutrality. The sea has the same fertility as the firm earth, 
and to an even higher degree. The generatio aequivoca is the general 
mode of vitalization manifested by sea and land, while in animation 
proper, the existence of an individual presupposes another of its kind 35 
(generatio univoca). 'Omne vivum ex ovo' used to be accepted as a + 
proposition, and if the origin of certain animalcula was not known, + 
recourse was had to fabrications. There are organisms that produce them-
selves immediately however, and procreate no further; infusorial anima-
cula agglomerate and become another formation, so that they serve only 40 
36 

-----------------
THE TBRRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
as a transition. This universal animation is an organic life which is self-
kindling, and which acts upon itself as a stimulant. The sea is not the same 
as spring and salt water, it contains not merely kitchen-salt, but also 
bitter-salt, and as an organic being which displays its procreativeness at 
5 every point, constitutes concrete salinity. Like water in general, it has a 
constant tendency to pass away and transform itself, for its aqueous form 
is only maintained by atmospheric pressure. The bad smell which is a 
feature of the sea, is a life which is as it were perpetually dissolving into 
putrefaction. Sailors speak of the blooming of the sea in summer. In July, 
10 August and September, the sea becomes polluted, turbid and slimy; 
further west in the Atlantic Ocean, this takes place a month earlier than 
it does in the Baltic. The sea is full of an infinite multitude of vegetable 
points, threads and surfaces; it constitutes a tendency to break out into 
+ vast expanses of phosphorescent light. This phosphorescence is a superficial 
15 life which concentrates itself into a simple unity. The unity is also fully intro-
reflected however, for this luminescence often occurs in fish, and in other 
animals which already belong to living subjectivity. The whole surface of 
the sea is also partly an infinite sheen however, and partly a vast and 
immeasurable expanse of light, consisting entirely of living points which 
20 enter into no further organization. If one takes this water from the sea, the 
animation perishes immediately, leaving a gelatinous slime which is the 
beginning of the vegetable life with which the sea is filled from its surface 
+ to its depths. In each fermentation there is already an immediate appear-
ance of animalcula. Finally however, the sea also progresses into deter-
2S minate formations, into infusorial animalcula, and other tiny transparent 
mollusca, which live longer, but which are still completely rudimentary 
+ organisms. While studying various Salpae, A. von Chamisso made the fine 
discovery of a Salpa which was so fertile, that its very numerous embryos, 
like the free petals of a plant clustered about its stem, were arranged in 
30 tiers, and formed a garland or circle. Here many have a single life, like the 
+ polyps, and then come together again in a single individual. This lower 
animal world includes a multitude ofluminous species, but as it attains to 
nothing more than a momentary and gelatinous existence, the subjectivity 
of animal being can scarcely coach it into luminescence, into the external 
35 appearance of self-identity. This animal world is unable to hold its light 
within it as inner selfhood, so that it is transient, and merely breaks out of 
itself as a physical light; the millions of living beings deliquesce rapidly 
into their element again. It is in this way that the sea displays a host of 
stars, densely crowded into galaxies; they are not inferior to the stars of 
40 heaven, for they have their origin in organic formations, while their 
37 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
celestial counterparts are only abstract points of light. The heavens 
exhibit light in the rawness of its primary crudity; here it breaks out of 
animal being as an animality, like the phosphorescence of rotten wood; 
it is a flicker of animation, and of the emergence of the soul. It has been + 
rumoured around the town that I have compared the stars to a rash on an 5 
organic body, where the skin breaks out into an infinite multitude of red 
spots, or to an ant-heap (see above § 268 Add. 1. 258,33), objects which 
also exhibit intelligence and necessity. In fact I make more of a concrete 
than I do of an abstract being, more of an animality, though it present 
nothing but jelly, than of the host of stars. And discounting fish, the fur-
10 
ther content of the marine world includes polyps, corals, lithophytes, 
crustacea, zoophytes etc., each drop is a living globe of infusorial-animal-
cula etc. The sea contains animation within itself in a more immanent 
manner than the land, in so far as its fluid nature does not facilitate the 
punctualization of animation into a living being which breaks loose from 15 
the sea and preserves itself against it. The neutrality of the sea draws this 
incipient subjectivity back into the insensibility of its womb, and so 
causes its vital power, which this subjectivity had taken as its own, to 
dissolve again into the universal. The earliest doctrines certainly treated 
the sea as that from which all living existence emerges. But this very + 
emergence entails the repulsion of the sea, and the living creature only exists 
by tearing itself away from the sea, and maintaining itself in the face of 
this neutrality. Consequently, the sea in its fluidity makes no advance upon 
elementary life, and the subjective life which is cast and drawn back into it 
again, is also imbued with this persistent and undeveloped torpidity. This 25 
is so even in more developed organisms such as whales, which are still 
mammals. 
3. As the gigantic corpse of a vanished life that was formerly immanent, 
the land is this individual concretion which disengages itself from neutral-
ity, it is the compact crystal of the lunar element, while the sea is the 30 
cometary element. These two moments penetrate each other in subjective 
living existence however, so that gelatination or slime becomes the vessel 
of internally durable light. Like water, the earth exhibits infinite and 
universal fertility, but while it is mainly animal existence which breaks 
out in water, the land tends to bring forth vegetable life. The sea favours 35 
animality, because neutrality is in itself a propagation; the earth maintains 
itself in punctualization, and is therefore more congenial to vegetable life. 
The earth covers itself everywhere with green vegetation, with indeter-
minate formations which can equally well be classed as animal life. 
Individual vegetation must of course be engendered from seeds of the 40 
38 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
same genus, but universal vegetation lacks this degree of individuality. It 
+ + consists of the lichens and moss which break out on any stone. Vegetable 
being will always occur where there is earth, air and moisture. Mildew is 
a vegetable formation, and appears immediately wherever anything 
+ decomposes. Fungi also spring up everywhere. This vegetation, as not yet 
formed individually, consists of formations such as lichens and fungi, 
which are both inorganic and organic, and which it is difficult to classify 
with any certainty, for they are made up of peculiar compact substances 
of an embryonically animal nature. Rudolphi writes (,Plant Anatomy' §I4 
10 and §I7), 'Lichens exhibit nothing that may be considered as characteristic 
of plant structure. All writers agree that they have no true parenchyma, 
and that they are quite devoid of tubes or vascularity. I have found no 
proof that what are called their reproductive parts really are such, and it is 
perhaps more likely that they are germination-buds, by which the lichens 
15 propagate themselves in a way similar to that of many true plants. Their 
propagation proves nothing therefore. The vegetable nature of many of 
them is apparent in their pigment, their gummy and resinous constituents, 
and their sugary mucilage and tannin. The structure of fungi differs con-
siderably from that of plants. I have examined a good number of them, 
20 and find that their substance is of a kind that may well be called animal. 
In the softer fungi one finds a fibrous mucous tissue which closely re-
sembles that found in animals, but which differs completely from the firm 
cellular structure of plants. The Boletus cetatophorus exhibits a lanuginous 
tissue which is in no way plant-like, but clearly constitutes a transition 
25 from soft fungi to the ligneous variety, the substance of which might be 
compared with the trunk of the gorgonia.' 'If one considers the animal 
composition of fungi, and its response to galvanization,' says baron 
Alexander von Humboldt, l 'one will more readily discard the opinion that 
fungi belong to the vegetable kingdom and are true plants. This is most 
30 apparent from the way in which they are engendered, for it is precisely 
when animal or vegetable matter decays or decomposes, that new forma-
tions are brought forth out of this putrefaction. The Clavaria militaris is 
only engendered out of dead caterpillars for example.' This infinite 
multitude of formations does not establish the point of a germ or seed, 
35 which has being only where subjectivity is reached. One cannot say that 
+ fungi grow, for they deploy themselves suddenly, as crystals do. We 
should not regard vegetation of this kind as being produced from spores, 
any more than are the multitudes of rudimentary animal formations such 
1 'Experiments on stimulated muscle and nerve fibres' (Berlin 1797), vol. I, sect. vi, pp. 171-180. 
39 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
as infusoria, intestinal worms, and swine-gar gets etc. This universal anima-
+ 
tion is not only found in the sea and on land therefore, but also occurs on 
independent living subjectivity. The determinations of vegetable and 
animal being, such as cellular tissues, seeds, eggs, growth and so on, are 
attributed to these formations by means of induction. Determinateness of 5 
this kind cannot be confirmed however, and in reality there is none. 
Fungi, lichens and similar formations belong in general to the vegetable 
kingdom, but because nature does not hold firmly to the Notion in its 
manifestations, they lack this determinateness. Indeterminateness and 
freakishness give rise to the rich variety of their forms. The Notion is not 10 
to be drawn from them, they are to be measured by the Notion. Corrupt 
anomalisms of this kind, which are neither fish nor flesh, are moments of a 
total form, but they are isolated moments. 
§ 342 
This division of the universal "and self-external organism, and 
this merely punctiform transitory subjectivity, raises itself by 15 
virtue of the implicit identity of its Notion, to the existence of 
this identity, which is the vitalized organism, the subjectivity 
which constructs its members within itsel£ This subjectivity 
excludes from itself the purely implicit organism of physical 
nature in its universal and individual forms, and confronts it. 20 
But at the same time, it has these powers as the condition of its 
existence, and the stimulus as the material of its process. 
Addition. The deficiency in this display of organic being, and in immediate 
organic being in general, consists in the Notion's still being immediate. Here 
the Notion is merely internal fulfillment within the element of indifference, 25 
but its moments are physical realities which are not intro-reflected, and which 
do not form a unity in the face of this indifference. As the universal fulfillment 
pervades these moments however, it returns into self; their indifference is the 
one-sided moment which draws itself together into negativity as an individual. 
Substance divides itself into absolute opposites, not only into differences. Each 30 
of these is a totality, for it is intro-reflected, indifferent to the other, and essen-
tially a unit. This unity is not only essential however, for the reality of these 
opposites is itself this oneness or negativity i.e. their existence in itself con-
stitutes the process. 
Consequently, life is essentially this completely fluid pervasion of all 35 
the parts of the whole, i.e. of the parts which are indifferent to the whole. 
40 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
These parts are not chemical abstractions, but have a complete and sub-
stantial life of their own. Although it is a life of parts, it is ceaselessly 
dissolving itself within itself, and brings forth nothing but the whole. 
The whole is the universal substance, so that it is the ground as well as the 
5 resulting totality, and it is this as actuality. It is the unit which holds the 
free parts bound within it; it sunders itself into these parts, communicates 
its universal life to them, and holds them within itself as their power or 
negative principle. This is so posited that their independent circulation 
takes place within this principle, which is however the sublation of their 
10 particularity, and the becoming of the universal. This is the universal 
sphere of movement within the individuality of actual being. More 
closely considered, this sphere is the three sphere totality which constitutes 
the unity of universality and actuality. This unity contains the two spheres 
of its opposition, and the sphere of its reflection into itself. 
15 
Firstly. Organic being is actual being which is self-maintaining, and which 
runs through the process in its own sel£ It is its own universal, and sunders 
itself into its parts. These parts sublate themselves by bringing forth the whole. 
The genus and organic being stand side by side. The consequence is that the 
genus immediately becomes unified with inorganic being. Consequently, 
20 organic being sunders itself into the two universal extremes of inorganic nature 
and genus, and constitutes their middle (U-S-P). With each of these it still 
forms an immediate unity, being itself both genus and inorganic nature. 
Consequently the individual still has its inorganic nature within itself, 
and nourishes itself from itself in that it consumes itself as its own in-
25 organity. By this however, it divides itself within itself into its members, i.e. 
dirempts its universality into its differences. This is the course of the process 
within it as the non-excluding diremption and self-relatedness of organic being. 
The universal has to actualize itself within itself, and it is precisely through this 
movement, by which it becomes for itself, that it assumes sentience. 
30 As this organic genus, organic being is turned against itself as this immediate 
universal. This is its process of individualization; it enters into an opposition 
to itself which corresponds to its subsequent opposition to that external to it. 
This other term is still enveloped within the Notion. Nevertheless, in so far 
as the singular is already presupposed here, it links its own universality, which 
35 is the genus, to particularized universality. This latter is one extreme, and be-
comes absolute particularity and singularity by being taken up into the absolute 
genus. Here we have the particular parturition of the moment of individuality. 
This is the becoming of the individuality which enters into the process as already 
in being. Nothing emerges from the process but what is already there. It is the 
40 process of self-digestion, the division of its members, and the formation of its 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
moments. The members are destroyed as well as engendered, and the soul is 
the simple being which persists within this general activity. In this process the 
individual is able to break away from the soul by means of the genus. It is pre-
cisely the process within the genus which makes it into a unified being which 
has negativity within it, and which is therefore opposed to the genus as the 5 
universal. 
Secondly. The universal is existent, and the organic unit is the power which 
controls and consumes this negation of itself, this external being. Consequently, 
this only exists as sublated. Organic being is an immediate unity of individu-
ality and universality. It is therefore organic genus, the exclusive unity, which 10 
excludes the universal from itsel£ It is the genus devoid of the power of nega-
tivity or life, and is therefore organic being positing for itself its inorganity. 
The genus is the absolute universal, which posits itself in the face of the abstract 
universal; but through this, it has also released the moment of singularity, which 
constitutes the negative relation opposed to this inorganic being. Previously, 15 
the individual constituted the middle, and the sides the universal extremes, 
now the genus is the common element. Consequently, organic being is 
here united with inorganic being by means of the genus (P-U-S), and has 
power over it because it is the absolute universal. This is the process of nutri-
tion. Inorganic being is universality as genus devoid of actuality; here pre- 20 
domin~mce falls partly to the Earth or individuality in general, and partly to the 
singularity which frees itself from this. This universality is mere passivity. How-
ever, the universality as it is in itself i.e. in its actuality, is the emergence of its 
inorganic nature, together with organic nature, into a state of juxtaposition. 
The first has the form of singularity, the second that of universality. Both of 25 
them are abstractions, for the substance is identical with the modes in which 
it has determined itsel£ 
(a) The determinateness remains a universality that belongs within the ele-
ment and principle; that which is for organic being cannot be alien to it. The re-
flection of organic being takes back the implicitness of its inorganic world; 30 
this world exists only as a sublation, of which organic being is the positor and 
bearer. It would be equally onesided to seize upon this activity alone however. 
It is rather the Earth, as this universal organic being, which makes the sun and 
its elements, as well as each organic being. Implicitly however, it is both. This 
positedness of inorganic being is its sublatedness; it is not implicit. Organic 35 
being is independent being; but for organic being, inorganic being as implicit-
ness is predominantly the indifferent existence of both. This subsequently passes 
over into tensioned existence however, into the form of being-for-self proper 
to organic being. 
(b) This immediate being of organic existence as genus is to an equal extent 40 
42 

THE TERRESTRIAL ORGANISM 
a simple mediation by inorganic being. Its being depends upon this otherness 
which is the abstract universality of this opposition to itself. It is the genus 
freed from individuality. This genus itself also contains life however. In the 
generatio aequivoca therefore, it passes over by means of itself into organic 
5 being. In general, the existence of organic being is the act in which the whole 
Earth individualizes and contracts itself; itis the intro-reflecting of the universal. 
As the result of this, it is an intro-reflectedness that has become quiescent how-
ever. This stabilized intro-reflectedness is expressed in higher plants and ani-
mals, which do not shoot up out of the earth like fungi, and are not devoid of 
10 individuality like gelatinous beings or lichens, which are merely the rudi-
mentary expressions of organic life in general. The Earth in its existence only 
attains to general reflection however, and breaks here into the immediacy of 
its becoming. Intro-reflected being is now established for itself, and proceeds 
in its own sphere. It has its own existence, which persists in opposition to that 
15 of the Earth, holds firm to its negative essence, disowns its origin, and exhibits 
its becoming by itself. 
Thirdly. The genus is the actual being brought forth here. It is the power 
which dominates the individual and constitutes its process. It sublates this 
singular, and brings forth another being which constitutes the actuality of the 
20 genus, and which precisely because of this, is <llso divided vis-a.-vis the inorganic 
nature into which the genus sinks. Organic being, mediated in this way with 
the genus by means of inorganic being (S-P-U) constitutes the sexual relation-
ship. The conclusion of the syllogism is the relation of the two terms which 
constitute the organic whole, or the diremption of this whole into two opposed 
2S and independent sexes. It is the sublation of the singular, and the becoming of 
the genus, but of the genus as a singular and actual being which recommences 
the process. The result is therefore that the singular has separated itself from the 
genus. Consequently, this independent being is related to being which is 
indifferent to it as genus. The genus has sundered itself into two independent 
30 beings, each of which is to itself the whole of this object, and yet external to it. 
In the first process we have being-for-self, in the second representation and 
cognition of another, and in the third the unity of both, i.e. of the other and 
itself. This is the true actualization of the Notion, for it is the complete inde-
pendence of both, in which each simultaneously recognizes itself as itself in the 
35 other. It is the relation which has reached the purity of its ideal nature, in which 
each term is itself of an ideal nature as an implicit universal, and the complete 
integration of subject and object is established within the self as such. 
Organic being begins with singularity, and raises itself to genus. This pro-
gress holds the immediate implication of its opposition however. The pure 
40 genus descends to singularity, for the consummation of individuals in the genus 
43 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
by means of their being sublated is also the becoming of the immediate sin-
gularity of the child. Consequently, the other moment of the universal 
life of the Earth is the actual organic living being, which projects itself 
into its genus. Initially, this is vegetable nature, which is the first stage 
of being-for-self, or intro-reflectedness. It is merely immediate and for-
5 
mal being-for-self however, it is not yet true infinity. The plant puts 
forth its members from itself as free moments, and is merely the sub-
jective point of life. Consequently, vegetable being begins where ani-
mation gathers itself into a point which maintains and produces itself, 
and engenders itself anew by self-repulsion. 
10 
44 

Chapter Two 
The vegetable organism 
(The plant) 
§ 343 
The subjectivity by which organic being has singularity 
develops into an objective organism in the shape of a body, 
which articulates itself into mutually distinct parts. In the 
plant, which is merely subjective animation in its primary 
5 immediacy, the objective organism and its subjectivity1 are 
still immediately identical. Consequendy, the process whereby 
vegetable subjectivity articulates and sustains itself, is one 
in which it comes forth from itself, and falls apart into 
several individuals. The singleness of the whole individual 
10 is simply the basis of these, rather than a subjective unity 
of members; the part-bud, branch, and so on, is also the whole 
plant. 
A further consequence is that the differentiation 
of the organic parts is merely a superficial metamorphosis, 
and that one part can easily assume the function of the 
15 other. 
Addition. The geological organism is devoid of ideality, for it is the bare 
system of shape. The subjectivity of plant-life now exhibits tllls ideality 
however. As the ideality wIllch is present in all its members, life is es-
sentially living being however, and tIlls living being is merely stimulated 
20 from without. Consequently, the causal relationsIllp falls away here, for 
in life in general, all the deternlinations of the understanding cease to be 
+ valid. The nature of these categories has to be perverted if they are still 
to be employed here. Then it can be said that living being is its own 
cause. To assert the sublime proposition that, 'Everythlng lives in 
+ nature,' is supposed to be speculative. The Notion oflife, or life in itself, 
is of course everywhere; it is to be clearly distinguished from real life 
1 First edition, 'The universality of life and its singularity.' 
45 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
however, which is the subjectivity of living being, in which each part 
has a vitalized existence. It is only as a whole that the geological organism 
is alive therefore, not in its singularity. Its animation is merely implicit, 
and does not have the presence of existence. Living being also differenti-
ates itself into subjective and inanimate being however. On the one hand s 
it constitutes the prerequisite of its being framed within the individual, 
by expressing itself in lignification and bones, as is the case with the geo-
logical organism as a whole. On the other hand, living being is also the 
shape which has substantial form dwelling within it. This form is not 
only determinative on account of the spatial relationships of the separate 10 
parts, but is also the productive restlessness which determines the process 
of physical properties in order to bring forth shape. 
+ 
The plant is the primary subject which is for itself, and yet still has 
its origin in immediacy. It is however the feeble and infantine life which + 
is not yet intrinsically differentiated. As with every living being, it lies 1 S 
in the nature of a plant to be particularized. The particularity of the 
animal is at the same time so constituted however, that the subjectivity 
which is opposed to it as soul is also universal, while the particular being 
of the plant is identical with its general animation in an entirely immediate 
manner. This particular being is not a state which might be distinguished 20 
from the internal life of the plant, for the quality of the plant completely 
pervades its general vegetative nature, and is not distinct from it, as it is 
in the animal. The members of the plant are only particular in relation 
to one another therefore, not in relation to the whole. These members 
are wholes in their own right, as they are in the inanimate organism, 2S 
where they are also still external to one another in stratifications. As 
the plant now posits itself as its other, and so perpetually idealizes this 
contradiction, this is merely a formal separation however. That which it 
posits as the other is not truly another, for it is the same individual as the 
subject.1 
30 
The growth which predominates in vegetable being is therefore self-
augmentation as a change of form. Animal growth is merely a change in 
size however, in which at the same time there is a persistent unity of 
shape, for the totality of the members is taken up into the subjectivity. 
1 Goethe 'On Morphology' (1817), vol. I, pp. X-XI. 'The more imperfect the creature, the + 
more similarity there is between its parts, and the more they resemble the whole. The more perfect 
the creature, the more dissimilar its parts become. In the first case the whole is more or less the 
equivalent of the parts, while in the second case the whole is not the equivalent of the parts. The 
more the parts resemble one another, the less they are subordinate to one another. The subordination 
of the parts is indication of a more perfect creature.' 
Note by Miche1et. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
The plant assimilates the other being into itself as it grows, but as self-
multiplication, this assimilation is also a self-emergence. It is not the 
individual coming to itself, it is a multiplication of individuality, in which 
the single individuality is merely the superficial unity of the many. The 
5 singularities remain a mutually indifferent and separated plurality; the 
substance from which they proceed is not a common essence. This is 
why Schultz, in his 'The nature of the living plant' vol. I p. 617, says 
that 'the growth of plants is an incessant formation of new and additional 
+ parts which were not previously present.' Consequently, as the parts 
10 of the plant do not relate themselves to one another as inner qualitative 
differentiations, their homogeneity entails their falling asunder. In other 
words, this organism is not systematized into viscera. Although it pro-
duces itself in externality, it still grows entirely out of itself, and is not a 
sort of external crystalline accretion. 
§ 344 
15 
It is in this way that the process of formation, and of the 
reproduction of the single individual, coincides with the 
process of the genus, and is a perennial production of new indi-
viduals. The individualized universality of the subjective 
unit of individuality does not separate itself from the real 
20 nature of particularization, but is merely submerged within 
it. As the plant is not yet a self-subsistent subjectivity distinct 
from its implicit organism (§ 342), it is unable to determine its 
place freely and so move from its site. What is more, it is not 
self-subsistent in the face of the physical particularization and 
25 individualization of its implicit organism, so that its nutri-
tion is a continuous flow, not an intermittent intussuscep-
tion, and it relates itself to the universal elements, not to 
individualized inorganic being. It is even less capable of 
animal warmth and sensibility, for its members are themselves 
30 individuals, and tend to be mere parts, and it is not the process 
which leads them back into a simple negative unity. 
Addition. All organic being differentiates itself within itself, and main-
tains the unity of multiplicity. Animal life is the truth of organic being 
however, and as such advances to a higher determinate difference, of 
35 which the difference pervaded by substantial form is merely one aspect, 
the other being the self-subsistent substantial form, which is distinguished 
47 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oli NATURE 
from this submergence. Consequently, the animal feels. The plant has 
not yet advanced to this internal difference however; if it had, the uni-
fying point of selfhood and the organic crystal would already constitute 
the two aspects of its life. The vital principle of the animal is its soul, but 
the vital principle of the plant is still submerged in a process of mutual 5 
externality. In the animal on the contrary, there is one animation, and it + 
is present in a dual manner (a) as an indwelling vitalization, and (b) as the 
incomposite existence of the unity of selfhood. It is true that both mo-
ments, as well as their relation, also have to be present in the plant; one 
part of this difference falls outside its existence however, while animal 10 
being has sentience, which is the absolute return of living being into 
itsel£ A plant existence on the contrary, is merely the one bodily or-
ganism, within which the pure unity of self-identity is still not of a real 
nature, but because it has not yet become objective, is only present in 
the Notion. Consequently, the articulated body of the plant is not yet 15 
the objectivity of the soul; the plant is not yet objective to itself. The unity 
here is therefore external to the plant, and resembles the process of the 
terrestrial organism, which falls outside the Earth. Light is the external 
physical self of the plant, towards which it strives in the same way as the 
lonely person seeks company. The plant has an essential and infinite re-
+ 
lationship with light, but like weighted matter, it is primarily searching 
for its sel£ This simple selfhood, which is external to the plant, has 
supreme power over it, and Schelling says therefore, that if the plant were 
conscious, it would venerate light as its god. The process of self-preserva-
+ 
tion is the winning of self, self-satisfaction, the attainment of sentience. 25 
The plant's self is external to it however, so that it tends rather to be 
drawn out of itself as it strives towards it. Consequently, its retum into 
itself is a perpetual egression, and vice versa. The plant multiplies itself 
in order to preserve itself (§ 343). The externality of the subjective 
and identified unity of the plant is objective in its relationship to light, 30 
as is the external appearance of light in gelatinous marine formations 
(see § 34I Add. III. 36,27), and in the colours of tropical birds (see Add. to 
§ 303 II. 83,23). The power oflight is even apparent in animal being there-
fore. The formation of man's self is more internal than this, although 
southern man also fails to guarantee his individuality or freedom objec-
35 
tively. It is primarily their sap, and in general a vigorous individualiza-
+ 
rion, that plants receive from light. Without light plants certainly be-
come larger, but they remain tasteless, colourless, and odourless. That 
is why they tum towards the light. Potato plants which sprout in the 
darker parts of a cellar will creep several yards across the floor towards 40 
48 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
a chink oflight on the other side of it, and in order to reach the opening 
where they can enjoy the light, they will climb up the wall as if they knew 
+ the way. Sunflowers and a host of other flowers face the sun, and turn as 
it moves across the sky. If we approach a field full of flowers in the evening 
5 and come upon it from the east, we shall see few or none of the flowers, 
for they will all be facing the sun. If we come upon the field from the 
west however, we shall see a fine display. We shall also fail to see the 
flowers if we approach the field from the east early in the morning, for 
it is only through the action of the sun that they face the east. 'Some 
+ flowers,' says Willdenow1 , 'like the Portulaca oleracea and the Drosera 
rotundifolia, do not open to the sun until noon. Others only open at 
night .. .' such as the magnificent Torch-thistle (Cactus grandiflorus), 
+ which only blooms for a few hours. 
(a) We have noticed that the subjective unit of the plant now coincides 
15 completely with its quality and particularization, so that the plant's 
negative selfhood is not yet self-relating. Consequently, this self also 
continues to fall short of the existence of the purely non-sensuous being 
we call soul; it is still sensuous, no longer as a sensuous material plurality 
it is true, but as a sensuous unity of material beings. The sensuous element 
20 now remaining for this unity is space. Consequently, as the plant cannot 
yet completely nullify that which is sensuous, in itself it is not yet pure 
+ time. It therefore occupies a determinate place, which it is unable to 
annul, although it unfolds itself within it. It is as process however that the 
animal relates itself to place and nullifies it, although it then also posits it 
25 anew. This is precisely the way in which the ego wills a change of place, 
by moving itself as a point, and so changing its immediate sensuous 
subsistence as point. Here the ego, as the ideality of the unit, wills its 
distinctness from its sensuous unity. The motion of the heavenly bodies 
constitutes a single system, but although the bodies also have an un-
30 doubtedly free motion, this is not contingent. The bodies do not posit 
their place as particulars, for this place is posited by the time of the system, 
which is rooted in the sun through law. In magnetism also, it is the opposed 
qualities which constitute the determining principle. In the subjective 
living being which is its own time however, there is a positing of the 
35 negation of place in an absolutely indifferent manner, or as inner in-
difference. The plant has not yet mastered the indifferent and mutually 
external subsistence of space however, so that its space is still abstract. 
The movement of pistils and anthers towards each other, and the 
1 'Outlines of Botany' ed. Link (6th edition 1821), p. 473. 
49 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
oscillations of Conferva etc., have to be regarded merely as a simple 
growth, and as lacking any arbitrary determination of place. Plant move-
ment is determined by light, heat, and air. Treviranus1 illustrates this from 
the Hedysarum girans, 'At the end of each stem this plant has a larger leaf, + 
the shape of which is elliptical and lanceolate, and on either side of it, 5 
attached to the same main stem, are two smaller petiolate stipules. The 
movement of the main stems and leaves consists of their rising in the light 
and drooping in the dark. This movement takes place in the joints, by 
means of which the leaf is joined to the stem, and the stem to the branch. 
Even the reflection of the sun from a wall twenty paces away brought 10 
about a distinct erection of the leaves, while the screening of the sunlight 
by an opaque body or by a passing cloud, caused them to droop. Rufe/and + 
noticed that a full noontide sun, as well as the concentration of sunlight 
through a burning glass, gave rise to a quivering movement in the main 
leaves, and in the plant as a whole. Moonlight and artificial light had no 15 
influence on this movement. The second movement, which is confined to 
the tiny lateral leaves, consists of the alternate erection and drooping of 
each of these pairs of leaflets ranged on either side of the same twig. This 
movement only ceases with the death of the plant; there are no immediate 
external causes of it, although it is most marked at the time of fertiliza-
20 
tion.' Nevertheless, Treviranus attributes a spontaneous movement to the 
zoospores of Conferva, even after they have escaped from these plants.2 
+ 
The movement of Conferva is said to be partly oscillatory, 'The separate 
cilia lashed their unattached ends from right to left and from left to right; 
they often rotated, so that these ends seemed to describe a circle.' Move-
25 
ment of this kind is still not a voluntary movement however. 
(b) If the plant broke off its relation to that external to it, it would exist 
as a subjective being, and so establish its self-relatedness. Consequently, 
the precise reason for the plant's intussusception being continuous, is that 
the plant does not have the nature of true subjectivity; its individuality is 30 
perpetually falling apart into its particularity, and is therefore unable to 
hold on to itself as an infinite being-for-sel£ Only the self as self excludes 
externality, and it is precisely as a self-relatedness that it constitutes the 
soul of this relation. In the self-relatedness, the self forms both sides of this 
relationship, which is therefore an internal circuit of the soul, keeping 35 
itself aloof from inorganic nature. As the plant has not yet attained to this 
selfhood however, it lacks the inwardness which would be free of external 
1 'Biology, or Philosophy of Living Nature' vol. V, pp. 202-203. 
2 Treviranus, lac. cit. vol. II, pp. 381 et seq., 507; vol. III, p. 281 et seq. 
50 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
relatedness. Thus air and water are perpetually acting upon the plant; the 
plant does not sip water. At night, or during the winter, the action oflight 
is of course interrupted or weakened externally, but this is a difference 
which is external to the plant, and is not part of the plant itscl£ Conse-
s quently, it is possible gradually to, change the plant's activities by placing 
it in a lighted room at night, and in a darkened room during the day. It 
was in this way that de Candolle changed the dormant periods of Mimosas 
+ and various other plants in a matter of a few nights. He did it by keeping 
lamps burning. The rest of plant behaviour depends upon the seasons and 
10 the climate; northern plants, which are dormant during the winter, 
gradually change this characteristic in southern regions. Similarly, the 
plant does not yet relate itself to individual being, and this is also because 
it is not the self-relatedness of a sel£ Its other is not an individual therefore, 
but elemental inorganic being. 
15 
(c) Many investigations have been made into the thermic qualities of 
plants and a great deal of controversy has developed. Hermbstadt in par-
+ ticular has devoted much attention to this subject.1 It has indeed been 
claimed, that a slightly higher specific temperature has been detected in 
plants than in their environment, but this is not conclusive. Heat is a 
20 conflict of altered cohesion; plants do not exhibit this change in cohesion 
however, and are devoid of the ignition of internal fire which constitutes 
animal life. It is certainly true that a thermometer placed in a hole bored 
through a tree has indicated a significant difference between the tempera-
+ ture outside and that inside. Temperatures of - s°R. outside and + 2° in-
2S side, and - 10° outside and + 1° inside etc., have been recorded. These 
differences are however the result of wood being a bad conductor of heat, 
and of the trunk receiving heat from the ground. Treviranus says more-
over (loc. cit. vol. V, p. 16), that there are, 'more than 4,600 experiments 
by Fontana, which show that plant temperature is entirely dependent 
+ upon the temperature of the medium in which the plants are situated.' 
Treviranus continues (p. 19), 'There certainly are plant genera capable 
of bringing forth heat and cold in certain circumstances, and therefore 
of withstanding the influence of the outside temperature. It has often 
been observed that there was an increase in heat on the surface of the 
3S spike (spadix) of the Arum maculatum, and other species, over a period 
of four to five hours, during the time at which it was beginning to 
+ break out of its spathe. In the case of the Arum macula tum, this took 
place between three and four 0' clock in the afternoon, and the heat 
1 Cf. Treviranus, loco cit. vol. V, p. 4 et seq. Willdenow, loco cit. pp. 422-428. 
51 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
decreased again over the same period of time. The maximum tem-
perature of the Arum macula tum exceeded that of the air outside by 
15-16°F., and that of the Arum cordifolium by 6o-7o°F.1 The Ice + 
plant (Mesembryanthemum crystallin urn) develops cold, undoubtedly 
from its saltpetre content. In the first instance, the heat probably has as 5 
little to do with protecting the plant from cold during its period of fertil-
ization, as the cold has to do with protecting the plant from heat in the 
second instance.' The plant is none the less devoid of this internal process + 
therefore, for as it sprouts forth, it merely rigidifies. The animal is the 
fluid magnet however, and its different parts pass over into one another and 10 
so develop heat, the precise principle of which resides solely in the blood. + 
(d) The plant's lack of sensibility may also be attributed to the coinci-
dence between its subjective unity and its quality and particularization; 
unlike that of the animal, its being-within-self is not yet a nervous system 
which is independent of external being. Only that which has the faculty 15 
of sense can endure itself as other, assimilate this opposition by the resili-
ence of its individuality, and venture into conflict with other individuali-
ties. The plant is the immediate organic individuality, in which the genus 
preponderates, and reflection is not individual. The individual plant does not 
return into itself as such, it is an other, and it therefore lacks sentience. The 20 
sensitivity of certain plants is merely a mechanical elasticity. It is not an 
example of sentience, and resembles the dormant state of plants, in which 
the relationship to light is the active principle. Treviranus touches upon 
this point (loc. cit. vol. V, pp. 206-208), 'There has been a tendency to 
regard stimulation by external and purely local agents, and the move-
25 
ments which this brings about, as feeling; and of course, the resemblance 
of these movements to the contractions of muscle-fibres is unmistakeable,' 
-but this can also take place without the faculty of sense. 'This kind of 
stimulation is particularly evident in the organs of fertilization: the pollen 
is scattered from the anthers when the stamens are touched, and mechani-
30 
cal stimuli give rise to movements of pistils and stamens, particularly that 
of the filaments towards the pistil when the former are touched.' Trevirantls 
(ibidem p. 210) cites the observation of Medicus as particular proof that 
the cause of this stimulation is external, 'A number of plants in the colder + 
regions give absolutely no evidence of stimulation in the afternoon, and 35 
when the weather is hot and dry, while in the morning, after a heavy dew, 
1 Link 'Principles of the Anatomy and Physiology of plants' (Gottingen, 1807) p. 229 observes 
that, 'The flower has a very offensive smell; in my opinion, the sole cause of the generation of heat 
is the release and decomposition in the air of the oil or carburetted hydrogen which produces the 
stench.' 
52 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
and for the whole of the day if there is gentle rain, they are very suscep-
tible to it. In warmer climates, the stimulation of plants is only evident 
when the sky is bright. The precise state in which all plants are most sus-
ceptible to it, is when the pollen ripens and the pistil covers itself with a 
5 lustrous oil. 'Various species of Mimosa, and other plants also belonging to 
the leguminous family, provide the best known examples ofleaf-stimula-
tion.' The Dionea muscipula has a large number of leaves arranged in a 
circle around the stem, and the leaves of the Oxalis sensitiva consist of 
twelve pairs of oval-shaped leaflets. When these plants are touched, they 
10 close up their leaves. The leaves of the A verrhoa Carambola are pinnate, 
+ and droop when one touches their stalk.'l The anatomical observations 
+ of Rudolphi and Link confirm this. Rudolphi ('Anatomy of Plants' p. 239) 
says, 'In these plants there is a peculiar articulation of the petiole and of the 
partial petioles. The leaves are contracted at the base, while other pinnate 
15 leaves are wider at the base, or at least not narrower. In these plants more-
over, the petiole is much thicker immediately above the joint than it is 
elsewhere, so that the contracted joint is even more evident. Incidentally, 
this thickening consists solely of cellular tissue, which usually lignifies at 
an early stage. When Cassia and Lupins etc. are cut, everything soon closes 
20 up, as it does when the plants are dormant, and the parts do not open 
again. Fresh Mimosa will droop at the slightest touch. If it is picked up 
quickly again when it is diseased or exhausted, it cannot be stimulated for 
a long time, and it will also take some time before it raises its drooping 
parts. Mirbel tells us of the Mimosa which Deifontaines took with him on a 
25 journey. At the first jolt of the carriage it closed all its leaves, but later on 
they gradually opened again, and stayed open for the rest of the journey, 
+ almost as if they had got used to the swaying of the vehicle.' Link says 
(loc. cit. p. 258), 'In the wind, the leaves close, but they open up again in 
spite of it, and finally become so used to it, that it ceases to have any effect 
30 upon them.' In the 'Supplements to the Principles' (I p. 26) he says that, 
'The stimulation is confined solely to the area of shock. A leaflet can be 
subjected to very violent actions without the leaves nearby being affected. 
Each stimulus seems to be confined to, and to affect, only the place where 
it is produced.' Here, then we undoubtedly have nothing but the simple 
35 phenomenon of contraction and dilation. It displays itself here more 
rapidly and more suddenly than in the slower operation of the change in 
activities mentioned above (b). 
1 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. v, pp. 217-219. 
53 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
§ 345 
As the plant is organic being however, its articulation is also 
essentially differentiated into abstract formations such as cells, 
fibres and the like, and into more concrete formations, which how-
ever retain their original homogeneity. As the sh ape of the plant is 
not a subjectivity liberated from individuality, it is still closely 5 
related to geometrical forms and crystalline regularity, and the 
products ofits process are even more closely related to those of the 
chemical process. 
Remark 
Goethe's 'Metamorphosis of Plants' marks the beginning + 
of a rational conception of the nature of the plant, for it has 10 
forced attention away from a concern with mere details, to a 
recognition of the unity of a plant-life. In the category of meta-
morphosis, it is the identity of the organs which predominates. 
The other necessary aspect of this substantial unity is however the 
determinate differentiation and the special function of the mem-
15 
bers, by which the life-process is posited. The physiology of the 
plant is necessarily more obscure than that of the animal body, 
because it is simpler, its assimilation passes through fewer inter-
mediaries, and change occurs as immediate infection. As in 
every natural and spiritual life-process, the crux of the matter in 20 
both assimilation and secretion, is the substantial change, i.e. 
the general immediate transformation of one external or par-
ticular material into another. A point occurs at which the tracing 
of this mediation as either a chemical or mechanical series of 
gradations breaks down and becomes impossible. This point is + 
omnipresent and pervasive, and it is ignorance of this simple 
identification and of this simple diremption, or rather the failure 
to acknowledge them, which makes a physiology of living being 
an impossibility. Interesting particulars concerning the physiology 
of the plant are given in the work of my colleague Prof. C. H. 30 
Schultz ('The Nature of the Living Plant, or Plants and the 
Vegetable Kingdom' 2 vols.). I mention this work in particular, 
because some of the special characteristics of the life-process of the 
plant mentioned in the following paragraphs are taken from it. 
S4 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
Addition. The plant's objectivization is entirely formal, It IS not true 
objectivity. The plant not only develops outwards generally, but the pres-
ervation of its self as an individual is only accomplished through the 
perennial positing of a fresh individual. 
5 
(a) It is simply the presence of a point (utricle), a germ, grain, node, or 
whatever one may call it, which constitutes the type of the whole plant. 
This point puts out threads, forms itself into a line (you can call this 
+ magnetism if you like, but it lacks polar opposition); and this linear 
extension checks itself once more, to constitute a fresh grain, a fresh node. 
10 These nodes are continually developing further tluough self-repulsion, for 
the plant splits up within a thread into a multitude of germs, each of which 
is a whole plant. It is in this way that members are produced, each of 
which is the whole. It makes no great difference whether these nodulations 
keep together within a single individual, or whether they fall apart into 
IS several individuals. This reproduction is not mediated by opposition 
therefore, it is not a unified emergence, although the plant can also rise to 
this. The emergence of true separation in the opposition of the sex-
relationship belongs to the power of the animal however. We shall speak 
later of the merely superficial form of it found in the plant. Conferva 
20 provide the simplest and most immediate example of this plant type, for 
they consist of nothing but these green threads, and are devoid of all 
further formation. They constitute the primary rudiments of aquatic 
vegetation. Treviranus describes them thus (loc. cit. vol. III, pp. 278-283), 
'The fresh water Conferva (Conferva fontinalis L.) propagate themselves 
25 by means of an oval plumule. The apicula of the delicate thread of which 
this plant consists, swells into a plumule, which after some time separates 
itself from the thread and establishes itself nearby. It soon puts forth an 
apicule, which elongates itself into a complete water-thread. The propaga-
+ tion of all the species classified by Roth under the genus Ceramium, takes 
30 place in approximately the same simple way. At various times, but mainly 
in the spring, they form bacciform bodies on the surface of their stem or 
branches. These bodies usually contain one or two smaller grains, and 
when they are fully ripe they either fall off or open, and discharge their 
seed. In Conferva proper (Conferva R.), in the Water-net (Hydrodictyon 
35 R.) 'in Rivularia and many Tremella, the reproductive organs,' (?), 'of 
which there are two kinds, are situated in the substance of the plant. They 
consist either of small grains, which are arranged regularly in rows, and 
which are already present in the initial formation of the plant, or they 
occur as larger ovular bodies, which have the same diameter as the inner 
40 tube of the Conferva, and only form at a certain period in the life of these 
ss 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Phytozoa. In some Conferva the grains are arranged in a zig-zag or a 
spiral, in others they occur in star-shaped figurations, right-angled 
parallelograms, etc. They may also be arranged in the shape of a branch, 
the branches forming a whorl about a common stem. They flow out and 
are the beginnings of new Conferva. Very different from these smaller 5 
grains is a larger variety of round ' (ovular and bacciform)' body which forms 
in some articulated Conferva (Conferva setiformis, spiralis, and bipunctata 
R.), and only at a certain period of their life (in May, June, and July). At 
this time the smaller primordial grains leave their regular position, and 
unite to form larger oval or spherical bodies. As these bodies are formed, 10 
the Conferva loses its green colour, and all that remains is a transparent, 
colourless skin, which contains a brownish fruit in each of its articulations. 
When this membrane has finally disintegrated, these fruits fall to the 
ground, and remain there until the following spring, when a Conferva 
of the same kind as before develops from each of them in a way which 1 5 
seems to bear more resemblance to an animal coming out of its shell, than 
to germination in grains of seed.' In the same work (p. 314 et seq.), 
Treviranus credits Conferva with a kind of copulation and coupling. 
+ 
(b) In higher plant-forms, and particularly in shrubs, immediate growth 
occurs at once as a division into twigs and branches. In the plant we dis-
20 
tinguish between roots, stem, branches and leaves. Nothing is more 
generally realized however, than that each branch and each twig con-
stitutes a complete plant, which has its root in the plant as it does in the 
soil, and that when a branch or twig is broken off and layered, it puts forth 
roots and constitutes a whole plant. This also happens when individualized 25 
parts of a plant are accidentally severed from it. Treviranus says (loc. cit. 
vol. III p. 365), 'The propagation of plants by division never occurs spon-
taneously in the parts, but always artificially, or by chance. The ability to 
propagate itself in this way is possessed to a remarkable degree by the 
Tillandsia usneoides, a parasitic plant of the Bromeliaceae family. If any + 
part of this plant is torn offby the wind and caught up in the branches of 
a tree, it takes root at once, and grows just as well as if it had sprung from 
seed.' It is well known that strawberries and a number of other plants put 
out stolons, i.e. runners, which grow from the root. These filaments or 
petioles form nodes (why not 'spontaneously in the parts?'). If these 35 
points touch the earth, they also strike root, and bring forth other 
plants. Willdenow (loc. cit., p. 397) mentions that, 'The Mangrove 
(Rhizophora mangle) bends its branches down to the earth perpen-
dicularly, and turns them into trunks. In the tropical parts of Asia, Africa, 
and America therefore, the watersides are often covered for a mile or more 40 
56 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
with the multitudinous trunks of a single tree, the top of which forms a 
dense coverage, closely resembling clipped foliage.' 
(c) The branches grow from buds (gemmulae). Willdenow (loc. cit., p. 
+ 393) quotes Aubert du Petit Thouars, 'Vessels elongate themselves from each 
5 bud, and pass down through the plant; strictly speaking, the wood is 
therefore a product of the root fibres of all the buds, and the ligneous 
plant is an aggregate of a number of growths.' Willden ow then continues, 
'If a grafted tree is opened up at the side of the graft, it will also be quite 
apparent, that fibres from a graft run for a short distance into the main 
+ stem. Link has noticed this, as I have.' On pages 486-487 he has more to 
say about this bud grafting. 'We know that a bud from a shrub or a tree 
will grow when it is grafted on to another stem, and that it is to be re-
garded as a distinct plant. There is no change at all in its nature, as it con-
+ + tinues to grow as if it were situated in the earth. Agricola and Barnes were 
15 even more fortunate with this kind of propagation; they simply set the 
buds straight in the earth, and raised perfect plants from them. A note-
worthy feature of this kind of artificial propagation is that if the branches 
or eyes (gemmae) are made into fresh plants by setting, grafting or bud 
grafting, or in any other way, the plant from which they were taken re-
20 produces itself not (only), as a species, but also as a subvariety. The seed 
only reproduces the species, which can grow forth from it as a subvariety 
in sundry variants. Consequently, while grafting and bud grafting will 
+ produce no modification in the Borsdorfer apple, quite distinct sub-
varieties are to be obtained from its seed.' These buds retain their in-
25 dividuality to such a degree when they form the branch of another tree, 
that a dozen varieties of pear may be grown on a single tree for example. 
The bulbs of monocotyledons are also buds of this kind, and propagate 
themselves by division. Treviranus says (loc. cit., vol. III, pp. 363-334), 
'Bulbs are peculiar to monocotyledons. In some plants they grow on the 
30 upper part of the root, in others, such as the Lilium bulbiferum and the 
Fritillaria regia, in the axil between the stem and the petiole. They also 
grow in the flowers, as in several species of Allium. Those plants whose 
roots bear bulbs' (i.e. simply divide themselves), 'usually produce infertile 
seeds. These seeds may become fertile however if the brood bulb is 
35 destroyed as soon as it appears. Each leaf of the Fritillaria regia is capable of 
producing bulbs, even when detached from the stem. When a leaf is cut 
from this plant close to the bulb in autumn, gently pressed between blot-
ting paper, and kept in a warm place, it sprouts fresh bulbs at its lowest 
extremity, where it was joined to the root. The extent to which this 
40 development takes place is directly related to the gradual withering away 
57 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the lea£ In many of the plants whose bulbs occur in the axils of the 
leaves or on the stems, the bulbs occasionally detach themselves of their 
own accord from the parent stem, and once they are separated from it, 
put forth roots and leaves. It is this in particular which deserves to be 
called viviparous germination. In the Lilium bulbiferum, Poa bulbosa, 5 
and several species of Allium, this phenomenon occurs without artificial 
aid. In the Tulipa gesneriana, Eucomis punctata, and a number of other 
succulent monocotyledons, it can be brought about artificially if the 
flowers are removed from these plants before fertilization, and the stem 
with the leaves on it is set in a shady spot.' Willdenow (loc. cit. p. 487) 10 
actually says that, 'Pothos and Plumiera may even be propagated from 
leaves;' to which Link adds, 'This property is particularly remarkable in 
the Bryophyllum calycinum.' If a leaf from this plant is placed horizon-
+ 
tally on the ground, it puts out fibres and rootlets all round its margin. 
Link says ('Principles' p. 181), 'We therefore have examples of rooting 15 
gemmae which grew from the petiole. Mandirola was the first to propagate + 
trees artificially from leaves. It is possible for a gemma to grow from any 
part, so long as it contains spiral elements and cellular tissue.' In short any 
part of the plant can exist immediately as the complete individual; this is 
never the case with animals, apart from polyps and other completely 20 
rudimentary animal species. Strictly speaking therefore, a plant is an 
aggregate of a number of individuals constituting a single individual, the 
parts of which are however completely independent. It is this independence 
of its parts which constitutes the impotence of the plant. The animal on the 
contrary has viscera, dependent members, the whole existence of which is 2S 
dependent solely upon the unity of the whole. If the viscera are injured 
(that is, the vital internal parts), then the life of the individual is destroyed. 
The animal organism can also have members removed of course, but the 
plant consists of nothing but these removable members. 
Goethe's great sense of nature has therefore led him to define the 30 
growth of plants as a metamorphosis of one and the same formation. He 
published his 'Metamorphosis of Plants' in 1790, but botanists have 
treated it with indifference, and precisely because it presents a whole, 
have not known what to make of it.1 Although the plant disembodies + 
into several individuals, it is at the same time a complete shape; it is an 35 
organic totality, the completeness of which includes its root, stem, 
branches, leaves, blossom, fruit. The totality also posits differentiation 
within itself of course, and we shall develop this presently. Goethe sets out 
to show however, that in all these different parts of the plant there is a 
1 Goethe 'On Morphology' vol. I (1817): 'The Metamorphosis of Plants' pp. 66, 70, 126. 
58 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
simple basic life which is self-contained and enduring, and that all its forms 
are nothing more than the exterior transformations of the identity of one 
and the same primary essence; also that this is not only so in the Idea, but 
in existence too, so that each member can pass over very easily into the 
5 other. This is spiritual, a fleeting breath of forms, which does not attain 
to qualitative and fundamental difference, but is merely a metamorphosis 
of an ideal nature within the material being of the plant. In their existence, 
the parts are intrinsically the same, and Goethe1 grasps the difference 
+ between them merely as an expansion or contraction. Cases are on record 
10 for example, in which trees have been planted upside down, their roots 
in the air and their branches and twigs in the ground, with the result that 
the former have sprouted into leaves, buds and blossoms etc., while the 
latter have become roots. In double flowers, in roses for example, extra 
nutrition has merely transformed the filaments (dust-fibres), anthers 
15 (dust-pouches), and in the Wild Rose the pistil (style) too, into petals, 
which are either changed completely, or still show traces of their original 
form. Many of these petals still retain the nature of the filament, so that 
they are petal on one side and filament on the other, for filaments are 
simply nothing but contracted leaves. There are Tulips which are called 
20 monstrosities, for they have petals and cauline leaves. Petals themselves 
are nothing but the attenuated leaves of the plant. The pistil too is merely 
a contracted lea£ Pollen (seed-dust), which on Rose-bushes is a yellow 
powder for example, also partakes of the nature of the lea£ The capsule 
and the fruit also participate fully in the nature of the leaf, and sometimes 
25 leaves can still be seen on the back of the fruit. The stone of the fruit also 
exhibits the nature of the lea£ The thorn of wild plants becomes a leaf in 
their improved counterparts; in poor soils, Apple, Pear, and Lemon trees 
have thorns, which disappear and change into leaves when the trees are 
+ cultivated.2 
30 
It is in this way that the whole production of the plant displays the same 
uniformity and simple development, and this unity of form is the leaf.3 
Consequently, one form can easily be acquired by another. Even the seed 
has the implicit character of a kind ofleaf, for its cotyledons or seed-Iobelets 
are merely unelaborated leaves consisting of a cruder material. The tran-
35 sition here is to the stem, from which leaves sprout forth. These leaves are 
often pinnate, and so approximate to flowers. When this has continued as 
a prolongation for some time (as it has in Conferva), the cauline-Ieaves 
1 'On Morphology' p. 58. 
2 Cf. Willdenow, loco cit. p. 293. 
3 Goethe 'On Morphology' pp. 59. 83-85. 
59 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
develop nodes. Leaves develop from these nodes; lower down a stem they 
have a simple form, higher up they are incised, distinct, and divided. In 
those lower down the stem, the periphery or margin is still unformed. 1 
In this description which he gives of an annual plant, Goethe therefore con-
tinues as follows, 'Yet the further formation of the plant spreads con-
5 
tinuously from node to node by means of the lea£ In appearance, the leaves 
are now more jagged, deeply incised, composed of several leaflets ; in the 
latter instance they present us with complete branches in miniature. The 
Date-palm provides us with a striking example of such a successive and 
extreme diversification of the most simple leaf-shape. The midrib moves 10 
forward in a series of several leaves; the simple flabelliform leafis torn and 
divided, and a highly compound leaf is developed which closely resembles 
a branch.' (Goethe loco cit. p. II). The leaves are now more finely elabor-
ated than the cotyledons, for they draw their sap from the stem, which 
already has an organization (ibidem p. 12). 
15 
With regard to the difference between the species, I should like to draw 
attention to the important fact that the course of leaf-development which 
displays itself in one species, is also the principal determinant in the differ-
ent species themselves. Consequently, the leaves of all the species taken 
together exhibit the complete development of a lea£ This can be seen in a 20 
series of Pelargoniums for example, in which the leaves which are at first 
very different, subsequently pass into one another by transitions. 'It is 
well known that botanists frod a great deal of the specific difference 
between plants in the formation of their leaves. On examining the leaves 
of the Sorbus hybrida, one discovers that some of them are still almost 25 
completely anastomosed; it is only the somewhat deeper incisions of the 
dentate margin, between the lateral costae, which indicate that nature is 
here striving towards a more marked separation. In other leaves, these 
incisions become deeper, mainly at the base and on the lower half of the 
lea£ It is quite evident that each lateral costa is meant to become the mid-
30 
rib of a separate leaflet. In other leaves, the lowest lateral costae are 
already separated into distinct leaflets. The lateral costae which follow have 
already developed the deepest incisions; it is clear that a freer impulse 
towards ramification would have overcome the anastomosis. This is 
accomplished in other leaves, in which two, three, or four pairs of lateral 35 
costae are detached from below upwards, and the original midrib pushes 
the leaflets apart by growing more rapidly. Consequently, this leaf is half 
pinnate, and still semi-anastomosed. The predominance of breaking apart 
1 C£ Goethe loco cit. pp. 7-10. 
60 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
into ramification, or of anastomosis, changes in accordance with the age 
of the tree and its condition, and even in accordance with the nature of the 
year. I have in my possession leaves which are almost entirely pinnate. If 
we now consider the Sorbus aucuparia, it becomes evident that this species 
5 is only a continuation of the evolutionary history of the Sorbus hybrida, 
and that these two species are only distinguished from one another by the 
+ fact that the Sorbus hybrida has a disposition towards a greater compact-
ness of tissue, while the Sorbus aucuparia attempts to reproduce itself 
+ more easily.'l 
+ 
Goethe then passes from the leaves to the calyx Qoc. cit. pp. 15-20), 
'Sometimes we see the transition to inflorescence take place more slowly, 
and sometimes more rapidly. In the latter case, we usually observe that the 
cauline leaves begin to contract again from their periphery, and in particu-
lar, to lose their various peripheral divisions, while in their lower parts, 
15 where these leaves are joined to the stem, there is a varying measure of 
expansion. At the same time, if we look at the stem, we shall see that even 
where the distances between the nodes are not perceptibly increased, the 
stem does at least assume a finer and slenderer shape than before. From this 
it has been concluded that excessive nutrition hinders the inflorescence of 
20 a plant. We often see this transformation occur rapidly, and in this case 
the stem above the node of the last-formed leafis suddenly lengthened and 
tapered as it shoots up. The calyx occurs at its extremity as a number of 
leaves grouped about an axis. The leaves of the calyx are the same organs 
as the cauline leaves, but they are now grouped about a common centre. 
25 What is more, in many flowers we see unaltered cauline leaves drawn 
together, immediately under the corolla, into a kind of calyx. As they still 
retain their complete leaf-form, we have only to appeal to the evidence 
of our eyes, and to that of botanic terminology which designates them by 
+ the name of "floral leaves" (folia floralia). The cauline leaves transform 
30 themselves where they gradually contract, and so grade imperceptibly 
into the calyx as it were. These leaves are made even more unrecognizable 
by their joining up, and by their growing together at the sides. The leaves 
which are thus pushed and crowded together so closely, present us with 
the bell-shaped or so-called monophyllous calyces, which are more or less 
35 incised from the top inwards. Nature forms the calyx therefore, by joining 
a number of leaves around a single centre, and consequently a number of 
nodes also, which she would otherwise have produced at separate times, 
and at some distance from one another. In the calyx therefore, nature does 
1 Schelver's 'Critique of the doctrine of sex in plants.' First continuation (1814), pp. 38-40. 
61 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
not produce a new organ.' The calyx is merely a point, and that which was 
formerly disposed throughout the whole stem is gathered around it. 
The flower itself is merely a duplication of the calyx, for the petals and 
sepals are very similar. Here too, in the 'transition of the calyx to the 
crown' (corolla), Goethe does not indicate any antithesis. 'Although the 
5 
colour of the calyx usually remains green, and similar to the colour 
of the cauline leaves, it frequently changes in one or the other of its 
parts, at the apices, the margins, on the dorsal, or even on its inner side, 
while its outer side still remains green. We shall always find that this col-
ouring is associated with a refinement oHorm. Consequently, ambigenous 10 
calyces occur, and may with equal correctness be regarded as corollas. The 
corolla is frequently produced by an expansion. The petals of a plant are 
usually larger than its sepals, and it is noticeable that the organs which 
were contracted in the calyx, now expand again as petals into a higher 
degree of refinement. Their delicate texture, their colour and their smell, 15 
would quite disguise their origin from us, if we could not watch nature at 
work in a number of unusual instances. In the calyx of a Carnation for 
example, there is often a second calyx, which is partly quite green, and 
displays the primordium of a monophyllous and incised calyx; it is partly 
lacina ted, and transformed at its apices and on its margins into the actual 20 
beginnings of petals, which are delicate, expanded, and coloured. In a 
number of plants the cauline leaves are more or less coloured long before 
inflorescence, while others become completely coloured as inflorescence 
approaches. An almost completely developed and coloured petal also 
appears frequently on tulip-stems; there is an even more remarkable 25 
phenomenon, in which one half of a leaf of this kind is green because it 
belongs to the stem and remains firmly attached to it, while the other half 
is coloured and taken up into the corolla, so that the leaf is torn into two 
parts.1 The conjecture that the colour and smell of the petals derive from 
the presence of the male seed is probably correct. It is probably present in 30 
them in an insufficiently isolated form, mixed and diluted rather with 
other saps. We are of the opinion, that the matter which fills the petals 
does not possess the highest degree of purity, although it is certainly very 
pure, for the highest purity would appear to be white and colourless, and not 
exhibit the beautiful phenomenon of colours. '(Goethe loco cit. pp. 21-23). 35 
Fructification is the highest development oflight within the plant; here 
also Goethe points out, 'the close affinity between the petals and the 
organs of pollination.' 'This transition often occurs regularly, as for example 
1 This is the case with the monstrosities previously referred to. 
62 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
in the Canna. A true petal, slightly modified, contracts its upper margin; 
an anther appears, for which the rest of the petal functions as a filament. In 
flowers which are often double, we are able to observe this transition in 
all its stages. There are several varieties of Roses within whose fully formed 
5 and coloured petals, other petals can be seen, which are sometimes con-
tracted in the middle, and sometimes at the side. This contraction is 
brought about by a tiny callosity which shows itself as a more or less 
complete anther. In some double Poppies, fully-formed anthers are borne 
on slightly modified petals of heavily doubled corollas. The organs which 
10 are called nectaries,' (paracorolla is a better term), 'are petals approximating 
to stamens. Various petals have small pits or glands which secrete a honey-
like sap, which is a still unelaborated fertilizing fluid. At this juncture 
there is a complete absence of all the factors which have caused the broad-
ening out of the cauline leaves, sepals, and petals, and a feeble and ex-
15 tremely simple filament develops. It is precisely those vessels which 
otherwise elongated and broadened themselves, and sought for one 
another, that are now present in an extremely contracted condition.' Thus 
the pollen acts all the more powerfully exteriorly, on the pistil. Goethe 
also traces the pistil back to the same type, 'In many cases the style closely 
20 resembles a filament without anthers. If this examination has made it 
clearly evident that there is a close affinity between the female and male 
parts, we are quite prepared to say that the coupling is a spiritual anasto-
mosis, and at least to flatter ourselves for a moment, that we have brought 
the concepts of growth and generation closer together. We often find that 
25 the style has grown together out of several separate pistils. In the pistil of 
the Iris, together with its stigma, we can see the complete form of a petal. 
It is certainly not so strikingly obvious that the umbelliform stigma of the 
Sarracenia is composed of several leaves, although its greenness is evidence 
+ of this' (Goethe, loco cit. pp. 23-26; 30-34). A physiologist says of the 
30 anthers, 'The margins of the sepalulii curled inwards as the anthers 
formed, so that at first a hollow cylinder developed, at the tip of which 
there was a fascicle of tiny hairs. Later, when the anthers became fuller 
and more perfect, these hairs fell away. A similar transformation was 
apparent in the style (stilus), where one, and often several sepals curled in-
35 wards from the margin to form an incurvation (arcuarentur). A simple cavity 
developed first from this, and then the ovary. The fascicle of hairs situated 
at the summit of the cavity did not wither as did those on the anthers, 
+ but on the contrary, assumed the nature of a perfect hilum (stigma).'1 
1 Herm. Frider. Autenrieth, 'De Discrimine sexuali' etc. (TUbing. 1821 pp. 29-30). 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
The fruit and the capsule can also be shown to be transformations of the 
leaf, 'Here we are speaking specifically of those capsules which contain 
the so-called angiosperms. In Carnations, the seed-capsules have often 
changed back into calyx-like leaves, and there are in fact Carnations in 
which the conceptacle has changed into a genuine and perfected calyx. In 5 
these instances, the apical incisions of the calyx still bear faint traces of the 
styles and stigmas, and instead of seeds, a more or less complete corolla 
develops from the interior of this second calyx. What is more, nature has 
herself revealed the leaf's hidden fertility to us in extremely diverse ways, 
by means of regular and constantly recurrent forms. Thus, the unmis-
10 
takably modified, but still recognizable leaf of a Lime-tree, will produce 
from its midrib a petiolule bearing a perfect blossom and fruit. The im-
mediate fertility of the cauline leaves is even more strikingly, and one may 
say curiously, apparent in Ferns, where it gives rise to the scattering of 
countless seeds which are capable of growth. We cannot fail to recognize 15 
the shape of the leaf in seed-vessels. The legume for example is a simple 
folded leaf; siliquas are formed from the superpositing of several leaves. It 
is most difficult to trace this resemblance to the leaf in seed-vessels which 
are either succulent and soft, or ligneous and firm. The relationship of the 
seed-capsules to the anterior parts is also apparent in the stigma, which in 20 
many cases is sessile, and inseparably bound up with the capsule. We have 
already indicated the relationship of the stigma to the shape of the lea£ It 
can be confirmed by observation that various seeds transform leaves into 
their immediate integuments. The traces of such leaf-forms, which are 
imperfectly adapted to the seed, may be seen on many alated seeds, such 25 
as those of the Maple. We have managed to keep to the line of enquiry we 
selected, by confining our consideration consistently and exclusively to 
the plant as an annual. However, in order to give requisite completeness 
to this investigation, it is now necessary to pass on to a consideration of 
buds. The buds needs no cotyledons ... .' etc. (Goethe, loco cit. pp. 36-40, 30 
42-43). Later, we shall also have occasion to speak of the powers and 
functions of perennial plants. 
These are the principal concepts of the Goethean metamorphosis of 
plants. Goethe has ingeniously represented the unity of the plant as a 
spiritual gradation. Metamorphosis only constitutes one side however, it + 
does not account for the whole; the difference of formations also has to be 
considered, and it is here that the special process of life first makes its 
appearance. Two aspects of the plant have to be distinguished therefore, 
(a) this unity of its entire nature, the indifference of its members and for-
mations to its change oHorm, and (b) the diversity of its development, the 40 
64 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
course of its actual life. The sexual difference which this organization has 
developed is merely indifferent and superfluous however, The plant's vital 
process is a distinct process of the whole within each of its parts; branches, 
twigs, and leaf all have an entire and distinct process of their own, because 
5 each is also the whole individual. The vital process of the plant is therefore 
complete within each part, for the plant is particularized throughout, with-
out there being as yet any primary diremption of its process into the various 
functions. Consequently, the process of the plant, as an immanent 
differentiation, appears in its beginning, as in its final product, merely 
10 as formation. In this respect the plant occupies a position midway be-
tween the mineralogical crystal and the freer shape of the animal; for 
animal being exhibits oval and elliptical form, while crystalline being, 
in its straight lines, constitutes the form of the understanding. The 
shape of the plant is simple. The understanding is still dominant in 
15 the straight line of the stem, and in the plant in general, the prepon-
derance of the straight line is still very marked. The shape of the cells 
in the interior of the plant is partly alveoliform and partly elongated. 
Then there are the fibres, which although they certainly intertwine in 
spirals, subsequently straighten out again of their own accord, and do not 
20 resume their rounded form. In the leaf, the surface is predominant. The 
various leaf-forms exhibited by plants as well as flowers are still extremely 
regular, and a mechanical uniformity is noticeable in their determinate 
incisions and acuminations. Leaves are dentate, jagged, acuminate, 
lanceolate, peltate, cordate, but yet their regularity is no longer abstract. 
25 One side of the leaf is not the same as the other, for it is more contracted 
underneath, while on top it is more expanded and rounded. Globularity 
is finally dominant in the fruit. This is a commensurable roundness how-
ever, it is not yet the higher form of roundness exhibited by the animal. 
Numerical determinations such as three or six, which are a characteristic 
30 of the understanding, are also still dominant in plants. Six predominates 
in bulbs for example, and in the calyx of flowers the numbers six, three 
and four are dominant. Yet the number five also occurs, and in such a way 
that if the flower has five filaments and anthers, there are also five or ten 
petals present, and the calyx then also has five or ten sepals etc. Link says 
is ('Principles' p. 212), 'Actually, only five leaves seem to constitute the 
complete whorl. If there are six or more, it is certain that two or more con-
centric whorls are present. If there are four leaves in a whorl, there will 
be a gap for the fifth. Those leaves are indication of a less perfect form, and 
likewise, if there are two or only one, there will be gaps for two or a third.' 
40 
Like its shape, the plant's saps also vacillate between chemical and organ-
c 
65 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
ic matter, and the plant-process itself is still intermediate between that of 
chemicals and that of animals. plant products consist of acids such as citric 
acid, and are certainly not wholly chemical substances any longer, for 
although they are not yet as undifferentiated as animal being, they are 
already too undifferentiated to be chemical, and cannot be accounted for 5 
simply by oxygenation and hydrogenation. This is even truer of animal 
being, of respiration for example. Chemistry is unable to deal with organic 
water permeated with life and individualized, for this water is a spiritual band. + 
Animation is a process, and to the same extent as it is singleness, 
this process has to explicate itself into the triad of processes (§ 217-
10 
220). 
Addition. The process of the plant falls into three syllogisms. As has 
already been indicated (§ 342 Add.), the first of these is the universal 
process, the process of the vegetable organism within itself, the relation of 
the individual to itsel£ In this process, which is that of formation, the 15 
individual destroys itself, converts itself into its inorganic nature, and by 
means of this destruction, brings itself forth from itself. In the second 
process, living being does not contain its other, but faces it as an external 
independence; it does not constitute its own inorganic nature, but meets 
it as an object, which it encounters through an apparent contingency. 20 
This is the process which is specified in the face of an external nature. The 
third process is that of the genus, and unites the first two. This is the process 
of the individuals with themselves as genus, or the production and preser-
vation of the genus. In it, the genus is preserved by the destruction of 
individuals, as the production of another individual. Inorganic nature 25 
consists here of the individual itself, while the nature of the individual is 
its genus. This genus is also distinct from the individual however, and con-
stitutes its objective nature. In the plant, these processes coincide, and are 
not so distinct as they are in the animal. It is precisely this which con-
stitutes the difficulty one encounters in expounding the nature of the 30 
vegetable organism. 
66 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
A 
The process of formation 
§ 346a 
As it accords with the simple nature of vegetativeness itself, the 
inner process of the plant's relation to itselfis at the same time 
a relation to externality, and an externalization. One side of this 
process is its substantiality, itis animmediate transformation, 
s partly of the nutritive infIuxions into the specific nature of the plant 
species, and partly of the internally transformed fluidity of the 
vi tal sap into formations. The other side of the process is its self-
mediation. This begins (a) with the simultaneously outward 
direction of the diremption into root and leaf, and with the inner 
10 abstract diremption of the general cellular tissue into wood-fibre 
and life-vessels. The wood-fibre also relates itself externally, 
and the life-vessels contain the internal circulation. The self-
mediating preservation which occurs here is (b) growth as a 
production of the new formations. It is diremption into abstract 
15 self-relation, into the induration of wood (which reaches petri-
faction in tabashir and suchlike formations) and of other parts, and 
into the permanent foliaceousness of the bark. (c) The gathering 
of self-preservation into unity is not unification of the individual 
with itself, but the production of a new plant-individual, the bud. 
20 Addition. In the process of formation we begin with an immediacy 
consisting of the germ ofliving being. This is merely a posited immediacy 
however, for the germ is also a product, and is in fact a determination 
which first occurs in the third process. The process of formation ought to 
be confined to the process of inwardness constituting the production of 
25 the plant from within itself. The self-production of vegetable being is a 
self-emergence however, so that what is brought forth is another, the bud. 
This is also directly involved in the process outwards, so that the first 
process cannot be grasped without the second and third. The developed 
form of the process of formation would be the visceral process of the 
30 individual. Consequently, it is precisely because the plant has no viscera, 
but only members which have a relationship with externality, that it lacks 
this process. It is however an essential aspect of the organic process in 
67 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
general, that it should destroy, infect, and assimilate that which comes to 
it from without. As water is absorbed, it is immediately affected by the 
force of animation, so that it is posited at once as pervaded by organic life. 
Does this occur immediately, or in a succession of transformations? The 
main point about the plant is that this transformation occurs without 
5 
mediation. In more highly organized plants however, as in animal being, 
one is able to trace the numerous intermediate stages through which this 
process passes. Yet the immediate infection into lymph also occurs here 
without being mediated by the members of the activity. In plants, and 
especially in the lower forms, there is no mediation by means of opposi-
10 
tion; opposition gives rise to no conjunction, nutrition is a transformation 
which is devoid of process. Consequently, the inner physiological con-
struction of the plant is also extremely simple. Link and Rudolphi have 
shown that it merely consists of simple cells, together with spiral-vessels 
and tubes. 
15 
I. The germ is that from which the whole Notion of the plant un-
folds; it is the nature of the plant, but as it still lacks reality, it is not yet 
Idea. The plant occurs in the grain of seed as a simple and immediate union of 
the self and the genus. On account of the immediacy of its individuality there-
fore, the grain of seed is an indifferent entity. It falls into the earth, which con-
20 
stitutes its universal power. When we say that a soil is good, we simply mean 
that it has this open organic power or possibility; just like a good head, it has 
potential. The essential power of the seed, which comes of its being in the 
earth, sublates its terrestriality, and actualizes itself However, this is not the 
opposite of indifferent existence, as it is of its inorganic nature. The placing 25 
of the seed in the earth means that the seed constitutes power. This fostering 
of the grain of seed in the earth is therefore a mystical, magical action. It shows 
that the seed contains secret powers which are still dormant, and that in reality 
it is something other than what it is as it lies there. It resembles the child, which 
is not merely a helpless human shape giving no indication of reason, but which 30 
is the implicitness of the power of reason, and something quite distinct from this 
being which can neither speak nor perform any rational action. Baptism more-
over is precisely the solemn recognition of the child's admission into the realm 
of spirits. The magician who infuses an entirely distinct significance into this 
grain which I crush in my hand, and for whom a rusty lamp is a mighty spirit, 35 
is the Notion of nature. The grain is the force which conjures the earth and 
masters its power. 
+ 
(a) The initial development of the germ is mere growth or increase; 
implicitly it is already the whole plant, the whole tree etc., in miniature. 
The parts are already fully formed, and are merely enlarged, formally 40 
68 

TilE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
duplicated, and indurated etc. For that which is to be already is, so that 
its becoming is this simply superficial movement. This becoming is to an 
equal extent a qualitative structuring and shaping however, and it is 
therefore an essential process. 'The germination of the seed first takes 
5 place through the agency of moisture. In perfect plants the future caudex 
can be seen distinctly in the future plant or embryo, and forms the 
conical part, which is usually called the radicle (radicula, rostillum). The 
apical part from which the future root sprouts is lower down. A marked 
elongation of the upper part is not common; this elongation is generally 
10 called a scape (scapus). Sometimes, this part also gives indication of a 
gemma or plumule (plumula). The two seed-lobes or nuclear organs 
(cotyledons) which develop later, and represent the seed-leaves, often grow 
from the sides of the embryo. It is incorrect to regard the radicle as the 
future root, for it is merely the caudex growing downwards. If one 
1 s watches the larger plant-seeds carefully during germination, for example, 
those of Wheat, Pumpkins, and Beans (the first of which is divided into 
three parts), one will see how much thinner and more delicate are the true 
roots which emerge from these bodies.'1 The apical part germinates if it 
is pointed upwards, but it grows into an arc, and turns its apex down-
20 wards. 'The germ consists of the radicle (rostellum) and the plumule 
(plumula). The root grows from the former, and the part of the plant 
above ground from the latter. If the seed is placed wrongly in the ground, 
so that the radicle points towards the surface, it will never grow upwards. 
It grows longer, but still passes into the earth, and turns the seed over in 
2S order to reach its proper position.'2 In this connection, Willdenow has 
made the following discovery, 'The Water-nut (Trapa natans) has no 
radicle. These nuts put out a long plumule, which grows in a perpendicu-
lar direction towards the surface of the water, and puts out piliform, 
branching leaves at wide intervals along its sides. Some of these leaves 
30 turn downwards and take firm root in the bottom. It is evident from this 
that some seeds can dispense with the radicle, although a fertile seed devoid 
+ of plumule and cotyledon is quite unthinkable. So far, no one has ever 
presumed to deny that any seed had a plumule. It is worth noting that in 
bulbaceous plants the radicle is transformed into the bulb, while in some 
+ which like Cyclamens have a middle caudex, it constitutes the axis.' (The 
middle caudex, 'belongs neither to the descending nor to the ascending 
caudex. Sometimes it has the appearance of a root, and sometimes of a 
stem. In the first case it is tuberous, and in the second either beet-like or 
+ 
I Link. 'Principles' pp. 235-236 (236 to § 6). 
2 Willden ow, loco cit. pp. 367-369. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
bulbous, as for example in the Ranunculus bulbosus etc.') 'Finally there + 
are plants in which the radicle disappears soon after the seed has germi-
nated, and the true root develops at the side.'l The diremption of the unit 
into two aspects, one having affmity with the earth, the ground, the con-
crete universal, the universal individual, and the other with the pure, 5 
abstract, ideal nature of light, can be called polarization. 
The stem comes between leaf and root as the first diremption, for here 
we are considering plants with a developed determinate being, and this 
does not include fungi and the like. The stem is not strictly essential 
however, the leaf can grow directly from the root, and many plants are 10 
restricted to the two main moments of leaf and root. This constitutes the 
great difference between monocotyledons and dicotyledons. The first order 
includes bulbaceous plants, Grasses, and Palms. These constitute the 
Hexandria and Triandria of Linnaeus, who had not yet drawn attention 
to this difference (Jussieu was the first to do so), and who still failed to + 
make any distinction here. The question is in fact, whether the leaflet 
(xoTv;\:l'}8wv) put out by the seed is double or simple. In monocotyledons, 
the root and leaf constitute the initial antithesis, and so exhibit the primary 
composite nature of the plant. However, this composition does not 
advance to the opposition in which a distinct stem occurs between root or 20 
bulb, and lea£ Palms certainly have a stem, but it is merely formed by the 
attachment of the leaves to one another at their base, as is quite evident 
from the outside. 'Palms only have branches at the top of the trunk, and 
their twigs are merely floriferous. It looks as though the branches have 
been absorbed by the excessive size of the leaves. Ferns are precisely the 2S 
same in this respect. Even in our indigenous grasses and many bulbaceous 
plants, one rarely sees branches which are not floriferous.'2 The antithesis 
of cells and wood-fibres occurs within the substance of these plants, but 
they have no medullary rays. The leaf-veins are either not curved, or only 
slightly so, and in grasses they run in straight lines. Monocotyledons are 30 
as devoid of a true stem as they are of a completed flat-leaf; they are nothing 
more than this enveloped bud, which opens, but never completely develops. + 
Consequently, they never produce fertile seed; pith is the constituent of their 
root, and of the whole of their stem. The stem is a continuation of the root, it 
has neither buds nor branches, but is continually renewing its roots, which die 3S 
off and are bound together by wood-fibres. The overwhelming power oflight 
prevents the internalization of the plant into wood; the leaf does not die off, but 
1 Willdenow, ibidem. pp. 37O-37I, 3S0 (p. 3I). 
2 Lil1k, 'Principles' p. ISS. 
70 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
puts forth fresh leaves. In the Palm, the trunk and branches seem to con-
sist of leaves however, and conversely there are also varieties of stem in 
which the stem remains one with the lea£ This is the case with the Cactus 
for example, where stem grows out of stem. 'The joints, which are corn-
s monly regarded as leaves, are parts of the stem. The leaves of this plant 
are awl-shaped fleshy apices, which are often surrounded at the base with 
small prickles. They fall off directly after the development of the member' 
+ (i.e. the joint of course); 'and a scar or fascicle of prickles indicates their 
former position.'l These plants remain a succulent leaf which withstands the 
10 light; instead of wood, they merely produce prickles. 
(b) The cellular tissue of the plant constitutes its general texture, and as 
in animal being, consists of small cells; it is the universal animal and 
vegetable product, the moment of fibriformity. 'Each cell is separate 
from the others, and has nothing in common with them. In the bast, the 
IS cells assume an oval form which is either a simple, apiculate, or an attenu-
ated form.' In this fundamental determination of the plant, there is an 
immediate distinction between the utricle and the elongated cells. (a) 'The 
regular tissue consists of (i) the parenchyma, the lax or spongy cellular 
tissue which is composed of large cells; it is very easily recognized, and 
20 occurs mainly in the bark and the pith of the trunks. (ii) The bast, which 
is fibrous and compact, and is the real cellular tissue, occurring mainly in 
+ the filaments, the support which carries the pistil, and similar parts. Its 
cells are very long and narrow, but are still distinguishable. It is only in 
the inner bark, the wood, and the nerves of the leaves, that there is any 
25 great difficulty in recognizing the structure of the bast or fibrous tissue. 
It consists of extremely thin and narrow cells, which assume an attenuated 
and apiculate form. (b) Irregular cellular tissue occurs in the species of 
vegetable life in which only a seed-vessel (sporangia), and the rest of the 
supporting body (thallus) are distinguished externally. In Lichens the 
30 thallus is either crustaceous or leaflike. The crust consists entirely of 
irregular coacervations of sphericle vesicles or cells, which vary greatly in 
size. Algae are markedly different from lichens. If one dissects their thallus 
at its thickest part, one sees very distinct but apparently gelatinous linins, 
which are skeined in various ways. The fundament of some Algae is a 
3 s membrane, which is often mucilaginous, frequently gelatinous, but never 
soluble in water. Fungaceous tissue consists of fibres, which are readily 
recognizable as cells. Grains are scattered everywhere between the fibrous 
tissue, just as they are in Lichens, where they might be regarded as gemmae. 
1 Willdeflolll, loco cit. p. 398. 
71 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
So much for the outward form of cellular tissue. How then does the 
cellular tissue develop and alter? It is evident that new cellular tissue 
forms between the old cells. The grains in the cells may well be the farina 
of the plants.'! 
The first diremption related itself immediately to the process outwards, 5 
for the root stands in reciprocal relation to the earth, as does the leaf 
to the air and light. The second diremption is more intimate, and is the 
plant's own division of itself into the wood-fibre or the active spiral-
vessel, and into the organs which Professor Schultz has called life-vessels. + 
Professor Schultz is as thorough in his empiricism as he is in his philosophic 10 
confirmation of the subject, although in certain details, the latter is 
open to some reassessment. This division of the plant in its interior 
formations, the generation of spiral elements etc., is an immediate 
production, and in general a mere multiplication. The medullary cells 
multiply, as do the spiral-vessels, wood-fibres etc. Link makes this par-
15 
ticularly clear, 'The spiral-vessels are raphes which are rolled spirally to 
form a tube, and they develop their scalariformity as their torsions grow 
together in pairs. It is a scalariformity which cannot unroll. The spiral-
vessels become taut or compressed through the accretion of neighbouring 
parts. This produces the undulate curvatures of the transversal bands, and 20 
the apparent cleavages of the transversal striae when two torsions have 
been pushed on to one another. Perhaps there are also true cleavages. The 
vessels which have such bands or points are the punctate and pitted vessels 
which I consider to be similar in kind to the scalariform vessels.' At first 
only the transversal lines remain; torsions which have grown very 25 
closely together in spiral-vessels merely exhibit small pits instead of lines, 
incisions, and transversal striae. 'The annular vessels arise from the rapid 
growth of the adjacent parts, which causes the torsions of the spiral-
vessels to be torn apart, and to be left standing separately. It is not sur-
prising that there are more old and modified vessels to be found in 30 
rapidly growing roots, and in other parts where numbers of these spiral 
vessels have to fulfill their functions, than in those parts where the growth 
proceeds at a gentler pace. The spiral-vessels spread into almost every 
part of the plant, and constitute its skeleton. The reticulated fascicles of 
spiral-vessels distributed throughout the leaves, after they have been 35 
stripped of all the intervening cellular tissues, are actually called the 
skeleton of the leaf. It is only in the anthers and the pollen that I have never 
Found spiral-vessels. They are always accompanied by bast, and it is the 
1 Lillk, 'Principles' pp. 12 (,Supplements' I, p. 7), 15-18, 20-26; 29-30, 32. 
72 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
fascicles of the vessels which are mixed with the bast that we call wood. 
Cellular tissue which surrounds the wood is called bark, and that which 
is completely surrounded by wood, pith.'1 
'In many plants, all these vessels are missing; they have never been 
5 found in plants which have anomalous cellular tissue, such as Lichens, 
Algae, and Fungi. Genuine plants with regular cellular tissue either have 
spiricles or do not. Mosses and Liverworts, and few aquatic plants such 
as Chara, are devoid of this feature. I do not know how spiral-vessels 
+ originate. Sprengel thinks it certain that as they are present in the form of 
10 cellular tissue, they must develop out of it. I cannot see why this should 
be so. It seems likely to me, that they develop between the cells of the 
bast, from the sap which is discharged there. Be that as it may, the spiral-
vessels do grow, and new ones grow between them. Apart from these 
vessels, to which one may give the general name of spiral-vessels (I call 
15 them true vessels, in contrast to scalariform and pitted vessels), I have 
discovered no other vessels in plants.'2 Where then are the life-vessels? 
It might be concluded from what Link says in the 'Supplements' (II 
p. 14), that it is the linear form of the wood-fibres which gives rise to the 
spiral-vessels. 'I find that I am compelled to reaccept the old view that 
20 simple elongated fibres are present in plants. It is difficult to decide whether 
they are solid or hollow. The simple fibre, without a trace of branches, 
by no means extends throughout the whole plant. It is easy to see that 
where the twigs join the stem, the twig-fibres adhere to those of the stem, 
and appear to form a wedge within it. Even within the same stem and bran-
2S ches, they do not appear to proceed uninterruptedly. The fibre-vessels 
always lie in fascicles, which in the oldest stems form annular coacerva-
tions together with the bast. They usually surround a fascicle of spiral-
vessels, although in some plants there are also simple fibre-vessels which 
exhibit no trace of spiral elements. These vessels lie in straight lines, and 
30 in the fascicles they are approximately parallel. In tree-trunks and roots 
they are found to be more divergent, and interwoven as it were. They 
occur in most plants, and are general in Phanerogams. In many Lichen 
and Algae one finds only convoluted threads, which are easily distinguish-
able in Fungi. Yet there are Fungi, Lichens, and Algae which show no 
3S trace of them, and which merely exhibit vesicles and cells.' Thus the original 
antithesis of grain or node and simple length, is seen again in the anti-
thesis of utricle and fibre, while spiral-vessels tend towards rotundity. 
1 Link, 'Principles', pp. 46-49; 51-58; 64-65. 
2 Link, 'Principles', pp. 65-68. 
c* 
73 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Oken's treatment of this passing of cellular tissue into spiral-vessels + 
certainly conforms to the principles presented above (§ 344 Add. III. 48, I2), 
but he embellishes it with the schematism of a philosophy of nature which 
is now dated. To quote him: 'The spiral-vessels are the system of light 
within the plant. I am fully aware of the extent to which this doctrine 
5 
stands in opposition to the hitherto accepted tenets. I have made exhaustive 
investigations however, and have assessed opinions and experiments. I 
can say quite confidently that there is nothing which might cast doubt 
upon the validity of this result, and it is a result which has been reached 
constructively by the philosophy of nature.' This construction is merely 10 
an assertion however. 'If they are the system of light, then they perform 
the spiritual function within the plant, or the function of simple polariza-
tion. The spiricle arises from the opposition between light and the cellu-
lar tissue, or from the opposition between the Sun and the planet. A 
light-ray traverses the utricle or the germ. The utricles, cells, or muci-
15 
laginous points (in its seed-form the plant consists of nothing more), 
gradually arrange themselves side by side along this polar line. In the 
conflict between the sphere, and the line introduced into it by light, the 
mucilaginous globules, although they range themselves together linearly, 
are perpetually being pulled down to the level of chemism by the plane-
20 
tary process of the cellular tissue. It is from this conflict that the spiral 
form arises. Here, I have merely touched upon the significance of the 
course of the Sun; the lighted part of the plant, and that part of it in the 
shadow, change from moment to moment, so that the different parts 
are successively stem and root.'l 
2S 
(c) Finally, the other side of this is the process itself, the activity within 
the first determination of the plant, universal life. This is the formal 
process of simply immediate transformation, it is the infinite living 
power constituted by this infection. Living being is stable and determined 
in and for itsel£ By coming into conflict with it, external chemical 30 
influence is immediately transformed. Consequently, any undue encroach-
ment by chemical action is immediately mastered by living being, 
which preserves itself through its contact with an other. It poisons and 
transforms this other in an immediate manner. It therefore resembles 
spirit, which transforms and appropriates that which it sees; for what it 35 
sees becomes its perception. In the plant, this process is also to be grasped 
in its two aspects, (a) as the absorbing action of the wood-fibres, and (b) 
as the action whereby the sap in the life-vessels acquires a vegetable 
I Gken, 'Text-book of the Philosophy of Nature' (1St edition), vol. II, pp. 52-54. 
74 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
nature. The absorption and the circulation of the vegetable and organi-
cally constituted sap, are the essential moments of the Notion, although 
there may also be variations in particular instances. The action of the vital 
sap has its principal seat in the leaf In the plant, each member does not 
5 have special functions, as it does in the animal however, and the leaf is 
just as absorbent as the root and the bark, since it already stands in a 
reciprocal relation to the air. As Link says ('Supplements' I p. 44), 
'One of the most important functions of leaves is to prepare the sap 
for the other parts.' The foliage is the pure process of the plant, and 
10 that is why Linnaeus suggests that the leaves might be referred to as its 
+ lungs. 
Link comments on the functions of the vessels, and of cellular tissue in 
general. 'Undamaged roots do not absorb coloured liquids, and these 
liquids are also unable to penetrate the coloured cuticle. The nutritive 
IS sap first passes through imperceptible apertures in the cuticle, and fills the 
cells at the tip of the roots, before being absorbed by the vessels. The saps 
pass through the various vessels, and in particular through those ducts in 
the cellular tissue which are not enveloped in any special integument. 
They also exude through spiral-vessels etc. There is air in the spiral 
20 vessels, and in all vessels associated with them. The sap in the fibre-
vessels exudes from them in the cells, and spreads out in all directions. 
The air-vessels are always accompanied by fibre-vessels. It still seems to 
me that the stomates on the cuticle function as excretory glands.' ('Sup-
plements' II pp. 18,35). For ' ... oils, resin, and acids are the secretions and 
25 waste products of plants.'! In their Journey to Brazil' (vol. I p. 299), 
Spix and Martius also speak of the gum which forms between the bark and 
the wood of the Hymenaea Courbaril L., a tree which is called the Jatoba 
or Jatai by the natives. 'By far the greatest part of the resin occurs under 
the tap-roots of the tree, when the earth has been cleared away from them. 
30 Usually, this clearing away can only be carried out once the tree has been 
felled. Round cakes of resin, pale yellow in colour, and weighing from 
six to eight pounds, are sometimes found under old trees. They are 
formed by the liquid resin having trickled together gradually. This 
formation of resinous masses between the roots seems to throw some 
35 light on the origin of amber, which had been accumulated in the same 
way before it was picked up by the sea. Insects, and particularly ants, are 
+ found in pieces of jatai-resin, just as they are in amber.' 
The spiral-vessels perform the primary function of absorbing the 
1 Schultz, 'The Nature of the Living Plant', vol. I, p. 530. 
75 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
moisture which is presented to the plant as an immediacy. The secondary 
function is therefore the organization of this moisture into sap. In accor-
dance with the nature of the plant, this organogenesis takes place in an 
immediate manner. The plant has no stomach etc., as the animal has. 
The sap circulates throughout the whole plant. It is because the plant is 5 
alive, that this tremulation of vitality within itself, this restlessness of 
time, is one of its features. It corresponds to the circulation of the blood in 
animals. As early as 1774, Abbe CortiI had observed a kind of circulation + 
of the sap in a Conferva (in the Water-horsetail, Chara Lin.). Amici2 made + 
a fresh examination of this in 1818, and with the aid of the microscope, 10 
made the following discoveries, 'In every part of this plant, in the most 
delicate of its root fibrilla, as well as the finest green threadlets of its 
stem and branch, the sap which these plants contain may be seen to 
circulate regularly. There is an uninterrupted circulation, in which white 
transparent globules of various sizes move constantly and regularly at a 15 
rate which increases gradually from the centre to the lateral partitions. 
They stream in two alternating and opposed directions, one up and the 
other down, and through both halves of a single cylindrical canal or 
vessel, which is devoid of any partition. This canal runs lengthwise through 
the plant-fibre, but is interrupted here and there by nodes, and is sealed 20 
by a partition which bounds the cyclosis. The circulation is frequently 
spiral also. The circulation moves throughout the whole plant therefore, 
and in all its fibres. It moves from one node to another, and in each 
sector bounded by these nodes, there is a separate circulation, which is 
independent of the rest. Only one such simple circulation takes place in 25 
the root-fibres, for there is only one such central vessel there. The vessel 
in the green filaments of the plant is multiple however, for the large central 
vessel is surrounded by several small vessels, which are similar to it, and 
divided from it by their own partitions. If such a vessel is loosely bound, 
or bent at a sharp angle, the circulation is interrupted as if by a natural 30 
node, and then continues to circulate above and below the ligature or 
bend, as it did formerly throughout the whole sector. If the vessel is 
restored to its former state, the original movement also reasserts itself. 
When such a vessel is cut transversally, all the sap which it contains does 
not flow out immediately. It is only the sap from that half in which the 35 
movement was towards the cut which flows out, the rest continues 
1 'Osservazioni micrascopiche sulla Tremella e sulla circolazione del fluido in una pianta aquajuola 
dell' Abate Corti' Lucca 1774. 8. 
2 'Osservazioni sulla circoIazione del succhio nella Chara. Memoria del Signor Prof. G. Amici.' 
Modena 1818. 4; with '1!1 engraving. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
-I- around the gyrus'l Professor Schultz has observed this flow in some more 
developed plants such as the Chelidonium majus (Greater Celandine), 
-I- which has a yellow sap, and also in Euphorbia. The description which 
Schultz gives of this is simply the activity of the Notion; an intuition of 
5 thought presents itself externally. The flow is a movement from the 
centre to the parietes, and from the parietes back again. Together with 
this horizontal flow there is a flow upwards and downwards. With regard 
to the parietes, the process is of such a kind, that they are also unfIxed; 
everything produces itself from them. The flow may be observed as a 
10 tendency towards the formation of a globule which is perpetually being 
redissolved. If the plant is cut in two, and the sap is allowed to run into 
+ water, globules which resemble the blood globules of animal being are 
to be seen. The flow is so slight, that it cannot be perceived in every 
species. In the plants examined by Professor Schultz, the flow is not 
15 through a single tube as it is in the Chara, for they have two vessels, for 
the ascending and descending movements. Investigations will have to be 
made to fInd out whether or not this circulation is interrupted in grafted 
trees. Now it is by circulation, which moves throughout the whole, that 
the many individuals which form a plant are combined into a single 
+ individual. 
i. Schultz (loc. cit. vol. I pp. 488, 500) now describes this double pro-
cess (see above III. 75, 38) as follows. Firstly, 'The wood-sap is the nutriment 
of the plant, which is still imperfectly assimilated' (barely particularized). 
'It is only later that it is made more fully organic, and is transported into 
25 the circulatory system. Wood is the means by which air and water are 
assimilated, and this assimilation is a living activity.' Wood consists of 
cellular tissues and spiral-vessels; it absorbs water by means of the wood-
fIbres of the roots, and air from above.' It is the function of the papillae, 
which are clearly visible at the tips of many roots, to absorb the nutritive 
30 sap, which the spiral vessels then take from them for further distribution.'2 
Capillary tubes, and the law of capillary action, are irrelevant to the ex-
planation of plants, when the plant is thirsty, it wants water, and so ab-
sorbs it. 
ii. The second aspect is the quite original and extremely important 
35 discovery made by Schultz, that a sap moves once it is assimilated. This 
1 'Vienna Yearbooks' 1819, vol. V, p. 203. (Martius' paper on, 'The Structure and Nature of 
Chara' in the 'Nova acta physio-medica' of the Leopold. Carolin. Academy of Naturalists; vol. I, 
Erlangen 1818. 4. L.C. Trevirallus of Bremen; 'Observations on the Chara' in Weber's 'Contributions 
to Natural Science', vol. II, Kiel 1810. 8). 
2 Link, 'Principles', p. 76. 
77 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is a movement which is difficult to observe however, so that it is not 
possible to point it out in all plants. The wood-sap is still almost tasteless 
and merely has a faint sweetness, it has not yet been elaborated into the 
peculiar disposition of the plant, which has a particular taste and smell 
etc. Schultz now says of this vital sap (loc. cit. pp. 507, 576, 564), 'The 5 
circulation which goes on in plants throughout the whole winter is the 
movement of a fully organized sap which extends into all the external 
parts of a closed system. It extends into the root, the stem, the flowers, 
leaves and fruits. All these parts also have their assimilative function, but 
this is always in polar opposition to the circulation, and the movement of 10 
the wood-sap within it is quite different from the movement of the 
circulatory system. What is more, wood-sap only passes into vital sap in 
the extremities of the external parts of the plant, that is to say in the leaves, 
where leaves are present, as well as in the flowers and in parts of the fruit. 
On the contrary, wood-sap does not pass from any bundle of wood- 15 
fibres into the life vessels. Wood-sap passes into the bark by means of 
the leaves.' That is why bark dies if it has no correlation with buds or 
leaves. In this connection, Link cites the following experiment, 'Meyer + 
isolated sections of bark by cutting round them, and removing strips. 
He discovered that the sections which survived were those carrying a 20 
bud and leaves, while those which were devoid of these features soon 
withered. I have repeated these experiments on Apricot trees and con-
firmed them. A section of bark without gemmae and leaves, when it was 
isolated in this way, soon wasted and dried up, as well as allowing no 
gum to flow. Another section, from which three gemmae and leaves 25 
were removed, took longer to dry out when it was isolated, but also 
allowed no gum to flow. Yet another section, with three undamaged 
buds and leaves, did not waste away once it was isolated, but remained 
green all over, and allowed gum to flow at its base. The first formation 
on a piece of detached bark was a layer of parenchyma, a fresh pith as it 30 
were. This was followed by a layer of bast, with individual spiral-vessels 
and scalariform tissues. The fresh bark from the parenchyma covered 
all this. This parenchyma is the first formation therefore, and also consti-
tutes the fundament of the young stem and the embryo. To some extent 
there was a formation of new pith, wood, and bark.'1 
35 
iii. Thirdly, the plant's vital sap passes over into product. 'When a 
plant is breaking into leaf, it is easy to separate the bark from the wood in 
every part of it. This is because of the delicate soft substance called 
1 Link, 'Supplements' I, pp. 49-51. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
cambium, which forms between the bark and the wood during foliation. 
The vital sap is in the bark however, not immediately beneath it.' This 
third sap is a neutral substance, 'The cambium does not move, and has a 
periodic existence in the plant. Cambium is the residuum of the entire 
s individual life of the plant, just as fruiting is of its generic life. It is not a 
fluid, as are the other vegetable saps, but is the delicate embryonic shape 
of the whole formed totality of the plant. It is the undisclosed totality, 
as is a non-ligneous plant or the lymph of animal being. The cambium 
is formed by the circulation from the vital sap of the bark, and this 
10 formation gives rise simultaneously to the wood and to the layer of bark. 
The uniformity of the cambium also gives rise to the cellular tissue. In 
cellular tissue therefore, the antithesis between the cells and the fluid 
content of this tissue is the counterpart of the antithesis between the 
life-vessels and the vital-sap in the vascular system of the circulation, 
1 s and between the spiral-vessels and the wood-sap in the assimilative system.! 
As the roots and branches become longer, the new embryonic formations 
arrange themselves at their tips; those formations originating in the 
homogeneous substance go to the top, those originating in the cambium 
go to the side, but there is no essential difference between them. In Ferns, 
20 Grasses, and Palms, one node forms on top of another. In bulbaceous 
plants, the nodes grow side by side, the roots emerge on one side of them, 
and the buds on the other. In the higher plants this external nodulation 
is no longer so evident, and one sees instead a ligneous and corticose 
body, which forms at the tips of the nodes.'2 
2S 
In summarizing the preceding exposition, we have first of all to dis-
tinguish the following three moments in the interior formative process of 
the plant: (i) the diremption into root and leaf, as itself an exterior rela-
tion, constituting the interior nutritive process or wood-sap; (ii) the 
interior relation of the pure process in itself, consisting of the vital sap; and 
1 If Link's scalariform, punctate, pitted, and annular vessels (see above p. 72), are identical with 
the life-vessels, then the trichotomies of saps and vessels arc.> present in their completeness. What is 
more, the description of these vessels given there, touching as it does upon tht'ir cleavages, apertures, 
and annulars, accords very well with the location of the circulation. The exposition of the plant's com-
plete process of formation which is given in the text, thus fmally rounds itself off into a self-contained 
sphere with great clarity. For if the cells of the cellular tissue, as the original element of the plant, 
and in conjunction with the cambium which constitutes their neutral content, develop through the 
action of light into the bast, the fibre, and the spiral-vessels which make up the differentiated exterior 
through which the plant draws the wood-sap from its surroundings: then this sap transforms itself, 
by the return of the process into itself, into the vital-sap, which constitutes the culminating point 
of the plant's activity; and as it engenders the cambium, this culminating point also initiates the 
process once again, turning that which was formerly present as an immediacy, into something 
posited. 
Note by Michelet. 
2 Schultz, 'The Nature of the Living Plant' vol. I, pp. 632, 636, 653, 659. 
79 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(iii) the general product, which is (a) the cambium of the botanists, (b) the 
inorganic secretion of the etheric oils and salts, and (c) the internal diremp-
tion of the plant into wood and cortical substance. Secondly, we have the 
formation of the nodes as a generic multiplication, and finally the bud, 
which shows traces of the process of sexual differentiation. 
2. The sap which has been endowed with a vegetable nature, and its 
product, which is the division of that which was formerly undifferen-
tiated, into bark and wood, may be compared to the diremption of the 
individual which occurs in the universal life-process of the Earth, i.e. 
the diremption into vital activity as such, which took place in the past, 10 
and is external to the individual, and into the system of organic formations 
constituting the material substratum and residuum of the process. The 
plant resembles the animal in that it is perpetually destroying itself by 
positing itself in opposition to being. The plant does this by lignification, 
the animal by the formation of its osseous system. The latter supports the 15 
animal organism, but as abstract immobile being, it is the moment of 
calcareous excretion. The plant also posits its inorganic basis or skeleton 
within itsel£ The unreleased power, the pure self which sinks back into in-
organic nature precisely because of its immediate simplicity, is the wood-fibre. 
If this is regarded chemically, it is carbon, or the abstract subject as exhibited 20 
by the root, which remains in the earth, and is pure wood, devoid of bark 
and pith. Wood itself is not heat but it has an igneous potential as combusti-
bility, and so frequently passes on to sulphureousness. In some roots, fully-
formed sulphur is produced. The root is such a contortion and extirpation of + 
surfaces and lines, such a tangle, that the surface is obliterated into a solid con-
25 
tinuity, which comes very near to being quite inorganic, and is devoid of any 
distinction of shape. Oken regards the wood-fibres as nervethreads, 'The 
spiral-vessels are for the plant, what nerves are for the animal'!. The + 
wood-fibres are not nerves however, they are bones. The plant only 
attains to this simplification as abstract self-relatedness; this reflection-
30 
into-self is a dead substance, for it is merely abstract universality. 
The process of wood-formation in its further details is very simple. Link 
describes it in his 'Principles' (pp. 142-146) as follows, 'There is a con-
siderable difference between the inner structure of the stem in monocoty-
ledons, and in dicotyledons. In the former, the rings of wood which sep-
35 
arate the pith from the bark are absent; the wood fascicles are scattered 
throughout the cellular tissue, sparsely in the middle, and more densely 
near the bark. In the dicotyledons, the disposition of all the wood-fascicles 
1 Oketl, 'Text-book of the Philosophy of Nature', vol. II, p. II2. 
80 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
is circular. Nature never draws precise boundaries however, and such 
scattered fascicles are found in Cucurbitaceae, and a few other plants. It 
is generally the case that the cellular tissue is accompanied by bast, yet in 
some cases there are fascicles of very narrow, elongated cellular tissue or 
5 bast, which occur in the stem at some distance from the vascular bundles. 
For example, some Labiatae have such bundles of bast in the four corners 
of the stem, and many umbelliferous plants have them in their protruding 
edges. In monocotyledons, the growth of the stem and the formation of the 
layers of wood occurs in a simple and ordinary manner. Not only do the 
10 parts become longer and more extended, but new parts form between the 
old; cells form between cells, vessels between vessels. The cross section 
of an older stem resembles that of a younger stem in every respect. In 
dendriform Grasses, the parts harden in an extraordinary manner.' 
Willdenow notes (loc. cit. p. 336) that, 'Silica has been found in many 
15 grasses, such as Bamboo-cane (Bambusa arundinacea) etc., and in Hemp 
and Flax for example, is also a constituent of the plant-fibre. It also appears 
to be present in the wood of the Alnus glutinosa and the Betula alba, for 
when their wood is turned on the lathe, it often emits sparks.' 
Link continues, 'The dicotyledons are quite different in this respect. 
20 During the first year, the wood-fascicles form a circle, and are separated 
from each other and surrounded by parenchyma. In this initial stage they 
simply consist of bast, with a bundle of spiral-vessels inside. It is mainly the 
bast which adnates, and inserts itself between the parenchyma'-thus 
giving rise to alternate layers of fibres and parenchyma. 'The wood-
25 fascicles spread laterally, compress the parenchyma, and finally form a con-
tinuous ring, which encloses the pith. The bast in this wood-fascicle is 
alternately compact and lax, and it is probable therefore, that new bast 
has inserted itself between the old. Inside the ligneous ring, and adjacent 
to the pith, there are still some wood-fascicles, which are disposed in a 
30 circle. The so-called medullary rays originate in the alternate layers of bast. 
as well as the compressed parenchyma.' They are extensions of the pith 
therefore, proceed outwards towards the bark,l occur between the longi-
tudinal fibres, and are not present in monocotyledons. 'It is the ligneous 
ring which first separates the pith from the bark. The wood-fascicles 
35 subsequently spread inwards and the ligneous ring becomes broader. 
Rows of scalariform vessels are seen radiating towards the pith' (un-
doubtedly in a vertical direction however). 'On the inner side of the ring, 
1 Would this not make them the fibres of the life-vessels? 
Note by Miche1et. 
81 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
around the pith, there are separated fascicles of spiral vessels which are 
arranged in a circle. However, the medullary cells have become larger, 
not smaller, although in relation to the thickness of the stem, the amount 
of pith has diminished. The pith is reduced therefore as its outer part 
diminishes, and is pressed laterally into rays. However, this reduction is 5 
not the result of its being compressed into a smaller space at the centre. 
Consequently, the first (innermost) fascicles of spiral-vessels are not 
pushed inwards by the adnate wood; on the contrary, new fascicles are 
perpetually being formed in the pith, and those formed earlier spread 
laterally, and compress the parenchyma. The scalariform tissues were 10 
formed from the spiral-vessels; and as the spiral-vessels are in the first 
instance somewhat separated from each other, the scalariform vessels also 
form rows leading inwards. It is evident from all this, that the layer of 
wood forms because scattered fascicles of spiral-vessels and bast meet and 
join laterally, and also because new fascicles of spiral-vessels are constantly 15 
growing in a circle on the inside, and joining up laterally.'1 
'In each of the following years a new ligneous layer inserts itself between 
the bark and the wood. As in the first year, there are strata which grow on 
to the wood-fascicles, and so enlarge them. It is very likely therefore, that 
in the following years a new ligneous strata of this kind will form about 20 
the wood. It is in this way that fresh parenchymatous strata are established 
in the outer bark, and new strata of bast in the inner bark. There is a 
distinct and precise transition from one strata to another however, which 
shows that the adnascent growth also takes place in the interstices of the 
vessels and of the cellular tissue of the older stratum; it also takes place in 25 
the pith, until it has filled out. Fresh parts are inserted everywhere, but it 
is only on the outside that the increase takes place on a very noticeable 
scale. In the adnascent growth itself, there is no difference between the 
strata, for the woods grows uniformly and uninterruptedly throughout. 
Difference occurs only in the compactness and looseness of the strata. The 30 
older layers do not retain their thickness however; they become pro-
gressively thinner, and finally so thin, that it is scarcely possible to dis-
tinguish and count them any longer. Thus a genuine contraction occurs, 
which narrows the bast cells. Adnascent growth finally ceases in the in-
terior of the wood when there is no more pith to be assimilated. From 35 
May until July I examined year-old twigs almost daily, and for a long 
time I found no trace of a second-year ring. When the ring appeared at 
last, it did so quite suddenly, and what is more, it was already of a consider-
1 Litlk, 'Principles', pp. 146-151 (,Supplements' I. pp. 45-46). 
82 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
able size. I am inclined to think therefore, that the annual ring was formed 
by a sudden contraction of the wood. This contraction must take place 
about St. John's Day or soon after it, and it can have no connection with the 
annual growth of wood. If what takes place is merely the accretion of a 
5 fresh ring around the outermost layer, then during the spring and summer, 
one could not fail to notice the annual ring of the previous year.'1 The 
forming of the annual ring is also a perpetually new production therefore, 
it is not the simple conservation found in animal being. 
3. This production is simultaneously bound up with the internal re-
10 sumption of individuality, and this constitutes the engendering of the bud. 
The bud is a new plant on the old one, or at any rate the simple resumption 
implicit in the primordium of a new plant. 'Each bud puts forth a foliate 
twig, and at the base of each petiole there is another bud. This is the way 
in which growth in general takes place. Yet the development from bud to 
15 bud would continue indefinitely were it not that each bud withers as soon 
as it has produced blossom, and the blossom and fruit have matured. The 
opening of the flower, and of the fruit which follows it, constitutes the 
necessary limit to the growth of the twigs.'2 The blossom is thus an 
annual plant. 3 With this, the process of the plant preserves itself by re-
20 producing itself, and at the same time producing another plant. The pro-
cess is therefore mediated by the moments indicated; with regard to 
production, it is still the formal process in which there is a simple bursting 
+ forth of that which was involved as the main germination began. 
B 
Process of assimilation 
(The process of assimilation) 
§ 347 
The process of formation is linked direcdy to the second process, 
25 which is that of self-specification in accordance with 
externality. The seed only germinates when itis stimulated from 
without. What is more, the diremption of the plant-form into root 
I Link, 'Supplements' I, pp. 46-48; II, 41-42 ('Principles', pp. ISI-IS3). 
2 Willdenow, loco cit., pp. 402-403. 
3 Goethe, 'On Morphology', p. S4. 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
and leaf, is itself a diremption1 directed towards the earth and 
water, and towards the light and air. In the first instance it is con-
cerned with the absorption of water, in the second, with the assimi-
lation of this water, as well as light and air, by means ofleaf and 
bark. The result of the return-into-self in which assimilation ter-
5 
ruinates, is not sentience, or the inner subjective universality of the 
self opposed to externality. It is rather, that light draws the plant 
out of itself by constituting its external self, so that the plant strives 
towards it, and branches out into a plurality of individuals. The 
plant in itself draws from light the specific animation and in-
10 
vigoration which constitute its aromatic properties, the volatility 
of its scent and savour, the lustre and depth of its colour, and the 
compactness and vigour of its structure. 
Addition. The process in accordance with externality coincides with the 
first process in such a way, that in its living existence, the process of root 15 
and leaf has being merely as a process towards externality. Consequently, 
the sole difference between the two processes consists partly of the outward 
aspect having to be considered more determinately. Principally however, 
it depends here upon the extent to which the return-into-self of the be-
coming of self (which is sentience, or the satisfaction of the self in over-
20 
coming inorganic nature), has the peculiar formation of also being a 
development outwards, and cannot therefore be taken into the process of 
formation. The self which is present in the shape enters into the process 
outwards in order to accomplish its self-mediation by means of this 
mediation, and so bring the self forth for the sel£ The self does not main-
25 
tain itself however; in the plant, this self-satisfaction does not give rise to 
unified self-relatedness, but to a formulation in accordance with light. 
This takes the place of the senses. The self is intra-reflected in its determinate 
being of shape; this means here that its determinate being or shape is a complete 
individual in all its parts, and has its own being. It is not itself a universal 30 
individual in)ts;,determinate being however, so that it is not the union of itself 
and the universal. The other singularity to which it relates itself is merely a 
part of the whole, and is itself a plant. The self does not become object of 
the self, it does not become its own self; the second self to which the plant, 
in accordance with the Notion, has to relate itself, is external to it. The self 35 
does not become for the plant, it is only in light that the plant becomes a 
self to itself In its being lighted or becoming light, the plant does not turn 
I In the second edition 'outwards' was added. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
into light, but is merely produced with the help of it, and within it. In the 
plant therefore, the selfhood oflight, as an objective presence, does not become 
vision. Within the plant, the sense of sight remains mere light and colour, and 
is not the light which has been reborn in the midnight of sleep, in the darkness 
+ of the pure ego, it is not the existent negativity of spiritualized light. 
This closed sphere of relations with externality is annual, even though in 
other respects the plant, as a tree, is perennial. It is not only the opening of 
the flower-bud which is annual, for so also are the roots and leaves, or all 
the parts and organs involved in the rest of the external relationship. 
10 Willdenow, (loc. cit. pp. 450-45I) says that the leaves fall, 'in the autumn 
in northern climates, but last for several years in other climates.' Whereas 
Willdenow accounts for defoliation by the stoppage of the sap however 
(p. 452), Link's explanation of this phenomenon is diametrically opposed 
to this ('Supplements' I. 55), 'The shedding of the leaves seems to be pre-
IS ceded by a superabundance of sap rather than a lack of it. Defoliation was 
accelerated by making incisions in the bark which completely ringed it. 
The precise result of this was a cessation in the bark of the return flow of 
the sap. It now seems to me that the prime cause ofleaf-shedding lies in a 
weakening of the bark partly by the growth of the trunk, and partly by 
20 cold.' The roots also die off and reproduce themselves: 'The root of the 
plant is constantly changing. Fibres and branches are perpetually dying 
and being replaced by others. The multitudes of fibres and hairs which 
grow out of the root, are drawn forth by moisture, and spread in all 
directions. It is in this way that the root is drawn away into moist sur-
25 roundings. Roots also exude moist substances, and this probably accounts 
for the sand which clings to them. As the older roots soon appear to 
become useless, perhaps because of the excessive displacement of the 
spiral-vessels, they manure and putrefy the earth. The main root seldom 
lasts more than a few years, and it dies after it has put out branches, and 
30 stems with new roots. In trees the trunk grows into the earth, and finally 
replaces the root. It is not only the root which tends to grow downwards, 
for this tendency is by no means absent in the stem; a few days after 
germination it can already be found to have penetrated well into the 
ground.'1 
35 
The external nature to which the plant relates itself is not individualized, 
but consists of the elements. The plant relates itself to (a) light, (b) air, and 
(c) water. 
I. While the process between the plant and the elements of air and water 
1 Lillk, 'Principles', pp. 137 (,Supplements' I, pp. 39, 43), 140. 
85 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
is general, the plant's relationship to light displays itself particularly, in the 
opening of the flower-bud. As a production of a new shape, this also be-
longs to the first process however, while as an indication of sexual differ-
ence, it belongs to an equal extent to the third process. It is therefore 
evidence of the interpenetration of the various processes of the plant, and 5 
the mere superficiality of their distinctness. It is in light that the various 
aspects of the plant acquire their vigour, aroma, and colour. Light is the 
ground of these qualities, and also keeps the plant upright. 'It is in light 
that the leaves become green; yet there are also green parts of the plant 
which are completely hidden from the light, e.g. the inner bark. Fresh 10 
leaves, grown in the dark, are white; yet if they are excluded from the 
light until they have grown and are more vigorous, they take on a greenish 
tinge. In the light, flowers become more beautifully coloured however, 
and there is an increase of aromatic oils and resins. In the dark, everything 
becomes paler, less scented, less vigorous. In hot houses, plants put out 15 
long shoots, but they are feeble, and as long as they are deprived of light, 
they lack both colour and scent.'2 The bark and the leaf constitute the self of + 
the process, and it is precisely because they are unseparative that they are green. 
This colour, which is the synthesis of blue and yellow, is preserved with the 
neutrality of water, and sundered into its chromatic constituents, the yellow 20 
subsequently passing over into red. It is the cultivation of a range of flowers in 
all these colours and their combinations, which constitutes the art of horticulture. + 
In its relationship to its external self, the plant does not at the same time 
comport itself chemically. As is the case with vision, it appropriates this 
self, and possesses it inwardly. In light, and in relationship to light, the 25 
plant is for itself; in the face of the absolute power and most intimate 
ideality of light, it consolidates its own individuality. In this it resembles 
an individual human being, who precisely in his relationship to the state 
which constitutes his essence, his absolute power, and his ethical sub-
stantiality, becomes an essential, mature, and independent individual. 30 
Similarly, it is through its relationship to light, that the plant assumes its 
integrated particularity, and its specific and determinate vigour. These 
aromatic plants occur mainly in southern latitudes; a spice-island will 
spread its scent many miles out to sea, and exhibit a magnificent display 
of flowers. 
35 
2. It is evident that the plant determines the air within itself by means of the 
aerial process, for by appropriating and so differentiating the element of 
air, it subsequently expels it from itself as a determinate gas. This process 
2 Link. 'Principles' pp. 290-291. 
86 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
comes very near to being chemical in nature. Plants exhale; they convert 
air into water, and water into air. This process is a respiration. During the day 
the plant breathes out oxygen, and during the night, carbon dioxide. 1 The 
obscurity of this process is due to the closed constringency of the plant. If 
5 intussusception is taken to be the appropriation of ready-formed parts, 
from which only the heterogeneous element is separated out, this is tanta-
mount to saying that the plant draws in carbon dioxide from the air, while 
leaving the rest of the air (oxygen etc.) outside. This supposedly philosophi-
cal way of regarding the matter is based upon experiments in which plants give 
10 off oxygen when under water, and when exposed to light. This is just as much a 
process in conjunction with water however, and plants also decompose the air 
and take in oxygen. The process by no means reduces itself to this determinate 
chemical state however, for if it did, organic life would be destroyed. From a 
chemical point of view, both nitrogen and hydrogen are untransformable 
15 substances; consequently, any chemical explanation of the passage from 
nitrogen to hydrogen, which occurs in the transformation of air into water, is 
useless. It is however oxygen, or the negative self, which mediates here. The 
process is not confmed to this mediation however, for it returns into the firmness 
of carbon; conversely the plant follows the opposite and corresponding course, 
20 and dissolves this punctiform substance into air and water. The plant contributes 
towards the humidity of the atmosphere, and also absorbs water from it; every-
thing negative is to the same extent positive. In the plant itself however, this 
process constitutes its formation, and contains three moments, in which the 
plant becomes (a) a firm ligneous self, (b) an aquiferous and neutral being, (c) an 
25 aerial process of a purely ideal nature (c£ § 346a, Add. p. 79 and note). 
Link gives the following account of this process of the plant with the 
air, 'I found that oxygen is indispensable to the life of the plant, but that 
the plant does not grow in it at all. However, I found that when carbon-
dioxide is mixed with oxygen in the ratio of about I: I2, it enables the 
30 plant to grow excellently in light; carbon dioxide is then decomposed, 
and oxygen developed. In the dark, carbon dioxide is harmful to the plant. 
Saussure's experiments showed that plants absorb oxygen, change it into 
carbon dioxide which they then decompose, and exhale oxygen. Parts which 
are not green do not absorb oxygen, but convert it immediately into carbon 
35 dioxide. That which is extracted from the fertile soil constitutes the nutri-
tion of plants. Oxygen draws carbon from it in order to form carbon 
dioxide. Soil from deep below the surface is not suitable for plant nutri-
tion, although it becomes so after long exposure to the air.' A shower will 
1 Link, 'Principles' p. 283. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
then put everything right. 'Saussure noticed that bare roots, which with-
ered when they were exposed to irrespirable gases and their apicals were 
dipped in water, survived in oxygen. They transformed this oxygen into 
carbon dioxide. If they were still attached to the stem however, they 
absorbed the carbon dioxide, and developed oxygen from the leaves.'l + 
It is therefore completely erroneous to regard the process with the air as 
an appropriation by the plant of something already formed, which it 
augments in a merely mechanical manner. Such a mechanical interpreta-
tion has to be rejected completely, for a complete transformation takes 
place. This is an accomplishment due to the majesty of living being, for 10 
organic life is precisely the power by which inorganic being is mastered 
and transformed. And besides, where else is the potash supposed to come 
from which is found so frequently, particularly in immature plants, in 
unripe grapes for example?2 
Willdenow (loc. cit. pp. 344-355) describes the organs of this process of 15 
the plant with the air as follows, 'The stomates (pori, stomata) are to be 
seen on the cuticle of the plants; they are extraordinarily delicate oblong 
fissions, which open and close. As a rule, they are open in the morning 
and closed in the hot midday sun. They may be seen on all parts of the 
plant which are exposed to the air, and which are green in colour. They 20 
are more abundant on the lower than on the upper side ofleaves. They do 
not occur on aquatiline leaves, or on the surface of leaves which float on 
the water. They are missing in Water algae, Mosses, Lichens, Fungi, and 
similar plants. No canal runs inwards from this cuticular opening how-
ever, and there were therefore no connected tubes to be found. The 25 
opening terminates, without any further functional accessory, in the 
closed cell.' 
3. Next to the aerial-process, the aqueous-process is of most importance, 
for it is moisture which first makes the plant fertile. Moisture has no 
impulse for itself, but without water the germ remains inanimate. 'The 30 
grain of seed may lie there for countless years, lacking any vital impulse, 
inert, and locked up within itself Its animation is a happy accident, with-
out which it would either continue to persist in its state of indifference, or 
finally perish. The impulse of the sprouting consists of freeing this growth 
from terrestrial influence, and growing forth from its (own) elaborated 35 
nutrition. In the life of the leaf, the growth from the elaborated nutrition 
(of the root) is freed from the accidents of what has already been elabor-
1 Lillk, 'Supplements' I, 62-63; 'Principles' pp. 284-285. 
2 Cf. Lillk, 'Supplements', I. 64. 
88 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
ated, and achieves the natural dimensions of its circumscribed form a~ 
opposed to the exuberance of its terrestrial influences.'1 
Most plants do not require soil for nourishment; they may be planted 
in powdered glass or in pebbles, which remain unaffected by them, i.e. 
s from which they are unable to draw any nutrition. The plant gets on just 
as well with water, although if possible the water should have some 
+ oleaginous content. 'Helmont was the first to discover that if a tree is 
planted in a pot filled with earth, its increase in weight is much greater 
than the decrease in the weight of the earth. He concluded from this, that 
+ water is the plant's proper means of subsistence. Duhamel grew an Oak 
tree in nothing but water, and it continued to grow for eight years. 
Schrader in particular has made accurate investigations into plant growth 
+ in sublimated sulphur sprinkled with pure water. plants grown in this 
way do not bear ripe seeds however. It is not surprising that plants which 
15 are not raised in their proper soil, but in either water alone, sand, or 
sulphur, should fail to reach their full perfection. A plant from a chalky 
soil will never thrive in sand alone, and on the other hand, when psam-
mophytes are planted in a rich soil, they generally fail to bear ripe seeds. 
It may be that salts act as manure and not merely as stimulants, but they 
20 are harmful in excessive amounts. The insoluble constituents of a soil are 
not a matter of indifference to plant-growth, and are not only of signifi-
cance in so far as they percolate or retain water. When sulphur is exposed 
to the air, it will accelerate the germination of seeds, as will lead oxide, 
and without any trace of disoxidation.'2 'When moisture begins to fail, 
H plants often feed on themselves, as is shown by bulbs which are laid out 
to dry, and which grow leaves and flowers, but consume the whole bulb 
in doing SO.'3 
One aspect of the process in accordance with externality is brought 
about by the root, and the other by the leaf. This process is the digestion 
30 of the plant drawn outwards, and in the Chelidonium and other plants, 
it is a circulation extending from the root to the lea£ The formation oj 
nodes within the plant itself is the product of this process. This developing 
and forming out of itself, which gives rise to this product, may be re-
garded as an internal ripening of the plant. By this ripening, the plant also 
3S arrests these developments however, and so gives rise to the multiplication 
of itself in buds. The first impulse is mere buddage, or the purely formal 
increase of that which is already present; it is often the case for example, 
1 Schelver, loco cit. Continuation I, p. 23; loco cit., p. 78. 
2 Link, 'Principles', pp. 272-274; 278-279. 
3 Willdenow, loco cit., pp. 434-435. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
that the bud also gives rise to leaves, which also bud, and so on indefinitely. 
However, as soon as inflorescence takes place, the flower-bud is at one and 
the same time an arrest and retraction of the outward forming which 
constitutes growth in general. 'All the shrubs and trees of our regions have 
two periods of sap-pressure every year. The main period occurs in the 5 
spring, and is the result of the quantity of saps which the root has absorbed 
during the winter. If we tap trees in our part of the world, we shall frnd 
no sap until about St. Fabian and St. Sebastian's Day, on January 20th. If 
there is a mild spell after that, the sap will not flow unless the cold weather 
returns. From the late autumn until the middle of January, the sap does 10 
not flow at all.' Later on, it also ceases to flow once the leaves have 
opened. It only flows twice therefore, once when the root begins to be 
active in January, and then for as long as the leaves are still actively feeding 
the bark. 'In the second period, the sap-pressure is not so great, and de-
velops when the days are longest. As this development usually takes place 15 
about St. John's Day, it is also called St. John's sap. It is brought about by 
the moistures absorbed during the spring. In warm latitudes, the two 
pressures are equally strong, so that the plants there grow with greater 
luxuriance.'! Thus, in those regions also, there are two separate periods of 
sap pressure. In such tropical plants however, growth and the suspension 20 
of growth occur simultaneously, while in our part of the world, the one 
is present only when the other is absent. As the reproduction of living 
being exhibits itself as the repetition of the whole, the production of fresh 
buds is also accompanied by the production of a fresh annual ring, or a 
fresh diremption of the plant; for just as the buds of the following year 25 
form about St. John's Day, so too does the new wood, as we have already 
seen above (§ 346a. Add. 2 p. 82). 
In general the fruitfulness of trees is increased by checking their growth 
outwards, but this may also be brought about in a particular way, i.e. 
by grafting. The precise reason for this is that the alien branch is not in full 30 
communion with the outward growth constituting the life of the entire 
plant. The graft therefore (a) bears more fruit, because its independence 
relieves it of simple sprouting, and its particular life enables it to under-
take more fructification; and (b) better and finer fruit, because, 'the root 
of the parent stock which serves the cultivated growth is always pre-
3S 
supposed, and the organ which is grafted is also already presupposed by 
the cultivated growth.'2 Ringing the bark, as is done with Olive trees, also 
1 WilldelWW, loco cit., pp. 448-449 (pp. 419-421). 
1 Schelver, loco cit., p. 46. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
checks growth. and makes the tree more fruitful. Incisions also promote 
root-growth. 
The general character of this process is not that of an endless growth 
outwards however; it is rather, that the plant consolidates itself, or with-
5 draws inwards. The blossom is precisely this moment of return, of 
being-for-self, although the plant can never really reach selfhood. The 
flower is this node, and this is not merely the growing bud; as a nodulation 
which checks growth, it is the assemblage of more delicately developed 
leaves (petala). From the punctiform cellular basis of the cellular tissue or 
10 primary germ, and through the linearity of the wood-fibre and the surface 
of the leaf, the plant has reached rotundity of shape in the flower and the 
fruit. The concentration of the plurality of leaves exhibits the point once 
again. It is primarily the flower, the shape which is raised into light and se1f-
hood, which displays colour. The mere neutrality of green is already 
15 coloured in the calyx, and this is still more the case with the flower. 
What is more, the flower differs from the leaves of trees by giving out 
scent, it does not smell only when it is bruised. The differentiation into 
organs finally occurs in the blossom. The organs have been compared 
with the sexual parts of the animal; they are an image of self-relating 
20 individuality engendered on the plant itsel£ The flower is the self-
enveloping vegetable life, which now develops a corolla about the germ 
as an inner product, whereas the sole direction of its previous activity was 
outwards. 
c 
Generic process 
(The generic process) 
Consequently, the plant now brings forth its light from itself, 
25 as its own sel£ It does this in the blossom, in which the chro-
matic neutrality of green is specifically determined for the first time. 
The generic process is the relationship of the individual self to 
the self, and as a return into itself, it checks the growth of 
sprouting from bud to bud, which is for itself unlimited. The plant 
30 does not attain to a relationship between individuals as such how-
ever; it merely attains to a difference, the sides of which do not in 
91 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
themselves, and at the same time, constitute the complete indi-
viduals, and are not determinative of the whole individuality. 
Consequently, this diiference is also no more than a beginning and 
intimation of the generic process. The germ is to be regarded here 
as one and the same individual, the vitality of which runs through 5 
this process, and which, by returning into itself, has not only 
advanced to the maturity of a seed, but has likewise preserved 
itself. This progression is on the whole superfluous however, for 
in its producing of fresh in d i v i d u a Is, the process of formation and 
assimilation is itself already a reproduction. 
+ 
Addition. The final act of the plant is the opening of the blossom. By 
this the plant makes itself objective, assimilates light, and produces this 
externality as its own. That is why Oken says ('Text-book of the Philo-
sophy of Nature', vol. II, p. II2) that the blossom is the brain of the 
plant.1 However, others of the same school were of the opinion that the + 
plant has its brain, the root, in the ground, while its sexual organs face the 
sky. The blossom is the culmination of the plant's subjectivity, it is the 
resumption of the whole as an individual, having its opposition within 
itself, and with itsel£ This opposition also faces itself as an externality 
however, for this unfolding of inflorescence is itself a further succession. 20 
'The stem blossoms earlier than the branches, the branch earlier than the 
collateral branches, and so on. On one and the same branch the lower 
blossoms break out before those above.'2 Yet as the plant preserves itself 
at the same time as it produces other individuals, the significance of this 
productiveness is not merely that the plant transcends itself by constant 25 
nodulation, but rather that the condition of this productiveness is the 
cessation of growth, and the arrest of this sprouting. If this negation of the 
plant's coming out of itself is now to attain existence, this means no more 
than that the independent individuality of the plant, which for itself is 
substantial form, which constitutes the Notion of the plant, and which for 30 
itself is present in the whole of it,-that this idea matrix of the plant 
becomes isolated. It is true that this isolation merely brings forth another 
fresh individual, but it is precisely because this individual checks multipli-
cation, that it merely constitutes a differentiation within itsel£ It is this 
that one finds taking place in the plant if one considers the fate of its 3S 
1 Schelling says the same: 'Journal for Speculative Physics', vol. II, pt. 2, p. 124. 
Note by Michelet. 
2 Link, 'Supplements', I, p. 52. 
92 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
sexual parts. As with generation in general, there is no point here in investigat-
ing the content of the unfertilized seed, and what is added to it by fertilization. 
+ Crude chemical interpretations will miss the point here, because they kill 
living being, and are only able to grasp that which is dead, not that which has 
5 life. The fertilization of the plant consists solely of its ranging its moments in 
this abstraction of separated determinate being, and of positing their unity once 
again by means of contiguity. This movement, as a movement between abstract, 
differentiated, activated, but existent moments, and because these moments are 
abstract, constitutes the plant's actualization, which it displays upon itself 
+ 
I. Since Linnaeus, this display has generally been regarded as a sexual process. 
It could only be this however, ifits moments consisted of whole plants, and not 
merely of their parts. Whether or not the sexual difference and the im-
pregnation which are found in animals are also present in plants, is there-
fore a well-known point of controversy among botanists. 
15 
(a) With regard to sexual difference, it has to be pointed out that the 
differentiation reached by the plant, in which there are two vegetative 
selves, each of which has the impulse to identify itself with the other, is 
only present as a determination analogous to that of the sexual relation-
ship. For that which enters into relationship does not consist of two in-
20 dividuals. There are only a few plant-forms in which this difference of 
sex occurs in such a manner, that the two sexes are the distinctive features 
of two separate plants. These are the Dioecia, which include some of the 
most important plants such as Palms, Hemp, Hops etc. Consequently, 
these dioecious plants constitute an important indication of impregnation. In 
25 Monoecia such as Melons, Pumpkins, Hazels, Firs, and Oaks however, the 
male and female plants are found on the same plant, so that such plants 
are hermaphroditic. The Polygamia, some of whose flowers have a distinct 
sex, and some of which are hermaphroditic, also belong here.1 These 
differences often vary very considerably during the growth of the plants 
30 however. For example, in dioecious plants such as Hemp and Mercurialis 
etc., a plant will show an early disposition towards being female, and yet 
subsequently become male. Thus the difference here is only quite partial, 
and the different individuals cannot therefore be regarded as having distinct 
sexes, for they have not yet been completely imbued with the principle con-
35 stituting their opposition. This is because they are not completely pervaded by 
this principle, which is not a universal moment of the entire individual, but a 
separated part of it, and because it is in accordance with this alone that both 
individuals relate themselves to one another. The opposed moments of the 
1 WilldcllOW, loco cit., pp. 235-236. 
93 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
sexual relationship proper must consist of whole individuals, the completely 
intro-reflected determinatenesses of which are diffused throughout their entirety. + 
The entire disposition of the individual must be bound up with its sex. It 
is only when the inner generative forces have completely penetrated and 
saturated individuality that the impulse is present in the individual, and 5 
the sexual relationship is established. The original sexuality of the animal 
merely develops into a force and an impulse, but this is not the external 
production which in the plant constitutes the formative principle of its 
organs. 
As the sexual parts of the plant are not an integral part of its individual-
10 
ity, but form a distinct and closed sphere, the plant is sexless. This is true 
even ofDioecia. On the one side we have the filaments and anthers, which 
constitute the male sexual parts, and on the other the ovary and pistil, 
which constitute the female sexual parts. Link describes them as follows 
('Principles' pp. 2I5-2I8, 220), 'I have never found vessels in the anther, 15 
which consists for the most part of large, round, and angular cells. These 
cells are only longer and narrower where nerves' (?) 'are to be found. It 
is in the anther that the pollen occurs. This is usually loose, and consists of 
tiny globes, which are very occasionally attached to minute threadlets; 
in some plants it is resinous substance, in others an animal substance con-
20 
sisting of phosphate of lime and phosphate of magnesia. In their exterior 
form, and in the regular arrangement of leaves around them, the anthers 
of Bryophates bear a close resemblance to stamens. The vascular fascicles 
never run from the pedicel or the middle of the ovary straight into the 
pistil, but inosculate into it from the outer opercula of the fruit, or the 25 
surrounding fruits. That is why the base of the pistil sometimes appears to 
be hollow, and a strong and delicate strip of cellular tissue runs through the 
middle of the pistillary cord. There is no other canal running from the 
stigma by means of which the seeds are fertilized.' (Does this mean that 
this cellular tissue does not actually reach the seeds?) 'These vessels often 30 
stop short of the stigma, or run from the stigma, past the seed, to the fruit 
outside, and from there to the pedicel.' 
(b) The controversy concerning the presence of true sexual organs in 
the plant, leads on to the question of the occurrence of copulation as such. 
The following account, which is well known in Berlin, proves that actual 35 
fructification does occur: 'In the Berlin botanical garden, there is a female 
Chaemerops humilis, which had borne flowers for thirty years prior to + 
I749, but never any ripe fruit. In that year Gleditsch fertilized it with the 
pollen of the male plant, which had been sent to him from the Bosian + 
garden at Leipzig, and obtained ripe seeds. In the spring of I767, Kolreuter 40 
94 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
sent some of the pollen of the Chaemerops hwnilis gathered in the 
Karlsruhe botanical garden to Gleditsch at Berlin, and the rest to EcklebeH, 
+ the head gardener at St. Petersburg. In both cases, the pollination of the 
female palm was successful. The palm at St. Petersburg was already a 
+ hundred years old, and its blossoming had been consistently sterile.'1 
(c) Although this compels us to admit that an actual fertilization takes 
place, the third question, that of its necessity, still remains open. As buds are 
complete individuals, plants propagate themselves by stolons, and leaves 
and twigs merely have to come into contact with the earth in order to 
10 possess a distinct fertility as independent individuals (§ 345. Add. III. 57, 12), 
the plant's production of a new individual by means of procreation, or 
the synthesis of the sexes, is a game and a luxury, and is not essential to 
propagation. The conservation of the plant is itself merely a self-multi-
plication. Impregnation by means of sexual union is not necessary, for the 
15 form of the plant is its entire individuality, and this for itself is already 
fertilized, even when it is untouched by another individual. Thus many 
plants have fertilizing organs, while their seeds are sterile, 'Many Mosses 
can have stamens without needing them for reproduction, as they have 
sufficient means of propagation in gemmation. If plants remain un-
20 fertilized however, at least for several generations, should they not also be 
able to bear germinating seeds, as do Aphides? SpaUanzani's experiments 
+ seem to prove that they are able to.2 
If we now ask whether a plant can bear ripe seeds without the pistil 
receiving pollen from the filaments and anthers, the answer is that 
25 although in many cases the plant does not bear ripe seeds, there are most 
certainly cases in which it does. It is generally true therefore, that the con-
dition of the fertilization of most plants is the contiguity of the pistil and 
the anther-dust, although there are many plants in which this is not the 
case. The reason for this is in fact, that although the feeble life of the plant 
30 certainly makes the attempt to assume sexual difference, it fails to accom-
plish this fully. In general, the nature of the plant is indifferent to this 
difference, so that certain plants mature and develop of their own accord 
even when their anthers and stigma have been nipped off and their life 
has therefore been damaged. These plants fulfil themselves of their own 
35 accord therefore, so that their seed is in no way superior to their buds. In 
hermaphrodites such as Melons and Pumpkins, the two parts mature at 
different times, or at such a distance and in such a position, that they are 
1 Willdenow, loco cit., p. 483; Schelver, loco cit., pp. 12-13. 
2 Link, 'Principles' p. 228. 
95 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATUUE 
unable to become contiguous. In many flowers therefore, and especially 
in the Asclepias, there seems to be no possibility of the pollen reaching the 
pistil.1 In some plants this must be effected by insects or wind etc. 
+ 
2. Where sexual differentiation and the generic process are present, the 
further question of how this process is to be regarded now presents itself, s 
for it is not necessary for the ripening of the seed. Should it be regarded 
as completely analogous to the generic process in animal being? 
(a) In plants, the generic process is formal, and it is only in the animal 
organism that it assumes its true significance. In the generic process of 
animal being, the genus is the negative power of the individual, and as 10 
such realizes itself by sacrificing the individual, and setting another in its 
place. In the plant however, this positive side of the process is already 
present in the first two processes, for relatedness to the outer world is 
already a reproduction of the plant itself, and so coincides with the generic 
process. Strictly speaking therefore, the relationship of the sexes should be re-
15 
garded as being to an equal extent, or even predominantly a digestive process. At + 
this juncture, digestion and procreation are the same. In the animal, digestion 
fashions and develops the individual itself; in the plant however, it is another 
individual which comes into being here, the precise equivalent of this in the 
immediate digestion of growth being nodulation. All that is necessary for 20 
the production and maturing of buds, is the checking of the rampant 
growth. It is by means of this checking that the whole plant recapitulates 
itself in buds and fruit, and disperses into a multitude of grains, all of 
which are capable of existing by themselves. Consequently, the generic 
process is of no importance to the nature of the plant. It shows that the 2S 
reproduction of the individual takes place in a mediated manner, and is even 
an entire process. In the plant however, the whole of this sexual differen-
tiation and production of seeds is also an immediate generation of in-
dividuals. 
(b) What happens when actual contiguity occurs however? The anther 30 
opens, and the pollen escapes and touches the pistillary stigma. After this 
release the pistil withers, and the receptacle, the seed and its integument, + 
swell up. All that is necessary for the generation of individuals is however 
that the growth should be negated; even the fate of the sexual parts is 
merely a checking, a negation, a pulverization, a withering away. Check-
3S 
ing or negation is also necessary in animal life. Each sex negates its being-
for-self, and posits its identity with the other. It is not through this nega-
tion alone that this living unity is posited in the animal however, for the 
1 Cf. Link. 'Principles'. p. 219. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
afftrmative positing of the identity of both individuals, which is mediated 
by this negation, also belongs here. This is accomplished impregnation, 
the germ, that which is engendered. Only negation is necessary in the 
plant however, for as each part of the plant is immediately an individual, 
S so that the plant constitutes the original element of identity, the affirma-
tive identity of individuality, which is the germ or idea matrix, is itself 
already immediately and implicitly present throughout it. In the animal 
however, the negation of the independence of the individuals also becomes 
an affirmation as a feeling of unity. It is merely the negative side which is 
10 present in the plant, and its precise occurrence is in the pulverization of the 
pollen, which involves the withering of the pistil. 
(c) schelver has even regarded this negative aspect as a poisoning of the 
pistil. He says, 'If one removes the anthers from Tulips, they produce 
neither capsule nor seeds, and remain infertile. However, it still does not 
15 follow, from the fact that the anthers are necessary to the perfection of 
the plant's fruit, and ought not to be removed,' (this in itself is certainly 
not always so, as we have seen, III. 95, 31) 'that they constitute the fertili-
zing sex. Even if they did not serve the purpose of fertilization, this would 
not make them a superfluous part which might be removed or damaged 
20 without harming the life of the plant. The removal of the petals and other 
parts can also harm the development of the fruit, but we do not say on 
this account that their removal entails the eradication of the fertilizing sex 
of the fruit. May not the excretion of the pollen also be a necessary pre-
requisite of the ripe germ? On the other hand, anyone who examines the 
2S matter impartially, will probably discover that although in general the 
removal of the stamina from plants will have a harmful effect upon their 
fertilization, in some climates there are also plants whose fertilization 
benefits from this operation. What is more, sterile plants can often be 
made fertile if their roots and branches are pruned, incisions are made in 
30 their bark, or they are tapped of nutritive material etc. However, Spal-
lanzani has also removed the male flowers from monoecious plants such 
+ as the clypeiform Musk-Melon and Water Melon, without any detri-
mental effect, for from the non-pollinated fruits he obtained ripe seeds 
which generated again.'1 The same result was obtained with dioecious 
3S plants whose female flowers were enclosed in glass vessels. When trees 
and roots etc. are pruned in this way in order to improve fruiting, their 
excess nutrition is tapped. This may be looked upon as arboreal blood-
letting. A number of experiments and counter-experiments were then 
1 Schelver, Ioc. cit., pp. 4-7 (I4-15). 
D 
97 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
made; some people have been successful with them, and some have not. 
'The fruit will not ripen until the plant's growth and sprouting are over, for if 
vegetation is in possession of its youthful vigour, and is continually 
making fresh efforts to grow outwards, it is impossible that it should at 
the same time be checked, or that the maturation in which its fruit is 5 
formed, should reach completion. That is why young plants in 
general, like all those rich in sap or heavily nourished, seldom bear 
ripe fruit. In the so-called perfoliate flowers and fruits for example, after 
the partial formation of the fruit has already taken place, its very apo-
physes are often repulsed again, or changed into shoots. The pollen checks 10 
growth therefore, and works upon the stigma like a lethal poison. In fact, 
the style always withers as soon as the germ begins to swell and ripen. 
Now if this defunction is not the result of the involution of the vegetative 
process, the germ will not ripen without external help. This help can be 
provided by the pollen however, for the pollen itself is the breaking-out 15 
and appearance of the culminating impulse of rankness or disrupted 
growth. It is mainly the oil in the pollen which constitutes its power to 
kill growth.' The reason being that the plant engenders for itself a com-
bustible being-for-sel£ 'In every part of the plant, oil, wax, or resin 
constitute the final outer gloss of its covering. After all, is not oil in itself 20 
the limit of vegetable matter, its highest and final product? Oil comes 
near to surpassing the nature of the plant, and is similar to the fatty 
material of animal being. The essence of the plant perishes in the transition 
to oil. That is why oil has the power to check the further sprouting of the 
germ. The so-called hybrids show that the pollen can also fertilize other 25 
plants.'l Consequently, the fertilization brought about by the contiguity 
of the stigma and the oily substance, is merely the negation which over-
comes the separateness of the sexual parts. It is not a positive unity. In a 
recent number of his periodical,2 Schelver deals with the incompetence 
of the experiments relating to this subject. 
30 
3. The result of this destructive process is the formation of the fruit. The 
fruit is a bud which is not immediate, but is posited by the developed process, 
while the bud in general is merely the formal repetition of the whole. How-
ever, the fruit is expressly the production of a seed, and that is why it is 
also in the fruit that the plant reaches its consummation. 
35 
(a) The seed which is engendered within in the fruit is a superfluity. 
In so far as that which is to be engendered is merely something new, the seed 
1 Schelver, loco cit., pp. 15-17. 
2 'Critique of the doctrine of sex in plants', Second continuation (1823). 
Note by Michelet. 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
as such is not superior to the bud. The seed is the undigested plant however, 
and in the fruit the plant shows that it has brought forth its own organic nature 
+ from itself, and by means of itself Nevertheless, in many plants which 
have no seeds, the preservation of the genus is not effected in this way, 
S the generic process having already coincided with the process of indi-
viduality. 
(b) The seed is seed as such, and the pericarp is its integument, which 
consists of either a husk or fruit, or of a more ligneous casing. Within 
this, the entire nature of the plant is finally concentrated into what is 
10 generally a rotundity. The leaf, which has spread out into a line and sur-
face from the simple Notion of the individual exhibited by the seed, has 
drawn itself together as a strong and aromatic covering for this seed. 
In the seed and the fruit, the plant has brought forth two organic essences; they 
are mutually indifferent however, and fall apart. It is the earth which becomes 
IS the power giving birth to the seed, it is not the fruit which constitutes its womb. 
(c) As it ripens, the fruit also rots; for if it is damaged, it will ripen more 
easily. It is certainly said that no fruits will form where the pollen is 
carried to the female parts by insects. Schelver has shown however, that 
in the case of Figs, it is precisely their being damaged which causes them 
20 to ripen. He quotes (loc. cit. pp. 20-2I) Julius Pontedera ('Anthologia,' 
+ Patavii I720. c. XXXII.) on caprification, 'In our part of the world, the 
fruits of most plants soon ripen and fall off if they suffer external injury, 
and that is why the Apple, and other fruit-bearing trees whose fruits fall 
offbefore maturing, have been helped by covering (induntur) them with 
25 stones, and fixing their roots, (fixe radice). This procedure often prevents 
the loss of the fruit. Country people often obtain the same result with 
almond trees, by driving an oaken wedge into them. In other cases, 
plugs (caulices) are bored into the trees as far as the pith, or incisions are 
made in the bark. It is this which makes me think that there is a certain 
30 kind of midge (culicum), which breeds on the blossom of the barren 
(i.e. male) palms, and throngs about the embryos of the fertile trees. It 
bores into these embryos, and affects them with a salutary nibble (medico 
morsu) as it were, with the result that all the fruits stay on the tree and 
ripen.' 
35 
Schelver continues (pp. 2I-24), 'It seems that fertilization by means of 
insects first became widely known on account of the Cynips Psenes, 
which is thought to fertilize the Fig tree. As this caprification is only 
necessitated by the climate, there is even less reason to think that the 
transported pollen is the fertilizing agency.' Caprification owes its name 
40 to the fact that the insect which has to puncture the good Fig tree in order 
99 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
that it may bear ripe fruit, is found only on another inferior species of 
Fig tree (Caprificus), which is planted in the vicinity on this account.' 
Johann Bauhin says, 'The midges engendered in the rotting fruit of the + 
wild Fig tree fly on to the fruit of the cultivated tree (urbanae). They 
then draw off its superfluous moisture by puncturing and opening it, and so s 
promote and hasten its maturation. Pliny (XV. 19) says that a dry soil, + 
which causes the figs to dry and burst at an early stage, has the same 
effect upon fertilization as do the insects; also, that in districts where a 
lot of dry dust from the roads gets on to the trees, and the superfluous 
sap is absorbed, caprification is unnecessary. In our regions, where the 10 
male tree and the insect are missing, Fig seeds do not mature, because the 
figs do not get fully ripe. There is no evidence however that the figs 
which matured in hot countries without caprification, were merely a 
ripe receptacle, and were devoid of any ripe seeds.' Consequently, a lot 
depends upon the warmth of the climate and the nature of the soil. The 15 
nature of the fruit is checked by caprification; this alien and lethal in-
fluence fashions and completes the reproduction of the plants themselves. 
The insect effects the maturation of the fruit by puncturing it, not by 
bringing pollen from elsewhere. It is generally the case that fruits fall 
and ripen earlier once they have been punctured. 
20 
'So long as the lower life is in control however, the flower, the pol-
lination and the fruit remain dormant. Yet when the flower fmally opens, 
the hidden nature of the plant dominates throughout to its fullest extent; 
growth and germination are suspended, and the colouring and the 
scent of the flower are often developed in every part. When pollination 25 
is dominant however, that which has unfolded into maturity dies away; 
all parts of the plant begin to wither, the leaves soon fall, the outer 
bark dries and becomes loose, and the wood hardens. In the final stage 
the fruit is dominant, and the same vitality enters into every part, so that 
the root puts out scions, and gemmaceous eyes well up in the bark; new 30 
leaves begin to bud in the axils of the old. Pollination is a self-contained 
purpose of vegetation, it is a moment of the entire vegetative life which 
passes through every part of the plant, and which, merely by attaining 
to a distinct manifestation in the anthers, finally breaks through to a 
form of its own.'! 
1 Schelver. lac. cit .• pp. 56-57. 69. 
100 

THE VEGETABLE ORGANISM 
§ 349 
That which has been posited in the Notion however, is that 
the process displays the individuality which returns into itself, 
and shows that the parts, which in the first instance are individuals, 
also belong to the mediation, and are transient moments within it. 
s Consequently, it also exhibits the sublation of the immediate 
singularity and extrinsicality of vegetable life. This moment 
of negative determination is the basis of the transi tion to the 
true organism, the exterior formation of which accords with the 
Notion in such a way, that the parts have an essential existence as 
10 members, and subjectivity exists as the one which pervades the 
whole. 
Addition. The plant is a subordinate organism, destined to tender itself to 
+ its organic superior and be consumed by it. The light in the plant's colour is a 
being-for-other, and the aerial form of the plant itself constitutes odour-for-
IS other. Similarly, the etheric oil of the fruit concentrates itself into the com-
bustible granularity of sugar, and becomes a fermented liquid. At this juncture 
the plant reveals itself as the Notion, which has materialized the principle of 
light, and converted the aqueous element into the essence of fire. The plant 
itself is the movement of the igneous element within itself, and passes over 
+ into fermentation. The heat which it gives out is not its blood however, but 
its destruction. This animal process is higher than the nature of the plant, and 
constitutes its destruction. As the stage of flower-life is merely that of an 
external relationship, while life consists of a self-related distinctness, the 
contiguity within the flower, whereby the plant posits its individuality, 
2S constitutes its death, for it violates the principle of the plant. This conti-
guity is a positing of individual being; it posits the singular as being 
identical with the universal. In this way the singular is degraded however, 
no longer immediately, but merely through the negation of its proper 
immediacy. It is thus that it is raised into the genus, which now comes 
30 into existence within it. With this however, we have reached the higher 
+ Notion of the animal organism. 
101 

Chapter_Three 
The animal organism 
(The animal) 
Organic individuality exists as subjectivity in so far as 1 the 
externality proper to shape is idealized into members, and in 
its process outwards, the organism preserves within itself the unity 
of selfhood.2 This constitutes the nature of the animal, in 
which the actuality and externality ofimmediate singularity S 
is countered by the intra-reflected self of singularity or the 
subjective universality which is within itself (§ 163). 
Addition. In the animal, light has found itself, for the animal checks its 
relationship with an other. The animal is the self which is for the self, 
it is the existent unity of differences, and pervades their distinctness. The 10 
plant's tendency towards being-for-self gives rise to the plant and the 
bud, which are two independent individuals, and are not of an ideal 
nature. Animal being consists of these two posited in unity. The animal 
organism is therefore this duplication of subjectivity, in which difference 
no longer exists as it does in the plant, but in which only the unity of 1S 
this duplication attains existence. True subjective unity exists in the animal 
therefore; it is an incomposite soul, which contains infinity of form, and 
is deployed into the externality of the body; what is more, it has a further 
relation with an inorganic nature, an external world. Nevertheless, 
animal subjectivity consists of bodily self-preservation in the face of 20 
contact with an external world, and of remaining with itself as the univer-
sal. As this supreme point of nature, animal life is therefore absolute 
idealism. This implies that it contains the determinateness of its corporeal-
ity in a completely fluid manner, and that it has incorporated this im-
mediacy into subjective being, and continues to do so. 
2S 
1 Addition to the first and second editions, 'its singularity has being as the concrete moment of 
universality'. 
2 The first and second editions, 'inwardly contains its individual sun'. 
102 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
It is here therefore that gravity is first truly overcome, for the centre 
has been filled, has itself as object, and has therefore initiated its true 
being-for-sel£ The Sun and the members of the solar system are indepen-
dent, and present us with a spatial and temporal interrelatedness, not one 
5 which accords with the physical nature of these bodies. If animal being is 
now also a sun, then the stars are after all interrelated within it in ac-
cordance with their physical nature; they are taken back into the sun, 
which holds them within itself in a single individuality. In so far as the 
animal's members are simply moments of its form, and are perpetually 
10 negating their independence, and withdrawing into a unity which is the 
reality o( the Notion, and is for the Notion, the animal is the existent 
Idea. If a finger is cut off, a process of chemical decomposition sets in, 
and it is no longer a finger. The unity which is produced has being for 
the implicit unity of the animal. This implicit unity is the soul or Notion, 
15 which is present in the body in so far as the body constitutes the process 
of idealization. The subsistence of the mutual externality of spatiality has 
no significance for the soul. The soul is incomposite and finer than any 
point, but incongruously enough, attempts have been made to locate it. 
There are millions of points in which the soul is omnipresent, yet it is 
20 precisely because the extrinsicality of space has no significance for it, that 
+ the soul is not present in any of them. This point of subjectivity is to be 
firmly adhered to; the other points are merely predicates of life. This is 
not yet the pure and universal subjectivity which is for itself however, 
for it is only aware of itself through feeling and intuition, not through 
25 thought. This means that it is only in that singularity which is posited 
as of an ideal nature when it is reduced to simple determinateness, that 
this subjectivity is conjointly reflected into itsel£ It is only objective to 
itself in a determinate and particular manner, and is the negation of any 
such determinateness, without transcending it. It therefore resembles 
30 sensual man, who can indulge in every appetite without rising above this 
indulgence and grasping the thought of his universality. 
§ 351 
The animal is able to move itself to a certain extent, 
because like light,l which is ideality severed from gravity, 
its subjectivity is a liberated time, which as it is removed 
1 Addition to the first and second editions, 'and:fire'. 
103 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from the real nature of externality, spontaneously determines 
its place. The animal's vocal faculty is bound up with this, 
for as the actualideality of soul, animal subjectivity dominates 
the abstract ideality of time and space, and displays its 
autonomous movement as a free vibration within itself. It 5 
has animal heat as a permanent process of the dissolution of 
cohesion, and of the independent subsistence of parts in the 
permanent preservation of its shape. What is more, it has 
interrupted intussusception, as a self-individualizing relation 
with an individual and inorganic nature. Above all it hasfeeling 10 
however, for as the exis ten t ideality of determinate bejng, it is 
the individuality which is immediately universal in determi-
nateness, and abides byitselfand preserves itselfin its simplicity. 
Addition. In the animal the self is for the self, and the immediate conse-
quence of this is that the differentia specifica or absolute distinguishing 1S 
feature of the animal, is the completely universal element of its 
subjectivity, the determination of sensation. The animal's self is of an ideal 
nature, it is not effused and immersed in materiality, but is merely active 
and present within it. At the same time however, it finds itself within 
itself This ideality, which constitutes sensation, also constitutes the 20 
supreme bounty of nature's existence, for everything is included within 
it. It is true that joy and pain etc. also form themselves corporally, but 
the whole of their bodily existence is still distinct from the simple being-
for-self of the existence into which they are taken back as feeling. When 
I see and hear, I am simply communing with myself, and this is merely a 25 
form of the pure perspecuity and clarity that is within me. Although this 
awareness is punctiform, it is infinitely determinable, and as it has itself 
as its object, the subject of which is the ego=ego of sentience, it maintains + 
the lucidity of its simplicity. The animal is related theoretically to another 
by means of sensation. The plant's relation with externality is either 30 
practical or a matter of indifference however, and in the first instance 
it does not allow the object to subsist, but assimilates it. It is certainly 
true that the animal, like the plant, treats externality as something which 
is of an ideal nature. At the same time however, this other is left alone as 
a persistent subsistence, although in this way is still related to the subject, 35 
and does not remain indifferent to it. It is a relatedness which makes no 
demands. Because of its sensation, the animal is inwardly satisfied, for 
it is modified by an other, and it is precisely this inner satisfaction which 
establishes the theoretical relationship. That which enters into a practical 
104 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
relationship is not satisfied inwardly, for an other is posited within it. 
It has to react to this modification posited within it, sublate it, and make 
it identical with itself, for it was a disturbance. In its relationship with 
the other, the animal is still satisfied inwardly however, because it can 
5 bear the modification brought about by externality, by simultaneously 
positing the ideality of its nature. The other merely consists of the con-
sequences of sensation. 
(a) The sensuous aspect of the animal is certainly weighted, and re-
mains bound to the centre. The animal's singularity of place is exempt from 
10 gravity however, for gravity is not rigidly binding upon the animal. 
Gravity is the universal determination of matter, although it also deter-
mines singularity of place. The precise mechanical relationship of gravity 
consists of something being determined in space, and having this deter-
mination only in something outside it. However, as a self-relating 
15 singularity, the animal does not have singularity of place as something 
determined from without. As a singularity which is in communion with 
itself, the animal is indifferent to inorganic nature, and in its free move-
ment is only related to it by means of space and time in general. Conse-
quently, the singularization of place lies within the power of the animal 
20 itself, and is not posited by means of another. It is the animal itself which 
posits this place. In all things apart from animals, this singularization is 
fixed, for it is only in the animal that the self has being-for-sel£ Of course, 
the animal is not exempt from the universal determination of singularity 
of place, but it posits its own place. It is for this very reason that the 
25 subjectivity of the animal is not merely distinguished from external 
nature, but also distinguishes itself from it. This positing of itself as the 
pure and proper negativity of various specific places etc., is an extremely 
important distinguishing faculty. The whole of physics is the form which 
develops in contradistinction to gravity. In physics however, form does 
30 not attain to this freedom from the torpor of gravity, and it is in the 
subjectivity of the animal that the positing of this being-for-self in the 
face of gravity is initiated. Physical individuality is also subject to gravity 
for even its process exhibits determinations of place and gravity. 
(b) The animal's vocal faculty is a high prerogative, and we may well 
35 marvel at it. It is the expression of sensation and of sentience. It is through 
its voice that the animal displays its internal being-for-sel£ It is only the 
sentient creature which can show that it is sentient however. Birds of the 
air and other animals emit cries when they feel pain, need, hunger, 
satiety, pleasure, joyfulness, or are ruttish. The horse neighs when it goes 
4-0 into battle, insects hum, cats purr when they are pleased. The theoretical 
105 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
emanation of the singing bird is a higher kind of vocal faculty however, 
and is so advanced that it has already to be distinguished from the general 
vocal power possessed by animals. The fish live in water and are mute, but 
the element of the birds is the air, and they soar freely through it; sepa-
rated from the objective gravity of the earth, they emanate into the air, s 
and express their sentience in their own element. Metals have a ring, but 
this is not yet vocal; a voice is the spiritualized mechanism expressing 
itself in this particular way. Inorganic being first exhibits its specific 
determinateness when it is stimulated into doing so, when it is struck. The 
resonance of animal being is autonomous however. Subjective being 10 
reveals its psychic nature by vibrating inwardly, and by merely making 
the air vibrate. By itself, this subjectivity in its completely abstract state is 
the pure temporal process which as the self-realizing time of the concrete 
body, is vibration and tone. It is because its own activity consists of 
making the bodily organism vibrate, that the animal is able to produce a 15 
sound. This production gives rise to no exterior change however, merely 
to movement, and the movement which it produces is merely abstract 
and pure vibration. This brings forth nothing but a change of place 
followed by the precise cancellation of the same, and is therefore a 
negation of specific gravity and cohesion, as well as precise reinstatement 20 
of the same. The vocal faculty comes closest to thought, for in the voice 
pure subjectivity becomes objective, not as the particular actuality of a 
condition or sensation, but in the abstract element of space and time. 
(c) Animal warmth is related to the vocal faculty. The heat yielded by 
the chemical process can also rise to the intensity of fire, but it is transitory. 25 
The animal is the lasting process of autonomous movement however, a 
process which consumes and produces itsel£ As such, animal being is 
perpetually negating and reproducing material being, and is therefore 
constantly generating heat. This is particularly so in the case of warm-
blooded animals, in which the opposition between sensibility and irrit-
30 
ability is more highly developed (see below § 370 Add.), and whose 
blood exhibits a distinct irritability, which may be regarded as a fluid 
magnet. 
(d) As the animal is a true self, which is for itself and has attained to individu-
ality, it establishes its separateness and particularity. It detaches itself from the 35 
universal substance of the Earth, which has an external determinate being for it. 
For the animal, the externality which has not come under the domination of its 
self, is a negative and indifferent being. The immediate implication of this for 
the animal is that its inorganic nature has individualized itself, for it does not 
withdraw from its element. This relationship with inorganic nature constitutes 40 
106 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the general Notion of the animal. The animal is an individual subject, which 
relates itself to individual being as such. It does not, like the plant, relate 
itself only to elementary being, and it only relates itself to subjective 
being in the generic process. In that it has a relationship to light, air, 
5 and water, the animal also has a vegetable nature. It has the further 
characteristic of sensation however, and this, in man, is accompanied by 
+ thought. Aristotle consequently enumerates three souls as the three deter-
minations of the development of the Notion, the vegetable, the animal, 
and the human. As an intro-reflected unity of various singularities, the 
;. animal exists as a spontaneously self-producing end, and is a movement which 
returns into its particular individuality. The process of individuality is a dosed 
circulation, which in organic being in general constitutes the sphere of being-
for-self. As this being-for-self is the Notion of organic being, the essence or 
inorganic nature of organic being is particularized for it. As a self which is for 
15 itself, organic being is to an equal extent self-relating however, so that 
in the relationship of its being-for-self with inorganic nature, it posits 
the distinctness of this being-for-sel£ It interrupts this exterior relation-
ship because it is satisfied and sated, because it has sensation, and is a self 
which is for itself. When it is asleep, the animal sinks into identity with 
20 universal nature; when it is awake, it enters into a relationship with indi-
vidual organic being, although it also interrupts this relationship. The life 
of the animal is the successive fluctuation between these two determina-
tions. 
§ 352 
As living universality, the animal organism is the Notion, 
25 which passes syllogistically through its three determinations. 
Each syllogism is implicitly the same totality of substan-
tial unity, and in keeping with the determination of its form, 
is at the same time the transition into the others. The 
existent totality of the animal is therefore the result of this 
30 process. Living existence has being, and preserves itself only 
as this reproductiveness, not as mere being. It has being only 
because it turns itself into what it is. It is a pre-existent end, and 
is itself merely result. The organism is therefore to be considered 
(a) as the individual Idea, which is simply self-related in its process, 
35 and which inwardly coalesces with itself, i.e. shape; (b) as Idea 
which relates itself to its other, its inorganic nature, and posits the 
ideal nature of this other within itself, i.e. assimilation; (c) as the 
107 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Idea relating to an other which is itself a living individual, and 
thereby relating itself to itself in the other, i.e. the generic 
process. 
Addition. The animal organism is the microcosm, the centre of nature 
which has become for itself Within it, the whole of inorganic nature has S 
recapitulated itself, and is idealized, and it is this that has to be demon-
strated by the more detailed exposition of it. As the animal organism is 
the process of subjectivity which is self-relating in the midst of externality, 
the rest of nature is present here, for the first time, as something external, 
for animal being preserves itself in this relationship with that which is 10 
external to it. For the plant however, which is drawn outwards without 
really preserving itself in this relation with an other, the rest of nature is 
not yet present as something external. As animal life is its own product 
and purpose, it is simultaneously both end and means. The end is a 
determination which is of an ideal nature, and which is already present as 15 
an antecedent. As the realizing activity which then occurs has therefore 
to conform to the determination which is present, it brings forth nothing 
new, so that the realization is to an equal extent a return-in to-self. The 
accomplished end has the same content as that which is already present 
in the activation, so that living existence with all its activities fails to 20 
extend this content. The organization itself is to an equal extent both 
end and means, for it consists of nothing which is subsistent. As the visce-
ra and the members in general are in a state of reciprocal activity, they 
are always posited as being of an ideal nature, and as each member is a 
centre which produces itself at the expense of all the others, it has existence 2S 
only by means of the process. In other words, that which is sublated and 
reduced to means, is itself end and product. As that which develops the 
Notion, the animal organism is the Idea which merely manifests the 
Notion's differences. It is in this way that each moment of the Notion 
contains the others, and is itself a system and a whole. Each system is im-
30 
plicitly the whole, and the unity and subjectivity of the whole is brought 
forth in the transition of these determinate totalities. 
The first process is that of the self-relating, self-embodying organism, 
which contains its other. The second process is directed against inorganic 
nature however, against the otherness of its implicit being, and is the 35 
basic division and active Notion of living existence. The third process is + 
higher, for it is the process of singularity and individuality, or of the 
individual opposed to itself as the genus with which it is implicitly 
identical. These processes are developed in the fullest and clearest way in 
108 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the human organism, which is the perfect animal. In general therefore, a 
universal type is present in this supreme organism, and it is in and from 
this type that the significance of the undeveloped organism may first be 
ascertained and assessed. 1 
A 
Shape 
(Formation) 
§ 353 
1. The functions of the organism 
5 
Shape is the animal subject, as a whole which is related only to 
itself. The developed determinations of the Notion exist 
in the subject, and are displayed there by this whole. Within 
subjectivity these determinations in themselves are concrete, 
although they constitute (a) the simple elements of this subjecti-
10 vity. Consequently, the animal subjectis : (i) the externality of 
its simple and universal being-in-self, by which actual deter-
minateness, as particularity, is immediately taken up into 
the universal, and through which the universality of this 
particularity constitutes the subject's undivided identity 
15 with itself, i.e. sensibility: (ii) particularity, as susceptibility 
to external stimulation, and the receiving subject's subse-
quent outward reaction to the stimulation, i.e. irritability: 
(iii) the unity of these moments, the animal subject's 
negative return to itself from external relationship, and the 
20 consequent singularity of its engendering and positing 
itself, i.e. reproduction, which is the reality and basis of the 
first two moments. 
Addition. The plant allows its wood and bark to die, and its leaves to fall, 
whereas the animal constitutes this negativity itself. The plant is only able to 
2S maintain itself in the face of its mutation by leaving what changes in a state of 
1 Anatomy and physiology deal with the Notion of this type, zoology with its reality, and 
medicine with the contest between these two aspects. 
Note by Miche1et. 
109 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
indifference. The animal is its own negativity however, it transcends its shape, 
and does not interrupt its growth in its digestive and sexual process. Its own + 
inner process, as the negativity of itself, fashions itself into viscera. By shaping 
itself as an individual in this way, the animal is a unity of shape and individuality. 
Sensibility is the sentient being, and in the spirit it is the ego; it is the 
5 
universal subjectivity of the Notion with itself, and if it is touched by 
something else, it immediately transforms it into itsel£ The particularity 
which is first posited as of an ideal nature, comes into its own in irrita-
bility, the activity of the subject consisting of its repelling the other to 
which it relates itsel£ Although irritability is also sensation, subjectivity, 10 
it is so in the form of relationship. However, while sensation is merely 
irritability as negated relation to an other, a reproduction is the infinite 
negativity which makes externality mine, and makes something external 
out of me. This is developed sensibility, which is the primarily real uni-
versality, and is not abstract. Reproduction passes through sensibility 15 
and irritability, and absorbs them; it is therefore derivative or posited 
universality, and although it is self-producing, it is at the same time 
concrete singularity. Reproduction is the initiation of the whole, the 
immediate unity-with-self in which the whole has at the same time 
entered into relationship. The animal organism is essentially reproductive, 20 
reproduction constitutes its actuality. In living existence, the higher natures 
are those in which the abstract moments of sensibility and irritability 
have a distinct existence; lower living existence is no more than repro-
duction, but in its higher natures it contains profounder differences and 
preserves itself in this more cutting diremption. Thus there are animals 2S 
which are nothing but reproduction; they are an amorphous jelly, an active 
and intro-reflected slime, and in them there is as yet no distinction between 
sensibility and irritability. These are the general moments of animal being, 
but they are not to be regarded as properties, each of which acts in a particular 
way, as colour has a particular effect upon sight, and taste upon the tongue etc. 30 
It is true that nature also deploys the moments separately and in a state of reci-
procal indifference, but it does this quite exclusively in the shape, i.e. in the dead 
being of the organism. Nothing in nature is as distinct in itself as is the 
animal, but as its nature is the speculative Notion, nothing is so difficult 
to grasp. Despite the animal's having the nature of a sensuous existence, 35 
it still has to be grasped in the Notion. In sensation, living existence ex-
hibits supreme simplicity, for everything else is a mutual externality of 
qualities. Yet at the same time, living existence is fully concrete, for it 
allows the moments of the Notion, which have reality in a single subject, 
to assume a determinate being. Lifeless existence is abstract however. In 40 
no 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the solar system, the Sun corresponds to sensibility, comet and Moon 
constitute the moments of difference, and the planet is reproduction. In 
the system each body is an independent member however, while in the 
case of the animal, the members are contained in a single subject. This 
s idealism, which recognizes the Idea throughout the whole of nature, is at 
the same time realism, for the Notion of living existence is the Idea as 
reality, even though in other respects the individuals only correspond to 
one moment of the Notion. In real, sensuous being, philosophy recognizes 
the Notion in general. One must start from the Notion, and even if it 
10 should as yet be unable to exhaust what is called the 'abundant variety' 
of nature, and there is still a great deal of particularity to be explained, it 
must be trusted nevertheless. The demand that there should be an ex-
planation for this particularity is generally vague, and it is no reflection on 
the Notion that it is not fulfilled. With the theories of the empirical 
15 physicists the position is quite the reverse however, for as their validity 
depends solely upon singular instances, they are obliged to explain every-
thing. The Notion holds good of its own accord however, and singularity 
will therefore yield itself in due course (see § 270 Add. 1. 281, 27). 
§ 354 
2. The systems of shape 
These three moments of the Notion are (b) not merely im-
20 plicitly concrete elements, for they have their reality in three 
systems, i.e. the nervous system, the system of the blood, and 
th e dig est i v e s y s t em. As totality, each of these systems differen-
tiates itself internally in accordance with the same Notional 
determinations. 
25 
(i) Thus the system of sensibility determines itself into: (a) 
The extreme of abstract self-relation, which is at the same time a 
transition into immediacy, into inorganic being and absence of 
sensation. This remains an incomplete transition however, and it 
constitutes the osseous system, which encloses the entrails. 
30 Outwardly this system is the firmness protecting the entrails from 
without. (b) The moment of irritability, i.e. the cerebral system 
and its further diffusion in the nerves, which also have an inner and 
outer reference as nerves of sensation and motion. (c) The system 
pertaining to reproduction, which contains the sympathetic 
III 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
nerves together with the ganglia, and in which there is merely a 
subdued, indeterminate and involuntary sentience. 
(ii) Irritability is stimulation by an other, and the reaction of 
self-preservation in the face of this; conversely and to an equal 
extent, it is active self-preservation, and in this it submits itself to 5 
another. Its system consists of: (a) Muscle in general, which is 
abstract (sensible) irritability, and the simple conversion of 
receptivity into reaction. As a division of immediate self-related-
ness, the muscle finds an outer hold on the skeleton, differentiating 
itself initially into extensor and flexor, and subsequendy into the 10 
further special systems of the extremities. (b) Pulsation, which 
is inward activity, or irritability differentiated for itself in the face 
of another, and concretely self-related and contained. Pulsation is 
living self-movement, the material of which can only be a f1 uid, 
or living blood. This movement can only be circulatory, and 15 
initially specified into particularity in accordance with origin, 
it is in itself a circulation which is duplicated and at the same time 
orientated outwards. As such, it constitutes the pulmonary and 
portal systems, in the first of which the blood animates itself 
within itself, and in the second of which it kindles itself against 20 
another. (c) The irritable self-coalescing totality, by which1 puI-
s a ti 0 n constitutes the circulation which returns into itself from its 
centre in the heart, through the differentiation of arteries and 
veins. It is precisely as such that this circulation is an immanent 
process, in which there is a general supply of blood for the repro-
25 
duction of the other members, and from which these members 
draw their nourishment. 
+ 
(iii) As a system of glands, together with skin and cellular tissue, 
the digestive system is immediate and vegetative reproduction. 
In the intestinal system proper however, it is a mediating repro-
30 
duction. 
Addition. Sensibility, irritability, and reproduction also have existences 
of their own; the first as the nervous system, the second as the system of 
the blood, and the third as the digestive system. Consequently, 'all animal 
bodies may be analysed into the three different constituents of which all 35 
their organs are composed, i.e. cellular tissue, muscular fibres, and nerve 
pulp'.2 These are the simple abstract elements of the three systems. How-
1 Addition to the second edition, 'universal'. 
2 Treviranus, 'Biology', vol. I, p. 166. 
II2 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
ever, as these systems are equally undivided, so that each point contains 
all three in an immediate unity, they do not constitute universality, par-
ticularity and singularity, which are the abstract moments of the Notion. 
On the contrary, each of these moments exhibits the totality of the Notion 
s in its determinateness, the other systems being present as existences in each 
of them. Blood and nerves are present everywhere, as is also the lym-
phatic and glandular element which constitutes reproduction. The 
unity of these abstract moments is the animal lymph, from which the in-
ternal members of the organism develop. Along with its internal self-
10 differentiation, this unity also envelopes itself in skin, which constitutes its 
surface, or the general relation of the vegetable organism with inorganic nature. 
Now although each system is the developed whole, and as such contains 
the moments of the other systems, the single form of the Notion remains 
predominant in each of them. The immediate shape is the dead and quiescent 
15 organism which constitutes the inorganic nature of organic individuality. 
As the organism is this quiescent being, the self or Notion is not yet 
actual, and its production is not yet posited; one might say that it is merely an 
inner self, and that it is we who have to grasp it. In its determination, this 
exterior organism constitutes a relation with equally indifferent shapes; it is the 
20 mechanism of the whole, a whole which is articulated into its distinct parts. 
As self-identity of sensation, sensibility reduced to abstract identity is 
insensibility; it is motionless and moribund, and it deadens itself, but it is 
never separated from the sphere of animation. It is in fact the production 
of bone, whereby the organism first establishes its basis. Consequently, 
25 even the osseous system still participates in the life of the organism. 'In 
old age the bones become smaller, and the cranium and cylindrical bones 
get thinner; their medullary cavity seems,' as it were 'to get larger, at the 
expense of the osseous substance. As a whole, the dry skeleton of an old 
person becomes comparatively lighter; that is why, quite apart from the 
30 bending of their backs, old people become smaller.' (In comparison with 
cartilages) 'bones in general possess more vitality, simply on account of 
their having a larger number of blood vessels. Further evidence of this 
vitality is to be found in their being more susceptible to inflammation and 
forms of disease, in their reproduction, in the ready absorption of their 
3S extremities, in the greater ease with which their sensibility may be stimulated, 
+ and even in their composite structure.'! Bone is the sensibility belonging to 
shape as such, and like the wood of the plant, it is a simple and consequently 
moribund force, which is not yet process, but abstract reflection-into-sel£ 
1 Autenrieth (Jh. Heillr. Fad.): 'Manual of Physiology', Pt II, § 767; § 772. 
II3 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OE' NATURE 
It is at the same time moribund reflection-into-self however, and it therefore 
corresponds to the vegetable bud, which in the production of itself, also brings 
forth something else. 
(a) In the first instance it has the shape of an osseous nucleus, for it is with this 
that all bones begin. Like the vegetable node which becomes a ligneous fibre, 5 
the osseous nuclei multiply and become elongated. They are to be found at the 
extremi ties of the limbs, and contain the marrow as that which is not yet expressly 
developed into their nerves. Bone-marrow is fat; that is why the bodies of 
thin people contain fluid marrow or little at all, while fat people have 
plenty of it. The life peculiar to the bone consists of the periosteum, which dies 10 
internally, and only lives on the surface of the bone, for the whole of its 
production proceeds outwards. It is a subdued and self-enveloped force, and + 
through it, the osseous system together with the system of the skin, falls 
within the existence of reproduction. As it develops towards totality from 
nucleus and line, the bone bursts open, and the nerve appears in the place of the 15 
marrow. The nerve is a nucleus which allows its filaments to sprout from its 
centre. However, in this totality of connection, the bone ceases to belong to 
shape as such, its marrow becomes a point of animated sensibility, which diffuses 
itself in lines, dimensions proceeding from it as moments of the totality. As 
nucleus, the bone is the immediately sensible moment of shape. As skeleton 20 
however, its primary and more precise determination consists of its 
relating itself to external being as something stable, hard, and simply firm. 
By this it attains mechanical objectivity, and a support against the general 
firmness of the earth. 
(b) The prolongation of the bone is the middle term of transition, in which 25 
shape degenerates into an externality which has another being as its internality. 
The bone is the inner moment or immediate firmness of the limbs, but at their 
extremities it ceases to be internal. In the plant, wood constitutes the inside and 
bark the outside, although in its seed the wood is overcome, and only constitutes 
the outer husk. Similarly, bone becomes the outer covering of the viscera. This 30 
covering no longer has a centre of its own, but is still discontinuous at first, and 
has its own articulation held together by its own line, i.e. the sternum. However, 
it finally becomes a pure surface again, and so lacks internality of its own. This 
is a reversion to the point or line, from which lines radiate to form a flatness 
which is merely an enveloping surface. This is the totality which has not yet 35 
rounded itself off, and so still has the tendency to tum outwards. The second 
aspect of the determination of the bone is therefore that it is subservient 
to another, having another within itself as subject, and extending out-
wards into firm terminations such as horns and claws etc. The skin extends 
into nails and heels etc., it is the most indestructible element of the organism, 40 
II4 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
for after everything else in a corpse has turned to dust, it is not uncommon for 
the skin to be still visible on some parts of it. 
(c) As the bone, which is interrupted in the central vertebration of the spinal 
column, is now at the same time returning into itself, its third formation is the 
5 hollow cranium. The form of the spinal column constitutes the basis of the skull-
bones, and it is possible to trace their derivation from it. The sphenoidal bone 
has the tendency to dominate the centre entirely however, and to completely 
+ reduce the skull-bones to a surface which lacks a centre of its own. At the same 
time however, this complete abolition of nuclear form passes over into its re-
10 instatement, the teeth now constituting this return of the nuclei into themselves. 
The teeth pass through the process, for they are negative, active and effective, 
and therefore cease to be merely passively distinct. Immediate sensibility has 
here become irritability. In the teeth, the periosteum is no longer external, but 
+ is merely internal membrane. The bones, like the periosteum, are without sen-
+ sation, although they acquire it in syphilitic lymphatic diseases. 
The spinal column is the basic organism of the bone, and all else is 
merely a metamorphosis of it, i.e. inwardly a tube, with its continuations 
outwards. It was Goethe in particular who realized that this is the funda-
+ mental form of bone formation. Guided by a fine organic feeling for 
20 nature, he followed out the full details of the transitions in a treatise which 
he wrote as early as 1785, and which he published in his 'Morphology.'l 
Goethe communicated the treatise to Oken, who immediately paraded its 
ideas as his own in a programme which he wrote on the subject, and so 
+ gained the credit for them. Goethe showed (and it is one of the finest in-
25 tuitions he has had), that the cranial bones, i.e. the sphenoidal bone, the 
zygomatic or cheek bone, up to the bregmatic or frontal bone, which is 
the iliac bone of the head, are developed wholly and exclusively out of 
+ this form. Here however, as also in vegetable being, identity of form is not 
a sufficient explanation of this transformation. How is it that these bones 
30 now become an enveloping structure instead of an internal centre? How 
is it that they now have the determination of becoming external fulcrums 
for extremities such as arms and legs etc., of combining with each other 
and at the same time being movable? It was Oken, not Goethe, who in-
vestigated this second aspect, i.e. the introjection of the spinal column into 
3S the separate bones. The spinal column is the centre of the osseous system, 
which dirempts itself into the extremes of the cranial bone and the ex-
tremities, and at the same time joins them together. The former is the 
cavity which forms an outwardly closed and rounded structure through 
1 C£ 'On Morphology', pp. 162, 248, 250-251, 339. 
lIS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the unification of the surfaces, the latter is the longitudinally extended 
development, which enters into the centre, and fastens itself along the 
muscles, mainly by cohesion. 
+ 
In sensibility, the moment of differentiation is the nervous system, 
which is directed outwards, and involves connection with an externality. 
5 
It is now either feeling, immediately posited from outside, or a self-
determination. It is mainly the motor nerves which proceed from the 
spinal cord, and it is above all the sensory nerves which proceed from the 
brain. The former constitute the practical aspect of the nervous system, 
and the latter its susceptibility to determination, to which the sense 10 
organs belong. In general the nerves are concentrated upon the brain 
however, and also branch out from it again by ramifying into every part 
of the body. The nerve is the condition under which sensation is present 
wherever a body is touched; it is also the condition of the will, and in 
general of any self-determining end. Apart from this, we still know very 15 
little about the organization of the brain. 'We know from experience that 
there is a partial or total cessation of the function of the particular organs 
which bring about voluntary actions and of their capacity for sensation, 
if there is any damage or destruction of the nerves leading from these 
parts, or of the spinal column, the cerebellum, or the cerebram with 20 
which these nerves are connected. The individual nerve-fibres and their 
sheaths are united into fascicles by cellular tissue, and these fascicles are 
more or less tightly combined into a larger tactile cord. Even the medullary 
fibres of the nerves are ubiquitously and variously interconnected by 
small lateral canals filled with marrow, which seem to form very fine 25 
nodules at their points of contact. In this respect a nerve fascicle resembles 
a tightly stretched net, the threads of which are almost parallel as the 
result of its having been pulled lengthwise into a cord.'! When the brain 
communicates with another part of the body, and the nerves of this par-
ticular part have been affected, we should not conclude that the affection 30 
was borne solely by this particular nerve-fibre. Nor should it be thought 
that the brain has exerted an influence upon a particular nerve-fibre 
through the external association of the nerves. The communication is 
made through the common nerve-trunk, and yet on account of the general 
presence of will and consciousness, it is still determined. A nerve-fibre is con-
35 
nected with many others, and when it is affected, they all are. This does not 
produce a plurality of sensations however, nor, conversely, does the general 
nerve-trunk proceeding from the brain set all the nerves in motion. 
1 Autenrieth, loco cit., pt. III, § 824; § 866; § 868. 
II6 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
Knots are formed on the nerves by the sensibility which has withdrawn 
into itself. This sensibility is the extremity of internality, by which sen-
sible being is no longer abstract; it consists of the general system of 
ganglia, and in particular of what are called the sympathetic nerves, and 
5 is a system which is not yet separated out or developed into determinate 
forms of sensation. These nerve-knots may be regarded as the cerebella 
of the abdomen, but they are not absolutely independent and self-con-
tained, for they communicate with these nerves, which have an immediate 
connection with the brain and the spinal sinews. They are at the same 
10 time independent however, for they are distinguished from these nerves 
+ by their function and structure.! This division into the cephatic and 
abdominal cerebram is the reason why headaches originate in the ab-
+ domen. 'It is remarkable that the extension of the eighth nerve stemming 
directly from the brain should terminate in the stomach, for one could 
15 almost say that it stops at its upper orifice, leaving the rest of the stomach 
to the sympathetic nerve. It is here therefore that a more distinct feeling 
seems to find its limit. This upper orifice plays a marked and significant 
role in many diseases, and autopsies show that inflammations are more 
common in its vicinity than they are in any other part of the stomach. To 
20 a great extent, nature left the selection of food, masticating, swallowing, 
and the final evacuation of the useless matter to choice, while she withdrew 
the proper business of digestion from voluntary control.'2 In the som-
nambulistic state, where the external senses are cataleptically rigid, and self-
consciousness is internal, it is the inner vitality that incites the ganglia and 
+ brain of this dim and estranged self-consciousness. Consequently, to 
quote Richerand,3 'The internal organs are withdrawn from the control of 
+ the will through the sympathetic nerves.' These nerve-knots have an 
+ irregular system.4 Bichat says that, 'The ganglionic system may be divided 
into ganglia of the head, the throat, the thorax, the abdomen, and the 
30 pelvis.'S Ganglia occur throughout the whole of the body therefore, 
though principally in the parts belonging to the internal structure, and 
especially in the abdomen. 'A series of these nerve-knots occurs on either 
§ide, in the openings between the vertebrae, where they are formed by 
the posterior roots of the spinal sinews.'6 Through their interconnections 
1 Cf. Autenrieth, lac. cit., pt. III, § 869. 
2 Autenrieth, lac. cit. pt. II, § 587. 
3 'Nouveaux elements de Physiologie', vol. I, Prolegom. CIII. 
4 Autenrieth, lac. cit., pt. III, § 871. 
5 'Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la mort' (4th ed. Paris, 1822). p. 91. 
6 Autenrieth, lac. cit., pt. III, § 870. 
II7 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
they form the so-called sympathetic nerves, and then the plexus semi-
lunaris, solaris, splanchnicus, and finally the communication of the semi-
lunar ganglion, by means of its ramifications, with the thoracic ganglia. 
'In many cases, what are called the sympathetic nerves are found to be 
interrupted, the part in the thorax being separated from that in the 
5 
stomach (pars lumbaris) by an interstice. After having furnished the neck 
with a number of threads, it often becomes thicker. The nerve threads 
of this system are very different from those of the actual cerebro-spinal 
system. The latter are thicker, less numerous, whiter, denser in tissue, and 
exhibit little variety in structure. On the other hand, the ganglia are dis- 10 
tinguished by their extreme thinness (tenuite), the very large numbers of 
their threads, particularly near the plexus, their greyish colour, the 
marked softness of their tissue, and the great variety in which they usually 
occur in the various specimens.'1 There is a controversy as to whether + 
these ganglia are independent, or whether they originate in the brain and 15 
spinal marrow. The relationship of the nerves to the brain and the spinal 
marrow is often thought of as an origination, but this conception has no 
definite meaning. It is taken to be an undeniable truth that the nerves 
originate in the brain. But although on the one hand the nerves are iden-
tical with the brain, they are also separate from it; separation of this kind 20 
does not imply that the brain is antecedent to the nerves however, any 
more than that the fingers originate in the palm of the hand, or the 
nerves in the heart. Individual nerves can be removed without impairing 
the vitality of the brain, just as parts of the brain can be removed without 
destroying the nerves. 
25 
As the sensibility of the outer organism passes over into the differentiation of 
irritability, its simplicity is overcome, and passes over into the opposition of the 
muscular system. The gemmation of the bone is taken back into the simple 
differentiation of the muscle, the activity of which constitutes the real mat-
erial relation with inorganic nature, the mechanism's process with that 30 
outside it. Organic elasticity is the softness which withdraws into itself when it 
is stimulated, just as it overcomes its having given way, and resists itself by re-
asserting itself as line. The muscle is the unity of these two moments, both of 
which also exist as kinds of movement. Treviranus 2 puts forward the propo-
sition, 'that contraction is accompanied by an actual increase in cohesion.' 35 
The following experiment is a good illustration of this. 'Erman (Gilbert's + 
'Annals of Physics' 1812 art. I, p. I) took a glass cylinder open at both ends, 
1 Bichat, loco cit., pp. 90, 92. 
2 Treviranus loco cit., vol. V, p. 238. 
II8 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
sealed the bottom of it by means of cork with a platinum wire passing 
through it, and filled the cylinder with water. He placed part of the tail 
of a live Eel in the water, and then sealed the upper opening of the cylinder 
in the same way. A platinum wire also passed through this upper cork, 
5 and in addition to this, a narrow glass tube open at both ends. When the 
upper cork was pressed, a certain amount of water entered the tube, and 
its level was carefully marked. Erman noticed that when he connected the 
spinal cord with one wire and the muscles with the other, and brought 
both wires into contact with a voltaic pile, the water in the small tube 
10 fell each time the muscles contracted. It fell to the extent of four or five 
+ lines, and what is more, it did so jerkily.'! Moreover, muscles such as 
those of the heart may be stimulated without this having any effect on 
their corresponding nerves. Similarly, the muscles set in motion in the 
galvanic battery also leave the nerves untouched.2 Treviranus also main-
15 tains (vol. V, p. 346) that his 'Hypothesis that the transmission of stimu-
lated volition to the muscles, and the convergence of external impressions 
on the brain, are effects of various of the nerves' component parts, the 
former being due to the nerve-sheaths, and the latter to the nerve-pulp,' 
+ has not yet been refuted. 
20 
Muscular movement is the elastic irritability which, as moment of the whole, 
posits a self-dividing movement of its own. This movement checks the circu-
latory influx, but as a self-contained movement, this irritability posits out of 
itself the igneous process by which this subsistent circulatory inertia is overcome. 
This dissolution of subsistence constitutes the pulmonary system, which as 
25 the external process with inorganic nature in the element of air, is of a truly 
ideal nature. This process constitutes the spontaneous movement which is 
peculiar to the organism, and which draws in and expels as an elasticity. The 
blood is the result of this, and is the external organism which returns to itself, 
doing this within itself and by means ofitsel£ It is the living individuality which 
30 engenders the members into viscera. As rotatory and self-pursuing movement, 
+ and absolute quivering within itself, the blood constitutes the individual life of 
the whole, in which nothing is distinguished. This is animal time. This rotatory 
movement then divides itselfinto the cometary or atmospheric process, and into 
+ the volcanic process. The animal's lungs correspond to the leaf, which relates 
35 itself to the atmosphere, and constitutes this recurrent and self-interrupting 
process of respiration. The liver on the other hand is the return from the come-
tary process into the being-for-self of the lunar process; it is the being-for-self 
1 Treviranus,loc. cit., vol. V, p. 243. 
2 ibid., vol. V, p. 291. 
119 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which seeks its centre, it is the heat of being-for-self, hostility to being other than 
itself, and the burning up of this otherness. The pulmonary and hepatic processes 
are intimately inter-connected. The volatile and winnowing pulmonary process 
moderates the heat of the liver, and is invigorated by it. The lung is in danger of 
turning into liver, of nodulating itself, and consequently of destroying itself by 5 
taking the heat of the being-for-self into itself. The blood divides itself into these 
two processes: its own, that of the lung, and that of the liver. Each of these 
contains its own circulation, for what appears as an artery in pulmonary circula-
tion, appears as a vein in the portal system, and conversely, the veins entering 
the portal system appear as arteries. The system ofliving movement is the system 10 
opposed to the external organism; it is the power of digestion, which is the 
power of overcoming the external organism. At this juncture, this inorganic 
nature is necessarily threefold. Firstly, it is the universal exterior lung. Secondly, 
it is the particularized element, or the universal relegated into the organic 
moment as the lymph, and into the entire being of the organism. Thirdly, it is 15 
the individualized moment. The blood elaborates itself from the air, the lymph 
and the digestion, and is the transformation of these three moments. From the 
air it takes oxygen, which is the pure dissolvent and the light of the air. From the 
lymph it takes the neutral fluid, and from the digestion the substantial moment 
of singularity. It is in this way that the entire individuality opposes itself again, 20 
and engenders shape. 
(a) As the blood in the pulmonary circulation has its own movement, it 
constitutes this purely negative immaterial life, which here has nature as air in 
pure subjection to itself. The child's first breath is its own individual life; + 
previous to this it swam in lymph, and functioned in a vegetative and imbibing 25 
manner. In emerging from the egg or womb the child breathes, and so relates 
itself to nature as to something which has become air, something which is not 
the former continuous flow, but rather the interruption of it. This interrupted-
ness is the simple organic irritability whereby the blood produces and realizes 
itself as pure fire. 
30 
(b) It is the blood which sublates the neutrality of swimming in the lymph. 
It overcomes this neutrality by stimulating and moving the whole exterior 
organism, and so disposing it towards its return into itself. This movement too 
is a digestive system, a cycle of differing moments. The lymphatic vessels form 
their own glands or [liters everywhere. The lymph digests itself in these glands, + 
and finally conducts itself into the thoracic duct. It is in this way that the blood 
acquires its general fluidity, for it must not coagulate. From its watery neutrality, 
the lymph changes into fat such as bone-marrow. It does not attain a higher 
animalization therefore, but becomes vegetable oil, and serves as nutriment. 
Consequently, hibernating animals become very fat in summer, and feed 40 
120 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
on themselves during the winter, so that they are quite thin in the spring. 
(c) Lastly, the blood is the main digestive process of the individual, which is 
the peristaltic movement in general. As this process of singularity, it divides itself 
into three moments. (i) It is the dull interior moment of being-for-self, the 
5 hypochondro-melancholic generation of its sleep. This is the venous blood in 
+ general, which becomes this nocturnal force in the spleen. This blood is said to 
be carbonized, but it is precisely in this carbonization that it becomes earth or 
absolute subject. (ii) Its subsequent centre is the portal system, where its sub-
jectivity is movement, and becomes an activity, a consuming volcano. Activated 
10 in this way in the liver, the blood operates upon the chyme, which is prepared 
in the stomach. Digestion begins in the stomach, after the food has been masti-
cated and saturated with the salivary lymph. The gastric and pancreatic juices 
are, as it were, the acids which break down the food in fermentation. This is 
the chemico-organic moment of lymphatic activity :and heat. (iii) In the 
15 duodenum, the fire of the bile, which is produced by the venous blood of 
the portal vein, gains true and complete mastery over the food. The outward-
orientated process which is still active in the lymph, is changed into being-for-
self, and now constitutes the self of the animal. The chyle which the blood has 
produced returns into it; the blood has engendered itsel£ 
20 
This is the great interior circulation of individuality; the blood itself is its 
middle, for the blood itself is the individual life. As the substance which is 
common to all the parts, the blood is the irritable principle uniting them 
all in an inner unity. Although the blood is the alteration of cohesion and 
specific gravity in that it constitutes the heat, it is not merely the dissolu-
2S tion of heat, for it is the real animal dissolution of all the parts. Just as all 
victuals change into blood, so the blood in its turn is the common source 
of all nutriment. This constitutes the completely real aspect of pulsation. 
It has been said that the juices are inorganic because they are secretitious, and 
that it is only the solid parts of the body which are alive. In themselves, distinc-
30 tions such as this are somewhat meaningless however, and what is more, the 
blood is not life, but is the living subject as such, which is opposed to the genus 
+ or universal. The seedy vegetarians ofIndia will eat no flesh, and refuse to take 
an animal's life; the law-giver of the Jews merely forbad the consumption of 
blood, the blood being regarded as the life of the animal. The blood is this 
35 infinite and continuous agitation, this welling forth from itself; the nerve 
is at rest however, and remains where it is. The infinite distribution, and 
this dissolution of the division, accompanied by redivision, is the immed-
iate expression of the Notion. The Notion might be said to appear here 
before the eyes; it occurs in an immediately sensuous way in the descrip-
40 tion given of it by Professor Schultz, according to whom globules have a 
121 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
tendency to form in the blood, although they do not actually do so. The 
blood will conglobe into globules if it is allowed to run into water, but 
the living blood itself will not do so. Thus, it is only when the blood is 
dying and it is exposed to the atmosphere, that its conglobulation becomes 
evident. The concrete existence of these globules, like atomism, is a fig-
5 
ment of the imagination, and is based upon false evidence obtained when 
the blood is drawn forcibly from the organism. The primary determina-
+ 
tion of the blood is pulsation; the circulation is the vital point, and the 
mechanical explanations of it given by the understanding are of no value, 
for it eludes the finest anatomical and microscopical investigations. It is 10 
said that the internal firing of the blood from the air entails the inhalation 
of the atmosphere, and the exhalation of nitrogen and carbon dioxide. 
Nothing can be grasped by means of this chemistry however, for it is life, 
and not a chemical process which constitutes the continuity of respiration. 
The concentration of this internal differentiation into a single system, 15 
is the heart, which is the vital muscular principle. This system is connected 
throughout with reproduction. There are no nerves to be found in the 
heart, for it is the pure vitality of centralized irritability, the pulsating 
muscle. As absolute movement, and the natural living unity of the process + 
itself, the blood is movement, it is not moved. Physiologists search for all kinds 20 
of forces to explain its movement. 'The cardiac muscle first thrusts the blood 
outwards, and then the walls of the arteries and veins and the pressure of the firm 
parts help to drive it. It is true that the impulse in the heart no longer operates 
in the veins, so that the effect there must be produced solely by pressure from 
the walls of the veins.' All these mechanical explanations offered by physi-
+ 
ologists are inadequate however, for they cannot explain the origin of this 
elastic pressure of the walls and the heart. They tell us that it comes, 'From 
the irritation of the blood,' which implies that the heart moves the blood, and 
that the motion of the blood in its turn motivates the heart. This is a circle, a 
perpetuum mobile however, and because of the equilibrium between its forces, 30 
it must at the same time remain immobile. This is precisely why it is rather the 
blood itself which constitutes the principle of movement. The blood is the 
leaping point through which the contraction of the arteries coincides with + 
the relaxation of the ventricle of the heart. There is nothing incompre-
hensible or unknown about the autonomy of this movement, unless 'com-
35 
prehension' is taken to mean that some extraneous cause is to be shown as 
working upon it. This 'extraneous cause' is only an external necessity 
however, and is therefore not a necessity at all. The cause itselfis something 
distinct, and the cause of this same thing still has to be looked for, so that there is 
a perpetual progression to something else. This leads to the spurious infinity, the 40 
122 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
inability to think and conceive of the universal as the ground and simplicity 
which is the unity of opposites, and which is therefore immovable and yet 
moved. The blood is this unity, it is the subject which is just as much the initia-
tion of a movement as the will is. In that it constitutes the whole movement, the 
5 blood is the ground as well as the movement itself. It is precisely as such, that it 
separates from itself into a single moment however, for it distinguishes itself 
from itself. The movement here is precisely this self-separation, by which it 
constitutes the subject or thing, and the sublation of this separation as the inclu-
sion of itself with that opposed to it. However, it is precisely because the 
10 opposite constitutes the implicit sublation of itself, and brings about the return 
from its own side, that the movement appears as a part and result. It is in this 
way that the living and animating force of the blood proceeds from shape, but 
its interior movement also requires the outer movement, which is strictly mech-
anical. It moves, and holds the parts in their negative qualitative difference, but 
15 it cannot dispense with the simple negative principle of external movement. 
Thus, an invalid who has been inactive for a long time, on account of amputa-
tions for example, develops anchylosis; there is a diminution in the amount of 
+ synovia, his cartilages ossify, and his muscles become flabby through lack of 
external movement. 
20 
In one respect the blood-circulation itself is to be regarded as this general 
circulation by which each part participates in this circular movement; inwardly 
however, it is to an equal extent completely elastic, and not merely this circular 
movement. The movement even varies somewhat throughout the various parts 
of the body. It is slower in the portal system and inside the cranium than it is 
+ elsewhere, while in the lungs it is more accelerated. In a whitlow, the artery 
(radialis) has a hundred pulse-beats to the minute, while the artery on the healthy 
side of the fmger has only seventy, and synchronizes with the pulsation of the 
heart. ~That is more, the arteries and veins pass into each other by means of the 
fmest canals (capillary vessels), some of which are so fine that they are devoid of 
+ red blood-globules, and merely contain a yellowish serum. 'In the case of the 
+ eye,' says Sommerring, 'it seems that the arteries are continued in finer branches, 
which no longer contain red blood. These branches pass initially into a similar 
vein, but fmally into veinlets carrying red blood.' Here therefore, there is no 
transition of that which is properly called blood; a movement is posited in which 
35 the blood vanishes and appears again, and this is an elastic vibration, not a pro-
gression. The transition is not immediately perceptible therefore, or is only 
rarely so. There is also an abundant anastomosis of the veins, and particularly 
of the arteries; this gives rise partly to the larger arteries, and partly to quite 
large plexa, and here therefore it is quite inconceivable that there should be any 
40 ordinary circulation. The blood is driven into the anastomising branch from both 
123 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
sides, giving rise to an equilibrium which is not a flow in one direction, but 
merely an interior quivering. One direction might perhaps be thought to pre-
ponderate in a single branch, but with several complete coronas, or plexa of 
anastomoses, one direction cancels out the other, and converts the movement 
into a general interior pulsation. If one of the arteries is opened, the blood will s 
spurt much further when the heart is contracted, than it will when it is 
relaxed. In the arteries, the period of contraction lasts a little longer than 
the period of distension, while the opposite is true of the heart. However, 
it must not be thought that the blood moves round the animated arterial 
system in a series of waves, or that if the whole length of an artery were 10 
uncovered, it would resemble a rosary thread. Throughout the whole of 
its length, and in all its branches, the arterial system has a uniformly 
cylindrical appearance; it oscillates faintly with every beat of the heart, 
and exhibits a uniform lateral expansion which is scarcely perceptible in 
any but the larger trunks, while during the contraction of the heart, it 1 S 
shrinks as it were.'1 Circulation certainly occurs therefore, but it is 
oscillatory. 
It is in the lung and the liver that the distinction between arterial and venous 
blood becomes a reality. There one has the opposition between the extensor and 
flexor muscles. The arterial blood is the diffusive, dissolving activity, and the 20 
venous blood is the movement into itself; the pulmonary and hepatic systems 
constitute their special life. The chemical explanation of the difference here is 
that the arterial blood has a higher oxygen content, and is therefore a brighter 
red, while the venous blood contains more carbon, and when shaken in oxygen, 
also becomes a brighter red. This explanation of the difference merely states the 2S 
fact however, it does not express the nature of these two kinds of blood, and 
their relatedness within the whole system of circulation. 
The general process is this return of the self from its cometary, lunar, and 
terrestrial course, to itself; this return from its viscera to its unity. The return is 
therefore its general digestion, in which its quiescence is its determinate being. 30 
It therefore returns into shape in general, and this constitutes its result. It is 
precisely by dividing itself into viscera that this shape-sublating process shapes 
itself, and so forms the alimentary process, which also has shape as its product. 
Now this nutrition does not consist of the arterial blood's ridding itself of its 
oxygenated fibrin. The exhalatory vessels of the arteries are more of an elabor- 3S 
ated vapour, an entirely general aliment, from which each individual part of the 
body takes what it needs to form its contribution to the whole. This lymph 
originates in the blood therefore, and constitutes the animating aliment. To a 
1 Autenrieth, loco cit., pt. I, § 367-369. 
124 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
greater extent it is the general animation however, the being-for-self of each 
mem ber, by virtue of which it transforms inorganic nature or the universal 
orgaILism into itself The blood is the animation of each member, it does not 
supply it with matter. The blood does not supply matter, but is the animation 
5 of each member, the form of which is the main thing. This is not merely the 
function of the artery, but of the blood in its dual capacity as vein and 
artery. The heart is ubiquitous therefore, and each part of the organism is 
merely the specified force of the heart itself 
Strictly speaking, the reproductive or digestive system is not present as 
10 a perfected system of members, for whereas the systems of sensibility and 
irritability belong to the distinct moments of development, reproduction 
does not give rise to form. What is more, it is only the whole shape in a 
formal manner, so that it reaches no distinct division into determinations 
of form. At this juncture, the reproductive system may only be said to be 
15 abstract, since its function appertains to assimilation. 
(a) Reproduction in its subdued and immediate form is the cellular tissue 
and glandular structure, the skin, simple animal gelatine, and tubes. In 
animals which consist of nothing else, there are as yet no developed dif-
ferences. The skin constitutes the organic activity of shape; the lymph is con-
20 nected with this, and its contact with externality is the whole process of 
nutrition. The skin is the immediate return of the exterior organism into itself, 
and through it the organism becomes self-related. At first, the skin is still only 
the Notion of the internal organism, and consequently the externality of shape. 
The skin can be and become anything, including nerves and blood-vessels etc.; 
25 in its absorbent capacity it is the general digestive organ of the vegetative 
system. 
(b) The skin has assumed a differentiated relationship through the claws, bones 
and muscles, but it now interrupts its absorption, and relates itself to air and 
water as a singularity. To the organism, the externality to which it relates itself 
30 is not merely a universal element, but something individualized, even ifit is only 
an individual mouthful of water. The skin works inwards therefore; in addition 
to being a general recipient, it now forms the individual orifice of the mouth, so 
that inorganic being is seized upon and taken in as individuality. The individual 
takes possession of it, obliterates it as a purely external shape, and transforms it 
35 into itself It does not do this by immediate infection, but by an intermediary 
motion, which causes it to pass throughlvarious moments. This is reproduction 
in opposition. In the higher species of animals, immediate and simple 
digestion explicates itself into a system of viscera, including the bile, the 
hepatic system, the pancreas or abdominal gland, and the pancreatic juice. 
40 The positing of animal heat derives on the whole from the individual nature of 
125 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
the shapes it overcomes. The heat is the absolute mediating movement of the 
intro-reflected organism. This organism has the elements within itself, and so 
maintains itself in a state of activity by bringing their concerted motion to bear 
upon the individual piece of food. It infects the food (i) with the organic lymph 
or saliva; (ii) with the neutrality of the alkaline and acid principles, the animal 5 
gastric and pancreatic juices; and (iii) with the bile, submitting the ingested 
food to the onslaught of the igneous element. 
(c) The stomach and the intestinal canal are the inward-turned or visceral 
reproduction. In its immediate function, the stomach is this digestive heat as such, 
and the intestinal canal separates the digested food (i) into the entirely inorganic 10 
substance which is to be excreted; and (ii) into the completely animalized sub-
stance of the blood, which is just as much the unity of the subsequent shape, as 
it is the heat of dissolution. The simplest animals consist of nothing but an 
intestinal canal. 
§ 355 
3. The total shape 
However, the differences of the elements and their systems also 15 
unite in a general concrete interpenetration in shape. In this unity, 
each formation of shape contains these elements linked together 
within it. Shape correspondingly divides or incises itself, (i) 
into the centres of the three systems of the head, the thorax 
and the abdomen. The extremities of these systems function 20 
as a mechanical movement and grasping, and constitute 
the moment of singularity positing itself as distinct from 
externality. (ii) In accordance with abstract differentiation, shapel 
distinguishes itself in two directions, outwards and in wards. 
Every shape shares in both the inwardly and the outwardly ori-
25 
entated aspects of each2 system. The outwardly orientated aspect 
is in itself differentiated, and as such exhibits this differenti-
ation through the symmetrical duality of its organs and limbs 
(Bichat's vie organique et animale).3 (iii) In this self-relating 
1 Addition to the second edition, 'in its wholeness'. 
2 Addition to the second edition, 'previously determined'. 
3 Addition. Bichat ch. I, pp. 7-8: 'Les fonctions de I'animal forment deux classes tres distinctes. + 
Les unes se composent d'une succession habituelle d'assimilation et d'excretion. II ne vit qu' en lui, 
par cette classe de fonctions; par l' autre, il existe hors de lui. II sent et apper~oit ce qui l' entourc, 
126 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
individuality, the whole as a shape perfected into an independent 
individual, is at the same time particularized into the sex-
relationship, which is an outward relationship with another indi-
vidual. As shape is self-enclosed, it indicates its two outward 
5 directions upon itself. 
Addition. Brought together concretely in the whole shape, sensibility, 
irritability and reproduction form the outer figuration of the organism, 
+ the crystal of animation. 
(a) In the first instance these determinations are merely forms, and are 
10 sharply separated from one another, as they are in insects. As this deter-
minateness, or in this single form, each moment constitutes a total system. 
Thus, the head is the centre of sensibility, the thorax of irritability, and 
the abdomen of reproduction. These centres contain the organism's 
most important viscera, its inner functions, while the extremities such as 
15 hands, feet, wings, fins etc., marks its relation with the outer world. 
(b) In the second instance, these centres are also developed totalities, 
so that the other determinations are not merely determined as forms, but 
are displayed and contained in each of these totalities. As each abstract 
system permeates them all, and is connected with them, and each exhibits 
20 the whole shape, the systems of nerves, veins, blood, bones, muscles, 
skin, glands etc. each constitute a whole skeleton. This establishes the 
contexture of the organism, for at the same time as each system is inter-
laced into the domain of the other, it maintains the connection within 
itself In the head and brain there are organs of sensibility, bones, and 
25 nerves; but all the parts of the other systems, blood, veins, glands, skin, 
also belong there. It is the same with the thorax, which has nerves, 
glands, skin, etc. 
(c) In addition to the two distinct forms of these totalities, there is a 
third form, which belongs to sensation as such, and whose main feature is 
+ the link up with the soul. These higher unities assemble the organs of all 
the totalities about themselves, and have their point of unity in the sen-
tient subject. They present considerable difficulties of a new kind. They 
constitute connections linking the particular parts of one system with 
reflechit ses sensations, se meut volontairement d'apres leur influence, et Ie plus souvent peut com-
muniquer par la voix ses desirs et ses craintes, ses plaisirs ou ses peines. J'appelle vie organique 1'en-
semble des fonctions de la premiere classe, parceque tous les Stres organises, vegetaux ou animaux, 
en jouissent. Les fonctions reunies de la seconde c1asse forment la vie anima/e, ainsi nommee parce-
qu' elle est l' attribut exc1usif du regne animale.' B;chat's fine perception of nature has here given 
him profound insight, in enabling him to draw attention to this difference in the organism. 
127 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
those of this or that other system. The connections are made on account 
of their functions however, partly by their forming a concrete centre, 
and partly by their having the implicitness of their associations, or 
rather, their more basic determination, in the sentient creature. They 
are soul-like nodes so to speak. As a self-determining entity, the soul s 
is present in the body in a general way, it does not merely conform to the 
specific connectedness of the corporality. 
(i) Thus the mouth belongs to the particular system of sensibility for 
example, to the extent that it contains the tongue, which is the organ of 
taste, as a moment of the theoretical process. The mouth also has teeth, 10 
which are its extremities, their function being to seize upon what is out-
side, and to grind it. The mouth is also the organ of the voice and of 
speech, and other related sensations such as that of thirst are also located 
there. Laughter, and kissing too, are also matters for the mouth. The 
mouth therefore unifies the expressions of many sensations. The eye 15 
provides another example of this. It is the organ of sight, but in animals as 
well as man, it also gives rise to tears. Seeing and crying may seem to be 
remote from one another, but they occur in a single organ, and have the 
inner ground of their connection in the nature of sentience. They therefore 
fmd a superior connection, which cannot be said to lie in the process of 20 
the living organism. 
(ii) There are also connections of another kind, in which phenomena 
emerge in widely separated parts of the organic being, their connection 
being merely implicit, not physical. There is therefore said to be a sym-
pathy between these parts, which is supposed to be due to the nerves. All 2S 
parts .of the organic being have this connection however, so that this 
cannot be a sufficient explanation of it. The ~connection is grounded 
in the determinateness of sensation, and in man, in his spirituality. The 
development of the voice together with the coming of puberty lies in 
the interior aspect of sentient nature, and is an example of such a con-
30 
nection. The swelling of the breasts during pregnancy is another example 
of it. 
(iii) Here, the sentient being brings forth relationships which are not 
physical, but it also isolates the physically connected parts once again. 
For example, one can will a certain part of the body to be active, and this 35 
activity is then brought about by means of the nerves. These nerves are 
themselves branches of other nerves however, so that they are connected 
with many other nerves, and unite with them in a single trunk, which is 
in communication with the brain. The sentient being certainly works 
throughout the whole of this therefore, but sensation isolates this point 40 
128 
---.-----~-.---------------

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
of activity, so that it is brought about or mediated by these nerves, with-
out the rest of the body's connectedness being involved. Autenrieth (loc. 
cit. pt. III, § 937) cites the following example of this, 'It is more difficult 
to explain crying by internal causes, for the nerves which reach the 
5 lachrymal glands are from the fifth pair, and this pair also serves many 
other parts, in which feelings of sadness do not bring about changes, as 
they do in the lachrymal glands. The soul is able to act outwards in 
certain directions however, without the particular direction being deter-
mined by the anatomical communication of the nerves. By using parti-
10 cular muscles which are also in communication with many other muscles 
through their common nerve-trunks, we are therefore able to move 
particular parts of the body in a certain direction, without all these other 
muscles also taking part in the action. Yet it is also quite clear in a case 
such as this, that the will only acts through the nerve-trunk common to 
15 all these muscles. The separate fibres of this nerve-trunk intercommuni-
cate so multifariously, that if the nerve is cut or ligatured, the soul no 
longer has any influence upon the muscles it serves, even when all its 
other means of communicating with these muscles, such as vessels and 
cellular tissue etc., remain undamaged.' The implicit being of the sentient 
20 creature holds supreme sway over the efficacy of the systems therefore. 
It establishes relationships which are not there physically, or conversely, 
interrupts those which are. 
Symmetry is also present in this shape, although only in its outward 
+ aspect;1 for in relationship with another, self-identity only manifests 
25 itself as equality. The different moments of shape which proceed inwards 
not only lack symmetrical duplication, for anatomists also come across, 
'numerous diversities in the form, size, position and direction of the 
internal organs such as the spleen, the liver, the stomach, the kidneys, 
and the salivary glands. This is particularly so in the case of the lymphatic 
30 vessels, which seldom occur in the same number and volume in any two 
+ specimens.'2 Bichat (loc. cit. pp. 15-17) is quite right when he says that in 
the system of sensibility, the sensory and motor nerves are symmetrical, 
+ for there are two similar pairs on each side. The same is true of the sense 
organs, for we have two eyes and two ears, and the nose is also symmetri-
35 cal etc. The osseous system is also extremely symmetrical. In the system 
of irritability the muscles, and the female breasts etc. are symmetrical. 
The same is true of the ligaments of the extremities, which facilitate loco-
motion, and the voice; also of mechanical grasping, for arms, hands and 
E 
1 Bichat, loco cit., p. 14. 
2 Bichat, loco cit., p. 22. 
129 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
legs occur in pairs. Bichat Ooc. cit. p. 41) regards the lack of symmetry in 
the larynx, which is a common occurrence, as an exception, 'Most 
physiologists, and Haller in particular, have attributed lack of harmony + 
in the voice to the discordance of the two symmetrical sides of the larynx, 
and to the difference in the strength of its muscles and nerves' etc. On the + 
other hand, the brain and the heart, as well as the lung, the ganglia, the 
internal venous system of reproduction, the abdominal muscles, the liver, 
and the stomach are all asymmetrical. The arrangement of the ganglia in 
particular is utterly irregular, in that they are entirely lacking in a division 
into two sides, 'The sympathetic nerve, whose sole purpose is to serve the 10 
inner life, displays an irregular distribution in most of its branches. The 
plexus solaris, mesentericus, hypogastricus, splenicus, stomachicus etc. 
are examples of this.'! 
+ 
Uniform duplication is not a complete duplication however. Occupa-
tion, habit, activity and intelligence generally, will modify this equality 15 
of shape into inequality again, especially in human beings. As a spiritual 
being, man tends to concentrate his activity upon a single point, and to 
screw himself up to speak. Unlike the animal, he does not only do this 
with his mouth in order to take in animal nourishment however, but 
shapes his form by orientating his individuality outwards, and in a special 20 
way concentrating his bodily power into a single point of his body, de-
ploying it in a certain direction, and for particular purposes. He will 
disturb the equilibrium of this power in order to write for example. 
In human beings therefore, the right arm and hand are used more than 
the left. This is of course due to their connection with the whole, for as 25 
the heart is on the left, this side of the body is always held back and 
defended by the right. Similarly, people rarely hear equally well with 
both ears, and one eye is often sharper than the other. In human beings, 
the cheeks of the face are seldom quite similar in shape. This symmetry 
remains much more definite in animals. Thus, there is equality in the 30 
strength and form of the limbs, but variation in their agility. However, 
exercises in which intelligence only plays a small part preserve symmetry 
in their movements. 'Animals leap with the greatest skill from crag to 
crag, where the very slightest slip would send them toppling into the 
abyss, and move with astonishing precision on surfaces scarcely as wide 35 
as the extremities of their limbs. Even the ungainliest of animals do not 
stumble so often as man. In them, the equilibrium in the motor organs 
1 Bichat, loco cit. pp. 17-18. 
130 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
of both sides' is even more rigidly maintained than it is in man, who 
voluntarily introduces inequality. When people acquire spiritual and other 
kinds of aptitudes, and develop a fluent style, ability in music and the 
+ fine arts, technical skills, the art of fencing etc., the equilibrium is lost.1 
5 On the other hand, cruder and purely bodily exercises such as drill, 
gymnastics, running, climbing, tight-rope walking, jumping and vault-
ing, preserve this equilibrium. Activities such as these are not conducive 
to aptitudes of the first kind however, and as they tend to be devoid of 
+ thought, they are generally obstacles to mental composure. 
loIn the course of this paragraph, shape is considered firstly as quiescent, 
and secondly in its relation to an other outside it. The third moment of 
shape is therefore also its relation to another, but to an other which at 
the same time belongs to the same genus, and in which the individual 
reaches awareness of itself in sensation, by having a sensation of itself in 
15 another. A determination of the whole shape emerges in the male and 
female. Here there is a difference in habitude, which in man also extends 
into spirituality, and becomes a distinct natural disposition. 
4. The process of formation 
In that it is alive, the shape is essentially a process. As such it is 
indeed abstract,3 and is the process of formation within itself, 
20 in which the organism converts its own members into its 
inorganic nature, or into means, consuming itself, and 
producing itself as precisely this totality of members. In 
1 Cf. Bichat, loco cit. pp. 35-40. 
2 In the first edition, this paragraph was preceded by the following passage: 'The Idea ofliving 
being is the demonstrated unity of the Notion and its reality. However, as an opposition to this sub-
jectivity and objectivity, it is only essential as process, as the movement of the abstract self-relation of 
living being. This movement develops itself within particularity, and as return into self, constitutes 
the negative unity of subjectivity, as well as totality. As a concrete moment of animation however, 
each of these moments is itself process, and the whole is the unity of three processes.' In the first edition 
therefore, the three anatomical moments were presented under numbers 1-3, and were separated 
from the three physiological moments, which then followed as the three processes of shape, assimi-
lation and the genus. This was improved upon in the second and third edition, where there is a'fuller 
interpenetration of the anatomical and physiological aspects. There is a further difference in' these 
editions however, for while four moments of shape are distinguished in the third edition, in the 
second edition there are only three, numbers 1 and 2 of the third edition being included under 
one heading. 
Note by Michelet. 
3 Addition to the first and second editions, 'animated singularity'. 
131 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
this process each member is interchangeably both end and 
means, and maintains itself by virtue of the other members, 
and in opposition to them. The result of this process is 
simple and immediate sentience. 
Addition. As the first process, the process of formation is the Notion of 5 
the process. It is the restlessness of formation, but it is this only as a 
general activity, as general animal process. Indeed, as this abstract process, 
and in so far as the force of living being is the immediate transformation 
of externality into animal being, it is to be grasped in conjunction with 
the external world, as the vegetable process. Organic being in its de-
10 
veloped state expresses itself in its particular structure however, the 
parts of which are not independent members, but merely moments 
within living subjectivity. Consequently, these parts are sublated, negated 
and posited by the vitality of the organism. The contradiction here be-
tween their being and not being, and between their having come forth 15 
from subjectivity while being contained within it, manifests itself as this 
perpetual process. The organism is the unity of the inner and outer, so that 
(a) as inner, it is the process of shaping, and the shape is a sublated moment 
which remains enclosed within the self; or so that this outer, this other, this 
product, has returned into that which brought it forth. Unlike the plant, the 20 
organic unit brings itself forth without becoming another individual; it is a 
circulation which returns into itself (b) The otherness or externality of the 
organism is the untrammelled being of shape, the quiescence opposed to 
the process. (c) The organism itself ,is the higher quiescence of both mo-
ments, which is the restless self-equality of the Notion. In shaping in general, 25 
the blood in its exhalation allows itself to be reduced to lymph, while the 
sluggish and indeterminate fluidity of the lymph becomes consolidated and 
ramate, on the one side separating into the opposition of the muscles, which 
is a movement immanent in shape, and on the other withdrawing into the 
immobility of bone. The fat or marrow of the bone is this vegetability, which + 
progresses as far as oil, and which excretes a neutrality from itself, not as water, 
but as the neutral earthy substance oflime, just as the plant progresses as far as 
the production of silica. Bone is this dead neutrality between the lymph 
and the marrow. 
The individual not only objectifies itself in this way however, but like-
35 
wise idealizes this reality. Each part is hostile to the others, and maintains 
itself at their expense, but to an equal extent it also surrenders itself 
There is no permanence about the organism; everything is reproduced, 
even the bones. Richerand therefore says of bone-formation (loc. cit. pt. II p. 
132 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
256), 'If the inner periosteum is destroyed with a stylet, the outer covering 
separates from the bone, appropriates the phosphate of lime brought to it by 
+ the vessels spread throughout its tissue, and forms new bone around the other.' 
In itself an organ is only determinate in that it conforms to the general 
5 purpose, and forms the whole living being. Each member draws on the 
others for its own needs, for each secerns animal lymph, which is distribu-
ted to the vessels and led back to the blood, and each draws its nourish-
ment from this secretion. The process of shaping is therefore conditioned 
by the consumption of its formations. If the organism is restricted to 
10 this process, as it is when the outward activity is interrupted in the case 
of disease for example, the patient constitutes his own food, and draws 
sustenance from himsel£ The organism becomes thinner in an illness be-
cause it no longer has the power to assimilate inorganic matter, and is 
only able to live on itsel£ Thus, in B[umauer's version of the 'Aeneid', 
+ Aeneas' companions consume their stomachs; and in starving dogs, it has 
actually been discovered that the stomach has been eaten into and partly 
absorbed by the lymphatic vessels. This process of self-emission and of 
self-collection inwards, is a perpetual operation. The organism is said to 
contain nothing of its former self after five, ten or twenty years, for in 
20 that time everything material has been consumed away, and only the 
substantial form persists. 
The higher unity is in general that in which the activity of a single 
system is conditioned by the activity of another system. For example, 
many experiments and investigations have been made in order to deter-
25 mine the extent to which the digestion, and the circulation of the blood 
etc. are independent of nervous activity, or the extent to which respiration 
is independent of the brain etc., and conversely therefore, whether life 
can still subsist if one or the other of them is stopped. Enquiry has also 
been made into the influence of respiration upon the circulation of the 
30 blood etc. In this connection Treviranus cites the case (loc. cit. vol. IV, 
p. 264), 'of a child born without heart and lungs, and yet possessing 
+ arteries and veins.' With these defects it could certainly have lived within 
the womb of course, but it could not have survived birth. From this 
example it was concluded that Haller's proposition, 'that the heart alone 
35 is the driving force behind the circulation of the blood,' was false, and 
that a fundamental question had been decided. But the question is whether 
the blood will continue to circulate after the heart has been removed. 
Treviranus (loc. cit. vol. IV, p. 645 et seq.) has conducted various experi-
ments, especially with frog's hearts, but apart from showing how he 
40 tortured these animals, they have proved nothing. Nevertheless, he 
133 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
opposed Haller's opinion that it is merely the beating of the heart which 
produces the circulation of the blood, and maintained, 'that the blood has 
a motive power of its own, which is dependent upon the nervous system 
and which has the uninterrupted influence of this system, and especially 
of the spinal cord, as a necessary condition of its continuance. For if the s 
nerve-trunk and spinal cord of a member are severed, the circulation 
of the blood in this part stops. From this it follows that, 'each part of the 
spinal cord, and each nerve-trunk coming from it, sustains the circulation 
of the blood in those organs which it provides with nerve-branches.' + 
Legallois, who, 'does not seem to have dreamt of the possibility of any 10 
theory of the circulation of the blood apart from Haller's,' opposes 
Treviranus with the hypothesis that, 'the circulation of the blood simply 
depends upon the contractions of the heart, and it is only through their 
influence upon this organ, that partial destructions of the nervous system 
enfeeble or stop the circulation.' In general, Legallois is of the opinion 1 S 
that the heart draws its power from the whole of the spinal cord.1 
+ 
Legallois experimented with rabbits, and also with cold-blooded animals, 
and reached the following conclusion:-There is certainly a very close 
connection between any given part of the spinal cord, such as that of the 
neck, the chest, or the loins, and the circulation of the corresponding 20 
part of the body which receives the motor-nerves from that part. When 
such a part of the spinal cord is destroyed, this has a double effect upon 
the circulation of the blood. (a) As the heart is deprived of the contingent 
of forces it received from the destroyed part of the cord, the general 
circulation is weakened. (b) The circulation in the corresponding part 2S 
is weakened first, so that the heart still has to do the same amount of 
work in the whole range of the circulation, although it no longer has the 
power of the whole cord. However, if the cord is destroyed in the loins 
for example, and a ligature is applied to the arteries in that part, circu-
lation is no longer necessary there; as there is spinal cord in the rest of the 30 
body, the equilibrium between the heart and the circulation is preserved. 
What is more, Legallois even discovered that this part lived longer, and 
that when he destroyed the brain and the cervical spinal cord, the cir-
culation continued through the jugular arteries. For example, a rabbit 
survived for more than three quarters of an hour after its head had been 3S 
completely removed, for bleeding was prevented, and an equilibrium was 
therefore established. He made these experiments on rabbits which were 
between three and ten, or at the most fourteen days old, and found that 
1 Treviranus, loco cit. voL IV, pp. 653, 272, 266-267, 269--270, 273, 644. 
134 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
+ older rabbits died more quickly.1 The reason for this is that the life of the 
older animals has a more intensive unity, whereas in the young it is more 
akin to the life of the polyp. The main evidence cited by Treviranus in 
contesting Legallois' conclusions, is that the heart will still continue to 
5 beat for a time, even when the destruction of the spinal cord has already 
arrested the circulation of the blood. At the end of this investigation he 
uses this evidence to counter Legallois with the conclusion that, 'Haller 
maintains that the nervous system has no immediate influence upon the 
+ beating of the heart, and this view therefore remains unrefuted.'2 What-
10 ever importance one may attach to determinations and conclusions such 
as these, one cannot infer more from them than certain differences, e.g. 
that digestion will still continue after the removal of the heart etc. This 
continuation is so limited in duration however, that neither function can 
be regarded as at all independent of the other. The functions of the organ-
IS ization are dependent upon one another to the precise extent of the 
organization's perfection, i.e. the extent to which its functions are distinct 
and determinate. In less perfect animals therefore, these functions are 
more tenacious of life. Treviranus (loc. cit. vol. V, p. 267) cites amphibia 
as examples of this, and mentions, 'toads and lizards which were found 
20 alive in stones, in completely sealed cavities,' and which therefore may 
well have been present at the creation of the world! 'In England recently, 
observations were made of two lizards which were discovered fifteen 
feet below the surface of the chalk at Eldon in Su:fJolk. At first they seemed 
to be completely lifeless; little by little they began to show signs of life, 
2S particularly after they were placed in the sun. In both creatures the mouth 
was sealed with a sticky substance which prevented their breathing. One 
of the lizards was put in water, and the other kept dry. The former 
succeeded in ridding itself of the sticky substance, and lived for several 
+ weeks before it finally died. The other died the following night.' Mol-
30 luscs, insects, and worms furnish us with much more remarkable facts. 
They can go without food for months and years. Snails can live for more 
than a year without a head. The life of many insects is not harmed by 
their being frozen for a considerable period of time. Some animals can 
do without atmospheric air for lengthy periods, and others can live in 
+ very hot water. Rotifers have been resuscitated after four years etc. 3 
1 'Moniteur universeI' 18I1 no. 312. (Cf. Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV. pp. 273-275). 
2 Treviranus,loc. cit. vol. IV, pp. 651-653. 
3 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. V, pp. 269-273 (vol. II, p. 16). 
135 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
B 
Assimilation 
§ 357 
1The sentience of individuality is to the same extent im-
mediately exclusive however, and maintains a state of tension 
with an inorganic nature to which it is opposed as to its ex-
ternal condition and material. 
Addition. The process outwards is the real process, in which the animal 5 
no longer converts its own nature into inorganic being, as it does when 
it is diseased. In this process, the animal must also release the other, which 
is a moment within the organism, into the abstraction of an immediately 
present outer world, with which it enters into relationship. This basic 
division, or expulsion of the Sun and everything else, constitutes the 10 
precise standpoint of animation. The Idea of life is in itself this uncon-
scious creativeness, it is an expansion of nature, which in animation has 
returned into its truth. For the individual however, inorganic nature is a 
presupposition with which it is confronted, and it is this which gives 
rise to the finitude of living being. The individual is for itself, but as the 15 
organic being has this negativity within itself, the connection here is 
absolute, indivisible, internal, and essential. Externality is determined only 
as having being for organic being; organic being is that which maintains 
itself in opposition to it. Organic being is orientated towards externality 
to the same extent that it is internally strung in opposition to it, and this 20 
consequently gives rise to the contradiction of this relationship, in which 
two independent beings come forth in opposition to each other, while at 
the same time externality has to be subIa ted. The organism must therefore 
posit the subjectivity of externality, appropriate it, and identify it with 
its own self; this constitutes assimilation. The forms of this process are 25 
threefold; firstly the theoretical process, secondly the real, practical process, 
and thirdly the unity of both, the process which is of an ideal and real 
nature-the adaptation of inorganic being to the end of living being, 
that is to say instinct, and the nisus formativus. 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'In its negative return into itself.' 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
I. The theoretical process 
In this external relation, the animal organism is immedi-
ately intro-reflected, and consequently the ideal nature of 
this relatedness is the theoretical process, sensibility as out-
ward process, and indeed as determinate feeling J which differ-
entiates itself into its multifarious perceptions of inorganic 
5 nature. 
Addition. The self of the organism is the unity of its blood or of the pure 
process, and its shape; and as such, and because its shape is completely sublated 
in this fluidity, it contains being as a sublation. It is through this that the organ-
ism is raised into pure ideality, which is perfectly transparent universality; it is 
10 space and time, and at the same time neither spatial nor temporal. As it perceives 
something which is distinguished from it by being spatial and temporal, this 
distinction undergoes an immediate nullification. This movement of intuition 
is the universal element of sense. Sensibility was precisely this vanishing 
of determinateness into the pure ideality of the soul or ego, which re-
15 mains with itself. Through its sensation, an animal determines itself in a 
particular way however, and is not merely aware of itself, but of a par-
ticular moment of itsel£ A sentient creature is distinguished from a non-
sentient by its becoming a particular moment of itsel£ In sentient being 
there is therefore a relation to an other which is immediately posited as 
20 the ego's. That which is hard and warm etc. is independent and external, 
but it is to an equal extent immediately transformed, and given an ideal 
nature as a determinateness of my feeling; what I contain is the same as 
that outside me, it is merely its form which is different. Thus, spirit only 
has consciousness as self-consciousness; in other words, in being related 
25 to an external object, I am at the same time for myself. The theoretical 
process is the free disinterested process of sensation, which also allows for 
the subsistence of the external being. The different determinations we 
have seen in inorganic nature are also modifications of sensation, and as 
such they constitute a diversified relation between inorganic nature and 
30 organic being. This is the precise reason for their being called senses. 
137 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
The senses and the theoretical processes are therefore: 
(1) feeling as such, which is the sense of the mechanical 
sphere-of gravity, of cohesion and its alteration and of 
heat; (2) smell and taste, which are the senses of opposition, 
of the particularized principle of air, and of the equally 5 
realized neutrality consisting of concrete water and the 
opposed moments of the dissolution of concrete neutrality. 
(3) The sense of ideality, which is also duplicated, in so far as 
the particularization which ideality must contain as abstract self-
reference falls apart into two indifferent determinations. It is 10 
duplicated (a) into the sense of sight, of ideality as manifestation 
of external being for external being; this is the sense of light 
in general, and more precisely 0 f colo u r, or of light which has 
become determined within concrete externality; and (b) in t 0 
the sense of hearing, of sound, of the manifestations of internal 15 
being, which reveals itself as such in its expression. 
Remark 
We see here how the triad of the Notion's moments passes 
over numerically into a quintuplicity. The more general 
ground for the occurrence of the transition at this juncture, is that1 
the animal organism is the reduction of the separated moments of 20 
inorganic nature to the infinite unity of subjectivity, although in 
this unity, the animal organism is at the same time inorganic 
nature's developed totality, the moments of which still exist 
separately, because the totality is still a natural subjectivity.2 
Addition. Sense is the immediate unity of being and of that belonging to it. 25 
1 First edition, 'The triad of the Notion's moments passes over numerically into a quintuplicity 
at this juncture, because in its totality, the moment of particularity or of opposition is itself a triad.' 
2 Addition to the first edition, 'Universality therefore, as that which is still inwardly concrete, 
and as gravity with its individualizing determinations, has touch as its particular sense. This sense 
is basic to all the others, and it is therefore better to call it feeling in general. Particularity constitutes 
the opposition, which is the indentity as well as the opposition itself. This particularity is therefore 
related to the sense of light, as identity which is abstract, but yet precisely for this reason self-
determined, and the constituent of one side of the opposition. It is also related to the two senses of 
the essential opposition as such, which are the senses of air and of water, both of which, like the 
other moments, have embodied specification and individualization. Sound, as the subjectivity which 
reveals itself as a pure being-in-self of subjectivity, belongs to the sense of singularity.' 
138 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
Initially it is feeling, which is the non-objective union with the object, in which 
however the object is also withdrawn to an equal extent into being-for-sel£ 
This unity has two aspects therefore: it is the sense of shape as shape, and the 
sense of heat. It is only a subdued differentiation which occurs here, be-
5 cause the other is only a generality, and is devoid of any intrinsic difference. 
The moment of difference-positive and negative-consequently falls apart as 
figure and heat. Feeling is therefore the sense of the earthy element, of 
matter, of that which offers resistance, of that in accordance with which 
I have immediate existence as an individual. The other also communi-
10 cates with me as an individual material being, the being-for-self of which 
also corresponds to my awareness of it. Matter aspires towards a centre, 
and the primary satisfaction of this aspiration is the animal, which has 
its centre within itself What I am sensible of is precisely this impulsion 
of matter which is devoid of self, towards an other. The particular ways 
15 of offering resistance, such as softness, hardness, elasticity, and smooth-
ness or roughness of surface, also belong here. Figure and shape are also 
nothing more than the manner in which this resistance is limited spatially. 
These determinations, which we dealt with in various spheres, arc bound 
together in feeling as in a bouquet; for as we saw above (Addition to 
20 § 355 III. 128, 8), it is precisely sentient nature which has the power of bind-
ing together many widely separated spheres. 
Even with regard to their organs, smell and taste are closely related, 
for the nose and the mouth are very intimately connected. Whereas 
feeling is the sense of the indifferent existence of things, smell and taste 
25 are the practical senses, their object being the real being-for-other of 
things, whereby things are exhausted. 
In light something only manifests itself immediately, as immediate 
determinate being. Sound however, which is the manifestation ofinward-
ness, is the posited and produced manifestation of inwardness as inward-
30 ness. In sight, the physical self manifests itself spatially, in hearing it does 
so temporally. In hearing, the object ceases to be a thing. We see the same 
thing with both eyes, because they see the same thing, making a single 
perception of their sight of the object, just as many arrows hit only one 
point. It is precisely the unity of the direction which cancels the diversity 
35 of the sensation. Yet I am also just as able to see a single object in dupli-
cate, if while it is in my field of vision, my eyes are concentrating upon 
something else. For example, if I fix my eyes on a distant object, and at 
the same time concentrate upon my finger, I am aware of my finger 
without changing the direction of my eyes, and see both objects at once. 
40 This becoming aware of the whole field of vision, is dispersed vision. 
139 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
There is an interesting article on it by Government Minister Schultz, in 
Schweigger's Journal (1816). 
+ 
As the developed totality of the Notion in nature, the tetrad also goes 
on to quintuplicity, in so far as the differentiation is not merely dupli-
cated, but itself appears as a triad. We could also have begun with the 5 
sense of ideality, which appears as a duality because it is abstract, and yet 
at the same time ought to constitute the totality here. In nature in gen-
eral, we began with the ideal nature of extrinsicality, which was space 
and time. Space and time constitute a duality, because the Notion is 
concrete (its moments are completely present, and yet appear as thrown 10 
apart in abstraction, because the content was not yet posited in its con-
creteness). Similarly, we now have on the one hand the sense of physically 
determined space, and on the other hand that of physical time. Space is 
here determined in conformity with the physical abstraction of light and 
darkness; time is internal quivering, the negativity of being-in-self. The 15 
second member in the division of the totality of sense consists of smell 
and taste, and retains its place; feeling is then the third member. The 
arrangement is more or less a matter of indifference, the main point being 
that the senses in their rationality constitute a totality. As the range of the 
theoretical relation is determined by the Notion, it is certain that there 20 
cannot be any more senses, although some of them can be missing in 
lower animals. 
+ 
As feeling, the sense organs are the general sensitivity of the skin. Taste is the 
muscle of the tongue, the neutrality which connects itself with the mouth 
i.e. with the skin which is beginning to become internal, or with the retrac-
25 
tion of the vegetative universality of the whole surface. As the sense-organ 
of smell, the nose is connected with the principle of air, and with breathing. 
Whereas feeling is the sense of shape in general, taste is the sense of digestion, 
the passage inwards of that which is external. Smell belongs to the inner organ-
ism as the principle of air. Sight is not the sense of an earlier function, but + 
is the sense of the brain, as is hearing. Sense relates itself to itself in the 
eye and the ear; in the case of the eye, the objective actuality is an indifferent 
self however, while in the case of the ear, it is self-sublating. As active hearing, 
the voice is the pure self which posits itself as universal, expressing pain, desire, 
joy, contentment. When suffering a violent death, every animal has a cry in 35 
which it expresses the annulment of its individuality. The senses are space which 
is saturated and ftlled, but in the voice, sense returns into its inner being, and 
constitutes a negative self or desire, which is an awareness of its own insubstantial 
nature as mere space. 
140 
+ 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
2. The practical relationship 
(The practical process) 
§ 359 
The process which is of a real nature, or the practical re-
lationship with inorganic nature, begins with the self'sintemal 
diremption, the awareness of externality as the negation of 
the subject. The subject is, at the same time, positive 
5 self-relatedness, the self-certainty of which is opposed to 
this negation of itself. In other words, the process begins 
with the awareness of deficiency, and the drive to over-
come it. The condition which occurs here is that of an external 
stimulation, in which the negation of the subject which is strung 
lOin opposition, is posited in the form of an 0 b j e ct. 
Remark 
Only a living existence is aware of deficiency, for it alone 
in nature is the Notion, which is the unity of itself and its 
specific antithesis. Where there is a limit, it is a negation, 
but only for a third term, an external comparative. However, 
15 the limit constitutes deficiency only in so far as the contra-
diction which is present in one term to the same extent as it 
is in the being beyond it, is as such immanent, and is posited 
within this term. The subject is a term such as this, which is 
able to contain and support its own contradiction; it is this 
20 which constitutes its infinitude. Similarly, when reference is 
made to finite reason, reason shows that it is infinite, and pre-
cisely by thus determining itself asfinite; for negation is 
finitude, and is only a deficiency for that which constitutes 
the sublated being of this finitude, i.e. for infinite self-
25 reference (cf. § 60 Rem.). Through lack of thought, no 
advance is made beyond the abstraction of the limit, so that 
even where the Notion itself enters into existence as it does 
in life, there is a failure to grasp it. This thoughtlessness 
keeps to the determinations of ordinary thought, such as 
30 impulse, instinct, need etc., and does not ask what they are in 
141 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
themselves. An analysis of the way in which these determinations 
are regarded would show that they are negations posited as con-
tained within the affirmation of the subject itself. 
An important advance in the true conception of the 
organism has been made by changing determinations, and 
5 
replacing the action of external causes by stimulation through 
external potencies. This is the seed of idealism, which real-
izes that nothing whatever could have a positive relation 
to living being, if living being in and for itself did not 
constitute the possibility of this relation, that is to say, 10 
if the relation were not determined by the Notion, and 
therefore not simply immanent in the subject. For a long 
time now, certain formal and material relationships in the 
theory of stimulation have been regarded as philosophical, + 
although their introduction is as unphilosophical as any 15 
other scientific hotch-potch of reflection-determinations. 
An example of this is the wholly abstract antithesis in 
which the faculties of receptivity and action are supposed to 
be related to each other as factors in an inverse ratio of 
magnitude. 1 As the result of this, the difference in the + 
organism, which is to be grasped, has fallen into the for-
malism of a merely quantitative variety of increase and de-
crease, strengthening and weakening, i.e. into the uttermost 
violation of the Notion. A theory of medicine based on these 
arid determinations is completed in half a dozen propo-
25 
sitions, so it is not surprising that it should have spread 
rapidly and found plenty of adherents. The cause of this 
aberration lay in the fundamental error of first defining 
the Absolute as the absolute undifferentiation of subjective 
and objective being, and then supposing that all determina-
30 
tion is merely quantitative difference. The truth is rather, 
that the soul of absolute form, which is the Notion and 
animation, is solely qualitative self- sublating differentia-
tion, the dialectic of absolute antithesis. One may think, in so far 
as one is not aware of this genuinely infinite negativity, 3S 
that one is unable to hold fast to the absolute identity of 
life, without converting the moment of difference into a 
simply external moment of reflection. This is of course the 
1 Schelling, 'First sketch of a systematic philosophy of nature', p. 88. Note by Michelet. 
I42 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
case with Spinoza, whose attributes and modes occur in an 
+ external understanding; life must then completely lack the 
+ leaping point of selfhood, the principle of autonomous 
movement, of internal self-diremption. 1 
5 
We must also recognize the crudeness and the completely 
unphilosophical nature of the procedure which, without any 
consideration whatever,2 replaced the determinations of the 
Notion by carbon and nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, and 
then went on to define the previously intensive difference as 
10 the varying preponderance of one matter or the other, while 
regarding the active and positive relation of the external 
stimulus as an addition of a deficient matter. In an asthenic 
+ disease such as nervous fever for example, the nitrogen in 
the organism is supposed to preponderate, because the 
15 brain and the nerves in general are supposed to be potenti-
ated nitrogen, chemical analysis having shown this to be the 
principal constituent of these organic formations. In this case 
this is supposed to imply that carbon should be added to the 
organism in order to re-establish the equilibrium of these 
20 matters, and so restore it to health. For no other reason 
than this, the remedies for nervous fever which have been 
discovered empirically are regarded as subjacent to carbon. 
Superficial collocation and opinion of this kind has been 
purveyed as construction and proof. The crudity of this 
25 procedure derives from its regarding the external caput 
+ mortuum of a dead matter made doubly dead by chemical 
analysis, not only as the essence of a living organ, but even 
as its Notion. 
In general, it is ignorance of the Notion and contempt for it, 
30 which perpetrates this facile formalism by making use of 
sensuous materials, such as the matters of chemistry, and of 
relationships belonging to the sphere of inorganic nature, 
such as the north and south of magnetic polarity, or even 
the difference between magnetism itself and electricity. Instead 
35 of making use of the determinations of the Notion, an 
attempt is made to grasp and develop the natural universe 
by externally fixing upon its spheres and differences a 
1 Addition to the first edition, 'as singularity'. 
2 Addition to the first and second edition, 'wanted to give significance of a real nature to the 
formal determinations, and' 
143 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
schema prepared from material of this kind.l A great number + 
of different forms is available for this, for selection re-
mains a matter of choice. One may for example, take as 
one's schema determinations as they appear in the chemical 
sphere, and then transfer oxygen and hydrogen etc. to 5 
magnetism, mechanism, electricity, male and female, 
contraction and expansion etc., in general, to draw oppo-
sites from anyone sphere, and to apply them to the others. 
Addition. It is true that the practical process is an alteration and sub-
10 
lation of the independent material subsistence of external inorganic nature, 
but it is none the less a process which lacks freedom, because in animal 
appetite the organism is orientated outwards. People believe that their free-
dom resides in the will, but it is precisely through their wills that they 
enter into a relationship with a reality which is external to them. Man's 15 
initial freedom derives from his rational will, which is theoretical, and 
resembles the theoretical process of the senses. Consequently, it is the 
subject's feeling of dependence which is primary here; the subject 
feels that it is not self-contained, and that another negative being is 
necessary to it, not contingent. This is the unpleasant feeling of need. 20 
The deficiency in a stool which has three legs is in us. In life, the de-
ficiency is in life itself however, although to an equal extent it is also 
sublated, for life is aware of the limit as a deficiency. Thus it is a privi-
lege of higher natures to feel pain, and the higher the nature, the more 
unhappiness it feels. A great man has a great need, as well as the drive to 25 
satisfy it, and great deeds proceed only from profound mental anguish. 
It is here that we may trace the origin of evil etc. Thus, the animal is + 
positively self-contained within a negative context, and higher natures 
also have the privilege of existing as this contradiction. To an equal 
extent, the animal also restores its lost harmony however, and finds 30 
satisfaction within itsel£ Animal appetite is the idealism of objectivity, 
whereby this objectivity loses its alien character. 
The external manner of interpretation mentioned in the paragraph is 
certainly rampant in the philosophy of Schelling, who often oversteps the 
mark in drawing parallels. Oken, Troxler and others also fall into an empty + 
formalism; we noticed above for example (§ 346 Addition III. 74, I), that 
Oken called the wood-fibres of plants their nerves, and that others have 
called the roots their brain(see above § 348, Add. III. 92, 13): similarly, the 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'such as north-south, west-east polarity, or any other 
material'. 
144 

THE ANIMAL ORGANUM 
brain is supposed to be the human Sun. In order to express the thought-
determination of an organ of vegetable or animal life, the name is taken 
not from the sphere of that thought, but from another sphere. Forms 
must be created from the Notion if they are to be used for determining 
5 other forms; they ought not to be derived a second time from the intu-
ition. 
The need is specific, and its determinateness is a moment 
of its universal Notion, although it is particularized in an infinite 
variety of ways. The drive is the activity of overcoming the de-
10 ficiency of such a determinateness, i.e. of overcoming its form, 
which is initially merely sub j e c ti v e. In that the content of the 
determinateness is primary, and in that it main tains itself in the 
activity in which it is merely carried into effect, the drive consti-
tutes purpose (§ 204), and confined solely to living existence, 
15 instinct. This deficiency in form is inner stimulation, the 
specific determinateness of whose content appears at the same time 
as an animal's relation to the particular individualization of the 
various spheres of nature. 
Remark 
Instinct is supposed to be shrouded in mystery and difficult to 
20 grasp, but the root of this difficulty is merely that purpose can only 
be grasped as the inner Notion, so that it soon becomes apparent 
that the relationships by which the mere understanding attempts 
to explain instinct, are inadequate. The fundamental determination 
of living existence is that it is to be regarded as acting purposively. 
25 This has been grasped by Aristotle, but has been almost for-
gotten in more recent times. Kant revived the concept in his own 
way however, with the doctrine of the inner purposiveness of 
living existence, which implies that this existence is to be regarded 
+ as an end in itself. The main sources of the difficulty here, are 
30 that the relation implied by purpose is usually imagined to be 
external, and that purpose is generally thought to exist only in a 
conscious manner. Instinct is purposive activity operating in an 
+ unconscious manner. 
145 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Addition. Since the drive can only be fulfilled by wholly specific acti-
vities, it makes its appearance as instinct, in that it appears to be a choice 
made in accordance with a purpose-determination. As the drive is not 
a known purpose however, the animal is not yet aware of its ends as 
ends. Aristotle calls that which is activated unconsciously in accordance 5 
with ends ~Ja£s. 
+ 
In so far as need is a connectedness with the universal mechan-
ism and abstract powers of nature, instinct is merely an internal 
stimulation which is not even sympathetic. It is this in sleeping 
and waking, climatic and other migrations etc. As a relation-
10 
ship of the animal to its own inorganic and individualized 
nature however, instinct is generally determined, and in its 
further particularity, is restricted to no more than a limited range 
of universal inorganic nature. Instinct maintains a practical 
relation in the face of inorganic nature; its inner stimulation is 15 
accompanied by the show of an external stimulation, and its 
activity is partly formal, and partly a real assimilation of 
inorganic nature. 
Addition. Waking and sleep are not the 'result of a stimulus originating 
in something external. They are an unmediated participation in nature 20 
and its changes, occurring as internal rest and retrenchment from the 
outer world. The migrations of animals constitute the same sort of parti-
cipation, for they are a passage within the life of nature itself, as for 
example when fish migrate to other seas. Sleep is preceded by the aware-
ness of a deficiency, not by a need; one falls asleep without trying to 25 
do so. It may well be said that animals sleep and gather food for the winter 
instinctively, for they are also merely drawn to this, as they are to waking. 
The lower the organism, the fuller is its participation in this life of nature. + 
Primitive peoples are sensitive to the course of nature, but the spirit turns 
night into day, so that the moods of the seasons are also less marked in 30 
more highly organized beings. Intestinal worms, which are to be found 
in the liver, and the brain of hares or deer at certain times of the year, 
are a weakness of the organism, in which one part separates out into its + 
own vitality. As the animal participates sympathetically in the universal 
course of nature, it is not so absurd to assume that there is a connection 35 
146 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
between the life of the animal, and the moon, as well as terrestrial and 
sidereal life. For example, it is quite feasible that earthquakes may be 
+ predicted from the flight of birds, and certain animals such as spiders 
and frogs have premonitions of the coming weather. Man will also be 
5 aware of a future climatic change in a weak spot such as a scar, so that 
the change is present and manifests itself in man, even though it only 
shows itselflater in the weather. 
The drive is completely determinate in particular animals; each animal 
has as its own only a restricted range of inorganic nature, which is its 
10 own domain, and which it must seek out by instinct from its complex 
environment. The mere sight of the object does not arouse the lion's 
desire for a deer, nor the eagle's desire for a hare, nor the desire of other 
animals for corn, rice, grass, oats etc. Yet these animals have no choice, 
for the drive is immanent in such a way, that this specific determinateness 
15 of the grass, and indeed of this grass, and this corn etc., is present in the 
animal itself, and it is simply unconscious of the presence of anything else. 
As the universal thinking animal, man has a widely extended range, and 
can treat everything as his inorganic nature, and as the object of his 
knowledge. Undeveloped animals have only an elemental principle such 
20 as water as their inorganic nature. Lilies, willows and fig trees have 
their own particular insects, whose inorganic nature is entirely restricted 
+ to such growth. The animal can be stimulated only by means of its 
inorganic nature, because for the animal, the only opposite is its own. The 
animal does not recognize the other in general, for each animal recog-
25 nizes its own other, which is precisely an essential moment of the special 
nature of each. 
In so far as instinct accomplishes a formal assimilation, it forms 
its determination within externalities. It gives the material of 
these externalities an outer form appropriate to the purpose, 
30 and leaves the objectivity of these things untouched, as in the 
building of nests and lairs etc. It is process of a real nature how-
ever, in so far as it individualizes inorganic things, or relates 
itself to those already individualized, and assimilates them by 
consuming them and destroying their characteristic qualities, i.e. 
35 through air entering into the process of respiration and of 
the skin, water into the process of thirst, and the particular 
147 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
formations of individualized earth into the process of hun-
ger. Life, which is the subject of these moments of the 
totality, constitutes a state of tension between itself as 
Notion and the external reality of these moments, and 
maintains the perpetual conflict in which it overcomes 5 
this externali ty. At this juncture, the animal functions as an 
immediate singulari ty, and can only overcome this externality 
in the singular, and by means of all the determinations of sin-
gularity, such as this place and this time etc. Consequently, this 
realization of itself is not adequate to its Notion, and its 10 
satisfaction is 1 perpetually reverting to a state of need. 
Addition. The animal itself determines where it will rest, sleep and bear 
its young; it not only changes its place, but decides upon it. The animal 
does something therefore, and by determining in a purposive manner, 
expresses its inner drive as activity. 
15 
The real nature of the process is primarily a process with the elements, 
for in the first instance external being itself is universal. The plant stops 
at the process of the elements, but the animals go on to the process of 
singularity. The relationship with light might also be called an elemental 
process, for light is also an external and elemental potency. However, 20 
light as such is not the same power for the animal and man as it is for 
vegetable nature; men and animals see light, so that the self-manifesting 
of the objective form of light is external to them, although in the theo-
retical process their relation to it is of an ideal nature. Light only has 
an influence upon the colour of feathered creatures and of pelts; the 25 
black hair of the negro is also the result of the climate, an effect of the 
heat and the light. The blood and coloured fluids of animals are also to 
be considered at this juncture. Goethe has observed that the colour of + 
plumage is determined by the action of light, as well as by its internal 
organization. Speaking of the colours of organic beings generally, he 30 
says, 'White and black, yellow, orange and brown, alternate in a variety 
of ways; yet the manner in which they appear does not remind us of the 
elementary colours. They are to a much greater extent mixed colours, 
subdued by organic concoction, and they more or less indicate the level + 
of the creature which displays them. Markings on the skin are related 35 
to the internal parts they cover. The colours of shells and fish are more 
elementary. Warmer climates certainly have an effect upon the water 
also, and bring out the colours of fish, beautifying and heightening 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'therefore'. 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
them. On Otaheiti, Forster saw a wonderful display of colours on a 
+ certain kind of fish, especially when it was dying. When it is first ex-
posed to the light and the air, the fluid in shell fish has the peculiar pro-
perty of appearing yellowish and then greenish; it subsequently turns 
5 blue, and then violet, before assuming a deeper red. Through the action 
of the Sun, and especially when it is spread on cambric, it finally turns a 
pure deep red. The action oflight upon the plumage and colours of birds 
is quite remarkable. For example, the breast feather of certain parrots is 
really yellow, but in the squamous part of it, which stands forth and 
10 catches the light, the yellow is intensified into red. Thus, although the 
breast of such a bird seems to be crimson, the yellow will appear if one 
blows into the feathers. There is therefore a very great difference between 
the exposed part of the plumage, and that part of it which is covered 
and unruilled. In ravens for example, it is in fact only the uncovered 
is part of the plumage which displays colours. If we bear this in mind, 
it is quite easy to rearrange the raven's tail feathers in their natural 
order.' 1 
The process with light remains of an ideal nature, but the process with 
air and water involves material being. The cutaneous process is the exten-
20 sion of the vegetative process, which breaks out into hairs and feathers. 
Human skin has less hair than animal skin, but it is mainly in the plumage 
+ of birds that vegetable being is taken up into animal being. 'The quills 
become true feathers when they are fully barbed; many of these barbs 
and befeatherings are subdivided once again, so that the whole bears a 
25 striking resemblance to the plant. The surface of the human body is 
smooth and clear, so that in the most perfect human specimens, with the 
exception of a few places which are more decorated with hair than covered 
with it, the body shows forth the beauty of its form. An excessive amount 
of hair on the chest, arms and legs is evidence of weakness rather than 
30 strength. It is probably only the poets who, having been misled by the 
kind of strength displayed by animal nature, have created among us the 
reputations enjoyed by these hairy heroes.'2 
The respiratory process is continuity displaying its interruptedness. 
Exhalation and inhalation bring about a vaporization of the blood, and so 
35 constitute the vaporization of irritability (§ 354 Add. III. 124, 18); thetransi-
tion into air is started and retracted. 'Mud fish (Cobitis fossilis) inhale 
through the mouth, and eject the air through the anus.'3 Fish decompose 
1 Goethe, 'Theory of Colours', vol. I, § 664. 640, 660. 
2 Goethe, 'Theory of Colours', vol. I, § 655; § 669. 
3 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV, p. 146. 
149 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
the water by means of their gills, which are also a secondary respiratory 
organ analogous to the lungs. The tracheae of insects are distributed 
throughout the whole body, and have orifices on both sides of the venter. 
Some underwater insects collect a supply of air, and keep it under their 
elytra, or in the pubescence of the abdomen. l Now why does the blood + 
relate itself to the ideal nature of this digestion of the abstract element? 
It relates itself because it is this absolute thirst, and is in an incessant 
agitation, both within itself and in opposition to itself. The blood is 
motivated towards the differentiation of animation. More exactly, this 
digestion is at the same time a mediated process with the air; that is to say, 10 
it is a conversion of air into carbon dioxide and dark carbonated venous 
blood, and into oxygenated arterial blood. I attribute the activity and 
vivification of the arterial blood to its satiation rather than to its material 
alteration. It seems to me in fact that the blood resembles other forms of 
digestion by perpetually appeasing what one may call its hunger or 15 
its thirst, and achieving being-for-self by negating its otherness. The 
air is the implicitness of the fiery and negative element. The blood is the 
same element as a developed restlessness; it is the burning fire of the 
animal organism, which not only consumes itself, but which also pre-
serves its fluidity, and finds its pabulum vitae in the air. Consequently, + 
the action of the organism may be paralysed by injecting venous blood 
in the place of arterial blood. When the organism is dead, the red blood 
is almost entirely replaced by venous blood; in the case of apoplexies, 
venous blood is found in the brain. This is not caused by a slight variation 
in the amount of oxygen and carbon. 2 In the case of scarlet fever however, 25 
the venous blood is also a scarlet-red. Yet the true life of the blood is the 
incessant conversion of arterial and venous blood into each other. It is in 
this operation that the capillaries develop the greatest activity.3 'In certain 
organs, there is evidence that the arterial blood is converted into venous 
blood more rapidly. In many cases, the characteristic properties of venous 30 
blood, such as its blackness and its lower density when coagulating, are 
present to a greater extent than they are elsewhere, for example in the 
spleen; yet the walls of the vessels in question bear no evidence of an 
abnormally high influx of oxygen through the arterial blood, on the 
contrary they are softer, and often almost pulpy. Taken as a whole, the 35 
thyroid gland has more arteries than any other part of the human body. In 
the short course of this gland, a great deal of arterial blood is converted 
1 Treviranus,loc. cit. vol. IV, p. ISO. 
2 C£ Bichat, loco cit. p. 329 et seq. 
3 Autenrieth, loco cit., vol. III, Index, p. 370. 
ISO 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
into venous blood.'! Since the vessels of this gland do not get harder, as 
they should, what becomes of the oxygen of the arterial blood? The 
+ gland brings about no external chemical action. 
The process with water is the demand for the neutral element, the 
5 desire to drink. On the one hand, it counteracts the abstract heat within 
the organism, and on the other hand, it is used to remove a specific taste. 
Consequently, the drive is only instinct when it relates itself to an indivi-
dualized object. In such a relation, the momentarily satisfied need is per-
petually recurring. Spirit however, by developing its cognition of univer-
10 sal truths, finds its satisfaction in a much more universal manner. 
The process begins with the mechanical seizure of the ex-
ternal 0 bj ect. Assimilation itself is the enveloping of the ex-
ternality within the unity of the subject. Since the animal is2 a 
subject, a simple negativity, the nature of this assimilation 
15 can be neither mechanical nor chemical, for in these processes, 
the substances, as well as the conditions and the activity, 
remain external to one another, and lack an absolute and 
living unity. 
Addition. Appetitive organic being, aware of itself as the unity of itself and 
20 of that confronting it, and so seeing through the detenninate being of the object, 
is shape, which is orientated outwards, and armed. Its teeth derive from its 
bones and its claws from its skin; in these features the process is still mech-
+ anical, although in the saliva it is already organic. For a long time now, 
it has been the fashion to give a mechanical explanation of the process of 
2S assimilation and of the circulation of the blood. Similarly, although a 
nerve is quite slack, the action of the nerves has been envisaged and 
explained as a quivering of taut strings. The nerves are also supposed to 
be a series of globules, which by exerting pressure, strike and push one 
another until the last of the series strikes the soul. The soul is omnipresent 
30 within the body however, and the extrinsicality of bones, nerves and 
veins is of no significance to its ideality. When dealing with electricity, 
we saw that it was futile to expect laboratory experiments to repro-
duce atmospheric phenomena, but it is even more pointless to apply 
finite relationships to life. Attempts have also been made to explain 
1 Autenrieth,loc. cit. pt. I, § 512 (391); § 458-459. 
2 Addition to the first edition, 'thereby'. 
151 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
digestion by means of impact and pumping etc. If it could be explained 
as such, it would be an external relationship of inner and outer. The ani-
mal is the absolute self-identity of animation however, it is not a mere 
composition. Use has recently been made of chemical relationships, but 
assimilation cannot be susceptible of a chemical interpretation either, 5 
for in living being we have a subject which maintains itself and negates 
the specific nature of the other, whereas the acid and alkaline being of 
the chemical process loses its quality, and either sinks into the neutral 
product of a salt, or reverts to an abstract radical. In this case, the activity 
is extinguished, whereas the animal is the persistent unrest within 10 
self-relatedness. Digesting may certainly be grasped as a neutralization 
of acid and alkali: it is correct to say that such finite relationships begin 
in life, but life interrupts them, and brings forth a product which is not 
chemism. It is like the moisture in the eye which refracts light. These 
finite relationships may be pursued to a certain point therefore, but 15 
then quite another order begins. A chemical analysis of the brain will 
certainly reveal a good deal of nitrogen, just as an analysis of exhaled 
air will reveal constituents other than those of the air that is breathed 
in. One is therefore able to trace the chemical process until even the se-
parate parts of living being disintegrate. It should not be assumed how-
20 
ever, that the processes themselves are chemical, for chemical being only 
accommodates that which is lifeless, whereas the animal processes are per-
petually sublating the nature of chemical being. There is plenty of scope 
for tracing and indicating the mediations which occur in living being and 
in the meteorological process, but this mediation is not to be confused 25 
with the real nature of the phenomena. 
Living being is the universal power of its external and 
opposed nature; initially therefore, assimilation is the immediate 
fusion of animality with that which is taken up into it. 
That which is taken up is infected with animality, and a 30 
simple transformation occurs (§ 345 Rem. and § 346). In the 
second instance, assimilation consists of the mediation of 
digestion. Digestion is the opposition of the subject to that 
which is external to it; it is further differentiated1 into the 
1 First edition, 'in opposition to its immediate assimilating, so that this assimilation stimulates 
itself into a negative opposition to it, and occurs as a process of opposition'. 
152 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
aqueous process of the animal, i.e. gastric and pancreatic 
juice and animal lymph in general, and into the animal's 
+ igneous process or bile, in which the organism has returned 
into itself from its concentration in the spleen, and is 
5 determined as being-for-self and active consumption. These 
processes are to an equal extent particularized infections however. 
This involvement with external being, in stimulation and the 
process itself, is also determined as an externality however, 
being opposed to universality, and to the simple self-refer-
10 ence of living being. Stricdy speaking therefore, this involve-
ment itself1 constitutes the object and negative opposed to the 
subjectivity of the organism, an object and negative which the 
organism has to overcome and digest. The change in its orien-
tation constitutes the principle of the organism's intro-reflec-
tS tion. Theretum-into-selfis the negation ofits2 outward-oriented 
activity. There is a double determination here. 3 On the one hand, 
the organism expels from itself4 the activity it has set in 
conflict with the externality of the object, and on the other, it 
has become for itself through its immediate identity with 
20 this activity, and by this means has reproduced itself. It is 
in this way that the process outwards is transformed into 
the first formal process of simple reproduction from itself, 
into the uniting of itself with itself. 
Remark 
The main moment in digestion is the immediate action of 
25 life as the power over its inorganic object. Life presupposes 
1 First edition, 'In the first instance, this animal stimulation is directed against the external potency; 
by means of infection however, this potency is placed immediately on the side of the organism. 
Yet as the opposition and being-for-self of the process, this stimulation has, likewise, the deter-
lnination of externality with regard to the universality and simple self-relatedness of living being. 
Initially, these two moments appear together on the side of the subject as a means, and so, strictly 
speaking, constitute the object and the negative opposed to the organism, an object and negative 
which the organism has to overcome and digest'. 
2 Addition to the first and second edition, 'own negativity or'. 
3 First edition, 'As natural being, the singularity which it reaches here consequently joins up 
with its universality as a loosening factor.' 
4 Addition to the first and second edition, 'the first negation, that is to say'. 
153 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
this object 1 as its stimulus only in so far as it is implicitly 
identical with it, although at the same time it is its ideality and 
being-for-self. This action is infection and immediate trans-
formation; it corresponds to the immediate seizure of the 
object pointed out in the exposition of purposive activity (§ 208). 5 
The researches of Spallanzani and others, as well as more + 
recent physiology, have also demonstrated the immediacy 
with which living being as a universal, employing no other 
means than simple contact and the taking up of nutriment 
into its heat and its own sphere in general, maintains its 10 
continuity within this nutriment. These researches have been 
carried out empirically, and have shown that the facts are in 
accordance with the Notion. They have exploded the fiction that 
digestion functions as a purely mechanical secretion and ex-
cretion of2 parts which are ready for use, or as a chemical 15 
process. However, research on the intermediary actions has 
not revealed any more determinate moments of this trans-
formation, as it has for example in vegetable matters, 
where a series of fermentations has been discovered. On the + 
contrary, it has been shown for example, that a great deal 20 
of nutriment passes straight from the stomach into the 
mass of gastric juices without having passed through the 
further intermediary stages, and that the pancreatic juice 
is nothing more than saliva, so that it might 3 well be dis- + 
pensed with etc. The final product is the chyle, which is 2S 
taken up by the thoracic duct and discharged into the blood. 
It is the same lymph as that which is secreted by each 
separate intestine and organ, which is appropriated every-
where by the skin and the lymphatic system in the immedi-
ate process of transformation, and which is already prepared 30 
wherever it is appropriated. Certain lower animal organ-
izations, which are however nothing more than a simple 
alimentary canal, or lymph curdled into a point or tube, 
do not progress beyond this immediate transformation. In 
the higher animal organizations, the special product of the lS 
mediated digestive process is just as superfluous as the plant's 
production of seeds by means of their so-called sexual 
1 Addition to the first edition, 'and sets it in opposition to itself'. 
2 First edition, 'homogeneous'. 
3 Addition to the first and second edition, 'very'. 
I54 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
differentiation. In faeces, the greater part of the food is 
usually unchanged, and mixed mainly with animal matters 
such as bile and phosphorus etc. This is particularly so in 
the faeces of children, who assimilate comparatively more 
5 matter than other people; which shows that the main 
action of the organism consists of its overcoming and 
ridding itself of its own products. Consequently, the 
syllogism of the organism is not that of external purposive-
ness, for it does not stop at directing its activity and form 
10 towards the outer object, but makes an object out of this 
process itself, which on account of its externality, is on the 
point of lapsing into mechanism and chemism. This beha-
viour was expounded as the second premiss of the universal 
syllogism of purposiveness (§ 209). The organism is the coal-
15 escence of itself with itself in its outward process. It wins and 
takes over from this process nothing but chyle, which is its uni-
versal animalization. Consequently, as the being-for-self of the 
living Notion, it is to an equal extent a disjunctive activity 
which rids itself of this process, separates itself from the 
-+ one-sided subjectivity of its hostility towards the object, 
and so becomes explicitly what it is implicitly. It therefore 
becomes the non-neutral identity of its Notion and its 
reality, and so finds the end and product of its activity 
to be the already established beginning and origin of its 
25 being. It is thus that satisfaction conforms to reason; the 
process which enters into external differentiation turns 
into the process of the organism with itself, and the result 
is not the mere production of a means, but the bringing 
forth of an end, the unity of the self. 
30 Addition. At this juncture, the alimentary process is the main factor. Or-
ganic being is in a state of tension with inorganic nature, which it ne-
gates, and posits as identical with itself In this immediate bearing of organic 
upon inorganic being, the former is as it were the immediate dissolution of 
the latter into organic fluidity. The ground of all relation between them is 
35 precisely this absolute unity of substance, which ensures that for organic being, 
inorganic being is simply transparent, of an ideal nature, and lacking in objec-
tivity. The alimentary process is merely this transformation of inorganic 
nature into a soma belonging to the subject. Subsequently however, it 
also appears as process which passes through many phases, and which is 
155 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
no longer an immediate transformation, but seems to employ media. 
Animal nature constitutes the universal facing the particular natures 
which have their truth and ideality within it, for it is the actuality of that 
which constitutes the implicitness of these figures. Similarly, as all men 
are implicitly rational, the man who appeals to their rational instinct 5 
has power over them, for what he reveals to them already corresponds 
to something in this instinct which is able to respond to the reason he 
makes explicit. The general public accepts what it comes across in an 
immediate manner, so that it exhibits rationality as a propagation and 
an infection; it is because of this that the former barrier or apparent 10 
separation disappears. This power of animality is the substantial relation-
ship which constitutes the main factor in digestion. Consequently, if the 
animal organism is the substance, inorganic being is merely an accident, 
its specific nature being merely a form which it abandons immediately. 
'We know from experience therefore, that sugar, vegetable gums and 15 
oils, nourish bodies which contain little or no nitrogen, and that in spite 
+ 
of this, they are converted into an animal substance which contains a 
great deal of nitrogen. For entire populations are completely vegetarian, 
just as others eat nothing but meat. The lack of malnutrition among these 
vegetarians makes it evident however, that their bodies do not merely 20 
retain the minute amount of apparently animal matter which is present 
in the plants they consume, and reject everything else, but that they 
elaborate a great deal of this vegetable diet into a nutriment appropriate 
to their organs.'1 Although it is true that the animals and plants which 
an animal consumes are already organic, they constitute, in their relation 25 
to it, the animal's inorganic being. Such a particular and external being 
has no subsistence of its own, for it is a nullity as soon as it is touched 
by living being. This transformation merely reveals the relationship. 
It is on this immediate transition and transformation that all chemical and 
mechanical explanations of the organism founder and find theirlimit. The pre- 30 
cise reason for this is that their explanations are merely based on a datum 
which already possesses exterior equality. The truth is however, that both 
sides in their determinate being are completely free with regard to each other. 
Bread in itself for example, has no connection with the body, the chyle, or the 
blood, for it is something quite different. Try as they will, neither chemis- 35 
try nor mechanics can trace empirically the transformation of the nutri-
ment into blood. Chemistry certainly displays something similar in both 
of them; albumen perhaps, and certainly iron and suchlike, as well as oxy-
+ 
1 Autenrieth, loco cit. pt. II, § 557. 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
gen, hydrogen, nitrogen etc. It will certainly extract matters from the plant 
that are also present in water. Wood, blood and flesh do not remain the 
same thing as these matters however, because, quite simply, both sides are 
at the same time something else. Blood which has been broken down into 
5 such constituents is no longer living blood. It is quite impossible to trace 
similarity any further and to fmd continuity here, for the existing sub-
stance completely disappears. By decomposing a salt, I obtain again the two 
matters which had combined to form it; consequently, this combination 
accounts for the salt, and the matters within it have not become something 
10 else, but have remained the same. In organic being however, the existing 
substances are posited as becoming something else. However, as inorganic 
being is merely a moment which is sublated in the organic self, It comes 
into consideration not in accordance with its determinate being, but in accord-
ance with its Notion. Yet in accordance with its Notion it is identical with 
15 organic being. 
This is evident in organic assimilation. The nutriment which enters into the 
sphere of organic life is steeped in this fluid, and changes into this solution. Just 
as a certain thing becomes odour, something dissolved, a simple atmosphere, so 
here it becomes a simple organic fluid, in which nothing more of it or its con-
20 stituents is to be discovered. This organic fluid, which persists in its self-equality, 
is the igneous essence of inorganic being, which here returns immediately, 
into its Notion; for inorganic things are turned into their implicit being by 
means of eating and drinking. Organic being is the unconscious Notion of 
inorganic things, and they are sublated into it because they constitute its implicit 
25 nature. This transition also has to exhibit itself as a mediated process, and display 
the members of its opposition. The basis of it is however, that as organic being 
is the genus as a simple self, and so holds sway over inorganic being, it draws 
inorganic being into its organic matter in an immediate manner. If organic being, 
+ as purpose, does gradually bring inorganic being into identity with itself by 
30 means of the particular moments of this immediacy, then these extensive diges-
tive preparations by means of various organs are certainly superfluous for 
inorganic being. The course of organic being within itself still takes place however, 
+ in order that organic being itself may constitute movement, and so have actuality. 
It is the same with spirit, the strength of which is measured by the extent of 
35 the opposition it has overcome. Nevertheless, the basic relationship of the 
organism is this simple contact, in which there is an immediate and instantaneous 
transformation of the other. 
The lower animals are still completely devoid of special features such as 
bile and gastric juice, which are essential to the activities connected with the 
40 assimilation of food. Water is already absorbed by the skin in the process 
157 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
with the air, as may be seen in many worms and zoophytes. Polyps 
provide an example of this, for the water on which they feed is trans-
formed directly into lymph and jelly. 'The simplest form of nutrition 
through a single mouth is to be found in Hydras, Brachiopoda and 
Vorticella. The Hydra viridis feeds on small aquatic animalcules, which it + 
seizes with its tentacles. The sac-like receptacle which comprises most of 
its body opens and receives the prey, which is changed almost as soon as 
it is swallowed. It is transformed into a homogeneous mass, and con-
tinually loses volume in the process. Finally, the mouth of the Polyp opens 
again, and part of the ingested food is evacuated through precisely the same 10 
orifice as that by which it had entered the hydra's stomach. Frequently, 
the creatures swallowed are long worms, only half of which can be con-
tained in the stomach. Even then however, there is still a rapid decompo-
sition of whatever has entered the stomach, so that on many occasions 
one half of the worm is still trying to escape, while the other half has 15 
already been digested. What is more, the Polyp is also able to digest with 
its outer surface. It can be turned inside out, "like a glove", so that the inside 
of its stomach becomes its outer covering, and yet the phenomena referred 
to still take place as before.'1 An intestine of this kind is a mere canal, and + 
is of so uncomplicated a structure, that there is no difference to be found 20 
between oesophagus, stomach and intestines. But, 'after the alimentary 
canal, there is no viscera so universal in its occurrence throughout the 
whole of the animal kingdom, as is the liver. It is to be found in all mam-
mals, birds, amphibia, fish and molluscs. Even in the vermian class, the 
Aphrodites seem to possess bile-secreting organs, for the sacs arranged + 
along either side of their intestinal canal contain a bitter dark green fluid. 
Similar sacs are to be found in the alimentary canal of Holothuria. An + 
actual liver occurs again in Asteriae. In insects, the vessels which may be + 
regarded as biliary vessels, seem to take the place of the liver.'2 Others + 
attribute another function to these vessels. 'Although many Zoophytes 30 
seem to produce no visible excretions, there can be no doubt that they all 
evacuate gaseous matters through their skin and respiratory organs, and 
that this evacuation is connected with their nutrition. There is therefore a 
close connection between nutrition and respiration.'3 
This immediate digestion is also to be found higher up the scale in more 35 
complex animals. It is well known to those who catch Thrushes and Field-
fares for example, that if these birds are quite thin, they will fatten up con-
1 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV, pp. 291-292. 
2 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV, pp. 415-416. 
3 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV, pp. 293-294. 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
+ siderably in the matter of a few hours, after a misty morning. In this case, an 
immediate transformation of this moisture into animal matter takes place, 
without any further secretion and passage through the separated moments of the 
assimilation process. Man also digests immediately, as is shown by the account 
5 of the English ship, the crew of which ran out of water while it was on the 
high seas. The rain-water very laboriously collected in the sails also run-
ning out on them, they slaked their thirst by soaking their shirts, and dip-
ping themselves in the sea, so that their skins absorbed only the water 
+ from the sea, not its salt. In animals which have organs by means of which 
10 they digest, the digestion which takes place is partly of this general and 
universal kind, and partly distinct and particular. In this latter case the 
assimilation is initiated by organic heat. The stomach and the intestinal 
canal themselves are nothing but the outer skin however, which is simply 
adapted, and which is developed and remoulded into a special form. 
15 Treviranus makes a more detailed comparison of these various membranes 
++ (loc. cit. vol. IV, p. 333 et seq.). Ifipecacuanha and opium are rubbed in on 
the outside of the stomach, they have the same effect as when they are 
taken internally; but ipecacuanha has also been rubbed into the shoulder, 
and equally well digested. 'Tiny pieces of flesh, enclosed in small linen bags, 
20 and placed in the abdominal cavity of a live cat, have been found to de-
compose into a pulp and tiny scraps of bone, as they do in the stomach. 
Precisely the same decomposition occurred when flesh of this kind was 
inserted under the skin of living animals next to their bare muscles, and 
left there for a time. An apparently similar phenomenon occurs in the case 
25 of bone fractures; nature discharges a quantity of moisture around the 
fractured part, by which the sharp ends of the bones are softened and 
entirely dissolved. A further phenomenon of this kind occurs when the 
congealed blood in contused parts of the body is gradually dissolved again, 
becomes fluid, and is finally absorbed once again. The gastric juice does 
30 not act therefore as a wholly special animal fluid, quite different from any 
other. It acts merely as a watery animal fluid, supplied in plenty to the 
reservoir of the stomach by the exhalatory arteries. It is secreted from the 
arterial blood, which just prior to this secretion, was exposed in the lungs 
to the action of oxygen.'! Treviranus also observes (loc. cit. vol. IV, pp. 
35 348-349) that, 'The bones, flesh and other animal parts which P. Smith 
inserted into the abdominal cavity or under the skin ofliving animals, were 
entirely decomposed there (Pfaff and Scheel's "Nordic Archive for Natural 
+ Science" etc. vol. III pt. 3, p. 134). This explains a remarkable phenomenon 
1 Autenrieth, loco cit. vol. II, § 597-598. 
159 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which Cuvier discovered while observing the Salpa octofora. In many of 
these creatures, although not in their stomachs, he found parts of an 
Antifera, all of which had decomposed and vanished, apart from the outer 
skin, and which had probably come in through the orifice by which 
Salpas take in water ("Annales du Museum d'Histoire naturelle" vol. IV, 5 
p. 380). These creatures certainly have a stomach, but they may well 
digest as much outside it as they do inside. They constitute the transition 
to organisms in which respiration, digestion and various other functions 
take place through similar but distinct organs.' 
The object of Spallanzani' s experiments was to discover whether digestion 10 
was brought about by solvent juices, by triturations effected through 
the muscles of the stomach, or by both means. In order to decide the 
matter, he administered food in metal tubes or spherical containers, to 
Turkeys, Ducks, Chickens etc. These tubes and containers were latticed 
or perforated, so that the gastric juice could reach the food. As the grain 15 
was never digested, but merely became sourer, he concluded that digestion 
is brought about by the intense pressing and pushing of the inner walls of 
the stomach. In these experiments, the hardest things, such as metal tubes 
and glass containers, and even sharp and jagged objects, were ground by 
the stomachs of these animals. It was thought therefore, that the trituration 20 
of the food was helped on by the numerous tiny stones, sometimes as 
many as two hundred, often to be found in the stomachs of such animals. 
In order to refute this hypothesis, Spallanzani took young pigeons, which 
could not yet have swallowed any stones from their parents' beaks, made 
certain that they obtained none with their food, and cooped them up to 25 
prevent them from finding any. Although these birds had no stones, they 
were also able to digest. 'I began to mix hard objects into their food, some 
iron tubes, some glass beads, some small fragments of glass; yet although 
not a single tiny stone had been found in the stomachs of these pigeons, 
the metal tubes were ground (froisses), and the beads and fragments of 30 
glass were broken up and worn down (emousses), without leaving the 
slightest trace of injury on the walls of the stomach.'l 
+ 
The two digestions are particularly to be distinguished in the case of 
drink. Drink exudes through the walls of the stomach and the cellular 
tissue into the urinary vessels, from which it is evacuated. Beer is a diuretic. 35 
Asparagus plants impart a special odour to the urine only a few minutes 
after they have been eaten, which is the effect of immediate digestion by 
1 'Experiences sur la digestion de l'homme et de differentes especes d'animaux, par l'abbe 
Spallanzani (par Jean Senebier, Geneve 1783).' pp. 1-27. 
160 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
means of the cellular tissue. The odour subsequently passes off, and only 
reoccurs eight to twelve hours later, when the digestion proper and the 
+ discharge of excrements is being completed. Treviranus cites another in-
stance of this immediate digestion (loc. cit. vol. IV, p. 404). 'When five 
s ounces of water were injected into a dog, two were vomited, and one 
remained in its stomach; two ounces must therefore have found an exit 
+ through the walls of the stomach.' If a diet consists solely of meat dishes 
for example, it will be so much easier to digest immediately, on account 
of its homogeneity. It is into the animal lymph, which is the universal 
10 element of animality, that the inorganic being is immediately trans-
formed. The animal digests the food from without, as well as it digests 
its own viscera, muscles, nerves and so on, and in the same way that it 
absorbs even the phosphate of lime constituting bones, as it does for 
example when it absorbs the splinters of bone in a fracture. It eradicates 
15 the specific particularity of these formations, and turns it into the general 
lymph or blood; it then specifies this lymph into particular formations 
once agam. 
The other form of digestion involves mediation, and occurs first in higher 
organizations. Of course, its primary moments are also actions of the 
20 organism opposed to external being, but it is no longer general, for it is a 
particular operation of particular animal formations such as the bile and 
the pancreatic juice etc. However, the activity of this mediation does not 
consist of merely passing through the organism, through the four stom-
achs of ruminants for example; nor does it entail various operations and 
25 changes, different stages of processing, as if the foods were being softened 
and seasoned. What is more, it is not an alteration brought about by the 
action of one specific matter upon another, for then the relationship would 
be merely chemical, and its effect nothing more than a neutralization. 
Chemical researches into gastric juice and bile have shown no more than 
30 that the chyme in the stomach is somewhat acidified (not putrid, but tend-
ing rather to resist putrefaction), and that the acidity is removed by the 
+ bile. When the bile is mixed with the chyme, 'a white precipitate is 
formed, which resembles a thick mucilage,' although this no longer con-
tains any acidity, milk will curdle in the stomach.1 This is certainly not 
3S beyond doubt however, and in any case it is by no means the specific 
principle of digestion, for if the precipitate were freed from acidity, it 
would be the same as it was before. The bile is therefore opposed to the 
juice which derives from the great gland or pancreas below the stomach. 
1 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. IV, pp. 467-469. 
F 
161 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
In higher animals, this pancreatic juice takes the place of the lymph which 
occurs in the glands, although it does not differ from it in any essential 
respect. 
Digestion as a whole is therefore as follows. By its hostility towards 
that external to it, the organism divides itself internally in two. The final 5 
product of digestion is the chyle, and this is the same as the animal lymph 
into which the animal in its immediate appropriation transforms its nutri-
ment, which it acquires either fortuitously or on purpose. In the lower 
animals, immediate transformation prevails, but in developed animals, 
digestion consists of the organism's relating itself to external being through 10 
activity which is specified, not immediate. This stage is not much of an 
advance however. The food is first mixed with the general animality of 
the saliva; the pancreatic juice is added to the stomach, and then finally 
the bile, which is resinous and inflammable, and of prime importance. 
Chemical analysis of the bile indicates nothing more specific than that it 15 
is igneous. We know also that bile flows into the stomach when we are + 
angry, and it is common knowledge that there is a connection between 
the bile, the stomach, and the liver. A physiology which investigated such 
connections would be extremely interesting; it might explain for example 
why a feeling of shame is accompanied by blushing in the face and bosom. + 
Just as anger is the feeling of being-for-self which flares up when a person 
is offended, so bile is the being-for-self which the animal organism turns 
on this potency posited within it from without; for the pancreatic juice 
and the bile attack the chyme. The bile, which is this active destruction, 
in which the organism has returned into itself, originates in the spleen. 25 
The spleen presents physiologists with certain difficulties. It is a sluggish 
organ belonging to the venous system, and related to the liver. It seems to 
function solely as a focal point for venous inertia, in opposition to the 
lung. This sluggish being-for-self, which has its seat in the spleen becomes + 
the bile when it is ignited. Animals possess liver and bile as soon as they are 30 
developed, that is to say, as soon as they do not merely digest immediately 
or simply remain at the lymphatic stage. 
The main point is however, that although the organism is active in a 
mediatory and differentiated manner, it does not abandon its universality, 
while at the same time it operates chemically upon external objects. It 3S 
therefore resembles fractured crystals, which display their characteristic 
inner formation as a particular mode of their determinate being. The 
animal becomes inwardly differentiated because it behaves in a differen-
tiated manner. In other words, as the animal is involved in the struggle 
with external being, its relationship with it has no reality, because the in- 40 
162 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
version of this external being has also been brought about implicitly 
through the power of the animal lymph. Consequently, the animal is not 
aware of its own self when it attacks this food. The immediate and precise 
result of this is however, that as the animal comes to itself, and recognizes 
5 that it constitutes this power, it reproaches itself for having become in-
volved with the external powers, and turns against itself and against its 
former illusion. By doing this however, it abandons its state of outward 
orientation, and returns to itself By overcoming inorganic potency, the 
animal overcomes animality itself, it does not overcome inorganic potency 
10 as such. The true externality of animal being is not the external object, but 
its irritated hostility towards external being. Animal being has to free 
itself from mistrusting itself in this way; it has to overcome this false bent, 
which makes the struggle with the object look like the work of the sub-
ject. In this struggle with that external to it, organic being is on the point 
15 of putting itself at a disadvantage, for it hinders itself somewhat in the face 
of this inorganic being. It is its own process, its being involved with ex-
ternal being, that the organism has to overcome, and its activity therefore 
runs counter to its outward orientation. This activity is the means to 
which the organism reduces itself, although only in order to return to 
20 itself through removing and discarding this means. If the organism were 
actively hostile to inorganic being, it would not get its due; in its precise 
constitution it is however the mediation of engaging itself with inorganic 
being, and yet returning into itself This negation of outward orientated 
+ activity has a double determination, for while the organism excerns its 
25 hostile activity towards inorganic being, and posits its immediate self-
identity, it also reproduces itself in this self-preservation. 
The Notion of digestion is therefore as follows. After the mediation of 
digestion has simply posited that which is already implicit, and the nutri-
ment which enters the atmosphere of living being has been overcome, 
30 organic being returns into itself out of this opposition, and concludes the 
matter by laying hold of itself The phenomena which correspond to this 
Notion have already been considered (p. 162). It is through this process 
of assimilation that the animal acquires its reality and individuality, for by 
specifying itself into the main differences of animal lymph and bile in its 
35 relation with individual being, it has proved its animal individuality, and 
by negating its other, it has posited itself as subjectivity and real being-for-
self As animal being has now acquired the individuality of real being-for-
self, this self-relatedness is immediate self-diremption and division, and 
the constituting of subjectivity is the immediate self-repulsion of the 
40 organism. Consequently, differentiation does not occur solely within 
163 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
organic being itself, but is rather a self, producing itself as a self-externality. 
The plant falls apart into its differentiation, and there can be no doubt that 
animal being also displays differences. In the case of animal being however, 
the independent being from which it distinguishes itself is not merely 
something external, but is at the same time posited as being identical with 5 
it. This real production, in which the animal duplicates itself by repelling 
itself, constitutes the final stage of animality in general. This real process 
in its turn has three forms: (a) the form of abstract, formal repulsion, (b) 
the nisus formativus, and (c) the propagation of the species. In nature, these + 
three apparently heterogeneous processes are essentially inter-connected. 10 
In many animals, the excretory and genital organs, which constitute the 
highest and lowest features of animal organization, are intimately con-
nected: just as speech and kissing on the one hand, and eating, drinking 
and spitting on the other, all focus upon the mouth. 
The conclusion of the process of assimilation is excretion, which is the 15 
abstract repulsion of itself by which the animal constitutes its self-external-
ity. As the animal only converts itself into an external being, this external-
ity is inorganic; it is an abstract other which is not identical with the 
animal. In thus separating itself from itself, the organism expresses its 
loathing for its lack of self-reliance; it does this by giving up the struggle, 20 
and ridding itself of the bile which it has discharged. Consequently, the 
significance of the excrements is merely that through them the organism 
acknowledges its error, and rids itself of its entanglement with external 
things. This is confirmed by the chemical composition of the excrements. 
The moment of excretion is usually regarded as nothing but the necessary 25 
evacuation of useless and unusable material. The animal need not have 
ingested anything useless or superfluous however, and although there is 
such a thing as indigestible material, the material evacuated in the excre-
ments is either mainly assimilated, or consists of whatever is added to the 
ingested matters by the organism itself, i.e. the bile, which has the function 30 
of combining with the victuals. 'The healthier the animal, and the more 
digestible the food it consumes, the smaller will be the amount of un-
decomposed fodder evacuated through its rectum, and the more homo-
geneous will be the composition of its excrements. However, even the 
dung of the healthiest animals invariably contains a fibrous residue of in-
35 
gested food. The principal ingredients of dung are however substances 
which originate in the gastric juices, especially the bile. When he analyzed 
human excrements, Berzelius found undecomposed bile, albumen, chol-
oidic acid, and two peculiar substances, one of which looks like glue, and 
the other of which only forms from the choloidic acid and the biliary 40 
164 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
+ albumen when the excrements are exposed to the air. Through its rectum, 
the human body excretes bile, albumen, two peculiar animal matters, 
biline, carbonate, muriate and phosphate of soda, phosphate of magnesia 
and phosphate of lime. Through its urinary organs it evacuates mucus, 
5 lactic, uric and benzoic acid, muriate of soda, muriate of ammonia, phos-
phate and hydrofiuate of lime etc. All these matters are not merely ex-
traneous substances incapable of being assimilated; they are the very con-
stituents of the animal organs. The constituents of the urine are to be 
+ found elsewhere in the body, principally in the bones. Many of these 
10 matters also enter into the composition of the hair, others into that of the 
+ muscles and the brain. Superficially considered, this comparison seems to 
indicate that a greater amount of matter is assimilated through digestion 
than can be appropriated by the organs which are to be nourished by it, 
and that it is this unchanged surplus which is evacuated through the 
15 excretory organs. Closer investigation will make it evident however, that 
there are disproportions between the constituents of the nutriment, the 
assimilated materials and the matters excreted, which cannot be brought 
into harmony with this conclusion.' The following is certainly evidence 
of disproportions between the nutriments and the assimilated materials, 
20 though it is hardly evidence of disproportions between the assimilated 
materials and the matters excreted. 'These disproportions are particularly 
+ evident in phosphoric acid and lime. Fourcroy and Vauquelin found more 
phosphate of lime in horse-dung, and more carbonate and phosphate of 
lime in bird-mute than could be extracted from the food consumed. In 
25 the case of birds on the other hand, a certain quantity of the silica in their 
food disappears. Perhaps the same might also be true of sulphur,' which 
is also found in excrements. 'Natron however is found in the bodies of 
herbivorous animals, whose foods are devoid of any significant quantity 
of this salt. On the other hand, the urine of Lions and Tigers contains a 
+ great deal of potash, instead of natron. It is more than likely therefore, 
that separations and combinations occur generally in all living bodies, and 
that they are more powerful than the chemical agents known at present'.1 
They are still supposed to be chemical therefore! Is there never to be any 
progression beyond the chemical sphere? The truth of the organism's 
3S activity is that it is purposive however, for it consists precisely of attaining 
its end and then discarding its means. Consequently, bile and pancreatic 
juice etc. are nothing but the organism's own process, whiCh it gets rid 
of in material shape. The result of the process is the satiation or sentience 
1 Treviranus, loc. cit. vol. IV, pp. 480-482; 614-618. 
165 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which is aware that completeness has countered its previous deficiency. 
The understanding will always keep to the mediations as such, and regard 
them as external relationships comparable with those of the mechanical 
and chemical spheres. These spheres are however completely subordinate 
to free animation and sentience. The understanding regards its knowledge 5 
as being superior to speculation, which it looks down upon. It remains 
limited to the sphere of finite mediation however, and is therefore unable 
to grasp animation as such. 
3. The nisus formativus 
As Blumenbach defmed it, the nisus formativus is principally reproduc-
+ 
tion, but here it is not to be understood as such. The mechanical drive, as + 
an instinct, constitutes the third moment; it is the unity of the ideal nature 
of the theoretical process, and of the real process of digestion. Primarily 
however, it is merely their relative totality, for the generic process is the 
true inner totality, the third moment of the whole. That which is assimi-
lated here is an externality belonging to the inorganic nature of the 15 
animal; in its assimilation however, it is at the same time allowed to remain 
as an external object. Consequently, the nisus formativus resembles ex-
cretion by being a self-externalization, but by externalizing itself, it 
reproduces the form of the organism within the external world. The ob-
ject is formed in a way that can satisfy the subjective need of the animal; 20 
here however, appetite does not merely stand in a hostile relation to the 
external world, for peace prevails in the face of external existence. Ap-
petite is satisfied and restrained at one and the same time therefore, and the 
organism only objectifies itself by disposing of inorganic material for its 
own purpose. Here therefore, the practical and theoretical relationships 25 
are united. The form can satisfy the drive without the object's being 
sublated, but this is only one side of the nisus formativus. The other side 
consists of the animal's excreting formations from itself It does not do 
this on account of a loathing, and a desire to be rid of them however; the 
excrements which are externalized are formed so as to satisfy the animal's 30 
need. 
This mechanical instinct makes its appearance as an intentional and 
knowing act of nature, and it is this determination of purposiveness which 
makes it difficult to grasp. It has always seemed most remarkable on 
account of its having been customary to grasp rationality only as external 35 
purposiveness, and to get no further than a sensuous mode of intuition in 
166 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the general interpretation of animation. The nisus formativus is in fact 
analogous to the understanding as a self-conscious entity; but because of 
this, one must not think of the purposive action of nature as self-conscious 
understanding. Each step involved in the consideration of nature is out of 
5 the question unless the end has been perceived. The end is precisely that 
which is predetermined and active, and which preserves itself by assimilat-
ing the other to which it relates itsel£ The Notion is the relation between 
these moments; it is a formation of the external being or the secretions, 
which have a connection with the animal's need. As mechanical instinct 
10 however, this Notion is only the inner implicitness, the mere unconscious 
overseer of the animal; it first constitutes its being-for-self in thought, in 
the human artist. This explains the observation made by Cuvier that in-
stinct is most prominent in insects, and diminishes in accordance with the 
+ height of an animal's grading. By virtue of this internal Notion, every-
15 thing is a means, i.e. everything is related to a unity. It is related in such a 
way, that if the unity (which in this case is living being) were devoid of 
this means, it would have no being. The means is at the same time only a 
moment sublated within the whole, it is not independent, it has no being-
in-and-for-itsel£ Similarly, for the Earth, even the Sun itself is a means, 
20 and in the case of the crystal, each of its lines is a means serving the im-
manence of its form. Living being has this higher faculty of constituting 
the activity which forms things external to it, and at the same time, simply 
because they are related to the Notion as a purposive means, of respecting 
their externality. 
25 
The primary form of the mechanical instinct, which we have already 
touched upon, is the instinctive building of nests, burrows and lairs, 
whereby the general totality of the animal's surroundings is its own, al-
though only in respect of its form (see above § 362). Then there is the 
migration of birds and fish, which is related to their climatic sensitivity, 
30 and also the collecting of provisions for the winter, whereby that which is 
to be consumed later by the animal becomes part of its present habitat 
(see above § 361). Animals therefore have relationships with the ground 
on which they lie, and want to make it more comfortable. In satisfying 
the need to lie down therefore, they do not consume something, as they 
35 do in the case of nutriment, but preserve it and merely form it. Nutriment 
is also formed of course, but it completely disappears. This theoretical 
aspect of the nisus formativus is a check on appetite; it does not occur in 
plants, which unlike the animal are unable to check their drives, because 
they do not possess the theoretical nature of sentience. 
Many animals first prepare and equip themselves, and this constitutes the 
167 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
practical aspect of the mechanical instinct. The spider weaves its web in 
order to catch its food for example, and other animals extend their powers 
of feeling and grasping prey by means of their claws and feet: in the case 
of the Polyp, by means of its tentacles. Animals of this kind excrete in 
order to equip themselves from their own bodies. The weapons they ex-
5 
crete are certainly their own productions, and separate themselves from 
the animals at the same time as they are ejected by them. 'In Crabs and 
Brachiopoda, caecal appendages (tufts, villi) in the intestinal canal take the • 
place of the liver and the pancreas, and in general of the whole apparatus 
of glandular organs which promotes digestion and nutrition in higher 10 
classes of animals.' (The oesophagus, stomach, intestinal canal, is one long 
tube, although it is, 'divided by contractions and sphincter muscles into 
several sections, varying in length, width and texture). In insects, not only 
does the same thing occur, but there is also no trace whatever of glands. 
In Spiders, these blind-sacs,' (inside the body) 'which resemble intestines, 15 
provide the material for web-making, while in caterpillars and similar 
larvae, they provide the material for the cocoon,' the transformation into + 
the chrysalis. 'In the larva of the Puss moth, they supply the liquid it ejects + 
when it is irritated, and in Bees, the poison imparted by the sting of this 
insect. It is moreover in sacs such as these that insects elaborate all the 20 
juices required for procreation. In the male, both sides of the body are 
equipped with an organ consisting of an extremely long but very delicate 
and narrow canal, which is coiled inwards, and which corresponds to the 
epididymus in mammals. From it, a further duct passes on to the penis. In + 
the female, there is a double ovary etc. All insects in their larval state are 25 
completely devoid of genitals, and some insects such as Worker-bees lack 
them throughout the whole of their life-span.' The only way in which 
these asexual Bees produce themselves is by building cells and excreting 
honey; they are sterile flowers as it were, and do not attain to the propaga-
tion of the species. 'With regard to this point, there is the remarkable law 30 
that in all cases of asexuality among insects, the genitals are replaced by 
other organs, which supply a material for constructional purposes. The 
converse of this law is not true however. Spiders for example, construct 
their webs from a material elaborated by their own organs, but they are 
not asexual.'l Caterpillars merely eat and excrete, and are devoid of any 35 
external genitals; the nisus formativus comes into play at the second stage, 
when the cocoon is spun for the chrysalis, while the life of coupling 
belongs to the Butterfly. 'There are a few insects which retain the shape 
1 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. I, pp. 366 (364)-367; 369-370. 
r68 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
they have when they emerge from the egg throughout the whole of their 
life-span. All the species of the Spider family have this characteristic, as 
well as many species from the orders of woodlice and Mites. All other 
creatures of this class undergo a partial or total transformation during their 
5 life-span. Where metamorphosis is only partial, the main difference 
between the larva and the pupa, and between the pupa and the adult 
insect, consists for the most part in nothing but their having fewer, or less 
completely developed organs. On the other hand, where total transforma-
tion occurs, the perfect insect no longer bears any trace of what it was in 
10 its larval state. The innumerable muscles of the larva have disappeared, and 
quite different ones have taken their place; similarly, head, heart and 
+ trachea etc. have a completely different structure'.2 
In the nisus formativus, the creature has brought itself forth and yet 
remained in its initial immediacy; it is at this juncture therefore that it 
15 first attains to the self-enjoyment of determinate sentience. Previously, the 
creature was the immediate sensation of a simply abstract being-in-self, a 
mere enjoyment of external things. As such, it merely has a sensation of 
the way in which it is determined. It certainly finds satisfaction in appeas-
ing its hunger and thirst, but this is not yet the self-satisfaction of which it 
20 now becomes capable. By adapting external being to itself, it possesses and 
enjoys itself in its environment. The mechanical instinct also accounts for 
the voice, in which the ideal nature of subjectivity is articulated into air, 
and the subject hears itself in the external world. It is the birds in particular 
which abandon themselves to this blithe self-enjoyment. A bird's vocal 
25 faculty is not confined to expressing a need, and is not simply a cry, for its 
song is the free expression of what is ultimately an immediate self-enjoy-
+ ment. 
Through the process with external nature, the animal as 
a single individual endows its self-certainty or subjective 
30 Notion with truth and objectivity. Consequently, this produc-
tion of itself is a self-preservation or reproduction} although as 
subjectivity has become a product, its immediacy is at the same 
time implicitly sublated. Linked up with itselfin this way, the 
Notion is determined as the concrete universal or genus, which 
2 TreviraIJus, ibid., pp. 372-374. 
F* 
169 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
enters into a relationship and a process with the singularity of 
subjectivity .1 
Addition. At this juncture, the significance of the appeased appetite is not that 
the individual brings itself forth as this particular being, but that it brings itself 
forth as a universal, as a ground of individuality, for which it is merely form. s 
The determinate appetite is therefore the universal which has returned to itself, + 
and which contains individuality in an immediate manner. The theoretical 
return (of sense) into itself, only brings forth a general deficiency, while through + 
the return of individuality into itself, the deficiency produced is positive. The 
deficient being is completed by itself, it is a dual individual. Initially, the 10 
animal is restricted to itself; secondly, it brings itself forth at the expense of 
inorganic nature, by assimilating it. The third relationship, which is the 
union of the first two, is the generic process, in which the animal relates 
itself to itself by relating itself to one of its kind. As in the first process, it 
relates itself to a living being, and as in the second process, it relates itself 15 
at the same time to a being which it finds before it. 
c 
Generic process2 
(The generic process) 
The genus constitutes the concrete substance of the subject, and 
is in implicit and simple unity with its singularity. As the univer-
sal is basic division however, it may proceed from this its self-
diremption as a unity which has being-for-self, and so posit 20 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'The disjunction of the singularity which comes to 
itself within the genus, constitutes sexual differentiation, which is the subject's relation to an object 
which is itself just such a subject.' This sentence was omitted from the third edition, in which the 
sex-relationship no longer followed on immediately after the nisus formativus. In the third edition, 
the genus and the species, as the object of zoology, formed the first member of the division which 
also included the sex-relationship and disease. The original order would seem to be more logical 
however, and I have therefore retained it. To quote the first edition, and the words are much the 
same in the second, 'The sex-relationship .•. has the universal Notion, as the essence of the indi-
viduals, as its universal extreme. Primarily. the genus exists within it ouly as this single individual, 
while in the second instance, it particularizes itself into the species, and finally into singularity itself, 
through the sinking away of which. it reveals itself as the true universal'. 
Note by Michelet. 
2 Instead of making Generic process correspond to Shape and Assimilation as the third main 
division of The animal organism. it might have seemed more to the purpose to present the Type 
of the individual as sub-divided into the Process of formation. Assimilation, and The sex-relationship, 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
itself within existence as subjective universality. This process by 
which the universal links up with itself, contains both the negation 
of the merely internal universality of the genus, and that of the 
merely immediate singularity in which living being still belongs 
5 to nature. The negation of this singularity exhibited in the preced-
ing process (see § 366) is merely primary and immediate. In this 
generic process, it is only the being which merely lives that 
perishes, for as such it does not transcend naturality. As the mo-
ments of the generic process are not yet based on the subjective 
10 universal of a single subject however, they fall apart and exist as 
various particular processes, which terminate in the various kinds 
of death suffered by living being. 
Addition. Consolidated by means of its sentience, the individual has 
acquired breadth so to speak; its immediate singularity is sublated, and 
15 singular being no longer needs to have a relationship with inorganic 
nature. With the disappearance of its determinations as an exclusive sin-
gularity, the Notion acquires the further determination of the subject's 
determining itself as a universal. This determination falls into a further 
basic division and exclusion of an other; it has the determination of being 
20 identical for this other however, and of existing for it as this identity. It 
is thus that we have the genus, the determination of which is its coming 
into existence in distinct opposition to singularity, which is the generic 
process in general. It is certainly true that in the individual, the genus fails 
to attain to free existence and universality; at this juncture however, 
2S although on the one hand the genus is also still identical with the indi-
vidual in a merely immediate manner, on the other hand, the individual 
has already assumed a singular subjectivity, and is therefore also distinct 
from the genus. This difference constitutes a process, the result of which 
is that the universality of the genus asserts itself, and immediate singularity 
30 is negated. This submergence constitutes the death of the individual. This 
and to make Zoology and Medicine, which are two sub-divisions of Generic process, follow Ana-
tomy and Physiology as the last two of four main divisions (see above p. 109 note.). In addition to 
the remark accompanying § 370 in the first and second edition (see below p. 177), it is made quite 
clear that the type of the individual, which was first presented merely as Notion completed within 
itself, has now in the second instance to unfold itself into the sequence of animal genera and species. 
To that which is subordinate in this sequence, that above it is invariably inorganic nature as a genus, 
and through this genus, that which is subordinate perishes. In the third instance, the animal dies in an 
immanent manner, and not into a genus which is external to it. It is thus that it then leaves itself 
behind in order that it may itself bring universality into actuality in a positive manner (cf. § 371, 
Add. III. 193,25). 
Note by Michelet 
171 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
brings organic nature to a close, for by coming into its own through the 
death of the singular being, the genus becomes its own object, and it is 
this that constitutes the proceeding forth of spirit. We have still to con-
sider this submergence of singularity within the genus. The relationship 
of the genus to the singular being is not always the same however, so that 5 
we also have to distinguish between the particular processes which con-
stitute the various kinds of death suffered by the living individual. Thus, 
the generic process has three forms. The first is the sex-relationship, 
through which the production of the kind consists of the procreation of 
individuals through the death of other individuals of the same kind, i.e. 10 
the individua1' s dying after having reproduced itself as another individual. 
Secondly, the genus particularizes itself into its various species, and com-
porting themselves as individuals in opposition to other individuals, these 
species at the same time constitute inorganic nature for one another, for 
they comport themselves as a genus does to individuality, and so give rise 15 
to violent death. The third form is the relationship of the individual to 
itself as genus, within a single subjectivity. This relationship is partly the 
transitory disproportion of an ailment, and partly the terminating state 
in which the genus as such maintains itself through the individual's passing 
over into existence as a universal, i.e. natural death. 
20 
I. The sex-relationship 
This relationship is a process which begins with a need, for 
while the individual as a singular being is not adequate to the 
immanent genus,2 it is at the same time the identical se1f-
relation of the genus in a single unity. It therefore feels this 
deficiency.3 Consequently, the genus is present in the indi-
25 
vidual as a strain opposed to the inadequacy of its single 
actuali ty; it is present as an urge to attain its sentience in the 
1 In the third edition, this and the following paragraph came after § 370. It began with the 
following reference to 'The genus and the species', which preceded it, 'This primary diremption 
of the genus into species, and the further determination of these species into the immediately exclusive 
being-for-self of singularity, is merely a negative and hostile attitude towards others. However, the 
genus is to the same extent singularity, as an essentially affirmative self-relatedness within the genus. 
In this self-relatedness, the singularity is an exclusive individual opposed to another of its kind, 
continues itself in this other, and is sensible of itself within it.' 
2 Addition to the first edition, 'this inadequacy still falls into an external reflection'. 
3 Addition to the first edition, 'and constitutes natural sexual differentiation'. 
172 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
other of its genus, to integrate itself through union with 
this other, and by means of this mediation to bring the genus 
+ into existence by 1 ink i n g its elf in t 0 it. This constitutes generation. 1 
Addition. Since the ideality of inorganic nature is posited through the 
5 process with it, the animal has consolidated its sentience and objectivity 
in its own sel£ This is not merely implicit sentience, but a sentience which 
is existent and animated. In the separateness of the two sexes, the extremes 
constitute totalities of sentience, and in its sex-drive, the animal produces 
itself as a sentience, as a totality. In the nisus formativus, organic being 
10 became a dead product; it was certainly freely released from organic 
being, but it was only a superficial form imposed upon an external 
material, so that this externality was not objective to it as a free and 
indifferent subject. This case bears a resemblance to the process of assimi-
lation however, for both sides are now independent individuals. The dif-
15 ference is that they are not related to each other as organic and inorganic 
beings however, for they are both organic beings belonging to the genus, 
and they therefore exist only as a single kind. Their union is the disappear-
ance of the sexes, in which the simple genus has come into being. The 
animal has an object with which it feels an immediate identity; this 
20 identity is the moment of the first process (of formation), which is added 
to the determination of the second process (of assimilation). The relation 
of one individual to another of its kind is the substantial relationship of 
the genus. The nature of each permeates both, and both find themselves 
within the sphere of this universality. Both are implicitly a single genus, 
25 the same subjective vitality, and in the process they also posit this as being 
so. At this juncture, the Idea of nature is actual in the male and female 
couple; up till now their identity and their being-for-self merely had being 
for us in our reflection, but they are now experienced by the sexes them-
selves in their infinite reflection into each other. This feeling of universal-
30 ity is the supreme moment of the animal's capabilities, but within it, its 
concrete universality never occurs for it as a theoretical object of intuition. 
If it did, it would be thought or consciousness, in which alone the genus 
attains to free existence. Consequently, a contradiction occurs; the uni-
versality of the genus, which is the identity of the individuals, is different 
35 from the particular individuality of these individuals. The individual is 
only one of the two individuals, and exists merely as a singularity, not as 
1 First and second edition, 'and through this mediation, the concrete universal is linked up with 
itself, and assumes singular actuality.' 
173 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
their unity. The animal sublates this difference by its activity. The basic 
genus constitutes the one extreme of the syllogism, for every process is 
syllogistic in form. The vitality which wants to bring itself forth, finds 
itself placed within the genus. The genus is the driving subjectivity and 
essence of the individuals, and by straining in opposition to the inadequacy 5 
of their singular actuality, it constitutes the mediation or middle term of 
the syllogism. It is precisely this that drives the individuals to realize their 
sentience only within another of their kind. As the actuality assumed by 
the genus has the form of an immediate existence, it is of course only a 
single actuality. By means of it, the genus links itself up with the other 10 
extreme of singularity. 
As the different sexes constitute the sex-drive as differentials, there must 
be a difference in their formation; their mutual determinateness must exist 
as posited through the Notion. The implicitness of both sides is not merely 
neutral, as it is in chemism however, for on account of the original identity 15 
of their formation, the same type underlies both the male and female genitals. 
The difference is however, that in one or the other of these genitals, one or the 
other part is essential; in the female this is necessarily the undifferentiated 
element, while in the male it is the sundered element of opposition. This identity 
is most conspicuous in the lower animals. 'In some Grasshoppers, such as the 20 
Gryllus verruccivorus, the large testicles, which consist of fascicularly coiled 
vessels, resemble the ovaries, which are equally large, and which consist of 
oviducts coiled in a similarly fasciculate manner. Similarly, in the male Gaijly, + 
the testicles not only have precisely the same general outline as the thicker and 
larger ovaries, but also consist of delicate vesicles, which are almost oviform and 25 
oblong, and which stand on" end on the substance of the testicles, like ova on an 
ovary.'l The identification of th~ female uterus in the male parts has presented + 
the greatest difficulty. The_ scrotum has ineptly been mistaken for it,2 for it is 
actually the testicle which apparently corresponds to the female ovary. In the 
male, it is however the prostate which corresponds to the female uterus; in him 30 
therefore, the uterus is reduced to a gland, an indifferent generality. Ackermann + 
has demonstrated this very well from his hermaphrodite, which has a uterus, 
although the formation of its other organs is male. This uterus not only occupies 
the position of the prostrate however, for the ejaculatory ducts also pass through 
its substance, and open into the urethra at the crista galli. What is more, the + 
lips of the female pudendum are shrunken scrota, which accounts for the 
labia pudendi of Ackermann's hermaphrodite having been filled with a 
1 Schubert, 'Ideas for a general history of life' pt. I, p. 185. 
2 Op. cit., pp. 205-206. 
174 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
kind of testicular formation. Finally, the medial line of the scrotum is split 
in the female, and forms the vagina. From this, it is quite understandable that 
one sex should change into the other. On the one hand, the uterus in the 
male is reduced to a mere gland, while on the other, the male testicle in the 
5 female remains enclosed within the ovary, fails to emerge into opposition, and 
does not become an independent and active cerebrality. The clitoris moreover, 
is inactive feeling in general; in the male on the other hand, it has its counter-
+ part in active sensibili ty, the swelling vital, the effusion of blood into the corpora 
cavernosa and the meshes of the spongy tissue of the urethra. The female 
10 counterpart of this effusion of blood in the male consists of the menstrual dis-
charges. Thus, the simple retention of the conception in the uterus, is 
differentiated in the male into productive cerebrality and the external 
+ vital. On account of this difference therefore, the male is the active principle; 
as the female remains in her undeveloped unity, she constitutes the principle of 
15 conception. 
+ 
Conception must not be regarded as consisting of nothing but the ovary 
and the male semen, as if the new formation were merely a composition of 
the forms or parts of both sides, for the female certainly contains the 
material element, while the male contains the subjectivity.1 Conception 
20 is the contraction of the whole individual into the simple self-abandoning unity 
of its representation. The seed is precisely this simple representation; it is a 
wholly singular point, as is its name and its entire self. Consequently, conception 
consists of nothing but the unification of these opposed and abstract represen-
+ tations. 
25 
The product is the negative identity of dUferentiated singu-
larities, and as a resultant genus, an asexual life. In its natural 
aspect, it is merely the implicitness of this product which 
constitutes this genus however. This dUfers from the singular 
beings whose dUferentiation has subsided in to it, 2 and is itself 
30 an immediate singular, although it has the determination of 
developing itself into the same natural individuality, and into a 
+ 
1 Aristotle, 'Metaphysics' VIII 4: 'What is the material cause of man? The menses. What is the 
moving cause? The semen.' 
Note by Michelet. 
2 First edition, 'the singular beings which have subsided into it'. 
175 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
corresponding sexual differentiation and transience. This 
process of propagation issues forth into the progress of the spurious 
infinite. The genus preserves itself only through the perishing of 
the individuals, which fulfil their determination in the process of 
generation, and in so far as they have no higher determination than + 
this, pass on to death.1 
Addition. Thus, the animal organism has run through its cycle, and now con-
stitutes the asexual and fecundated universal. It has become the absolute genus, 
which is however the death of the particular individual. Lower animal organisms 10 
such as Butterflies die immediately after generation therefore, for their 
singularity is their life, and they have sublated it within the genus. Higher 
organisms survive the act of generation, for they have a higher degree of in-
dependence; their death is the developed dissolution of their shape, which we 
shall see presently as disease. The genus brings itself forth by negating its 15 
differentiation; it exists merely in a series of single living beings however, 
not in-and-for-itself. Consequently, the sublation of each contradiction 
invariably gives rise to a fresh one. The different individuals perish within 
the generic process, for it is only outside the unity of this process, which is 
the true actuality, that they are different. In the feeling of love however, 20 
the selfishness of the single being is negated, together with its self-con-
tained aloofness. The single shape is no longer able to preserve itself there-
fore, and so perishes, for only that which is absolute in its self-identity, 
i.e. the universal which is for the universal, is self-preserving. The genus 
is merely implicit within the animal however, it does not exist within it, 25 
and it is only within spirit that it is eternal in its being-in-and-for-sel£ 
The transition to the existent genus takes place implicitly, in the Idea, in 
the Notion, that is to say, in the sphere of eternal creation. There how-
ever, the sphere of nature is closed. 
1 First edition, 'However, within this new life, in which the* singularity is sublated, the same 
subjectivity is at the same time positively preserved. This constitutes the return of the genus into 
itself. Within it, the genus as such has entered into the being-for-self of its reality, and hast tran-
scenbed nature.' ~ 
* Addition to the second edition, 'immediate'. 
t Addition to the second edition, 'nevertheless'. 
~ Addition to the second edition, 'It is this higher sphere which has subsequently to be con-
sidered.' 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
2. The genus and the species 
(Zoology) 
The universal type of the animal determined by the Notion, 
lies at the basis of the various forms and orders of animals. 
This type is exhibited by nature partly in the various stages 
of its development from the simplest organization to the 
5 most perfect, in which nature is the instrument of spirit, 
and partly in the various circumstances and conditions of 
elemental nature. Developed into singularity, the animal species 
distinguishes itself from others both in itself and by means of itself, 
and has being-for-self through the negation of that from which it 
10 has distinguished itself. In this hostile relation to others, in which 
they are reduced to inorganic nature, violent death constitutes 
the natural fate of individuals. 
Remark2 
In zoology, as in the natural sciences in general, the main 
15 concern has been the discovery of simple and unmistak-
able characteristics by which classes and orders etc. may be 
recognized. A wider prospect, taking in the objective nature 
of the forms themselves, has only opened up since there has 
been less preoccupation with the classification of animals 
1 In the third edition, this paragraph constituted the first subdivision of Generic process, and 
began with the following words, 'At first, the genus in its implicit universality simply particularizes 
itself into species.' 
2 In the first and second edition, this remark began with the following passage, 'As the animal 
is the actuality of the Idea oflife, the essence of its Notion is the Notion itself. Through the nature 
of its universality, the Notion has the possibility of a determinate being which varies in simplicity 
and development, and which, to a varying extent, corresponds to it. Consequently, the Notion in 
its determinateness cannot be grasped by means of this determinate being. The developed Notion 
emerges into the full display of its moments in the classes, which appear as a particular determinate 
being, opposed to the others; but even here, its determinate being can be imperfect. In order to say 
that such a determinate being is imperfect however, it is necessary to have presupposed the Notion. 
When the empirical determinate being is presupposed * in order to recognize the nature and essential 
determinations of the animal, or to identify the essential organs of a class, it is impossible to establish 
a fixed determination, t and what is more, none of the particular characteristics seems to be indis-
pensable. For example, Acephala have been cited to show that man also might live without a brain.' 
* In the first edition, this read as follows, 'When, as was usually the case, the determinate being 
was presupposed .. .' 
t Addition to the first edition, 'empirically'. 
177 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
by means of what are called artificial systems. In recent 
times, all the empirical sciences have made great advances 
in the accumulation of observations, but in the extent to 
which its material has tended to conform to the Notion, 
scarcely one of them has advanced as much as zoology has 5 
by means of its auxiliary science, comparative anatomy. 
Thoughtful observation of nature, primarily by French naturalists, 
has led to the division of plants into monocotyledons and dicoty-
ledons, and in the animal world, to the cogent distinction based 
upon the absence or presence of vertebrae. By means of this 10 
distinction, the fundamental classification of animals has, in its 
essentials, been led back to that which had already been observed 
by Aristotle.-What is more, particular importance has been + 
attached to the habit of the individual forms, which has 
been regarded as a coherence determining the construction 15 
of every part; this has enabled Cuvier, the illustrious foun-
der of comparative anatomy, to boast that from a single 
bone, he could make out the essential nature of the entire 
animal. In addition to this, the general type of the animal + 
has been traced in its barest initial indication, as well as in 20 
the various formations, which appear. in an extremely 
imperfect and disparate manner; it has also been possible 
to grasp the significance of the interrelated organs and 
functions. It is precisely by means of this that the general 
type of the animal has been lifted out of particularity, 25 
and raised into its universality.-An important aspect of 
this approach is the recognition of the way in which nature 
shapes and adapts this organism to the particular element 
in which it places it, to climate, to a range of nutrition, 
and in general, to the environment which it finds about it. 30 
This environment can also be a particular genus of plants 
or another genus of animals (see § 361 Add.). For the deter-
mination of the species however, the distinguishing characteristics 
have, by a happy intuition, been selected from the animal's 
weapons, i.e. its teeth and claws etc. This is valuable, because it 35 
is by its weapons that the animal, in distinguishing itself from 
others, establishes and preserves itself as a being-for-self. 
The immediacy of the Idea of life consists of the Notion 1 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'although it alone is that which is determined in and 
for itself.' 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
as such failing to exist in life, submitting itself therefore to 
the manifold conditions and circumstances of external 
nature, and being able to appear in the most stunted of 
forms; the fruitfulness of the earth allows life to break 
5 forth everywhere, and in all kinds of ways. The animal 
world is perhaps even less able than the other spheres of 
nature to present an immanently independent and rational 
system of organization, to keep to the forms which would 
be determined by the Notion, and to proof them in the face 
10 of the imperfection and mixing of conditions, against 
mingling, stuntedness and intermediaries. The feebleness of 
the Notion in nature in general,! not only subjects the formation 
ofindividuals to external accidents, which in the developed animal, 
and particularly in man, give rise to monstrosities, but also makes 
15 the genera themselves completely subservient to the changes 
of the external universal life of nature. The life of the 
animal shares in the vicissitudes of this universal life (cf. 
Remark § 392), and consequently, it merely alternates between 
health and disease. The milieu of external contingency contains 
20 very little that is not alien, and as it is continually subjecting 
animal sensibility to violence and the threat of dangers, the 
animal cannot escape a feeling of insecurity J anxiety and 
misery.2 
25 Addition. In that it is a life belonging to nature, the animal is still 
essentially an immediate existence, and is therefore determinate, finite 
and particular. Bound as it is to the infinitely numerous particulariza-
tions of inorganic and vegetable nature, animation always exists as a 
limited species, and the living being is not able to overcome these limi-
30 tations. Universality of existence would constitute thought, and the 
particular character is devoid of this determination; in its relationship 
to nature, living being attains to nothing more than particularity. The 
life which takes up these potencies is capable of the most diverse modi-
fications of formation; it is able to put up with all kinds of con-
35 ditions and to continue to pulsate among them, although the universal 
powers of nature within these conditions never relinquish their overall 
supremacy. 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'which also fails to exist in animals in the firm inde-
pendence of its freedom.' 
2 In the first and second edition, this reads as follows, 'Consequently, the general life of the 
animal appears as a life of illness, and the animal's feelings are those of insecurity, anxiety and misery.' 
179 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
The method used by research which has as its object the classification 
of animals, is to look for the common element to which the concrete 
forms can be reduced, i.e. for a simple sensuous determinateness, which 
moreover is also an external one. There are no such simple determina-
tions however. For example, one might accept the general concept 5 
'Fish', as the common element of what one includes under this name 
when one thinks about it, and then enquire as to the simple determinate-
ness or objective characteristic of fish. The conclusion to be drawn from 
this enquiry would be that fish swim in water, but as a number of land 
animals also do this, it would be insufficient. What is more, swimming 10 
is neither an organ nor a formation; it is mode of the activity of Fish, 
and in no respect is it part of their shape. Simply as a universal, a universal 
such as fish is not bound in any particular mode to its external existence. 
If one now assumes that a common element must be present as a simple 
determinateness, such as fins for example, and such a determinateness is 15 
not to be found, classification will be difficult. In this classification, the 
features and habits of the individual genera and species are used as the 
basis and rule, but the untrammelled variety of life in this genera and 
species excludes all universality. Consequently, the infinity of forms 
exhibited by animal being is not to be pedantically regarded as conform-
20 
ing absolutely to the necessary principle of orders. The general deter-
minations must be made to rule therefore, and the natural forms com-
pared with them. If the natural forms do not tally with this rule, but 
exhibit certain correspondences, agreeing with it in one respect but 
not in another, then it is not the rule, the determinateness of the genus 25 
or class etc. which has to be altered. The rule does not have to conform 
to these existences, they ought to conform to the determinateness, and 
this actuality exhibits deficiency in so far as it fails to conform. Some 
Amphibia are viviparous for example, and like Mammals and Birds, 
breathe by means of lungs; in that they have no breasts, and their heart 30 
has a single ventricle, they resemble Fish however. If one is prepared to 
admit that the works of man are sometimes defective, it must follow that 
those of nature are more frequently so, for nature is the Idea in the mode 
of externality. In man, the basis of these defects lies in his whims, his 
caprice and his negligence, e.g. when he introduces painting into music, 35 
paints with stones in mosaics, or introduces the epic genre into drama. + 
In nature, it is the external conditions which stunt the forms of living 
being; however, these conditions produce these effects because life is 
indeterminate, and also because it is from these externalities that it 
derives its particular determinations. The forms of nature cannot be 40 
180 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
brought into an absolute system therefore, and it is because of this that 
the animal species are exposed to contingency. 
There is subsequently another aspect to this, which is of course that 
the Notion also asserts itself, although only to a certain degree. There is 
5 only one animal type (§ 352 Add. III. 108, 4), and all animal difference is 
merely a modification of it. The main varieties of it are based on the 
same determinations as those we saw earlier in inorganic nature as the 
elements. These stages are therefore also stages in the formation of the 
animal type in general, so that it is possible to recognize from these 
10 determinations the gradings of the various kinds of animal. Two prin-
ciples are therefore effective in determining the difference between 
animal genera. The first principle of classification, which is closer to the 
Idea, is that each subsequent stage is merely a further development of the 
simple animal type; the second is, that the organic type's scale of develop-
15 ment is essentially connected with the elements into which animal life 
is cast. Such a connection occurs only in more highly developed animal 
life however; lower animal life bears little relation to the elements, 
being indifferent to these great differences. These are the main moments 
in the grouping of animal classes, and their further determinateness is 
20 related to the climatic factor. We have already observed (§ 339 Add. 
III. 23, 19) that the comparative uniformity of the flora and fauna of the 
northern hemisphere is a result of the contiguity of the continents, and 
that as the continents of Africa and America taper away towards the 
south, their indigenous animal genera also break up, to an increasing 
25 extent, into species. Whereas animals are determined by climatic differ-
ences therefore, man lives everywhere; although even in the case of man, 
Eskimos and other extreme peoples differ from those of the temperate 
zone. The animal however is subject to a much greater extent to such 
determinations and localities, to mountain, forest and plain etc. In this 
30 case there is no need to search everywhere for determinations of the 
Notion, although traces of them are never absent. 
In the graded scale of development formed by the genera and species, a 
beginning can now be made with the undeveloped animals, in which the 
three systems of sensibility, irritability and reproduction do not yet 
3S exist in differentiation. As animation's most perfect organism, man then 
constitutes the highest stage of the development. Particularly in recent 
times, classification of this kind, based upon the stage of development, 
has been introduced into zoology. It is natural to progress in this way 
from the undeveloped to the higher organism, but in order to under-
40 stand the lower stages, one has to identify the developed organism, for 
181 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY O}1 NATURE 
it is this that constitutes the measure or prototype of its less developed 
counterparts. As everything in it has reached its developed activity, it is 
clear that it is primarily from this developed organism that the unde-
veloped being is to be understood. Infusoria cannot be taken as the basis, 
for in this subdued life, the rudiments of the organism are still so feeble, 5 
that they can only be recognized through prior knowledge of more 
developed animal life. It is dunder-headed to say that the animal is more 
perfect than man however, for although the animal may certainly be 
better formed, it is the harmony of the organization which is the precise 
constituent of its perfection. The universal type which forms the basis 10 
cannot exist as such of course; but as the animal exists, it does so in a 
particularity; just as the perfect beauty of art must always be individualized. 
It is only in spirit that the universal, as ideal or Idea, possesses the uni-
versality of its determinate being. 
We now have to see how the organism determines itself for these 15 
particularities. The organism is alive, and its viscera are determined by 
the Notion, although it also develops entirely in accordance with this 
particularity. This particular determination pervades all the parts of the 
shape, and harmonizes them with one another. This harmony is mainly 
present in the limbs, not in the viscera, for the particularity is precisely 20 
outward orientation towards a determinate inorganic nature. The pre-
valence of this particularization becomes more marked in the higher 
and more completely formed animals however. It is Cuvier who has 
developed this aspect of the science, and he was led to do so as the result 
of his having concerned himself with fossil bones. In order to discover 25 
the animal to which these bones belonged, he had to study their formation, 
and through this, he was led to consider the purposiveness of the way in 
which the individual limbs are related to one another. In the 'Discours 
preliminaire' to his 'Recherches sur les ossements fossiles des quadrupcdes' 
(Paris 1812, p. 58 et seq.) he says, 'Every organized being forms a whole, + 
a unified and closed system, all the parts of which mutually correspond, 
and by means of reciprocal action, contribute to a common purposive 
activity. None of these parts can alter without the others altering also; 
as the result of this, each of them, taken separately, implies and yields all 
the others.' 
35 
'Consequently, if the intestines of an animal are so organized that they 
are only able to digest raw meat, its jaw-bones must also be adapted to 
the swallowing of its prey, its claws to the seizure and tearing of it, and 
its teeth to the biting off and chewing of the flesh. What is more, the 
animal's whole system of motor organs must enable it to pursue and 40 
182 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
overtake other animals, just as its eyes must enable it to see them at a 
distance. It is even necessary that nature should have implanted in the 
animal's brain the instinct by which it conceals itself and lays traps for 
its victims. These are the universal requisites of carnivorous animals, every 
5 one of which has to combine all of them within itself. Particular conditions 
such as the size, the species and the haunt of the prey, also result from the 
particular circumstances within the general forms however, so that not 
only the class, but also the order, the genus and even the species, is ex-
pressed in the form of each part.' 
10 
'In fact, in order that the jaw-bone may seize the prey, the condyle,' 
the organ which moves the jaw-bone, and to which the muscles are 
attached, 'must have a particular shape. The temporal muscles must have 
a certain bulk; this requires a certain hollowing of the bone which re-
ceives them, and of the zygomatic arch (arcade zygomatique) under 
15 which they pass. This zygomatic arch must also have a certain strength, 
in order to provide a requisite support for the masticatory muscle 
(masseter) .' 
The same principle applies throughout the entire organism, 'In order 
that the animal may be able to carry away its prey, there must be a certain 
20 strength in the muscles which lift the head' (the cervical muscles), 'this 
in its turn is closely related to the form of vertebrae to which the muscles 
are attached, and to the form of the occiput, in which they are inserted. 
The teeth must be sharp in order to bite into the flesh, and must have a 
firm base to facilitate the crushing of bones. The claws must have a 
25 certain mobility,' -so that their muscles and bones must be developed; 
the same is true of the feet etc. 
What is more, this harmony also leads on to further points of corres-
pondence, which have an inner connection of another kind. This con-
+ nection is not always so easy to recognize, 'It is easy to see why animals 
30 with hoofs must be herbivorous, for they have no claws for seizing any-
thing else. We can also see why they do not need such large shoulder-
blades, for they can only use their forefeet for supporting their bodies. 
Their herbivorous diet will necessitate teeth with a flat crown which will 
enable them to grind grain and grasses. Grinding requires that this 
35 crown should move horizontally, so that the condyle of the jaw bone 
will not constitute such a tight ginglymus as it does in the carnivorous 
animals,' Treviranus says (loc. cit. vol. I, pp. 198-199), 'In the lower 
jaw-bone on the other hand, instead of incisors, there is a cartilaginous 
pad. Most horned beasts lack canine teeth, and in all of them, the molars 
40 are grooved by serrated transverse furrows. The crowns of these molars 
183 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
are not horizontal, for they are obliquely notched in such a way, that in 
the upper jaw, it is their outer side which is higher, while in the lower 
jaw, it is their inner side, i.e. that closest to the tongue.' 
The following observations by Cuvier also present us with no difficul-
ties, 'It is fitting that those animal species whose teeth are less perfect, 5 
should have a more complex digestive system.' Here he is referring to 
Ruminants, which need a more complex digestive ~ystem of this kind 
mainly because it is more difficult to digest herbivorous fodder. 'How-
ever, I doubt whether anyone who had not discovered the fact by ob-
servation, would have inferred that all Ruminants have cloven hoofs, 10 
and that therefore the dental system of Ungulata which are not ruminants, 
is more perfect than that of the cloven-hoofed or ruminant animals. It + 
is also noticeable that the formation of the teeth and the larger formation 
of the osteology of the feet are generally related.' According to Trevi-
ranus (loc. cit. vol. I, p. 200), most horned animals have no fibulas (Coiter: 
15 
'De quadrupedum sceletia' ch. 2; Camper's 'Natural History of the + 
Orang-outang', p. !O3). In the passage quoted above, Cuvier continues + 
as follows, 'It is impossible to give reasons for these connections; it is 
evident that they are not fortuitous however, for an animal with cloven 
hoofs very often shows an approximation to the non-ruminants in the 20 
arrangement of its teeth and in the structure of its feet. Camels for ex-
ample, which have eye-teeth (canines), and even have two or four 
incisors in their upper jaw-bone, have one bone more in their tarsus,' + 
than other animals whose dental system is less formed. In the case of 
children moreover, their teething, and the development of their ability 25 
to walk and talk, all begin to take place during the course of their second 
year. 
The particularity of the determination brings a harmony into all the 
formations of an animal therefore, 'The minutest facet of bone, the slight- + 
est apophysis, has a determinate character relative to the class, order, 30 
genus and species to which it belongs. Consequently, with nothing but 
the well-preserved end of a bone, it is often possible to determine the 
whole of an animal by means of analogy and comparison, and with as 
much certainty as one would have if one were in possession of the animal 
itself,' -ex ungue leonem, as the saying goes. 'I tried this method out on + 
parts of known animals on many occasions, before I felt that I could use 
it with complete confidence in dealing with fossil bones; its success 
has always been so complete however, that I no longer entertain the 
slightest doubt as to the certainty of the results it has yielded.' 
But although there is a basic and universal type, which nature pu~ 40 
184 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
into effect in animals in such a way, that this effecting is in conformity 
with particularity, everything occurring within an animal must not be 
thought of as having a purpose. In many animals, there are rudiments of 
organs which belong only to the universal type, not to the particularity 
s of these creatures, and which have not yet developed, because they are not 
needed by the animal's particularity. What is more, they can be under-
stood only by means of higher organisms, not by means of these lower 
organisms. For example, Reptiles, Snakes and Fish will be found to have 
the rudiments of feet, which are quite superfluous; similarly, the Whale 
10 has teeth which are not developed, and which, as they are merely rudi-
mentary and hidden in its jaw-bones, serve no purpose. On the other 
hand, man has many features which are only necessary in lower animals; 
he has in his neck the so-called thyroid gland for example, the function 
of which, as it is actually obliterated and defunct, cannot be discovered; 
I s in the pre-natal foetus however, and still more in inferior species of ani-
+ mals, this gland is an active organ. 
It is then the graded scale of formation which provides the basis for 
the main divisions in the general classification of animals. In its inner 
formation, the animal is an unmediated self-production, but in its out-
20 wardly orientated articulation, it is a production mediated by its inorganic 
nature. More closely considered therefore, the difference between the 
forms of the animal world will be found to depend either upon an equi-
librium between these two essential aspects, or upon the animal's existing 
more in accordance with one aspect than with the other, in which case its 
2S formation will be lop-sided. It is through this lop-sidedness that one 
animal is subordinate to another, and yet no animal can be completely 
devoid of either aspect. Man is the crowning type of the organism, and 
as he is used as the instrument of spirit, all aspects must have reached 
their most perfect development. 
30 
Aristotle was the originator of the traditional division of animals into 
the two main groups of those with blood (Eva~fLa) and those without 
+ it (ava~fLa). To this division he adds the general proposition, based on 
observation, that, 'all animals which have blood have an osseous or bony 
spine.'l This is in fact the great division, but it has of course been possible 
3S to raise many objections to it. It has been pointed out for example, 
that there are animals such as Leeches and Earth-worms, which according 
to their habit should be bloodless, but which do possess a red fluid or 
blood. What is blood then? This is the main question, and in the last 
I Aristotle, 'Hist. animal', 14; III, 7: nana oe Tn Cwa, alIa lvatpa eGTty, lxet paxw ij OGT@or] 
ij dKay(Jwor]. 
185 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
resort the deciding factor is colour. This division has been abandoned on 
account of its vagueness therefore, and as is well known, Linnaeus has 
replaced it with his six classes. Linnaeus' systematic classification of plants + 
is merely a rigid product of the understanding, and by the French it has 
been discarded in favour of Jussieu's division of plants into mono-
5 
cotyledons and dicotyledons. Through the brilliance of another French- + 
man, Lamarque, the French have also returned to the Aristotelian division 
of animals, although this now takes the form of a distinction between 
Vertebrata and Invertebrata (animaux avec vertebres, animaux sans 
vertebres). Cuvier brought together both principles of division, for while + 
Vertebrata are in fact red-blooded, other animals have white blood and 
no internal skeleton; at least, if they do have one, it is either simply in- + 
articulate, or articulate and external. The initial occurrence of a noto-
chord is in the Lamprey; in this case it is still coriaceous however, and the + 
vertebrae are merely indicated, by means of striae. Vertebrae are to be 15 
found in Mammals, Birds, Fish and Amphibia, and consequently distin-
guish them from Mollusca and Crustacea, which have a carapace which is 
separated from their fleshy skin, and from Insects and Worms. The 
animal world is divided between these two groups, and a cursory glance 
at them immediately brings to light the enormous difference between 20 
them. 
This difference also fits in with the previously mentioned division 
based on the relationship between the organism's viscera and its outward-
ly orientated articulation. This relationship in its turn is based on the 
important distinction between 'vie organique' and 'vie animale'. 'Animals + 
which lack a spinal column also lack the basis of a proper skeleton, and as 
they are also devoid of true lungs, consisting of cells, they have no voice 
or vocal organ.'1 On the whole, this is also a confirmation of Aristotle's 
division according to blood. In the passage already quoted, Lamarque 
continues as follows, 'Invertebrata have no true blood, which should be 30 
red,' and warm, but which in their case is more like lymph. 'Blood owes 
its colour to the intensity of its animalization,' which is also lacking in 
these animals therefore. 'On the whole, animals such as this also lack a 
genuine circulation of the blood; their eyes have no iris, and they are 
devoid of kidneys. They also lack a spinal cord, as well as the great 35 
sympathetic nerve.' Vertebrata exhibit more formation therefore, and + 
an equilibrium between inner and outer; while in the other group, one 
aspect is formed at the expense of the other. Consequently, two classes 
I Lamarque, 'Elements de zoologie', vol. I, p. 159. 
186 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
of Invertebrata in particular are to be mentioned, Worms, (Mollusca) and 
Insects. The viscera of the former are more highly formed than those of 
the latter, while it is the Insects which have the more delicately fashioned 
exterior. Polyps and Infusoria etc. are also Invertebrata, but as they 
5 consist merely of skin and jelly, they have the appearance of being com-
pletely unformed. Polyps, like plants, are composed of several individuals, 
and will survive shredding; even the Garden snail will grow a new head. 
This reproductiveness stems from a weakness in the organism's substan-
tiality however. In the graded scale of Invertebrata, the heart, brain, 
10 gills, circulatory vessels, the organs of hearing, sight and sex, finally 
+ sensation in general, and even movement itself, all disappear. 1 Where 
there is a predominance of self-sufficing inwardness, it is the digestion 
and the reproductive organs, as the concrete universal lacking as yet in 
differentiation, which exhibit formation. It is only where the animal 
15 world falls into externality, that a differentiation takes place together 
with the emergence of sensibility and irritability. Thus, while organic 
and animal life stand opposed to each other in the Invertebrata, both 
moments have a single unity in Vertebrata, and consequently it is in 
thew that the other essential basis of determination must come into play. 
20 They are therefore determined in accordance with their element, i.e. the 
land, the water or the air. As Invertebrata are already subject to the first 
basic division however, they do not exhibit this relation between their 
development and the elements. There are of course animals which 
cannot be clearly classified; the reason for this lies in nature's not having 
25 the power to remain true to the Notion, and to coalesce neatly with the 
determinations of thought. 
(a) In Worms, Mollusca and Shell-fish etc., the inner organism is more 
fully formed, although outwardly these creatures are formless. 'In spite 
of the outer difference which distinguishes Mollusca from the higher 
30 classes of animals, inwardly they are by no means devoid of the organiza-
tion of these higher classes. Although they have no spleen or pancreas, 
they have a brain resting on an oesophagus, and a heart with arteries and 
veins. Their blood is white or bluish in colour; their fibrin does not form 
in the cruor, but its filaments swim freely in the serum. Only in a few 
35 cases are the male and female sexual organs to be found in separate indi-
+ viduals, and in these cases, the structure of these organs is so peculiar, that 
it is often almost impossible to recognize them.'2 'They breathe by means 
1 Lamarque, 1oc. cit., p. 214. 
2 Treviranus, 1oc. cit. vol. I, pp. 306-307. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of gills and they also have a nervous system, although they do not have 
nodulated nerves forming a series of ganglia. They have one heart or more, 
and although these hearts only have a single ventricle, they are well-
formed.' 1 In Mollusca, the system of external articulation is however much + 
less fully formed than it is in Insects, 'In all Fish and Amphibia there 5 
are still traces of a distinct head, thorax and abdomen, but in Mollusca, 
this distinctness completely disappears. Mollusca also lack a nose; most of 
them have no external extremities at all, and either move by alternately 
contracting and relaxing their venter muscles, or are quite incapable of 
any forward movement.'2 
10 
(b) Insects are far superior to Mollusca in their organs of movement, 
and in general, Mollusca have only a few motor muscles. Insects on the 
other hand have feet and wings, as well as a distinct head, thorax and 
abdomen. Internally however, their structure is correspondingly un-
developed. Their respiratory system permeates their whole body, and 15 
as in some Fish, coincides with the digestive system. Their blood-system 
also has few formed organs, and those that are formed are scarcely to be 
distinguished from their digestive system. In the external articulation of 
Insects however, for example in their masticatory organs etc., formation 
is correspondingly more determinate. 'In insects and other lower classes 20 
of animals, there appears to be a movement of fluids which is not however 
a circulation. This takes place in the following way:-fluids are continu-
ally being taken up into the body from the surface of the alimentary 
canal, and after contributing to the growth of the parts, are gradually 
evacuated from the body again as waste matter, either through its surface 25 
or in other ways.'3 These are the principal classes of Invertebrata; 
according to Lamarque (loc. cit., p. 128), they fall into fourteen divisions. + 
(c) In the further classification of animals, Vertebrata divide more 
simply, i.e. in accordance with the elements of inorganic nature. These 
are the elements of earth, air and water, and Vertebrata are therefore 30 
either land animals, Birds, or Fish. In the preceding classification, the 
importance of this difference became negligible, many Beetles for ex-
ample are fin-footed, live on land equally well, and have wings with 
which they fly; at this juncture it is obvious however, and presents no 
difficulties to any candid consideration of nature. Among the higher 35 
animals of course, this difference is also nullified by transitions from one 
class to another. The precise reason for life in different elements uniting 
1 Lamarque, loco cit., p. 165. 
2 Treviranus, loco cit. vol. I, pp. 305-306. 
3 Autenrieth, loco cit. pt. 1, § 346. 
188 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
is that it is unable to find, in the exposition of the Land-animal for ex-
ample, the special determinateness which should contain its simple and 
essential character. Only thought or the understanding can establish 
fixed differences, and only spirit, because it is spirit, can produce works 
5 conforming strictly to these differences. Artistic or scientific works are 
abstractly and essentially individualized in such a way, that they neither 
violate their individual determination, nor confuse essential differences. 
Genius can produce a genuine work of art only by expressing itself 
through a specific individuality, and the essential character of a work of 
10 art is violated if this distinctness is not preserved. There is a failure to 
preserve it in poetic prose or prosaic poetry for example, in dramatized 
history, in the introduction of painting into music or the poetic art, or in 
the painting of stone, either in order to give a statue curly hair for ex-
ample, or in bass-relief, which is also sculptural painting. The same in-
15 congruity occurs when a man wants to be poet, painter and philosopher; 
this is not the case with nature however, for an animal form can progress 
in two ways, and there are many examples of its doing so. In the case of 
Cetacea for example, the Land animal returns to the water. In Amphidae 
and Ophidia, the Fish climbs to the land again, and in that Snakes for 
20 example, possess the rudiments of feet, which are however without 
+ significance, they make a poor show of it. The Bird becomes aquatic, 
until in the case of the Duck-billed platypus (Ornithorhynchus), it passes 
+ over into a Land animal; in the case of the Ostrich, it becomes a camel-
+ like animal covered more with hair than with feathers. The Land animal 
2S and the Fish also take to the air, as we see in the case of Vampire-bats, 
Flitter-mice and Flying fish. All this does not efface the fundamental 
difference however, which is determined in and for itself, and should 
not be regarded as a matter of common denominators. The main differ-
ences must be recognized despite these imperfect productions of nature, 
30 which like humid air or wet earth (i.e. mud), are merely mixtures of the 
main determinations. The transitions have to be interpolated as mixtures 
of the differences. The Mammals are the true Land animals, and are the 
most perfect; then come the Birds, and these are followed by Fish, which 
are the least perfect. 
35 
(i) The whole structure of Fish shows that the water is their natural 
element; their articulation is limited by it, and forced inwards. They 
are not warm-blooded to any great extent, for the temperature of their 
blood differs very little from the temperature of the medium in which 
they live. Fish either have a heart with a single ventricle, or with several 
40 ventricles which are however directly inter-connected. When describing 
189 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the four higher classes of animal, Lamarque says (loc. cit., p. 140 et seq.) 
that, 'Fish respire by means of gills, have a smooth or scaly skin, fins, no 
tracheae, no larynx, no sense of touch, and evidently no sense of smell 
either.' Fish, like certain other animals, simply abandon their young, and + 
right from the start, show no concern for them whatever; consequently, 5 
they do not yet attain to a feeling of unity with their young. 
(ii) Reptiles or Amphibia are intermediate forms, belonging partly to 
land and partly to water; that is why there is something repugnant about 
them. They have only one cardiac ventricle, an imperfect pulmonary 
respiration, and a smooth or scaly skin. Frogs have gills instead oflungs 10 
before reaching maturity. 
(iii) Birds resemble Mammals in that they are capable of feeling for their 
young. They provide them with nourishment in the egg. 'Their foetus is 
contained in the inorganic envelope of the egg-shell, and at an early stage 
ceases to have a connection with the mother bird, being able to develop 15 
within the shell without drawing nourishment from her.'l Birds warm + 
their young with their own bodies, sharing their own food with them and 
also feeding their hens, but they do not give up their own lives for their 
young, as Insects do. They give evidence of the mechanical instinct and 
the nisus formativus in nest-building, and so reach a positive self-aware-
20 
ness by positing themselves as inorganic nature in the interests of another 
being. Thirdly, they produce their young by means of immediate ex-
cretion. In this connection, Lamarque (loc. cit., p. ISO) attempts to rank 
Birds in the following way, 'If one bears in mind that web-footed aquatic 
Birds, Waders and Gallinaceae have an advantage over all other Birds, in 25 
that their young can walk and feed themselves as soon as they have 
emerged from the egg, it will be apparent that they must form the first 
three orders. It will also be apparent that Pigeons, Passeres, Birds of prey 
and Creepers must form the last four orders of this class, for their young, 
when they have emerged from the egg, can neither walk nor feed them-
30 
selves.' It is precisely this circumstance which might be regarded as a + 
reason for reversing the order however, not to mention the intermediate 
nature of web-footed Birds.-Birds are distinguished by the positive 
nature of their relation to the air, evidence of which is to be found in their 
lungs, the reservoirs of air contained by their skin, and the large marrow-
35 
less cavities of their bones. They do not suckle their young, so they have + 
no breasts. They are bipeds, and their two arms or forefeet are converted 
into wings. As animal life is in this instance committed to the air, it is in 
1 Lamarque, loco cit., p. 146. 
190 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the Birds that the animation of the abstract element comes into being; 
Birds consequently pass over from animal life, and revert to the pre-
ponderance of vegetative nature, which forms on their skin as plumage. 
The particular formation of their thoracic system is also due to their 
5 belonging to the air. That is why many Birds not only have a voice, as 
Mammals do, but also sing, the inner vibration forming in the air, as in 
its element. The Horse neighs and the Ox bellows, but the Bird's cry is 
+ trilled forth as the ideal nature of self-enjoyment. On the other hand, the 
bird does not roll about on the ground in crude contentment, but aban-
10 dons itself solely to the air, in which it becomes aware of itsel£ 
(iv) Mammals have breasts, four articulated extremities, and exhibit all 
the organs in a formed state. As they have breasts, they suckle and feed 
their young from their own bodies. These animals therefore attain to the 
feeling of unity between one individual and another, i.e. to the feeling of 
15 the genus, which comes to existence in the progeny. For the progeny, 
it is precisely the two parental individuals which constitute the genus, even 
though in nature, this unity of the individual with the genus sinks away 
again into singularity. Higher animals such as the Mammals, and Birds 
which are still hatching their young, continue to behave towards this 
20 existence as a genus however, since it is in this way that they sense their 
universality. Monkeys are the most adaptable of animals, and show the 
most affection for their offspring; the satisfaction of their sexual drive 
maintains its objectivity, for they themselves have passed over into another, 
and are aware of this unity in the higher unselfishness of caring for the 
25 needs of their young. In Mammals also, the skin certainly has something 
of a vegetative nature about it, although this is not nearly so marked as it 
is in Birds. The skin of the Mammal progresses into wool, hairs and 
bristles, into the spines of the Hedgehog, and even into the scales and 
armour of the Armadillo. Man on the other hand has a skin which is 
30 smooth, clear, and much more animalized, and which sheds anything of 
an osseous nature. In the female sex there is a stronger growth of hair. An 
abundance of hair on the chest and elsewhere is regarded as a sign of 
strength in the male; it is however a sign of weakness in the organization 
+ of the skin (see above § 362 Add. III. 149, 25). 
35 
Further essential classifications have been based on the relation of 
animals as individuals to other individual animals; they have been based 
therefore upon the animals' teeth, feet, claws and snout. It was a happy 
intuition which led to the choosing of these parts, for it is by means of 
them that the animals distinguish themselves from one another. If the 
40 difference is to be a true one however, it has to belong to the animal itself, 
191 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
and should not be a distinguishing feature which is merely selected by us. 
The animal displays the being-for-self of its subjectivity by using its 
weapons in order to oppose itself, as an individual, to its inorganic nature. 
The various classes of Mammals distinguish themselves very accurately in 
this way. (i) There are the Mammals whose feet form hands-man and the s 
Monkey for example. The Monkey is a satire on man, and if man does not 
take himself too seriously, but is willing to make fun of himself, he can 
hardly help appreciating the parody. (ii) There are the Mammals whose 
extremities form claws-Dogs for example, and carnivorous animals such 
as the Lion, the king of the beasts. (iii) There are the Rodents, in which the 10 
teeth in particular are highly formed. (iv) There are the Bats, which have a 
membrane stretched between their toes, as indeed do several Rodents. 
These animals have a closer affinity with Dogs and Monkeys however. 
(v) There are the Sloths, which in a way are quite devoid of toes, for in 
them, these features have changed into claws. (vi) There the Cetacea, the 15 
limbs of which are fm-like. (vii) There are the hoofed animals such as 
Swine, Elephants, which have a trunk, Cattle, which have horns, and 
Horses etc. The strength of these animals lies in the upper part of their 
bodies, and most of them can be tamed to work. The formation of their 
extremities shows a particular relationship to their inorganic nature. If 20 
the animals in the second, third, fourth and fifth classes are grouped 
together as having claws, there are four classes: (I) animals with hands, (2) 
animals with claws, (3) working animals with hoofs, and (4) animals with 
fins. It is in accordance with this that Lamarque (loc. cit., p. 142) grades 
Mammals in a descending order (degradation) as follows, 'Mammals with 2S 
claws (mammifieres onguicuIes) have four limbs, and at the tips of their 
toes, uncovered claws which are either blunt or pointed. These limbs are 
generally fitted for seizing objects, or at least for clinging to them. It is 
in this class that the most perfectly organized animals are to be found. The 
hoofed (onguIes) Mammals have four limbs, the toes of which are com-
30 
pletely covered at their extremities by a rounded body of horn (sabot). 
Their feet can be used only for walking or running on the ground; they 
cannot be used for climbing trees, seizing their prey or any other object, 
or for attacking and tearing other animals. They are completely herbi-
vorous. The Mammals without hoofs (exongules) have only two extremities, 3S 
which are very short and flat, and shaped like fins. Their toes are covered 
by skin, and have neither claws nor hoofs (corne). They are the least 
perfectly organized of all Mammals. They have neither a pelvis, nor hind 
legs. They swallow their food without chewing it first. In the usual way 
they live in the water, although they surface in order to breathe the air.' + 
192 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
The further subdivisions here must be left to determination from without, 
i.e. to the chance and contingency proper to nature. The climates still 
constitute the great determining factor however. In the southern latitudes, 
the animal kingdom is particularized more in accordance with differences 
5 of climate and country than it is in the north; consequently, the Asiatic 
+ Elephant is essentially distinct from its African counterpart, while there 
+ is no American Elephant. Lions and Tigers etc. are also quite distinct. 
3. The genus and the individual 
(Medical Science) 
a. The disease of the individual 
(Nosology) 
In the two relationships considered above, the self-mediation of 
the genus with itselfis the process ofits diremption into individuals 
10 and the sublation of its differences. However, as the genus also 
(§ 357) assumes the shape of an inorganic nature which is opposed 
to the individual, it brings forth its existence within it in an abstract 
and negative manner. The determinate being of the indi-
vidual organism is therefore involved in a relationship of ex-
15 temality, and while the organism preserves itself by returning into 
itselfin its genus, it may also, and with equal facility, fail to corres-
pond to it (§ 366).-The organism is in a diseased state when 
one of its systems or organs is stimulated into conflict with 
the inorganic potency of the organism. Through this con-
20 flict, the system or organ establishes itself in isolation, and 
by persisting in its particular activity in opposition to the 
activity of the whole, obstructs the fluidity of this activity, 
as well as the process by which it pervades all the moments 
of the whole. 
25 Addition. The animal type particularizes itself into the division of the 
animal world; when the individual organism is diseased, it resembles this 
particular type, for it also is then capable of a particularization which does 
G 
193 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
not conform to its Notion, i.e. to its total particularization. Consequently, 
at this juncture also, the deficiency of the individual subject as opposed to 
the genus is still not effaced, for the individual is in itself the genus which 
is opposed to it, the individual alone being that which constitutes its genus, 
and has this genus within itsel£ This is the scission to which the animal is 5 
now subjected, and with which it reaches its conclusion. 
In a state of health, there is no disproportion between the organic self and its 
determinate being; all its organs give free play to the fluidity of the universal. 
When this state prevails, there is a commensurate relationship between organic 
and inorganic being, as the result of which inorganic being does not offer any 10 
insuperable resistance to the organism. Disease is not an irritation incommen-
surate with the susceptibility of the organism; its Notion consists of a dispropor-
tion between the organism's being and its self, and not of a disproportion be-
tween certain mutually dissociating factors within it. Factors are abstract 
moments, and cannot dissociate. When disease is spoken of as a heightening of 15 
excitation and a lessening of excitability, as if this were a matter of qualitative 
contrast, and an increase in the one were accompanied by a corresponding 
decrease in the other, the interpretation is immediately suspect therefore. To 
bandy about the concept of disposition, as if it were possible to be implicitly ill 
without being infected and sick, is no improvement; the reason for this being 20 
that the organism itself constitutes this reflection, within which that which is 
implicit is also actual. Disease occurs when the organism as a being separates 
itself, not from inner factors, but from inner aspects which are completely real. 
The cause of disease lies partly in the age, mortality and congenital defects of 
the organism itself, and partly in its susceptibility, as a being, to external in-
25 
fluences. As a result of this susceptibility, there is a build up of a single aspect 
which does not accommodate the inner power of the organism, and the organ-
ism then exhibits the opposed forms of being and self, the self being precisely that 
for which the negative of itself has being. A stone cannot become ill, for as its 
form is unable to survive chemical decomposition, its negative involves its 30 
destruction. A stone is therefore devoid of the self-negation found in sickness 
and sentience, which is capable of taking in its opposite. Appetite, which is 
awareness of a deficiency, is also self-relating in constituting its own opposite, 
for it is both itself and its state of deficiency. In this case however, the deficiency 
is something external, so that the selfis not opposed to its shape as such, while in 3S 
the case of disease, the negative thing is the shape itsel£ 
Disease is therefore a disproportion between irritation and the organism's 
ability to operate. As the organism is an individual being, it can maintain 
equilibrium in an outer aspect, while exceeding its proportionality in a 
particular aspect. To quote Heraclitus, 'Excess of heat constitutes fever, 40 
194 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
excess of cold paralysis, and excess of air suffocation.' 1 The organism is sus-
ceptible to excessive irritation because it is as completely the unity of the possi-
bility of substance, as it is of the actuality of the self, being fully subject to both 
forms. Activity and susceptibility to stimulation are separated through the 
5 opposition of the sexes, by means of which they are allotted to two organic 
individuals. The organic individual itself consists of both however, and it is 
because it breaks down into these forms of its own accord, that it holds within 
itself the possibility of its death. Consequently, the possibility of disease is 
rooted in the individual's consisting of both forms. In the sex-relationship, the 
10 individual has surrendered its essential outwardly orientated determinations, in 
so far as this determinateness enters into the relationship; at this juncture how-
+ ever, it has it within .itself, as if it were mating with itself As animation is 
bound up with a single singularity, the union is not consummated in the 
genus, and in many animals copulation even constitutes the termination 
15 of existence. However, although other animals survive copulation, so 
that the animal overcomes inorganic nature as well as its genus, the genus 
still retains its mastery over it. Disease falls into this reversal of the re-
lationship. When an organism is healthy all its vital functions are main-
tained within the ideality of its health; however, when its blood is diseased 
20 for example, an activity of its own is developed, and it becomes heated 
and inflamed. It is the same when the bile becomes over-active for ex-
ample, and generates gall-stones. If the stomach is overloaded, the diges-
tive activity is no longer a moment of the whole, but dominates the 
whole by its being isolated and turning into itself This isolation can 
25 progress so far, that life is generated in the intestines; all animals, at certain 
times, have worms in their heart, lungs and brain (see § 361 Add.). Gen-
erally speaking, the animal is weaker than man; but although man is the 
strongest of the animals, one is not justified in assuming that the Tape-
worms which occur within him are the result of his having swallowed 
+ their eggs. The restoration of health can consist only in the overcoming of 
this particularization. 
A certain Dr. Code has attacked this doctrine in a rigmarole published 
+ in 'Isis' (vol. VIII, 1819, p. II27), in which he even proposes to, 'preserve 
the unity of the Idea, the essence, the comprehension of the essence oflife 
35 and of disease' in a deeply philosophic manner. This is a theory concerned 
only with appearance and externality, and to attempt to refute it thus, with 
the arrogance and parrhesia proper to truth, is the height of pretension, 
1 Heraclitus, 144. h. caa ;'V 
~fL'iv EKaG'TOV Kpd:TOS, v60"T)fLa· 
1m€pf3oA~ 8€PfLoiJ, 
7TVP€T6s· lm€pf3oA~ o/vxpoiJ, 7TapdAVats· 'l57T€pf30>"~ 7TV€VfLaTOS, 7TViyoS. 
195 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'This definition of disease is erroneous; it applies only to the external 
appearance, the symptom of fever.' He continues (p. II34), 'That which 
in life is unified, blended, and inwardly concealed, emerges into the + 
phenomenal world as a particularity, i.e. in a characteristic way, forms 
and exhibits the essence of the one organism and of its idea. It is thus that 5 
life's inner essence appears externally as its character. Where everything is, 
living from a single Idea and a single essence, all opposition is merely 
apparent and external, and has being only for appearance and reflection, 
not for the inwardness of life and of the Idea. ' Yet it is precisely in living 
being itself that reflection and distinctness are prominent. To appear is to 10 
have life; what the philosophers of nature have in mind however, is 
merely an external reflection. They are unable to comprehend life because 
they fail to reach it, and stop short at inanimate gravity. One of Mr. 
Gode's particular tenets seems to be that in the first instance, the diseased 
form enters into conflict with its own essence, not with the organism, 'The 15 
collective activity of the whole is primarily a consequence and reflex of 
the checking of free movement in its individual parts.' He considers this 
to be a truly speculative remark. But what is this essence if it is not anima-
tion? And what constitutes actual animation, if it is not the organism as a 
whole? Consequently, when he says that the organ is in conflict with its 20 
essence, with itself, this must mean that it is in conflict with the totality 
which is within it as a general animation or universal. It is the organism 
itself which constitutes the reality of this universal however. Here we have 
true philosophers, for they are of the opinion that essence is what is true, 
and that in order to express what is internal and correct, they merely have 25 
to mention it! I can find nothing worth considering in their prattle about 
essence however, for they proffer nothing but abstract reflections, while 
if essence is to be made explicit, it has to be made apparent as a determinate 
being. 
There are various ways in which activities can fall short of ideality, and 30 
so disturb subjectivity. The essential origins of disease are on the one hand 
air and dampness, and on the other hand the stomach and the cutaneous 
process. Considered more precisely, the forms of disease can be reduced to 
the following classification. 
(a) Noxiousness, which is a form of disturbance, is in the first instance a + 
general determinateness residing in inorganic nature as a whole. This 
simple determinateness must be regarded as external in origin, and as being 
inflicted upon the organism from without; but although it is manifest 
externally in the organism's environment, it can also be apparent simul-
taneously, and with equal facility, in the organism itsel£ Diseases such as 40 
196 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
epidemics or plagues are not to be regarded as a particular determination of 
the organism, but as an aspect of the determinateness of external nature, 
to which the organism itself also belongs. They may well be said to infect 
the organism. Various circumstances contribute to noxious determinations 
5 of this kind, and as these circumstances are of an elemental or climatic 
nature, they also reside and have their origin in the elemental determinate-
ness of the organism. Initially therefore, the presence of these diseases 
resembles that of the universal fundamentals of the organism, which do 
not yet constitute a developed and formed system. In this state, they 
10 reside mainly in the skin, the lymph and the bones. Diseases of this kind 
are not simply climatic; they are also historical, for they occur at certain 
+ periods of history, and then disappear again. They can also break out as 
the result of an organism's being removed into an alien climatic environ-
ment. Historical research has not thrown any reliable light upon this 
15 matter. When syphilis or venereal disease first occurred for example, 
there was certainly contact between European and American organisms. 
It has merely been presumed that the disease was brought from America 
however, this has not been proved. The French call it 'mal de Naples' 
+ because it broke out when they took that city, but no one knew where it 
+ came from. Herodotus gives an account of a nation which caught a disease 
after migrating from the Caspian to Media; the disease being brought 
forth merely by the change of place. The same thing occurred recently 
when cattle were brought into southern Germany from the Ukraine; 
although they were all healthy animals, the mere change of place gave 
25 rise to a murrain. The mephitic exhalations which were encountered in 
Russia by Germans and the animals they took with them, gave rise to 
+ various nervous diseases; similar circumstances set off a frightful outbreak 
+ of typhus among a thousand otherwise healthy Russian prisoners. Yellow 
fever occurs endemically in America, and in certain Spanish maritime 
30 districts for example: it will not spread from these districts, and the local 
+ inhabitants guard against it by going a few miles inland. As changes such 
as these also take place within the human organism, it cannot be said that 
this organism is infected when it participates in these dispositions of 
elemental nature, although infection is then also present of course. Con-
35 sequently, it is pointless to dispute whether these diseases break out of their 
own accord, or occur through infection. Both factors play a part, for if 
such a disease breaks out of its own accord, after it has penetrated into the 
lymphatic system, it also occurs through infection. 
(b) Another general form of disease is that which is brought forth by the 
organism's entering into contact with certain specific noxious influences 
197 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from without. In this case one of the organism's specific systems, such as 
that of its skin or its stomach, becomes particularly involved, and so 
isolates itsel£ At this juncture, a distinction has to be made between acute 
and chronic diseases. It is the former of these which medicine knows better 
how to treat. 
5 
(i) When one of the systems of the organism is affected by an acute 
disease, curing it depends mainly upon the entire organism's being sus-
ceptible to the ailment. The spread of this disease will then also enable the 
former freedom of the entire activity of the organism to come into play 
again, and this in its turn will facilitate the cure. In a case such as this, the 10 
organism is not open to its environment, and is lacking in appetite and 
muscular movement; in so far as it lives, it draws upon its own resources. 
It is precisely because these acute diseases have their seat in the organism 
as a whole, not being confmed exclusively to a single organic system, but 
residing in the so-called humours, that the organism is able to rid itself of 15 
them. 
(ii) If the disease is unable to spread to the whole organism, I regard it as 
being chronic; scirrhus of the liver and pulmonary consumption are ex-
amples of chronic ailments. Diseases such as these do not impair the 
appetite and the digestion, nor do they weaken the sexual impulse. As in 20 
this case a single system has isolated itself as a centre of activity, and the 
organism is no longer able to overcome this particular activity, the disease 
remains confined to a single organ, and the organism also is no longer able 
to assert itself as an independent whole. Curing such a disease is difficult 
therefore, and the difficulty increases in proportion to the extent of the 2S 
attack and alteration inflicted upon the organ or system involved. 
+ 
(iii) A third form of disease is that which is rooted in the universal subject, 
and especially in man. It consists of diseases of the soul, which are caused by 
terror and grief etc., and can also give rise to death. 
+ 
§ 372 
The characteristic feature of disease is that the identity of 30 
the whole organic process1 exhibits itself as the successive 
course of the vital motion, i.e. as fever. It therefore ex-
hibi ts itself through sensibility, irritability and reproduc-
tion, which are the distinct moments of this course. As a 
1 First edition, 'Notion'; second edition, 'system'. 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
course which is inherent in the totality of the organIsm 
however, and which is opposed to the isolated activity, 
fever constitutes to an equal extent, the organism's in-
cipient inclination towards recovery. 
5 Addition. We have seen that the Notion of disease consists in this implicit 
dissociation of the organism; consequently, we now have to consider the 
course of disease in more detail. 
(a) In its first stage, disease is implicitly present, but not apparent. 
(b) In its second stage, disease becomes effective for the self, i.e. the self as a 
10 universal is opposed by the determinateness which establishes itself within it, and 
organizes itself as a fixed sel£ In other words, the self of the organism becomes 
a fixed determinate being, a determinate part of the whole. Consequently, 
while hitherto the systems of the organism had a selfless subsistence, 
the actual incipience of disease at this juncture consists in the organism's 
15 being stimulated beyond its ability to operate, so that the individual 
system gains subsistence in opposition to the self, from a certain aspect of the 
part of the organism which is in question. This is in fact a matter of digestion, 
and it is possible for the disease to be a general indigestibility, and to begin either 
in the organism as a whole, or in the isolating of an individual aspect of it, such 
20 as the hepatic or pulmonary process. The isolated determinateness is an indi-
vidual being, which takes possession of the whole in spite of the sel£ When it is 
still as immediate as it is isolated, the disease is said by the physicians to be in 
its first stages; it still constitutes nothing but the initial conflict, the exuber-
ance of the individual system. Disease in the full sense of the word is estab-
25 lished in so far as the determinateness has become the centre and self of the whole, 
so that a determinate self is dominant, instead of the free sel£ On the other 
hand, so long as only a single organ is stimulated or weakened, so that the 
disease is peculiar to one particular system, and is confined to the develop-
ment of that system, it will be easier to effect a cure in a case such as this. 
30 The system has only to be freed from its involvement with inorganic 
being and established in its proper proportion. At this juncture therefore, 
external remedies are also useful; generally speaking, remedies in cases such 
as these can be restricted to the stimulation of the system concerned, use 
being made of emetics, purgatives, blood-Iettings and the like. 
35 
(c) Disease also passes over into the general life of the organism how-
ever; for when a particular organ is affected, it is principally the general 
organism which is infected. The whole organism is involved in this 
therefore, and because one ofits circulations has turned itselfinto a centre, 
its activity is disturbed. At the same time however, in order that the 
199 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
isolated aCtiVIty may not remain an excrescence, but may become a 
moment of the whole, the whole animation of the organism also turns 
against it. If the digestion isolates itself for example, the circulation of the 
blood and muscular energy etc., will also be affected; in the case of 
jaundice, the whole body secretes bile and is thoroughly hepatic etc. The 5 
third stage of disease is therefore coction, in which the weakening of one 
system becomes an affection of the whole organism. At this stage, disease + 
is no longer confmed to a particular organ and external to the whole, for 
the entire life of the organism is concentrated into it. It is therefore com-
paratively easy to cure, for as we saw above (III. 198,6), it is always easier 10 
to cure acute diseases, than it is to cure chronic pulmonary diseases for 
example, in which the lungs are no longer capable of infecting the whole 
organism. As the entire organism is infected with a particularity, a dual life 
begins to emerge. The whole becomes a d~fferentiating motion opposed to the 
stable universality of the self, and the organism posits itself as a whole in 15 
opposition to the determinateness. In a case such as this, the physician can 
do nothing; in general moreover, the whole art of medicine does no more 
than aid the forces of nature. As the particular morbid affection transforms 
itself into the whole, this very disease of the whole is at the same time a cure; for 
it is the whole which is motivated, and which breaks itself apart in the sphere of 20 
necessity. It is therefore the characteristic constitution of disease, that the organic 
process now follows its course in this hardened and subsistent shape, so that the 
harmonious processes of the organism now form a succession. What is more, 
the general systems are torn apart, so that they no longer constitute an immediate 
unity, but display it by passing into one another. Health can only be restored 25 
by a succession of activities, but although this disruption is harmful to it, 
it does not drive it out of the organism. Health consists of the whole pro-
cess, and its abnormality is not implicit in or relative to the form of 
disease or the system; it is relative only to this succession. This motion now 
constitutes fever. Consequently, fever is disease in its purity, or rather the 30 
ailing individual organism, freeing itself from its specific disease in the same way 
as the healthy organism frees itself from its specific processes. As fever con-
+ 
stitutes the pure life of the diseased organism therefore, it is actually only when 
fever is present that the diagnosis of a distinct disease becomes possible. As fever 
is both the constitution and fluidification of this succession of functions, the + 
disease is simultaneously sublated by it, i.e. digested by its motion. This sublation 
constitutes an interior circulation opposed to the inorganic nature of the 
organism, a digestion of medicines. Consequently, although fever is certainly 
a morbid state and a disease, it is also the means by which the organism 
cures itsel£ This ils only true of a severe and virulent fever which affects 40 
200 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
the whole of the organism however, for a lingering and consuming fever 
which never really develops is a very dangerous sign in chronic diseases. 
Chronic illnesses are therefore of a kind which cannot be overcome by fever. 
In the course of a lingering fever, the disease does not dominate the digesting 
5 organism, for all the individual processes of this organism merely produce them-
selves in an untrammelled manner, each operating of its own accord. In this 
case, fever merely follows a superficial course, and fails to subdue these in-
dividual parts of the organism. In the case of violent inflammatory fevers, it is 
mainly the vascular system which is attacked, while in the case of asthenic 
10 fevers it is mainly the nervous system. When it is attacked by a true fever 
therefore, the organism subsides initially into the nervous system, which is 
the general organism; then into the internal organism, and finally into its 
shape. 
+ 
(i) Coldness, heaviness in the head, headache, twinges in the spine, twitching 
15 of the skin and shuddering, constitute theftrst symptoms off ever. In this activity 
of the nervous system, there is a relaxing of the muscles, so that through 
their own irritability they constitute an uncontrolled trembling, and lose 
their strength. A heaviness of the bones, tiredness of the limbs, a draining of 
the blood from the surface of the skin, and a sensation of cold set in. The simple 
20 and wholly intro-reflected subsistence of the organism isolates itself and 
dominates the whole. The organism dissolves itself inwardly into the 
simplicity of its nervous system, and feels that it has withdrawn into the 
simple substance of its being. 
(ii) In the second instance however, it is precisely this, as a dissolution of the 
25 whole, which constitutes the negative power. The organism has dissolved into 
its nerves, and by means of the Notion of this negativity, passes over into the 
organism of inflamed blood-delirium. It is precisely the withdrawal into the 
nervous system which constitutes the transformation into inflamed negativity; 
in this, the blood is now the dominating factor. 
30 
(iii) In the third instance, this dissolution finally passes over into the shaping 
of a product. The reproducing organism reverts to lymph, and so gives rise 
to the fluid subsistence of sweat. The significance of this product is that within it, 
the isolated singularity of determinateness disappears, the organism as a whole 
having brought itself forth, and generally digested itsel£ Sweat is concocted 
35 morbid matter; it was the physicians of antiquity who described it as such, and 
+ they were fully justified in doing so. Sweat is the critical secretion; in it, the 
organism attains to a self-excretion, by means of which it eliminates its 
abnormality, and rids itself of its morbid activity. The crisis is the organ-
ism's mastering of itself, reproducing itself, and putting this power into effect 
40 by excretion. It is not the morbid matter which is secreted of course; it is not the 
G* 
201 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
case that the body would have been healthy ifit had never contained this matter, 
or if it could have been ladled out of it. The crisis, like digestion in general, is at 
the same time a secretion. It has a dual product however, so that critical secre-
tions differ widely from the secretions of exhaustion. These latter are not really 
secretions at all, they are dissolutions of the organism, and in significance they 5 
are therefore the direct antithesis of the critical secretions. 
Fever facilitates recovery on account of its motivating the totality of the 
organism into activity. Once motivated in this way, the organism as a 
whole is animated, and lifts itself out of its submergence in a particularity. 
It rises above the particular activity before also excreting it, and by 10 
reasserting itself in this way, recovers the universality obstructed by the disease. 
In the first instance, its determinateness changes into motion, necessity and total 
process, and this in its turn changes into the whole product. Likewise, by means 
of this, and because this product is a simple negativity, the organism assumes the 
wholeness of its selfhood. 
1S 
h. Healing 
(Therapy) 
§ 373 
It is by means of the healing agent that the organism is 
excited intol annulling the particular excitement in which the 
formal activity of the who Ie is fixed, and restoring the fluidity of 
the particular organ or system within the whole. This is effected 
by the agent by reason of its being a stimulus which is how-
20 
ever difficult to assimilate and overcome, and which therefore 
presents the organism with an externality against which it is com-
pelled to exert its force. By acting in opposition to an external-
ity, the organism breaks out of the limitation which had be-
come identical with it, by which it was indisposed, and 25 
against which it is unable to react so long as the limitation is not 
an object for it. 
1 Addition to the first edition, 'ridding itself of the inorganic potency with which the activity 
of the individual organ or system is involved, and by means of which it is singularized'. 
202 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
Remark 
Me dicamen ts have mainly to be regarded as something which is 
indigestible. Indigestibility is a relative property however, 
although not in the vague sensel that only that which can be 
tolerated by weaker constitutions is easily digestible, for the 
s stronger the individuality, the more difficulty it will find 
in digesting such substances. The immanent relativity of the 
Notion, which has its actuality in life, is of a qualitative nature; 
expressed in its quantitative aspect, in so far as this aspect 
is valid at this juncture, it consists in the intrinsic indepen-
10 dence of the opposed moments increasing in accordance 
with increased homogeneity.2 The lower forms of animal 
life, which have not reached the stage of internal differentia-
tion, resemble the plants in that they are only able to digest 
the unindividualized neutrality of water. Infants digest the 
15 completely homogeneous animal lymph constituting mother's 
milk; this is a substance which has already been digested, 
or rather converted directly into animality in a general way 
and without any further internal differentiation. They also 
digest those differentiated substances which have matured 
20 least in individuality. For invigorated constitutions, sub-
stances such as these are indigestible however. On the other 
hand, individualized animal substances, or those vegetable 
juices which have been mellowed by light into a more 
powerful individuality and are therefore said to be spirit-
+ uous, are more easily digested by such constitutions than 
vegetable productions which still exhibit the neutral colour 
for example, and which have a closer affinity with chemism 
as such. On account of their more intensive individuality, 
the former substances constitute a stronger opposition, but 
30 it is precisely because of this that they are more homogen-
eous as stimuli.-In so far as they are negative stimuli, 
medicaments are poisons. When the external and alien sub-
stance of an indigestible stimulant is administered to an 
organism alienated from itself by disease, this organism is 
3S forced to counter its effect by drawing itself together and entering 
1 First and second edition, 'in which this is usually understood i.e'. 
2 Addition to the first and second edition, 'The sex-relationship, in which independent indivi-
dualities comport themselves as being identical, has shown itself to be the highest qualitative form 
of this living existence'. 
203 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
into a process, by means of which it regains its sentience and sub-
jectivity.-In the Brunonian system, diseases were classified 
as being sthenic and asthenic, the latter being subdivided 
into direct and indirect asthenia. This system also reduced the + 
efficacy of healing agents to the principles of invigoration 5 
and debilitation. In order to give these distinctions an air 
of natural philosophy they were l traced back to carbon 
and nitrogen, and to oxygen and hydrogen,2 or to magnetic 
electric and chemical factors etc. Regarded as a complete 
system of medicine, Brown's theory was merely an empty 10 
for mali s m, but by tracing these distinctions back in this way, it 
served to direct attention beyond what was merely specific 
and particular in diseases and healing agents, to a recogni-
tion of their essential universality. By calling in question 
the traditional method, which on the whole had attached 15 
more importance to the healing power of asthenia, 3 Brown's 
theory led to the discovery that the organism does not react 
to extreme opposites of treatment in correspondingly 
opposite ways, but that at least in the final results of treat-
ment, it often reacts in a similar and therefore general way. 20 
It also led to the discovery that the simple self-identity of the 
organism, as the substantial and truly effective activity opposed 
to a particular indisposition of one of its systems, displays 
itself in specific stimuli.-In this paragraph and this remark, + 
the determinations put forward are so general, that they are 2 S 
clearly inadequate to the extremely diverse phenomena of disease. 
Nevertheless, it is only the firm foundation of the Notion which is 
able to lead the way through particulars, and make fully intelligible 
those features of morbid phenomena and methods of healing which 
seem extravagant and bizarre to those who are steeped in the 30 
externalities of specific detail. 
Addition. Our treatment of digestion should be borne in mind when 
healing is being considered. The organism does not attempt to subdue 
an externality, but is healed by coming to itself, and abandoning its 
involvement with a particular determination which it has to regard as 3S 
being subordinate to it. This can take place in various ways. 
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'even'. 
2 Addition to the first and second edition, 'too'. 
3 Addition to the first edition, 'and by means of those of its transitions which were subsequently 
adopted'. 
204 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
(a) One way is for the determinateness which holds sway within the 
organism to be administered to it as a selfless inorganic cause, with which 
it involves itsel£ Administered to the organism in this way, as something 
opposed to its health, this determinateness constitutes medicine. The animal is 
5 instinctively aware of the determinateness established within it, and the drive 
towards self-preservation, which motivates the whole self-relating organism, 
has a definite feeling of deficiency. The organism therefore proceeds :to con-
sume this determinateness, treating it as absorbable inorganic nature. It is there-
+ fore available to the organism in a less potent form, as a mere presence. Homoeo-
10 pathic theory in particular treats illness by prescribing an agent capable of 
+ bringing forth the same disease in a healthy body. The effect of introduc-
ing this poison into the organism, and in general, of confronting it with 
something obnoxious, is that the particularity in which the organism is 
fixed becomes something external for it. When the organism is diseased 
15 however, this particularity is still one of its own properties. The medicine 
constitutes the same particularity therefore, the difference being that the 
determinateness with which it now brings the organism into conflict is 
an externality. Consequently, the healthful energy of the organism is now 
stimulated into an activity outwards; it is forced to rally, to emerge from 
20 its self-absorption, and not merely to concentrate itself inwardly, but to 
digest this externality. Every disease, and especially acute disease, is a 
hypochondria of the organism, in which the organism loathes the external 
world and repulses it. The reason for this is that it is restricted to itself 
while containing its own negative. As the medicine now stimulates it into 
2S digesting this negative however, the organism is restored to the general 
activity of assimilation. The precise way in which this effect is obtained is 
by administering to the organism something which is much more 
potently indigestible than its disease,1 and so forcing it to draw itself 
together in order to overcome it. This results in the internal division of 
30 the organism; for as the initially immanent indisposition has now become 
external, the organism has been duplicated internally into its vital force 
and its diseased parts. This effect of medicine may well be regarded as 
magical. It resembles the effect of mesmerism in bringing the organism 
under the power of another person, for it is by means of the medicament 
35 that the whole organism is subjected to this specific determination, suc-
1 This does not contradict the statement made just previously, that poison is available to the 
organism in a less potent form as medicine, for although poison is more powerful, the form in 
which it makes itself effective is less potent, being a merely external hostility, which is more easily 
overcome than the internal hostility of the disease itsel£ 
Note by Michelet. 
205 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
cumbing as it were to the power of a magician. However, even if the 
organism, on account of its diseased condition, is under the power of 
something other than itself; at the same time, as in the case of mesmerism, 
it also has a world beyond, which is free from its diseased state, and by 
means of which it can recover its vital force. Thus, the organism is 5 
capable ofinternal repose; for in sleep it remains by itself As the organism 
has divided itself internally in this way, the force of its vitality endows it 
with individuality, and in assuming this condition, the organism has 
broadly re-established its general vitality, and removed the particularity 
of its indisposition. As this particularity is no longer able to obstruct it, 10 
the inner life of the organism has re-established itself by means of this 
removal. In the case of mesmerism also, the organism's indisposition is 
countered by the vitality of its inner life. It is just this liberation therefore, 
which at the same time permits and effectuates the return of the organism 
into itself by means of digestion; and it is precisely this state of being 15 
withdrawn into itself which facilitates the self-digestion constituting the 
organism's recovery. 
Deciding which remedies are the right ones now presents us with a 
difficulty. The materia medica has not yet uttered a single rational word on 
the connection between a disease and its remedy; experience alone is 20 
supposed to decide the matter. Experience with Chicken droppings is 
therefore as valuable as that with the various officinal plants, for human 
urine, and the droppings of Chickens and Peacocks were formerly used 
medicinally, in order to produce nausea. Each particular disease does not + 
have its specific remedy. If it did the connection here would have to be 25 
found, i.e. the form in which a determinateness occurs within the organ-
ism, and the way in which it occurs in vegetable nature or elsewhere, as 
an inanimate and external stimulant. Thus, cinchona, leaves and greenery 
seem to have a cooling effect upon the blood. To counteract excessive 
irritability, it seems to be necessary to administer soluble salt and salt-
30 
petre. What is more, as disease merely obstructs the vitality of the organ-
ism, it is frequently the case that the mere sustaining of this vitality by 
easily digested foods suffices to bring about a cure. When the disease is 
located not in a particular system, but in the digestive system in general, 
vomiting can occur of its own accord, as in the case of children, who 35 
vomit very easily. An inorganic agent such as quicksilver for example, 
gives rise to an inordinate heightening of a partial activity; although on 
the one hand the effect here is specific, a general stimulation of the 
organism also takes place. In general, it may be said that the relationship 
between disease and medicine is a magical one.-Brown calls the stimulus 40 
206 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
or poison which is administered, a positive stimulus, which is an acceptable 
+ term for it. 
(b) However, the remedy can also be more in the nature of a negative 
stimulus, such as hydrochloric acid for example. It is then used to depress 
s the activity of the organism, so that by removing all its activity, that 
which accrues from its morbid state is also eliminated. Thus, in the one 
case, the organism has to exert its activity in order to direct itself outwards, 
while in the other, the activity of the conflict is weakened, either by 
means of blood-letting or ice, as in the case of inflammations for example, 
10 or by paralysing the digestion by means of salts. In this way, the external 
object is eliminated, and the organism's inner vitality is therefore en-
couraged to re-emerge. It is this that has suggested the fasting cure as a 
method of debilitation, and in so far as homoeopathy is mainly concerned 
with dieting, it also employs this kind of treatment. The purpose of the 
15 simplest kind of nutriment, such as that received by an unborn child, is 
to enable the organism to overcome abnormality by living from its own 
resources. On the whole, remedies have tended to become more general 
in character. In many cases, all that is necessary is a general shake-up, and 
physicians themselves have admitted that one remedy may work as well 
20 as its opposite. Thus, although the debilitating and restorative methods 
are antithetical, they have both proved to be effective, and ailments 
which prior to the teaching of Brown had been cured by means of emetics 
and purging, have since been cured by means of opium, naphtha and 
brandy. 
2S 
(c) A third way of healing, corresponding to the third form of disease 
(see § 37I, Add. III. I98, 27), is that which also affects the organism in its 
entirety. It is here that mesmerism has its place. As the organism in its 
implicit entirety is to be brought into control of itself, this healing can 
be effected from without. Thus, as the simplicity of the self falls outside the 
30 diseased organism, it is the fInger-tips of the mesmerizer which fluidize the 
organism by conducting magnetism throughout the whole of it. Only sick 
persons can be mesmerized, and put to sleep by this external means. 
Precisely considered, mesmerization is the collection of the organism 
+ into its implicit entirety. However, it is not only sleep brought about by a 
3S mesmerizer which can elicit this turning-point in an illness, for a healthy 
sleep has the same effect, and in this case the organism collects itself into 
its substantiality entirely of its own accord. 
207 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
§ 374 
In its diseased state, the animal is involved with an inorganic 
potency, and held fast in one of its particular systems or organs in 
opposition to the unity of its vitality. As a determinate being, its 
organism has a certain quantitative strength, and is certainly 
capable of overcoming its division; however, this division is just 5 
as likely to master it, and it will then succumb to one of the forms 
of its death. In the long run, the universal inadequacy of the 
individual is not removed by the suppression of its singular 
and transitory inadequacy. The individual is subject to 
this universal inadequacy because its Idea is only the Idea 10 
in its immediacy, because as an animal it stands within 
nature, and because its subjectivity merely constitutes the 
implicitness of the Notion, not its being-for-self. Conse-
quently, the inner universality remains opposed to the 
natural singularity of the living creature as a negative power. 15 
From this negative power it suffers lethal violence, for its 
determinate being as such does not contain this universality, 
and is therefore not a reality which corresponds to it. 
Addition. The organism which is abandoned by the self dies away within 
itself In so far as disease as such is not fatal however, it constitutes the external 20 
and existent course of this movement from singular to universal. Nothing 
in organic being subsists in singular causes, and the necessity of death is no ex-
ception to this, for it lies in the nature of the organism itself that externality 
should be the cause of its death. A singular cause may always be remedied, 
for it is weak, and cannot be the ground of death. This ground constitutes the 25 
necessity of the transition of individuality into universality; for while the living 
creature in its animation is the exclusive existence of the self, the genus is the 
movement which comes into being by sublating the immediate singularity of 
the self, into which it relapses -
a process in which the immediate singularity 
sinks away. In general, death in old age is due to lack of strength, a general and 30 
simple state of wasting away. The outer signs of this are an increase in ossifica-
tion and the slackening of muscles and tendons, bad digestion and feeble sensa-
tion, a retreat from the individual to the purely vegetative life. 'Although to 
a certain extent the steadiness of the heart increases in old age, its irrita-
bility diminishes and finally ceases completely.'! There is also a notice-
35 
1 Autenrieth, loco cit. pt. I. § 157. 
208 

+ 
THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
able 'shrinking in size in extreme old age.'l Disease properly so called was 
this merely quantitative relation as a qualitative relation and determinate process; 
to regard it as weakness or excessive strength is to interpret it in a wholly super-
ficial manner. 
c. The death of the individual of its own accord 
§ 375 
5 
Universality, in the face of which the animal as a singularity is a 
finite existence, shows itselfin the animal as the abstract power 
in the passing out of that which, in its preceding process (§ 356), is 
itself abstract. The original disease of the animal, and the in-
born germ of death, is its being inadequate to universality. 
10 The annulment of this inadequacy is in itself the full maturing of 
this germ, anditis by imagining the universality of its singular-
ity, that the individual effects this annulment. By this however, 
and in so far as the universality is abstract and immediate, the 
individual only achieves an abstract objectivity. Within this 
15 objectivity, the activity of the individual has blunted and ossi-
fied itself, and life has become a habitude devoid of process, 
the individual having therefore put an end to itself of its own 
accord. 
Addition. The organism can recover from disease, but it is because it 
20 is diseased from its very nature, that death is a necessity, i.e. that this dis-
solution occurs, in which the series of processes becomes an empty process 
not turning back into itsel£ In the opposition of the sexes, it is only the 
excreted sexual elements which die in an immediate manner,- the plant-
like parts. At this juncture they die on account of their one-sidedness, 
25 not as a whole. The sexual parts die as a whole on account of the opposition 
between male and female which each contains within itsel£ Just as the 
stamens of the plant swell into the passive receptacle, and the passivity 
of the pistil swells into the generative principle, so now at this juncture, 
each individual itself constitutes the unity of both sexes. It is this that 
30 constitutes its death however, for each is nothing more than individu-
ality, individuality constituting its essential determinateness. Only the 
1 Ibidem, pt. II, § 767. 
209 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
genus unifies complete wholes within a single unity. In the first instance 
therefore, the opposition between male and female fell within the organism in 
an unresolved state; now a similar but more determinate opposition falls within 
it, i.e. the opposition of the abstract forms of the whole which emerge in fever, 
and which contain nothing but the whole. Individuality is not a universal, and s 
is therefore unable to divide its self in this way. It is this general inadequacy 
which establishes the separability of soul and body; spirit is not mortal 
but eternal however, for as it is truth and therefore constitutes its own 
object, it is inseparable from its reality, i.e. the universal which exhibits 
itself as universal. In nature however, universality makes its appearance 10 
only in this negative way, which involves the sublation of the subjectivity 
within nature. It is precisely the form in which this separation comes 
about that constitutes the consummation of the singular being which 
assumes a universal character, but is unable to sustain this universality. 
In life, the animal certainly maintains itself in the face of its inorganic 15 
nature and its genus, but in the long run the universality of the genus 
retains its supremacy. As living being brings about the infusion of its 
living reality into its body, it dies as a singularity in the habitude oflife. 
In that its activities become universal, animation endows itself with a 
universality which is for itself, and within this universality, it is precisely 20 
animation which dies. It does not survive, because it is a process which 
needs opposition, and at this juncture, the other which it had formerly 
to overcome, is no longer an other. The physical sphere resembles the 
spiritual therefore, in which to an ever increasing extent, old people 
settle down within themselves and their genus, steadily becoming more 25 
set in their general attitudes, and less aware of anything particular; as a 
result of this, there is also a dying away of tension or interest, (i.e. to be 
between) however, so that they are satisfied with this habitude devoid of + 
process. The lack of opposition to which the organism progresses con-
stitutes the stillness of dead being, and the repose of death overcomes the 30 
inadequacy of disease, which was therefore the primary origin of death. 
lThe identity with the universal which is achieved here is the 
sublation of the formal opposition between the individuality 
in its immediate singularity and in its universality; it is how-
1 Addition to the first and second edition, 'Essentially however, the subjectivity of living being 
is implicitly identical with the genus'. 
210 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
ever the death of natural being, which is only one side, and 
moreover the abstract side of this sublation. In the Idea of life 
however, subjectivity is the Notion, and implicitly therefore, 
it constitutes the absolute being-in-self of actuality, as well 
5 as concrete universality. Through this sublation of the im-
mediacy of its reality, subj ectivity has coincided with itself. 
The last self-externality of nature is sublated, so that the 
Notion, which in nature merely has implicit being, has become 
for itself. -
With this, nature has passed over into its 
10 truth, into the subjectivity of the Notion, whose objectivity 
is itself the sublated immediacy of singularity, i.e. concrete 
universality. Consequendy, this Notion is posited as having the 
reality which corresponds to it, i.e. the Notion, as its determi-
nate being. This is spirit. 
15 Addition. Superseding this death of nature, proceeding from this dead 
+ husk, there rises the fmer nature of spirit. Living being ends with this 
separation, and this abstract coincidence with itsel£ The one moment 
contradicts the other however, for (a) that which coincides is necessarily 
identical, so that Notion or genus and reality, or subject and object, are 
20 no longer separated; and (b) that which has repulsed and sundered itself 
is for that very reason not abstractly identical. Truth consists in their 
unity as distinct moments. It is because of the implicit identity of those 
moments therefore, that it is precisely and exclusively their formal 
opposition which has sublated itself in this coincidence and separation; 
25 similarly, it is because of their separation, that it is only their formal 
identity which has negated itsel£ This may be expressed more concretely 
in the following way. The Notion oflife, the genus, life in its universality, 
expels from itself its reality, which has become a totality within it. It is 
however identical with this reality, and because it is Idea, absolute in its 
30 self-preservation, the Divine, the Eternal, it abides within it. That which 
has been sublated is only the form, the natural inadequacy, the merely 
persistent abstract externality of time and space. In living being, the 
Notion certainly exhibits the highest mode of its existence in nature; but 
here also, the Notion is merely implicit, for the Idea exists in nature as a 
35 singular. By moving from one place to another, the animal has certainly 
released itself completely from gravity; it is aware of itself in sensation 
and hears itself in voice; the genus exists in the generic process, but also 
only as a singular. Now as this existence is still inadequate to the univer-
sality of the Idea, the Idea has to break out of this sphere, and draw breath 
2II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
by shattering this inadequate existence. Consequently, instead of the third 
moment of the generic process lapsing again into singularity, the other 
side, which is death, constitutes the sublation of the singular, and is there-
fore the proceeding forth of the genus, of spirit. This is so because the 
negation of the immediate singularity of natural being consists in the 5 
positing of the universality of the genus, and moreover in the form of the 
genus. In spiritual individuality, this movement of the two sides is the self-
sublating progression which results in consciousness, i.e. the unity which is in and 
for itself the unity of both, and which is this as self, not merely as genus in the 
inner Notion of the singular. It is in this way that the Idea exists in the 10 
independent subject, which as an organ of the Notion, frods everything 
to be fluid and of an ideal nature, i.e. it thinks, appropriates to itself all 
that is spatial and temporal, and so contains universality, i.e. itsel£ As the 
universal now has being for the universal, the Notion is for itsel£ This is 
first manifest in spirit, in which the Notion objectifies itself, although by 15 
this, the existence of the Notion is posited as Notion. As this universal 
which has being for itself, thought is immortal being, while mortal being 
consists on the universality of the Idea being inadequate to itsel£ 
This is the transition from natural being into spirit; nature has found its 
consummation in living being, and has made its peace by shifting into a 20 
higher sphere. Spirit has therefore issued forth from nature. The purpose 
of nature is to extinguish itself, and to break through its rind of immedi-
ate and sensuous being, to consume itself like a Phoenix in order to emerge 
from this externality rejuvenated as spirit. Nature has become distinct + 
from itself in order to recognize itself again as Idea, and to reconcile 25 
itself with itsel£ To regard spirit thus, as having come forth from impli-
citness, and as having become a mere being-for-self, is however a one-
sided view. Nature is certainly that which is immediate, but as that which 
is distinct from spirit, it is nevertheless merely a relativity. As the nega-
tive of spirit, it is therefore merely a posited being. It is the power of 30 
free spirit which sublates this negativity; spirit is nature's antecedent 
and to an equal extent its consequent, it is not merely the metaphysical 
Idea of it. It is precisely because spirit constitutes the end of nature, that 
it is antecedent to it. Nature has gone forth from spirit; it has not done 
this empirically however, for while it presupposes nature, it is already 35 
constantly contained within it. In its infinite freedom however, spirit 
allows nature freedom, and opposes it by exhibiting within it the action 
of the Idea, as an inner necessity; just as a free man is certain that his 
action constitutes the activity of the world. Spirit itself therefore, pro-
ceeding forth in the first instance from immediate being, but then ab-
40 
212 

THE ANIMAL ORGANISM 
stractly apprehending itself, wants to liberate itself by fashioning nature 
from within itself; this action of spirit is philosophy. 
With this we have brought our consideration of nature to its limit. 
Spirit, which has apprehended itself, also wants to recognize itself in 
s nature, to make good again the loss of itsel£ It is only by this reconcilia-
tion with nature and actuality that spirit is truly liberated, and sheds the 
particularity of its modes of thought and intuition. This liberation from 
nature and its necessity constitutes the Notion of the philosophy of nature. 
The shapes of nature are merely shapes of the Notion, although in the 
10 element of externality; it is true that their forms are grounded in the 
Notion as the stages of nature, but even where the Notion collects itself 
into sensation, it is still not yet present to itself as Notion. It is precisely 
because material being is so intractably opposed to the unity of the 
Notion, and because spirit has to deal with an ever increasing wealth of 
1 s detail, that the philosophy of nature is so difficult. In spite of this difficulty 
however, reason must have confidence in itself, confidence that in nature 
the Notion speaks to the Notion, and that the true shape of the Notion, 
which lies concealed beneath the extrinsicality of infmitely numerous 
shapes, will reveal itself to it.-Let us briefly survey the field we have 
20 covered. In the primary sphere of gravity, the Idea was freely deployed 
into a body which has the free heavenly bodies as its members. This 
externality then shaped itself inwardly into the properties and qualities 
belonging to an individual unity, and having an immanent and physical 
movement in the chemical process. Finally, in animation, gravity is re-
2S leased into members possessing subjective unity. The aim of these lectures 
+ is to convey an image of nature, in order to subdue this Proteus: to fmd 
in this externality only the mirror of ourselves, to see in nature a free 
reflection of spirit: to understand God, not in the contemplation of 
+ spirit, but in this His immediate existence. 
(Concluded: March 18, 1820; March 23, r822; March 30, r824; 
March 17, r826; August 26, 1828; August 27, 1830). 
213 

HEGEL~S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
NOTES 
10,21 
,md)tig' is an obsolete Swabian word. Hegel evidently uses it in order to catch 
the shade of meaning implied by this complicated nexus of fact and theory. See 
Wilhelm Pfleiderer's supplements to Hermann Fischer's 'Schwabisches Worter-
buch' vol. 6 pt. 2 (Tiibingen, 1904-1936). He quotes from Nicodemus Frischlin 
(1547-1590) in order to clarify the meaning of the word, 'Lucidus,luminosus 
~eI1, lie c~tig.' 
Although the importance of light to the living organism was known at this 
time, it was by no means fully understood. Jean Senebier (1742-1809) spent six 
years (1782-1788) investigating the influence of light upon vegetation, and pub-
lished the results of his labour in 'Experiences sur l' action de la lumiere solaire 
dans la vegetation' (Geneva, 1788), and in the five volumes of his 'Physiologie 
vegetale' (Geneva, 1800). J. C. Reil (1759-1813) makes mention ofits influence 
upon animals, ,~ud) ba~ md)t, bie auuetft fuutile materie, fd)eint ein ~eftanbteil 
bet tierifd)en st6tlJet 5U fein. mangel be~ md)te~ mad)t fett; ba~et H:>ertt man 
%iete, bie man maftet, an finftete ~rtet ein" ('Von der Lebenskraft' 1796 ed. 
K. Sudhoff Leipzig 1910 I p. 16). C£ E. Hom (1772-1848) 'Ueber die 
Wirkungen des Lichts auf den lebenden menschlichen Korper, mit Ausnahme 
des Sehens' (Konigsberg, 1799). 
II,2 
This may be a reference to Spinoza's 'Ethics' pt. II prop. XLV 'Every idea 
of every body or individual thing actually existing necessarily involves the 
eternal and infinite essence of God .. .' prop. XLVI 'The knowledge of the 
eternal and infinite essence of God which each idea involves is adequate and 
perfect.' 
II,33 
'The Logic of Hegel' tr. W. Wallace. Second Edition Oxford University 
Press 1963 p. 336. 
II,36 
Kant 'Critique of Judgement' tr. J. C. Meredith pt. II pp. 3-34 Oxford 
University Press 1964. 
C£ Aristotle's remark, 'It is manifest that the soul is also the final cause of the 
body. For Nature, like mind, always does whatever it does for the sake of some-
thing, which something is its end. To that something corresponds in the case 
214 

NOTES 
of animals the soul, and in this it follows the order of nature; all natural bodies 
are organs of the soul,' 'De Anima' II 4 (415b) tr. J. A. Smith Oxford University 
Press 193 I. 
12, II 
The division of the kingdoms of nature into a triad has been attributed to 
Aristotle, but in modern times it seems to have been the 'Gazophylacium 
Rerum Naturalium, e regno Vegetabili, Animali, et Minerali depromptarum' 
(Nuremberg, 1642) of M. R. Besler (1607-1661) which initiated its wide-spread 
acceptance. It had already become a commonplace by the end of the seventeenth 
century cf. the 'Regnum Animale' (1682), 'Regnum Minerale' (1686) and 
'Regnum Vegetabile' (1688) of Emanuel Konig (1658-1731). Linnaeus makes 
use of it in his 'Systema naturae' (Leyden, 1735), and H. F. Link has an interest-
ing assessment of it in his 'Ueber die Leiter der Nature' (Rostock and Leipzig, 
1794) p.21. ,@)ef)on feit langen .8eiten untetfef)eibet man hie bten meief)e bet 
~atut, unb ungeaef)tet aUet stiinftelet}en bet @)t}fteme, 
~at fief) biefe 
~int~eHung bi5 ie~t et~aUen, ja ben @)ieg iibet aUe metiinbetungen batlon 
gettagen. ~n 
me\tJei~, bau fie fief) \tJenigften~ bem gemeinen iDCenfef)entletftanbe 
fe~t em.\Jfe~Ien muU.' 
12, 33 
In Hegel's day, crystals were of great importance in speculation and experi-
ment concerned with the distinction between inanimate and animate being. 
Charles Bonnet (1720-1793), who seems to have initiated this line of research, 
distinguished between crystalline growth by means of accretion, and organic 
growth by means of intussusception, 'Les Etres organises proviennent d'un 
germe ou toutes leur parties essentielles sont concentres, et ils crolssent par 
intussusception. Les Etres crystallises crolssent par l' apposition successive de 
certaines molecules de figure deterrninee, qui se reunissent dans une masse 
commune. Ainsi, les Etres crystallises ne crolssent pas proprement; mais ils 
accroisent.' 'Oeuvres d'Histoire Naturelle' (8 vols. Neuchatel, 1779-1783) Part 
III Ch. IV note 12 (p. 51). 
Bonnet realized therefore, that as organizations of elements, crystalline and 
organic formations were closely related, but he was unable to give a precise 
definition of their common factor, and was therefore led to assert that at this 
juncture nature made a leap, 'Si Ie polype nous montre Ie passage du Vegetal a 
l'Animal, d'un autre cote nous ne decouvrons pas celui du Mineral au Vegetal. 
lei la Nature nous semble faire un saut; la gradation est pour nous interrompre, 
car l' organisation apparente de quelques pierres et des crystallisations ne repond 
que tres-imparfaitement a celle des plantes.' See his 'Considerations sur les corps 
organises' (Amsterdam, 1762) Ch. 12 § 209. 
Various lines of research were opened up in geology, botany and animal 
physiology in order to discover this common factor. The geologist J. L. Heim 
215 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(1741-1819), in his 'Geologische BeschreibWlg des Thiiringer Waldgeburgs' 
pt. II sect. IV (Meiningen, 1803) noted the close resemblance between the 
elongated mica crystals occurring in a certain coarse-grained conglomerate 
(@emenge) fOWld near Brottrode, and the reed- and rush-like figurations found 
in the greywack formations of the Kellbach area. Commenting upon this 
resemblance, he continues as follows (p. 290) ,D~ne 3u ettoatten, baa toit jemag 
es ba~in bring en toetben, bie @:ntfte~ung bet etften otganiid)en ~eien 3U 
enttiit~ie1n, toitb bod) jebet ~atutrotid)et eingefte~en milHen, baa Meies ein 
~od)ft inteteHantet @egenftanb, unb too~l toett~ iet), baa @eognoften unb 
I.t~emifet bet) beHen Untetfud)ung fid) einanbet bie ~iinbe bieten/ He then 
quotes with approval an article by Charles Hatchett (1765-1847) 'Chemical 
experiments on Zoophytes,' in 'phil. Trans. of the Roy. Soc.' 1800 pp. 
327-402. 
The botanist K. H. Schultz (1798-1871), a colleague of Hegel's in Berlin, took 
the overcoming of chemical differentiation to be the common factor ('Die 
Nature der lebendigen Pflanze' Berlin 1823, I pp. 41-60). See especially § 58 
of this work, ,Sh:t)ftaUe geftalten fid), toie bie ~flan3en unb 5t~iete, aus innetet 
WCad)t, unb 3toat bifben fie fid), aus utft>tilnglid) gerotmten @egenfii~en, bie 
man i~te otganifd)en @:lemente nennen fonnte ... 3n biefen otganifd)en 
@:lementen ift jebe d)emijd)e 'l)i!reten3 butd)aus 3Ut ffiu~ e gebtad)t, unb aus 
bem d)emifd)en 5tobe ge~en fie etft inS inbibibueUe 2eben ilbet.' 
J. C. Reil (1759-1813), in his 'Von der Lebenskraft' vo1.I 1796 (ed. K. Sudhoff, 
Leipzig, 1910) p. 37 emphasised the similarity between crystallisation and 
animal growth, ,'l)ie tietifd)e WCaterie fd)ieat in @eriij3e, ~etben, ~iiute, 
WCujfe1faiem ufm. an, toie bas Sfod)ia13 in einem toiltfeligen SftiftaU. 'l)us 
2rnfd)iej3en bet rtemben WCaterie an bie fd)on bot~anbene mua bon autJen 
gefd)e~en, toe1d)e~ aw bem lBegtiff dnet Sh:iftaUifation et~eUt. Dtganifd)e 
~efen betme~ten a1fo, toie bie g:oHifien i~te WCaHe butd) 3ufa~ bon auj3en.' 
F. Tiedemann (1781-1861), in his 'Physiologie des Menschen' vol. I pp. 105-106 
(Darmstadt, 1830 Engl. tr., 'A Systematic Treatise on Comparative Physiology' 
tr. with notes by J. M. Gully and J. H. Lane. London, 1834) suggested that it was 
in their lines and surfaces that the essential difference between these inorganic 
and organic 'crystallisations' was to be fOWld, ,2rUe otganifd)en Sfott>et, bie 
@etoiid)ie fotoo~l a1s bie 5t~iete, ~aben eine me~t obet toeniget tunblid)e unb 
et)rotmige, obet iiftige unb gegliebette g:otm, unb fie finb butd) ftumme obet 
toeUenrotmige mnien, fo toie butd) COnbe!;e obet concabe g:liid)en begtiin3t. 
'l)ie unotganifd)en Sfott>et bagegen, toenn fie eine tegu1iite g:otm ~aben, toie 
Me SfriftaUe, finb butd) ebene g:liid)en unb getabe 2inien, Me in beftimmten 
~infe1n an ben @:den unb Sfanten 3uiammeniteten, begtiin3t.' 
These approaches towards the distinction between inanimate and animate 
being found a protagonist in Hans Przibram as late as the 1920'S; see his 'Die 
anorganischen Grenzgebiete, insbesondere der Kristallvergleich' (Berlin, 1926), 
c£ E. Schrodinger 'What is Life?' (Cambridge, 1944). Schrodinger calls the gene 
216 

NOTES 
or the chromosome an 'aperiodic crystal'. Hegel makes use of them on many 
occasions, and may have been encouraged to do so at this juncture as a result of 
the work of the geologist J. F. L. Hausmann (1782-1859); see his 'Entwurf des 
Systems der anorganischen Naturkorper' (Cassel, 1809), and 'Untersuchungen 
iiber die Formen der leblosen Nature' (Gottingen, 1822). E. Mendelsohn 
'Physical Models and Physiological Concepts: explanation in nineteenth 
century biology' in 'Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science' (ed. Cohen, 
Wartofsky, New York, 1965) vol. ii pp. 127-155. 
13,22 
C£ blO,11. ,bie Unid)ulb bet$f{an5e.' Light is thrown upon Hegel's attribu-
tion of innocence to plants by Johann Christoph Adelung (1732-1806), who, in 
his 'Grammatisch-kritisches Worterbuch der Hochdeutschen Mundart' (ed. 
Soltau and Schonberger, 4 pts. Vienna, 1807-1808) IV col. 888, notes that the 
word 'is often used for innocuousness, to denote that state in which a thing does 
not contribute to the lessening of the perfection of something else.' The O.E.D. 
cites a contemporary English instance ofits use in this sense (1828), 'The inno-
cence of a medicine which can do no harm.' The Houstonia caerulea, a plant 
with small blue flowers, is known popularly as Innocence. 
13, 31 
Etheriality, baS met~eriid)e, Greek al8~p, formed on root of a'l8ELv to burn, 
glow. Cf. Holderlin's elegy 'An den Ather.' 
,Unb es btangt lid) unb tinnt aw beinet etoigen truIle 
ilie befeelenbe Buft butd) aIle mO~ten bes Bebens.· 
For Aristotle, the ether was the quintessence or fifth element after earth, 
water, air, and fire, it was the godlike in contradistinction to the terrestrial fire, 
and functioned as spirit and as the source of everything spiritual and living. For 
the postulation of ether in modern physical theories, see Sir Edmund Whittaker 
'A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity' (2 vols. London, 1951.) 
C£ E. A. Underwood 'Science, Medicine and History' (2 vols. Oxford, 1953) 
vol. I pp. 247-265. W. Kern 'Eine Uebersetzung Hegels zu De Anima III, 4-5': 
in 'Hegel-Studien' (ed Nicolin and Poggeler, Bonn, 1961) vol. I pp. 49-88. 
16, 20 
This paragraph almost certainly owes something to Kant's 'Kurzer Abriss der 
physischen Geographie' ('Samtliche Werke' II ed. Hartenstein, Leipzig, 1867). 
Kant distinguishes between mathematical, political and physical geography, and 
if we consider his definitions of these branches of the subject, it becomes evident 
that they broadly correspond to what are now known as geodesy, human 
geography and geomorphology. 
217 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
The geodetical background to geographical studies, as it is presented here by 
Hegel, was a commonplace at that time; see the introduction to 'A New Geo-
graphical, Historical and Commercial Grammar' (6th ed. London 1779) by 
William Guthrie (1708- 1770), John Pinkerton's 'Modem Geography' (London, 
18n), and Carl Ritter's 'Die Erdkunde im Verhaltniss zur Nature und zur 
Geschichte des Menschen (Berlin, 1822). 
16,33 
,iiie ~be ift untet allen 1,l31aneten bet botttefflid)fte, bet mittlete.'· 'For a 
planet to be suitable for life, it must move in what is known as the parent sun's 
biosphere-that is to say, the region in which the temperature is neither too high 
nor too low. In our Solar System there are three planets in the biosphere: Venus 
(near the inner edge), Earth (more or less in the middle) and Mars (near the outer 
edge).' P. Moore, 'The Listener' vol. LXXIV p. 229. 
17,23 
Geognosy (formed on Greek yew (y1j) earth + yvwO'tr; knowledge). This 
term seems to have been coined by J. C. Fiichsel (1722-1773), who speaks of 
'scientia geognostica' in his 'Historia terrae et maris' ('Acta Academiae elector-
alis Moguntinae' Erfurt, 1761 vol. II p. 44-209). 
'Geognosy treats of the general structure of the earth. It makes us acquainted 
with the common and particular beds of fossils, with their probable origin, relative 
formation and arrangement in the Earth-with the rocks which compose 
mountains, and which constitute, if not the solid mass, at least the great shell of 
the Globe-with the various strata and veins which form the more particular 
repositories of fossils, and with their reciprocal relations to each other.' A. G. 
Werner 'A treatise on the external characters of fossils' (Leipzig 1774, tr. T. 
Weaver, Dublin 1805 p. 3). 
In modem German 'Geognosie' may be used to cover mineralogy, petrology 
and economic geology, whereas 'Geologie' deals specifically with the history 
of the earth and the superficial crust. 
F. Hoffmann 'Geschichte der Geognosie' (Berlin 1838); C. Keferstein 
'Geschichte und Litteratur der Geognosie' (Halle, 1840). 
17, 32 
From about 1790 until about 1820, this controversy gave rise to two distinct 
schools of geology. Abraham Gottlob Werner (1749-1817), professor at the 
Freiberg Mining Academy and founder of the neptunist school, held that the 
sea had at one time covered the whole of the globe, and that rocks and their 
formations were the result of marine depositions and the recession of this univer-
sal ocean. 
Robert Jameson (1774-1854), professor of natural history at Edinburgh, was 
218 

NOTES 
one of the first to introduce Werner's ideas into Britain. In one of his earliest 
articles, 'Examination of the supposed igneous origin of the rocks of the Trapp 
formation' ('Nicholson's Journal' III Oct. 1802 pp. 111-119), he called in 
question the volcanic origin of basalt and attempted to show that it had been 
formed by the action of water. In 1805 (2nd ed. 1816), he published an English 
translation of Werner's 'Von den ausserlichen Kennzeichen der Fossilien' 
(Leipzig, 1774), and in 1804-1808 gave a full account of Werner's system in his 
'System of Mineralogy' (3 vols. 3rd ed. Edinburgh, 1820). It was his enthusiasm 
which led to the formation of the 'Wernerian Natural History Society of 
Edinburgh' (1808-1839), the memoirs of which show how Werner's ideas were 
put to the test, modified and finally abandoned. 
The founder of the vulcanist school was James Hutton (1726-1797) of 
Edinburgh. Hutton expounded the doctrine that the present rocks of the earth's 
surface have been formed mainly out of the waste of older rocks; that these 
materials, having been laid down under the sea, were consolidated there under 
great pressure, and subsequently disrupted and upheaved by the expansive power 
of subterranean heat; that during these convulsions, veins and masses of molten 
rock were injected into the rents of the dislocated strata; that every portion of 
the upraised land, as soon as it is exposed to the atmosphere, is subject to decay; 
and that this decay must tend to advance until the whole of the land has been 
worn away and laid down on the sea-floor, whence future upheavals will once 
more raise the consolidated sediments into new land. Hutton first communi-
cated these views to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1785. Ten years later he 
gave a fuller account of them in his 'Theory of the Earth' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 
1795), but the book was clumsily written and never finished, and it was John 
Playfair (1748-1819) who, by presenting Hutton's theories in a brilliantly lucid 
manner, gained widespread acceptance for them (,Illustrations of the Huttonian 
Theory of the Earth' Edinburgh, 1802, ed. G. W. White, New York, 1964). 
The best contemporary English account of the neptunist-vulcanist contro-
versy is John Murray's 'A Comparative View of the Huttonian and Neptunian 
Systems of Geology' (anon. Edinburgh, 1802). 
As this controversy was thought to have theological implications, the two 
points of view were denigrated and defended with great vehemence: see C. C. 
Gillipsie 'Genesis and Geology' (Harvard University Press, 1951). 
Goethe introduces the subject into 'Faust' pt. II Act II, in the interchanges 
between the Sphinxes and Seismos, and between Anaxagoras and Thales. cf. 
Goethe 'Schriften zur Geologie und Mineralogie' ed. G. Schmid (Weimar, 
1947, 1949). 
18,14 
Matthew XXIV v. 35: Mark XIII v. 31: 2 Peter III vv. 4-10: Revelation XXI 
v. I. 
C£ M. Stuart 'Remarks on a critical examination of some passages in Genesis 
219 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
I; with remarks on difficulties that attend some of the present modes of geo-
logical reasoning.' ('The AmericanJoumal of Science and Arts' ed. Silliman vol. 
xxx pp. II4-130, 1836). 
18,27 
Hutton's geological studies led him to the conclusion that the history of the 
world showed, 'no trace of a beginning and no prospect of an end.' In its day 
this was a revolutionary assertion, for natural scientists were then only begin-
ning to become aware of the true extent of geological time. 
George Buff"on (1707-1788) drew attention to these 'prodigious revolutions' 
of the 'remote past', by distinguishing seven main epochs in the history of the 
earth: (i) the formation of the solar system, (ii) the cooling of matter and the 
interior formation of the earth, (iii) the universal ocean, (iv) the subsidence of 
the ocean and emergence of volcanoes, (v) the first appearance of animals, (vi) 
the separation of the continents, (vii) the appearance of man. ('Oeuvres philo-
sophiques de Buff"on' ed. J. Piveteau, Paris, 1954: pp. II6-229 'Epoques de la 
nature' 1778). 
This new chronology, together with the systematic investigation of the 
animal remains discovered in geological formations, gave rise to great advances 
in palaeontology. The changes postulated as having taken place in the past were 
thought to have been the result of cataclysms however, 'The breaking to pieces, 
the raising up and overturning of the older strata, leave no doubt upon the 
mind that they have been reduced to the state in which we now see them by the 
action of sudden and violent causes ... Life, therefore, has often been disturbed 
on this earth by terrible events.'-G. Cuvier (1769-1832) 'Theory of the Earth' 
tr. Jameson, 5th ed. 1827 pp. 14-16. 
In his 'Essai sur la geographie mineralogique des environs de Paris' (Paris, 
1808), Cuvier made the first exact contribution to stratigraphic geology, but he 
never abandoned this cataclysmic theory of change, and in geology, it was 
Hutton and Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875) who, by their advocacy of uniformi-
tarianism, did most to prepare the way for the evolutionism of Darwin. 
Nevertheless, it was also Cuvier who laid the foundations of vertebrate palaeon-
tology in his 'Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles' (Paris, 1812). 
J. B. Lamarck (1744-1829) brought geological uniformitarianism to bear upon 
palaeontological theory, and it was his 'Sur les fossiles des environs de Paris' 
(Paris, 1802-1806) which laid the foundation of all subsequent invertebrate 
palaeontology. 
S. Toulmin andJ. Goodfield 'The Discovery of Time' (London, 1965). 
18,29 
Johann Gottfried Ebel (1764-1830) was a medical doctor by profession, and 
practised for some years at Frankfurt-on-Main in this capacity. At one time, 
Goethe wanted to fmd him an appointment at Jena. After travelling widely in 
220 

NOTES 
Switzerland, he published a travel book on the country which was translated 
into French and English and ran into many editions: see' Anleitung die Schweiz 
zu bereisen' (2 vols. Zurich, 1793; French tr. Paris, 1795; English tr. D. Wall 
London, 1818). 
H. Escher 'J. G. Ebel, sein Leben und Wirken' (Trogen, 1836). 
In his 'Ueber den Bau der Erde in dem Alpen-Gebirge zwischen 12 Lingen-
und 2-4 Breitengraden. Nebst einigen Betrachtungen uber die Gebirge und den 
Bau der Erde uberhaupt' (2 vols. Zurich, 1808), he drew to some extent upon 
the material he had collected for his fIrst book, but added much that was new. 
It was evidently the detail of his observations rather than his theorizing which 
interested Hegel, and subsequent assessments of his work have tended to bear 
out the soundness of Hegel's judgement on this point. The primary object of 
the book was to present the Alps in their inter-related entirety. Ebel took the 
core of the whole system to be a series of more or less steeply inclined tables of 
primitive rock, which had been engendered by the chemical process and the 
prevailing force of crystallization. He distinguished between several parallel 
lateral ranges resting upon this central core, i.e. the fletz-formations, which he 
thought to be of mechanical origin, the limestone hills, and other stratifIed 
rocks such as molasse (tertiary sandstone). He regarded the globe of the earth 
as a huge voltaic pile, from which these particular formations had derived their 
basic animation. 
Ebel also published a slender volume entitled, 'Ideen uber die Organisation 
und das eigenthumliche Leben des Erdkorpers, und uber die gewaltsamen 
Veranderungen seiner Oberflache' (Vienna, 18n) which consists very largely 
of extracts from the work quoted by Hegel. 
18, 31 
Fletz-formations ,~lot,lge&itgen' The word ,f{ot,l' is cognate with the Anglo-
Saxon 'flett', floor, ground, hall, dwelling. In Old High German 'flezzi' had the 
same meaning, and in Middle High German occurred as 'vlez', with the added 
general meaning of 'levelled ground'. The word was fIrst used as a technical 
term by the miners of the Erz- and Riesengebirge in the sixteenth century (H. 
Veith 'Deutsches Bergworterbuch' Breslau, 1871 p. 188, E. Gopfert 'Berg-
mannssprache' 1902 p. 26). As a geological term it is now obsolete, having given 
way in modern geological nomenclature to 'Secondary' and 'Tertiary', but it 
was widely used in Hegel's day, and the history of its origin covers some im-
portant advances in the development of geology. 
Ultimately, its subsequent use by geologists may be traced back to the theories 
of rock-formation put forward by the Dane Nicolaus Steno (1638-1686) in his 
'The Prodromus to a dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within 
solids. Laying the foundation for the rendering a rational account . . . of the 
frame ... of the Earth' (Florence, 1669 tr. H. Oldenburg London, 1671). As 
the result of his geological studies in Tuscany, Steno put forward the theory that 
221 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
geological strata are sediments which have been deposited in water, subsequently 
hardened to a greater or lesser degree, and then raised or convulsed by seismic 
disturbances. 
A. L. Moro (1687-1740), in his, 'De Crostacei e degli altri marini corpi che 
si truovano su monti' (Venice, 1740, German tr. Leipzig, 1751), distinguished 
between 'montes primarii' which he regarded as primeval and volcanic in 
origin, and 'montes secundarii' which he regarded as derived from these primary 
rocks by the various processes of weathering, erosion and disintegration. 
In the foreword to his 'Versuch einer Geschichte von Flotz-Gebiirgen' 
(Berlin, 1756, French tr. 1759), J. G. Lehmann (d. 1767) distinguished between 
primitive and veined rocks (Ur-und Ganggebirge) devoid of fossils, and fletz-
formations (Flotzgebirge), within which he distinguished between an older 
series consisting of old red sandstone, blue slate, coal etc., and a newer series 
consisting of new red sandstone, blue clay, upper earth (Dammerde) etc. 
Lehmann certainly did a great deal of original research upon the geology of 
north Germany, but in the ordering of his material he seems to have been 
influenced by Moro. 
lt was Lehmann who gave the term 'flotz' a general currency in Germany. 
A. G. Werner (1749-1817) adopted it in his 'Classification der Gebirgsarten' 
(Dresden, 1787), and it was mainly through the work of his disciple Robert 
Jameson (1774-1854), that it was introduced into English. 
Werner's classification distinguished between primitive rocks such as granite, 
gneiss, mica- and argillaceous schist, porphyry, basalt etc.; fletz-formations 
such as limestone, marl, sandstone, greywack, coal, chalk, rock-salt, gypsum 
and iron-clay; volcanic rocks; and alluvial terrains. In his later system he in-
serted a further group, which he called 'transition rocks' (Uebergangsgebirge), 
between the primitive rocks and the fletz-formations, and enumerated twelve 
sub-divisions of fletz. C. Keferstein (1784-1866) published a critical analysis of 
this classification ('Tabellen iiber die vergleichende Geognosie' Halle, 1825), 
but he did not abandon the term 'fletz'. 
19, 14 
Ebel's source here seems to have been the 'Beobachtungen, Zweifel und 
Fragen die Mineralogie iiberhaupt und insbesondere ein natiirliches Mineral 
system betreffend. Erster Versuch (Hanover and Osnabriick, 1792) of Franz von 
Beroldingen (1740-1798). ,CIlet ~ollanbiid)e, bet iYtie~Ianbiid)e, bet CIldniid)e 
unb bet meifte (fugHid)e %otf id)einen auf folgenbe mtt, nemHd) butd) 
Ueoetid)tuemmung unb 8utildtueid)ung be~ IDCeete~, entftanben ~u iet)n. CIlie 
natiltHd)e fIad)e £age bieiet £dnbet Iii~t bieie~ Ieid)t begteifen, unb ~u geid)tuei .. 
gen, ba~ bet meifte %otf gebad)tet £dnbet Sfod)iaI~, unb tuie in ~ottuegen, oft 
ie~t biele~ Sfod)iaI5 au~ fid) au~oringen Iii~t; io betfid)em aUd) bie babon 
~anbernben 6d)riftftellet, ba~ bie, beionbet~ in ~olldnbiid)en %otfmooten nid)t 
ieIten bodommenbe, umgeftilt~te mdume einedei £age ~aben, io, ba~ fie i~te 
222 

NOTES 
srtone obet @it;lfel nad) bet @egenb 5ltlifd)en :Oft unb Wotb, i~te ~Ut5eln abet 
gegen 6iib~~eft 5ufe~ten.' (vol. I pp. 43-44) 
19,28 
'Voyage au sommet du Mont-Perdu' par Ie dtoyen Ramond. ('Annales du 
Museum National D'Histoire Naturelle' vol. III pp. 74-84, Paris, 1804). 'Tout 
est secondaire dans ces enormes amas. Les poudingues, les gris, Ie calcaire coquiller 
et fetide, tels en sont les materiaux; et dans Ie nombre des corps marins qui y 
sont enfermes, Ie genre qui l' emporte sur tous les autres, est celui des numismales 
que l' on rencontre par-tout dans une si prodigieuse abondance, qu' elle epou-
vante l' esprit Ie plus accoutume a 1'idee des grandes destructions de la nature' 
(pp. 82-83). C£ 'Nicholson's Journal' vol. vi pp. 250-252 Dec. 1803. 
19,29 
Most of the data here is taken from Ebel, but Hegel himself introduced this 
reference to Voltaire's 'Dissertation ... sur les changemens arrives dans notre 
globe, et sur les petrifactions qui' on pretend en etre encore les temoignages', 
which was addressed to the Academy ofBoulogne in 1746 ('Oeuvres completes 
de Voltaire' 2nd ed. Paris, 1828 vol. XLII pp. 227-244). 
'On a vu aussi dans des provinces d'ltalie, de France etc. de petits coquillages 
qui'on assure etre originaires de la mer de Syrie. Je ne veux pas contester leur 
origine; mais ne pourrait-on pas se souvenir que cette foule innombrable de 
pelerins et de croises, qui porta son argent dans la Terre-Sainte, en rapporta des 
coquilles ?' 
This volume (pp. 282-303) contains a further discussion of these shells and of 
the theories built upon them, 'He! pauvres gens qui osez parler en maltres, vous 
voulez m'enseigner la formation de 1'univers, et vous ne savez pas celIe d'un 
dron, celle d'un paille' (p. 303). 
19, 32 
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826) mentions these shells in a letter to a friend, 
'Immense bodies of Schist with impressions of shells near the eastern foot of 
North mountain recall statements that shells have been found in the Andes 
15,000 feet above sea level, which is considered by many writers both of the 
learned and unlearned as a proof of a universal deluge ... We must be contented 
to acknowledge that this great phenomenon is as yet unsolved. Ignorance is 
preferable to error, and he is less remote from truth who believes nothing than 
he who believes what is wrong'. F. W. Hirst 'Life and Letters of Thomas 
Jefferson' (New York, 1926) p. 186. 
20, II 
Throughout the eighteenth century, these animal remains attracted a great 
deal of interest, and most of the travel books of the time made mention of them. 
223 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
J. B. Breyne's 'Observations, and a Description of some Mammoth's Bones 
dug up in Siberia, proving them to have belonged to Elephants' (Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc. 1737 pp. 124-128 London, 1741) is typical of speculation on the 
subject early in the century. Breyne set out to prove, 'that the extraordinary 
large Teeth and Bones found under Ground, and digged up in several Places 
of Siberia, by the Name of Mammoth's, or Mammut's, Teeth and Bones, were, 
I True Bones and Teeth of some large Animals once living; and, 
II That those animals were Elephants, by the Analogy of the Teeth and 
Bones, with the known ones of Elephants. 
III That they were brought and left there by the universal Deluge'. 
P. S. Pallas (1741-18II) frequently refers to these remains in his 'Reisen durch 
verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen Reichs' (3 vols. 1771-1776, Eng. tr. 
'Travels through the Southern Provinces of the Russian Empire' 2 vols. London, 
1802-1803), and was often quoted on the subject by the writers of Hege1's day. 
For an account of A. von Humboldt's American travels between 1799 and 
1804 see H. M. Williams' translation of his 'Personal Narrative of Travels to 
the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent' (6 vols. London, 1818-1826). 
The fossils he discovered on these journeys are dealt with in detail in 'Annales 
du Museum d'Histoire Naturelle' vol. II p. 177 et seq., and 'Gilbert's Annalen 
der Physik' vol. XVI pp. 424-425. At the time of Hege1's delivering these 
lectures, the fullest account of the fossilized quadrupeds of the River plate was 
to be found in 'Essais sur 1'histoire naturelle de Quadrupedes de la Province de 
Paraguay' by Felix d' Azara (tr. M. L. E. Moreau-Saint-Mery 2 vols. Paris, 
1801). 
By the turn of the century, the first competent attempts at dating rocks by 
means of these fossils were being made. As the Secondary and Tertiary forma-
tions of southern and eastern England and the Paris Basin are easily observable, 
and lie in undisturbed succession one above the other over hundreds of square 
miles, it was natural that English and French geologists should have taken the 
lead in this work. 
As early as the seventeenth century, Martin Lister (1638-1712) had done 
systematic work on conchology, and had suggested that the shells and animal 
remains found in the different strata might be of prime importance in reaching 
an understanding of the formation of the earth: see his 'Historia Animalium 
Angliae' (London, 1678-1681). In 1799 William Smith (1769-1839) dictated 
his famous 'Order of Strata and their imbedded Organic Remains' to the rector 
of Pewsey; in 1816 he began his 'Strata identified by organized fossils'; and in 
1817 his 'Stratigraphical System of Organized Fossils ... explaining ... their 
use in identifying the British Strata' appeared. John Farey (1766-1826) pointed 
out that Smith's work was in many ways the fulfilment of Lister's suggestions; 
'A Stratigraphical or Smithian arrangement of the fossil shells described by 
Martin Lister in his 'Historia Animalium Angliae' (Tilloch's Philosophical 
Magazine 1819 pp. 133-138). 
224 

NOTES 
In France, George Cuvier's 'Recherches sur les Ossemens fossiles' (Paris, 
1812), and 'Essai sur la Geographie mineralogique des environs de Paris' (Paris, 
18II) opened up similar fields of research. German geologists soon began to 
produce corresponding works. E. F. Schlotheim (1764-1832) published his 
'Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte der Versteinerungen' in 1813 ('Mineralogisches 
Taschenbuch von Leonhard' VII pp. 1-134), and in 1826 August Goldfuss 
(1782-1848) began to publish his 'Petrefacta Germaniae' in a series of magni-
ficently produced folio volumes (Dusseldorf, 1 826-1 844). 
These works brought the rapid advances then being made in palaeontology 
to bear upon stratigraphical geology. Hegel could have drawn upon a number 
of systematic palaeontological works in illustrating this subject therefore, but 
as he saw no teleological significance in these researches into the chronology of 
rock formation, he regarded them as philosophically unimportant, and chose 
to draw upon the comparatively random observations ofEbel. 
20, 34 
Cf. J. F. W. Charpentier (1738-1805) 'Bey trag zur geognostischen Kenntnis 
des Riesengebirgs schlesischen Antheils' (Leipzig, 1804), p. 54. ,3d) ~a£le 
o£len gefagt, baa bie S)aU.):ltgefteinatt bes ffiiesenge£lirgs @ranit fet). (;!s 
finbet fid) a£ler aUd) nod) @neia unb )Bafaa, jebod) nur an einigen ein5efn 
5ur .8eit vefannten 6teUen: ben @neia fanb id) auf ber 6 d)neefo.):l.):le, bem 
~od)ften fegefformigen )Berge bes gan5en ffiiefenge£lirgs, in einer ~o~e bon 
4940 $ar. tyua ii£ler ber meere~fHid)e, a£ltued)felnb in unb 5tuifd)en bem@ranit.' 
21,9 
Hoffmeister ('Jenenser Realphilosophie II', Leipzig, 1931) p. 109 gives the 
words emphasized by Hegel, and corrects the tense of this passage, ,'!lie 
@efd)id)te ift frii~er in bie (;!rbe gefaUen; je~t a£ler ift fie 5ur ffiu~e 
gefommen, ein Beven, ba~ in fid) fef£lft giirenb, bie .8eit an i~m fef£lft ~atte, 
ber (;!rbgeift, ber nod) nid)t 5ur ~1ttgegenfe~ung gefommen, bie )Betuegung 
unb ;triiume eine~ 6d)lafenben, £lis er ertuad)t unb im menfd)en fein 
)Betuuatfein er~alten (~at) unb fid) alfo als ru~ige @eftaltung gegenii£lergetreten 
(ift)/. 
He also prints Hegel's marginal note on this, ,mUgemeiner ~~arafter 
ber @eftalt. -
S)at hie ~be eine @efd)id)te? ~as ift @efd)id)te? .8ei! 
fiim in ben menfd)en bem >sernunftlofen gegenii£ler. -
tyorm bes Wad)ein .. 
anber ne£len bem .8ugleid).' 
21, 19 
,3n bie 6.):laUen fet) ber )Brei ~ineingelaufen/. C£ the note III. 240. 
H 
225 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
21,23 
The nature of' organic fermentation' was not known at this time, although it 
played as important a part as crystal formation in speculation and experiment 
concerning the distinction between inanimate and animate being. 
L.]. Thenard (1774-1857) was the first to suggest that it was animal and not 
chemical in nature ('Annal. de Chimie' XLVI, 1803 pp. 224-320), but it was not 
until 1835 that C. C. Delatour (1777-1859) showed that it was caused by minute 
organisms ('L'Institut' III, 1835 pp. 133-134). 
Prior to these advances, it was not uncommon to account for rock formation 
by means of ' fermentation'. F. W. H. von Trebra (1740-1819), in his 'Erfahrun-
gen vom Innern der Gebirge' (Leipzig, 1786), attributed the formation of rocks 
to what he called 'fermentation' and 'decomposition', although in modern 
terminology the processes he had in mind would probably be referred to as 
'metamorphism' and 'weathering'. 
In the controversy between Werner and]. K. Voigt (1752-1821) concerning 
the origin of basalt (see Voigt's 'Mineralogische und bergmannische Abhand-
lungen' Weimar, 1789-1791), Werner insisted that the main factor in its forma-
tion had been water, and Voigt that it had been heat. This conflict of opinion 
gave rise to C. Keferstein's theory ('Beitrage zur Geschichte und Kenntniss des 
Basaltes' Halle, 1819), according to which basalt had been formed by a kind of 
fermentation. Keferstein was unable to give a precise description of this process 
however. 
22,9 
Abraham Gottlob Werner (1749-1817) was appointed lecturer in mineralogy 
at the Freiberg Academy in 1775, and taught there for forty years. He wrote 
very little, and his first-hand knowledge of geological formations was confined 
to those of his native Saxony, but he had an immense influence on account of 
his lectures, and although not a few of those who heard them later abandoned 
many of the leading ideas they were meant to convey, they gave a great impetus 
to geological research throughout Europe. Several outstanding British geolo-
gists-George Greenough (177&-1855), Robert Jameson (1774-1854) and 
Thomas Weaver (1773-1855) studied under him. 
His accurate and systematic work on the classification of minerals has proved 
to be his most lasting contribution to science. He took a comprehensive view 
of the subject, assessing opacity, colour, lustre, hardness, specific weight, 
chemical content, cleavage and crystal structure etc. See F. von Kobell 'Ges-
chichte der Mineralogie' (Munich, 1865 pp. 85-96); Werner 'Von den ausser-
lichen Kennzeichen der Mineralogie' (Leipzig, 1774); 'Abraham Gottlob 
Werner's letztes Mineral-System' (Freiberg, 1817). 
Systematic mineralogy was already well established when geologists began to 
suggest systematic classifications of strata in the closing decades of the eighteenth 
226 

NOTES 
century, and it was natural therefore that they should have been influenced by 
the mineralogists. The working method generally adopted by the German 
geologists of the time was to make a detailed study of a certain area, noting the 
juxtaposition and sequence of the rocks, and then to attempt a classification by 
generalizing from this data. The assumption made was that if rocks are closely 
juxtaposed, they are almost certainly closely related in composition and origin, 
and have probably been subjected to similar aqueous and igneous processes. 
The systems evolved by this method naturally tended to reflect the geological 
structure of north Germany, where most of the fieldwork was done. J. G. 
Lehmann's 'Versuch einer Geschichte von Flotz-Gebiirgen' (Berlin, 1756) was 
the first work of this kind, and led to the general acceptance of the distinction 
between primitive rocks and fletz-formations. After studying the geology of 
Thuringia, J. C. Fuchsel (1722-1773) drew up a series of fourteen formations 
grading from what he called basic rocks (Grundgebirge) to shell-limestone 
characterized by the presence of ammonites, nautilites and terebratulae etc. 
('Historia terrae et maris, ex historia Thuringiae per montium descriptionem 
erecta' Act. Acad. elect. Moguntinae, Erfurt, 1762, vol. II pp. 44-209). J. F. W. 
Charpentier (1738-1805) also did his field-work in Thuringia, and in his 
'Mineralogische Geographie der Chursachsischen Lande' (Leipzig, 1778) 
elaborated upon Lehmann's basic distinction between primitive rocks and fletz-
formations. 
J. L. Heim (1741-1819) and K. G. von Raumer (1783-1865), whose works are 
quoted elsewhere by Hegel, as well as Werner's disciples in France-A. H. 
Bonnard (1781-1857) and J. F. d'Aubuisson (1769-1819)-and England, also 
worked out classifications in which there was a general progression from 
primitive inorganic formations to rocks having a certain organic content. Hegel 
might therefore have quoted any of them as having drawn attention to the 
'the sequence' which constitutes, 'the significance and spirit of the process'. The 
whole body of their work lent itself easily to the teleological interpretation he 
was looking for, and he probably mentions Werner specifically only because 
his classification was the best known. 
The weakness of Werner's geological system was that it involved his theory 
of a primeval universal ocean, and that the field-work on which it was based 
had been carried out only in Saxony. The value of it lay in the accuracy and 
comprehensiveness with which he had noted the characteristics of the various 
rocks, and the neatness with which his graded assessment of them allowed 
Hegel to make the transition from 'the primary organism' constituting the 
subject matter of geodesy, geognosy and physical geography, to the 'animation' 
of the atmosphere, the sea and the land. Hegel has already pointed out that he is 
no Neptunist, so that when he says that Werner's assessment of the sequence is 
'on the whole' correct, he probably has in mind Werner's controversy with 
J. K. Voigt (1752-1821) concerning the classification of basalt, C. Keferstein's 
critical analysis of the Wernerian classification of the fletz-formations ('Tabellen 
227 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
fiber die vergleichende Geognosie' Halle, 1825), and the dialectical imperfec-
tions in Werner's progression from the chemical and crystalline texture of 
granite, to the arborescent and conchyliaceous formations of coal-measures and 
limestone stratifications. 
Werner produced two systems of geological classification. In the first ('Classi-
fication der Gebirgsarten' Dresden, 1787), he distinguished between (i) primitive 
rocks such as granite, gneiss, mica and argillaceous schist, porphyry, basalt etc.; 
(ii) fletz-formations such as limestone, marl, sandstone, greywack, coal, chalk, 
rock-salt, gypsum and iron-clay; (iii) volcanic rocks; and (iv) alluvial terrains. 
About 1796 he introduced a new class of 'transition' rocks into this system, so 
that his final classification distinguished between (i) primitive rocks, sub-divided 
according to their age into granite, gneiss, mica and argillaceous schist, which 
are uniformly deposited, and prophyry and syenite which accompany these 
uniform deposits in an irregular manner; (ii) transition rocks such as greywack, 
slate, chalk, trapp etc.; (iii) fletz-formations such as sandstone, fletz-chalk, 
gypsum, rock-salt, coal-formations, and trap rocks such as basalt etc.; (iv) alluvial 
rocks consisting of sand, brown-coal etc. ; (v) volcanic rocks. 
22, 13 
,'!lie @eid)id)te bet Q;tbe ift alio einetieits 
em~iriid), anbetetieit~ ein 
6d)lieten aw em~iriid)en '!laten/ 
22,21 
cf. Hegel 'Philosophy of Right' tr. T. M. Knox, Oxford, 1962. Introduction 
§ 3· 
22, 32 
,'!lie 91atut ~at ttleientlid) }8 etftanb'. The understanding is to be distin-
guished from reason on account of its failing to exhibit the unity of the Idea. 
In nature, as in the understanding, the Idea is divided and fragmentary. 'The 
understanding determines, and maintains the determinations; reason is negative 
and dialectical because it dissolves the determinations of the understanding into 
nothing; it is positive because it engenders the universal and grasps the particular 
within it.' ('Wissenschaft der Logik' Glockner's ed. vol. 4 p. 17). 
22, 37 
It is not clear why Hegel should refer to these gods by their Latin names. 
Pallas Athena was the daughter of Zeus and Metis. Her father had swallowed 
her mother before her birth, and she sprang forth from his head fully armed. 
She was the pre-Hellenic patroness of the Minoan and Mycenaean princes in 
their fortress palaces, and was probably thought of as protecting and guiding 
the handicrafts carried on there. In the more complex economic life of Athens 
her functions tended to embrace every kind of skill, until she came to be re-
garded as presiding over the purely intellectual activity of the citizens. 
228 

NOTES 
The Stoics put forward various allegorical interpretations of her birth; see 
H. Diels 'Doxographi Graeci' (Berlin, 1879) pp. 548-549. Hegel may have in 
mind Plato's 'Republic' 508, 509 and the interpretation of the myth mentioned 
by Macrobius in his 'Saturnalia' (Bk. I, 17, 66 et seq.), 'Porphyrius too asserts 
that Minerva is the sun's virtue, which furnishes the minds of men with wisdom. 
Indeed that is why the goddess is said to have sprung from the head of Jupiter, in 
other words, to have arisen in the topmost portion of the upper air, where the 
sun originated'. 
The representation of her birth on the magnificent Etruscan mirror from 
Arezzo, which is now in the museum of Bologna, was illustrated in F .Inghirami' s 
'Monumenti Etruschi 0 di Etrusco nome disegnati' (Fiesole, 1824) vol. II plate 10. 
Philipp Buttmann (1764-1829), in his 'Mythologus, oder gesammelte Abhand-
lungen fiber die Sagen des Alterthums' (2 vols. Berlin, 1828) vol. I p. 28 asks, 
,3ft e~ nun nid)t natiitHd), baa Me iYCation ltJeld)e ben ~etftanb in bet \l!aU~ 
.petfonificitte, unb biefe, aI~ g iHtli d) en ~ etftanb, a~ bem 
~au.pte bet 
obetften @ott~eit entfte~en Hea, baa fie, fage id), eben biefet \l!aUa~ ben 
~od)ften mang nad) 3u.p.pitet eintiiumte?1 Alexander Ross (1590-1654) inter-
prets the myth in a similar way in his delightful 'Mystagogus Poeticus' (2nd 
ed. London, 1653) p. 284. C£ E. Ruckert 'Der Dienst der Athena' (Hild-
burghausen, 1829) pp. 63, 193 etc. Dictionaries and handbooks had spread 
this edifying doctrine, and in Hegel's day no gentleman's library was complete 
without a bust of the goddess. See A. B. Cook 'Zeus: a study in ancient 
religion' (3 vols. Cambridge, 1914-1940) vol. III pp. 656-739. 
23,8 
Hegel is here expressing his views on certain eighteenth century controversies 
respecting embryology and evolution; there is no evidence that he was aware 
of the important advances being made in these fields in the first decades of the 
last century by Meckel, Dollinger, Pander, von Baer etc. His opinions are by 
no means worthless, but his knowledge seems to have been second-hand, and 
was probably based upon the various philosophical interpretations of these 
controversies current at the time. 
By not accepting 'a revolution out of chaos' as an explanation of the produc-
tion ofliving being, he is evidently rejecting the theory of epigenesis put forward 
by C. F. Wolff(1733-1794) in his 'Theoria Generationis' (Halle, 1759), according 
to which, in the process of reproduction, the germ is not merely developed, but 
is brought into existence by successive accretions. This theory found difficulty 
in accounting for heredity and the formative power of the organism, and in 
asserting that an individual at birth, 'is already the real possibility of everything 
it will become', Hegel shows a tendency to accept the opposing theory of 
preformation, according to which all parts of the perfect organism exist pre-
viously formed in the germ, and are merely developed or unfolded in the process 
of reproduction. Swammerdam and Leibnitz had put forward this theory in the 
229 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
seventeenth century, but its classical formulation is to be found in the 'Elementa 
physiologiae corporis humani' (vols. 7 and 8, Berne, 1764-1766) of Albrecht 
von Haller. W. Cullen published an English version of this book: 'First lines of 
physiology' (Edinburgh, 1779). 
When he says that such an individual, 'evolves in certain ways', and that, 'at 
birth', it is the real possibility of everything it will become, Hegel is evidently 
avoiding the encasement (emboitement) theory accepted by most preformation-
ists. According to this hypothesis, which was worked out by Charles Bonnet 
(1720-1793) in his 'Considerations sur les corps organises' (Amsterdam, 1762), 
successive generations proceed from germs, and contain the germs of all future 
generations. 
The theory of preformation strengthened belief in the fixity of the species. 
Linnaeus thought that, 'There are as many species as issued in pairs from the 
hands of the Creator', and it was one of Haller's tenets that, 'God has created 
all structures; they do not develop, but only grow.' Hegel falls in with this line 
of thought when he says that a determinate and complete formation is present, 
'as soon as the flash ofliving being strikes into matter.' In denying that, 'man 
has formed himself out of the animal' etc., he is evidently rejecting the theory 
of evolution put forward by J. B. Lamarck (1744-1829) see especially the intro-
duction to his 'Histoire naturelle des animaux sans vertebres' (Paris, 1815). 
In taking 'the point at which the soul is present' to be the principle ofliving 
being, Hegel is evidently accepting Harvey's doctrine of the' punctum sanguin-
eum saliens': see 'Anatomical Exercises on the Generation of Animals' no. 17, 
in 'The Works of William Harvey' (tr. Willis, London, 1847) p. 235, and the 
note on crystals III. 215. 
'The general living existence which has dispersed into the various species' 
etc. is evidently a reference to the postulations ofG. L. BufI"on (1707-1788); see 
his 'Histoire Naturelle' (Paris, 1750) vol. 2 p. 306) 'La matiere qui sert a la 
nutrition et a la reproduction des animaux et des vegetaux est la meme; c'est 
une substance productive et universelle composee de molecules organiques 
toujours existantes, toujour actives, dont la reunion produit les corps organises. 
La nature travaille toujours sur Ie meme fond, et ce fond est inepuisable; mais 
les moyens qu'elle emploie pour Ie mettre en valeur, sont differens les uns des 
autres.' Hegel probably knew of Buffon's theories through the works of G. R. 
Treviranus (1776-1837): see his 'Biologie oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur' 
(Gottingen, 1802-1822) vol. II p. 403. Cf. Erasmus Darwin 'Zoonomia' (2 vols. 
London, 1794-1796). 'Would it be too bold to imagine that all warm-blooded 
animals have arisen from one living filament, which the great First Cause endued 
with animality!' 
When he says that 'natural and living being is not mixed', Hegel is evidently 
rejecting the theory of animism worked out by G. E. Stahl (1660-1734) in his 
'Theoria medica vera physiologiam et pathologiam ... sistens' (Halle, 1708), 
according to which the phenomena of animal life are produced by an immaterial 
230 

NOTES 
anima or soul, which is distinct from matter. Stahl was of the opinion that any 
true conception of the phenomenon of life must be based upon knowledge of 
the mixture of the body and its parts, i.e. its chemical constituents: see 'De vera 
diversitate corporis mixti et vivi ... demonstratio' (Halle, 1707) : 'Philosophical 
Principles of Universal Chemistry. Drawn from the Collegium Jenense of 
G. E. Stahl. By P. Shaw.' (London, 1730): J. R. Partington 'A History of 
Chemistry' vol. II pp. 664-665 (London, 1961). 
About 1810 J. F. Meckel (1781-1833) of Halle began to call attention to the 
epigenesist theories of Wolff, and in a remarkable essay published in 18 II, he 
suggested that it might be profitable to introduce Lamarck's theory of evolution 
into embryological studies, 'There is no good physiologist who has not been 
struck by the observation that the original form of all organisms is one and the 
same, and that out of this one form, all, the lowest as well as the highest, are 
developed in such a manner that the latter pass through the permanent forms of 
the former as transitory stages.' ('Entwurf einer Darstellung der zwischen dem 
Embryozustande der hoheren Thiere und den permanenten der niederen statt-
fmdenden Parallele' in 'Beytrage zur vergleichenden Anatomie' vol. II pt. I 
Halle, I8I1.) 
While Hegel was at Heidelberg, the Russian biologist C. H. Pander (1794-
1865), who had been working under professor I. Dollinger at Wiirzburg, 
published his 'Historia metamorphoseos quam ovum incubatum prioribus 
quinque diebus subit' (Wiirzburg, 1817), in which a clear description of the 
developing blastoderm was given for the first time, and the origin, in its three 
layers, of the principal rudimentary organs and systems of the embryonic chick, 
was noted. K. E. von Baer (1792-1876) was also studying under Dollinger at this 
time, and took up Pander's researches. In 1819 he moved to Konigsberg, and his 
work there laid the foundations of modern embryology. In 1827 he announced 
the discovery of the mammalian ovum, and in 1829 published the first part of 
his 'Beobachtungen und Reflexionen iiber die Entwicklungsgeschichte der 
Thiere' (Konigsberg, 2nd part 1837), in which he distinguished between 
the animal and vegetal layers and their intermediaries, i.e. the endoderm, 
ectoderm and mesoderm, and pointed out the organs which develop from 
them. 
Unfortunately, although the work of Wolff, Pander and von Baer outdated 
eighteenth century speculations on embryology and evolution, and has been 
the basis of all subsequent developments in these fields, Hegel seems to have been 
completely ignorant of it. Since Hans Driesch showed by experiment in 1891, 
that if two blastomeres are separated at the two-cell stage, each half is able to 
form a pluteus, epigenesis can no longer be denied. On the other hand, Sven 
Horstadius (b. 1898) has shown that the eggs of Sea Urchins contain two 
qualitatively different agents or substances, both of which show concentration 
gradients, the peak of one being the animal and the peak of the other the vegetal 
pole, and that the proper ratio of both is necessary for the formation of a normal 
23 1 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
larva. In this way, preformation has also found its place in modem embryological 
theory. 
E. Radl 'Geschichte der Biologischen Theorien' (Leipzig, 1905-1909) tr. E. J. 
Hatfield (O.u.P., 1930). 
1. R. Wheeler 'Vitalism: its history and validity' (London, 1930). 
Joseph Needham 'A History of Embryology' 2nd ed (Cambridge, 1959). 
S. J. Holmes 'K. E. von Baer's perplexities over evolution' ('Isis' 1947 pp. 
7-14). 
23, 36 
This attempt to explain the origin of the continents and oceans bears some 
resemblance to the tetrahedral theory put forward by W. 1. Green ('Vestiges 
of the molten Globe as exhibited in the figure of the earth, volcanic action and 
physiography' London, 1875). Green attempted to explain the apparent 
symmetry of the great land masses and the oceans, and suggested that as the 
earth cools, its outer crust is warping towards a tetrahedral shape. He pointed 
out that in the western hemisphere there is a large triangle ofland with its apex 
to the south and its base to the north; that in the eastern hemisphere two 
triangular land masses unite at their bases to the north and have separate apices 
to the south; and that there is a fourth land mass around the South Pole. These 
four triangular land masses he took to be the four points of the tetrahedron, and 
pointed out that between them lie three triangular oceans, with their apices to 
the north and their united bases to the south. Ch. Jean Reynaud 'Terre et del' 
(Paris, 1854), J. N. M011er (1777-1862) 'Fors0g til en Characteristik af de fire 
Verdensdele' (C. Molbech's 'Athene' II pp. 322-344, Copenhagen, 1814, 
Swedish tr. Stockholm, 1815). M011er and Hegel taught together at the 
Grammar School in Nuremberg for a while in 1812 (note II. 307). 
24, 12 
,~ne ungefjeure ~egetation (ift) barin borfjanben.1 Michelet seems to have 
substituted ,ungefjeurel (vast, immense, prodigious) for ,il1J1Jige l (exuberant, 
luxuriant, luscious). In the lectures of 1803/4 Hegel speaks of ,hie ftatfe ~egeta­
tionl of the Americas, i.e. vigorous. See 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' I p. 95; II 
p. 108 n. 2. 
,1t1J1Jigel is a common adjective for tropical vegetation; see Spix and Martius 
'Reise in Brasilien' pt. II p. 190, ,in ben il1J1Jigen UrltJalbungen .. / etc. C£ 
the note II. 298. 
24, 21 
,ber nid)t ins )8eltJu~tlet)n tretenbe ftumme @eift/ Michelet evidently 
misread the manuscript. Hegel wrote ,ber nid)t ins )8eltJu~tfein tretenbe 
232 

NOTES 
ftumpfe ®eift'. ,@?tumm' has the meaning of mute, speechless inarticulate. 
,ftumpf' that of obtuse, dull, stupid. 
24, 23 
A marginal note ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 108 n. 3) may help to 
clarify the meaning here. Hegel writes, , (futftequng, ~etben, ttJilbe >net .. 
ttJiiftung be~ 9Renfcf)engef(cf){ecf)te~)'. 
For a fuller exposition of Hegel's views on geographical anthropology, see his 
'Philosophy of History' (tr. Sibree. Dover Publications, 1956) pp. 79-102. 
24,28 
On the state of geography and related studies at the beginning of the nine-
teenth century, see Oscar Peschel 'Geschichte der Erdkunde bis A. v. Humboldt 
und Carl Ritter' (Munich, 1865), and K. A. von Zittel 'Geschichte der Geologie 
und Palaontologie bis Ende des 19. Jahrhunderts' (Munich, 1899). 
John Pinkerton (1758-1826), at the beginning of his 'Modern Geography' 
(3 vols. London, 1807) gives a lucid account of what was at that time considered 
to be the scope of the subject, 'What is called General Geography embraces a 
wide view of the subject, regarding the earth astronomically as a planet, the 
grand divisions of land and water, the winds, tides and meteorology etc. and 
may extend to what is called the mechanical part of geography, in directions for 
the construction of globes, maps, and charts ... 
Among other divisions of this science may be named Sacred Geography and 
Physical Geography, or Geology, which investigates the interior of the earth ... 
But Geography, popularly considered, is occupied in the description of the 
various regions of this globe as being divided among various nations, and 
improved by human art and industry.' 
25, II 
Oryctognosy (Greek 0PVKT6s 'dug up' yvwu£s 'knowledge'). An eight-
eenth century term for the science of fossils, or whatever is dug from the earth. 
'Oryctognosy teaches us to know fossils, to recognize them whenever they occur 
to us. For this purpose it exhibits the subjects of the mineral kingdom to our 
view arranged in an order corresponding as nearly as possible with that of their 
affinities, and distinguished from each other by appropriate denominations and by 
determinate and defined characters.' A. G. Werner 'A Treatise on the External 
Characters of Fossils', (tr. T. Weaver, Dublin, 1805) p. 2. 
Cf. also Werner's 'Oryktognosie, oder Handbuch fur die Liebhaber der 
Mineralogie' (Leipzig, 1792); James Parkinson 'Outlines of Oryctology' 
(London, 1822). In his 'Elements of Geology' (1838), Sir Charles Lyell (1797-
1875) referred to this science as 'palaeontology', and as it became more special-
ized and differentiated, the older term fell out of use. 
H* 
233 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
25, 19 
Werner's account of this distinction is to be found in his 'Neue Theorie von 
der Entstehung der Gange' (Freiberg, 1791, Eng. tr. C. Anderson 'New Theory 
of the Formation of Veins', Edinburgh, 1809). 
Werner was not the first to make the distinction however, for it is also to be 
found in 'Anleitung zur Markscheidekunst nach ihren Anfangsgriinden und 
Ausiibungen kiirzlich entworfen' (Dresden, 1749) by F. W. von Oppel (1720-
1769). Part two of this work is entitled ,~on ben 6tteid)en unb tyaUen betet 
@Siinge unb ~Hifte.' 
,~in @ang (vena) ... ift ein in einem @eoiitge fid) roeit aufoteitenbet ffii~ 
unb :ttennung bes @efteiw, toeId)e mit einem bon bem @eoutge untetfd)iebenen 
@eftein angefiiUet ift. 
~ebet eine ~Iuft nod) @ang rid)ten fid) nad) bet Bage bes @efteiw, unb fie 
fonnen bie Baget eines @eoiitges burd)fe~en. 
~as @eftein, mit toeId)em eine fold)e :trennung unb 6~altung bes @eoutge~ 
angefiiUt ift, unb toeId)e~ in ~n;e~ung bes @eoutge~, burd) roeId)e~ ber @ang 
fe~et, jeber&eit ftembattig oefunben toitb, toitb befien @angatt genennet. 
~s ift alfo ein @ang mit einem anbem @eftein angefiiUet, al~ mit bemjenigen, 
aug toeId)em bas @ebiitge befte~et, unb toeId)es man bie )Betgatt nennet/ 
(pp. 233-234). 
25, 35 
Werner 'Neue Theorie von der Enstehung der Gange' (Freiberg, 1791) § 2 
,@iinge finb ~Iattenfotmid)e oe;onbete Bagetftiibte bet tyofiiIien, toeld)e faft 
immet bie 6d)id)ten bes @efteins butd)fd)neiben, unb in foferne eine bon bieien 
aotoetd)enbe Bage ~aoen, aud) mit einet bon bet @eoitgsatt me~t ober toenid)et 
betfd)iebenen IDCaf3e angefiiUt finb.' 
26,2 
cf. F. M. Bullard 'Volcanoes in history, in theory, in eruption' (Univ. of 
Texas 1962); F. Hoffmann 'Geschichte der Geognosie' (Berlin, 1838) pp. 271-
596. 
Werner supported the conjecture that most volcanoes arise from the com-
bustion of underground seams of coal, and in 1826 C. G. B. Daubeny (1795-
1867) put forward a chemical theory of volcanic activity ('A Description of 
Active and Extinct Volcanoes' London, 1826). In Hegel's day however, the 
formation of volcanoes was generally explained in terms of von Humboldt's 
and von Buch's crater-elevation hypothesis, according to which molten material 
rises from below and arches the earth's crust into a blister or dome. This theory 
was challenged in 1825 by G. J. P. Scrope (1797-1876), who after studying 
Vesuvius, Etna and the volcanic regions of Central France, published 'Consider-
ations on Volcanos', (London, 1825, German tr. Berlin, 1872). This book was 
dedicated to Lyell, and had as its object, 'to dispel that signal delusion as to the 
234 

NOTES 
mode of action of subtelluric forces with which the crater- elevation theory has 
mystified the geological world.' Scrope's 'craters of accumulation' theory laid 
the foundation of modem vulcanology. 
26,18 
Werner and the neptunists regarded granite as a chemical precipitate from a 
universal ocean, on the bed of which it had served as a foundation for the 
stratified rocks. Hutton and the vulcanists regarded it as the consolidation of 
matter made fluid by heat. Lyell agreed with Hutton as to its origin, but sug-
gested that as it is so frequently associated with transformed rocks (which he was 
the first to call 'metamorphic'), it may itself be metamorphic in origin. 
Although he insists upon the 'primary' nature of granite, Hegel avoids dis-
cussing its origin, and his exposition of its significance accords well with H. H. 
Read's conclusion in 'The Granite Controversy' (London, 1957): 'Each granite 
is a unit to be discussed by itself, to be related to its setting and to be interpreted 
on its intrinsic evidence' (p. xix). 
26, 36 
Heinrich Steffens (1773-1845) 'Geognostische-geologische Aufsatze' (Ham-
burg, 1810) p. 205" mm meiften tlOn ben iibrigen Bagern bet Utgeoitge 
gettennt in fid) am einfad)ften etfd)eint bet Udalf, inbes bie iiorigen @eoitgs .. 
maHen, unb tvenn fie aud) nod) fo tletfd)ieben finb, butd) ben aUes tletoinbenben 
g:elbf.):Jat~ obet butd) ben Ouaq ein betmittelnbes @lieb et~aIten. 3n ben 
Utgeoitgen fd)eint fid) bet @egenfat3 3tvifd)en ben ~alfgeoetgen unb ben 
iiorigen @eoitgsaden am teinften et~aIten 3U ~aoen.' 
Some of Steffens' views may have been undisciplined, but this did not prevent 
him from producing some extremely valuable, systematic and detailed work on 
geological subjects c£ his 'Handbuch der Oryktognosie' (4 vols. Halle, 18II-
1824): note II. 253. 
27,15 
J. G. Ebel (1764-1830) 'Ueber den Bau der Erde in dem Alpen-Gebirge' (2 
vols. Ziirich, 1808) vol. I pp. 63-64. Ebel speaks of ' a series of extremely diverse 
(mannigfaltigften) relationships' between the constituents of gneiss, but Hegel 
omits the adjective. 
27,25 
In a marginal note at this point, Hegel writes, ,t)eim gan3 aogefonbed.' 
jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. II2 n. 3. 
27, 33 
Johann Ludwig Heim (1741-1819), councillor to the Duke of Saxe-Meinin-
gen, brother of the popular Berlin doctor Ernst Ludwig Heim (1747-1834). 
235 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Hegel is here referring to his 'Geologische Beschreibung des Thiiringer Waldge-
biirgs. Von der innern Einrichtung des Gebiirgs nach seinen Gebiirgslagern' 
(3 parts Meiningen, 1796-1812). 
This work was the result of a very careful geological survey of the Thiirin-
gerwald, which occupied Heim for twenty years. As a hand-book for field-
work in the area it proved to be indispensable, although its usefulness in this 
respect was somewhat limited by Heim's failure to provide any accompanying 
maps. It is remarkable on account of the accuracy and detail of the observations 
it contains, its freedom from the Wernerianism prevalent when it was being 
written, and, as Hegel notes, on account of the attention it draws to the related-
ness of certain rocks. 
Heim regarded basalt as volcanic in origin, he was the fIrst to draw attention 
to the close relationship between granite and porphyry, and he made useful 
suggestions as to the origin of dolomite. 
28, 10 
Greywack (German ,@toutuode'). This term was introduced into English by 
Robert Jameson ('Elements of Geognosy' Edinburgh, 1808). As he used it, it 
covered practically all Werner's 'transition' rocks (Upper pre-Cambrian and 
Lower Palaeozoic), sedimentary rocks other than limestone, and hard schistous 
mudstones. It was used so loosely, that by 1839 it had become useless as a means 
of mineralogical definition: see R.I. Murchison 'The Silurian System' (London, 
1839). Fairly recently, (Bailey, 'Geological Magazine' 1930) it has been proposed 
to revive it as a term for certain sandstones. 
In German geological terminology the term has retained a more precise 
meaning however, and signifies a conglomeratic breccia, grey or red in colour 
and granular or schistous in texture, consisting of fragments of quartz, argillac-
eous and siliceous schist, and grains of felspar and micaceous lamina, set in a 
siliceous, argillaceous or calcareous matrix. 
28, II 
Greenstone (German ,@tiinftein'). This term was brought into use towards the 
end of the eighteenth century to cover all those varieties of dark, greenish, 
igneous rocks which in more recent terminology would be referred to as 
diorites, dolerites and somewhat altered basalts. It is now obsolete in German 
also. 
28, 13 
Trappean formation. (Swedish 'trapp', so named from the stairlike appearance 
often presented by the rock, formed on 'trappa' stair.) The term was used by 
Swedish miners long before it was introduced into the written language about 
the middle of the eighteenth century. The fIrst mineralogist to classify it was 
Axel von Cronstedt (1722-1765): see 'Forsok til Mineralogie eller Mineral 
236 

NOTES 
Rikets Upstallning' (Stockholm, 1758, Eng. tr. G. von Engstrom ed. J. H. 
Magellen, London, 1788 p. 880). At that time however, Swedish mineralogists 
were not agreed as to the exact meaning of the term or the origin of the rocks 
covered by it. Sven Rinman (1720-1792), in his 'Bergwerkslexicon' (2 vols. 
Stockholm 1788-1789) p. 1023, noted that it was used to refer to rocks differing 
widely in texture and hardness, but generally consisting of clay hardened with 
silica and iron, and usually occurring in considerable gangues. He mentions the 
'rowly-ragg' found in England, and the 'Schwarze Wacke' found in Germany 
as rocks corresponding to Swedish trap. 
From the local names for it, it is clear that Swedish miners regarded it as 
aqueous in origin; the 'Saxum Danemorense' found in the Dannemora iron-
mines and mentioned in the English translation of Cronstedt's book (op. cit.), 
was known locally as 'vattband' (water-band) for example. T. O. Bergman 
(1735-1784) submitted 'trap' to chemical analysis, and came to the conclusion 
that it differed very little from basalt, although he was convinced that unlike 
basalt, it had never been affected by heat: 'De Productis Vulcanicis' (Uppsala, 
1783) p. 213: 'T. Bergmann ... Kleine Physische und Chymische Werke' iii 
p. 259, (tr. H. Tabor, Frankfurt-on-Main, 1785). 
This uncertainty as to the use of the term and the origin of the rocks it 
referred to gave rise to further controversies once it was taken over into German 
geological nomenclature. 
In his assessment of this formation Hegel keeps to Werner's first system (1787), 
in which trap rocks were classified as primitive, although in his second system, 
they were classified as a fletz-formation. Werner did not regard them as an 
independent rock-type, but as a distinct group of rocks composed mainly of 
felspar and hornblend. He distinguished between (i) primitive trap, including 
greenstone, hornblend, green porphyry and diorite etc.; (ii) transition trap, 
including amygdaloid and wacke; and (iii) fletz-trap, including basalt forma-
tions. The term has since been extended to include all igneous rocks which are 
neither granitic nor of recent volcanic formation. 
28, 15 
In the lectures of 1805-6 Hegel takes porphyry to be the 'limit of these 
absolute rocks'. ,<Iler @limmer toirb aber 3um ~on boqiiglid) in ~orl:>~t)r, 
(ber) Me @ren3e Mefer aofoluten @eoirge (ift).' 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. IIO. 
28,24 
N. Desmarest (1735-1815) was the first to establish the plausibility of the 
proposition that basalt is volcanic in origin: see 'Memoire sur I' origine et la 
nature du Basalte ... observe en Auvergne' ('Histoire de l' Academie Royale des 
Sciences' 1771 pp. 705-775, Paris, 1774). 
237 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
T. O. Bergman (1735-1784) submitted the rock to chemical analysis, and 
came to the conclusion that Swedish basalt from Hunneberg in Vastergotland 
did not differ from that found on the island of Staffa. He argued that as the rock 
has none of the porous and slaggy texture of lava, and that as marl also is 
frequently separated into columns, it was probably not volcanic in origin: see 
'De productis vulcanicis' (Uppsala, 1783): 'T. Bergmann ... Kleine Physische 
und Chymische Werke' vol. III p. 259 (tr. H. Tabor, Frankfurt-on-Main, 1785). 
Werner's later classification of basalt was almost certainly influenced by 
Bergman's work. 
Werner's re-classification gave rise to the controversy concerning the origin 
of basalt: see C. Keferstein 'Geschichte des Basaltes' (Halle, 1819).J. F. d'Au-
buisson (1769-1819) began his career as an orthodox neptunist, but a first-hand 
study of the basalts of Auvergne convinced him of their volcanic origin: see 
'Sur les volcans et les basaltes de I' Auvergne' ('Bulletin des Sciences de la Societe 
Philomathique de Paris' 1804 p. 182). L. von Buch (1774-1853) also began his 
career as a Wernerian, but was convinced of their volcanic origin by 1809: see 
'Geognostische Beobachtungen auf Reisen' pt. II. 
It was the opposition these men encountered from orthodox neptunists which 
more than any advance in the geological sciences, served to lessen Werner's 
authority. Hegel retains Werner's original classification because he regards 
basalt as being related to the 'absolute' rocks by reason of its composition and 
structure. He therefore regards its origin as a matter of comparative indiffer-
ence. 
28,40 
Talc, serpentine, steatite, soapstone, olivine, peridotite etc. are all magnesium 
silicates, and olivine and peridotite are certainly igneous in origin. In his dialec-
tical interpretation of the primitive rocks, Hegel takes the formations of this 
silicate to be the mediating moment in the progression from siliceous graniticity 
to the calcareousness of primitive limestone. 'The property of bitterness' 
possessed by these rocks is due to their magnesia content; dolomite was once 
known as 'bitter-spar' for example, and it was in allusion to its magnesia content 
that J. F. L. Hausmann (1782-1859) called serpentine of a columnar or coarsely 
fibrous kind 'picrolite' (Greek 7TtKp6s, bitter). 
Light may be thrown upon Hegel's formulation of this moment by compar-
ing it with the account of the 'Magnesian Earth' given by A. F. Cronstedt 
(1722-1765): 'An Essay towards a System of Mineralogy' (Stockholm 1768; 
Eng. tr. G. von Engstrom London, 1788 pp. 93-II9). Pierre Bayen (1725-1798) 
analysed serpentine chemically: 'Opuscules Chimiques' vol. II p. 128 (Paris, 
1798). 
A progression similar to that made by Hegel at this juncture is made by 
Alexandre Brongniart (1770-1847), in his 'Tableau des Terrains qui composent 
l'ecorce du globe' pp. 3II-312 (Paris, 1829), i.e. from what he calls 'terrains 
238 

NOTES 
hemilysiens talqueux' to 'terrain primordiaux de cristallisation', which include 
calcareous formations. 
Dolomite, which is a double-salt consisting of calcium and magnesium 
carbonate, may be regarded as the moment realizing the transition from granite 
to calcareousness. It was chemically analyzed by M. H. Klaproth (1743-1817) in 
1804. C£ Leopold von Buch (1774-1853) 'Ueber Dolomit als Gebirgsart' 
('Abhandlungen der Berliner Akademie' 1822-1823, pp. 93-136.) 
29, 12 
Karl Georg von Raumer (1783-1865) studied under Werner at the Freiberg 
Mining Academy, and was later councillor of mines at Breslau. The war years 
took him to France and England, and enabled him to acquaint himself with the 
geologists and geological structures of these countries (see his 'Geognostische 
Umrisse von Frankreich, England, einem Theil von Deutschland' etc. Berlin, 
1816). From 18n until 1813 he was professor of mineralogy at Breslau, and 
from 1819 until 1823 member of the chief mining office and professor of min-
eralogy at Halle. He then taught at Nuremberg for a time, and in 1827 was 
appointed professor of natural history at Erlangen. 
While he was still a student at Freiberg, his discovery of a granite lying above 
younger rock strata caused Werner to reconsider his views on granite formation. 
In 1808, together with Engelhardt, he investigated the granites and syenites on 
the north eastern edge of the Erzgebirge, where these hills dip away into the 
valley of the Elbe, and in his 'Geognostische Fragmente' (Nuremberg, I8n), he 
was able to point out that in this area Werner's 'transition rocks' often underlie 
his 'primitive rocks'. This was of course a great blow to the orthodox neptunist 
theory of rock-formation, and the book caused a great stir. 
By assessing rocks by concentrating upon their composition and structure 
rather than upon the chronological sequence of their formation, and insuffi-
ciently substantiated theories of their general history, Hegel avoided becoming 
involved in open questions of this kind. 
The work Hegel quotes at this juncture, ('Geognostische Versuche von 
Moritz von Engelhardt und Karl von Raumer' Berlin, 1815) falls into two 
parts: (I) ,~a~ 6d)iefetgebitge be~ notbttJeftlid)en :.teutld)lanb~, bet 91iebet .. 
liinbe unb be~ notboftlid)en ~tanftei~,' and (2) ,~a~ SfteHle ••. unb 6anb" 
@ebilbe -
befonbet~ in bet @egenb bon \lSaw/ 
It may be of value to quote at length the passage Hegel refers to here, because 
where Hegel speaks of primitive limestone (Udalf), Raumer speaks of a close-
textured calcareous stone (bid)ten SfaIfftein). 
,§ 7 ~alfftein. 60 etfd)einen bie 6d)iefet al~ ein @eftein, in ttJeld)em bie 
Sfeime anbetet @ebitg~atten fd)lummem, aw benen fid) biefe entttJidefn; 
obet -
mogte bielme'f)t bet Ott)ftognoft fagen- in ttJefd)e fid) bie eigen" 
t'f)umlid)e 91atut bet Ouat3-, ~elbf~at'f) .. , @rimmet" unb ~omblenbe"~ilbungen 
aUffoft unb betriett. 3n einem gan3 anbeten )8et'f)iiltni~ fte'f)en bie 6d)iefet 
239 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
&um bid)ten ~alfftein, toe{cI;et niicI;ft if}nen in unfetm @eoitg~&uge tJottoaUet. 
6eine ~atut ift butcI;au~ tJetfcI;ieben tJon bet ~atut bet 6cI;iefet; et mengt 
ficI; aoet mit if)nen, toecI;fert mit if)nen in biinnen £agen, in 6cI;icI;ten, in 
miicI;tigen £agetn, ow et 5utoeHen 6tiide @eoitge oilbet in toe{cI;en bet 6cI;iefet 
faft gan& untetbtiidt ift.' (p. 13). 
C£ p. 19 ,'1let %f)onfcI;iefet toecI;fert &toat f)iiufig mit bem Stalffteine, ift aoet 
im @an&en nicI;t fo miicI;Ug. 'Bemetfewtoedf) Hnb '1lacI;fcI;iefet .. 'BtiicI;e tJon 
6teenfetfen untoeit (fugf)ien.' 
30, 4 
'The metallic magma' (,bet aufgdofte 'Btei tJon 9J1etaUen') C£ Werner's 
'Neue Theorie von der Entstehung der Gange' (Freiberg, 1791), '§ 28 IllUe 
toaf)te @iinge Hnb ... tJon ooen f)etein au~gefiiUte 6varten ... § 62 (Ch. VI) 
~etoeife iioet bie I]{wfiiUung bet offenen @ang~ffiiiume butcI; naHen mebet .. 
fcI;rag tJon ooen f)etein.' 
Bearing in mind the neptunist theory, one might translate Hegel's ,'Btei' 
(which is not a term peculiar to him) and Werner's ,naHen ~iebetfcI;{ag' as 
'solution' or 'sludge'. If 'magma' is understood here in its original Greek sense 
however, i.e. as a plastic mass or a paste of solid and liquid matter, and not in its 
modern sense, i.e. as a subterranean lava, the word will cover Hegel's meaning. 
30, 12 
Friedrich Wilhelm Heinrich von Trebra (1740-1819) was born in the Palatin-
ate. From 1769 until 1773 he was chief mining officer at Marienberg in the 
Erzgebirge. In 1780 he was appointed deputy director of mines at Zellerfeld in 
the Harz, in 1791 director of mines at Klausthal, and in 1801 chief director of 
mines at Freiberg. Apart from numerous articles on geology, which appeared 
in various periodicals, he wrote 'Erfahrungen vom Innern der Gebirge' (Leipzig, 
1786) and 'Die Bergbaukunde' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1789-1790). 
His reputation rests mainly on the ftrst of these books, which is elegantly and 
charmingly written, and well supplied with good plates. Only a year after its 
publication in German, a magniftcent French edition of it appeared at Paris: 
'Observations de M. de Trebra sur L'Interieur des Montagnes, precedees d'un 
plan d'un Histoire generale de la Mineralogie par M. de Veltheim. ed. M. Ie 
Baron de Dietrich.' 
In this work, Trebra gives a geological description of the Harz, and it was 
his account of the greywack of this area, of the rocks, that occur with it, and 
of the fossilized animals and plants which it contains, which led Werner to 
introduce the new classiftcation of 'transition rocks' into his later system. 
Trebra tries to account for the formation of rocks by means of 'fermentation' 
and 'decomposition'; he regards gneiss as a transformation of granite, argil-
laceous schist as a transformation of greywack, and clay as a transformation 
of quartz etc. 

NOTES 
Trebra has many references to the gentle slopes of lodes (French ed. pp. 21, 
97, 182, 246 etc.). Hegel may well have had in mind the passage which occurs 
on page 246 of the French edition, 'Pour saisir d' un coup d' oeill' ensemble d' une 
chaine de fuon principale, suivant les trois dimensions, longueur, largeur et 
profondeur, il faut rapprocher toutes les figures de nos planches ... La planche 
III prouve ce que nous avons deja observe a plusiers reprises, que les points les 
plus puissons se trouvent dans les vallons a pentes douces.' 
30,18 
Knowledge of the paragenesis of metals is still very incomplete, so that in 
many cases this determining is still a matter of experience, and cannot be ex-
plained. 'In each of these two classes' (of isomorphism, or the formation of 
mixed crystals) 'the association is natural and what might be expected to occur 
on general chemical and physical grounds. There are however other instances 
of metal associations, many of them of great economic importance, for which 
no reason can as yet be assigned.' -R. H. Rastall 'The Geology of Metalliferous 
Deposits' (Cambridge, 1923). 
30,21 
C. T. Delius (1728-1779) 'Abhandlung von dem Ursprunge der Gebiirge 
und der darinne befmdlichen Erzadern, oder der sogenannten Gange und 
Kliifte; ingleichen von der Vererzung der Metalle und insonderheit des Goldes' 
(Leipzig, 1770). 
Delius regards rocks and lodes as aqueous in origin. He assumes that the 
mother rock split while drying out, and that the fissures were subsequently 
fuled with the aqueous magma now forming the lodes. He discusses the 
occurrence of gold at some length (pp. 87-157), and is almost certainly the 
ultimate source of Hegel's information on the subject. Cf. F. von Kobell 
'Geschichte der Mineralogie' pp. 559-564 (Munich, 1864); E.]. Dunn 'Geology 
of Gold' ch. XV (London, 1929). 
30,37 
,~ie aIte (tobtliegenbe) eanbftein-iYormation.' The rock Hegel is referring 
to forms part of the sandy conglomeratic subdivision of the Permian system, 
which flanks the Harz and is also found in the Rhine Provinces, Saxony, 
Thuringia, Bavaria and Bohemia. It was called the red-dead-Iayer (mot~tobtIie .. 
genbe) by the miners who worked the cobalt and copper-bearing slate (~UlJ" 
ferfdJiefer) of these areas, because it was into these red rocks lying beneath the 
slate that the lodes they worked tended to disappear. 
Heinrich Veith, in his 'Deutsches Bergworterbuch' (Breslau, 1870) pp. 
493-4 observes that, 'the terms red-layer or dead layer are not exactly some of 
the most brilliant to be found in geological nomenclature; the term red-dead-
layer, from which they originate, is however a nomenclatural monstrosity 
241 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which quite clearly originates in the language of the miners of Thuringia.' 
InEngland, the millstone grit into which the coal seams disappear was known 
to the miners as 'farewell-rock', and in France the unproductive rocks flanking 
these seams were known as 'les terrains d'adieu.' Cf. C. F. Naumann'Lehrbuch 
der Geognosie' (Leipzig, 1850) II 583: F. A. Romer 'Synopsis der Mineralogie 
und Geognosie' (Hanover, 1853) 337. 
As the pioneer work of William Smith (1769-1839) enabled his countrymen 
to become more intimately acquainted with the English fletz-formations, 
attempts were made to identify them with the German formations which were 
already well-known in England as the result of Wemer' s disciples. There was 
some doubt as to the identity of this 'primordial and moribund sandstone 
formation.' J. C. Prichard, in his 'Remarks on the older floetz strata of England' 
(T. Thomson's 'Annals of Philosophy' First Series vol. VI pp. 20-26, 1815) is 
of the opinion that although there is little correspondence between German and 
English formations, this German rock may be identified with the old red 
sandstone of the west Midlands etc. W. Buckland (1784-1856) paid several 
visits to Germany in order to settle the matter, and in his 'On the structure of 
the Alps ... and their relation to the Secondary and Transition rocks of Eng-
land' (T. Thomson's 'Annals of Phil.' Second Series vol. I pp. 450-468, 1821) 
comes to the conclusion that the closest English equivalent is the 'Exeter con-
glomerate'. 
Thomas Weaver (1773-1855), who was well acquainted with the German 
geological literature of his day, supported Prichard's view in his 'Additional 
remarks on the Rothe Todte Liegende of German geologists', and defended it 
when it was challenged by Conybeare and Phillips (T. Thomson's 'Annals 
of phil.' Second Series vol. V pp. 321-340, 1823; vol. VIII pp. II-22, 1824). 
31, 10 
For details concerning these mining areas and mineral deposits see Carl 
Hintze 'Handbuch der Mineralogie' (7 vols. Leipzig, 1897-1933): J. F. Ziickert 
'Die Naturgeschichte und Bergwerksverfassung des Unterharzes' (Berlin, 1763) 
'Die Naturgeschichte und Bergwerksverfassung des Oberharzes' (Berlin, 1762); 
Joseph von Sperges 'Tyrolische Bergwerksgeschichte' (Vienna, 1765); C. F. 
Mosche 'Zur Geschichte des Bergbaues in Deutschland' (Liegnitz, 1829); F. A. 
Romer 'Synopsis der Mineralogie und Geognosie' (Hanover, 1853). 
31,22 
'Reise in Brasilien auf Befeh! Sr. Majestat Maximilien Joseph I Konigs von 
Baiem in den Jahren 1817 bis 1820 gemacht' vol. I p. 332. 
This book was prepared by J. B. Spix (1781-1826), a friend of Schelling's 
and K. F. P. Martius (1794-1868), from the records of their travels, and pub-
lished by subscription in three volumes quarto (Munich, 1823,1828, 1831). As 
Spix died during the preparation of the second volume, the greater part of the 
242 

NOTES 
work was carried out by Martius, who was director of the botanical garden at 
Munich from 1832 until 1864. 
Cf. Jakob Frischholz 'Ueber den Salzburger Smaragd.' (K. E. von Moll 'Neue 
Jahrbiicher' IV pp. 382-385, 1821.) 
]2,15 
From 1804 until 1806 Henrik Steffens (1773-1845) was professor of Philo-
sophy, Mineralogy, Physiology and Natural History at Halle. His 'Grundziige 
der Philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' (Berlin, 1806) was written as a 
textbook for his lectures there, and it is evidently to pp. II5-u6 of this 
work that Hegel is here referring. ,ilie m:nimalifation fd)lient fid) in ben 
~Hltgebitgen an Me 
~amaget, bie ~egetation an Me 
~HlttratJtJgebitge 
unb 6anbfteinformationen -
bie lettem als ~ortfetung bet 6d)iefetbUbung. 
ila~et aUe ~~ietbetfteinetungen falrig, aUe $f{annenbetfteinetungen fiefelig •.• 
~alf uub ~iefel fiub otganifd)e ffiefibuen bet m:nimalifation unb ~egetation, 
unb nid)t aU fold)e bon aunen in bie Otganifation ~ineingetreten.' 
33,12 
Hegel's opinions on the origin of these shells were conventional and traditional 
rather than well informed. As he regarded the new geological chronology of 
his day as philosophically insignificant (§ 339), he found it difficult to grasp its 
importance in the development of palaeontology being pioneered by Lamarck 
('Histoire naturelle des animaux sans vertebres' 1815-1822), James Parkinson 
('Outlines of Oryctology' London, 1822), and E. F. Schlotheim ('Die Petrefak-
tenkunde' Gotha, 1820-1823). He therefore based his interpretation of these 
shells upon the generally accepted theories of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries. 
J ames Woodward ( I 665-1728), in 'Fossils of all Kinds, digested into a Method' 
(London, 1728), distinguished between 'native' formations, which he took to 
be mineral in origin, and 'extraneous' formations, which he regarded as the 
remains of living creatures. 
Robert Plot (1640-1696), in his 'Natural History of Oxfordshire' (Oxford, 
1705 p. II2) mentions an 'organic-plasticity' in connection with the origin of 
fossilized shells, 'This brings me to consider the great question, now so much 
controverted in the W orId, whether the Stones we find in the Forms of Shell-
fish, be Lapides sui generis, naturally produced by some extraordinary plastic 
virtue, latent in the Earth or Quarries where they are found? Or, whether they 
rather owe their Form and Figuration to the Shells of the Fishes they present, 
brought to the places where they are now found by Deluge, Earth-quake, or 
some other means.' 
At the beginning of the last century 'plasticity' was still regarded as an attri-
bute of a formative principle giving rise to organisms, and corresponding to the 
243 

• 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'vis formativa' of Aristotle: see A. von Humboldt, 'Versuche fiber die Gereizte 
Muskel und Nervenfaser' (Berlin, 1797) vol. I p. 180: Reil's 'Archiv fiir die 
Physiologie' vol. I sect. ii p. 281: Sprengel 'Instit. med.' vol. I p. 104. Hegel 
evidently regarded it as a link between crystallization and organic formation. 
34,7 
'Generatio aequivoca', i.e. spontaneous generation, the development ofliving 
organisms without the agency of pre-existing living matter. This development 
was usually considered to be the result of changes taking place in some inorganic 
substance. 
Prior to Pasteur (1822-1895). the concept was used to account for internal 
parasites, infusoria and bacteria. Towards the close of the nineteenth century it 
gave rise to hypotheses such as abiogenesis. autogeny and plasmogeny. which 
were used in the attempt to explain the simplest forms of life. 
Francesco Redi (1626-1698) had called the doctrine of spontaneous generation 
in question by showing that flies were the cause of maggots in rotten meat: see 
'Esperienze Intorno Alla Generazione Degl' Insetti' (Florence, 1668: Eng. tr. 
M. Bigelow Chicago. 1909 'Experiments on the Generation of Insects.'). John 
T. Needham (1713-1781) defended it in his, 'Observations upon the generation. 
composition and decomposition of Animal and Vegetable Substances' (London, 
1749). but was worsted by L. Spallanzani (1729-1799) in the controversy which 
followed the publication of this book. 
Priestley's discovery of oxygen in 1774 gave the doctrine a new lease of life, 
but by the early years of the nineteenth century it was again being questioned: 
see T. A. Knight's discussion (1813) of the supposed generation of mushrooms 
from horse-dung by vital powers, 'For, if a mass of horse-dung can generate a 
mushroom, it can scarcely be denied that a mass of animal matter, an old 
cheese may generate a mite; and if the organs of a mite can be thus formed, there 
can be little difficulty in believing that a larger mass of decomposing matter 
might generate an elephant, or a man.' ('Transactions of the Horticultural 
Society of London' vol. II p. 83 London, 1818). 
34,25 
,3nbem bie ~be abet aud) ein befonbetet stiit~et gegen i~tet %tabanten,' 
(sic) ,bie @)onne unb bie stometen ift'o 
36,3 
,t~eil~ betttJanbelt fie fid) in 9JCeteote al~ betgiingHd)e stometen -
in ~ben, 
bie fie et3eugt, 
b.~. ~tmof~~iitiHen.' The original text differs from this 
somewhat, ,ten~ in bie betgiingHd)en S'eometen (unb) 9JCeteote, tei@ in ~tben, 
bie fie et3eugt, ~tmof~~iitiHen'. ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 106). 
244 

NOTES 
36,5 
Aerolites. When he regards them as atmospheric formations, Hegel is keeping 
to the traditional opinion as to the origin of aerolites. E. F. F. Chladni (1756-
1827), in his consideration of the iron masses found by P. S. Pallas (1741-18II) 
in Russia, came to the correct conclusion that they were extra-terrestrial and not 
atmospheric in origin: 'Ueber den Ursprung der von Pallas gefundenen und 
anderer ahnlicher Eisenmassen' (Leipzig, 1794). Chladni subsequently backed 
up his thesis with a wealth of detail from a wide range of sources, and so 
initiated the modern approach to this subject: 'Ueber Feuer-Meteore und 
iiber die mit denselben herabgefallenen Massen' (Vienna, 1819). 
Miasmata. (Greek l.tLaap.a, pollution). 'The Edinburgh Medical and Physical 
Dictionary' by R. Morris and J. Kendrick (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1807) gives the 
following information on 'miasma', and shows that microbiology had not as 
yet given any very precise meaning to the term, 'Miasma ... is a particle of 
poison, in a volatile state, borne on the wings of the atmosphere, and capable of 
attaching itself to an animal body so as to produce disease. Miasmata, as they 
relate to diseases, are productive of some of the febrile kinds, and of them only, 
as in the case of Contagion. They are, in the atmosphere, not observed to act, 
except when a healthy body approaches the sources from whence they arise; 
or else is brought into contact with some substances, which are imbued with the 
noxious effluvia. The idea of contagion properly implies a matter arising from a 
body under disease; and that of miasma, a matter arising from other substances, 
so from putrefying vegetables etc.' Cf. 'Sur les differens miasmes contagieux' 
('Mem. de Turin' 1805-1808. vol. IX p. 92); Michael Underwood (1736-1820), 
'A treatise on disorders of childhood' (4th ed. London, 1799,1 p. 288), 'I have 
attended where children born in an air, saturated as it were, with the miasma of 
this disease,' (small-pox) 'and even lying continually in a cradle in which an-
other child has died a few days before, have, nevertheless escaped the disease.' Cf. 
J. S. T. Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. 1 pp. 475-488 (Leipzig, 1825). 
Honey-dew. R. A. F. Reaumur (1683-1757), in his 'Memoires pour servir a 
l'histoire des insectes' (6 vols. Amsterdam, 1734-1742, vol. 3 pt. 2 p. 46), had 
shown that aphides are the principal cause of honey-dew. Towards the end of 
the century Gilbert White ( 1 720-1793) was still speculating on its origin however; 
see 'The Natural History ofSelbourne' ed. Allen, 1898, p. 471, 'June 4th 1783. 
Fast honey-dews this week. The reason of these seems to be that in hot days the 
effluvia of flowers are drawn up by a brisk evaporation, and then in the night 
fall down with the dews with which they are entangled.' By 1802 however, 
Reaumur's views were generally accepted in England; see W. Curtis 'Observa-
tions on Aphides, chiefly intended to show that they are the principal Cause of 
Blights in Plants, and the sole cause of Honey-dew.' ('Trans. of the Linnean Soc.' 
vol. vi pp. 75-95, London, 1802). L. C. Treviranus (1779-1864) regarded honey-
dew as the natural excretion ofleaves; see, 'Ueber die siissen Ausschwitzungen 
der Blatter,' in 'Vermischte Schriften' (Gottingen, 1816, vol. vi, p. 89). 
245 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Aphides and Coccideae are the most frequent, but not the sole cause of honey-
dew. A fungus-Claviceps-also causes it, and in some tropical plants such as 
Caesalpina and Calliandra, it appears to be excreted by the ordinary processes 
of overturgescence pressing the liquid through the water-pores. 
Mildew. See T. A. Knight 'On the Prevention of Mildew in particular cases' 
(a paper read to the Horticultural Society of London on May 4,1813, published 
in the 'Transactions' of this Society vol. II p. 82 in 1818), 'This disease originates 
in a minute species of parasitical fungus, which is propagated, like other plants, 
by seeds.' C£ James Robertson 'On the Mildew' etc. ('Transactions of the 
Horticultural Society of London' vol. V pp. 175-179, 1824) 'It has been a 
question, whether it was of animal or vegetable origin, or a fortuitous produc-
tion, but it is now generally admitted to be a parasitic fungus, and that those 
parts ofit which are apparent, form the fructification.' 
36,8 
See Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) bk. iii 
prop. 36 prob. 16, prop. 37 prob. 18: 'System of the World' par. 38-54. 
36,24 
This is probably a reference to the 'nymphs called Naiads of th~ windring 
brooks', the tutelary spirits of springs and rivers. (Greek Nards, NardS, related 
to "d€w to flow, "ap.a running water). Nevertheless, Hegel could be referring 
to the generative powers of Naididae (maiben, ~aHetfd){iingeld)en): Abraham 
Trembley (1700-1784), in his 'Memoires pour servir a l'histoire d'un genre de 
Polypes d' eau douce (Leyden, 1744, Germ. tr. J. A. E. Goeze, Quedlinburg, 
1775) first described the multiplication of these Water-worms by means of 
voluntary division, and o. F. Miiller (1730-1784), in his 'Von Wiirmern des 
siissen und salzigen Wassers' (Copenhagen, 1771) gave a detailed and precise 
description of this form of generation. 
C£ W. H. Roscher 'Ausfiihrliches Lexikon der Griechischen und Romischen 
Mythologie' (Leipzig, 1897-1909) vol. iii cols. 507-515. 
36,26 
Aristotle took the sources of spring water to be percolated rain water, the 
condensation of air within the earth and the condensation of vapours which have 
risen from the earth. He observed that, 'We do not call water that flows anyhow 
a river, even if there is a great quantity of it, but only if the flow comes from a 
spring' ('Meteorologica' Book I ch. 13 2-20). Until the close of the eighteenth 
century, these views, together with the difficulties which hydrologists encoun-
tered in their attempts to explain artesian wells etc., coloured most theories as to 
the origin of springs and rivers. 
However, Bernard Palissy (1510-1589) suggested that springs might be caused 
solely by water percolating down and collecting between non-porous strata: 
246 

NOTES 
'Discours admirable de la nature des eaux et fontaines tant naturelles qu' arti-
ficielles' (Paris, 1580, Eng, tr. E. E. Willett, Brighton, 1876), and E. Mariotte 
(1620-1684) confirmed this hypothesis by experiment: 'Traite de mouvement 
des eaux' (Paris, 1668, 2nd ed. 1700, Eng. tr. 'The Motion of Water and other 
Fluids' by J. T. Desaguiliers, London, 1718). 
By the end of the eighteenth century John Dalton (1766-1844) had shown 
beyond reasonable doubt that the rain and dew of the areas he had investigated 
were equivalent to the quantity of water carried from them by evaporation and 
rivers: 'Experiments and Observations to determine whether the quantity of 
Rains and Dew is equal to the quantity of Water carried off by the Rivers and 
raised by Evaporation, with an Enquiry into the origin of Springs.' ('The 
Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester,' March I, 1799). 
Hegel may have revived Aristotle's views on this subject on account of the 
hypothesis put forward by Prof J. K. P. Grimm of Breslau, that subterranean 
water is formed chemically from hydrogen and oxygen: 'Ueber den Ursprung 
des unterirdischen Wassers' ('Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' 1799 vol. n pp. 
336-345). G. H. O. Volger (1822-1897) attempted to revive the Aristotelian 
hypotheses as recently as 1877: 'Zeitschrift des Vereins deutscher Ingenieure' 
vol. XXI, but the theoretical basis of his argument was demolished soon after-
wards by J. Hann: 'Zeitschrift fur Meteorologie,' 1887 p. 388. 
In the geological literature of his day, the closest approximation to Hegel's 
views on the origin and nature of springs and on the 'organic' nature of the 
earth, is to be found in C. Keferstein's 'Teutschland geognostisch-geologisch 
dargestellt' (vol. V pt. i, 1827). For a detailed survey of the subject see J. S. T. 
Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' (ed. Brandes, Muncke etc. II vols. 
Leipzig, 1825-1845) vol. 7 pp. 1023-II25. 
Cf G. Wachsmuth 'Die Erde als lebender Organismus', in his 'Goethe in 
unserer Zeit' (Basel, 1949) pp. 29-50. 
36,36 
'Generatio univoca' (universal generation) i.e. normal generation between 
members of the same species. 
36,37 
'Omne vivum ex ovo.' This saying is generally attributed to William Harvey 
(1578-1657), although he seems never to have expressed the idea in precisely 
these words. It may well have originated from the frontispiece of his 'Exercita-
tiones de generatione animalium' (London, 1651) however, in which Zeus is 
depicted holding an egg, from which all kinds of living creatures are issuing 
forth, and on which is inscribed 'Ex ovo omnia'. 
37. 14 
Olaf Wasstrom, 'Versuch uber einen besonderen Schein im Wasser der 
247 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Ost-See' tr. from the Swedish ('Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. II p. 352 
1799). Cf. F. Tiedemann (1781-1861) 'Physiologie des Menschen (1830, tr. 
Gully and Lane, London, 1834) Book II Pt. ii Sect. 2 Ch. 2. Tiedemannis profuse 
in his references to the periodicals of his time. C£ E. N. Harvey 'A History of 
Luminescence from the earliest times until 1900.' (Philadelphia, 1957). 
37,23 
This account of the spontaneous generation of the sea may owe something 
to J. T. Needham's assertion that water breeds its microscopic animals from a 
vegetative force. 'Needham imagined that there was a vegetative force in every 
microscopical point of water, and (sic) every visible filament of which the 
whole vegetable contexture consists; that the several species of microscopic 
animals may subside, resolve again into gelatinous fllaments, and again give 
lesser animals, and so on, till they can be no longer pursued by glasses.' George 
Adams 'Essays on the Microscope' (2nd ed. London, 1798 p. 421). 
37,27 
O. F. Miiller (1730-1784) of Copenhagen first distinguished and classified 
many of these 'determinate formations', and his 'Animalcula infusoria, fluvia-
tilia, et Marina' (Copenhagen, 1786) became a standard work on the subject. 
C. G. Ehrenberg (1795-1876), in his monumental 'Infusionsthierchen als 
vollkommene Organismen' (Leipzig, 1838, English adaptation by A. Pritchard, 
'A History of Infusoria' London, 1842), produced a more exact classification, 
but even his work has since been largely superseded. He distinguished between 
(i) Desmids, Diatoms and Schizomycetes, now regarded as essentially Plant 
Protista or Protophytes; (ii) Sarcodina (excluding Foraminifera, as well as 
Radiolaria, which were only as yet known by their skeletons, and termed 
Polycystina), and (iii) Rotifers, as well as (iv) Flagellates and Infusoria in our 
present sense. 
37,31 
Adelbert von Chamisso (1781-1838) came of a French emigre family which 
had settled in Berlin soon after the Revolution. His reputation now rests mainly 
upon his work as a novelist and poet, but in the Berlin scientific circles of his 
day he was also well known as a botanist. 
In 1815 he was appointed botanist to the Russian ship 'Rurik', which Otto 
von Kotzebue commanded on a scientific voyage round the world. On his 
return in 1818 he was made custodian of the botanical gardens in Berlin, and 
was elected member of the Berlin Academy of Sciences. See E. H. du Bois-
Reymond 'Adelbert von Chamisso als Naturforscher' (Leipzig, 1889). 
Salpae constitute a family of Hemimyaria, which are a sub-order of the 
Tunicata. Their most striking characteristic is that they exhibit alternation of 
248 

NOTES 
generations in their life history. Each species occurs in two forms, which are 
usually quite unlike one another, the solitary asexual (proles solitaria), and the 
aggregated sexual (proles gregaria). The solitary form gives rise by internal 
gemmation to a complex tubular stolon, which becomes segmented into a series 
of buds or embryos. As this stolon elongates, the embryos near the free end 
which have become advanced in their development are set free in groups, which 
remain attached together by processes of the test, each enclosing a diverticulum 
from the mantle so as to form 'chains'. Each member of the chain is a Salpa of 
the sexual or aggregated form, and when mature may produce one or several 
embryos, which develop into the solitary Salpa. Thus the two forms alternate 
regularly. 
Chamisso and]. F. von Eschscholtz (1793-1831), who accompanied him on 
the voyage around the world, were the first to observe this alternation of 
generations in salpae. Their 'fine discovery' as Hegel calls it was made on 
October 23, 181S, while the 'Rurik' was becalmed just north of the Canary 
Islands (30036'N. ISo20W.). Chamisso gives the following account of it in his 
'Reise um die Welt mit der Romanzoffischen Entdeckungs-Expedition in den 
Jahren 18IS-1818,' 
,~ier befd)iiftigten mid) unb 
~fd)fd)ol\} befonber~ hie 
6al1Jen, unb ~ier toar e~, too toir an biefen burd)fid)tigen 1meid)t~ieren be~ 
~o~en meeres bie uuS toid)tig bilnfenbe ~tbecfung mad)ten, baf3 bei benfe1ben 
eine unb hiefeThe m:rt fid) in abtoed)fe1nben @enerationen unter 5toei fe~r 
toefentlid) tJerfd)iebenen tyormen barftellt; baf3 niimHd) eine ein5eln frei .. 
fd)toimmenbe 6al1Ja anbers geftaltete, faft 1Jo1t)1Jenartig an einanber gefettete 
,3ungen 1ebenbig gebiert, beren jebes in ber 5ufammen aufgetoad)fenen 
ffie1JubHf toieberum ein3eln freifd)toimmenbe ~~iere 5ur 1melt fe\}t, in benen 
bie tyorm ber tJorbongen @eneration toiebede~rt. ~s ift, a1~ gebiire hie ffiaU1Je 
ben 6d)metterHng unb ber 6d)metterling ~intoieberum hie ffiau1Je.' ('Werke' 
ed.]. E. Hitzig, Leipzig, 1842, vol. lb. 43). 
Chamisso published two Latin works on Salpae: 'De animalibus quibusdam e 
classe vermium linnaeana in circumnavigatione terrae auspicante Comite N. 
Romanzoff duce Ottone de Kotzebue annis 181S. 1816. 1817. 1818. peracta 
observatis Adelbertus de Chamisso. Fasciculus Primus. De Salpa. Berolini 
1819' and 'De animalibus e classe vermium linneana Fasciculus secundus, requos 
vermes continens,' which was published in 'Verhandlungen der Kaiserlichen 
Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen Academie der Naturforscher' (vol. ii, Bonn, 1821). 
It was probably on these publications that Hegel based his account of the dis-
covery. An anonymous and somewhat critical review of the first of these works 
appeared in Oken's 'Isis' (1819, pp. 6S2-6S3). 
38,4 
The analogy between the discoveries made with the help of the microscope 
and those made with the help of the telescope also occurred to George Adams 
(17S0-179S), 'By the help of magnifying glasses we are brought into a kind of 
249 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
new world; and numberless animals are discovered, which from their minute-
ness, must otherwise for ever have escaped our observation: and how many 
kinds of these invisibles there may be, is yet unknown; as they are observed of 
all sizes, from those which are barely visible to the naked eye, to such as resist 
the action of the microscope, as the fixed stars do that of the telescope, and with 
the best magnifier hitherto invented, appear only as so many moving points.' 
('Essays on the Microscrope' 2nd ed. London, 1798, pp. 415-416). 
38,20 
In Greek mythology for example, Oceanus was the seat of all dark and 
mysterious things, and the origin of gods and men. See Juno's words in the 
Iliad (XIV 200-201), 
'For 10, I haste to those remote abodes, 
Where the great parents (sacred source of Gods!) 
Ocean and Tethys their old Empires keep, 
On the last limits of the land and deep.' (Pope) 
C£ M. Leach 'Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology, and Legend' (2 vols. New 
York, 1950) vol. 2 p. II67. Stith Thompson 'Motif-Index of Folk Literature' 
(5 vols. Copenhagen, 1955) A 1232.2, A 1261. 
39,2 
Between 1802 and 1846 approximately 500 new species of lichen were 
described, but because of tardiness in the use of the microscope, investigation 
into the nature and structure of these plants did not keep pace with the advances 
made in classifying them. 
C. F. W. Wallroth (1792-1857), in his 'Naturgeschichte der Flechten' (2 vols. 
Frankfurt-on-Main, 1825) supposed them to be propagated by means of gonidia 
and spores, but G. F. W. Meyer (1782-1856), whose 'Die Entwicklung, Meta-
morphose and Fortpflanzung der Flechten' appeared at the same time (Gottin-
gen, 1825), thought them capable of the 'generatio originaria' here ascribed to 
them by Hegel, and he was by no means alone in holding this opinion. See A. L. 
Smith 'Lichens' (Cambridge, 1921); A. von Krempelhuber (1813-1882) 
'Geschichte und Litteratur der Lichenologie' (3 vol. Munich, 1867-1872). 
39,2 
Informed opinion of Hegel's day would not have regarded mosses as 'uni-
versal vegetation' on account of their being devoid of' seeds', although at that 
time the propagation of moss was certainly a matter of controversy. 
J. J. Hedwig (1730-1799), who laid the foundations of modem bryology, 
realized that the archegonium and antheridium of bryophyta correspond to the 
250 

NOTES 
pistil and anthers of flowering plants. C. G. Nees von Esenbeck (1776-1858), on 
seeing the capsule of the Sphagnum burst and throw off the operculum and 
spores, was surprised that, ,fief) aw if)nen ein ~eet (eoenbet imonaben etgoul 
(1823), although it was not until 1834 that F. Unger (1800-1870) showed that 
these 'monads' were in fact spermatozoids. By the 1820'S therefore, bryologists 
were well on the way to understanding the sexual generation of mosses. 
Hedwig also described the germination of the spores and the development of 
the protonema correctly, although it was not until 1830 that Wallroth recog-
nized the true significance of the protonema in the asexual propagation of these 
plants. C. G. Nees von Esenbeck, F. Hornschuch, J. Sturm 'Bryologia Germ-
anica' (Nuremberg, 1813); M. Mobius 'Geschichte der Botanik' ch. 26 (lena, 
1937). 
39,5 
C£ the note on III. 246 Hegel evidently regarded mildew as being vegetable 
in nature and atmospheric in origin. 
39, 36 
Carl Asmund Rudolphi (1771-1832) was born in Stockholm, but when his 
father died in 1778, his mother moved to Swedish Pomerania, and it was there 
that he grew up. In 1790 he began his studies at the university of Greifswald, 
where he took his doctorate in 1795. He taught in the medical and veterinary 
faculties of the university until 1808, when he left for a six-month tour, taking 
in Brussels, Paris and Lyons. On his return to Greifswald he was appointed 
professor of medicine. In 1810 he accepted the offer of the chair of anatomy and 
physiology at the newly founded university of Berlin. He settled in the city, and 
fwally took Prussian citizenship. 
He did his best work as a biologist not as a botanist, and published important 
works on physiology ('Elements of Physiology' tr. W. D. How, London, 1825), 
intestinal worms ('Entozoorum synopsis' Berlin, 1819) and embryology ('Ueber 
den Embryo der Affen' Abhandlungen der Berliner Akademie, 1831). His 
'Anatomie der Pflanzen' (Berlin, 1807) was one of the three essays accepted by 
the Royal Academy of Sciences at Gottingen as answering a prize-question on 
plant anatomy. Those who judged the entries evidently knew as little of the 
subject as the competitors however, for the two winning essays (Rudolphi's, 
and H. F. Link's 'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der Pflanzen') 
contradicted each other on several important points, while the best of the three 
(L. C. Treviranus's 'V om inwendigen Bau der Gewachse') was deemed to be 
worthy of a mere 'proxime accessit'. 
Luigi Galvani (1737-1798) had published his account of muscular irritability 
in 1786, and the 'Versuche iiber die gereizte Muskel- und Nervenfaser, nebst 
Vermuthungen iiber den chemischen Process des Lebens in der Thier- und 
251 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Pflanzenwelt' (Berlin, 1797) of Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859) contained 
the results of a prolonged course of experiments in which the nature of this 
phenomena had been investigated. 
P. A. Micheli (1679-1737) had given an excellent description of the growth 
of fungi from spores a full century before Hegel delivered the last of these 
lectures: 'Nova Plantarum Genera juxta Tournefortii Methodum disposita' 
(Florence, 1729), and Linnaeus' assessment of fungi as plants without leaves was 
widely accepted by the turn of the century. 
Hegel's choice of these works by Rudolphi and von Humboldt as the authori-
ties on which to base his views on the nature oflichens and fungi was therefore 
most unfortunate, although some of his contemporaries outdid him in the 
singularity of their opinions on this subject. Otto von Miinchhausen (1716-1774) 
thought of fungi as being intermediate between animals and plants ('Der 
Hausvater' vols. II and III, Hannover, 1765-1766), 'The black powder in the 
Lycoperdon and Mucor was taken for animalcules by Baron Miinchhausen, and 
thus the Fungi were on the verge of migrating into the class of Zoophytes' (P. 
Miller and T. Martyn 'The Gardener's and Botanist's Dictionary' 2 vols. 
London, 1807). Robert Scott, in his 'Account of crystallized .oxalic Acid pro-
duced from the Boletus sulphureus' ('Transactions of the Linnean Society of 
London' vol. VIII 1808 pp. 262-263) throws an interesting sidelight on one of 
the reasons for Miinchhausen's opinion, 'That the oxalic acid is produced or 
evolved in the course of vegetation in many plants of the higher ranks is well 
known, but that it should be found in any of the fungus tribe, (which have 
hitherto been supposed to produce only an ammoniacal salt, and on that account 
considered as a link between vegetables and animals,) is a curious, and, I believe, 
isolated fact'. 
Other naturalists, concentrating upon the rapidity with which fungi grow, 
regarded them as intermediate between crystals and plants: see F. K. Medicus 
(1736-1808), 'Uber den Ursprung und die Bildungsart der Schwamme' ('Vor-
lesungen der kurpfalzischen physikalisch-Okonomischen Gesellschaft zu 
Heidelberg' vol. 8); N. J. de Necker (1729-1793), 'Traite sur la Mycetologie' 
(Mannheim, 1793); K. H. Schultz (1798-1871), ,S)et S'rtt)ftaU bilbet iid), ltJie 
bet $il3- unb bas 3nfuiionst~iet, butd) feine eigene totaIe imad)t, unb ltJie 
bei ben 
le~teten, fo fann aud) bei 
i~m bie 
~ilbung butd) aunete 
~nfliine ge~inbett unb begiinftigt ltJetben, o~ne ban jebod) bet @tunb biefet 
utfl:ltiingHd)en ~t3-eugung in ben aunern ~et~altniHen bes aUgemeinen inatut .. 
lebenS begtiinbet ltJate.' ('Die Natur der Lebendigen Pflanze' vol. I p. 58, 
Berlin, 1823). 
C. A. J. A. Oudemans, in his monumental 'Enumeratio Systematica Fung-
orum' (5 vols. Hague, 1919-1924) makes no mention of either the 'Boletus 
cetatophorus' mentioned by Rudolphi, or the 'Clavaria militaris' mentioned by 
von Humboldt. E. J. Corner's 'A Monograph of Clavaria and Allied Genera' 
(Oxford, 1950) also makes no mention of the 'Clavaria militaris'. 
252 

NOTES 
40, I 
Intestinal worms were thought to be formed from the matter contained in the 
intestines: see G. R. Treviranus (1776-1837) 'Biologie' vol. II p. 366 (G6ttingen, 
1803); Matthew Baillie (1761-1823) 'The Morbid anatomy of some of the most 
important parts of the human body' (3rd ed. London, 1807 p. 192). The theory 
that they reproduced themselves by eggs was widespread, but had not yet been 
substantiated, 'There is every reason to believe that Taeniae produce ova, and 
that their ova, as well as those of other intestinal worms, are so constructed as 
to be very little perishable'-A. Carlisle 'Observations upon the Structure and 
Oeconomy of those Intestinal Worms called Taeniae' ('Transactions of the 
Linnean Society' vol. II pp. 147-262. London, 1794). C£ 'Einiges iiber Einge-
weide-Wiirmer' by H. W. Eysenhardt 'Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft Natur-
forschender Freunde zu Berlin' (Berlin, 1829, p. 144). J. F. Blumenbach (1752-
1840), in his 'Beytrage zur Naturgeschichte' (2nded. pt. I G6ttingen, 1806, Eng. 
tr. by Thomas Bendyshe, London, 1865) discusses the origin of swine-gargets, 
'The pimple-worm in pigs, which Malpighi was the first to discover, is quite as 
real and perfect an animal in its kind as man and the elephant in theirs. But, as is 
well known, this animal is only found in tame swine, and never in any way in 
the wild pig, from which however the former is descended. It would seem there-
fore that this worm was no more created at the same time as the original stock of 
the hog than, according to probability, the allied species of bladder worms, 
which have been lately discovered, just like those hydatids, in the flesh and 
among the entrails of human bodies, which must needs have been created after 
the original parents of mankind.' 
R. W. Dickson, in his 'An improved system of management of Livestock and 
Cattle' (London, 1822-1824, vol. II p. 329), proposes to cure a hog of the garget 
by mixing sublimed sulphur and powdered root of madder into its swill. 
45,22 
C£ 'The Logic' tr. Wallace §§ 95-96. The geological organism does not 
attain to this ideality, although as a bare system of shape (be£l @efta!ten£l) it has 
an implicit ideality which becomes explicit in plant-life. The causal relationship 
falls away here, because although inorganic nature provides the matter of 
organic being, life is self-engendering, its ideality consisting in its transforming 
this matter in accordance with its own organic forms. 
45,25 
'Everything lives in nature.' This is evidently a reference to Schelling's 
'Von der Weltseele, eine Hypothese der h6heren Physik zur Erklarung des 
allgemeinen Organismus' (1798, 2nd ed. 1806, 3rd ed. 1809; 'Schellings Werke' 
ed. M. Schr6ter vol. I Munich, 1958). ,~a nun biefe£l $tinci~ bie ~ontinuitiit 
bet anotganifd.Jen unb bet otganifd.Jen ~eIt untet~iiIt unb hie ganoe 9Catur ou 
.einem aUgemeinen :Otgani£lmw 
I:lerfnii~ft, fo erfennen Wit auf£lneue in 
253 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
i~m jenes 7llieien, bM bie iiltefte $~iloiOlJ~ie aIs bie gemeinidJaftIidJe 
eleele bet inatut a~nbenb begtuijte, unb bM einige $~t}iifet jenet Sei! mit 
bem fotmenben unb biIbenben m:et~et ••• fut eines ~ieIten/ (loc. cit. p. 637). 
46,12 
The infinite form of living being constitutes the end of nature (Add. to § 337). 
Consequently, this process of physical properties is subordinate to it, and in the 
production of living being it is the form which determines the properties, not 
the properties which determine the form. C£ 'The Logic' tr. Wallace § 219. 
46, 14 
,bas idJwadJe finbiidJe 2eben/ 
46,35 
The translation of the first two sentences of this quotation has been made 
from the version of them printed by Michelet in his edition of 'The Philosophy 
of Nature'. In Goethe's 'Zur Morphologie' (vol. I pp. x-xi, Stuttgart and 
Tiibingen, 1817), they appear in a slightly different form however, ,,s<e 
unbOUfommenet bas @eidJOlJf ift, beftome~t finb bieie %~eiIe einanbet 
gIddJ obet 
ii~nndJ, unb 
beftome~t gIeidJen fie bem @anjen. 
,s<e 
tlofIfommenet ba~ @eidJOlJf witb, befto unii~nndJet wetben hie %~eiIe 
einanbet.' 
47, 9 
Karl Heinrich Schultz (I7yS-1871) was trained at the Frederick William 
Institute in Berlin as an army doctor. In 1822 he left the army for an academic 
career, writing his thesis on the circulation of the sap in Celandines. He was 
appointed extraordinary professor of medicine at Berlin 1825, and in 1833 be-
came a full member of the professorial staff of the university. In 1830 his essay 
'Sur la circulation et sur les vaisseaux lactiferes dans les plantes' was awarded 
a prize by the French Academy. Hugo von Mohl (1805-1872), professor of 
botany at Tiibingen, called in question Schultz's mistaken contention that the 
lactescence of plants corresponds to the blood of animals and circulates, and the 
ensuing controversy degenerated into a series of abusive exchanges. 'Ober den 
Milchsaft und seine Bewegung' Botanische Zeitung I, 1843 col. 553-558, 593-
598; Annals of Natural History XIII 1844, pp. 441-444; Annales des Sciences 
Naturelles I (Bot.) 1844 pp. 4-24. 
J. B. D. Boussingault (1802-1887), professor of chemistry at Lyons, took the 
trouble to check many of Schultz's experiments, and found them to be faulty. 
'Ober die gegen seine Versuche iiber pflanzenernahrung gemachten Einwend-. 
ungen' Neue Notizen, vonL. F. und Rob. Froriep vol. XXXIII, 1845 col. 39-41. 
'Die Natur der lebendigen pflanze', which is a rambling but basically com-
petent work, was published in two parts (Part I, Berlin, 1823; Part II Stuttgart 
254 

NOTES 
and Tubingen, 1828). The sentence here referred to by Hegel reads as follows 
in its entirety, ,'l)ai3 ~ad)i3tum bet ~f{anaen ift ein eltJigei3 
~inaubHben 
neuet, tJot~et nid)t tJot~anbenet ;t~eHe, aU ben alten, unb untetfd)eibet 
lid) babutd) ltJefentlid) tJon bem t~ietifd)en ~ad)i3tum, ItJcld)ei3 blofi in einet 
~etgtofietung utf.))tunglid) 
tJot~anbenet ;t~eHe befte~t, aU benen feine neue 
~inaugebHbet ltJetben/ 
48,6 
,~od) ini3 .))toceHualifdJe 2{ufieteinanbet tJetfenH.' i.e. the vital principle of 
the plant is confmed to external development, to the engendering of products 
united only by the process of this development, and in themselves external to 
one another. 
48, 20 
,~ie bet WCenfd) ben WCenfd)en fud)t.' Hegel wrote, ,ltJie bet einfame WCenfd) 
ben WCenfd)en fud)t.' (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 126). Cf. Johann Georg 
Zimmerman (1728-1795) 'Ober die Einsamkeit' (4 pts. Leipzig, 1784, Eng. tr. 
London, 1791). 
48, 24 
Schelling certainly implies this in the following passage, ' ~ein ~unbet, 
bafi (bie ~iitme) fut (ben WCenfd)en), ben aUe i~te ~idungen unmittelbat 
tii~ten, bai3 ~fte ift, ltJai3 i~n aUt 2{nbetung bet eionne ~inteifit ••. 'l)ie ~f{anae 
butd) ben ~inf{ufi bet ~iitme ~ettJotgettieben, tJetltJeIft bod) ltJiebet, fob alb 
2id)t unb ~iitme auf~oten aU entltJicfeln, ltJotJon fie fid) 
nii~tte.' 'Ideen zu 
einer philo sophie der Natur' (1797, 2nd ed. 1803): 'Schellings Werke' First 
Supplementary volume pp. 174-175 (Munich, 1958). Cf.James Hervey (1714-
1758) 'Meditations' (London, 1746, 42nd ed. 1824, Germ. tr. Hamburg, 1762) 
pt. 1 sect. 2, "To an attentive mind the garden turns preacher, and its blooming 
tenants are so many lively sermons ... Let us all be heliotropes ... to the Sun 
of righteousness." Macrobius 'Saturnalia' 1 xvii 66 et seq. 
48,36 
Cf. Hegel's 'Philosophy of Right' § 33 Addition (tr. Knox pp. 233-234): 
'Philosophy of History' (tr. Sibree, Dover ed. 1956 pp. 108-IIO). 
49.3 
The ultimate source of this information is to be found in the 'Memoirs of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences' vol. II pp. 146-147 (Boston, 1793). 
James Warren (1726-1808), wrote to the Academy from Milton, Massachusetts 
on January 25, 1786, 'I therefore beg leave to communicate an extraordinary 
255 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
instance, related to me by a gentleman of undoubted veracity in my neighbour-
hood. The account is as follows: On going into a cellar, which he used for the 
preservation of roots in the winter, and kept close and dark, he discovered, in 
the south east corner, a very small hole, which admitted a little light; and that a 
vine proceeding from a potato, accidentally left in the north west corner, had 
pursued a direct course to the aperture in the wall; and after running twenty 
feet on the cellar floor, ascended the wall, and without any deviation in its 
whole course, went out at the hole. This is the strongest instance of the effect of 
light on the growth of plants, that has fallen under my observation; and being 
so extraordinary, will, I hope, apologize for this communication, if it produces 
no other effect, than amusement to the curious.' Cf. 'Transactions of the 
Linnean Society' (II p. 267, 1794). 
49, 10 
Carl Ludwig Willdenow (1765-18I2) was born in Berlin, and was introduced 
to botanical studies by his uncle J. G. Gleditsch (1714-1786) who was director 
of the Berlin botanical garden. After studying chemistry under M. H. Klaproth 
(1743-1817), he qualified in medicine at Halle, but through the influence of his 
friend A. von Humboldt, geographical botany soon became his main interest. 
In 1790 he was offered the position of botanist on a Russian ship about to start 
on a world voyage, but as he had planned to marry in the autumn of that year, 
he eventually decided not to accept it. 
His 'Grundriss der Krauterkunde' was first published at Berlin in 1792, and 
on account of the admirably lucid manner in which its subject-matter was 
presented, was widely read. A large part of the book is devoted to the definition 
of botanical terms. Willdenow was appointed professor of botany when the 
university of Berlin was founded in 1810. 
Hegel might have added Oenothera tetraptera, molissima, Silene noctiflora, 
Mirabilis longiflora, Gladiolus tristis and Cactus trianguloris as further examples 
of flowers which open only at night. Willdenow continues here as follows, 'g:Ut 
Oenothera biennis fd)eint bet lRei5 bes l;ageslid)ts 5U ~eftig 5U fein, unb fie 
fann fid) nid)t e~et offnen aIs ow fein ftatfe5 Bid)t me~t aUf fie witft, ba~et 
fte~t fie bon m:oenb hie 9Cad)t ~inbutd) ow 5um imotgen offen.' 
49, 13 
The Portulacca Oleracea is also known as the Garden Purslane. It is an annual 
and herbaceous plant, a native of the East and West Indies, China, Indo-China, 
Japan, Ascension and many parts of Europe. In Hegel's day it was prescribed 
as a salad for scorbutic disorders. 
The Drosera Rotundifolia or Round-leaved Sundew, is also known as Sundew, 
Youthwort, and in Northern England as Red-rot. In Hegel's day its juice was 
mixed with milk and applied to the skin in order to remove freckles or cure 
sun-burn. 

NOTES 
The Cactus Grandiflorus is a native of Jamaica and Vera Cruz. 'This species, 
when arrived to a sufficient strength, will produce many exceedingly large, 
beautiful, sweet-scented flowers; like most of this kind, of very short duration, 
scarcely continuing six hours full blown; nor do the flowers ever open again 
when once closed. They begin to open between seven and eight 0' clock in the 
evening, are fully blown by eleven, and by three or four in the morning they 
fade, and hang down quite decayed.' Thomas Green 'The Universal Herbal; 
or, botanical, medical and agricultural dictionary' (2 vols. 2nd ed. London, 
1824) vol. I p. 219. Green also supplies a fme illustration of the flower (p. 220). 
49,22 
,3nbem Die I.l3ffan&e ;0 bas 6innIid)e nod) nicfJt gan& bernid)ten fann, ift 
fie nod) nid)t teine Eeit in fid).' In this sentence, and in the passage which 
follows, Hegel clearly has in mind his analysis of space, time and motion (cf. 
§§ 253-271). 
In the plant space is dominant, in that the parts of the plant are external to one 
another and confined to the space they occupy in the process of growth. In the 
animal however, time is dominant, in that the animal's ego, while functioning as 
the ideal unity of its body, is able to nullify its spatial fixity by willing movement, 
which involves time. 
The progression from vegetable to animal being is therefore analogous to the 
progression from space to time and motion. The time involved in animal move-
ment is 'pure' because it is determined by the animal's ego, whereas the time of 
the solar system involves the laws of that system. 
50,4 
Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus (1776-1837) was born at Bremen, and studied 
medicine and mathematics at Gottingen. While still a student, he contributed an 
important article on neurology to 'Reil's Archive for Physiology' (1796 pt. I 
sect. ii), and at the age of twenty-one was appointed professor of mathematics 
and medicine at Bremen. 
His 'Biologie, oder Philo sophie der lebenden Natur fur Naturforscher und 
Aerzte' (6 vols. Gottingen, 1802-1822), which is based upon a great deal of 
reading and a certain amount of research, provides an admirably detailed and 
comprehensive survey of the botanical and biological studies of his time. Hegel 
often uses the book without referring to it. Treviranus's second great work was, 
'Die Erscheinungen und Gesetze des organischen Lebens' (2 vols. Bremen, 
1831-1833). 
The Hedysarum gyrans was discovered in the Dacca lowlands of Eastern 
Bengal in 1775, by Lady Monson (d. 1776), wife of George Monson (1730-
1776), the opponent of Warren Hastings.]. E. PoW (1746-1800) gave an account 
of the strange movements of its leaves in 'Vorlaufige Nachricht von einer bis 
jetzt noch unbekannten sich bewegenden Pflanze' ('Sammlungen der Physik und 
I 
257 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Naturgeschichte' Leipzig, 1779, vol. I p. 502), as did the younger Linnaeus 
(1741-1783) in his 'Supplementum plantarum' (Braunschweig, 1781): c£ 
'Memoires de l'Academie des sciences de Paris' 1784 p. 616; 'Vorlesungen der 
kurpfalzischen physikalisch-okonomischen Gesellschaft' (Mannheim, 1785, 
vol. I p. 391). 
At the beginning of book sixteen of 'Dichtung und Wahrheit', Goethe speaks 
of the consternation caused by our discovering an apparent exception to what 
we had accepted as a general law of nature, when we find for example that 
plants are not devoid of movement, and that the Hedysarum gyrans, ,ieine 
)sliittd)en oqne iicqtbate metanlaaung aUf unb niebetfenft unb mit lid) idbft 
tuie mit unieten )Segrlffen oU i.\Jiden fd)eine. 
50,12 
Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland (1762-1836), the well known doctor. Both his 
father and his grandfather were physicians in ordinary at the court of Weimar, 
and for ten years (1783-1793), he also lived in the town, making the acquaintance 
of Wieland, Herder, Goethe and Schiller. He moved first to Jena, and in 1798 
to Berlin, where he threw himself energetically into the organizing of hospital 
facilities for the poor. He was one of the most uncompromising opponents of 
the Brunonian system, and was one of the first to introduce Jenner's method of 
vaccination into Germany. 
Treviranus is here referring to his, 'Ueber die Bewegungen des Hedysarum 
gyrans und die Wirkung der Elektrizitat auf dasselbe', which appeared in J. H. 
Voigt's 'Magazin fur das Neueste aus der Physik und Naturgeschichte' (Gotha, 
1790, vol. VI pt. iii pp. 5-27). Hufeland discovered that when the leaves of the 
plant were touched by an electric spark, they would not move again until the 
following day, and that although a minute or two of continuous electrification 
would stimulate their movements, it would also bring about their death. ,Sa 
oum ~ftaunen tuat mit!\l oU feqen, tuie fo gat bet blaHe ~iebetfd)ein bet 
eonne auf eine oqngefiiqt 20 ed)titt entfemte Wlauet, ein ieqt beutHd)e!\l 
2{ufrld)ten bet )sliittet betuitfen lonnte .•. Biea id) ben ~ocu!\l be!\l eonnen-
Hd)t~ butd) ein )Stenngla!\l auf ba!\l )Slatt obet ben eitel faUen, fo tuat Me 
fd)on oben bemetfte oittembe )Setuegung im eonnenfd)ein bid ftiitfet.' (p. 12). 
50,22 
Treviranus had observed this movement in the zoospores of the 'Rivularia 
endiviaefolia R.' in 1803. J. P. Vaucher (1763-1841) in his 'Histoire des conferves 
d'eau douce' (Geneva, 1803), suggested that it was voluntary in nature, and 
J. Girod Chantrans (1750-1841), whose 'Recherches chimiques et micro-
scopiques sur les Conferves, Bysses, Tremelles' was published at Paris in 1802, 
and whose preliminary article on the subject (1797) is quoted by Treviranus, 
suggested that the movement might indicate the link between vegetable and 
animal being. 

NOTES 
For subsequent attempts to explain the movement see M. Mobius 'Geschichte 
der Botanik' (lena, 1937, pp. 75-76). 
51, 8 
Auguste Pyrame de Candolle (1778-1841) was born at Geneva. From 1798 
until 1808 he studied at Paris, where he made the acquaintance ofDesfontaines, 
Cuvier and Lamarck. From 1808 until 1816 he was professor of botany at 
Montpellier, and in these years he also travelled widely in Europe. 
In 1813 he published 'Theorie elementaire de la botanique', and in 1817 
'Systeme naturel des vegetaux'. These are his best known works, and by showing 
that the affInities of plants are to be sought by the comparative study of the form 
and development of organs (morphology), not of their functions (physiology), 
they did much to further the acceptance ofJussieu's natural system of classifica-
tion, and to prepare the way for Darwin. 
In 1816 a chair of botany was founded for him at Geneva, and he returned, 
for the rest of his life, to his native city. In 1824 he began the monumental 
'Prodromus systematis naturalis regni vegetabilis', which was continued by his 
son, and which had as its object the classification of all the known species of 
plants in accordance withJussieu's system. 
His account of the experiment mentioned by Hegel is to be found in 'Journal 
de Physique' vol. 52 p. 124. He discovered that the movements of the Convol-
vulus arvensis, Convolvulus Cneorum, Silene fructicosa and Mimosa leuco-
cephola were not affected by the artificial light, but that after three days of 
treatment, the Mimosa pudica was open at night and closed by day, and that it 
returned to its former rhythm once it was placed in the open again. He also 
discovered that artificial light at night lengthened the blossoming period of the 
Convolvulus purpureus, and caused the Anthemis maritima to stay open con-
tinuously. 
Linnaeus concerned himself with this phenomenon: see 'Dissertatio de somno 
plantarum, resp. P. Bremer' (Uppsala, 1755: Amoenitat. academic. vol. 4 p. 
333). John Hill (1716-1775) published his letter to Linnaeus on this subject as 
'The Sleep of plants and cause of Motion in the Sensitive Plant explained' 
(London, 1757, German tr. Nuremberg, 1768), and evidently inspired much of 
the subsequent research. Hill's conclusion was that, 'We know that in these 
experiments, light alone is the cause, we are therefore certain, that what is 
called the sleep of plants, is the effect of the absence oflight alone, and that their 
various intermediate states are owing to its different degrees' (op. cit. p. 21). C£ 
'Observations upon the sleep of plants, and an account of that faculty, which 
Linnaeus calls "Vigiliae florum'" (Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. vol. 50 p. 506) by R. 
Pulteney (1730-1801). 
51, 17 
Sigismund Hermbstadt (176<>-1833) was born in Erfurt, and trained as a 
259 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
doctor and pharmacist. In 1791 he was appointed professor of chemistry and 
pharmacy at the Berlin Collegium Medico-Chirurgicum, and in 1810 profes-
sor of chemistry and technology at the newly founded university of Berlin. 
He was interested in industrial chemistry, and published works on brewing, 
distillation and tobacco, and on improving the quality of soap. 
Hegel is evidently referring to his 'Dber die Fahigkeit der lebenden Pflanzen 
im Winter W1irme zu erzeugen' which was published in 'Der Gesellschaft 
Naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin. Magazin fiir die NeuestenEntdeckungen 
in der Gesammten Naturkunde' (vol. II pp. 316-319, Berlin, 1808). He de-
scribes experiments made with plane-trees in January 1796, in which he in-
vestigated the sugar content of their saps, and discovered that the saps were 
warmer than the air. He also discovered that although apples and pears remained 
the same temperature as the air surrounding them, beetroots, carrots, turnips 
and potatoes were somewhat warmer. He concludes, ,~ieneid)t f)iingt jene 
~iirme3eugenbe Shaft ber lebenben 
~egetabi1ien tlOn einer ltlirfHd)en 
ffieftJitatioMliif)igfeit betfe1ben ab, Itleld)e ber ffieltJitation ber %f)iere iif)nlid) 
ift? 1tle1d)e~ gleid)fan~ niif)er unterlud)t 3U Itlerben tJerbient'. 
John Hunter and Jean Senebier (1742-1809) also came to the conclusion that 
plants had power of generating heat: see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1775 p. I16; 
1778 pt. I p. 6: 'Journal de Physique' vol. 40 p. 173. 
51,24 
Cf. F. Tiedemann 'Physiologie des Menschen' (Darmstadt, 1830, p. 449). 
Those who wrote on this subject used the thermometric scales of Reaumur, 
Fahrenheit, Celsius and De Luc, so that when summarizing and comparing 
their arguments, it became usual to convert all the temperatures quoted to the 
Celsius scale. In this case - 5°R = 21°F = - 6°C: - 100R = 9°F = - 12°C: 
lOR = 34°F = 1·25°C. 
51,30 
Felice Fontana (1730-1805) was born at Pomarole in the Tyrol. He studied 
the humanities at Verona and Parma, and the sciences at Bologna and Padua. 
After fmishing his studies at Florence and Rome, the grand-duke of Tuscany 
appointed him professor of theoretical philosophy at the university of Pisa. 
He published a great number of works on physics, chemistry and physiology, 
his best known book being, 'Richerche filosofiche sopra la fisica animale' 
(Florence, 1775), in which he formulated the laws of animal irritability. A 
German translation was published at Leipzig in 1785. 
For thirty years he was curator of the museum of physics and natural history 
at Florence, and under his direction it became one of the most outstanding 
institutions of its kind in Europe. 
He wrote the article to which Treviranus refers in November 1804, and died 
only four months later, on March 9, 1805. It was published by Harless and 
260 

NOTES 
Ritter in their 'Neues Journal der ausHindischen medizinisch-chirurgischen 
Litteratur' vol. v pt. ii pp. 45-68, Erlangen, 1806). In order to discover whether 
or not plants had the power of producing heat, he placed them in a cellar, so 
that he could regulate and check their temperature, and some weeks later 
brought in fresh plants, ,3d) untetjud)te f)ierauf bieje l.l3f!an5en nad) einigen 
6tunben, ben gan5en ';tag f)inbutd), unb fanb nun, ba~ Me IDSiitme betjeIben 
genau mit bet lilliitme bet iibtigen aufgef)angenen ~egetabHien, Me jd)on feit 
mef)tete lillod)en in bem !rellet fid) befanben, iibeteinfamen; 5um ffaten 
lBettJew ba~ alle iibtigen l.l3f!an5en im !rellet ba~ nemltd)e ~etmogen beibef)alten, 
entttJebet if)te lilliitme 5U etf)aften, obet foId)e 5u et5eugen ... '!la~ tfubte-
fuftat bon mef)t aI~ 4600 ~etfud)en Me mit einet jo gto~en IDCenge begeta" 
bHijd)et 6ubftan5en bon jo betjd)iebenet Illrt im .8uftanbe 
if)te~ Beben~ 
angefteUt ttJotben Hnb, 
fe~t e~ boutommen 
au~et allen .8ttJeifeI, ba~ bie 
~egetabHien ba~ ~etmogen, lilliitme 5U eqeugen, nid)t befi~en, ttJeId)e~ ben 
ttJatmbIutigen ';tf)ieten beftimmt 5ufommt.' 
Schuebler and Halder, in their 'Ueber die Temperatur der Vegetabilien' 
(Tiibingen, 1826) agreed with Fontana that although plants are unable to 
generate heat, they are certainly able to conduct it from the earth. 
51,37 
Arum Maculatum, i.e. the Common Arum, native of all except the most 
northern parts of Europe. 
52, 3 
Jean Senebier (1742-1809) gives an account of this generation of heat by the 
Arum maculatum in his 'Physiologie vegetale' (Geneva, 1800) vol. iii p. 314. 
J. B. Bory de St. Vincent (1780-1846), in his 'Voyage dans les quatre principales 
lIes des mers d'Afrique' (Paris, 1804) vol. ii p. 66, mentions the generation of 
heat by the Arum cordifolium, and the fact that the male parts of its blossom 
become warmer than the female. In the instance of this recorded by St. Vincent, 
the temperature rose from 23'33°C to 56.67°C in the male parts. 
N. T. de Saussure (r767-r845) investigated this phenomenon, and came to 
the conclusion that it was the rapid combination of oxygen with the carbon of 
the plant which gave rise to the generation of heat (' Annales de chimie et 
physique' vol. 2r Nov. r822 p. 286). 
John Murray (1786-r851) showed that the colour of a flower has an effect 
upon its temperature ('Experimental Researches' Glasgow, r826, p. 9). 
This reference to Link's 'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der 
Pflanzen' is somewhat misleading, as Link is referring to the Arum italicum in 
the passage quoted. 
52,8 
Mesembryanthemum Crystallinum, 'This plant is an annual, and is distin-
guished by its leaves and stalks, being closely covered with pellucid pimples 
261 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
full of moisture, which when the sun shines on them reflect the light, and appear 
like small bubbles of ice; whence it has been called by some the Ice Plant, and 
by others the Diamond Plant.' Thomas Green 'The Universal Herbal' (2 vols. 
2nd ed. London, 1824) vol. II p. II8. 
52, II 
C£ §§ 354 and 364. 
52, 34 
Friedrich Kasimir Medicus (1736-1808) was born at Grumbach in the 
Rhineland. He studied medicine at Tubingen, Strassburg and Heidelberg, and 
in 1758 settled in Mannheim as a general practitioner. 
He published several important medical works, including 'Sammlung von 
Beobachtungen aus der Arzneywissenschaft' (Zurich, 1764-1766), and 'Vorle-
sung von der Lebenskraft' (Mannheim, 1774), but through his friendship with 
J. G. Kolreuter (1733-1806), who was supervisor of the court gardens at 
Karlsruhe, he also developed an interest in botany. 
In 1763 he became a member of the Palatinate Academy of Sciences. In 
1765 he started a botanical garden at Mannheim, but during the French occupa-
tion of the town in 1794, and the subsequent Austrian counter-offensive in 
1795, it was destroyed. 
The reference here is to his 'Pflanzen-physiologische Abhandlungen. Von 
Friedrich Kasimir Medicus. Erstes Bandchen. Fortpflanzung der pflanzen 
durch Saamen. Erzeugung des Saamens.' (Leipzig, 1803) p. 29, ,mud) bei 
bet Sfiiqlung finb biefe )Bliitqen (Cistus helianthemum) am tei&batften, bei 
ttocfnet unb ftadet .\)i~e qingegen giin&lid), unb ~u allen Seiten unem+,finbIid). 
)Bei bet ftaden .\)i~e, hie wit &u mnfange unb in bet WHtte be£l ,3uniu£l 1773 
qatten, lonnte id) &u feinet %ageftunbe nut hie getingfte )Bewegung waqt~ 
neqmeni ba abet mit ben 20ften ,3uniu£l qeftige£l ffiegenwettet einfiel, etwad)te 
biefe ffiei&badeit auf einmal, unb &eigte fid) in iqtet gtofjten etiide.' C£ loco cit. 
p. 139 et seq. 
53, II 
On the Dionaea muscipula, see J. Ellis (1710-1776), 'Directions for bringing 
over Seeds and Plants from the East Indies' (London, 1770); 'Dionaea muscipula 
descripta' (Nov. Act. Societat. Upsaliens. vol. i p. 98). 
On the Oxalis sensitiva, see G. E. Rumphius (1627-1602), 'Herbarium 
amboinense' (ed. Burmann, 6 vols. Amsterdam, 1741-1755; vol. v p. 302); and 
'Phil. Trans. Roy.' Soc. 1729, vol. 36 p. 377. 
On the Averrhoa carambola, see R. Bruce, 'An account of the sensitive 
quality of the tree Averrhoa carambola' ('Phil. Trans. Roy.' Soc. 1785, vol.75 
pt. ii p. 356). 

NOTES 
53, 12 
Heinrich Friedrich Link (1767-1851) was born at Hildesheim, and studied 
the natural sciences at Gottingen, where J. F. Blumenbach (1752-1840) was his 
tutor. In 1792 he was appointed professor of natural history at Rostock. He 
was interested in Kant, and for some years his writings had a distinctly philo-
sophical bent. His 'Ueber die Leiter der Natur' (1794) touches upon many of the 
ideas taken up by Hegel in 'Die Naturphilosophie', and in 'Ueber Naturphiloso-
phie' (1806) and 'Natur und Philosophie, ein Versuch' (18II) he shows that he 
continued to concern himself with the problems involved in a philosophical 
interpretation of the natural sciences, although he never advanced much 
beyond the Kantian position. 
From 1797 until 1799 he travelled extensively in France, Spain and Portugal, 
and wrote an account of his journeyings (Eng. tr. by J. Hinckley, 'Travels in 
Portugal and through France and Spain' London, 1801). In 18II he was ap-
pointed professor of botany at Breslau, and in 1815 professor of natural history 
at Berlin. As his interest in philosophy waned, he turned to history as a means of 
synthesizing knowledge, and expressed this change of view in a popular form 
in his 'Die Urwelt und das Altertum, erlautert durch die Naturkunde' (1820-
1822). In his old age he came to regard inductive empiricism as the only sound 
means of grasping philosophical truths. He expressed this view in 'Philo-
sophie der gesunden Vernunft' (1850), and near the end of his life, in a private 
conversation with his friend K. F. P. Martius (1794-1868), he said proudly 
but not with complete accuracy, '3d) bin fiinWg ga'f)re lang ben inbuttiben 
~eg gegangen.' 
Hegel is here referring to his 'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie 
der Pflanzen' (Gottingen, 1807). Despite improvements in the microscope, 
very few advances in the sphere of plant anatomy had been made during the 
eighteenth century, and in the early years of the nineteenth century, phytoto-
mists still knew very little about the nature and functions of the vascular 
structure of plants; attempts were made to ascribe a circulation to the sap, and 
the plant's vessels were therefore regarded as being analogous to the veins and 
lymphatic vessels of animal bodies. There was in fact no clear understanding 
of the structure, origin and function of these vessels, and in 1804 therefore, the 
Royal Academy of Sciences at Gottingen decided to invite prize-essays on the 
following subject, 'Although it has generally been accepted that plants are 
truly vascular in structure, some modern physiologists have denied this. A 
fresh microscopical investigation should be made therefore, either in order to 
confirm the observations of Malpighi, Grew, Duhamel, Mustel and Hedwig, 
or to demonstrate that the simpler organization of plants differs from that of 
the animal kingdom, and that it has its origin either in incomposite and dis-
tinct fibres and threads (Medicus), or in cellular and tubular tissue (Mirbel).' 
Link's 'Grundlehren' and Rudolphi's 'Anatomie der Pflanzen' were awarded 
the prize, although they contradicted one another on several important points, 
263 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
whereas L. C. Treviranus's 'Vom inwendigen Bau der Gewachse', which most 
botanists would now consider to have been the best of these essays, was awarded 
a mere 'proxime accessit'. 
In this work Link denies that receptacles such as the lactiferous and resini-
ferous ducts are vessels, and regards only the ducts in wood as being vascular. 
He notes that cells containing coloured sap occur between colourless cells, and 
concludes from this that the cells are sealed. With regard to the relationship 
between cells, threads and vessels, he comes to the conclusion that all these parts 
originate in the cellular tissue. Although he has no doubt that the threads 
develop from cells, he has no very clear conception of the way in which cells 
give rise to vessels. 
53,27 
Charles Franr;:ois Brisseau de Mirbe1 (1776-1854) was professor at the Sor-
bonne, and Napoleon's 'Director of gardens and conservatories.' Rene Louiche 
Desfontaines (1750-1833) travelled for two years in north west Africa and 
discovered more than three hundred new plants, which he described in his 
'Flora Atlantica' (2 vols. Paris, 1798). 
Mirbel's account ofDesfontaines' experience occurs in his 'Histoire naturelle, 
generale et particuliere des plantes' (vol. i pp. 263-264, Paris, 1802), 'Le hasard 
a rendu Ie celebre Desfontaines temoin d'un phenomene tres singulier; il 
etoit en voiture et transportait d'un lieu dans un autre un pied de sensitive; Ie 
mouvement communique a la plante fit d' abord fermer toutes les feuilles, mais 
elles se rouvrirent insensiblement et ne se fermerent plus pendant la route, 
comme si elles se fussent accountumees au balancement de la voiturc.' 
54,9 
Goethe's 'Versuch die Metamorphose der Pflanzen zu erklaren' was first 
published at Gotha in 1790, and then re-issued, together with other related 
writings, in his 'Zur Morphologie' (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1817). The 
'Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher' has recently published a critical 
edition of these works: 'Goethe, die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' (vols. 
viii, ix, x, ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962, 1954, 1964). 
Goethe said that because of the opposition to which it stimulated him, the 
'Philosophia botanica' of Linnaeus (1751, Eng. tr. 'The elements of Botany' 
H. Rose, London, 1775), had the greatest influence upon his intellectual de-
velopment after the writings of Shakespeare and Spinoza, 'For the innermost 
necessity of my being made it imperative, that what he had tried forcibly to 
keep apart, should tend towards unity.' 
The general argument of the 'Metamorphosis of Plants' is not easy to 
follow, for while Goethe agrees with C. F. Wolff(1733-1794) in regarding the 
plant as a development from a basic leaf, he also thinks of it as a variation of a 
basic plant-type. He probably formulated his 'category of metamorphosis' by 
264 

NOTES 
asking himself how it is that such a variety of living forms, ranging from the 
minutest mosses to the greatest trees, may be regarded as having a common 
factor, and coming to the conclusion that as all these forms have leaves, the 
leaf must constitute the basic organ of plant-life. 
Goethe's great contribution to botany consists, as Hegel notes, in his having 
treated the plant as a living and developing unity (cf. M. Mobius 'Geschichte 
der Botanik' Jena, 1937 p. 150). 
Literature in English on this subject is limited, but the following works will 
be found to be useful:-'Essay on the Metamorphosis of plants. By J. W. von 
Goethe' tr. E. M. Cox ed. M. T. Masters in 'The Journal of Botany' ed. B. 
Seemann vol. I pp. 327-345 and 360-374 (London, 1863): M. T. Masters 
'Vegetable Morphology' ('British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review' 
vol. xxix pp. 202-218, Jan. 1862): W. Whewell 'History of the inductive 
sciences' vol. III pp. 433-441 (Cambridge, 1837): W. Darlington 'An essay on 
... plants; compiled chiefly from the writings of ... Goethe' (West Chester 
Pa., 1839): K. Goebel 'The fundamental problems of present day plant mor-
phology' ('Science' N. S. vol. xxii no. 550 pp. 33-45, July, 1905): B. Hayata 
'An interpretation of Goethe's Blatt in his "Metamorphose der Pflanzen'" 
(Tokyo, 1921): W. B. Crow 'Contributions to the principles of morphology' 
(London, 1929). 
54,25 
,~s trttt ein l.l3unft ein, tuo bie ~erforgung ber ~ermitt1ung, es fet) in dyemif" 
dyer ober in ~eife medyanifdyer ~mmii~1ic~feit(graduality), abgebrodyen unh 
unmo glidy tuirb'. 
55,8 
See Schelling, 'Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie' (1799, 
Schellings Werke ed. M. Schroter vol. ii p. 253, Munich, 1958). ,stliefe 
,3bentitiit ber @)enfibmtiit unb bes IDCagnetismus in ~nje~ung i~ter 
Urfadye \)orausgefe~t, jo mU)3 ber IDCagnetismus, ebenfo tuie hie @)enfi" 
bmtiit bM j8eftimmenbe arrer otganifdyen 5rtiifte, bas j8eftim .. 
menbe arret bt)namifdyen 5rriifte fet)n/ 
55,29 
Albrecht Wilhelm Roth (1757-1834) was born at Dotlingen in Oldenburg. 
He was the son of a clergyman, and it was his father who first interested him in 
botany. In 1775 he began to study medicine at Halle, and after taking his 
doctorate at Erlangen in 1778, he settled down as a general practitioner at 
Vegesack on the Weser, not far from Bremen. 
He interested himself in the improvement of science instruction in the 
schools ('Ueber die Art und Nothwendigkeit, Naturgeschichte auf Schulen zu 
behandeln' Nuremberg, 1779), looked after a busy practice with great efficiency, 
1* 
265 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
botanized energetically in the surrounding countryside, and developed a small 
botanical garden for himself. 
'Tentamen florae Germanicae', which is his main work, was published in 
three parts at Leipzig between 1788 and 1801. As a result of this book he was 
offered professorships at Jena and Erlangen, but as he could not bring himself 
to leave his garden, he refused them, and ended his days at Vegesack. 
He made a number of important discoveries, being the first to note, for 
example, that the Drosera rotundifolia is insectivorous (1782). He did important 
work on the classification of aquatic Cryptogamia, being the first to apply the 
word 'Algae' to the class of plants to which it now refers (1797), and to defme 
the genus Batrachospermum (1800), which Linnaeus had classified as a Fucus. 
His definition of the genus Ceramium, which Treviranus refers to here, is 
to be found in his 'Catalecta Botanica quibus plantae novae et minus cognitae 
describuntur atque illustrantur'. (Fasc. primus, Leipzig, 1797 pp. 154-156). 
Roth also published a short survey of this work in German, 'Bemerkungen 
fiber das Studium der cryptogamischen Wassergewachse' (Hanover, 1797, see 
PP·33-36). 
56,18 
Treviranus cites Roth's Conferva scalaris as evidence of this, ,~er 5.8Hbung 
biefer Q':t)et obet eamentornet nun gegt ein goef)ft metfttJiitbige~ ~giinomen, 
bie (£onjugation obet (£o~ulation bet (£onfetben, borget. @egen hie Beit 
negmlief), ttJo fief) jene ijruef)tteime bilben ttJollen, fef)ttJiUt hie (£onferbe etttJa~ 
an, unb au~ ben ein&elnen @Hebern betfe1ben fef)ieflen an ben eeiten fur&e, 
offenftegenbe ffiogten get bot. metmittelft hiefet ffiogten bereinigt fief) jener 
~aHetfaben mit dner anbern (£onfetbe, hie ebenfall~ mit folef)en eeiten~ 
cantHen b etf eg en ift.' 
In the Chlorophyceae group of algae, the subdivision Conjugatae effects 
reproduction solely by means of conjugation. 
56, 30 
Treviranus took this account of the Tillandsia usneoides from E. A. W. 
Zimmermann's translation of 'Travels through North and South Carolina, 
Georgia, Elst and West Florida' etc. (Philadelphia, 1791), by William Bartram 
(1739-1823). Zimmermann's translation appeared in volume ten of the 'Magazin 
von merkwfirdigen neuen Reisebeschreibungen' (Berlin, 1793). 
Francis Harper has recently published an excellent edition of 'The Travels of 
William Bartram' (Yale Univ. Press, 1958). 
While describing his journey along the eastern side of St. John's River 
Florida, B.lrtram writes (Zimmermann p. 88, Harper p. 56), 'The long moss, 
so called (Tillandsea usneascites)'-Zimmermann standardizes the Latin-'is 
a singular and surprising vegetable production: it grows from the limbs and 
266 

NOTES 
twigs of all trees in these southern regions, from N.lat. 35 down as far as 28, 
and I believe everywhere within the tropics. Wherever it fixes itself, on a 
limb, or branch, it spreads into short and intricate divarications; these in time 
collect dust, wafted by the wind, and which, probably by the moisture it 
absorbs, softens the bark and sappy part of the tree, about the roots of the plant, 
and renders it more fit for it to establish itself; and from this small beginning, 
it increases, by sending downwards and obliquely, on all sides, long pendant 
branches, which divide and subdivide themselves ad infinitum. It is common to 
find the spaces betwixt the limbs oflarge trees, almost occupied by this plant; 
it also hangs waving in the wind, like streamers, from the lower limbs, to a 
length of fifteen or twenty feet, and of bulk and weight more than several men 
could carry; and in some places, cart loads of it are lying on the ground, torn 
off, by the violence of the wind. Any part of the living plant, torn off and 
caught, in the limbs of a tree, will presently take root, and grow and increase, 
in the same degree of perfection, as if it has sprung up from the seed.' 
57,4 
Louis Marie Aubert Dupetit-Thouars (1758-1831) was a native of Anjou. 
He was educated at a military academy, and at sixteen joined the regular army 
as a second lieutenant. The revolution unsettled him. In 1792 he was held in 
custody for six weeks by the local authorities at Quimper, who had found him 
botanizing in the district, and had regarded this activity with suspicion. 
In September 1792 he fled the country, and spent the next ten years 'aug-
mentant sans cesse son herbier' on Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands. 
When he arrived back in France in September 1802, he brought a collection of 
over two thousand species with him. He was appointed director of a nursery 
in Paris in 1807, and published several books on his work abroad, 'Histoire des 
vegetaux recueilles dans les iles de France, de Bourbon et de Madagascar' 
(Paris, 1804); 'Esquisse de la flore de Tristan d' Acugna, precedes de la descrip-
tion de cette tie, avec 15 planches et une carte' (Paris, 1815). He never systema-
tized his work with any thoroughness, but he was highly thought of by several 
British botanists, including T. A. Knight (1759-1838) and John Lindley (1799-
1865). 
The development of the annual rings was very imperfectly understood at 
this time. C. F. Wolff(1733-1794) had attempted to explain their formation by 
postulating the growth of threads passing down from the new leaves and then 
combining to form these zones of new wood. The explanation of them offered 
by Dupetit-Thouars and c. A. Agardh (1785-1859), and assumed here by 
Willdenow, was even more fantastic. J. N. La Hire (1685-1727) had first 
formulated it in 'Memoires de l' Academie des Sciences' 1719. Dupetit-Thouars 
drew upon La Hire's work, and expressed his own views on the subject in 
'Essais sur la Vegetation consideree dans Ie developpement des Bourgeons' 
(paris, 1809). He defended them in 'Histoire d'un Morceau de Bois' (Paris, 
267 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
1815). He evidently thought that the new wood was formed by 'root-fibres' 
passing down from the buds. 
It was not until the middle of the nineteenth century that any clear concep-
tion of the function of the cambium in the formation of new wood was arrived 
at. See M. Mobius 'Geschichte der Botanik' (jena, 1937, pp. 216-219). 
57,10 
Willdenow noticed it in Robina Pseudacacia, which had had twigs of 
Robinia viscosa grafted upon it. He is evidently referring here to Link's 'Grund-
lehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der Pflanzen' (Nachtrage i p. 50), ,Q':ben 
fo bet) $totlfteifetn 3-ltJild)en bem ~ol3-e be£l orten 6tomme£l unb bem $totl~ 
fteiie ItJOt eine neue 6d)id)t bon $otend)t)m gebi1bet ltJotben, botubet ltJor 
bo£l 
~013- be£l $totlfteiie£l fJingeltJod)ien unb hie ffiinbe be£l orten 6tommes 
umf1eibete bo£l @on3-e.' 
57, 14 
Georg Andrea Agricola (1672-1738) was born and died in Regensburg, 
where he practised as a doctor. He made a great deal of money by advertising 
his skill in grafting and propagating plants from buds and roots, and claimed 
to have discovered a vegetable mummy (consisting largely of copal and 
turpentine) which with the aid of fire, would cause trees to sprout forth at the 
rate of sixty an hour. 
Willdenow is here referring to his, 'Neu- und nie erhorter, doch in der 
Natur und Vernunft wohlgegriindeter Versuch der universal Vermehrung 
aller Baume, Stauden, und Blumen- Gewachse, das erste mahl theoretice als 
practice experimentiret' (Regensburg, 1716), in which he gives an account of 
his 'skills'. The book is well-produced and printed, and supplied with well-
executed plates: see R. Bradley's Eng. tr. 'The Experimental Husbandman and 
Gardener' (London, 1721). 
57,14 
Thomas Barnes was gardener to William Thomson Esq., at Elsham just 
north of Brigg in Lincolnshire. In 1758 he published, 'A New Method of 
propagating fruit-trees and flowering shrubs from their parts: Whereby the 
common kinds may be raised more expeditiously; and several curious exotics 
increased, which will not take root from cuttings or layers. Confirmed by 
successful and repeated experience.' (London, published by R. Baldwin at 
IS 6d). Three editions of the pamphlet had appeared by 1762. 
Barnes mentions that it was John Hill (1716-1775) who proposed the ex-
periments he describes. Although Hill was never elected fellow of the Royal 
Society, and although his appointment as superintendent of the Royal Gardens 
at Kew was never confirmed, he was an industrious and learned botanist. He 
evidently knew of Agricola's book, because Barnes mentions it when describing 
the preparation of the mummy. 
268 

NOTES 
The preparation of this vegetable mummy was an important part of the 
whole procedure, 'Melt together, in a large earthen pipkin, two pound and a 
half of common pitch, and half a pound of turpentine. When they are melted, 
put in three quarters of an ounce of powder of aloes; stir them all together, and 
then set the matter on fire; ... November the third, 1757, I took off four 
dozen leaves of the common Laurel, with the Bud entire in the bosom of each 
leaf; and everything being in readiness, I cut the wounded part smooth, 
wiped it dry, and covered it with some of the dressing ... I planted them in 
four pretty large pots, one dozen in each. The mould in these pots was made 
extremely fine; and I planted them by making very small openings, and letting 
in the base of the leaf just so far that the top of the bud !night not be wholly 
excluded from the benefit of the air.' He mentions similar experiments with 
White Poplars and Common and White Willow. 
57,23 
This apple was named after the village of Borsdorf, which is situated on the 
river Parthe a few miles to the east of Leipzig. A. F. A. Diel (1756-1833), in 
his 'Ueber die Anlegung einer Obstorangerie in Scherben und die Vegetation 
der Gewachse' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1798, p. 459) distinguishes between three 
varieties of Borsdorfer, largely on account of their periods of ripening. 
Eduard Lucas (1816-1882), who founded the pomological institute at 
Reutlingen, and whose system of pomology replaced Diel's, classified Bors-
dorfers as the ninth of his fifteen classes of apples; see 'Die Lehre vom Obstbau' 
(1St ed. 1844/5, 8th ed. 1898). 
The apple is a very fine German Rennet; it is a good keeper, and has a firm 
aromatic flesh. 
58, 13 
Lilium bulbiferum, the Bulb-bearing or Orange Lily, is found wild in Austria 
and the south of Europe, Siberia and Japan. It may be increased without 
digging up the plants, by means of the little bulbs that grow in plenty on the 
axils of the leaves. 
Poa Bulbosa or Bulbous Meadow Grass is found in Sweden, Germany, 
Spain and North Africa. In England it is found only on sandy sea-coast, over 
which its little dry bulbs are blown in summer, until the autumn rains make 
them vegetate and take root. 
Bryophyllum calycinum was sometimes known as the Cotyledon calycina. 
Oken, in his 'Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte' (pt. ii sect. ii p. 851 (Jena), 1826) 
has the following note on it, ,3nfel 9Rotitcr, feit furcrem in aUen @iitien unb 
.8immern; 2-3 ~ufl 'f)od), mit bteiten ~ettbliittern, ttJelc'f)e bas Q:igent'f)iimHc'f)e 
'f)aben, bafl !:lie Stetbelt, ttJo fie nut Me Q:tbe betu'f)ten, m3Utcrel fc'f)lagen unb 3U 
dnet neuen ~flancre ttJetben.' 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
58,14 
Agostino Mandirola (d. 1661) was born at Castelfidardo, a picturesque 
fortified town in the Italian province of Ancona. The date of his birth is un-
known. He was a doctor of theology and a conventual, that is to say, a Franciscan 
following a mitigated form of the ru1es of his order. Like most of the botanists 
and horticulturalists of his day, he was also interested in the medicinal properties 
of plants. Little is known of him, see however Giovanni Cinelli (1625-1706) 
'Biblioteca volante di Gio' (ed. Sancassani, 4 vols. Venice, 1734-1747) vol. iii 
p. 249: G. Panelli 'Memorie d'uomini illustri del Piceno' (Ascoli, 1757-1758): 
'Novelle letterarie' (1759), col. 329: 'Miscellanea Francescana di storia, di 
lettere, di arti' (1926) pp. 88-89: P. A. Saccardo 'La botanica in Italia' (2 vols. 
Venice, 1895-1901) vol. i p. 101: C. Trinci 'L'Agricoltore' (Venice, 1796). 
He was evidently the first to propagate orange and lemon trees from leaves, 
and he gave an account of the method he used in a well-written and widely 
read book, 'Manuale di giardinieri. I. il modo di connoscere e coltivare Ii 
fiori di bu1bi piu rari, 2. la cu1tura delli fiori de radiche piu rigardevoli, 3. il 
modo di cultivare gli agrumi.' (Vicenza, 1652). 
Further editions of the book were published at Macerata (1658), Vicenza 
(1661), Venice (1675 and 1684), and Roveredo (1733). A French translation 
also appeared, 'Manuel du jardinier ... par Sieur Mandirola, traduit sur l' ori-
ginal italien' (tr. M. Raudi, Paris, 1765). There are two German translations, the 
first published at Nuremberg in 1670, and the second, which is a great improve-
ment on its predecessor, nine years later: see 'Der Italiiinische Blumen- und 
Pomeranzen- Garten. F. Agustini Mandirolae. Nunmehro zum andern mal in 
unserer Mutter-Sprache aufgelegt, und mit Anmerkungen und schonen 
Figuren ausgezieret' (tr. W.A.S.U.R., Nuremberg, 1679). 
The account of this method of propagation occurs in book iii ch. v (p. 374) 
of this second German edition, 'I put the best earth through a fine sieve and 
filled a tub with it. Taking the stalked leaves of these trees, I planted them in the 
tub so as to leave about two-thirds of their length above ground. I then 
filled a small pitcher with water, and placed it so that the drops should fall, in 
the abovementioned manner, into the middle of the tub. As soon as the drops 
had worn out a hole, I was careful to fill it again with fresh earth. In this way 
I not only obtained saplings easily, but also saplings with fine shoots.' 
Link knew of Mandirola's book from 'Versuch einer Griindlichen Erliiuter-
ung der Merckwurdigsten Begebenheiten in der Natur' (Marburg, 1735) by 
1. P. Thummig (1697-1728). Chapter seventeen of this work treats 'Of trees, 
which are propagated from leaves': see especially pp. 108-9, where Thummig 
specifies the process into propagation from buds, stalks and calluses. 
58,34 
Goethe analyzes the reception of this book in the following way ('Zur 
Morphologie' 1817, p. 66), ,'Ila5 lEublitum ftu~te: benn nad) feinem m!unfd) 
270 

NOTES 
fid) gut unb gleid)fotmig vebient ijU fe~en, betlangt es an jebcn baa et in feinem 
~ad) vleive unb biefes mnfinnen ~at aud) guten @tunb: benn lUet bas mot .. 
tteffHd)c leiften lUiU, lUeld)es nad) aUen Sciten ~ht unenbHd) ift, foU es nid)t, 
lUie @ott unb bie matu! 1U0~( t~un biltfen, aUf mandJetlet) 1roegen betfud)en. 
'lla~et lUiU man baa ein ;talent bas fid) in einem gelUiffen ~elb ~ettJoti~at, 
beffen mti unb 1roeife aUgemein anetfannt unb veHevet ift, aui3 feinem Sl'teife 
fid) nid)t cntfeme, obet lUo~1 gat in einem lUeit aogelegenen ~iniioetf+>tinge. 
1roagt es einet, fo lUeia man i~m feinen 'llanf, ja man gelUii~ti i~m, lUenn et 
es aud) ted)t mad)t, feinen oefonbem >Bet)faU.' On pp. 69-79 and II7-127 he 
gives an account of its subsequent fate. 
J. Sachs ('Geschichte der Botanik' Munich, 1875 pp. 168-172) regards 
Goethe's botanical writings as somewhat muddled, but since the appearance 
of A. Hansen's 'Metamorphose der Pflanze' (Giessen, 1907): G. Lakon's 'Goethe's 
physiologische ErHirung der Pflanzenmetamorphose' (Beiheften zum Bot. 
Zbl., vol. 38, ii, 1921): J. Schuster's annotated edition of'Versuch die Meta-
morphose der Pflanzen zu erkHiren' (Berlin, 1924): W. Troll's 'Goethe's 
morphologische Schriften' (jena, 1926): and D. Kuhn's edition of the morpho-
logical works (Weimar, 1954, 1962, 1964), a fuller understanding of his sig-
nificance as a botanist has become possible. 
59,9 
'Zur Morphologie' (1817 cd.), ,So lUie lUi! nun bie tJetfd)iebenen fd)einenben 
Dtgane bet f+>toffenben unb vlii~enben l.lSf{anije aUe aus einem ein5igen ne~mlid) 
bem 58latte, lUeld)es fid) gelUo~nlid) an jebem Sl'noten entlUidelt, ijU etfliiten 
gefud)t ~aven; fo ~aven lUit aud) biejenigen ~tiid)te, lUeld)e i~te Samen feft 
in fid) ijU bctfd)Hefjen +>f{egen, aus bet 58lattgeftalt ~et5uleiten gelUagt' (p. 59) ... 
1roenn alfo aUe ;t~eile bet l.lSf{an5e, ben Stengel ausgenommen, auf bie ~otm 
bes 58lattes ijU!iidgefii~ti lUetben fonnen, unb nic1)ts alS 9JCobification betfelven 
finb: fo etgieVi fid) leid)t, bafj bie @enetationst~eorie bet l.lSf{an5en nid)t fe~t 
fd)lUet ijU entlUideln ift; unb 5u9leid) ift bet 1roeg ve5eid)net, ben man einfd)lagen 
mua, lUenn man biefe ;t~eorie Hefem lUiU' (pp. 85-86). 
59,29 
Willdenow says that the richness of the soil is the deciding factor here, 
not cultivation as such, ,58imen, (Wtonen unb me~tete @elUiid)fe ~aven in 
mageten >Boben 'llomen, bie fid) in fettetem tJetlieten.' Link, in his edition 
of the book (1821), questions this fact, and this probably accounts for Hegel's 
modification of Willdenow's statement. 
61,7 
The Sorbus Hybrida is the Bastard Service, or Mountain Ash. The Sorbus 
Aucuparia is the Mountain Service or Rowan Tree. The name Aucuparia 
originated from the fact that the German fowlers of Hege1' s day used the 
271 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
berries of this tree to bait the springes or nooses of hair with which they en-
trapped Redwings and Fieldfares (see the note on III. 340). 
61,9 
Friedrich Joseph Schelver (1778-1832) was born at Osnabriick, and studied 
medicine at Gottingen, where he graduated in 1798 with a thesis 'De irrita-
bilitate'. He then returned to his home town, and worked as a general practi-
tioner until 1802, when he became a private tutor at Halle. In 1803 he was 
appointed professor of philosophy at Jena, where he remained until 1806, and 
where he must have become acquainted with Hegel. In 1806 he took up the 
appointment of professor of medicine at Heidelberg, where he remained for 
the rest of his life. He was director of the Heidelberg botanical garden from 
I8II until 1827. 
Early in his career he produced several works on entomology and also inter-
ested himself in the writings of Schelling and Oken, but after his move to 
Heidelberg, he concerned himself almost exclusively with botanical studies. 
During his stay at Jena, he persuaded Goethe that the formation of pollen has 
nothing to do with fertilization, but although this opinion fitted in well with 
Goethe's theory of metamorphosis, it was so unorthodox that he asked 
Schelver not to publish the fact that he had begun to question the doctrine of 
the sexuality of plants. 
Schelver felt at liberty to express his views once he had left Jena however, 
and did so in his 'Kritik der Lehre von den Geschlechtern der Pflanzen' (Heidel-
berg, 1812), to which he added two supplements (Karlsruhe, 1814 and 1823). 
His doctrine was championed by his son-in-law August Wilhelm Henschel 
(1790-1856) in 'Von der Sexualitat der Pflanzen' (Breslau, 1820). 
61,10 
The following passage was based largely on Goethe's observation of the 
Stinking Hellebore (Helleborus foetidus). 
61,29 
Goethe gives 'Folia floria' as the Latin equivalent. 
63,29 
Four species of the genus Sarracenia were known at that time, the Sarracenia 
Flava, Minor, Rubra, and Purpurea. See Thomas Green 'The Universal Herbal' 
(2 vols. 2nd ed. London, 1824) vol. II p. 529. 
63,38 
Hermann Friedrich Autenrieth (1799-1874) was the son of]. H. Autenrieth 
(1772-1835), chancellor of Tiibingen university. He was educated at Stuttgart 
Grammar School, and in 1816 began his medical studies at Tiibingen. As early 
as October 1816, he had an article, 'Observations on some cases of deafness, 
272 

NOTES 
with the means of removing them', published in the Edinburgh Medical and 
Surgical Journal (vol. 12 pp. 498-500). Hegel quotes from his doctoral thesis, 
'De Discrimine Sexuali Jam In Seminibus Plantarum Dioi:carum Apparente 
Praemio Regio Ornata. Additis De Sexu plantarum Argumentis Generalibus' 
(Tiibingen, 1821), and as he makes his own translation of Autenrieth's Latin, 
it may be of interest to give the original. 
'In antherarum quidem formatione foliolorum margines per longitudinem 
introrsum convolvebantur, ita ut duplex idemque cavus primum cylindrus 
exoriretur, in quo medio perspicue saepe unum folioli calcini marginum, non 
mutatum, longitudine decurrere conspexi (xi et xii), cujusque apici fasciculus 
pilorum impositus erat (xiii), qui certe ex incremento lanae folioli calcini 
originem ducebat. Verum simul ac anthera magis ad perfectum statum accedebat 
et pulposa materia repleri coepit, fasciculus ille, sensim exarescens, postremo 
decidit, anthera justam legitimamque conditionem tunc adepta (xiv). 
Similis, quamvis minus perspicua, mutatio quoque in germinis stili que 
formatione apparuit, cum foliola calicina, et saepe quidem plura (xvi) invicem 
connata, ex margine introrsum arcuarentur (xv); quo facto simplex modo 
cavitas orta est, posthac in ovarium mutata. Pilorum autem ille fasciculus, 
cavitatis apici impostus, idemque solidi ore telae cellulosae obturamento a 
primitiarum germinis cavitate separatus, non, ut in antheris, exaruit, sed, 
prolongatus, perfecti stigmatis naturam assecutus est (xv et xvi).' The numerals 
refer to six of the diagrams on plate one of this book; the quotation occurs on 
pages 29-30. 
Immediately after taking his doctorate, Autenrieth left for the Low Coun-
tries and Great Britain. He contributed another article to the Edinburgh 
Medical and Surgical Journal (vol. 18 pp. 325-34,July, 1822), 'On the sporadic 
abdominal typhus of young people', and collected material for his, 'Ueber-
sicht iiber die Volkskrankheiten in Grossbritannien, mit Hinweisung auf ihre 
Ursachen und die daraus entstehenden Eigenthiimlichkeiten der englischen 
Heilkunde' (Tiibingen, 1823; reviewed in Edin. Med. and Surg. Journal vol. 
23,PP· 308-35, 182~. 
In 1823 he became a private tutor in medicine at Tiibingen, and in 1834 
just before the death of his father, he was appointed to a professorship at the 
university, where he continued to teach until he retired on account of illness in 
1859. During his teaching period at Tiibingen he wrote numerous articles and 
books on medical subjects, and edited his father's 'Ansichten iiber Natur-und 
Seelenleben' (Tiibingen, 1836). 
64,35 
'Versuch die Metamorphose der Pflanzen zu erklaren' (Gotha, 1790, p. 3), 
,SJie tegelmiif3ige ID1etamot+,~oie, fiinnen tuit aud) bie fottfd)teitenbe 
nennen: benn fie ift e£l, tueld)e fid) tJon ben etften 6amenoliittetn oi£l 5ut 
le~ten mu£loilbung bet tytud)t immet ftufentueife tuitffam oemetfen liif3t, uno 
273 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
butd) UmtoanbIung einet &eftalt in hie anbete, gleid)fam auf einet geiftigen 
£eitet, 3U jenem &i~fel bet matut, bet ~ott~flan3ung butd) 3toet) &e\d)led)tet 
~inauf fteige. 
This passage shows to what extent Hegel's overall view of botanical pheno-
mena coincided with Goethe's. 
66,8 
Cf. 'Faust' pt. I lines 1936-1939: the study scene, where the student meets 
Mephistopheles: 
68,37 
,~et toiU toa£! £eoenhige£! etfennen unb oefd)teioen, 
@)ud)t etft ben &eift ~etau£! 3U treioen, 
'l)ann ~at et bie %eile in feinet ~anb, 
~e~lt leibet! nut ba£! geiftige ~anb.' 
Antoin Galland (1646-1715), the French orientalist, was the first to translate 
the story of Aladdin and his wonderful lamp from the Arabic; see 'Les Mille et 
une Nuits' (12 vols. Paris, 1704-8). In Hegel's day, the best edition of this work 
was Caussin's (9 vols. Paris, 1806), and both German translations, 'Arabische 
Marchen' (4 parts, Gotha, 1790-1) and 'Der Tausend und einen Nacht' (tr. 
Zinserling, 3 vols., Stuttgart, 1823-4) were from the French. C£ R. F. Burton's 
eccentric version: 'The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night' (ed. Smithers, 
12 vols. London, 1897) vol. X pp. 33-140. 
The Danish romantic poet Adam Oehlenschlaeger (1779-1850) published 
his 'Aladdin' in 1805, and like Hegel, took the lamp to be a symbol of 
,'l)en ~emmenge Udtaft: £t)iet iell:l, 
@)om I:lidet aU, ~I:lab bet et £il:l og £t)ffe.' 
69, 32 
The Trapa Natans or Four-horned Water Caltrops occurs over a considerable 
part of Europe, the Caucasus and Siberia. It has been used from early times for 
food, medicine and magic, and is supposed to have been introduced into 
Switzerland as long ago as the period of the lake dwellings, although it is now 
nearly exterminated in that country. In Hegel's day it was sold in the market 
at Venice under the name of the Jesuit Nut. At Vercelli it was called Galaril1, 
and was much eaten by the children and the poor of the city. 
Willdenow made this 'discovery' in 1788, and published his first account of 
it in vol. XVII (p. 19) of the 'Annalen der Botanick' edited by P. Usteri (1768-
1831). He was wrong in regarding this 'long plumule' as foliar in nature how-
ever. It is by means of this fwely divided submerged organ that gaseous change 
takes place as the result of the intimate contact achieved with the water. The 
organ probably assists not only assimilation but also respiration. 'In the Water 
274 

NOTES 
Chestnut, Trapa natans, the later roots, developed adventitiously below the 
leaf-bases are free-floating and branched. These feathery structures have been 
supposed by some authors to be of foliar nature; this is erroneous, although 
physiologically they correspond to the divided leaves of Myriophyllum.' Agnes 
Arber 'Water Plants, a study of aquatic angiosperms' (Cambridge, 1920) p. 207. 
69, 35 
Hegel inserted this description of the middle caudex. He took it from the 
first part of Willden ow's work (§ 13, p. 31), which is devoted to the definition 
of botanical terms. 
69, 39 
The pagination of the 'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der 
Pflanzen' (Gottingen, 1807) is faulty at this point. Hegel does not correct it 
in this reference. The page referred to in parenthesis is actually p. 246 of the 
text. 
70, I 
Ranunculus Bulbosus, i.e. Bulbous Crowfoot or Buttercup. Shakespeare's 
'Cuckoo-buds of yellow hue'. 
70,15 
The system of plant-classification proposed by Linnaeus (1707-1778) in his 
'Systema naturae' (Leyden, 1735) was based on the number, proportion, 
figure and situation of the stamens and pistils, the so-called sexual organs of the 
flower. By means of it, he enumerated twenty five classes, Triandria, which 
have three fertile stamens constituting the third, and Hexandria, which have six, 
the sixth. Linnaeus' was a binary system, the first name indicating the plant's 
genus, and the second its species, and as it was easily grasped and readily 
applicable, it was soon widely accepted. 
Linnaeus himself admitted that it was not a natural system however, that is 
to say, that it took into account only a few marked characters in plants, and did 
not propose to unite them by natural affinities. However, in his 'Fragmenta 
methodi naturalis' (Halle, 1747), and his 'Philosophia Botanica' (1751), he drew 
upon the system put forward by John Ray (1627-1705) in his 'Methodus 
Plantarum Nova' (London, 1682), and suggested that a division of plants in 
accordance with the number of seed-leaves they exhibit, i.e. into acotyledons, 
monocotyledons and dicotyledons might provide the basis for a more natural 
method of classification. 'Vegetables may be divided into the three following 
tribes, viz. I. Monocotyledons; 2. Dicotyledons; and 3. Acotyledons. The first 
have only one seminal leaf, valve, or lobe; and therefore the leaves they put 
275 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
forth, at their first springing out of the ground, are entirely similar in the suc-
ceeding one. This tribe comprehends the three families of I. palms, 2. grasses, 
and 3. bulbous plants of the lily kind etc.' (,Philosophia Botanica' 1751 pt. I, 
ch. iii, sect. 78, tr. H. Rose, London, 1775). Linnaeus never worked this sugges-
tion out into a complete system however, and Hegel's statement that Jussieu 
was the first to draw attention to the difference between monocotyledons and 
dicotyledons is therefore only partly incorrect. 
Antoine Laurent de Jussieu (1748-1836) came of a family distinguished for a 
century and a half by the botanists it produced. He was born at Lyons, but at 
an early age he was invited to Paris by his uncle Bernard de Jussicu (1699-1777), 
who gave him an excellent training in medicine and botany. In 1759 his uncle 
was asked to arrange the plants in the royal garden of the Trianon at Versailles, 
and did so on the basis of the natural system of classification recently outlined 
by Linnaeus ('Histoire de l' Academie Royale des Sciences' Paris, 1777). 
Antoine de Jussieu began work on his, 'Genera plantarum secundum ordines 
naturales disposita, juxta methodum in horto regio Parisiensi exaratum' the 
year after his uncle's death, and saw the last sheets of it through the press as the 
revolution was sweeping the French capital. In this book, which is generally 
accepted as laying the foundation of modern botanical classification, he draws 
upon his uncle's work (see pp. lxiii-Ixx), and divides the whole vegetable 
kingdom into acotyledons (Cryptogamia), monocotyledons and dicotyledons. 
He accepts many of the families formulated by Linnaeus and his uncle, diagnoses 
them with much greater precision, and groups them into fifteen classes. Instead 
of merely enumerating smaller co-ordinated groups of plants, he attempts to 
grasp the actual division of the whole vegetable kingdom as a series of gradually 
subordinated groups. 
In 1790 Jussieu was made a member of the municipality of Paris, in 1792 he 
was put in charge of the hospitals of the city, and in 1793 he was given the task 
of organizing the Natural History Museum. It was not until 1802 that he was 
able to resume his botanical studies. 
Although his system rapidly replaced that ofLinnaeus in France and Germany, 
it was not so readily accepted in Britain, and Sir James Edward Smith (1759-
1828) was purveying Linnean principles in his 'Introduction to Botany' as late 
as 1824. Robert Brown (1773-1858) employed Jussieu's system of classification 
in his 'Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et insulae Van-Diemen' (London, 
1810) however, and in 1830 John Lindley (1799-1865) introduced de Candolle's 
version of it to the British public in his 'Introduction to a Natural System of 
Classification' . 
Once systems of classification based on natural affinities had replaced the old 
artificial systems, it was not long before the immutability of the species assumed 
by Linnaeus and his predecessors was questioned. Goethe's doctrine of mor-
phology had also drawn attention to plant development (W. von Wasielewski, 
'Goethe und die Descendenztheorie' Frankfurt-on-Main, 1903), and when the 
276 

NOTES 
work of Franz Unger (1800-1870) on fossil plants, and of Wilhelm Hofmeister 
(1824-1877) on the morphology of mosses appeared in the early 1850'S, the 
scene was set for the acceptance of Darwin's doctrine. 
70,32 
Hegel mentions the Musa paradisiaca as an instance of this. ('Jenenser Real-
philosophie' II p. 139). 
71, 8 
Hegel mentions the Cactus as an instance of this. ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 140). 
71,22 
,~et sttiiget/. Hegel is evidently referring here to the gynophore (bet 
6tem~elttiiget) or the torus (bet 5Sfumenboben). 
72 ,9 
K. H. Schultz (1798-1871) 'Die Natur der lebendigen Pflanze' pt. I 
(Berlin, 1823) pp. 508-526, ,~on ben Bebewgefiieen (vasa laticis), 
,~ie 
tJetld)iebenattigen ~inge, ttJeld)e leU 9Raf~ig~i untet bem inamen bet eigenen 
@efiiee begtiffen ttJotben linb, linb t~eif5 6eftetion50tgane, unb t~eU5 @efiiee, 
in benen bet Sftewfauf tJOt lid) ge~t. ~iele fe~teten ~aben aud) einen gan~ 
tJetld)iebenen 5Sau tJon ben 6eftetion50tganen, unb id) nenne lie ~um Untet~ 
lcl)iebe tJon allen ~ingen ttJomit lie tJetttJed)lelt ttJotben finb, Beben5gefiiee 
(vasa laticis), ttJeU lie ben Bebenlaft (latex) ffr~ten/. 
In this work Schultz attaches too much importance to the laticiferous 
vessels, and overestimates the extent of their distribution. To the lacteal juice 
he attributes the function of a vital-sap, and an independent movement which 
he calls a 'cyclosis'. The analogy with the functioning of an animal body which 
these assertions were meant to imply was questioned by a number of botanists 
and finally rejected. Hugo von MoW (1805-1872), professor of botany at 
Tiibingen, demolished Schultz's arguments and so became involved in an 
acrimonious debate ('Botanische Zeitung' I, 1843). J. B. D. Boussingault 
(1802-1887), professor of chemistry at Lyons, took the trouble to check Schultz's 
experiments, and found many of them to be faulty. Hermann Schacht (1814-
1864), professor of botany at Bonn, examined the lactiferous vessels very 
carefully, and showed conclusively that they do not form a continuous system 
('Die sogenannten Milchsaft-Gefasse der Euphorbiaceen, u.s.w. sind Milchsaft 
fiihrende, nicht selten verzweigte Bastzellen' Botanische Zeitung 1851, col. 513-
521; cf. his 'Physiologische Botanik,' Berlin, 1852). 
One hundred and thirty-three pages of the first volume of Schultz's book are 
devoted to 'a philosophic confirmation' of its subject-matter, so he may well 
277 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
deserve the qualified compliment paid him by Hegel on this account. As Hegel 
indicates however, this is not to be confused with the tribute paid to the 
thoroughness of his empiricism. 
73,9 
Kurt Polykarp Joachim Sprengel (1766-1833) was the son of a clergyman, 
and in 1783 began to study theology at Greifswald. In 1785 however, he began 
to study medicine at Halle, and in 1789 was appointed to a professorship at the 
university. His main interests were botany and the history of medicine. In 1797 
he was appointed director of the botanical garden at Halle, and for almost forty 
years worked at his great 'Versuch einer pragmatischen Geschichte der Arznei-
kunde' (5 vols. Halle, 1792-1828). 
He was remarkable as a linguist, and mastered Swedish, French, Italian and 
Spanish, as well as Hebrew and the classical languages. 
He published a number of important botanical works. His 'Historia rei 
herbariae' (Amsterdam, 1807-1808) was translated into German in 1817; his 
'Grundziige der wissenschaftlichen Pflanzenkunde' (Leipzig, 1820) was trans-
lated into English as 'Elements of the philosophy of plants' (Edinburgh, 1821), 
and C. D. E. Koenig published an English translation of another of his works: 
see 'An introduction to the study of Cryptogamous Plants' (London, 1807). 
Link is here referring to his 'Anleitung zur Kenntniss der Gewachse, in 
Briefen von Kurt Sprengel, Professor der Botanik in Halle. Erste Sammlung. 
Von dem Bau der Gewachse und der Bestimmung ihrer Theile' (Halle, 1802). 
This work is written in the style of 'Botanical dialogues between Hortensia and 
her four children, Charles, Harriet, Juliet and Henry, designed for the use of 
schools. By a Lady'. (London, 1799), but by raising the question of the origin of 
cellular-tissue and spiral vessels, and by postulating a kind of peristaltic vascular 
movement, it awoke interest in plant anatomy. which since the days of Marcello 
Malpighi (1628-1694) and Nehemiah Grew (1641-1712) had been somewhat 
neglected. 
,'Ilie etfte unb tuid)tigfte ~tage, bie abet aud) am fd)tuetften 5U beanttuotten 
ift, tuitb immet Me fet)n: ~otauf, auf tueld)e ~otm fii~tt uns aUe 3etgliebetung 
bet @etuiid)fe 5utiid? ~as ift bas etfte, tuotaus fid) Me %~eile bes @etuiie!)ies 
bUben, unb tuas bas lei}te, tuas uw Me 3etgliebetung als @tiin5e bet begeta" 
bilifd)en 58Ubung 5ei9t? 
eo biel ie!) £liS ii}t tueia, meine @niibige, fd)eint fie!) Me lnatut bet) l.l3f!an5en 
tuie bet) %~ieten in bet 58ilbuttg eittes @etuebes 5U gefaUen, tuele!)es tuit am 
beften mit ben 58ienett5eUen betgleid)en unb, um fuq 5U fet)n, 3eUgetuebe 
nennen fiinnen.' Qoc. cit. p. 88). 
74, I 
Lorenz Oken (1779-1851) was born at Bohlsbach near Offenburg in Baden, 
278 

NOTES 
and educated at the Franciscan Grammar School at Offenburg. He studied 
natural history and medicine at Freiburg im Breisgau, Wiirzburg and Gottingen, 
and in 1807 was appointed professor of medicine atJena. 
His inaugural lecture at Jena was 'On the significance of the skull bones', it 
was delivered in the presence of Goethe, who was rector of the university, and 
gave rise to the famous controversy concerning the origin of the idea of the 
vertebral analogies of the skull (see III. 305). 
Oken's interest in the natural sciences had been awakened by Schelling, 
Steffens and D. G. Kieser (1779-1862), and it was because of his philosophical 
attitude towards the subjects he was teaching at Jena that he was not accepted 
as professor of medicine at Rostock in 1811. He was an excellent teacher in that 
he was able to stimulate enthusiasm, but he never developed the habit of testing 
his ideas by research and genuine induction. In his 'Lehrbuch der Naturphiloso-
phie' (3 vols. Jena, 1809, 1810, 18u, Eng. tr. A. Tulk 'Elements of Physio-
philosophy' The Ray Society, London, 1848), he systematized the natural 
sciences in much the same general way as Hegel, but his logic was flimsy, and 
his systematization was therefore arbitrary and frequently irresponsible. 
In 1816 he began thejournal 'Isis, eine encyclopadische Zeitschrift, vorzuglich 
fur Naturgeschichte, vergleichende AnatOInie und Physiologie'. Articles were 
admitted on politics as well as on the natural sciences however, and it was 
because of its political line that the court of Weimar, in 1819, gave Oken the 
choice of discontinuing the journal or resigning his professorship. He chose the 
latter alternative, and continued to publish it until 1848. 
He lectured at Basel from 1821 until 1822, and in 1822 organized the first of 
the annual meetings of German naturalists and medical practitioners, at Leipzig. 
He had been impressed by the meetings of the corresponding Swiss association 
and the German meetings in their turn gave rise (1831) to the foundation of the 
British Association for the Advancement of Science. He was professor of 
physiology at Munich from 1827 until 1832, when he accepted the appointment 
of professor of natural history at Ziirich. 
In his essay on generation (1805) he put forward the proposition that, 'all the 
parts of higher animals are made up of an aggregate of Infusoria or animated 
globular monads', but it was the microscopical observations of Brown, Schleiden 
and Schwann which were to confirm this. In his 'Erste Ideen zur Theorie des 
Lichts' (1808) he suggested that, 'light could be nothing but a polar tension of 
the ether evoked by a central body in antagonism with the planets, and heat was 
more than a motion of this ether', and so anticipated the experimental dis-
coveries of H. C. Oersted and M. Faraday. Sir Richard Owen, in his 'Archetype 
and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton' worked out inductively Oken's 
vertebral theory of the skull. Oken played his part in the advancement of the 
sciences therefore, but as Hegel notes, most of his constructions were mere 
assertions, and it was left to others to stabilize his system by logic, and verify or 
reject his suggestions by means of experiment. 
279 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
75, II 
'Philosophia Botanica' (1751) tr. Hugh Rose, London, 1775 p. 66 (pt. I ch. iii 
sect. 81), 'The second part of the vegetable is the herb or main body of the 
plant, which rises from the root, and is terminated by the fructification. It 
consists of the trunk, the leaves, the fulcra, props or supports, and the hyber-
nacula or winter quarters ... The leaves transpire and draw the air, as the lungs 
in animals, and also afford the shade .. .' 
75, 37 
Spix and Martius are here describing the Locust Tree, the beans in the pods of 
which, 'are enclosed in a whitish substance of fme filamenta as sweet as honey. 
This substance ... is eaten by the Indians with great avidity. The wild bees are 
fond of building their nests in this tree ... From between the principal roots of 
the tree a fine yellowish or red transparent resin, called gumamine, exudes. It is 
collected in large lumps, and makes a varnish superior to Chinese Lacca, when 
dissolved in the highest rectified spirits of wine. It burns readily, and with a clear 
flame, emitting a grateful fragrant smell, on which account it is sometimes 
ordered by way of fumigation, in the chambers of persons labouring with 
asthmas or suffocating catarrhs.' Thomas Green 'The Universal Herbal' (2 vols. 
2nd ed. London, 1824) vol. I p. 724. 
76,8 
Bonaventura Corti (1729-1813) was professor at Modena. He was born near 
Milan and died at Reggio. He published two accounts of this discovery: 
'Osservazioni microscopiche sulla Tremella e sulla circolazione del fluido in una 
pianta acquajola' (Lucca, 1774), and 'Lettera sulla circolazione del fluido scoperta 
in varie piante' (Modena, 1775). He tells us that the sight of the plasma stream-
ing in the cells so amazed him, that it took his breath away ('rimasi senza 
spirito'). Opinions differ as to the identity of the 'aquatic plant' in which he 
observed this movement. Hegel thought that it was the Water-horsetail, but 
F. Tiedemann (,Physiologie des Menschen' Darmstadt, 1830 § 279) thought that 
it was probably Willdenow's Caulinia fragilis. 
76,9 
Giovanni Battista Amici (1786-1863) was a native of Modena. After studying 
at Bologna, he started an optical workshop, and in 1811 produced the first really 
effective reflecting-microscope, for which he was awarded a medal by the 
Institute of Milan. He was appointed professor of geometry and algebra at the 
university of Modena in 1810, and in 1815 began to teach in the philosophical 
faculty of the university. In 1825 he was appointed director of the astronomical 
observatory at Florence and held the post until 1859. 
He effected several improvements in the construction of the microscope, and 
pursued his botanical studies mainly in order to demonstrate the excellence of 
280 

NOTES 
the instruments he was producing. He read this account of his investigations into 
the functions of the Chara in 1818, see 'Memorie della Societa Italiana della 
Scienza, XVIII, Fisica' (Modena, 1820) pp. 183-204. 
Hugo von Mohl wrote an obituary notice on him for 'Die Botanische 
Zeitung' (vol. XXI pp. 1-8, Leipzig, 1863). The article in the 'Jahrbiicher der 
Literatur' vol. V pp. 203-215 (Vienna, 1819) seems to have been Hegel's main 
source of information on the subject. It is a review, evidently by K. F. A. von 
Schreiber (1775-1852) the Austrian naturalist, of two works by Amici: 'Mem-
oria ... de' Micropscopj catadiottrici' (Modena, 1818), and the published 
version of the paper read to the Society, 'Osservazioni sulla circolazione del 
Succhio nella Chara' (Modena, 1818). 
77, I 
F. Tiedemann, in his 'Physiologie des Menschen' (Darmstadt, 1830, Eng. tr. 
1834) §§ 278-290 discusses this subject at some length, and assesses the various 
books and articles dealing with it. For a contemporary English account of it see 
T. A. Knight (1759-1838). 'On the motion of the Sap of trees' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1801-1808). 
Hegel, in a footnote, presents the pros and cons of the case by making mention 
of the 'Wiener Jahrbiicher' (1819, vol. V p. 203), and, in parenthesis, of two 
crucial articles. 
1. C. Treviranus (1779-1864) published his, 'Beobachtungen iiber die Bewe-
gung des k6rnigen Wesens in einigen Conferven und einer Chara' in a periodical 
which had been started by F. Weber (1781-1823) and D. M. H. Mohr (d. 1808), 
and which after the latter's death was published as 'Beitrage zur Naturkunde'. 
In Verbindung mit meinen Freunden verfasst und herausgegeben von Dr. und 
Prof Friedr. Weber (vol. II, Kiel, 1810, pp. 126-141). He gives an account of an 
observation he made on June 24, 1803, while watching the Conferva glomerata L. 
through a microscope, ,3ef) ~atte nun bas mir unoefef)teioHef)e 58ergnugen, 3tuei 
®Hebet dnes ~abens neoen einanbet 3u fe~en, Itlotin 3a~Uofe ~ot,):>et, ettua~ me~r 
angefef)ltloUen Itlie geltlo~nHef), in einet ltdfenben unb bre~enben ~eltlegung 
fief) oefanben ... 3n bem einen @Hebe tuaren aUe ~otner in ~eltlegung in 
bem anbem oeltlegten fie fief) nur in bet dnen ,\)iHfte besfeloen, tuii~tenb fie 
in bet anbem ru~ten: boef) lamen auef) biefe 3ule~t in ~etuegung.1 
K. F. P. Martius (1794-1864) read his paper, 'Ober den Bau und die Natur der 
Charen' to a meeting of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Munich in October 
1815; it was published in 'Nova Acta Physico Medica Academiae Caesareae 
Leopoldino-Carolinae naturae curiosorum' (vol. IX, Erlangen. 1818, pp. 181-
2I4). In it, he mentions the publications of Corti and Treviranus, and then speaks 
of his own observations (p. 175), , 3ef) gefte~e, bafl, oogleief) ief) Me Chara 
flexiles im ~ru~Hng, Sommer unb ,\)etofte untet bem Wmtof co,):> untetfuef)t 
~aoe, ief) boef) nie fo gliicfHef) Itlat, dne ~eltlegung in i~t 3U entbecfen, bie nut 
im geringften @tabe ben Sef)ein bon ffiegelmiifligfeit fur fief) ge~aot ~atte/. 
281 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
77.3 
Schultz's doctoral disputation was concerned with this: see, 'Ueber den 
Kreislauf des Saftes im Schollkraut und in mehreren andern Pflanzen' (Berlin, 
1822). 
77, 12 
,1lie ~lutfiige1d.Jen in ~~ierifd.Jen.' Hegel is here referring to blood corpuscles 
($totvetd.Jen) of course, but this term had not yet come into use. 
77,20 
Corti, Amici, Treviranus, and on some occasions Schultz also, had evidently 
observed the movement of the plant's cytoplasm and nuclei, which is in many 
cases of a circulatory or rotatory kind. This first clear description in English of 
this rotary movement was given by Robert Brown (1773-1858) in 1831, who 
had observed it in the staminal hairs ofTradescantia virginica, the cells of which 
contain a large sap-cavity, across which numerous protoplasmic bridges run in 
all directions. In forms such as Elodea, Nitella, Chara etc., where the cytoplasm 
is restricted mainly to the periphery of the sap vacuole and lining the cell wall, 
the streaming movement is exhibited in one direction only. In some cases both 
the nucleus and the chromatophores may be carried along in the rotating stream, 
but in others, such as Nitella, the chloroplasts may remain motionless in a non-
motile layer of the cytoplasm in direct contact with the cell wall. See A. J. 
Ewart 'On the Physics and Physiology of Protoplasmic Streaming in Plants' 
(Oxford, 1903). 
Schultz's fault lay in his failing to distinguish between these protoplasmic 
movements and the functioning of the lactiferous tissue. M. J. Schleiden (1804-
1881) was the first to point out the true analogy between the plant and the 
animal, by showing ('Grundziige der wissenschaftlichen Botanik', Leipzig, 
1842-3), that all the organs of plants are built up of cells, that the plant embryo 
originates from a single cell, and that the physiological activities of the plant are 
dependent upon the individual activities of these vital units. 
78, 18 
Johann Christian Friedrich Meyer (1777-1854) was the son of an orphanage 
inspector in the employ of the grand-duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach. He was 
born at Eisenach, and attended the grammar school there before studying the 
law and cameralistics at Jena. Theoretical and experimental physics interested 
him as much as forestry, and after finishing his studies in 1799, he taught these 
subjects at the school of estate management run by H. Cotta (1763-1844) at 
Zillbach near Meiningen. 
In 1803 he took his doctorate atJena, the title of his thesis being 'Abhandlung 
iiber Forst und Jagdrecht', and in the following year he was appointed to a 
lectureship in forestry management at the newly founded institute of forestry 
282 

NOTES 
at Dreissigacker near Meiningen. J. M. Bechstein (1757-1822) was then in 
charge of this establishment, which was in the process of becoming the most 
outstanding of its kind in Germany. Meyer was gifted as a teacher, but it was 
mainly OIl accoUllt of his books that his fame spread. He was influenced by the 
philosophical attitude towards the natural sciences being cultivated at lena, and 
this is particularly apparent in his first book, 'System einer auf Theorie und 
Erfahrung gestiitzten Lehre iiber die Einwirkung der Naturkrafte auf die 
Erziehung. das Wachstum und die ErnahrUllg der Forstgewachse' (Coburg and 
Leipzig, 1806). In 1807 he published 'AbhandlUllgen iiber die Waldhut, in 
okonomischer, forstwirtschaftlicher und politischer Hinsicht'. In the preface to 
the book quoted here by Link, 'Naturgetreue DarstellUllg der Entwikkelung, 
Ausbildung, und des Wachstums der Pflanzen, und der Bewegung Ulld FUllC-
tionen ihrer Safte; mit vorziiglicher Hinsicht aufHolzgewachse' (Leipzig, 1808), 
he shows that he is still intent upon defending the philosophers of nature; very 
little of their influence is apparent in the main body of the work however, which 
considering that the investigations described did not involve the use of chemical 
analysis or the microscope, gives a competent account of the formation of bast 
and sap-wood. 
In 1808 he accepted the offer of a post on the Bavarian forestry commission, 
and it was in Munich that he made the acquaintance of Link. In 1810 he published 
his main work 'Forstdirektionslehre, nach den Grundsatzen der Regierungs-
politik Ulld Forstwissenschaft', on the strength of which he was appointed 
counsellor to the forestry board at Ansbach in 1818. He remained at Ansbach 
for the rest of his life. He made no attempt to keep pace with developments in 
plant physiology, but cultivated his early interest in the philosophy of the 
natural sciences, and towards the end of his life published two important 
works on estate and forestry management. See C. Fraas 'Geschichte der Landbau 
und Forstwissenschaft' pp. 577-578 592-594 (Munich, 1865). 
Link is evidently referring to § 17 of the 'Naturgetreue Darstellung' etc., in 
which Meyer shows that ,'!let 6aft fteigt eoen 10 toenig aue!) in bet ffiinbe 
obet in bet Cloetf)aut auf', see pp. 49-50: ,But \,fStiifung hie1et mngaoe oot 
fie!) mit im tJetfloHenen 3af)t an einem in 5toet) %f)eiIe geoetfteten, als 
Sfol:Jff)015 oef)anbeIten ~eibenftam, bet iiotigens noe!) freuhig im 60mmer 
tJegetide, eine 1e!)one@eIegenf)eit bat. mn oet)ben %f)eiIen toat intoenbig toeniget 
lEil:Jrint' (alburnum, sap-wood). ,3e!) naf)m baf)et tJon bet einen .\}iUfte aUf 
5 BoU mteite 1ammtHe!)en 6l:Jrint toeg, unb tJetmieb 10 tJiel toie mogUe!) hie 
maftf)aut 5U tJetle~en. mn bet anbetn .\}iiIfte tf)at ie!) bos1eloe mit ber ffiinbe, -
unb iioetUe~ fie, nae!)bem ie!) fie 1e!)on tJorf)et untetftii~t f)atte, -
if)tem 
6e!)id1al, toele!)es folgenbes to at : 
'!let 1einet .\}015tf)eiIe oetauote 6tammtf)eil oUeo 5toat ben 60mmet bes 
tJetfloHenen 3af)tes f)inbute!) 10 Memrie!) gtiin, hie mlattet tJetiinbeden feboe!) 
5eiti9 im .\}etofte if)te iratoe, oHeoen eine lange Beit im ~intet f)iingen, unb 
hie Sfn01l:Jen fingen 5toat an fie!) in bielem irtiif)iaf)r 5U entfalten, tourben 
283 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
in3toifd)en, nod) e~e fie i~re @rofje eneid)t ~atten, fd)on toeU, -
unb ein %rieb 
ber 2toeige toar gar nid)t 3U oemeden. 
'Ilie i~rer ffiinbe oerauote ~a!fte be~ etamm~ aoer tlegetirte nid)t nur ben~ 
feloen eommer ~inburd), bie 5B!atter fielen 3ur ge~origen 2eit ao, fonbern bie 
S'fnofven enttoicreIten fid) aud) in biefem iYru~ja~r, trieoen 2toeige unb 5B!atter, 
!egten !etJtere in biefem ~erofte toieber ao, unb e~ ift 3U ~offen, bafj bie geoiIbeten 
S'fnofven im fiinftigen .s:a~re nod) einma! ben ye!oen ~rocefj oefte~en ... 
'Iliefer ~erfud) . . • oetoeifjt . . . ba~ in ber ffiinbe fein 2lufiteigen be~ 
SJCa~rung~fafte~ etatt finbet, benn bafj er oet) ber 5Berauoung ber ~o!3t~ei!e 
nod) eine 2eitIang grunte, ~at feinen @runb in bem 5Bau unb ber 5Beftimmung 
ber Sfnofven.' 
80,24 
,'Ilk ~ur3el ift eine fo!d)e ~edrummung/ In the original ('Jenenser Real-
philosophie' II p. 129), Hegel speaks of ,bie ~ur3e!ung' (radication). 
80,28 
'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' vol. II p. II2 Dena, 1810). '1424 'Ilagegen 
ftirot eine ~f!an3e nid)t fooa!b, toenn ber 5Baft burd)fd)nitten, bie elJira!fafern 
aoer er~aIten finb. 
1425. 'Ilie elJiraIfafern oebingen mit~in bie 5Betoegung unb bie ~regung 
ber organifd)en ~roceHe. 
1426. 'Ilie eViralfafern finb fur bie ~flan3e ba~, toa~ bie SJCertlen 
fur ba~ %~ier finb. eie {onnen mit tloUem ffied)te ~f!an3ennertlen ~eifjen, 
unb id) freue mid), fie in biefe~ ffied)t einfetJen 3u burfen.' 
83, 23 
Bearing in mind the state of knowledge at the time and the sources upon 
which Hegel draws, it has to be admitted that he gives a perfectly competent 
and plausible exposition of plant anatomy. At the turn of the century, Sprengel, 
Mirbel, Treviranus and Link had revived interest in the nature and origin of 
vessels and in the functions of the various tissues, and as a result of their work, 
these features came to play a role in botanical research which was out of all 
proportion to their real significance in the construction of the vascular plant. 
What is more, plant anatomists began to develop a false confidence in the con-
clusiveness of their researches. In 1824 for example, R. H. J. Dutrochet (1776-
1847) asked, 'Que pourrait-on, en effet, attendre de nouveau de l' observation 
microscopique des organes des veghaux, apres les recherches de Leuwenhoeck, 
de Grew, de Malpighi, d'Hedwig; apres les travaux recents de messieurs Mirbel, 
Link, Treviranus, Sprengel etc.?' ('Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques 
sur la structure intime des animaux et des vegetaux, et sur leur motilite.' Paris, 
1824, p. 8.) 
By sharpening the antithesis between cells and their 'fluid content' in the 
284 

NOTES 
cellular tissue, between 'life-vessels' and 'vital sap' in the vascular system, and 
between spiral-vessels and wood-sap in the assimilative system (III 77, 78), 
Hegel seems to be preparing the way for the discovery that the vessels also have 
their origin in cells. After having studied the Marchantia polymorpha, Mirbel 
reached this conclusion in r 83 r; see 'Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques 
sur Ie Marchantia polymorpha, pour servir a l'histoire du tissu cellulaire de 
l'epiderme et des stomates' ('Annales des Sciences Naturelles' vol. xxv, r832 
pp. 73-87). Hugo von MoW (r805-r872) developed similar views at almost the 
same time, as the result of having submitted the trunk of a Cycad to a micro-
scopical investigation; see 'Ueber den Bau des Cycaden-Stammes' ('Abhand-
lungen der ... Konigl. Baierischen Akademie der Wissenschaften' r829-r830 
pp. 397-442). M. J. Schleiden took up their suggestions, and in his 'Grundziige 
der wissenschaftlichen Botanik' (Leipzig, r842-3), attempted to show that all 
the organs of plants are built up of cells, that the plant embryo originates from 
a single cell, and that the physiological activities of the plant are dependent upon 
the individual activities of these vital units. 
As the result of these researches, the decade following Hegel's death saw the 
foundations of plant cytology laid. It is true that Hegel would have found little 
that might have suggested a radical reconstruction of this paragraph in 1. C. 
Treviranus's 'Physiologie der Gewachse' (2 vols. Bonn, r835-r838), but when 
this book appeared, it was already out of date. Michelet was evidently so 
delighted with the neatness of Hegel's dialectical exposition of a difficult subject 
(III 79), that he failed to note that the information on which it was based was 
already obsolete. 
85,5 
Hoffmeister ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' IIp. r34) gives the emphasized words 
here. Michelet fails to indicate the emphasis, and also omits the word ,reinel 
(pure) from ,bie reine e r i f ti ere n be inegatitlitiit'. He took the sentence from a 
passage in which Hegel is discussing the flower, and the sexuality and pigmenta-
tion of plants. It is difficult to grasp Hegel's precise meaning here, but Augusto 
Vera (r8r3-r885) evidently had no difficulty in doing so. He writes 'Pour 
entendre ce passage, il faut avoir presente la theorie de la lumiere de Hegel, et 
l' ensemble de la philosophie de la nature. La Iumiere, cet element simple, 
identique et universel qui manifeste, et dans lequel Ia nature se manifeste, 
reparait sous des formes diverses dans les differentes spheres de la nature, en se 
combinant avec ces spheres, et se transforment avec elles. On peut dire qu' avant 
d' arriver a la sphere de l' organisme la lumiere manifeste et eclaire, mais qu' elle 
ne se manifeste pas a elle-meme, et ne s' eclaire pas elle-meme, ou, si l' on veut, 
qu' elle n' est pas a elle-meme son propre objet. C' est dans la vie que se produit 
d'abord cette reflexion de la lumiere sur elle-meme, cette manifestation reci-
pro que du sujet et de l'objet, laquelle a sa racine dans I'unite interne et con-
substantielle des deux termes, unite qui se pose et se realise dans l' organisme. Or 
285 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
la plante aspire a cette unite, sans l' atteindre, elle y touche de pres, sans la 
realiser. Elle est dans la lumiere, suivant les expressions du texte, et elle devient 
lumiere; mais elle ne Ie devient pas pour elle-meme, ce qui fait qu'elle est un 
objet de la vision, mais qu' elle ne voit point, et que, dans l' obscurite et Ie sommeil 
de sa vie, i1 n'y a point ce principe qui l' eclaire a la fois interieurement et 
exterieurement, parce qu' en lui Ie dedans et Ie dehors, Ie moi et Ie non-moi 
viennent s'unir et se compenetrer;-cette lumiere spiritualisee, cette negation 
realisee (vergeistigte Licht, als die existirende Negativitat) qui forme I'unite de 
la nature par cela meme qu' elle nie tout ce qui n' est pas elle, et qu' elle Ie nie en 
Ie contenant.-Maintenant ce que Hegel dit de la lumiere, il faut l'etendre a 
l' air, a l' eau et a la nature en general, car la pensee de Hegel est que I' organisme 
est I'unite de la nature, et que la plante constitue un moment de cette unite. 
S'il insistc ici surtout sur la lumiere, c'est d'abord que de tous les elements la 
lumiere parait etre Ie plus essentiel a la plante; c' est ensuite que la vie, et surtout 
la vie animale (rime proprement dite) est cette lumiere concrete ou la nature se 
perc;oit elle-meme et devient transparente a elle-meme, si ron peut ainsi s'ex-
primer. Voy. ci-dessous, I, plus haut, §§ 275, 337, 344, et plus loin, § 350.'-
'Philosophie de la Nature de Hegel' vol. III p. 142 (Paris, 1866). 
86,17 
Cf. C. F. A. Morren (1807-1858), 'Essai pour determiner l'influence qu' exerce 
la lumiere sur la manifestation et Ie developpement des etres organises' (' Annales 
des sciences naturelles' Zoologie, 1822, vol. III). 
86,22 
Hoffmeister (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 134 note 3) indicates that this 
sentence was taken by Michelet from a marginal note which he reads 
as follows: 
,~euetfatbe .. Stomfelbgelb, Stomblume 
(~lau), Wlo~n (mot). 
~iele \2(rten butd)laufen aUe biefe 
~atben. ~utftlid)e' (sic) ,@iirtnetei(en 
betiud)en,) fie butd) aUe bieie ~atben unb i~te ~etmiid)ung butd)5utteiben. 
?menn Die roilbe ~Iume tot (ift, ift es) fd)roet, (fie) 5um ~Iau ~inubet5utteiben. 
?menn eine I.l3fIan5e nid)t bli1~t, fiitbt fie Ieid)t i~te ~Iiittet, malt aud) bie 
l.l3iftiUe batauf~in'. 
88, 5 
Nicolas-Theodore de Saussure (1767-1845) was born at Geneva, into a family 
which for generations had produced outstanding scientists as well as members 
of the representative council of the city. He lived quietly and avoided society, 
and in the latter part of his life became more of a recluse than ever, but he was 
true to the family tradition, in that the attention he gave to public affairs was 
matched only by that which he devoted to scientific research. His father was 
286 

NOTES 
H. B. Saussure (1740-1799), the famous physicist and Alpine traveller, and it 
was by accompanying his father on his expeditions among the Alps that he got 
the grounding of his education in the natural sciences. 
Saussure turned his attention to the chemistry of vegetable physiology when 
great advances were being made in chemistry through the application of 
Lavoisier's principle that the total weight of all the products of a chemical 
reaction must be exactly equal to the total weight of the reacting substances. 
John Ingenhousz (1730-1799), in his 'Experiments upon Vegetables, discovering 
their great power of purifying the common air in the sun-shine, and of injuring 
it in the shade and at night' (London, 1799), had shown that the green parts of 
a plant exhale oxygen in the light and carbon dioxide in the dark, but that the 
parts that are not green give off nothing but carbon dioxide. Priestley discovered 
oxygen in 1774, and Lavoisier discovered the constituents of carbon dioxide in 
1779, so that in a German edition ofIngenhousz's book (Leipzig, 1798), F. A. 
von Humboldt was able to show, as did Ingenhousz in 'On the food of plants' 
(London, 1797), that the entire carbon content of the plant is derived from the 
carbon dioxide of the air, and that the absorption of it is a process of nutrition, 
in which the carbon is assimilated and the oxygen discharged, while the absorp-
tion of oxygen and the discharging of carbon dioxide correspond to the 
respiration of animals. Jean Senebier's researches into the influence oflight upon 
the plant's leaves showed why the assimilative process took place during the 
day, and the respiratory process at night. 
When Saussure began his experiments therefore, the assimilative and res-
piratory functions of the leaves were known, although Link, as Hegel's quotation 
shows, was still able to misassess them to some extent. As is apparent from 
Hegel's subsequent comment however, the functioning of the roots was not 
always taken to account for the presence in the plant of certain minerals. It was 
still thought that the plant had the power of engendering these minerals from 
pure water and air, and Saussure was the first to show that this was not the case. 
His experiments led him to suggest that these minerals were taken in through the 
roots, and that it was also by means of the roots that the nitrogen necessary to 
plant life was assimilated from the processes of vegetable and animal decompo-
sition in the soil. Hegel evidently failed to see the significance of this part of his 
work. 
Saussure published an account of his experiments in 1804: 'Recherches 
chimiques sur la vegetation' (facsimile ed. Paris, 1957, ed. M. Solovine in'Les 
Maitres de la Pensee Scientifique' series.) He says of his work that, 'Les re-
cherches dont je m' occupe dans cet Ouvrage, ont pour objet I'influence de l' eau, 
de l' air et du terreau sur la vegetation'. Link is evidently referring to § VI (p. 
104) and § VII (p. 109) of this book. 
89,7 
Jean Baptiste van Helmont (1577-1644) has been called the Faust of the 
287 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
seventeenth century. He was born at Brussels, educated by the Jesuits, and took 
his M.A. at Louvain when he was only seventeen. From 1600 until 1602 he 
travelled widely, visiting France, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, England, and even 
Russia, and after contracting a rich marriage, settled at Vilvorde near Brussels 
in 1609 where he occupied himself with chemical experiments and medical 
practice until his death. 
Like many other seventeenth century men of science, he presents curious 
contradictions. He was a careful observer of nature and an exact experimenter, 
and took part in the general criticism of Aristotelianism then in vogue, but on 
the other hand he was a disciple of Paracelsus, a Rosicrucian and a mystic, and 
based much of his general outlook on life on his reading of Thomas a Kempis 
and Johannes Tauler. From 1634 until 1635 he was imprisoned for supposedly 
denying the power of religion to effect physical healing. 
As a chemist he deserves to be remembered as the founder of pneumatic 
chemistry, even though it made no substantial progress for a century after his 
time. He was one of the first to realize that there are gases distinct in kind from 
atmospheric air; in fact he claims to have been the inventor of the word 'gas': 
'Hunc spiritum incognitum hactenus (Carbon dioxide), novo nomine GAS 
voco, qui nec vasis cogi, nec in corpus visibile reduci, nisi extincto prius semine, 
potest.' 'Ortus medicinae' (Amsterdam, 1652, Eng. tr. J. Chandler, London, 
1662, Germ tr. Rosenroth, Sultzbach, 1683) no. 18 § 14. 
He regarded air and water as being the two primitive elements of things. He 
explicitly denied that fire is an element, and thought that earth can be reduced 
to water. In order to show that plants are composed of water, he conducted the 
following experiment, which he describes in his 'Ortus Medicinae' (op. cit. no. 
18 § 30; Eng. tr. p. 109), 'I took an earthen vessel, in which I put 200 pounds of 
Earth that had been dried in a Furnace, which I moystened with Rain-water, 
and I implanted therein the trunk or Stem of a Willow Tree, weighing five 
pounds; and at length five years being finished, the Tree sprung from thence did 
weigh 169 pounds, and about three ounces: But I moystened the Earthen 
Vessel with Rain-water, or distilled water (always when there was need) and it 
was large, and implanted into the Earth, and least the dust that flew about should 
be co-mingled with the Earth, I covered the lip or mouth of the Vessel, with an 
Iron plate covered with Tin (lamina ferrea, stanno abducta) and easily passable 
with many holes. I computed not the weight of the leaves that fell off in the four 
Automnes. At length, I again dried the Earth of the Vessel, and there were 
found the same 200 pounds, wanting about two ounces. Therefore 164 pounds 
of Wood Barks, and Roots, arose out of water onely'. 
The conclusion is mainly correct, for about fifty per cent of fresh Willow 
wood consists of free water, but van Helmont knew nothing of the nutrition the 
plant had gained from the carbon dioxide in the air, and there was evidently 
some inaccuracy in his weighing of the earth. Hermann Kopp (1817-1892) 
gives an account of this experiment in his 'Geschichte der Chemie' (Braun-
288 

NOTES 
schweig, 1843) pt. I p. 120; see also an excellent account of van Helmont in]. R. 
Partington's 'A History of Chemistry' (London, 1961) vol. II pp. 209-243. 
H. M. Howe, in 'A Root of van Helmont's Tree' ('Isis' 1965 pp. 408-419), 
points out that Nicholas of Cusa (c. 1400-1464), in his 'De staticis experimentis' 
(1450), mentions the same experiment: see 'D. Nicolai de Cusa Cardinalis ... 
Opera' (3 vols. Basel, 1565) p. 176. 
89,10 
Henri Louis Duhamel du Monceau (1700-1782) was born and died at Paris. 
He had ample private means, which enabled him to devote himself whole-
heartedly to his scientific interests. He was a member of the French Academy of 
Sciences and of the Royal Society of London, and when asked, patronisingly, 
what he considered to be the point of these memberships, is said to have replied, 
'Monsieur, vous voyez a quoi i1 sert d'etre de I'Academie: c'est a ne parler que 
de ce qu'on sait'. 
His interests were wide, and he published works on physiology, botany, 
agriculture, economics and the navy. The excellence of his botanical works was 
somewhat marred by his failure to take into account certain of the other 
workers in the fields which interested him. In his 'Traite des arbres et arbastes' 
(2 vols. Paris, 1755) for example, although he listed many American species for 
the first time, he failed to use the improved system of nomenclature recently 
introduced by Linnaeus, and kept to the older system ofTournefort. 
Link is here referring to an experiment mentioned by Duhamel in vol. II 
(p. 198) of his, 'De la physique des arbres, de l' anatomie des plantes, et de 
l' oeconomie vegetale' (2 vols., Paris, 1758). The merit of this book consists in 
the detail of its observations concerning the structure, anatomy and physiology 
of plants, and Haller, in his 'Bibliotheca Botanica', refers to it as, 'Nobile opus, 
cujus merita non possumus in nostram brevitatem contrahere.' However, 
although Edme Mariotte (1620-1684) of Dijon had shown in 1679 that plants 
form many of their constituents and do not find them ready-made in the soil, 
and although Stephen Hales (1677-1761), in his 'Vegetable Staticks' (1727) had 
shown that the air plays a part in this formation, Duhamel repeated Helmont's 
experiment with an oak, in order to prove that water alone is capable of pro-
viding all the material necessary for plant growth. 
89, 13 
Johann Christian Carl Schrader (1762-1826) was born in Altmark, where his 
father was an apothecary, and was educated at home by his maternal grand-
father. At the age of fifteen he left home to study pharmacy at Osterburg, but 
his teacher was so bad, that he spent most of his time there reading Klopstock 
and writing verse. 
He taught himself botany while serving as an apothecary's assistant at 
K 
289 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Altona, and in order to finish his training, went to study chemistry and mineral-
ogy under Meyer at Stettin. In 1790 he took a job as a dispenser at the 'Elephant' 
apothec in Berlin, and in 1791 as the employee of M. H. Klaproth (1743-1817), 
under whom he greatly improved his professional training. 
In 1794 he married, and so gained an apothec of his own. He took an active 
part in Berlin life, and soon became well-known there. He was elected member 
of the Berlin 'Gesellschaft Naturforschender Freunde', in 1807, adviser to the 
Berlin Board of Public Health in 1816, and member of the Royal Commission 
of Court Apothecaries in 1817. He also played an important part in the organiza-
tion of the Sunday schools of the city. 
Between 1796 and 1821 he published thirty five articles in various periodicals, 
most of them on the chemical and bio-chemical constituents of plants. He also 
published two botanical works: 'Die Norddeutschen Arzneypflanzen fur 
Anfanger der Apothekerkunst' (Berlin, 1791), and 'Flora oder landliche 
Gemalde' (Berlin, 1796). 
In 1797 the Berlin Royal Academy of Sciences invited prize essays on the 
following subject, 'De quelle nature sont les principes terreux qu' on trouve, a 
l' aide de l' analyse chemique, dans les differentes sortes de ble indigenes? Ces 
principes entrent-ils dans les vegetaux tels qu' on les y trouve? ou bien sont-ils 
produits par la force vitale et l' action des organes du vegetal?' 
Schrader's essay was awarded the prize, and an essay by Johann Samuel 
Benjamin Neumann, a clergyman from Templin, proxime accessit. The Acad-
emy published these essays in 1800 as, 'Zwei Preisschriften uber die eigentliche 
Beschaffenheit und Erzeugung der erdigen Bestandtheile in den verschiedenen 
Getreidearten', and it is to this publication that Link is referring. Schrader came 
to the conclusion that the 'vital force' of the plant was able to generate these 
substances. That an essay defending such a point of view should have been 
awarded the prize is not so surprising if we remember that it was not until the 
middle of the last century that J. B. D. Boussingault (1802-1887) showed that 
most plants supply their nitrogen needs from the nitrates in the soil, and not until 
the end of it that S. Winogradsky (1856-1934) pointed out the functions per-
formed by bacteria in plant nutrition. 
In referring to this work by Schrader, Link evidently has the following 
passage in mind (op. cit. pp. 27-28), , .•. ber fuoHmirte ®ef)ttJefef, ttJefef)er 
aUe ~igenfef)aften l.1ereinigte, bie mein fiinftfief)er l:j3f{an&enooben fJaoen mUf3te. 
~ entfJieft feine ~be unb fein iUCetaU, ttJie mir eine '!ligeftion be~fefoen mit 
®iiuren oettJie~. Sef) ttJufef) ifJn mit fJinfiingHef)em beftiUirten m!aHer ao, unb 
faete barein l.1or&iigfief) ffioggen ••• Sef) nafJm ba&u @fa~~ unb l:j3or5efangefiif3e, 
Hnb fteUte fie ber freien Buft unb ®onne in einem @arten au~ .•• '!lie SHimer 
feimten unb ttJuef)fen fefJr gut unter 'l(nttJenbung 
be~ ooen angefiifJrten 
m!aHer~ •.• '!la aoer buref) bie l.1iefen Ueinen l.1orliiufigen ~erfuef)e, l.1ief Belt 
l.1erforen ttJar, l.1erflJiitete fief) mein fe~ter ~erfuef) mit ®ef)ttJefef, unb meine 
~afme mUf3ten oi~ in ben flJiiteften .\leroft ttJaef)fen, ttJo ber fJerannafJenbe 
290 

NOTES 
tytoft unb bie 58eenbigung meinet ~toei!, eg not~toenbig macf)ten bie ~alme 
auf&u&ie~n. 3n biefet Bei! ~atten einige betfeloen, eine ~o~e bon 12-14 Boll 
eneicf)t, unb me~tete babon ••• m:~ten angefebt. ~ie @5.):lel&en, toelcf)e mit 
i~ten ge~origen @tannen betfe~n toaten, ent~ielten aucf) bie 58liitent~eile 
fcf)on beutHcf) enttoicfelt'. 
For contemporary British views on plant nutrition see Richard Kirwan 
(1733-1812), in 'Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy' vol. 5 p. 160; John 
Murray (d. 1820), in 'The Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' no. xiv p. 328 ; John 
Ingenhousz (1730-1799), 'On the food of plants' (London, 1797); Sir Humphrey 
Davy (1778-1829), 'Elements of Agricultural Chemistry' (London, 1813); Sir 
James Edward Smith (1759-1828), 'Introduction to Botany' (London, 1809). 
92, 10 
In Michelet's edition this sentence reads as follows, ,. . . biefet 58etlauf 
ift aoet im gan&en ein Ueoetf{ua, ba bet @eftaltung~ unb ~ffimHation~.):ltocea 
fcf)on fdoft We.):ltobuction, alg $tobuction neuet 3nbitlibuen, finb'. 
The translation has been made from the revised version of it given by Nicolin 
and Poggeler in their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959). 
92, 15 
Lorenz Oken 'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' vol. II p. II3 (lena, 1810). 
,§ 1433 ~ie 58!ii~te ift bM ~im bet $f{an&e, bie 58!ume ba~ @5innenftJftem, 
bet %aftfinn.' 
Schelling 'Zeitschrift fiir speculative Physik' vol. II pts. i and ii (Jena and 
Leipzig, 1801). Most of this edition consists of Schelling's 'Darstellung meines 
Systems der Philosophie', in § 156 of which he writes, ,~et ,):loten&ittefte 
.):lofititle $o! bet (ttbe ift bM @e~im bet %~iete unb untet biefen be~ Wlenfcf)en'• 
Buf. 1 
~ag @efcf)!ecf)t ift bie )lliut&eI be~ %~iet~. ~ie 58liit~e ba~ @e~im 
bet ~f{an&en, 
Bui. 2 )lliie bie $f{an&e in bet 58liit~e fid) fcf)lieat, fo bie gan&e (ttbe im 
@ef)hn be~ Wlenfcf)en, todcf)e Me ~ocf)fte 58Wtf)e bet gan&en otganifcf)en Wleta .. 
mot.):lf)ofe ift.' 
93, 3 
Michelet has evidently made some important changes in the text at this point. 
Hegel (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 135) speaks of the ,unoeftucf)teten 
@etmen' (germ), not the ,unoeftucf)teten @5amen' (seed). He says that, ,~ie 
58etiinbetung (mutation) entgef)t ben gtooen ~iinben bet ~f)emie', not that 
,58ettacf)tung' (interpretation, speculation, reflection) from a chemical standpoint 
will be of no avail. 
93, IO 
Linnaeus based his system of plant-classification on the number, proportion, 
291 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
figure and situation of the stamens and pistils, the so-called sexual organs of the 
flower. See his 'Philosophia Botanica' (1751), Eng. tr. by Hugh Rose 'The 
Elements of Botany' (London, 1775). It is mainly in pt. I, ch. V, sects 132-150 
of this work that he emphasizes the importance of this sexual process. See 
especially sect. 146, 'The calyx then is the marriage bed, in which the stamina 
and pistilla, the male and the female organs, celebrate the nuptials of the plants; 
and here also those tender organs are cherished and defended from external 
... , 
lnJuoes. 
94, 2 
Michelet makes 'determinateness' singular, whereas the verb in Hegel's 
sentence shows that he meant it to be plural, , ... beren 58eftimmtf)eit(en), in 
fid) boUfommen reflettiert, fid) uver 
ba~ @an5e bervreiten/ ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 136). 
94, 37 
Chremerops humilis, i. e. the Dwarf Fan Palm, which grows naturally in 
Italy, Sicily, Spain, and particularly in Andalusia, where, in a sandy soil, the 
roots will spread and propagate so quickly, that the plants cover the ground in 
the same manner as Fern in England. 
94, 39 
The Great Bosian garden at Leipzig, to which Hegel is referring, was founded 
by Caspar Bose (1645-1700), a wealthy merchant of the city, and during the late 
seventeenth century and the early eighteenth it contained one of the finest 
collections of rare plants in Germany. It took on its eighteenth-century form 
about 1690, when Bose had it laid out by the Brunswick architect Leonhard 
Christoph Sturm. 
Its contents were catalogued on several occasions. Paul Amman (1634-1691) 
classified its plants in accordance with the system proposed by Robert Morison 
(1620-1683); see his 'Hortus Bosianus' (Leipzig, 1686). Elias Peine's 'Hortulanus, 
der Bosische Garten in Leipzig' (Halle, 1690), proved so popular, that four 
further editions of it were published at Leipzig (1699, 1705, 1713, 1723). On 
p. 89 of the 1713 edition of this book, mention is made of a, "Palma humilis 
Hispanica, spinosa, sive Chamaeriphes', and among the Palms mentioned in the 
1723 edition (ed. F. A. Wehmann) is a, 'Palma dactylifera, minor: vulgo Palma 
foemina: it. Chamaeriphes.' J. E. Probst seems to have published the last of these 
catalogues, see his, 'Worterbuch ... nebst einem Verzeichniss der pflanzen des 
Casp. Bosischen Gartens' (Leipzig, 1747). 
Caspar Bose's brother also founded a garden at Leipzig, which was known 
as the 'Lesser Bosian'. On the death of the founder, the 'Great Bosian' passed into 
the hands of his son, Caspar Bose (1672-1730). Gleditsch worked in the garden 
from about 1730 until about 1733, when it was owned by the younger Bose's 
292 

NOTES 
widow. This woman's son, Caspar Bose (1704-1733), made something of a 
name for himself as a doctor and botanist and was well known to Gleditsch. 
At the age of twenty-four he published 'Dissertatio de motu plantarum sensus 
aemulo' (Leipzig, 1728), in which he tried to explain the movements of Mimosa 
and the Rose of Jericho etc. by postulating a plant soul. Early in 1733 he was 
appointed professor of botany at the university of Leipzig on the strength of his 
'Calycem Tournefortii explicat' (Leipzig, 1733), in which he defended Tourne-
fort's theory of plant sexuality against the criticisms of Pontedera. He died, 
unmarried, on April 22, 1733, but the address books in the Leipzig archives show 
that his grandfather's foundation was known as 'Caspar Bose's Garden' until 
much later in the eighteenth century. 
95, 3 
Heinrich Jakob Eckleben (d. 1778) was one of the many Germans who contri-
buted to the modernization of Russia during the eighteenth century. He first 
entered the service of the Empress as a gardener on May 13th 1757, and by his 
industry and ingenuity, but above all by the success of his experiments, he soon 
established his reputation. He was appointed head gardener at St. Petersburg 
on June 29th 1762. On June 3rd 1766 his outstanding contributions to Russian 
agriculture and horticulture were rewarded by his being summoned to take the 
oath of office as a member of the Civil Council. 
He conducted experiments which enabled him to indicate methods for 
improving the production of wheat, rye and cattle fodder, and eventually pub-
lished the details of these researches in 1772. M. V. Lomonosov (17II-1765), 
professor of chemistry at the university of St. Petersburg, seeing that this work 
was a means to improving the grain yield in northern Russia, brought it to the 
notice of the Empress. Patronage was granted as early as September 7th 1764, 
but since the promised fmancial support never materialized, the improvements 
were never made. In order to please his imperial patron, he subsequently 
concentrated upon hothouse production: despite the severity of the winter of 
1767-8 for example he managed to astonish and delight her by presenting 
Spanish cherries on February 10th, a green cucumber at the end of the month, 
and on March 6th, ripe peaches. He was elected one of the fifteen members of 
the Free Imperial Economic Society, in the papers of which he is referred to as 
Eikleben. Curiously enough, in his official publications he signed himself either 
Andrej Ekleben or H. J. Eklenberg. 
His two-year contract of March 28th 1759 required that he should undertake 
the training of students, but it was not until 1764 that the elementary school 
nearby provided him with four suitably literate pupils. His limited knowledge 
of Russian, his evident lack of interest in teaching, and the stringency of the 
fmancial situation hindered the development of this proposed 'Garden Training 
School.' In 1774 he reported that two students had completed the course 
successnuly, that three continued to study satisfactorily, and that a sixth, who 
293 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
wanted to marry, was a complete failure, and had been transferred, as a worker, 
to another garden. 
In January 1767 Eckleben received i of a grain of the previous year's pollen 
from Kolreuter, and in March l of a grain of the current year's pollen. The 
St. Petersburg palm, which had been acquired by Peter the Great, was then 
about 140 years old, and had never borne dates. That year it began to sprout on 
April 1st, and from the opening of the lower flowers in mid-April until the 
end of the month, Eckleben dusted on the pollen three times a day. By June 
the complete success of the experiment was fully evident. The old pollen yielded 
only 40 dates, but that of the current year was so effective that not one fruit fell. 
The dates were so clustered that it was impossible to count them, but there were 
not less than 600. Accounts of the experiment appeared in the local papers, and 
the palm was viewed by the general public on Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
P. Stolpiansky 'Gardener Eckleben and the first School of Gardening 
at 
St. 
Petersburg' 
('BBCTHllH'b CA.n;OBO.n;CTBA, TIJIO.n;OBO.n;CTBA 
II oropo.n;HIIQECTBA' no. 5 May 1914 pp. 409-435). 
95.5 
Nehemiah Grew (1641-1712), in a paper which he read to the Royal Society 
of London in November 1676, described the functions of the stamens and pistils 
as follows, 'When the attire or apices break or open, the globules or dust falls 
down on the seedcase or uterus, and touches it with a prolific virtue'. He said 
however that it was Sir Thomas Millington (1628-1704), who had suggested to 
him that sexuality might play a part in vegetable reproduction. The line of 
research opened up by this paper was developed by R. J. Camerarius (1665-
1721), professor of botany at Tubingen, who demonstrated the existence of 
distinct sexes in the plant world by isolating female Mercurialis annua, Ricinus 
communis, Mulberry and Spinach plants, and then showing that they were 
unable to produce fertile seeds. From his experiments with dioecious, or at least 
with diclinous plants, and by regarding monoclinous flowers as self-fertilizing, 
Camerarius concluded that in the plant world there can be no generation from 
seeds unless the anthers of the female flowers have been fertilized. He expressed 
this view in a letter which he wrote to a friend in 1694, 'De sexu plantarum 
epistola' (tr. and ed. M. Mobius, Leipzig, 1899). 
Many eighteenth-century botanists attempted to prove or disprove the exis-
tence of sexuality in plants. Willdenow is here referring to the famous 'Experi-
mentum berolinense', first carried out by Gleditsch in 1749, and confirmed by 
further experiments in 1750, 1751 and 1767. Johann Gottlieb Gleditsch (1714-
1786) was professor of botany at the Berlin Collegium Medico Chirurgicum, and 
director of the city's botanical garden. In 1770 he was appointed head of the 
Berlin institute of forestry. He was a close friend of Linnaeus, whose system of 
plant-classification was based upon the assumed sexuality of the vegetable 
kingdom. Gleditsch published an account of this experiment in 'Histoire de 
294 

NOTES 
l'Academie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres' (Berlin, 1749, pub. 1751, pp. 
103-108). 
In 1749 Gleditsch received the pollen of a male C~merops humilis then 
growing at Leipzig, and used it to fertilize a female palm of this species which 
was at that time about eighty years old, which had been brought to Berlin from 
Holland about thirty years before, but which had never borne dates. A similar 
result was achieved in 175I. 
Joseph Gottlieb Kolreuter (1733-1806) was supervisor of the court-gardens 
at Karlsruhe, and about 1760 he also began to interest himself in the sexuality of 
plants. The result of this interest was a series of excellent articles on experiments 
and observations relating to the subject, 'Vorlaufige Nachricht von einigen das 
Geschlecht der Pflanzen betreffenden Versuchen und Beobachtungen' (Leipzig, 
1761-1766, ed. W. Pfeffer, 1893). In 1767 he sent some pollen from the male 
C~merops humilis at Karlsruhe to Gleditsch at Berlin and to Eckleben at 
St. Petersburg. At Berlin, the experiment was successful again after an interval 
of sixteen years. Kolreuter published an account of this experiment in 'Historia 
et commentationes Academiae electoralis scientarum et elegantiorum literarum 
Theodoro-Palatinae' vol. III Physicum pp. 21-40, Mannheim, 1775). Gleditsch 
also published an account in 'Histoire de l' Academie Royale des Sciences et 
Belles-Lettres' pp. 3-19 (Berlin, 1769). 
Kolreuter's 'Vorlauftge Nachricht' is important, because in it he points out 
the significance of the nectaries and the function performed by insects in 
pollination. He considers the actual fertilization to be a mixing of two different 
oleaginous materials, which unite on the stigma. 
95,22 
Lazaro Spallanzani (1729-1799) was born at Scandiano in Modena. He was 
educated by his father and the Jesuits, and then studied at the university of 
Bologna under his kinswoman 1. M. C. Bassi (17II-1778) who first awakened 
his interest in the natural sciences. 
In 1754 he was appointed professor of logic, metaphysics and Greek at the 
university of Reggio, and in 1760 was translated to Modena, where he con-
tinued to teach with great assiduity and success. He declined many offers from 
other Italian universities and from St. Petersburg, until in 1768 he accepted the 
invitation of Maria Theresa to the chair of natural history at Pavia. His fame 
grew, mainly as the result of his work on physiology, although he also made 
valuable contributions to vulcanology, meteorology and embryology. He was 
immensely popular with the students, and when he returned to Pavia after a 
year's sabbatical in Turkey in 1786, his entry into the city had the nature of a 
triumphal progress. 
His main work is the 'Dissertazioni de fisica animale e vegetabile' (Modena, 
1780). It was soon translated into English as 'Dissertations relative to the natural 
history of animals and vegetables' (London, 1784), and C. F. Michaelis trans-
295 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
lated the French version of it into German, 'Versuche iiber die Erzeugung der 
Thiere und Pflanzen' (Leipzig, 1786). 
Link is referring here to vol. 3 p. 305 of the original Italian edition, where 
Spallanzani describes the experiments he made at Scandiano in 1777, 1778 and 
1779. He tells us that he removed the male flowers from monoecious plants such 
as Melons, enclosed the female flowers of dioecious plants in glass vessels, and 
yet still obtained fertile seeds from the non-pollinated fruits. (Michaelis's tr. pt. 
II sect. iii ch. 3 § xv). 
The parthenogenesis of aphides was discovered by Leeuwenhoek in 1702, and 
first described at length by Charles Bonnet (1720-1793), in his 'Observations sur 
les Puc;:erons' ('Oeuvres d'Histoire Naturelle' vol. I pp. l-II3 Neuchatel, 1779). 
George Adams mentions it in his 'Essays on the Microscope' (London, 1798) 
p. 274, 'Their habits are very singular: an aphis or puceron, brought up in most 
perfect solitude from the very moment of its birth, in a few days will be found 
in the midst of a numerous family; repeat the experiment on one of the indi-
viduals of this family, and you will find this second generation will multiply like 
its parents; and this you may pursue through many generations'. 
96,3 
Hegel is here referring to the following observation by Link ('Grundlehren' 
p. 219), 
,~sll ift fein 
~inttJutf, ban bet Staub bieiet ~ntqeten nid)t 5um 
l,13iftiU fommen tonne -
in mand)en Hegen bod) ~ntqeten unb l,13iftiU beutHd) 
5U %age -
benn ionft butfte esll gat teine ~ntqeten in ben ~lte1e.\Jiabeen geben, 
ttJei{ man nid)t einfieqt, ttJie an einigen bet l,13oUen aUf basll l,13iftiU fommen fann/. 
96, 16 
Hegel wrote, ,ffieifen besll ~o15esll iiberqau.\Jt' in the margin at this point 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' IIp. 136 n. 1). 
96,3 2 
Hegel ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 137) speaks of ,bet tytud)tbobenl 
(receptacle). Michelet prints ,bet tytud)tfnotenl (ovary). 
97, 32 
Michaelis's translation (op. cit. pp. 384-390), which gives the Latin names of 
these fruits, is Schelver's source here. The Clypeiform Musk Melon (Scqilb. 
melone) is Spallanzi's 'Cucumis Melo fructu clypeiformi'. Six varieties of the 
Cucumis Melo, i.e. Common or Musk-Melon were recognized at that time. 
296 

NOTES 
Spallanzani is probably referring to the Cantaloup, so named from a place near 
Rome, where it had been long cultivated. It is a native of Armenia, where it is 
very plentiful. In Hegel's day it was also very popular in Holland. It is of 
middling size, long rather than round, and its flesh is for the most part of an 
orange colour. The Water Melon (~affetmefone) is Spallanzani's 'Cucurbita 
Citrulus', not Citrullus vulgaris. 
99.3 
Michelet's version reads as follows, ,'l)ielet aoet ift bie tJetbaute ~fIan5e; 
unb in bet ~tud)t fteUt fid) bie ~fIan5e bat, if)te eigene otganifd)e ~atut aU5 
if)t fefoft unb butd) fie f)ettJotgeotad)t 5U f)aoen/ Hegel ('Jenenser Real-
philosophie'll p. 137) wrote, ,'l)iefet ift aoet bie un tJ etb aute ~fIatt&e, unb 
~tud)t, ltJeId)e fid) eoen batfteUt, fid) 015 if)te eigne otganifd)e inatut aU5 Hjt 
feIoft unb burd) fie f)ettJotgeotad)t 5U f)aoen/ 
99,21 
Julius Pontedera (1688-1757) was born at Perusia, and studied Cartesian 
philosophy, medicine and natural history at Padua. As a boy he had taken a 
keen interest in botany however, and after finishing his university studies, he 
took up his botanical studies once again. In 1719 he took his doctorate at 
Padua, and in the same year was appointed professor of botany at the university. 
He was one of the few botanists of his day who refused to accept the evidence 
of the sexuality of plants provided by R.J. Camerarius (1665-1721) ofTiibingen, 
and this probably accounts for Schelver's interest in his writings. As a patriot, if 
not as a scientist, he felt obliged to support the views of Marcello Malpighi 
(1628-1694), who had denied the existence of sexual difference in plants. 
His two most important works are, 'Compendium tabularum botanicarum, 
in quo plantae 273 ab eo in Italia nuper detectae recensentur' (Padua, 1718), and 
'Anthologia, sive de floris natura libri tres' (Padua, 1720). Schelver is here re-
ferring to the second book of this latter work. As he quotes Pontedera's Latin, 
and Hegel makes his own version of it, it may be of interest to give the original, 
'Quemadmodum apud nos in quam plurimis plantis, fructus externis injuriis 
affecti jamjam maturi decidunt, et aliquando etiam ob dissimiles et ineptos 
stirpium succos. Hinc etiam ars excogitata est, qua plantis fructum ante maturi-
tatem amittentibus succuratur. Pomiferis et quibuscunque aliis stirpibus fructus 
acerbi decidunt, fixa radice, lapides indundur: hoc remedio saepe ne fructus 
amittat, prohibetur. Amygdalis cuneo e rob ere adacto idem praestant coloni. 
In aliis etiam usque ad medullam terebratos caulices prodesse vel incisum 
corticem rusticarum rerum scriptores testantur ... Hinc itaque peculiare culicum 
genus creatum fuisse opinor, qui sterilium (palmarum) floribus innascerentur: 
hi ad fructiferarum embryones delati eos terebrant, ... partes que medico veluit 
quodam morsu ita officiunt, ut poma omnia retineantur, et perfectionem 
habeant.' 
297 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
100,3 
Johan Bauhin (1541-1613) came of a family which produced several out-
standing botanists. His father, Jean Bauhin (1511-1582) had had to leave France 
on becoming a convert to Protestantism, and after living in England for three 
years (1532-1535), had finally settled in Switzerland. His brother, Gaspard 
Bauhin (1560-1624) was professor of botany at Basel, and produced several 
important botanical works, including 'Pinax Theatri Botanici, siue index in 
Theophrasti, Dioscoridis, Plinii et Botanicorum, qui a seculo scripserunt, opera' 
etc. (Basel, 1623). His nephew, John Gaspard Bauhin (1606-1685) was professor 
of botany at Basel for thirty years. 
Johan B. was educated by his father, he then studied botany under Leonhard 
Fuchs (1501-1566) at Tiibingen, and continued his studies at Montpellier, 
Padua, Lyons and Geneva. He also accompanied Konrad von Gesner (1516-
1565) on some of his journeys. It was probably the example of Fuchs's 'Neu 
Kreiiterbuch' (Basel, 1543) and of Gesner's 'Historia Plantarum' (Basel, 1541), 
which inspired Bauhin with the idea of writing a universal, critical history of 
plants. 
Having finished his studies, he began to practise medicine at Basel, and in 
1566 was elected professor of rhetoric at the university there. Four years later 
he accepted the post of physician to Duke Ulrich ofWiirttemberg, and settled 
at Montbeliard, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
His great work, 'Historia Plantarum Universalis' (Yverdon, 1619, 1650, 
1651), which is in effect an encyclopaedia of all that was known about botany 
at that time, took him fifty years to compile. His son-in-law J. H. Cherler 
published the prodromus to it in 1619, and the work was completed thirty 
years later through the generosity of 1. A. Graffenried of Berne, who contri-
buted four thousand gulden towards the printing costs. 
The passage given by Schelver is an adaptation of what Bauhin has to say 
'de caprifico' in book I p. 135 col. I of this work. As Hegel makes his own 
translation of the Latin, it may be of interest to print it here, 'E putrescente 
caprifici fructu culices geniti in urbanae fructus euolant, easque morsu aperientes 
superfluan humiditatem depascuntur, radiosque una solares intromittunt, 
adeoque non tantum impediunt, ne decidant, sed et earundem concoctionem 
promovent et accelerant'. 
100,6 
The Elder Pliny (A.D. 23-79). Books xii-xxv of his 'Naturalis historia' are 
devoted to botany, agriculture and horticulture. Schelver is here referring to 
book XV chap. 21 (Pliny, 'Natural History' tr. H. Rackham and W. H. S. 
Jones vol. 4 pp. 343-345 London, 1945) 'A remarkable fact about the fig is that 
this alone among all the fruits hastens to ripen with a rapidity due to the skill 
of nature. There is a wild variety of fig called the goat-fig which never ripens, 
but bestows on another tree what it has not got itself, since it is a natural 
298 

NOTES 
sequence of causation, just as from things that decay something is generated. 
Consequently this fig engenders gnats which, being cheated out of nutriment 
in their mother tree, flyaway from its decaying rottenness to the kindred tree, 
and by repeatedly nibbling at the figs-that is by feeding on them too greedily 
-they open their orifices and so make a way into them, bringing with them 
the sun into the fruit for the first time and introducing the fertilizing air through 
the passages thus opened. Then they consume the milky juice-this is the symp-
tom of the fruit's infancy-which also dries up of its own accord; and because 
of this in fig orchards a goat-fig is allowed to grow on the windward side, so 
that when a wind blows the gnats may fly off and be carried to the fig-trees.' 
101, 13 
The meaning of this sentence is clearer in Hoffmeister's version of it 
(Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 137), ,~g 5u biefet ~etbauung bringt es bie 
\l!f{an5e. 6ie bietet fid) als (9Ca~tung) ~o~em Dtganifmen bat, um genoffen 
5U tuetben'. 
101,20 
,'Ilie \l!f{an5e ift fefOft bie ~etuegung bes ~eurigen in fid) felbft, fie ge~t in 
®ii~tung tibet.' Hegel wrote ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' IIp. 138), ,6ie felbft ift 
bie ~etuegung bes ~euets in fid) felbft. 6ie ge~t in ®iitung fibet.' 
101, 31 
This transition from the vegetable organism to the animal organism would 
appear to be highly unsatisfactory. Hegel was never able to formulate it very 
clearly, and the differences between his successive attempts to do so show that 
he was aware of the inadequacy of his exposition. In the lectures of 1803-4 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' I p. 145) he fastened upon the significance of the fruit, 
in those of 1805-6 he concentrated upon the leaf ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 140), and in the Heidelberg Encyclopaedia (1817) § 272, he drew 
attention to the generic process of the plant. 
It was evidently Goethe's conception of a metamorphic progression in plants, 
culminating in reproduction by means of sexual differentiation (note III. 273), 
which fmally led Hegel to conclude his dialectical assessment of vegetable 
phenomena in this way. Had he lived another ten years, and seen M. J. Schleiden 
lay the foundations of plant cytology in his 'Beitrage zur Phytogenesis' 0. 
Muller 'Archiv fur Anatomie' 1838 pp. 137-177: R. Taylor 'Scientific Memoirs' 
ii, 1841 pp. 281-312), and Theodor Schwann apply Schleiden's discoveries in the 
field of animal physiology ('Mikroskopische Untersuchungen uber die Ueberein-
stimmung in der Struktur und dem Wachstum der Tiere und Pflanzen', Berlin, 
299 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
1839), he would almost certainly have illustrated the transition from vegetable 
to animal being in a different manner. 
His transition from the animal organism to subjective spirit by means of the 
sex-relationship, zoology, disease and death (§§ 367-377) is much more success-
ful, and he would undoubtedly have paralleled it at this juncture had he known 
that the subject-matter was tractable. Unicellular vegetable organisms such as 
Schizomycetes (Bacteria), several important forms of which were known to 
o. F. Muller as early as 1773, could have provided him with a very neat 
transition to the unicellular Protozoa which he knew as 'Infusoria'. This 
transition would have been especially effective if he had preceded it with an 
exposition of plant pathology, as this would have involved an assessment of 
various micro-organisms. Tournefort had attempted to systematize plant 
diseases as early as 1705. J. B. Zallinger (1731-1785) had continued this line of 
research in his 'De morbis plantarum' (Oeniponti, 1773, German tr. 1779), and 
A. J. Batsch had given it a high degree of precision in his 'Versuch einer An-
leitung zur Kenntnis und Geschichte der Pflanzen' (Halle, 1787-8). 
Hegel could easily have linked this up with a treatment of plant-like animals 
such as Porifera (Sponges), and Coelenterata such as Hydrozoa and Anthozoa, 
or a closely related division such as Ctenophora, the locomotive organs of 
which could have provided the link with his zoological classification (§ 370). 
At the beginning of the nineteenth century several naturalists were concerning 
themselves with possible connections between vegetable and animal being (see 
note III. 258), and as early as 1751, the Royal Society of London (Transactions, 
1752 p. 445) had accepted a paper by Jean Antoine Peyssonel (b. 1694) containing 
the suggestion that coral-forming Anthozoa are animal and not vegetable in 
nature. 
See N. E. Stevens 'Plant Pathology in the Penultimate Century' ('Isis' 1934 
PP·98- 122). 
103, 21 
This definition of the soul is in substantial agreement with that given by 
Aristotle, who regarded it as the primary entelechy of an organic individual: 
see 'De Anima' II, (412b) tr. J. A. Smith (Oxford, 193 I). 
Plato ('The Republic' 435 et seq.) finds three elements in the constitution 
of the soul, reason (logistikon), will (thymos) and desire (epithymia), and re-
gards them as being functions of the head, breast and abdomen respectively. 
The seat of the soul was taken to be the frontal cavity by Heraclitus and Galen, 
and the pineal gland by Descartes. S. T. von Sommerring (1755-1830), the 
most outstanding German anatomist of Hegel's day, in his 'Dber das Organ 
der Seele' (Konigsberg, 1796), put forward the theory that the vapour occurring 
in the ventricles of the brain constitutes the organ of the soul. 
Hobbes evidently inspired the numerous materialistic interpretations of the 
soul put forward in the eighteenth century: see J. o. de Lamettrie (1709-1751) 
300 

NOTES 
'Histoirc naturelle de l'ime' (Hague, 1745), P. J. G. Cabanis, (1757-1808) 
'Traite de physique et de morale de l'homme' (Paris, 1802). Cf. M. Planck 
'Scheinprobleme der Wissenschaft' (Leipzig, 1946). 
104,28 
,bas 6ubject als 6elbfHelbft, als 6elbftgefiif)1.' See R. Adamson (1852-1902) 
'Fichte' (London, 1881) pp. 153-163 'Only in and for a consciousness that is 
aware of its own identity can the law A = A have validity. The unity and 
identity of self-consciousness thus lies at the basis of all empirical consciousness, 
for all empirical consciousness falls under the rule, A = A. But if the proposition 
A = A, valid for all empirical consciousness, has validity only because it is 
grounded on the fact of the identity of self-consciousness, Ego = Ego, this 
identity must be the pure act of the Ego itself, the mere expression or product 
of the activity by which the Ego is Ego at all. Self-affirmation, then, is given 
simply, unconditionally, as the being the Ego. The Ego is, because it posits 
itself as being; it posits itself as being, because it is. The fundamental activity of 
all consciousness is thus the affirmation of itself by the Ego.' (pp. 155-156.) 
107,7 
'De Anima' (tr. J. A. Smith, Oxford, 1931) 414a28-414b 20. Aristotle dis-
tinguishes between the nutritive, the appetitive, the sensory and the thinking 
powers of the soul. He then says that plants have only the nutritive power, that 
animals have the nutritive, the appetitive and the sensory powers, and that man 
'and possibly another order like man or superior to him' has in addition the 
power of thinking. 
107, 10 
,Wg in fid) teflectirte ~inf)eit tletfd)iebenet ~nbelnf)eiten, e!iftirt bas stf)iet 
als 3ttJed, bas fid) felbft fid) felbft f)ettlotbtingt.' Hoffmeister (Jenenser Real-
philosophie' II p. 141) takes this repetition of ,fid) felbft' to be a slip on Hegel's 
part. If it is interpreted as meaning spontaneous self-production however, 
there is no need to accept this view. 
108,36 
,bas Uttf)eil bes 2ebenbigen, bet tf)iitige megtiff besfelben ift.' The process 
of assimilation involves the basic division between the organism and that which 
it assimilates. The usual meaning of'Urteil' is 'judgement', so that by using the 
word in this unusual and literal manner, Hegel is perhaps implying that the 
organism is selective in its assimilative process. Cf. 'The Shorter Logic' (tr. 
Wallace, Oxford, 1963) §§ 166-179. 
30r 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
110,2 
Michelet alters and misreads this sentence somewhat. The translation 
has been made from Hoffmeister's version of it ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 142), ,bM %iet (aoet) ift bie ~egatibitiit feinet fe1oft, bas iioet ieine 
@eftalt iioetgteift unb bas ~uff)oten bes 7macf)stums nicf)t in feinem ~etbauungs .. 
unb @efcf)1ecf)ts1:>to3ef! untetoricf)t'. 
112,27 
This assessment of sensibility and irritability derives from the work of 
Albrecht von Haller (1708-1777), who ftrst discussed the cause of muscular 
motion in his commentaries on Boerhaave's 'Praelectiones academicae in 
proprias institutiones' (4 vols. Gottingen, 1740-1744) II p. 429. His pupil J. G. 
Zimmermann (1728-1795) published an account of their joint researches on 
the subject in his 'Dissertatio de irritabilite' (Gottingen, 1751), and Haller 
communicated the full results of their work to the Gottingen Society of 
Sciences on April 22, 1752: 'Sermones de partibus corporis humani sentienti-
bus et irritabilibus' (French tr. Lausanne, 1754; English tr. London, 1755; 
German tr. Leipzig, 1756). 
These publications gave rise to an extensive literature on the subject in Latin, 
French, Italian, German and English: see for example Robert Whytt (1714-
1766) 'Physiological Essays ... with observations on the sensibility and irrit-
ability of the parts of man and other animals' (Edinburgh, 1755). An excellent 
survey of this literature was published by H. Dedial in his 'Succincta recensio 
historico-critica doctrinae Alb. Halleri, principis physiologorum, de irritabili-
tate' (Bonn, 1854). 
According to the writers of Hegel's day, sensibility was a term denoting the 
capability that a nerve possesses of conveying the sensation produced by the 
contact of another body along with it. All parts of the body possessing the 
power to produce a change so as to excite a sensation were said to be sensible. 
Irritability was 'the contractility of muscular ftbres, or a property peculiar to 
muscles, by which they contract upon the application of certain stimuli, with-
out a consciousness of action.' ('The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Diction-
ary' R. Morris and J. Kendrick, 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1807). 
According to Haller, the brain and the nerves are possessed of sensibility, 
and impart it to the skin, the muscles, the intestines, the urinary bladder, the 
ureters, the uterus, the penis, the tongue and the retina, and to a lesser extent to 
the heart, lungs, liver, spleen, glands etc. Irritability he regarded as characteristic 
of the heart, the muscles, the diaphragm, the stomach, the lymphatic vessels 
of the intestine, the Ductus thoracicus, the urinary bladder, the pituitary gland, 
the uterus and the genitals. See H. Haeser 'Geschichte der Medicin' vol. II 
pp. 575-583, Qena, 1881); K. F. Burdach 'Die Literatur der Heilwissenschaft' 
(3,vols. Gotha 1810-1821) vol. I pp. 423-432; A. von Haller 'A dissertion on the 
302 

NOTES 
sensible and irritable parts of animals' (tr. M. Tissort, London, 1755, ed. O. 
Temkin, Baltimore, 1936). 
Irritability and sensibility were taken to be modifications of reproduction, which 
was regarded as predominating in the lower organisms, andas becoming subordi-
nate to its modifIcations in more complex animals. See]. F. Pierer 'Anatomisch-
physiologisches Realworterbuch' vol. VI pp. S46-S50 (Altenburg, IS25). 
II3, 36 
Johann Heinrich Autenrieth (1772-IS35) was the son of J. F. Autenrieth 
(1740-ISOO), professor of cameralistics at the Caroline Academy in Stuttgart. 
His brother Christian Friedrich A. was matriculated with Hegel at Tiibingen 
on May II, 1788 ('Die Matrikeln der Universitat Tiibingen' ed. A. Biirk 
and W. Wille vol III p. 342, Tiibingen, 1953). 
He took his doctorate in medicine at Stuttgart in 1792, and then went to 
Pavia to hear the lectures of A. Scarpa (1752-1832) on anatomy, and of J. P. 
Frank (1745-1821) on medicine. On the way back to Stuttgart he visited 
Trieste, Hungary and Vienna, and in 1794 left for Baltimore with his father. 
The main result of this journey was 'Bemerkungen iiber die Seekrankheit', 
which appeared in 'Hufeland's Journal' (1796). In 1796 he also published a 
translation of a work by Benjamin Rush (1745-1813), 'An Account of the 
bilious remittent yellow fever as it appeared in the city of Philadelphia in the 
year 1793' (Philadelphia, 1794). In 1797 he was appointed professor of anatomy 
at Tiibingen, an academic post which also entailed practical work as an obstetri-
cian in the town clinics. 
Hegel has here quoted his, 'Handbuch der empirischen menschlichen 
Physiologie' (3 vols. Tiibingen, ISOI-2), which was the outcome of his early 
work at Tiibingen, and which sought to rid physiology of its prevailing 
tendency towards Schellingianism and to emphasize that empiricism and 
experimentation were of prime importance to it. 
About ISIIhis interest in anatomy and physiology began to wane and he 
concerned himself to an increasing extent with pathology and therapy. He had 
learnt from J. P. Frank that theorizing about diseases was less important than 
exact observation of their symptoms, developments and consequences. He 
applied this teaching and his clinic at Tiibingen became one of the most pro-
gressive in Germany. It was widely known on account of the 'Tiibinger 
Blatter fiir Naturwissenschaften und Heilkunde' (Tiibingen, ISI5-IS17), 
which Autenrieth helped to edit. 
In ISI9 he was appointed vice-chancellor of the university, and in 1822 
chancellor. His son H. F. Autenrieth (1799-IS74) also taught at the university 
and edited some of his father's works (see note III. 272). 
II4, 12 
'The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Dictionary' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1807) 
303 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
by R. Morris andJ. Kendrick gives the following account of this membrane:-
'Periosteum (7T€PWUT€OV from 7T€P£, about, and oUTlov, a bone); that mem-
brane which invests the external surface of all the bones except the crowns of 
the teeth. It is of a fibrous texture, and well supplied with arteries, veins, nerves, 
and absorbents . . . Its use appears to be, to distribute blood-vessels on the 
external surfaces of bones, and to protect the bones themselves from friction, 
and occasionally to afford a medium of attachment for the muscles.' 
IIS,8 
The translation of these sentences has been made from Michelet's version 
of them. Hegel's version is as follows, ,~en @;cljiibdfnocljen liegt bie &orm ber 
ffiiidenwiroe1 3-um @runbe. (~ieie) fOnnen barin au~einanbergelegt werben 
(os spenoideum), gef)t aoer barauf, ben WCittellJunft gan3- 3-U iioerwinben unb 
fie gan3- 3-U tlerfliicljen of)ne eignen WCitte1lJunft/. ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II 
p. 145). In the manuscript, Hegel wrote ,&lebermau~1 (Bat) above 'os spenoid-
, 
eum. 
'Sphaenoides Os (from ucPT}V, a wedge, and €£80>, likeness; because it is 
fixed in the cranium like a wedge), also named os cuneiforme, and os multiforme 
the sphenoid or pterygoid bone. This is called by the above name, from its 
wedge-like situation amidst the other bones of the head. It is however of a more 
irregular figure than any other bone, and has been compared to a bat with 
its wings extended. Yet this resemblance is but faint, though it would be difficult 
perhaps to find any better comparison ... ' (R. Morris and James Kendrick 
'The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Dictionary' 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1807). 
At the end of the eighteenth century most handbooks of osteology described 
the sphenoid as a separate bone supporting the bones of the skull. S. T. von 
Sommerring ('Knochenlehre' p. 109 note) called this conception of it in 
question however, and regarded it as a mere extension of the occipital bone. 
Many early nineteenth-century anatomists such as J. F. Meckel ('Handbuch 
der menschlichen Anatomie' § 528) accepted this new interpretation of it, and 
spoke either of the 'basilary' (@runboein) or of the 'spheno-occipital bones'. 
Hegel, like later anatomists, rejected this view. 
IIS, 14 
Hegel ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 145) has a marginal note on 
toothache at this point, ,3af)nicljmeqen (gef)oren) 3-um tlegetaoiHfcljen 
unmitte10aren ~ro3-ef3" rf)eumatii clje 6c1jmer3-en/. He has just defined (loc. 
cit. p. 142) one moment of animal being; ,W~ ficlj gegen bie lJf)t)fiicljen Q;lemente 
tlerf)altenb ift e~ tlegetaoiliicljer ~ro3-ef3, eine geftaltloie @aUede, ein tiitiger 
6cljleim, ber in ticlj refleftied ift. WCanclje :tiere tinb nicljt~ al~ Me fer @;cljleim/• 
He was aware therefore, that the tooth pulp enclosed by the dentine and 
the alveolar periosteum contains the dental nerve. When he says that tooth-
ache is rheumatic, he is probably thinking of'Abhandlung vom rheumatischen 
304 

NOTES 
Zahnwehe' (Wiirzburg, 1801), by C. F. Ringelmann (1776-1833 ?), 
,~ie 
meantlPottung bet ~tage; ~a~ benn tf)eumatifef)e~ 3af)nlPef)e fet), -lPie man 
e~ edenne? fe~t eine anbete tJotaus, niimlief); ~a~ ift ffif)eumatifm? ... 6~iiten 
lPit ben Utfaef)en tJon ffif)eumatifm genau naef), fo finben fief) f)au~tfiief)licf) 
folgenbe; tJetiinbetlief)e ~ittetung ... bet @enu~ ftad gelPiiqtct 6~eifen unb 
geiftiget @ettiinle; .2eibenfef)aften, 
al~ 30rn, 6ef)tecren, srummet, u.f.f.' 
(op. cit. pp. 14-15). 
P. Fauchard may well be regarded as the founder of modern scientific 
dentistry, see his 'Le chirurgien dentiste ou traite des dents' (Paris, 1728, German 
tr. Berlin, 1733); c£ J. C. F. Maury 'Traite complet de l' art du dentiste' (Paris, 
1828, German tr. Weimar, 1830). John Hunter (1728-1793) helped to set 
British dentistry on a scientific basis with his 'The natural history of the human 
teeth' (London, 1771) and 'Practical treatise on the diseases of the teeth' (Lon-
don, 1778), and in Hegel's day the 'Praktische Darstellung aller Operationen der 
Zahnheilkunst' (Berlin, 1804) by J. J. J. Serre (d. 1830) was the standard German 
work on this subject. 
115, 15 
In a marginal note at this point ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 145), 
Hegel draws attention to the nature of the marrow, and the formation of 
new bones, ,imad bet srnoef)en ift ~ett. ~itb bie meinf)aut a£lgettennt, fo 
£lUbet fief) um fie ein neuet srnoef)en. imad be~ srnoef)en~ (ift) £llo~e~ ~ett, 
lPenig in mag ern, tJiel in fetten imenfef)en'. 
Chronic ostitis and periostitis may be due to injury, rheumatism, or syphilis. 
There is a dull pain in the bone, which is worse at night, and the inflamed 
piece of bone is thickened and tender. C£ Adolph Murray (1751-1803) 'Dis-
sertation de sensibilitate ossium morbosa' (Uppsala, 1780) 'Acta med. suec.' I 
p. 393; J. F. Bottcher (fl. c. 1781-1800) 'Abhandlung von den Krankheiten der 
Knochen, Knorpel und Sehnen' (Konigsberg and Leipzig, 1796); C. F. Clossius 
(1768-1797) 'Ueber die Krankheiten der Knochen' (Tiibingen, 1798); C. F. 
Ringelmann 'De Ossium morbis, eorumque, in specie dentium, carie' (Wiirz-
burg, 1804). 
115, 19 
,f)at £lefonbet~ @iHf)e mit feinem otganifef)en iQatutfinn gefef)en'. In the 
second edition of Michelet's text (Berlin, 1847) pp. 567-8 ,feinem' is replaced 
by ,feinem' i.e. 'Guided by his organic feeling for nature ... ' 
See Giinther Schmid 'Goethe und die Naturwissenschaften' (Halle, 1940) 
no. 2235. 
115, 24 
As the facts given here are not strictly accurate, and as they complicated still 
further a bitter controversy well known to English readers on account of Sir 
305 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Richard Owen's article on Oken in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (8th ed. 
1853-60, 11th ed. 1911) and G. H. Lewes' 'The Life and Works of Goethe' 
(Everyman ed. 1949) pp. 369-377, it may be of value to give their background 
in some detail. 
The treatise Hegel is referring to here is Goethe's 'Ueber den Zwischen-
kieferknochen des Menschen und der Thiere', in which he announces his 
discovery of the intermaxillary bone in man. This was composed at Jena between 
March 27, 1784, when he wrote excitedly to Herder about the discovery 
('Goethes Werke' Weimarer Ausgabe pt. IV vol vi p. 264), and October 31, 
1784 whenJ. C. Loder (1753-1832) wrote to thank him for sending a copy of 
the work (Karl von Bardeleben 'Goethe als Anatom' Frankfurt-on-Main, 
1892 p. 168). Another copy was circulated via J. H. Merck (1741-1791) and 
S. T. Sommerring (1755-1830) and fmally reached Peter Camper (1722-1789) 
the famous Dutch anatomist on Sept. 16, 1785. The treatise was therefore 
well known to anatomists (see G. Schmid 'Goethe und die Naturwissenschaften' 
Halle, 1940 pp. 51-58), and was frequently cited by them prior to its being 
printed in Goethe's 'Zur Natunvissenschaft iiberhaupt, besonders zur Mor-
phologie' (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1820) vol. I sect. ii pp. 199-251. In this 
work it is dated 1786. 
There is no evidence in this treatise that Goethe possessed any idea of the 
vertebral analogies of the skull. When he had it printed in 1820 however he 
added an appendix to the original text (loc. cit. pp. 248-251) entitled 'Inwiefern 
von den Wirbelknochen die Schadelknochen abzuleiten seyen, und auch 
Gestalt und Function dorther zu erklaren seyn mochte?' This was written in 
1819, and apart from the publisher's notice, which appeared on January II, 
1820, was the first published evidence of Goethe's having concerned himself 
with this subject. Its appearance together with the earlier thesis evidently misled 
Hegel into thinking that it was also written about 1785. 
Oken's inaugural lecture at Jena 'Dber die Bedeutung der Schadelknochen' 
(Jena, 1807) contains a clear presentation of his theory concerning the vertebral 
analogies of the skull, which he says occurred to him when he came across the 
blanched skull of a deer while walking near Ilsenstein in the Harz in August 
1806. This statement is confirmed by a letter he wrote to Schelling on December 
27, 1806 (A. Ecker 'Lorenz Oken' Stuttgart, 1880 p. 199) and by the evidence 
provided by D. G. Kieser (1779-1862) in September 1836 ('Amtlicher Bericht 
iiber die Versammlung deutscher Naturforscher' Weimar, 1837 pp. 95-96). 
Goethe had arranged for Oken to be invited to Jena, and in his capacity as 
privy-councillor and rector of the university, was present at the lecture. It was 
well-known by 1811-1815 that Oken's claiming the discovery had displeased 
him: see Henrik Steffens 'Was ich erlebte' (Breslau, 1842) vol. VI p. 252; 
George Ticknor (1791-1871) 'Life, letters andjournals' (ed. Hillard and Ticknor, 
2 vols. London, 1876) vol. I p. 115, but it was not until 1830 that he printed the 
passage in which he clearly accuses him of plagiarism ('Tag-und Jahreshefte' 
306 

NOTES 
Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1830 pp. 6-7). With these facts before him, it is only 
natural that Owen (op. cit.) should have concluded that Hegel was utterly 
wrong in attributing the discovery to Goethe. There can at least be no doubt 
that the publications quoted by Hegel do not provide evidence of Goethe's 
having developed the theory prior to Oken's having delivered his lecture. 
Oken made no printed contribution to the controversy until 1836, when 
some anonymous articles in the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' (nos. 142-152, Stuttgart, 
March-April, 1836) stung him into calling anyone who said that he had 
borrowed the idea from Goethe 'a wicked liar, slanderer and traducer' (einen 
bo~~aften £iignet, ~etraumbet unb 
~~tabfcf)neibet): op. cit. nos. 282 and 
283 (June 30, 1836). The publication of these lectures by Michelet in 1842, 
and the references to the controversy in K. P. Fischer's 'Speculative Charak-
teristik und Kritik des Hegel'schen Systems' (Erlangen, 1845) pp. 356-362, 
livened up the matter even further, and it was while passions were still running 
high that Owen and Lewes interested themselves in it and presented their 
first accounts of it to the English public. 
It is now known however that a theory concerning the vertebral analogies 
of the skull, which would in any case have been a natural development of the 
studies he made known in 1784, occurred to Goethe as early as April 30, 1790, 
when he wrote about it from Venice to Charlotte von Kalb (E. Kopke 'Char-
lotte von Kalb und ihre Beziehungen zu Schiller und Goethe' Berlin, 1852); 
see also his letter to Caroline Herder (Venice, May 4, 1790) in 'Aus Herders 
Nachlass' (ed. Diintzer and Herder, Frankfurt-on-Main, 1856) vol. I. Hegel 
may therefore have heard about the matter from Goethe or his friends before 
it became a real issue in 1830, and may simply have cited the 1820 publication 
in order to confirm his knowledge. He should however have investigated the 
matter more carefully before making this statement in public. 
II5, 28 
See T. H. Huxley's critical analysis of this view in his 'Lectures on the 
elements of comparative anatomy' (London, 1864): see also his Croonian 
Lecture delivered to the Royal Society on June 17, 1858: 'The fallacy in-
volved in the vertebral theory of the skull is like that which before von Baer 
infested our notions of the relations between fishes and mammals. The mammal 
was imagined to be a modified fish, whereas, in truth, both fish and mammal 
start from a common point, and each follows its own road thence. So I conceive 
what the facts teach us is this :-the spinal column and the skull start from the 
same primitive condition-a common central plate with its lamiae dorsales 
and ventrales-whence they immediately begin to diverge. The spinal column, 
in all cases, becomes segmented into its somatomes; and in the great majority 
of cases distinct centra and intercentra are developed, enclosing the notocord 
more or less completely. The cranium never becomes segmented into soma-
tomes; distinct centra and intercentra, like those of the spinal column, and 
307 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
never developed in it. Much of the basis cranii lies beyond the notocord. 
In the process of ossification there is a certain analogy between the spinal 
column and the cranium, but the analogy becomes weaker as we proceed 
towards the anterior end of the skull.' 
II6,3 
For a general account of Oken's life and works see the note III. 278. The 
development of his views upon the spinal column as being basic to the forma-
tion of the whole osseous system is to be traced in the following publications: 
'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' pt. III sect. iii (Jena, 18II) pp. 61-79; 'Isis' 
vol. I sect. ii cols. 157-159 (Jena, 1817); 'Allgemeine Naturgeschichte fiir 
alle Stande' (Stuttgart, 1833) vol. IV pp. 28, 163-172. 
Oken's ideas clearly influenced Sir Richard Owen's 'On the archetype and 
homologies of the vertebrate skeleton' (London, 1848), Cf. William Whewell 
'History of the inductive sciences' (London and Cambridge, 1837, Germ. tr. 
Stuttgart 1841) vol. III pp. 444-455. 
See C. Giittler 'Lorenz Oken und sein Verhaltniss zur modernen Entwickel-
ungslehre' (Leipzig, 1885): H. Wohlbold 'Die Wirbelmetamorphose des 
Schadels von Goethe und Oken' (Munich, 1924). 
117, II 
Hegel is here referring to Autenrieth (loc. cit. pt. III § 869), ,~ie 9Cetben 
bHben ie unb ie 9Cetbenfnoten, It>elcf)e inlt>enbig eine bem ~im einigetmaflen 
ii~nIicf)e ~ubftan~ ~aben'. 
117, 13 
For contemporary German views on the causes of headaches see; 'Ueber 
Kopf- und Zahnschmerzen und iiber die Mittel dagegen' (Hannover, 1806): 
'Von den Kopfschmerzen und besonders der Migrane' (J. G. Kriinitz 'Encyklo-
padie' Prague, 1794). 
British doctors of that time tended to draw a distinction between head-
aches caused by disorders of the head itself, and 'cephalalgia spasmodica' or 
sick head-ache, which was considered to be incident to 'sedentary and inactive 
persons of relaxed habits, who are incautious respecting their diet'. This second 
form of the complaint was regarded as having its origin in the stomach. See 
R. Morris and James Kendrick 'The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Diction-
ary' (Edinburgh, 1807). 
117,25 
In Hegel's day, the developments in psychotherapy brought about by F. 
A. Mesmer (1734-1815) through his doctrine of animal magnetism gave rise 
to a great interest in somnambulism. o. Goldsmith (1728-1774) in his 'History 
308 

NOTES 
of the Earth and Animated Nature' (8 vols. London, 1774), collected some 
remarkable cases of this activity. In Germany some doctors such as Arnold 
Wienholt (1749-1804) 'Beitrage zu den Erfahrungen iiber den thierischen 
Magnetismus' (Hamburg, 1782), 'Heilkraft des thierischen Magnetismus' (3 
pts. Lemgo, 1802-1806) saw mystical and religious implications in somnambu-
listic and hypnotic phenomena, others, such as J. L. Bockmann (1741-1802) 
'Archiv fiir thierischen Magnetismus and Somnambulismus' (8 pts. Strassburg, 
1787-1788), and A. E. Kessler 'Ueber die innere Form der Medicin' (Jena, 
1807) attempted to provide physiological explanations of the activity. Hegel is 
evidently citing Kessler's theory that somnambulism is caused by the activity 
of the ganglia increasing in relation to that of the brain. 
In 1812 the Prussian government set up a commission under C. W. Hufeland 
(1762-1836) to investigate Mesmer's doctrines. The result of this move was the 
publication, by c. C. Wolf art (d. 1832) of ' Mesmerism us oder System der 
Wechselwirkungen' (Berlin, 1814). See also J. C. L. Ziermann 'Geschichtliche 
Darstellung des thierischen Magnetismus als Heilmittel, mit besonderer 
Beriicksichtigung des Somnambulismus' (Berlin, 1824); A. Gauthier 'Histoire 
de somnambulisme' (2 vols. Paris, 1842); H. Schwarzschild 'Magnetismus, 
Somnambulismus und Clairvoyance' (Cassel, 1853). 
117, 27 
Anthelme-Balthasar Richerand (1779-1840) studied at Paris, and at the age 
of twenty-three was already widely known throughout Europe on account of 
the work quoted here by Hegel, 'Nouveaux elemens de physiologie' (Paris, 
1801). Thirteen French editions of this book were published, and seventeen 
translations of it appeared including one into Chinese. The first English trans-
lation appeared in 1807, the best was that edited by J. Copland in 1829· 
Richerand was also successful with two further publications: 'Lec;:ons de 
Boyer sur les maladies des os' (2 vols. Paris, 1803; German tr. G. A. Spangen-
berg, 2 vols. Leipzig, 1804; English tr. R. Farrel, London, 1804), and 'Noso-
graphie et therapeutique chirurgicales' (3 vols. Paris, 1805-6). 
In 1806 he was appointed chirurgeon in chief to the Departmental Guard in 
Paris. In the following year he was made director of chirurgical pathology in 
the medical faculty of the university. He was ennobled in 1815, and in 1829 was 
appointed chirurgeon to Louis XVIII. In 1832 he began to relinquish his 
practice, and from then on he spent the greater part of his time on his estate at 
Villecresne. 
Hegel is here referring to the following passage, 'Le systeme des nerfs 
grands-sympathiques a non-seulement pour usage d' etablir une connexion 
plus intime, une liaison plus etroite entre tous les organes qui remplissent les 
fonctions nutritives; ils soustrait encore ces actions importantes a l' empire de 
la volonte: faculte de !'arne si mobile et tellement variable, que la vie courrait a 
chaque instant de grands dangers, s'il etait en notre pouvoir d' arreter ou de 
309 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
suspendre l' exercice des fonctions auxquelles l' existence est essentiellement lice.' 
'Nouveaux elemens de Physio10gie' (lIth ed. Brussels, 1833) p. 32. 
117,28 
Marie Franlfois Xavier Bichat (1771-1802) the most outstanding French 
anatomist and physiologist of the revolutionary period. He was born at Thoi-
rette in the Jura, and received his early training as a physician from his father. 
He began his university studies at Lyons in 1791, and although he made rapid 
progress in mathematics and the physical sciences, he finally devoted himself 
to the study of anatomy and surgery. 
In 1793 the revolutionary disturbances compelled him to flee from Lyons 
and take refuge in Paris, where he became the pupil ofP. J. Desault (1744-1795), 
whose labours had made the Hotel Dieu at Paris one of the finest chirurgica1 
clinics in Europe. In 1798/9 he brought out an edition of Desault's works, but 
these years immediately following the death of his master were also spent on 
his own researches in anatomy and physiology. He published the results of his 
work in 'Traite des membranes' (Paris, 1800, German tr. Tiibingen, 1802), in 
which he gave a brilliant account of the structure of cellular tissue and the part 
it plays in cicatrization and the formation of tumours, polypi, cysts etc. 
In 1797 he began a course of anatomical demonstrations, and they were so 
successful that he was encouraged to announce a course of operative surgery. 
In 1798 he gave in addition a separate course on physiology. In 1799 he was 
appointed physician to the Hotel Dieu, a situation which opened an immense 
field to his ardent spirit of enquiry. 
'Anatomie generale appliquee ala physio1ogie et ala medecine' (Paris, 1801, 
English tr. C. Coffyn, London, 1824), gave a fuller account of the researches 
assessed in the 'Traite des membranes', and had as its main object the removal 
of a postulated 'hidden force' from physiological theory, and the introduction 
into this branch of science of the strictly anatomical method of Desault. Never-
theless, he was aware of the inadequacy of many of the contemporary attempts 
to explain organic life in purely physical terms, 'Dans 1es corps organises 
l' esprit des theories doit etre tout different de l' esprit des theories appliquces 
aux sciences physiques. II faut dans celles-ci, que tout phenomene soit rigou-
reusement expliquee ... Au contraire toute explication physio1ogique ne doit 
offrir que des aperlfus, des approximations . . . parce que nous conoissons 
encore si peu 1es lois vita1es.' (op. cit. I p. 535). 
'La vie est l' ensemble des fonctions, qui resistent a 1a mort.' This is Bichat's 
famous definition oflife, and in his 'Traite de la vie et de 1a mort' (Paris, 1800, 
Eng, tr. F. Gold, London, 1815), as Hegel points out (III. 126), he elaborates 
upon it by distinguishing between the merely organic life of growth, nutrition 
and propagation, which is dominant in plants, and the animal life involving 
sensibility and contractility, by which the organism enters into active re-
lations with its environment. This book was the result of a series of examina-
310 

NOTES 
tions carried out with a view to ascertain the changes induced in the various 
organs by disease, and the effects of remedial agents. In one period of six 
months, while collecting material for it, he dissected more than six hundred 
bodies. 
A fall from a staircase at the Hotel Dieu resulted in a fever, and, exhausted 
by his excessive labours and by constantly breathing the tainted atmosphere 
of the dissecting room, he died on July 22, 1802. Napoleon ordered that his 
bust should be placed in the Hotel Dieu. His physiological theories had a great 
influence upon Schopenhauer. 
Hegel is here translating from 'Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la 
mort' (4th ed. Paris, 1822) p. 91 j'examinerai d'abord les divisions du systeme 
cerebral; je traiterai ensuite du systeme des ganglions, qu' on peut subdiviser en 
ceux de la tete, du cou, du thorax, d'abdomen et du bassin'. 
lI8, 14 
Hegel is here translating from Bichat Qoc. cit. pp. 90, 92). The original 
French is as follows, '11 est des sujets, par exemple OU l' on trouve till intervalle 
tres-distinct entre les portions pectorale et lombaire de ce qu' on appelle grand 
sympathique, qui semble coupe en cet endroit . . . Qui ne sait . . . qu' apres 
avoir fourni une foule de divisions, Ie sympathique est plus gros qu' avant d' en 
avoir distribue aucune? 
Quel anatomiste n' a pas ete frappe, en effet, des differences qui se trouvent 
entre les nerfs de l'un et de l'autre? Ceux du cerveau sont plus gros, moins 
nombreux, plus blancs, plus denses dans leur tissu, exposes a des varietes assez 
peu frequentes. Au contraire, tenuite extreme, nombre td!s-considerable, 
surtout vers Ie plexus, couleur grisatre, mollesse de tissu remarquable, varietes 
extremement communes, voila les caracteres des nerfs venant des ganglions'. 
lI8, 36 
Paul Erman (1764-1851) was born in Berlin. His father, who had come to 
the city from Alsace, was a Huguenot pastor and director of the College 
fran<;:ais. Erman was educated in Berlin, and in 1791 was appointed professor 
of physics at the military academy. In 1806 he became a member of the Berlin 
academy, and in 18IO professor of physics at the newly founded university. 
He was a determined opponent of Schellingianism, and was generally 
known on account of his experiments with animal magnetism, for which he 
was awarded a prize of three thousand francs by the National Institute of 
France in 1807. Research on this subject had been popularized by Luigi Galvani 
(1737-1798), who had published an account of muscular irritability in 1786. 
In his 'De viribus electricitatis in motu musculari commentarius' (179I, Mutinae, 
1792), Galvani had shown that the living animal body generates electricity, and 
had put forward the view that this electricity has its origin in the brain, from 
3II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which it is conducted, by means of the nerves, to all parts of the body, and 
especially to the muscles. 
The experiment mentioned here by Hegel was devised by Sir Gilbert Blane 
(1749-1834), but Blane was unable to draw any satisfactory conclusions from 
the data he collected; see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. LXXIX, 1789. 'A lecture 
on muscular motion' (London, 1791). F. P. von Gruithuisen (1774-1852) was the 
first to conduct the experiment successfully, 'Resultate der Versuche fiber die 
Volums-Verminderung, welche die Muskeln bei ihrer Contraction erleiden' 
('Salzburger medicinische und chirurgische Zeitung' 18II no. 84 pp. 91--95). 
Erman's fmdings confirmed those made by Gruithuisen, and he published 
his account of them as, 'Einige Bemerkungen fiber Muskular-Contraction' 
('Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. 40 pp. 1-30, Leipzig, 1812.). In this article 
he criticizes William Croone's (1633-1684) 'De ratione motus Musculorum' 
(London, 1664). 
Hegel tells us that the water fell ,ftonh:>eile' (jerkily); Erman writes that 
it fell ,mit einem ein3igen mud, ber fo inftantan h:>ar, h:>ie bas ~ontra~iren 
bes 9Ruffefs fe1bW (loc. cit. p. 14). 
II9, II 
The English line is equal to 2·54mm., the Rhenish to 2·179mm., and the 
Viennese to 2·95mm. It is to be presumed that Erman made use of the Viennese 
measure, in which case the water in the tube fell a little more than half an inch. 
119, 19 
Treviranus formulated this hypothesis in one of the earliest of published 
articles; 'Reils Archiv ffir Physiologie' (1796 pt. I sect. ii), and in part one of 
his 'Physiologische Fragmente' (Hanover, 1797-9). 
119,31 
,bien abfolute 
3n4id)"~5ittern'. Hegel wrote, ,bies abl01ute 3n-fid)-
$ulfieren unb ~hittern' ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 148). The whole of 
this extract is merely an adaptation of Hegel's text. 
119, 34 
Linnaeus was evidently the originator of this idea cf. the note on III. 280. 
120, 24 
The translation of this sentence has been made from Michelet's version 
of it, Hegel wrote as follows, ,a) bas 5lHuti im 2ungenfrewlauf ift e5 
bies rein negatibe immaterieUe 2eben, eigne 18eh:>egung, filr h:>eld)es hie 
9latur 2uft ift unb fid) ~ier bie reine ftberh:>inbung berfeThen gat.' 
312 

NOTES 
120, 35 
,~ie ItJm~1)atifd)en @efline vilben fid) aUent1)alven eigene ~noten, IDCagen.' 
Michelet reproduces Hegel here, Hoffmeister (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II 
p. 150 n. I) makes ,IDCagen' plural, and his emendation has been incorporated 
into the translation. 
Cf Eduard Farber 'The Colour of Venous Blood' ('Isis' 1954 pp. 9-20). 
121,6 
W. Cullen (1712-1790), in his system of nosology, 'Synopsis nosologiae 
methodicae in usum studio sorum' (Edinburgh, 1769, English tr. 1800, German 
tr. Leipzig, 1786), classified hypochondriasis as a disease belonging to the class 
neuroses and the order adynamiae. He regarded hypochondriasis melancholica as 
the only idiopathic species of it, and took all others (e.g. hysterica, asthmatica, 
biliosa, pituitosa etc.) to be merely symptomatic. The disease was thought to 
originate in the region of the spleen, and to be caused by plethora and preter-
natural thickness of the blood. 
Then as now, there was some doubt as to the precise functions of the spleen. 
It was thought, ,ban eine vetrlid)tlid)e IDCenge >Blutes ttJefd)e Me IDCilo~uliaber 
fii1)rt, befo!tJbirt burd) bie IDCilotJene ourMfe1)rt, ... unb ban biefes nid)t 
o1)ne ttJid)tigen ~influn auf ben ganoen ~or~er gefd)etJen fann.' 0. F. Pierer's 
'Anatomisch-physiologisches Realworterbuch' Altenburg, 1823) vol. V p. 330. 
Hegel is evidently questioning the adequacy of this chemical explanation of 
the changes brought about in the blood by this organ, and the curious references 
to 'sleep' and 'nocturnal force' (mitternlic1)tige ~aft) might be interpreted as 
anticipations of the hypothesis that useless or worn-out red blood corpuscles 
are broken up by it, and the discovery that it plays some part in the formation 
of the white blood corpuscles. 
121, 32 
,~as fd)ttJad)e >81umentJolf, bie ,3nbier': i.e. 'the feeble flowery folk of 
India'. Vegetarianism is of course wide spread in India, where the general 
tenderness towards animals, based on the principle of 'ahimsa', or inflicting 
no injury on sentient beings, may have originated in Buddhist teaching. See 
the Laws of Manu, which in their present form date from about the time of 
Christ, V. 46-48, 'He who does not willingly cause the pain of confinement 
and death to living beings, but desires the good of all, obtains endless bliss. 
He who injures no creature obtains without effort what he thinks of, what he 
strives for, and what he fixes his mind on. Flesh-meat cannot be procured 
without injury to animals, and the slaughter of animals is not conducive to 
heavenly bliss: from flesh-meat, therefore, let man abstain.' (tr. Biihler ed. 
F. M. Muller 'Sacred Books of the East' 50 vols. Oxford, 1879-1925, vol XXV). 
Hegel's second reference is evidently to Genesis IX vv. 3-4, 'Every moving 
thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you 
313 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
all things. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not 
eat.' 
George Cheyne (1671-1743) made known the merits of vegetarianism in 
his 'Essay on Regimen' (London, 1740). Cf. John Frank Newton 'The return 
to nature, or, a defence of the vegetable regimen' (London, 18n). 
122, 7 
Hegel is evidently referring to the following passage, in K. H. Schultz's 
'Die Natur der lebendigen Pflanze' pt. I p. 534 (Berlin, 1823), ,mettad)tet 
man ben £eoenfaft, fo toie et eoen aU9 ben ®efiij3en bet leoenbigen 
$f{an3e au~gefttomt ift, in einem ~eUen md)te, fo oemedt man, baj3 et 
butd) unb butd) au~ :t~eilen oefte~t, toeId)e in einet leoenbigen gegenfeitigen 
~ed)felt~iitigfeit, unb fomit in einem etoigen <rntfte~en unb ~etge~en, uub 
einet unauf~otlid)en ~etiinbetung i~tet ®eftalt oegtiffen flnb, fo baj3 fid) 
immet je 3toei unb 3toei mit einanbet t>eteinigen, aoet augenolicUid) toiebet 
t~eilen unb mit anbem t>eteinigen, unb fo fott. ~iej3 ift nid)t ettoa eine oloj3e 
2{n3ie~ung unb 2{oftoj3ung, fonbem eine toidlid)e ~utd)bringung unb ~et~ 
mifd)ung bet 6uoftan3 3toeiet 6aftt~eile, fo baj3 im traIl bie ein3eInen einen 
t>etfd)iebenen 3n~alt ~aoen, biefet fid) gleid)miij3ig untet oeibe t>ett~eilen muj3, 
fooalb fie fid) toiebet t>on einanbet itennen, toie id) biej3 fd)on ftii~et oefd)tieoen 
~aoe.' Schultz is referring here to his 'Der Lebensprozess im Blute' (Berlin, 
1822). 
If Hegel and Schultz are of the opinion that the red and white corpuscles 
are only to be distinguished from the plasma when the blood is dying, they are 
of course mistaken. It seems likely however (c£ Vera op. cit. vol. III pp. 264-
266) that they are merely opposing the idea that the basic constituents of the 
blood are these atomlike corpuscles, and attempting to make the perfectly 
valid point that the blood is alive. 
See William Hewson (1739-1774) 'Experimental Inquiry into the Properties 
of the Blood' (3 pts. London, 1771-1777); John Hunter (1728-1793) 'Treatise 
on the Blood' (1794. ed. Home, London, 1812); J. F. Blumenbach 'Com-
mentatio de vi vitali sanguinis' (Commentat. Soc. Gottingensis. vol. 9 pt. i 
P·3). 
122, 19 
A. Haller (1708-1777) was the first to announce that the activity of the 
heart is not dependent upon the nervous system but is stimulated by the blood. 
See, 'Dissertatio de motu sanguinis per cor' (Gottingen, 1737); 'Elementa 
physiologiae corporis humani' vols. I and II (Lausanne, 1757-8). 
122,25 
Bichat (' Anatomie generale, appliquee a la physiologie et a la medecine' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1801, Germ. tr. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1802, 1803) was of the opinion that 
314 

NOTES 
the influence of the heart upon the movement of the blood was confined to the 
arteries and veins, and that in the capillaries the movement was to be attributed 
to the tonicity of these vessels. 
Even in the lectures of 1803-4, Hegel opposed this theory, ,'!ler setewlauf 
bes }B(utes ift ein allgemeiner, realer bes gan&en geftafteten Drganwmus; e~ ift 
ber tiitige ao;olute }Begrlff, ber ;eine .s3eoenbigfeit im gan&en Drganismus f)at 
unb auf bie aofo(ut entgegenge;et,;te ~eife in if)m iW (jenenser Realphiloso-
phie' I p. 163), and advances in haemadynamics, which since the days of 
Stephen Hales (1677-1761) had been few and far between, soon showed that 
he was justified in doing so. 
In 1808 Thomas Young (1773-1829) delivered the Croonian lecture, 'On 
the Functions of the Heart and Arteries' ('Miscellaneous Works' ed. Peacock, 
2 v.ols. London, 1855), and showed (i) that the blood pressure gradually dimi-
nishes from the heart to the periphery; (ii) that the velocity of the blood be-
comes less as it passes from the greater to the smaller vessels; (iii) that the 
resistance is chiefly in the smaller vessels, and that the elasticity of the coats of 
the great arteries comes into play in overcoming this resistance in the interval 
between systoles; and (iv) that the contractile coats do not act as propulsive 
agents, but assist in regulating the distribution of the blood. 
Michelet inserted the inverted commas here, they do not occur in the 
original (Jenenser Realphilosophie' IIp. 151). 
122, 33 
,ber ;~rlngenbe $unft' i.e. the punctum saliens. See Aristotle 'Historia 
Animalium' (tr. D. W. Thompson, Oxford, 1910) VI iii 'TOVTO D€ TO O"TJI'-€iOll 
1T'T}8cl 
Kat 
Kw€iTat'. William Harvey (1578-1658) popularized the phrase 
through his 'Exercitationes de generatione animalium' (London, 1651) ex. 17. 
R. Willis, in his English translation of this work, 'The Works of William 
Harvey' (London, 1847) p. 235, translates Harvey's Latin with a phrase closely 
resembling Hegel's, ... 'a leaping point, of the colour of blood ... such at the 
outset is animal life' . 
123, 18 
Hegel wrote, ,bie ID1uffe(n ttJerben wei»' (white) ,burd) bie;e !iu»re ffiuf)et , 
but he must have meant ,weid)' (flabby). 
Until the end of the eighteenth century it was thought that synovia originated 
in the blood-vessels and medullary matter discharged from the Haversian 
canals (cf. Clopton Havers (d. 1702) 'Osteologia Nova' London, 1691). Bichat 
('Traite des membranes', Paris, 1800) showed that this is not the case, and that 
the synovial system is part of the serous system, the synovia being produced by 
the synovial membranes. 
Sir Humphry Davy analysed the synovia of oxen and found that it consisted 
mainly of albumen and water. Cf. Alexander Monro (1733-1817) 'Outlines 
315 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the Anatomy of the human body' (Edinburgh, 1813) I pp. 79-82; Sir Ben-
jamin Brodie (1783-1862) 'Pathological researches respecting the diseases of 
joints' ('London Med. Chir. Trans.' vols. IV and V 1813, 1814). 
123, 25 
'Panaricium', but more correctly 'paronychium' (Greek IIapwvvXta, from 
?Tapa, about, and tlvvx- the nail): a purulent swelling on the finger, usually 
giving rise to a painful inflammation of the tendon sheath and periosteum. It 
occurs in three varieties, for it is either situated (i) between the epidermis and the 
skin, (ii) in the sub-cutaneous cellular tissue, or (iii) underneath the sheath of 
the flexor tendons of the fmgers. Hegel is evidently referring to the second 
variety. 
Guiseppe Flajani (1741-1806) gave an account of the whitlows and ways in 
which to cure them in his 'Osservazioni pratiche sopra l' amputazione' (Rome, 
1791, German tr. by C. G. Kiihn, Nuremberg, 1799). Cf. J. 1. A. Focke 
'Tractatio de panaritio' (Gottingen, 1786); P. Sue 'Praktische Bemerkungen ... 
zur Heilung des Fingergeschwiirs' ('Schregers und Harless Annalen' vol. I sect. 
iii, no. 5). 
Hegel's spelling of the word was unusual, 'panaritium' being more common 
at that time. There were various German equivalents for it i.e. mat, iYinger-
IUmm, ~oge!geicf)lUiir, ~ietnoge!, %001 etc. 
123,30 
,gelolicf)es )8lutlUoffer'. Hegel wrote ,geolicf)tes', but this must be a mistake. 
Hoffmeister (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 153 n. I) suggests ,gebleicf)tes' 
(bleached) as a possible alternative reading, but retains Michelet's version in his 
text. The blood-serum is certainly a greenish yellow. 
123, 3I 
Samuel Thomas von Sommerring (1755-1830) was the son of a well-known 
doctor. After a brilliant university career at Gottingen, where he studied under 
E. G. Baldinger (1738-1804) and H. A. Wrisberg (1739-1808), he spent a year 
travelling in Holland and Great Britain. He spent the winter of 1778-9 in 
Edinburgh, and met his countryman George Forster (1754-1794) in London. 
In 1779 he was appointed lecturer in anatomy and chirurgy at Cassel, and in 
1784 professor of anatomy and physiology at Mainz. His work in Mainz was 
disturbed by the French occupation of 1792-1793, and in 1794 he left the city 
and paid a second visit to Great Britain. On his return to Germany he gave up 
university teaching and settled in Frankfurt-on-Main as a medical practitioner. 
He was very successful in his practical work, and was one of the first German 
doctors to practise vaccination. 
In 1805 he moved to Munich. He was a member of the Bavarian privy 
316 

NOTES 
council and academy of sciences; he broadened his scientific interests, and in 
July 1809 constructed the first electric telegraph. He never felt at home in south 
Germany however, and when he retired in 1820, he returned to Frankfurt. 
He is known mainly on account of his 'Vom Baue des menschlichen Korpers' 
(Frankfurt-on-Main, 5 vols. 1791-1796), which became the standard work on 
human anatomy, and was re-issued as such by various editors until well on into 
the nineteenth century (e.g. the eight volume Leipzig edition of 1839-1845). 
Hegel is here referring to part IV p. 83 of this work (Frankfurt-on-Main, 
1792), ,<Rne anbete \}{tt bet lfubigung bet \}(derien ift, ban fie in feinete, 
fein totlje5 \Blut meljt filljtenbe, .8ltJeigd)en fodgele~t ltJetben, ltJeId)e anfang~ 
in eine gIeid)e ~ene, enbHd) abet in totlje~ \Blut filljtenbe ~end)en iloetgeljen. 
<Ilie~ ld)eint am \}(uge bet !JaU 5u ~et)n, ltJo ltJegen bet 'Ilutd)lid)tigfeit blon 
feinete !J!ilnigfeiten ljingeIangen. 'Ilod) ltJetben biele &efiind)en owltJeUen fo 
ieljt etltJeited, ban fie totlje~ \8Iut butd)faHen, 5.\8. bet) bet Q:nt5ilnbungt. 
In the margin at this point Hegel notes that no circulation takes place in 
insects, citing J. H. Autenrieth's 'Handbuch der empirischen menschlichen 
Physiologie' § 346 (Tiibingen, 1801-1802) as his authority for this. 
126, 32 
Bichat 'Recherches physiologiques sur la Vie et la Mort' (4th edition, ed. F. 
Magendie, Paris, 1822) ch. I pp. 7-8. 'Les fonctions de l'animal forment deux 
classes tres-distinctes. Les unes se composent d'une successionhabituelled'assirni-
lation et d' excn!tion; par elles ils transforme sans cesse en sa propre substance 
les molecules des corps voisins, et rejette en suite ces molecules, lorsqu' elles lui 
sont devenues heterogenes. II ne vit qu'en lui, par cette classe de fonctions; par 
l' autre, il existe hors de lui, il est 1'habitant du monde, et non, comme Ie vegetal, 
du lieu qui Ie vit naitre. II sent et apperc;:oit ce qui l' entoure, reflechit ses sensa-
tions, se meut volontairement d' apres leur influence, et Ie plus souvent peut 
communiquer par la voix, ses desirs et ses craintes, ses plaisirs ou ses peines. 
J' appelle vie organique l' ensemble des fonctions de la premiere classe, parce 
que tous les etres organises, vegetaux ou animaux, en jouissant a un degre plus 
ou moins marque, et que la texture organique est la seule condition necessaire a 
son exercise. Les fonctions reunies de la seconde classe forment la vie animale, 
ainsi nommee parce qu' elle est l' attribut exclusif du regne animal'. 
Michelet prints a corrupt version of the French text. 
127,8 
,ben Sht)ftaU bet .s3ebenbigfeit'; in that the head, the chest etc., arc merely 
juxtaposed, like the laminae of a crystal. Cf. the note on III. 215. 
127,30 
,ltJo aflo 
ba~ 6eeIenljafte bie 
~au,):Jtlad)e au~mad)tt. ,6eeIenljaft' is an 
unusual word, generally synonymous with ,1eefentJOU' (animated, soulful,large-
317 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
minded). Hegel is evidently using it here in its literal sense. The sufftx ,~aft' was 
originally an independent adjective and meant 'connected with'. 
129,24 
Franc;:ois Magendie (1783-1855), who edited Bichat (op. cit. 4th ed., Paris, 
1822) has the following note on symmetry (p. IS § I 'Symetrie des formes 
exterieurs dans la vie animale'). 'c' est plutot aux formes exterieurs que Ie 
symetrie parait avoir ete primitivement attachee, et c' est en quelque sorte 
accidentellement, et parce que la nature de leurs fonctions exigeait en general 
qu'ils fussent places a l' exterieur, que les organes de relation se sont trouves 
modifies en vertu de cette loi'. 
129,3 1 
Hegel is here translating Bichat (op. cit. p. 22), 'C'est une remarque qui n'a 
pu echapper a celui dont les dissections ont ete un peu multipliees, que les 
frequentes variations de formes, de grandeur, de position, de direction des 
organes internes, comme la rate, Ie foie, l' estomac, les reins, les organes salivaires, 
etc. Telles sont ces varietes dans Ie systeme vasculaire, qu'a peine deux sujets 
offrent-ils exactement la meme disposition au scalpel de l'anatomiste.' 
129, 33 
Bichat (loc. cit. p. IS), 'Deux globes parfaitement semblables rec;:oivent 
l'impression de la lumiere. Le son et les odeurs ont chacun aussi leur organe 
double analogue. Une membrane unique est aff"ectee aux saveurs, mais la ligne 
me diane y est manifeste; chaque segment indique par elle est semblable a celui 
du cote oppose'. 
130 , 3 
Albrecht Haller (1708-1777) 'Elementa physiologiae corporis humani' (8 vols. 
Lausanne, 1757-1766). Volume three of this work is devoted to the respiratory 
system and the voice. 
Aristotle had been of this opinion that in the production of the voice, the 
larynx functioned in the manner of an ordinary flute or wind instrument. 
Antoine Ferrein (1693-1769), in his 'De la formation de la voix de l'homme' 
('Mem. de l'acad. de sc. de Paris' 1741 p. 409) suggested that the voice might be 
caused by vibrations. Haller, with some reservations, accepted Ferrein's hypo-
thesis, and by thinking of the larynx as functioning in the same way as a stringed 
instrument, was led to emphasize the importance of its symmetry in the produc-
tion of harmonious sounds. 
These different hypotheses gave rise to a great deal of research on the nature of 
318 

NOTES 
the voice in the second half of the eighteenth century; see J. M. Busch 'De 
mechanismo organi vocis hujusque functione' (Groningen, 1770); W. de 
Kempelen (1734-1804) 'Le mecanisme de la parole' (Vienna, 1791), James 
Beattie (1735-1803) 'The Theory of Language' (London, 1788, German tr. 
Gottingen, 1790). The standard work on the subject in Hegel's day was by 
K. F. S. Liscovius (1780-1844) 'Theorie der Stimme' (Leipzig, 1814). 
130,5 
Hegel is here translating Bichat (op. cit. p. 41) 'La plupart des physiologistes, 
Haller en particulier, ont indiqu6, comme cause de son Oa voix) d6faut d'harm-
onie, la discordance des deux moiti6s symetriques du larynx, l'inegalite de force 
dans les nerfs qui vont de chaque cote a cet organe, de reflexion des sons dans 
'une et l' autre narines, dans les sinus droits et gauches.' 
130, 13 
Bichat (op. cit. p. 17), 'Le grand sympathique, partout destine a la vie interi-
eure, presente dans la plupart de ses branches une distribution irreguliere: les 
plexus soleaire, mesenterique, hypogastrique, splt~nique, stomachique, etc. en 
sont un exemple.' 
13 1, 4 
Bichat (loc. cit. p. 40), 'Cela est si vrai, que l'ensemble des mouvements 
executes avec tous nos membres est d' autant plus precis qu'it y a moins de 
difference dans l' agilite des muscles gauches et droits. Pourquoi certains animaux 
franchissent-ils avec tant d'adresse des rochers OU la moindre deviation les 
entrainerait dans l' abime, courent-ils avec une admirable precision sur des plans 
a peine egaux en largeur a l'extremite de leurs membres? Pourquoi la marche 
de ceux qui sont les plus lourds n' est-elle jamais accompagnee de ces faux pas 
si communs dans la progression de I'homme? C' est que chez eux la difference 
etant presque nulle entre les organes locomoteurs de l' un et de l' autre cote, ces 
organes sont en harmonie constante d' action'. 
Cf. F. H. Loschge (1755-1840) 'De sceleto hominis symmetrico' (ErIangen, 
1795); F. M. Heiland 'Darstellung des VerhaItnisses zwischen der rechten und 
linken Hilfte des menschlichen Korpers' (Nuremberg, 1807); F. 1. H. Ardieu 
'Considerations anatomiques et physiologiques sur la ligne mediane qui divise 
Ie corps humain en deux moities symetriques' (Strassburg, 1812). 
131,9 
There seems to be little justification for this view, and Hegel's entertaining it 
may well be due to the suspicion with which physical culture was regarded by 
the Berlin establishment in the decade following the downfall of Napoleon. 
Between 1810 and 1820 gymnastics came to play an important part in 
German politics as the result of the work of Friedrich Ludwig Jahn (1778-1852). 
319 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Jahn had witnessed the defeat of the Prussian army at Jena in October 1806, and 
the subsequent French occupation of Berlin stimulated his patriotism. In his 
'Deutsches Volksthum' (Lubeck, 1810), he attempted to show the importance 
of physical fitness to the survival and self-respect of his country, and in 18II, 
as part of his plan for national regeneration, he founded the first German 
gymnastic club at Hasenheide near Berlin. One of his most outstanding pupils 
was Ernst Eiselen (1793-1846), who helped him write his main work on 
Gymnastics 'Die Deutsche Turnkunst' (Berlin, 1816), and published several 
books on fencing. 
When the war of liberation began in 1813, Jahn and all his able-bodied 
gymnasts enlisted in Blucher's army. After Waterloo therefore, popular 
enthusiasm for his ideas spread rapidly, and gymnastic clubs were founded all 
over Germany. In Hegel's youth, the standard work on physical culture had been 
the 'Versuch einer Encyclopiidie der Leibesubungen' (2 pts. Berlin, 1794-1795) 
by G. U. A. Vieth (1763-1836), but in this post-war period a great change took 
place in the general attitude towards the subject. This radical re-orientation is 
clearly apparent in the later writings of Johann Christoph Friedrich Guths-
Muths (1759-1839), who in the 1790'S had published several perfectly sober 
books on physical culture, e.g. 'Gymnastik fur die Jugend' (Schnepfenthal, 1796, 
Eng. tr. J. Johnson, London, 1800). Two decades later this man was swept into 
writing a 'Turnbuch fur die S6hne des Vaterlandes' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1817), 
and even a 'Katechismus der Turnkunst' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1818). 
This enthusiasm soon came into conflict with the authorities cultivating the 
Holy Alliance. At the great Wartburg meeting of October 1817, the German 
student associations and gymnastic clubs showed themselves to be strongly 
opposed to the post-war political reaction, and in favour of a unified and 
liberalized Germany. On March 23,1819 a student by the name of Karl Ludwig 
Sand, who had mixed with members of the gymnastic clubs and student associ-
ations, murdered the writer August von Kotzebue (b. 1761) for his 'reactionary' 
views. Metternich used the incident as the occasion for the Carlsbad conference 
of August 1819. The Carlsbad decrees, which were the outcome of this meeting, 
had as their main object the suppression of 'demagogical stratagems': a strict 
censorship was introduced, 'curators' such as C. F. 1. Schultz (1781-1834) at 
Berlin were appointed to keep watch on the universities, and all gymnastic 
clubs and student associations were banned. 
Jahn was arrested, imprisoned until 1825, and kept under observation until 
1840. His gymnastic club at Hasenheide was closed, but his work was carried on 
by Eiselen, who founded a private club at Berlin in 1825, and trained many of 
the most outstanding German physical instructors of the nineteenth century. 
See C. M. Bungardt 'Friedrich Ludwig Jahn als Begrunder einer v6lkisch-
politischen Erziehung' (Wurzburg, 1938); M. Hobohn Johann Christoph 
Guths-Muths' (Quedlinburg, 1939). 
C£ Robert Burton (1577-1640) 'The Anatomy of Melancholy' pt. 2, sect. 2, 
320 

NOTES 
memo 4;JamesJohnson (1777-1845) 'The influence of civic life, sedentary habits 
and intellectual refinement on human health' (London, 1818, Germ. tr. H. 
Breslau, Weimar, 1820); August Hornbostel 'Dissertatio de peregrinationis usu 
in valetudine servanda vel recuperanda' (Vienna, 1816); P. H. Clias 'Anfangs-
griinde der Gymnastik oder Turnkunst' (Berne, 1816). 
132, 30 
,bet anbern @)eite fief; in hie lRu~e be5 Sfnoef;ens &urfrcfnimmt'. Hegel wrote 
that this side gathers (collects, concentrates) itself (,fief; &ufammennimmt'). 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 156). 
133, 3 
Michele Troja (1747-1827), in his, 'De novorum ossium' (Paris, 1775, Germ 
tr. Leipzig, 1780), had suggested that new bone is formed by ossification of the 
periosteum. Richerand, in his 'Nouveaux elemens de Physiologie' (Paris, 1801, 
lIth ed. Brussels, 1833) challenged this view. Hegel is quoting from the follow-
ing passage (p. 284), 'Les fibres celluleuses et vasculaires qui traversent la sub-
stance de l' os etablissent un commerce sympathique tres-etroit entre son 
perioste et la membrane tres-mince qui tapisse ses cavites interieures, secrete la 
moelle, et a rer;u Ie nom perioste interne. La membrane medullaire, etant detruite 
par I'introduction d'un stylet dans Ie canal interieur, les couches exterieurs de 
l' os se gonflent, se separent des couches interieurs, et forment comme un 
nouvel os autour du sequestre'. 
Cf. Sir Everard Home (1756-1832) 'Experiments and observations on the 
growth of bones' ('Transactions for the improvement of medical and chirurgical 
knowledge' vol. IIp. 23). 
133, 15 
Johannes Alois Blumauer (1755-1798), the Austrian satirist. He was educated 
by the Jesuits and at one time thought of taking Holy Orders, but when the 
Society was expelled from the Austrian dominions in 1774, he left his native 
town of Steyer and found a new vocation in Vienna as a librarian. In 1781 he 
became a freemason, and soon afterwards was made a censor, a post which he 
held until 1793. He opened a book-shop in Vienna in 1787, but the concern went 
bankrupt. 
He was an energetic and eloquent opponent of ultramontanism, and advo-
cated the separation of church and state. Much of his writing reminds one of 
Butler's 'Hudibras'. His main butts are the Pope, monkery, the Jesuits, religion 
in general. His sense of humour is somewhat homely and often dwells upon 
culinary and degustatory matters. 
His 'Virgils Aeneis travestiert' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1783) is his best known 
work, and contains a magnificent description of the land of Cockaigne. Hegel 
L 
321 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is perhaps referring to the following passage in book VI ('Aloys Blumauer's 
sammtliche Werke' vol. I p. 137, Konigsberg, 1827) 
, Unb litt fie bann bon 3eit 5U 3eit 
(m!eil fie nid)ts .)Jflegt 5U Hiuen) 
mn einet Unbetbaulid)feit, 
iEo fing fie an 5U i.)Jet)en/ etc. 
Paul Scarron (1610-1660) seems to have written the first travesty of Virgil, 
'Le Virgile travesty en vers burlesques' (Paris, 1648); cf. Charles Cotton (1630-
1687) 'Scarronides, or Virgile travestie' (London, 1670). 
133, 32 
Treviranus mentions two accounts of this phenomenon, one by C. F. 
Daniel (1714-1771), 'Sammlung medicinischer Gutachten und Zeugnisse ... , 
sammt einer Abhandlung iiber eine besondere Missgeburt ohne Herz und 
Lungen' (Leipzig, 1776), and the article by Sir Benjamin Brodie (1783-1862) in 
the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1809, pt. I pp. 161-168), 
'Account of the Dissection of a Human Foetus, in which the Circulation of the 
Blood was carried on without a Heart.' 
In the case investigated by Brodie, the Woman had given birth to twins after 
a seventh month pregnancy. 'An opportunity lately occurred to me of examin-
ing a human foetus, in which the heart was wanting, and the circulation of the 
blood was carried on by the action of the vessels only ... It is to be understood, 
that the circulation in the foetus receives no propelling power from the action 
of the heart and arteries of the mother. This, although perfectly known to 
anatomists, it is proper to mention, as it may not be equally known to all the 
members of this Society ... But the most interesting circumstance, which we 
learn from this examination is, that the circulation not only can be carried on 
without a heart, but that a child so circumstanced can be maintained in its 
growth, so as to attain the same size as a foetus which is possessed of that 
organ ... It may be observed, that all these cases, in which the heart was want-
ing, the liver was wanting also. It is probable, that the action of the vessels only, 
without the assistance of the heart, would have been insufficient to propel the 
blood through the circulation of the liver, which is so extensive in the natural 
foetus.' 
See also V. Malacarne (1744-1816) 'De' monstri umani' (Padua, 1801): J. C. 
Zimmer 'Physiologische Untersuchungen iiber Missgeburten' (Rudolstadt, 
1806). 
134,9 
Haller deals with this subject in 'Elementa physiologiae corporis humani' 
vols. I and II (Lausanne, 1757-1758). Treviranus is probably referring to two of 
322 

NOTES 
his earlier works however, which were translated into French, 'Deux memoires 
sur Ie mouvement du sang' (Lausanne, 1756), and republished in a fuller form 
in his 'Opera minoris argumenti anatomici' (3 vols. Lausanne, 1762-1768). 
H. Haeser (18II-1885) in his 'Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medicin' (3 vols. 
Jena, 1875-1882) vol. II p. 566, mentions an English translation of these memoirs 
(London, 1757), but there is no trace of it in British catalogues. 
134, 16 
Julien Jean Cesar Legallois (1770-1814) was born at Cherrueix near Dol in 
Brittany, and studied at Caen until 1793, when he joined the federalist army. 
After its defeat he went into hiding in Paris. 
In 1801 he graduated at the Ecole de sante in Paris, and in 1813 was appointed 
doctor at Bicetre. He died in the February of 1814. He was a member of the 
Galvanist Society, and his writings show him to have been one of the ablest of 
the early experimental physiologists. Hegel mentions the 'Moniteur universal' 
(1811, no. 312) as the source of his information concerning his experiments. 
Legallois' main work was however 'Experiences sur Ie principe de la vie, 
notamment sur celui des mouvemens du coeur, et sur Ie siege de ce principe' 
(Paris, 1812). His son published 'Oeuvres de].]. C. Legallois ... precedees 
d'une notice sur l'auteur' (2 vols., Paris, 1828), and there is an account of his 
work in F. H. Garrison's' An Introduction to the History of Medicine' (4th ed., 
London, 1929) pp. 466-467. 
The most important result of his somewhat crude and cruel experiments was, 
as Hegel notes, that they enabled him to indicate the importance of the spinal 
marrow and the brain in the functioning of the heart, the circulation of the 
blood, and the respiratory organs. 
His conclusions were questioned by A. P. W. Philip (1770-1850) in papers 
published by the Royal Society (1815 and 1817) and in his 'Experimental 
inquiry into the laws of the vital functions' (London, ISIS). According to 
Philip, the heart and the vascular system are able to function quite independently 
of the spinal marrow and the brain. C. F. Nasse (1778-1851), in his, 'Ueber das 
Verhaltnis des Gehirns und Riickenmarks zur Belebung des iibrigen Korpers' 
(Halle, 1818), tried to mediate between these different views by pointing out 
that the relationship between the heart and the spinal marrow is closer in more 
highly developed organisms than it is in the lower animals. 
135, I 
See 'Le Moniteur Universel' no. 312, Friday, November 8, ISII (pp. n89-
1190). The gazette carries a lengthy extract from the report of a meeting held 
on September 9,1811, at which]. N. Halle (1754-1822), F. H. A. von Humboldt 
(1769-1859) and P. F. Percy (1754-1825) investigated Legallois' thesis that the 
principle of the powers of the heart resides in the spinal cord, and not, as had been 
323 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
asserted prior to Haller, in the brain, or, as had been claimed since, simply in 
'irritability' or galvanic activity. 
Various experiments, involving decapitation and the partial destruction of 
the spinal cord, are described. Hegel evidently has in mind the following pas-
sage, 'n s' assura d' abord que la destruction de chacune des deux portions dorsale 
et cervicale de la moelle etait mortelle pour les lapins de vingt jours, de meme 
que celIe de la portion lombaire, et meme dans un terns plus court d' environ 
deux minutes. 11 reconnut ensuite que les memes experiences repetees sur des 
lapins de differens ages, ne donnaient pas les memes resultats. En general, la 
destruction de la moelle lombaire n' est pas subitement mortelle pour ces 
animaux avant rage de dixjours; plusieurs y survivent meme encore a celui de 
quinze jours. Au-dela de vingt jours l' effet en est Ie meme qu'a vingt jours. Les 
tres-jeunes lapins peuvent de meme continuer de vivre apres la destruction soit 
de la moelle dorsale et dans un plus petit nombre de cas apres la destruction de 
celle-ci qu' apres celIe de la dorsale. Aucun ne peut survivre ni a l' une ni a 
l' autre passe !'age de quinze jours.' 
The members of the commission concluded that Legallois' work was, 'un 
des plus beaux, et certainement Ie plus important qui ait ete fait en physiologie 
depuis les savantes experiences de Haller'. 
135,9 
See the note III. 314. 
135, 29 
The origin of this information is a communication made to the Bath Philo-
sophical Society in 1816. This Society first met at the Kingston Lecture Rooms, 
York Street, Bath on Monday January 8, 1816. It was founded by Dr. Wilkinson, 
who received an account of these lizards from a Suffolk clergyman. Unfortun-
ately, the manuscripts and records relating to this society have been lost. The 
rector of Elveden at that time was the Rev. Thomas Bull, but the church records 
contain no evidence of his having had geological interests. See the 'Bath Herald' 
for January 6, 1816, in which the formation of the society is announced. Dr. 
Wilkinson sent an account of the matter to Alexander Tilloch (1759-1825), who 
published it in his 'Philosophical Magazine and Journal' (vol. 48 p. 469, December 
1816). Hegel is evidently quoting Treviranus, who had read Tilloch's version. 
'A pit having been opened in the summer of 1814, at Elden, Suffolk, for the 
purpose of raising chalk, I deemed it a favourable opportunity for procuring 
fossils ... In this search I ... had the good fortune to be present at the discovery 
of two lizards imbedded in the solid chalk, fifty feet below the surface ... So 
completely devoid oflife did the lizards appear on their first exposure to the air, 
that I actually considered them in a fossil state ... I ... placed them in the sun, 
the heat of which soon restored them to animation ... I ... immersed one in 
water, keeping the other in a dry place. You may perhaps consider it worthy 
324 

NOTES 
your observation, that the mouths of the lizards were dosed up with a glutinous 
substance ... The newt which had been immersed in the water ... was at length 
enabled to open its mouth . . . The other lizard . . . was unable to open its 
mouth ... It died in the course of the night ... The remaining lizard continued 
alive in water for several weeks, during which it appeared to increase in size. 
It disliked confinement; and ... to my great mortification, effected its escape, 
nor could I ever after find it.' 
Hegel may have misspelt the name of the village on account of his having had 
in mind John Scott, first Earl of Eldon (1751-1838). It is now known as Elveden, 
and is situated about 3 i miles S.W. of Thetford; in his day it was known as 
Elden, Elevedon or Elvidon. In this part of Suffolk, the chalk lies beneath a bed 
of sand, and the opening of the pit in which these creatures were found may have 
had something to do with the activities of the owner ofElveden Hall, the Earl 
of Albemarle, 'a very active and experimental farmer, who by improving and 
planting, has changed the face of the desert which surrounded him.' See James 
Dugdale's 'The New British Traveller' (London, 1819) vol. iv p. 305. 
Cf 'The Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' nr. xvi p. 403; J. S. T. Gehler 
'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. 4 pp. 1300-1301, where many examples of 
discoveries of this kind are given, and the writer concludes his account of them 
by assuring us that we may be certain that they are not pre-Adamitic. 
135,35 
Haller, in his 'Elementa Physiologiae Corporis Humani' vol. VI pp. 169-170 
(Lausanne, 1777) gives many examples of animals able to go without food for 
months and years. Treviranus Qoc. cit. V p. 272) says that he has seen a vineyard-
snail (Helix pomotia) live six months without food, and that O. F. Muller 
(1730-1784), in his 'Vermium terrestrium et fluviatilium historia' vol. II pp. 
xii-xxxiv (Copenhagen, 1773) mentions headless wood-snails (Helix nemorosa) 
and slugs having lived without food for more than a year; cf. Alexander Hunter 
(1729-1809), 'On the Reproduction of the Head of the Garden Snail' in 'Georgi-
cal Essays' vol. 5 (York, 1803). 
The 'New Pneumatical experiments about Respiration' by Robert Boyle 
(1627-1691), which was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society' (1670, pp. 20II-2057) is evidently the authority for Hegel's 
statement that some animals can do without atmospheric air for lengthy periods. 
Boyle noticed this characteristic particularly in slow-worms, leeches, shell-fish 
and crayfish. 
The 'Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile in the Years 1768-1773' 
(1790, 7 vols. Edinburgh, 1804, German tr. by Volkmann 5 vols. Leipzig, 
1790-1791) by James Bruce (1730-1794), was his source for the statement that 
animals can live in very hot water. 'At Feriana ... I found nothing remarkable 
but the baths of very warm water without the town; in these there was a 
number of fish, above four inches in length, not unlike gudgeons. Upon trying 
325 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the heat by the thermometer, I remember to have been much surprised that they 
could have existed, or even not been boiled, by continuing long in the heat of 
this medium' (Eng. ed. vol. I pp. 39-40, German tr. vol. I p. 32). The rotifers 
resuscitated after four years are mentioned by L. Spallanzani (1729-1799) in his 
'Opusculi di fisica animale e vegetabile' (2 vols. Modena, 1776) vol. I p. 309. 
140,2 
Christoph Friedrich Ludwig Schultz (1781-1834): see the note II. 338. This 
article has as its title, 'Ueber physiologe Gesichts undFarbenErscheinungen'. It 
i~ to be found in J. S. C. Schweigger's Journal fur Chemie und Physik' vol. XVI 
pp. 121-157 (Nuremberg, 1816). Hegel shows that he had inside information 
on its authorship, for it was published anonymously. 
Schultz's general theory of vision, as expounded at the beginning of this 
article, closely resembles Goethe's, and later in the article Goethe is mentioned. 
Reference is also made to Kepler's investigation of double vision, Lucas Din, 'De 
visione, quae oculo fit gemino' (Jena, 1714), C. N. Le Cat (1700-1768), 'Traite 
des sens' (Rouen, 1739), and Joseph Priestley, 'History of Discoveries relating to 
Vision' (London, 1772, Germ. tr. Klugel, 2 pts. Leipzig, 1776). 
Hegel is evidently referring to the following sections of Schultz's exposition: 
,§ 26 Sum normalen 6e'£)en mit beiben ~ugen ge'£)ott bas gleid)e ilCormiren 
ber ilimenfionen in beiben ~ugen, 
§ 27 alio aud) bas ilurd)id)neiben ber beiben ~ugen~~d)fen in einem unb 
bemfelben ~uncte. 
§ 28 Seber ~unct, weld)er nid)t bieier ilurd)id)nUg .. ober >Uereinigungs* 
~unct ber beiben ~ugen~~d)ien felbft ift, Hegt alio bor ober '£)inter bemielben. 
§ 29 ~ mUll alio, in io fern er mit beiben ~ugen gele'£)en wirb, bO\J\Jelt 
erfd)einen; aUes abnorme 6e'£)en mit beiben ~ugen ift alio ein ilo\J\Jelie'£)en.' 
Cf. Everard Home's article in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 87 p. 8. 
140,22 
The first attempts to define coenaesthesis (@emeingefii,£)l) as the sixth sense 
were made in the middle of the eighteenth century: see 'Beweis, dass der 
Mensch nur einen einzigen Hauptsinn, namlich das Gefuhl be sitze' (anon. 
Sorau, 1758): F.J. W. Schroder (1733-1778) 'Von der physicalischen Theorie der 
Empfmdungen' (Quedlinburg, 1764); F. G. de la Roche (1743-1813) 'Analyse 
des fonctions du systeme nerveux' (2 vols. Paris 1778, German tr. J. F. A. 
Merzdorf, Halle, 1794-1795, pt. II pp. 225-303). 
1. P. V. Troxler (1780-1866), in his 'Versuche in der organischen Physik' 
(Jena, 1804) nr. I accepted this definition, and distinguished between the three 
'spatial' senses touch, feeling, and sight, and the three 'temporal' senses smell, 
taste and hearing. J. G. Steinbuch (1770-1818) 'Beitrag zur Physiologie der 
Sinne' (Nuremberg, 18rr) p. 307 attempted to define the faculty of speech as 
the sixth sense. At this time the most outspoken defence of sensory sextuplicity 
326 

NOTES 
appeared in D. Walther's 'Ueber die Natur und Nothwendigkeit der Sechszahl 
der Sinne' (Amberg, 1809). 
The means by which blind Cheiroptera avoid collision with objects when in 
flight was unknown at this time, and so provided another reason for postulating 
a sixth sense: see Spallanzani's article in L. G. Brugnatelli's 'Giornale fisico med.' 
(1792) vol. I p. 197, and 'Reil's Archiv fur die Physiologie' vol. I p. 58. On 
knowledge without observation, c£ G. E. M. Anscombe 'Intention' (Blackwell, 
1963): R. Galambos 'The Avoidance of Obstacles by Flying Bats: Spallanzani's 
Ideas (1794) and later theories' ('Isis' 1942-1943 pp. 132-140): S. Dijkgraaf 
'Spallanzani's unpublished experiments on the sensory basis of object perception 
in bats' ('Isis' 1960 pp. 9-20). 
140, 30 
,bet ®etucf) ge1)ott bem innem Otgani~mus ar~ £uftigteit an'. Hoffmeister 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 161) suggests the following version, ,('Ilet) 
&etucf) 
(enti~ticf)t) bem innetn Otganismus, £uftigfeit', but Michelet's 
reading is more readily comprehensible. 
140, 39 
We have records of four attempts by Hegel to display the rationality of the 
senses. In the Jena lectures of 1803-1804 ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' I pp. 168-
171) he simply took the brain and the nerves to be the focus and organization 
of the senses, and then related each sense to its inorganic equivalent, i.e. sensation 
in general to gravity, shape and heat, hearing and sight to sound and colour, 
smell to air, and taste to water. 
In the Jena lectures of 1804-1805 ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II pp. 158-162) 
he took the ego to be the focus, and the feeling of the skin to be basic to the senses, 
which he then ranged in accordance with their approximation to the inwardness 
of consciousness, paying little attention to their inorganic equivalents. Hearing 
was taken to be the culminating sense because of its intimate connection with 
vocal Jaculty, through which the individual is able to give its fullest expression 
to consciousness. 
In the Heidelberg Encyclopaedia of 1817 (ed. Glockner, 1956 pp. 208-209) 
Hegel worked out the progression from gravity to light, air, water and sound 
with greater precision, and then attempted to reproduce this progression in 
assessing the senses. In this new treatment of the subject he managed to combine 
the essentials of both his previous expositions. 
The distinctive feature of his mature views on this subject is the emphasis he 
lays upon the triadicity of his assessment. 
C£ John Elliot (1747-1787) 'Philosophical observations on senses' (London, 
1780, German tr. Leipzig, 1785): C. N. Le Cat (1700-1768) 'Traite des sens' 
(Rouen, 1740): F. J. Schelver (1778-1832) 'Versuch einer Naturgeschichte der 
Sinneswerkzeuge' (Gottingen, 1798). This last work is probably the source of 
327 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Hegel's statement that some of the lower animals may not possess all five senses. 
See also the addition to § 3 16. 
142, 14 
, ~tegungi5t~eotiel. This theory was developed by the followers of John Brown 
(1735-1788), whose 'The Elements of Medicine' (2 vols. London, 1788) had a 
great effect upon German medicine about the turn of the century, c£ the note 
III. 378. According to Brown, animate bodies are distinct from inanimate 
bodies merely on account of their being susceptible to stimulation. He tended 
to regard this 'excitability' as an imponderable, and defined it merely as the 
essential principle of neural and muscular activity. 
J. A. Roschlaub (1768-1835) formulated the stimulation theory. He attempted 
to give philosophic form to the Brunonian system, and improved upon Brown's 
basic theory by putting forward the idea that this 'excitability' is the result of a 
reciprocal relationship between a vital principle and external stimulation. Brown 
had regarded disease as nothing but abnormal excitability resulting from an 
excess or deficiency in stimulation. Roschlaub added to this, that before a disease 
can set in, the excess or deficiency in stimulation must be accompanied by a 
requisite reaction or lack of reaction in the body concerned. In his later writings 
he attempted to explain health and disease in terms of oxidation and disoxida-
tion. See his, 'Von dem Einflusse der Brownischen Theorie' (Wurzburg, 1798): 
'Untersuchungen uber Pathogenie' (3 vols. Frankfurt-on-Main, 1798-1801): 
'Magazin fur ... praktische Heilkunde' (10 vols. Frankfurt-on-Main, 1790-
1803): 'Lehrbuch der besonderen Nosologie' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1807). 
The 'Erlauterung der Erregungstheorie' (Heilbronn, 1803), by J. F. Frank 
(1771-1842) provides an excellent exposition of the theory. It is based on one of 
Frank's earlier works, 'Erlauterungen der Brownischen Arzneilehre' (Heilbronn, 
1797), which gives a very good picture (pp. 193-238) of a doctor putting the 
theories of Brown to the test in his practical work. As Hegel points out however, 
these theories were soon abandoned by practising doctors, and taken up by 
would-be philosophers. He probably has in mind L. A. Liffmann's 'Ideen zu 
einer neuen Darstellung des Brownschen Systems' (2 vols. Gottingen, 1800-
1802), C. G. Kilian's 'Differenz der echten und unechten Erregungstheorie' 
(jena, 1803), and w. Liebsch's 'Babel in der neuen Heilkunde' (Gottingen, 1805). 
142,20 
Schelling's treatment of this subject is a good example of the empty 
formalism into which 'philosophic' interpretations of the Brunonian 
system tended to fall. Hegel is evidently referring to the following passage, 
,~a abet bie B-unftion be~ ffiei&e~ iibet~aulJt nut in bem ~ettJotbtingen 
feine~ GrntgegengefeNen liegt, fo et~eUt, ba~ bet ffiei& fe!bft entgegengefe~tet 
~tt, b.~. lJofititJ obet negatitJ fet)n fann, je nad.Jbem et bie :t~atigfeit et~o~t 
328 

NOTES 
obet ~ctaoftimmt. mOet j:lofititJ fann ein 91ei5 nUt miden oei einem gemiffen 
@tab bet 91ecej:ltitJitat. (5.58. ein getinget @tab 7IDatme nut oei dnem 9'~otb .. 
lanbet), negatitJ nut oei einem gemiHen @tab bet ~f)atigfeit, (5.0. SMHe .. 
negatitJ 91ei5 nut auf einen 6ubliinbet), mei! et in jenem U:aU Me 9tecej:ltitJitiit, 
in Mefem Me ~f)iitigfeit ~etaoftimmen foU. 58ci einem f)of)en @tab bet <ra,)Jacitiit 
fut dnen negatitJen 91ei5 fann butd) biefen bie ~f)iitigfeit nid)t tJetminbert, fo 
mie oei einem f)of)en @tab tJon ~f)iitigfeU butd) ,)JofititJen 91ei5 nid)t tJetmef)d 
metben. (:Ilaf)et aUein bas $f)iinomen bet m 0 ft u m p fun 9 gegen ben 91ei5 butd) 
&emof)nf)eU)'. 'Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie' (Jena, 1799) 
p. 83· ('Schellings Werke' ed. Schroter, Munich 1958) IIp. 88. 
143,2 
Although Hegel never shows anything but the greatest respect for Spinoza, 
he rarely mentions him without criticizing him. He deals with him at length in 
his 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane, 3 vols. London, 1963) 
III pp. 252-290, and assesses many of his ideas in the first two parts of his 
'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 2 vols. London, 1961). 
143,3 
See the note III. 315. 
143, 13 
John Brown (1735-1788), in his 'Elementa medicinae' (Edinburgh, 1780, Eng. 
tr. London, 1788, German tr. Copenhagen, 1796) classified diseases as either 
sthenic, i.e. inflammatory, or asthenic, i.e. debilitating. See the note III. 379. 
143,26 
'Caput mortuum'. In Hegel's day this was already an archaic term. In general 
usage it was taken to mean any worthless residue, in this case the chemical 
constituents of organic matter. In German it also had a more specific meaning 
however, and was used as a term for rotten-stone (~ti.\Jel), a decomposed 
siliceous limestone mainly used in metal-polishing, and colcothar (Q;ifenrott), a 
brownish-red peroxide of iron. C£ F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798) 'Handbuch der 
Chemie' (Halle, 1787) vol. I § 143, note; J. F. Pierer (1767-1832) 'Medizinisches 
Realworterbuch' (Altenburg, 1829) vol. 8 p. 343; J. C. A. Heyse (1764-1855) 
'Fremdworterbuch' (14th ed. Hanover, 1870). 
144,1 
Medical writers such as the later Brunonians, Roschlaub and the followers of 
Schelling made various attempts to explain disease in chemical terms, cf. B. 
Hirschel 'Geschichte des Brown'schen Systems und der Erregungstheorie' 
329 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(Leipzig, 1846). In assuming this to be a fruitful line of research, they were in 
substantial agreement with chemists such as A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809), L. N. 
Vauquelin (1763-1829) and].]. Berzelius (1779-1848), who were busily engaged 
in making chemical analyses of the most various organic products. Hegel was 
ready to admit that work of this kind had its value (§ 365), but he objected to its 
being interpreted as providing a full explanation of organic phenomena. He 
based this objection on his definition of the Notion of living being (§ 337), 
according to which the unity of the organism is compatible with the positing of 
distinct and transitory (e.g. chemical) moments within it. 
By the sixties of the last century the founding of microbiology by Pasteur, 
the discoveries made by Lister and I. Semmelweis (1818-1865) in the field of 
antiseptic surgery, and the advances made in medical entomology by R. 
Leuckart (1822-1898) etc. had fully substantiated Hegel's position in so far as 
he had objected on principle to chemical interpretations of nervous fevers. 
However, although this subsequent research showed why this objection was 
justified, it did not bear out his reasons for making it, in so far as these reasons 
were based upon empirical data (cf. § 371). 
Outbreaks of'nervous fever' ravaged the armies of Europe on many occasions 
throughout the Napoleonic period. There is a fascinatingly detailed account of 
these epidemics and of the related German, French and English medical literature 
of the time in H. Haeser (18II-1885) 'Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medicin' 
Oena. 1882) vol. III pp. 571-602. The worth of this literature in light of present 
knowledge may be judged by the fact that it was not until 1836 that two 
American doctors, W. Gerhard (1809-1872) and C. W. Pennock (1799-1867) 
distinguished between typhus and typhoid. See 'On the Typhus-Fever which 
occurred at Philadelphia in 1836, showing the distinctions between it and 
dothienenteritis' ('American Journal of Medical Science' February and August 
1837). 
144, 27 
Hegel took evil to be 'nothing but the inadequacy of that which is to that 
which should be' ('Encyclopaedia' § 472, cf. §§ 23,35). He also touches upon the 
subject in his 'Philosophy of Religion' (tr. Speirs and Sanderson. London, 1962) 
vol. III pp. 71-72, 'The world in its positive subsistence and the destruction and 
contradiction within it, occur in distinct contrast to God as the reconciled unity 
of being-in-self and being-for-self, and this gives rise to those questions con-
cerning the way in which evil is compatible with the absolute unity of God, the 
original source of wickedness etc., questions which pertain to all religions in 
which there is a more or less developed consciousness. In the first instance this 
negative appears as the evil of the world; but it also draws itself back into self-
identity, in which it constitutes the self-conscious being-for-self of finite spirit.' 
Hegel discusses Voltaire's, Kant's and Fichte's views on evil in 'Glauben und 
Wissen' (1802, Glockner's ed. Stuttgart, 1958) pp. 419-424, and Leibnitz's views 
330 

NOTES 
on the s:ubject in 'The History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, London, 
1963) vol. III pp. 340-342. 
144, 35 
Ignaz Paul Vitalis Troxler (1780-1866) was born in the Beromiinster district 
of the canton of Lucerne, and attended the grammar school at Solothurn. He 
left Switzerland for the first time when the French revolutionary troops invaded 
the country, and in 1800 began to study philosophy and medicine at Jena, where 
he fell under the influence of Schelling. He took his doctorate in medicine at 
Gottingen, visited Vienna, and then returned to his home canton where he 
practised as a medical doctor until 1807. 
It was in these early years that he produced the works to which Hegel is 
evidently referring, i.e. 'Ideen der Grundlage zur Nosologie und Therapie' 
(Jena, 1803), 'Versuche in der organischen Physik' (Jena, 1804), and 'Grundriss 
der Theorie der Medicin' (Vienna, 1805), all of which show the influence of 
Schelling and elicited his approbation. Typical of his writing at this time is his 
definition of secretion as ,eine nne£) innen gerie£)tete Q;Fretion' and of life as, 
'individual productivity, in which the producer and the product devour them-
selves within the form of self-determination and determinability.' 
In 1807 he lost his job in Lucerne because of his outspoken criticism of sanitary 
conditions in the canton. He then travelled in the Low Countries, France and 
Italy, and on his return to Beromunster began to play an active part in local 
politics. His attitude towards Schelling changed, and he began to develop his 
own views on the importance of anthropology, see 'Blicke in das Wesen des 
Menschen' (Aarau, 18II). In 1815 he attended the Congress of Vienna on behalf 
of Switzerland. 
In 1820 he was appointed professor of history and philosophy at the Lucerne 
Lyceum, but when his 'Furst und Yolk nach Buchanan's und Milton's Lehre' 
(Aarau, 1821) appeared, the Jesuit party on the staff forced him to resign his post 
and he again began to practise as a medical doctor. In 1823 he was appointed 
member of the Aarau education committee, in 1830 professor of philosophy 
at Basel and in 1834 professor at the new university of Bern, a post which he 
retained until his retirement in 1850. 
In these later years F. H. Jacobi (1743-1819) replaced Schelling as the main 
influence upon bis intellectual development. His work as a doctor, politician, 
teacher and philosopher had given him breadth of experience and knowledge, 
which he tried to deepen and synthesize by means of a philosophic anthropology 
or 'anthroposophy' as he called it. His mature works are very different from his 
early attempts at a philosophy of medicine. His 'Naturlehre des menschlichen 
Erkennens oder Metaphysik' (Aarau, 1828) has recently been republished (W. A. 
Aeppli, Bern, 1944), and his 'Logik. Die Wissenschaft des Denkens und Kritik 
aller Erkenntniss' (3 parts, Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1829-1830) is of interest on 
33 1 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
account of its comprehensive and sensitive treatment of the subject. The book 
contains a short appreciation of Hegel's logic (pt. III). 
145,29 
See the note III. 214. 
145, 33 
,~et S'nftinct ift hie aUf oetouat!ofe ?meife toitfenbe 3toedt'£)aUgfeU
I
• The 
word 'instinct' (Latin instinctus, from stinguere, to prick or sting) became com-
mon currency among the scholastics through the writings of St. Thomas 
Aquinas. It was not introduced into English until the sixteenth century however, 
and the first German writer to use the word in his mother tongue was Johann 
Jakob Bodmer (1698-1783), in his poem 'Noah' (1752) line 256. 
In Hegel's day it was a new word therefore, and there was some discussion 
as to its exact meaning. It was generally used as a substitute for 'bIinber :ttieb' 
or 'blind impulse', and taken to be innate, determined only by the animality of 
a sentient being. It was therefore distinguished from 'ilCatuttrieb' or 'natural 
impulse', which was a more comprehensive term, covering the higher spiritual 
impulses towards justice, honour, truth etc. See J. F. Blumenbach (1752-1840) 
'Handbuch der Naturgeschichte' (Gottingen, 1779) sect. III § 33: Erasmus 
Darwin (1731-1802) 'Zoonomia' (2 vols. London, 1796, German tr. 3 vols. 
Hanover, 1799) sect. XVI. 
146,6 
'The Physics' (tr. Wicksteed and Cornford, 2 vols. Loeb, 1929) Bk. II ch. i, 
'For nature is the principle and cause of motion and rest to those things, and 
those things only, in which she inheres primarily, as distinct from incidentally 
... And all such things have a substantive existence; for each of them is a 
substratum or "Subject" presupposed by any other category, and it is only in 
such substrata that nature ever has her seat. 
Further, not only nature itself and all things that "have a nature", but also the 
behaviour of these things in virtue of their inherent characteristics is spoken of 
as "natural".' 
146,28 
Different stages of sleep were recognized at this time and distinctions were 
drawn between sleepiness (somnolentia), slumber (sopor) and deep sleep (somnus 
profundus). Individuality, age and climate were generally recognized as playing 
an important part in sleeping habits. Whether sleep was to be regarded as a 
condition affecting the whole organism and related directly to its environment, 
or whether it was to be most clearly understood as a state determined mainly 
332 

NOTES 
by 'the highest functions of the nervous system' was a matter of debate however, 
and it was evidently this debate which determined Hegel's assessment of the 
subject. C£ Stephen Dickson 'Dissertatio de somno' (Edinburgh, 1783); 
Robert Cleghorn 'Dissertatio de somno' (Edinburgh, 1783); Erasmus Darwin 
(1731-1802) 'Zoonomia' (2 vols. London, 1796, German tr. 3 vols. Hanover, 
1799) sect. XVIII; J. E. M. Guiaud (1790-1844) 'Essai physiologique et patho-
logique sur Ie sommeil' (Paris, 1816); H. von Buchholz 'Ueber den Schlaf und 
die verschiedenen Zustande desselben' (Berlin, 1821); F. A. von Ammon 
(1799-1861) 'Commentatio ... in qua somni ... exponuntur et dijudicantur' 
(Gottingen, 1820). 
146, 33 
Hegel is here expressing the traditional view that these parasites originate in 
putrescible phlegm by a kind of spontaneous generation; see Geronimo Gabuc-
cini 'De lumbricis alvum occupantibus' (Venice, 1547): J. R. Sultzberger 'De 
vermibus in homine' (Leipzig, 1628); c£ William Ramsay (1626-c. 1676) 'Some 
Physical Considerations of the Matter, Origination and Several Species of 
Wormes' (London, 1668). This view was accepted because these parasites were 
known to be incapable of surviving outside their hosts, and because it was 
thought unlikely that their eggs could develop at any temperature other than 
that of the body in which they were engendered. The question was still an open 
one in Hegel's day, and it was not until J. J. Steenstrup (1813-1897) published 
his famous monograph in 1842 (tr. 'On the Alternation of Generations' Royal 
Society, 1845), and the work ofT. S. Cobbold (1828-1886) 'Entozoa' (London, 
1864) and R. Leuckart (1822-1898) 'Die Parasiten des Menschen' (2 vols. 
Leipzig, 1863-1876, English tr. 1886) had been published, that helminthology 
took on its modern form. 
Linnaeus traced the descent of the liver fluke of sheep from a free-living stage, 
and P. S. Pallas (1741-1811), in his doctoral dissertation (1760), pointed out that 
experiments were needed before any reliable statements could be made on the 
origin of parasitic 'worms'. In 1781 ('Neue nordische Beitrage' vol. I p. 43), 
Pallas even attempted to prove that the eggs of these insects must have been 
taken into the hosts from without. However, when the Danish Society of 
Sciences offered a prize for the best work on this subject in 1780, both the 
winning essays called Pallas's thesis in question: See J. A. E. Goeze (1731-1793) 
'Versuch einer Naturgeschichte der Eingeweidewiirmer thierischer Korper' 
(Leipzig, 1782, ed. J. G. H. Zeder, Leipzig, 1800); M. E. Bloch (1723-1799) 
'Abhandlung von der Erzeugung der Eingeweidewiirmer' (Berlin, 1782). As 
late as 1820, G. A. Goldfuss (1782-1848) cited these works as standard authori-
ties: 'Handbuch der Zoologie' (Nuremberg, 1820) pt. I pp. 126-127. 
In Hegel's day the classification put forward by C. A. Rudolphi (1771-1832) 
in 'Entozoorum, sive vermium intestinalium historia naturalis' (2 vols. Amster-
dam, 1808-1810) was in general use among German helminthologists. 
333 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
147,3 
G. S. Poli (1746-1825) 'Memoria sul tremuoto di 26 Luglio 1805' (Naples, 
1805) p. 48 et seq., gives a fme description of the general restlessness of the 
animals in the area just prior to the Neapolitan earthquake of July 26,1805. C£ 
Friedrich Hoffmann (1797-1836) 'Geschichte der Geognosie' (Berlin, 1838) 
pp. 380-383: II. 51, 25. 
147. 22 
The Lily Thrips (Liothrips vaneeckei) breeds and feeds and completes its 
entire life-cycle among the scale leaves of the bulbs of Lilies. Hegel may also 
have had in mind the Lily Beetle (Crioceris lilii), the grubs of which feed on the 
leaves of Lilies during the summer, and later pupate in an earthen cell beneath 
these plants. 
Few trees are more liable to the attacks of insect pests than Willows. An 
account of Willow pests is given in the Ministry of Agriculture's Bulletin no. 
29. Hegel may have had in mind Willow Aphides such as Melanoxantherum 
saliis and Pterochlorus saligna, Willow Leaf Beetles such as Phyllodecta vulgatis-
sima and Galerucella lineola, or the Willow Weevil, Cryptorrhynchus lapathi, 
which does considerable damage to the cricket-bat Willow, Salix coerulea. 
In mentioning the insects peculiar to Fig trees he probably has in mind the 
caprification mentioned in § 348, III. 99-100. 
148,28 
Cf. G. A. Gaultier 'Recherches sur l' organisation de la peau de l'homme, et sur 
es causes de sa coloration' (Paris, 1810). 
148,34 
,6ie fin!:> aUe tJierme~r gemifd)te, !:>urd) organifd)e S'eod)ung be&h.mngene 
~arbenl, C£ the note III. 376. 
149,2 
Johann Reinhold Forster (1729-1798) came of a West Prussian family which 
had emigrated from Scotland about 1642. He studied theology at Halle and 
worked as a priest at Danzig for some years before discovering that this was not 
his vocation. In 1765 he left for St. Petersburg with his son Johann Georg Adam 
Forster (1754-1794), and in the following year they came to England. The father 
taught French, German and Natural Science at Warrington Academy until 
1770, when he moved to London. His miscellaneous scientific and translation 
work soon made him known in London circles, and he was elected fellow of the 
Royal Society for his, 'Characteres Generum Plantarum quas in Itinere ad 
Insulas Maris Australis collegerunt' (London, 1775). 
334 

NOTES 
In 1772, when Captain Cook was about to set forth on his second' great 
voyage, Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820), who should have accompanied him, 
suddenly fell ill. Lord Sandwich recommended Forster as a replacement, so 
that father and son sailed with the expedition as naturalists. On their return in 
1775, Forster became involved in an undignified squabble with Cook and the 
Admiralty over the publication of his account of the voyage. On being forbid-
den to write, he gave his note-books to his son, whose vivid account was 
published a few weeks before Cook's. This gave rise to more bad feeling, and he 
was obliged to leave the country in 1779. He spent the last years of his life 
teaching at Halle. After these turbulent events his son was successively professor 
of natural history at Wilna and librarian at Mainz. 
J. G. A. Forster's 'A Voyage round the world in His Britannic Majesty's 
Sloop, Resolution, commanded by Capt. James Cook during the years 1772, 
1773, 1774 and 1775' (London, 1777) was translated into German (3 vols. 
Berlin, 1784). Goethe appears to be referring to the following passage in J. R. 
Forster's 'Observations made during a voyage round the World' (London, 1778) 
pp. 184-185, 'We cannot help being in raptures, when we tread the paths of 
O-Taheitean groves, which at each step strike us with the most simple, and at 
the same time the most beautiful prospects of rural life ; presenting scenes and 
happiness and affluence to our eyes, among a people, which, from our narrow 
prejudices we are too readily accustomed to call savage ... On the sea shore, the 
natives are employed in dragging the net, and taking a variety of beautiful fish, 
whose dying colours change every moment: or they pick some shells from the 
reefs .. .' 
149,22 
The 'vegetable' nature of hairs and feathers is not an invention of 
Hegel's. J. 1. Choulant (I791-1861) mentions it in his article 'Haare' in 
Pierer's 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' vol. III p. 790 (Leipzig, 1819), ,~s 
fd)einen baf)et tuirtHd) bie .\laau ettuas bon bet I.l3flan3ennatur an fid) 3u 
tragen, gleid)fam lJarafitifd) auf bem :tf)ierforlJer 3U tuur3eln, unb 3u91eid) eine 
21rt bon metmittlung 3tuifd)en ber iiuj3ern Dberfliid)e bes :tf)ierfotlJers unb bet 
iiuj3ern if)n umgebenben matur bat3ufteUen. mus biefet 21nfid)t ergibt fid) am 
natUrlid)ften, tuarum gerobe an ben md)tfeiten bet :tf)iete bet .\laattuud)s am 
ausgebilbetften f)etborttitt . • • ~nblid) ergibt es fid) aUd) barous, baj3 ben 
.\laaren bes :tf)ierforlJers eine ben I.l3flan5en analoge ~unction, ~infaugung 
unb 21usf)aud)ung, tuaf)tfd)einfid) aUd) bie 21bfonberung itgenb dnes @Saftes 
5ufommen miiffe.' 
C£ J. K. Pfaff 'De pilorum varietatibus naturalibus et praeternaturalibus' 
(Halle, 1799); C. A. Rudolphi (1771-1832) 'Dissertatio de pilorum structura' 
(Greifswald, 1806); A. Rowlandson 'Historical, philosophical and practical essay 
on the human hair' (London, 1818); Aristotle 'Historia Animalium' (tr. D. W. 
Thompson, Oxford, 1910) 517b-519a. 
335 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
150, ~ 
Treviranus cites certain beetles as examples of this: Dyticidae, which keep a 
supply of air under their elytra, and Hydrophilidae, which hold air in the pubes-
cence extending on either side beneath their abdomens. 
The Argyrotleta or European fresh-water spider provides the most striking 
example of an aquatic insect with a capacity for carrying air by means of this 
pubescence. It is known as the 'silver swimmer' because of its silvery appearance 
as it swims about under water enveloped in the air which it retains on its sternum 
and abdomen by means of these hairs. 
150,20 
Although Hegel rejects the hypothesis that the living blood is atomistic (cf. 
the note Ill. 314), by regarding arterial blood as 'satiated' with oxygen, he 
anticipates the discovery that the haemoglobin content of red corpuscles enables 
it to act as an oxygen carrier. 
For contemporary views on this subject see D. Ellis 'An inquiry into the 
changes induced on atmospheric air by ... the respiration of animals' (London, 
1807 and 18II): K. J. Zimmermann 'Abhandlung fiber den Respirationsprocess 
der Thiere' (Bamberg, 1817): J. Bourdon (1796-1861) 'Recherches sur Ie 
mechanisme de la respiration, et sur la circulation du sang' (Paris, 1820). 
151, 3 
The functioning of the glands was very imperfectly understood at this time, 
and nothing was known of the exact nature or function of the thyroid hormone, 
or of the control of its production by the thyrotrophic hormone produced by 
the pituitary gland. ,ilet SJCu~en bet iltiifen ift betfd)ieben, nad) ben 
betfd)iebenen 
~rten berfelben; im aUgemeinen beaief)t et fid) auf bie 
WHfd)ung~betiinbetung be~ 5Blute~ butd) 
~u~fd)eibung eine~ 6toffe~, obet 
bieUeid)t aud) nut bei einigen butd) einen innem tf)ierifd)~d)emifd)en $tocefl' 
(Pierer's 'Anatomisch- physiologisches Realworterbuch' vol. II p. 398, Leipzig, 
1818). It was known that changes took place in their texture, and exudation was 
thought to be the main cause of their becoming harder; see J. F. Meckel (1781-
1833) 'Handbuch der menschlichen Anatomie' (Halle, 1815) vol. I pp. 651-652. 
Autenrieth and Hegel were only vaguely aware of the nature of the blood and 
the way in which it supplies the ductless glands and helps to convey their secre-
tions and remove their waste products. It was not until Thomas Wilkinson 
King (1809-1847) had published his paper on the structure and functions of the 
thyroid gland in 1836, and E. C. Baber (1843-1890) had published the results 
of his researches on its minute structure ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1876 p. 557; 
1878 p. 56: 1881 p. 577), and shown that its lymphatic vessels contain the same 
colloid material as its alveoli, that any clear idea of the structure and functioning 
of the gland became possible. 
For early nineteenth century views on the gland see J. A. Schmidtmfiller 
336 

NOTES 
(1776-1809) 'Ueber die Ausfiihrungsgange der Schilddriise' (Landshut, 1804): 
A. Maas 'Dissertatio de glandula thyreoidea' (Wiirzburg, 1810): J. F. Acker-
mann (1765-1815) 'Dissertatio de corporis thyreoidei vera functione' (Heidel-
berg, 18II). 
151, 23 
J. J. Berzelius (1779-1848) analyzed saliva, and discovered that it contains, 
'99.29% water, ·29% salivous matter, ·14% mucus, ·17% muriatic alkalis, 
·009% lactic natron and osmazone, and ·002% pure natron'. ('Ueberblick iiber 
die Zusammensetzung der thierischen Fliissigkeiten' Nuremberg, 1814). 
Hegel probably had this book in mind when he wrote this paragraph. F. 
Tiedemann (1781-1856) and L. Gmelin (1788-1853) produced a similar work 
'Die Verdauung nach Versuchen' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1826-1827, French tr. 
1827). 
153, 3 
For contemporary English views on the bile see: J. Maclury 'Experiments 
upon the human bile and reflexions on the biliary secretion' (London, 1772): 
Richard Powell (1767-1834) 'Observations on the bilis and its diseases' (London, 
1800): George Rees (1776-1846) 'Practical observations on disorders of the 
stomach with remarks on the use of the bile' (London, 1810). In Hegel's day 
the standard German work on the physiology of the bile was by S. Goldwitz 
(b. 1758) 'Neue Versuche zu einer wahren Physiologie der Galle' (Bamberg, 
1785). 
A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809) suggested that it originates in the blood ('Journal 
de physique' vol. I pt. i p. 372). T. G. A. Roose (1771-1803) questioned this 
theory in his 'Physiologische Untersuchungen' (Braunschweig, 1796) pt. 5, and 
A. A. Parmentier (1737-1813) and N. Deyeux (1753-1837) showed by a series 
of experiments that Fourcroy's theory could not be substantiated ('Reil's 
Archiv' vol. I art. ii p. 104). 
154,6 
Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729-1799) 'Dissertazioni di fisica animale e vegetabile' 
(2 vols. Modena, 1780). The first volume of this work deals with digestion, the 
second with the genesis of animals and plants. Hegel evidently used the French 
translation of it hy Jean Senebier (1742-1809) 'Experiences sur la Digestion de 
l'homme et de differentes especes d'animaux' (Geneva, 1783), although C. F. 
Michaelis (1754-1814) had translated it into German (Leipzig, 1786). 
Hegel gives an account of his experiments in the addition to this paragraph. 
They were carried out in order to decide whether digestion operates by means 
of trituration, dissolvant juices, fermentation or putrefaction, or whether, as 
Hermann Boerhaave (1668-1738) had suggested, it involves all these factors. 
Antorio Vallisneri (1662-1730) had suggested that the stomach of the ostrich 
337 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
worked solely by means of trituration ('Opere fisico mediche' Venice, 1733, 
vol. I). Francesco Redi (1626-1698), in his 'Esperienze intorne a diverse cose 
naturali' (Florence, 1671) had made apparent advances in the understanding of 
digestion, but his conclusions had been questioned by Guiseppe Pozzi (1697-
1752). 
The method used by Spallanzani was suggested by R. A. F. Reaumur (1683-
1757) in an article published by the Academie des Sciences de Paris in 1752. 
154, 19 
G. E. Stahl (1660-1734), in his 'Zymotechnia universalis' c. 19 (Halle, 1697) 
attempted to show that the differences between various kinds of fermentation 
were merely a matter of degree, but Hermann Boerhaave (1668-1738), in his 
'Elementa Chemiae' (Lugduni, 1732, English tr. 1735) vol. II p. 166, distinguished 
between vinous, acidic and putrefactive fermentations, and this classification was 
still aceepted in Hegel's day. A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809) attempted to show that 
sugar fermentation and the' chromatic' fermentation which takes place in leaves 
are also distinct forms, but his views did not gain general acceptance. 
Sugar was taken to be the organic basis of vinous fermentation, and there was 
a general readiness to accept chemical explanations of acidic fermentation, and 
of the putrefactive fermentation occurring in humus and decaying animal 
bodies etc. 
L J. Thenard (1774-1857) was the first to suggest that fermentation is animal 
and not chemical in nature ('Annal. de Chimie' XLVI, 1803 pp. 224-320), but 
it was not until 1835 that C. C. Delatour (1777-1859) showed that it is caused 
by minute organisms ('L'Institut', III, 1835, pp. 133-134). 
154, 24 
Hegel is evidently referring here to Fourcroy's 'Systeme de connaissances 
chimiques' (6 vols. Paris, 1801). In vol. IV (p. 401) of the German translation of 
this work (Braunschweig, 1801-1803) Fourcroy states that he has been unable to 
fmd any difference between saliva and pancreatic juice. C( John Thomson's 
(1765-1846) notes to the English translation of this work. 'The Elements of 
Chemistry' (5th edition, 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1798). 
G. Fordyce (1736-1802) analyzed the pancreatic juice of animals and merely 
discovered that it contained a certain amount of cooking salt: 'A treatise on the 
digestion offood' (London, 1791, German tr. Leipzig, 1793 p. 53). 
155, 20 
,feinem 30me gegen bas Ooject'. By using the word ,30m' (wrath, choler), 
Hegel is evidently indicating the part played by the bile in the formation of the 
chyle. He evidently has in mind the Hippocratic doctrine of the four juices of 
the human body, and Galen's parallel doctrine of the four temperaments. 
338 

NOTES 
According to these doctrines the bile is the predominant factor in the develop-
ment of choler or wrath. 
156, 16 
,\tle{d)e \tlenig ober gar feinen 6Hdftoff entf)aUen'. Autenrieth wrote ,befi~en' 
(to be endowed with, hold, possess), not ,entf)aUen' (hold, include, contain). 
156, 38 
,'!lie [f)emie friegt aus 18eiben ~\tlar et\tlas 2lef)nHd)es f)eraus'. Hegel wrote 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. II8), ,'!lie [f)emie ~eigt in 18eiben et\tlM 
2lef)nHd)es' i.e. 'Chemistry indicates something similar in both'. 
157,29 
,~enn bas Organifd)e burd) Me ein~ernen smomente f)inburd) bas Unorga .. 
nifd)e aUmaf)Hg ~ur 3bentitat mit fid) bringt'o Hegel's version of this is signifi-
cantly different ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II pp. II 9-120) , ,~enn bas 
Organifd)e burd) bie ein~ernen smomente f)inburd) ms ~\tledmaflig bas Unor .. 
ganild)e aUmaf)Hd) ~ur 3bentitat mit fid) bringt'. i.e. 'If organic being, as 
purpose, docs gradually bring inorganic being into identity with itself'. 
157, 33 
Michelet introduced the emphasis here. 
158,5 
On the Hydra viridis (2lrmfjo{t)fj) see A.J. Rosel (1705-1759) 'Insectenbelusti-
gungen' (Nuremberg, 1755) pt. IIIsect.ii. G. A. Goldfuss (1782-1844) 'Handbuch 
der Zoologie' pt. I p. 79 (Nuremberg, 1820). 
158, 19 
Treviranus cites the Pyrosoma atlanticum as an example of this, and men-
tions, as his source, the account of this creature given by F. Peron (1775-1810) 
in 'Annales du Museum d'Histoire Naturelle' vol. IV pp. 437-446 (1804). He 
does not mention that Peron's description of its 'mode of nutrition' was 
merely a matter of conjecture however (loc. cit. p. 445). 
158, 25 
Aphrodites constitute a genus of marine worms with bristles of iridescent 
hues. In English they are also called Sea-mice, and in German '6eeraufjen' 
(Sea-caterpillars) . 
158,27 
Holothuria constitute the typical genus of the Echinoderms. They have an 
elongated form, a tough leathery integument, and a ring of tentacles around the 
339 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
mouth. See F. Tiedemann (1781-1860) 'Anatomie der Rohrenholothurie, des 
pomeranzenfarbigen Seesterns und des Stein-Seeigels' (Landshut, 1816). 
158, 28 
Asteriae constitute a genus of Echinoderms, containing the common Five-
rayed Star-fish, with allied species. See Tiedemann (op. cit. pp. 5-9), J. B. 
Spix (1781-1826) 'Memoire pour servir a l'histoire de l'asterie rouge' etc. 
('Annales du Museum d'Histoire Naturelle' vol. 13 pp. 438-459, 1809). 
158,29 
This point is made by Carl August Ramdohr in his 'Ueber die Verdauungs-
werkzeuge der Insecten' (Halle, 18II). Cf R. A. F. Reaumur(1683-1757) 'Mem-
oires pour servir a l'Histoire des Insectes' (Paris, 1734) vol. I pt. 2 p. 204. 
159, I 
John Latham (1740-1837), in his 'A General Synopsis of Birds' (3 vols. 
London, 1781-1785) mentions that the flesh of the Missel Thrush (Turdus 
viscivorus) 'is pretty good eating, though not so much esteemed as the lesser 
species', and that that of the Fieldfare (Turdus pilaris), 'is tolerably good, 
though apt to be bitter' (vol. II pp. 17, 24, 25). In England therefore, these 
birds do not seem to have been popular fare. 
In Germany however they were consumed in immense numbers. Johann 
Andreas Naumann (1747-1826), in his delightful 'Naturgeschichte der Vogel 
Deutschlands' (ed. J. F. Naumann, 4 vols. Leipzig, 1822-1824), although he 
discusses the snaring and marketing of these birds, makes no mention of the 
professional knowledge which Hegel considers to be an open secret. Naumann 
informs us (vol. II p. 275) that the flesh of the Song thrush (Turdus musicus) 
has a very fine taste, and that these birds were consumed by the thousand in 
the autumn, when they were fat. The most highly-prized of the Thrushes, as a 
table-bird, was the Redwing (Turdus iliacus), and in a season, Naumann 
estimates (vol. II pp. 287-8), 300,000 brace of these birds were caught on the 
coasts of East Prussia alone. 
The Fieldfare (Turdus pilaris) was caught all the year round and prized on 
account of the faintly bitter flavour of its flesh, which is due to its diet of juniper 
berries. Naumann informs us (vol. II p. 309) that they were always on sale in 
large quantities in the markets of the big towns, and that in the Danzig area 
60,000 brace of them were consumed annually. In part of Thuringia, many 
fowlers took between 600 and 1,200 brace of them a year. 
159,9 
See William Bligh (1754-1817) 'A Voyage to the South Sea, ... including 
an account of ... the subsequent voyage ... in the ship's boat, from Tofoa 
... to Timor' (1790, 2nd ed. London, 1792) pp. 191,238, 'With respect to the 
340 

NOTES 
preservation of our health, during a course of sixteen days of heavy and almost 
continued rain. I would recommend to every one in a similar situation, the 
method we practised, which is, to dip their clothes in salt-water, and \"ring 
them out, as often as they become filled with rain: it was the only resource we had 
and I believe was of the greatest service to us, for it felt more like a change of 
dry clothes than could well be imagined. We had occasion to do this so often, 
that at length all our clothes were wrung to pieces: for, except the few days 
we passed on the coast of New Holland, we were continually wet either with 
rain or sea ... Extreme hunger was ... too evident, but no one suffered from 
thirst, nor had we much inclination to drink, that desire, perhaps, being 
satisfied through the skin.' Cf. Byron's 'The Island' canto I ix (1823): John 
Barrow 'The Mutiny and Piratical Seizure ofH.M.S. Bounty' (London, 1831). 
It soon became well known in medical circles that Bligh's men had alleviated 
their thirst in this way: see Thomas Thomson's 'System der Chemie' (5 vols. 
tr. F. Wolff, Berlin, 1805-1811) vol. iv p. 681, and Bligh's account awoke a 
general interest in the problem of whether or not the skin is able to absorb 
moisture. Opinions were sharply divided over this matter of 'cutaneous absorp-
tion' as it was called. James Keill (1673-1719) seems to have initiated research 
in this field: see his 'Account of Animal Secretion' (London,1708). The subject 
was taken up and dealt with at some length by Georg Heuermann (1722-1768) 
in his widely read 'Physiologie' (4 pts. Copenhagen and Leipzig, 1751-1755) 
pt. II ch. 22, but the most influential writer to deal with it was Haller: see his 
'Elementa physiologiae corporis humani' (8 vols. Lausanne, 1757-1766) vol. 
IV bk. 12 p. 2 § 20, who came to the conclusion that the skin was able to absorb 
moisture. This view was questioned by Claude Pouteau (1725-1775) in his 
'Memoire contre l' extension donnee a l' action des pores absorbans de la peau' 
('Oeuvres posthumes' 3 vols. Paris, 1783) vol. I p. 185, and this difference of 
opinion gave rise to some very detailed research by William Cruikshank 
(1745-1800), see his 'The Anatomy of the absorbing vessels of the human 
body' (London, 1786), 'Experiments on the insensible perspiration of the human 
body' (London, 1795. German tr. Leipzig, 1798), and by John Abernethy 
(1764-1831) 'Surgical and Physiological Essays' (2 pts. London, 1793. German 
tr. Leipzig, 1795). 
This work was not primarily concerned with the skin however, and did not 
decide the matter. John Baptiste Clement Rousseau, a native of St. Domingo, 
graduated at the University of Pennsylvania in 1800 with a dissertation 'On 
absorption' (Philadelphia, 1800). He was convinced that the liquid was taken 
in by the lungs, and to prove this he fitted a mask which brought him air from 
an adjoining room. An assistant then applied spirit of turpentine, by means of a 
sponge, to the whole of his naked body, during the space of an hour. Turpen-
tine, if absorbed by the body, will make the urine smell of violets, but in this 
case, although he evacuated urine on three occasions, there was no trace of a 
violet smell. See J. G. Stock 'Account of Dr. Rousseau's Experiments on 
341 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Cutaneous Absorption' ('The Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' vol. 
II pp. 10-14, 1806): J. B. C. Rousseau 'A few words more against cutaneous 
absorption' ('Philadelphia medical Lyceum' vol. iv no. 4 pp. 201-216. 1808). 
This experiment inspired Dr. Josephus Bradner Stuart of Albany to counter 
with 'Experiments and Observations in defence of the doctrine of cutaneous 
absorption' ('New York Medical Repository' hexade 3, vol. 3 no. 2 art. 6 pp. 
137-142, 1812) cf. Leroux's Journal de Medecine'vol. 26 pp. 315-319, 1813. 
After urinating, Dr. Stuart got into a bath of madder at 4.30 p.m. and stayed 
there for two and a half hours. The temperature of the bath varied between 
82°F and 90°F, and that of the air was 34°F. Three hours after he had got out 
of the bath his urine was dark red, and he continued to pass water of this 
colour for a further twenty three hours. Similar experiments with a bath of 
rhubarb juice and with garlic plasters under the armpits showed beyond doubt 
the cutaneous absorption does take place. His conclusions were confirmed by 
Thomas Sewall (1787-1845): see 'Experiments and observations on cutaneous 
absorption' published in Thomas Bradley's 'Medical and Physical Journal' 
1814, vol. 3I p. 80. 
These experiments were well known in Germany, see J. F. Meckel's 'Deut-
sches Archiv fiir die Physiologie' vol. I pt. i pp. 151-154: vol. II pp. 146-147 
(Halle and Berlin, 1815, 1816): J. F. Pierer 'Anatomisch-physiologisches 
Realworterbuch'vol. IV pp. 217-222 (Leipzig, 1821), and evidently formed the 
basis of Hegel's judgement here. 
159, 16 
Guillaume Le Pois of Leyden gave the first account of the medicinal pro-
perties of ipecacuanha in his 'De medicina Brasiliensi' (Amsterdam, 1648). The 
French doctor Le Gras was the first to bring the root to Europe (1672), and J. 
H. Helvetius (1661-1727) popularized it as a cure for dysentry: see his 'RemMe 
contre Ie cours de ventre' (Paris, 1688): G. W. Leibniz 'De antidysenterico 
novo' (Hanover, 1696). In 1688 Louis XIV bought the secret of this cure for 
one thousand louis d' or, and made it public. 
In Hegel's day there were various kinds of ipecacuanha on the market: 
see A. Richard 'Histoire naturelle et medicale des differentes especes d'ipeca-
cuanha en commerce' (Paris, 1820). It was usually powdered and taken as a 
tincture in wine (vinum ipecacuanha), and during the eighteenth century was 
prescribed for fevers, see Abraham Vater (1684-1751) 'De Ypecacoanhe' 
(Wittenberg, 1732), and cramp, see J. J. Plenck 'Ueber die krampfstillende 
Eigenschaft der Ipekakuanha' ('Abhandlungen der Joseph. Akademie' I nr. 15), 
as well as dysentries. 
The root contains an alkaloid 'emetine' which acts as an irritant when 
brought into contact with the interior of the stomach and produces vomiting. 
This effect is also brought about after its absorption into the blood by its 
action on the vomiting centre of the brain. In Hegel's day however, very little 
342 

NOTES 
was known about the way in which it worked: see 'The Edinburgh Medical 
and Physical Dictionary' (Edinburgh, 1807). 
159, 16 
In Hegel's day opium was administered externally in order to diminish pain 
and remove spasmodic affections. It was usually taken in the form of a pill, 
bolus, or electuary however, and was also dissolved in diluted alcohol, white 
wine, or water. 
It was prescribed as a cure for inflammations, fevers, syphilis and cramps, 
and was used to deaden the pain during births and amputations: see an ex-
tensive bibliography in K. F. Burdach's 'Die Literatur der Heilwissenschaft' 
(3 vols. Gotha, 1810-1821): Thomas Kirkland (1722-1798) 'Thoughts on 
Amputation' (London, 1780): Samuel Crumpe (1766-1796) 'An inquiry into 
the nature and properties of opium' (London, 1793, German tr. Leipzig, 1796). 
Very little was known about its alkaloid contents, so that it was impossible 
to administer it with any degree of precision. It was not until 1802 that C. 
Dcrosne (1780-1846) isolated a crystalline compound which he called 'opium 
salt' ('Annales de Chimie' XLV 1802 pp. 257-285). In 1805 F. W. Sertiimer 
(1783-1841) independently obtained the same alkaloid and also isolated mesonic 
acid ('Trommsdorffs Journ. d. Pharm.' XIV pp. 47-93, 1806); see also a second 
paper by Serturner in which he gave this alkaloid the name of morphium 
('Trommsdorffs Journ. d. Pharm' XX pp. 99-103, 18rr). P.]. Robiquet (1780-
1840) identified a new base, narcotine, in 1817 ('Annales de Chimie' V pp. 
275-288, 1817). 
159, 38 
Pierce Smith (1774-1796) published 'Observations of the Structure of the 
Eyes of Birds' at the age of twenty one ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1795 pt. II pp. 
263-269). This paper was communicated to the Royal Society by George 
Pearson (1751-1828) who had at that time just published his translation of 
Lavoisier's 'Nomenclature Chimique' (London, 1794). Smith describes him-
self in this paper as a 'student of physic', and indicates that he has also shown his 
work to John Thomson (1765-1846) of Edinburgh. 
Treviranus took his account of Smith's later work from 'Nordisches Archiv 
fur Naturkunde, Arzneywissenschaft und Chirurgie' vol. III pt. ii pp. 130-136 
(Copenhagen, 1803). This publication was edited by Christoph Heinrich Pfaff 
(1773-1852), Pow Scheel (1773-18II) and C. A. Rudolphi (1771-1832). Scheel 
had visited Italy in 1797, and while he was in Florence, had obtained an account 
of Smith's experiments from G. V. M. Fabroni (1752-1822), who had at that 
time already published a tribute to his dead friend, 'Tributo d' amicizia a 
Pierce Smith ossia lettere sopra alcune novita fisiologiche, e specialmente 
sugli usi ed efllcacia del sugo gastrico' (Naples, 1796). 
In Naples, Smith experimented with the effects of certain drugs on various 
343 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
animals, i.e. of sal-ammoniac on frogs, of opium on frogs, kittens and ravens, 
and of tobacco on lizards, but when he dissected them after their death, he 
found that he was unable to draw any defInite conclusions from his work. 
Treviranus is evidently referring to the following passage in Scheel's article, 
,'Ilr. 6mitf) fanb fetner, baa ieber :tf)eU bei3 tf)ierifef)en Sfor.)Jeri3 ein j8ermogen 
befi~t, einen bem 6uccui3 gaftricui3 analogen 6aft 5U ergieaen, um abgeftorbene 
:tf)eUe 5U ber5ef)ren ober frembe 5ror.)Jer 5U berbauen unb einfaugbar 5U 
maef)en. Q;r beobaef)tete biei3 bei j8erfuef)en, bie er anfteUte, um noef) lebenbe 
()ba bon 9.Riiufen in bem berroaef)fen 5U maef)en, bei roelef)en bieielben 
bonig berbaut rourben, unb berfef)roanben. 6tilden B-leifef), 5atte Sfnoef)en 
u. berg!. f)atten bai3ielbe 6ef)idfal, roenn er fie unter bai3 B-eU ober in anbre 
:tf)eUe einei3 lebenben :tf)ierei3 braef)te. 
'Iliefer fief) in ~unben aofonbetnbe 6aft unb bie bamit berbunbenen auf" 
geioften, abgeftorbenen tf)ierifef)en :tf)eUe ober coaguHtte £t)m.)Jf)e, bUben 
naef) 6mitf) ben Q;Uer, beHen aUflOfenbe 5rraft man felbft an ben 5Sanbagen 
nief)t ielten geroaf)r roerbe.' 
Cf. Robert Watt (1774-1819) 'Bibliotheca Britannica' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 
1824) pt. i vol. ii col. 864g. 
160,32 
Hegel is here translating from Jean Senebier's version of Spallanzani's 
'Dissertazioni di fisica animale e vegetabile' (see the note III. 337) pp. 26, .20, 
27, 'Enfm, ... je fIs avaler a tous quelque chose, aux uns des petits tubes de 
fer-blanc, aux autres des petites boules de verre, a d' autres des balles de plomb 
herissees d' aiguilles et de lancettes ... nest vrai qu'il n'y eut aucun de ces 
estomacs qui ne contint quelqu'une de ces petites pierres, mais leur nombre 
etoit fort diminue ... Malgre ... Ie froissement des tubes de ferblanc, ... (et 
que) les pointes des unes et des autres qui restoient implantees dans la balle de 
plomb etoient fort emoussees . . . les estomacs eux-memes n' avoient pas plus 
souffert du sejour.' 
161,3 
For the effect of asparagus on the urine see, Stuart, 'Asperges: remarques 
sur l' odeur particuliere qu' elles communiquent aux urines' (J oumal de Mede-
cine' ed. Corvisart, Leroux and Boyer XXVI pp. 425-426, 1813). 
161,7 
Treviranus is referring here to experiments performed on dogs and asses by 
Sir Everard Home (1763-1832). Home published accounts of them in the phil. 
Trans. of the Royal Society (1808, pt. I 45-54, and pp. 133-142). In the fIrst 
article (p. 50) he describes an experiment performed on a dog on November 
8, 1807. Twelve ounces of 'a strong decotion of madder' were injected into 
the animal after its pylorus had been secured. 'In this experiment, without 
344 

NOTES 
making allowance for any liquid in the stomach, prior to the decoction of 
madder being injected, one-fourth part of the quantity thrown in had escaped.' 
Home drew the following conclusions from his experiments (pp. 141-142), 
'That the liquids received into the stomach beyond what are employed for 
digestion, are not wholly carried out of it by the common absorbants of the 
stomach, or the canal of the intestines, but are partly conveyed through the 
medium of the spleen into the circulation of the liver. 
The vessels which communicate between the stomach and the spleen have 
not been discovered; but ... there appears to be no other mode in which it 
can arrive there, but by means of such vessels; and the two different states of the 
spleen, which correspond with the quantities of liquids that pass from the 
stomach, are strongly in favour of the existence of such a channel.' 
Home retracted these views a few years later ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 18II). 
The arguments of the time for and against the existence of a 'viae urinariae 
clandestinae' are summarized by J. F. Meckel (1781-1833) 'Handbuch der 
menschlichen Anatomie' (Halle and Berlin, 1820) vol. IV pp. 479-485; c£ 
Treviranus (op. cit.) vol. IV pp. 513-521;J. H. Thilow(1761-I837) 'Anatomisch-
pathologische Abhandlung' (Erfurt, 1794). 
161, 32 
Human chyme had not been chemically analyzed at this time (Pierer op. cit. 
II p. 145, 1818) and analyses of animal chyme had proved inconclusive. Spal-
lanzani (op. cit.) discovered acidity in the stomachs of grain-eating animals, 
but not in those of carnivorous animals. B. Carminati (1750-1830), in his 
'Ricerche sulla natura ... del succo gastrico' (Milan, 1785, German tr. Vienna, 
1785) discovered that the gastric juice of carnivorous animals is acidic and that 
it also counteracts putrefaction. 
See: L. Brugnatelli (1761-1814) 'Versuch einer chemischen Zergliederung 
der Magensafte' (Cre11's 'Beitrage zu den chemischen Annalen' vol. I art, iv 
p. 69). G. T. Kelch, 'De liquore gastrico, ciborum menstruo' (Regiom., 1797), 
gives a summary of numerous chemical researches into the nature of gastric 
juice. 
162, 16 
See the note III. 338. 
162,20 
S. T. Sommering (1775-1800) suggested that blushing and turning pale 
were probably the result of a constriction brought about by the nerves, and so 
affecting the blood-vessels of the face, that in the first instance the blood is 
prevented from leaving the vessels, while in the second it is prevented from 
reaching them: 'Vom Baue des menschlichen Korpers' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 
1791-1796) 'Hirn- und Nervenlehre' §§ 241, 257. 
345 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
162,29 
There was some doubt at this time as to whether the spleen performs glandu-
lar functions or is merely a mass of vascular tissue, and there always had been 
doubt as to its general relatedness. Some physiologists such as Aristotle, Galen, 
Home, Meckel, Autenrieth etc. thought that it functions primarily in relation 
to the stomach. Others, such as William Hewson (1739-1774) and F. Tiede-
mann in his 'Versuche ... tiber die Verrichtung der Milz' (Heidelberg, 1820) 
tended to regard it as related primarily to the circulation of the blood. Hegel 
evidently accepts the third main proposition current at the time, i.e. that it is 
mainly related to the liver, and has the function of dis oxidizing the blood 
which is subsequently secreted as bile. In holding this view he was in agreement 
with Sommering, Richerand, Bichat, P. F. von Walther (1781-1849) etc. 
Certain very curious ideas were put forward regarding this gland. Ignaz 
Dollinger (1770-1841) even suggested that it was merely a second liver, formed 
by the tendency towards symmetry in vertebrates, and denied full develop-
ment through the presence of the stomach. ('Grundriss der Naturlehre des 
menschlichen Organismus' Bamberg and Wiirzburg, 1805 p. 127). 
C£ G. Stuckeley 'The spleen, its description, uses and diseases' (London, 
1723). 
163,24 
C£ S. T. Lucae 'Einige Satze aus der physiologischen Lehre von den 
secernirten Saften des menschlichen Organismus'. (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1815). 
164,9 
,bet 58ilbung~trieb'. See the note III. 350. 
165, 1 
Treviranus is referring to Berzelius's 'Untersuchung der Zusammen-
setzung des Menschenkoths', an article published in A. F. Gehlen's 'Neues 
allgemeines Journal der Chemie' vol. VI pp. 509-541 (1806), and evidently 
inspired by the work of A. Thaer (1752-1828) and H. Einhof (d. 1808), who 
had published an account of their researches on cow-dung in the same journal 
(vol. III p. 276). 
In this article Berzelius shows how he attempted to reach an understanding 
of the chemical changes involved in the process of chylification by isolating 
the various constituents of human faeces. He broke them down into 73·3% 
water, ·9% bile, ·9% albumen, 1-2% salts (carbonate, muriate and sulphate of 
soda, phosphates of magnesia and lime), 14% indissoluble animal matter, and 
bilin ('Gallenstoff', not 'Gallenharz' or choloidic acid as in Treviranus's account)_ 
The 'peculiar substance which looks like glue', Berzelius refers to it as 
,einen eigent~iimIid)en @>toff', accounted for 7% of the whole, and had also been 
346 

NOTES 
discovered by Thaer and Einhof in cow-dung. Berzelius describes it as resem-
bling nasal mucus in that it was slimy, grey-green in colour, and difficult to 
lixiviate with water. He thought that it was probably formed by the combina-
tion of bilin with a constituent of the chyme. 
The second 'peculiar substance' accounted for 2'7% of the whole, and 
Berzelius gave the following account for it, ,~r ift fotuo1)1 im m!affer aI£! in 
WIfo1)oI auffofIid), 1)at dne rotfJbraune iYarbe, tueld)e burd) 6iiuren 1)od)rotfJ 
gemad)t tuitb .•. 'Iliefe eigent1)iimIid)e imateria 1)at leine mertuantfd)aft 3-U ben 
ineutralfaI5en ..• Su ben imetaUo!t)ben 1)at fie dne groj3e Wffinitiit unb tuirb 
bon faI3-faurem Sinn, faI-\.1eterfaurem 6i1ber unb effigfaurem ~Iei beina1)e boU .. 
ftiinbig aw ifJrer WufIOfung in m!aHer niebergefd)Iagen •.. 6ie erft burd) 
~intuirtung ber £uft burd) eine meriinberung be£! &aUenftoff£!, unt> bieUeief)t 
auef) be£! ~itueij3ftoff£!, gebHbet tuerbe/ 
165,9 
On the chemical contents of urine Treviranus is evidently quoting P. H. 
Nysten (1771-1818) 'Recherches de physiologie et chimie pathologiques' 
(Paris, 18II) p. 240, and Berzelius, 'Ueberblick tiber die Zusammensetzungen 
der thierischen Fltissigkeiten' (Nuremberg, 1814). 
As these researches showed, urine contains phosphorus. A. F. Fourcroy 
showed by chemical analysis that bones contain a high percentage of phospho-
rus, see J. F. John (1782-1847) 'Tabellen des Thierreichs' (Berlin, 1814) p. 134, 
and it was probably this element that Treviranus had in mind when making 
this remark. 
165, II 
See L. N. Vauquelin (1763-1829) 'Analyse de la matiere cerebrale' (Paris, 
18II). 
165, 22 
Antoine-Francois Fourcroy (1755-1809) was born in Paris and educated 
at the College d'Harcourt. He was encouraged to study medicine by his 
father's friend Felix Vicq-d'Azyr (1748-1798), the well-known anatomist. 
After finishing his university studies in 1780 he did research on zoological 
and anatomical subjects, but his interest soon shifted to 'animal chemistry', 
and in 1784 he was appointed to the chair of chemistry at the Jardin du roi. 
He played no part in politics during the revolutionary period. In 1801 
Napoleon appointed him director general of public education, but he was 
unable to fulfil his duties satisfactorily and soon fell from favour. 
He is remembered mainly as one of the founders of organic chemistry, 
although the crudity of his methods of analysis merely enabled him to disting-
uish the chemical constituents of organisms. His 'Philo sophie chimique' (Paris, 
1792) was translated into many of the European languages, and his 'Medicine 
347 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
eclairee par les sciences physiques' (4 vols. Paris, 1791) and 'Systeme des con-
naissances chimiques' (8 vols. Paris, 1801) were widely read. Many of his 
chemical analyses of organic matters were first presented to the public in 
periodicals. 
Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin (1763-1829) was born in Normandy, and at the 
age of thirteen was apprenticed to an apothecary in Rouen. When he first 
arrived in Paris Fourcroy employed him as his servant, but he soon became 
his pupil, and before long he was his co-operator and friend. 
In 1791 he was elected member of the Paris Academy, and during the 
1790'S held various civil offices, until in 1802 he was appointed professor of 
chemistry at the College de France. He retired in 1812, but continued for 
several years, to do research and publish articles. 
Much of his work was done in conjunction with Fourcroy, although he 
took a greater interest in inorganic chemistry than did his master. In 1798 for 
example, he discovered chrome and glucina, and in 1805 isolated kinic acid. 
He applied the principles of analytical chemistry with great accuracy, and gave 
accounts of most of his fmdings in separate articles, which were published in 
various periodicals. 
Treviranus is evidently referring to Vauquelin's articles in 'Annales de 
Chimie' (1799) vol. 29 pp. 1-26, 'Experiences sur les excremens des poules, 
compares ala nourriture qu'elles prennent', and to the article 'Sur Ie guano' by 
Fourcroy and Vauquelin, which also appeared in 'Tilloch's Philosophical 
Journal' (1806, pp. II2-I15). C£ Vauquelin's article 'Analyse du chyle de 
cheval' ('Thomson's Annals of Philosophy' II, 1813 pp. 223-225). 
See W. A. Smeaton 'Fourcroy, chemist and revolutionary' (Cambridge, 
1962). 
165, 30 
Treviranus is evidently basing this statement on Vauquelin's article in 
'Annales de Chimie' (May, 1812). Many analyses of animal urine were made 
at this time, the main discovery being that herbivorous animals pass benzoic 
acid, but little or no uric and phosphoric acid, and that carnivorous animals 
pass urine containing pure ammonium. For a detailed account of these researches 
see J. F. Pierer (1767-1832) 'Anatomisch-physiologisches Realworterbuch' 
vol. III pp. 882-891 (Leipzig, 1819). 
166,9 
Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840) was born at Gotha, where his 
father was a schoolmaster. In 1769 he began to study medicine at lena, but he 
soon moved to Gottingen, where it was evidently Professor C. W. Buttner 
(1716-1801) who awoke his interest in anthropology. In 1775 he took his 
doctorate at Gottingen, and in the following year he was appointed professor 
of medicine at the university. Apart from visits to Holland and England in 
348 

NOTES 
1791-2, and to Paris in 1806, he stayed at G6ttingen for the rest of his life. He 
lectured there on mineralogy and botany as well as zoology, but his main 
interests were zoological, and it was in the fields of comparative anatomy, 
anthropology, and theoretical zoology that he made his most original contri-
butions to science. In 1784 he was elected member of the G6ttingen Society 
of Sciences. See K. H. Marx 'Zum Andenken an Blumenbach' (G6ttingen, 
1840). 
He gave his first lectures on comparative anatomy in 1777, and by 1785 was 
dealing comprehensively with the subject, although it was not until twenty 
years later that he published his, 'Handbuch der vergleichenden Anatomie' 
(G6ttingen, 1805, English tr. London, 1807). 
He is probably best known as the founder of scientific anthropology. His 
doctoral dissertation on this subject 'De generis humani varietate nativa' 
(G6ttingen, 1775) was re-issued and translated many times. In it he distinguishes 
between the five great races of mankind, the white or Caucasian, the yellow 
or Mongolian, the brown or Malayan, the red or American, and the black or 
Ethiopian. As part of his anthropological investigations he worked for many 
years on descriptions of sixty human crania, 'Collectionis suae craniorum 
diversarum gentium' (8 parts, G6ttingen, 1790-1828). 
His immensely popular 'Handbuch der Naturgeschichte' (G6ttingen, 1779) 
is largely based on Linnaeus, and is primarily factual and descriptive. It is not 
therefore typical of his work, the main feature of which consists in its providing 
interpretations of data. In his own day Blumenbach was known principally as 
the originator of the vitalist theory of the nisus formativus mentioned here by 
Hegel. 
The vitalists held the view that the origin and phenomena of life are due to 
or produced by a vital principle, as distinct from purely chemical or physical 
force. The early purveyors of the doctrine postulated a 'spiritus animalis' or 
'spiritus vitalis' as the principle of living being; see for example J. Actuarius 
(c. 149Q-C. 1560) 'De actionibus et adfectibus spiritus animalis' (Paris, 1557. ed. 
Fischer, Leipzig, 1774): Caspar Hofmann (1572-1648) 'Dissertatio de spiritibus' 
(Altdorf, 1616): August Quirinus Rivinus (1652-1732) 'De spiritu hominis 
vitali' (Leipzig, 1681). By the middle of the eighteenth century however, so 
many advances had been made in the exact study of human physiology, that 
vitalism in its traditional form was no longer a defensible doctrine, and radical 
reinterpretations of it began to be formulated. Haller's work is typical of the 
vitalist thinking of that time. His general physiological investigations, and 
especially those concerned with neurology, led him to postulate a 'spiritus 
nervorum' as the principle of living being: see 'Elementa physiologiae cor-
poris humani' (Lausanne, 1757-1766) vol. IV bk. 10 ch. 8 §§ 16-22. Towards 
the end of the century Johann Christian Reil (1759-1813) gave classical form 
to the theory of a life-force (vis vitae) in his 'Von der Lebenskraft' (1796, ed. 
Sudhoff, Leipzig, 1910). 
349 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Blumenbach's 'Ueber den Bildungstrieb und das Zeugungsgeschaft' (Got-
tingen, 1781, 3rd. ed. 1791) was the most important work in this general 
reassessment of vitalist principles. His belief in the fixity of the species seems to 
have been an important factor in his formulation of the nisus formativus, 
which he defines as follows, 'It is a force effective mainly in a merely mechanical 
manner, and giving rise in the inorganic sphere to crystallizations and similar 
formations. It is distinguished by the fact that it is able, in accordance with the 
infinitely varied and diverse determination of the organized body and its parts, 
to form the various organizable generative materials into determinate shapes 
in an equally various but purposefully modified manner. It is therefore within 
this drive, by the combination of the mechanical principle with that of pur-
posive modifiability, that it is effectuated, in the first instance by motivation 
into gradual transformation, but then also by the life-long maintenance of 
these organic formations through nutrition, so that even if the formations 
happen to have suffered injury, it re-establishes them, so far as possible, by 
means of reproduction.' Cf. Goethe 'Die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' 
sect. I vol. 9 (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1954) pp. 99-100. 
166, 10 
,~et stunfttrie6/. The distinction Hegel draws here, between ,58ilbung~trie61 
and ,stunfttrieb' is not original. The creative impulse (fd)i'>t'feriid)e 58ilbung~ttie6) 
was also taken to be a distinct form of the nisus formativus. For an excellent 
exposition of contemporary views on the subject, see the article ,58Hbung~ttie61 
by J. F. Pierer (1767-1832), in his 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' (Leipzig, 
1816) vol. I pp. 757-770. 
167, 14 
Cuvier 'Le Regne Animal distribue d' apres son organisation' (4 vols. Paris, 
1817); see vol. I pp. 47-55 'Expose rapide des fonctions intellectuelles des 
animaux'. 'L'instinct a ete accorde aux animaux comme supplement de l'in-
telligence, et pour concourir avec elle, et avec la force et Ie fecondite, au juste 
degre de conservation de chaque espece.' Cuvier makes particular mention 
of the building abilities of bees and wasps. 
For the history of the idea of instinct see E. C. Wilm 'The Theories of 
Instinct' (New Haven, 1925) and W. M. Wheeler 'Instinct: Essays in Philosophi-
cal Biology' (Harvard Univ. Press, 1939). 
Part three of W. H. Thorpe's 'Learning and Instinct in Animals' (London, 
1958) provides an excellent commentary on Cuvier's observation. 
168,8 
,6linbe mnlJiinge/• Treviranus notes that they were called 'Vasa varicosa' 
by Marcello Malpighi (1628-1694); see 'Opera Omnia' (2 vols. London, 1686); 
G. Blasius (co 1625-1692) 'Anatome animalium' (Amsterdam, 1681), and 'les 
350 

NOTES 
intestines greles' by Pieter Lyonet (1707-1789); see 'Traite anatomique de la 
Chenille' (Le Haye, 1762). 
168, 17 
,£lei ben ffiau~en unb Il{ftettau~en'. An ,Il{ftettau~e' is a caterpillar with 
more than eighteen feet: see N. I. Lucas 'A Dictionary of the ... German 
and English Languages' (2 pts. Bremen, 1863-1868) pt. I p. 71. Strictly speaking 
a caterpillar is the larva of a butterfly or moth. The word is occasionally used 
to describe the larvae of other insects however: Treviranus probably has in 
mind that of the Saw-fly. 
168,18 
,@a£le{fd)ttJan3 .. ffiau~e/ i.e. Phalaena vinula. 
168,24 
,bet mit bem ~e£len1)oben bet ~iiugt1)iete u£leteinftimmt'. Treviranus wrote, 
,bet mit bem ~e£len1)oben bet ~iiugt1)iete u£leteinfommt' (agrees). Hegel's 
version would appear to be an improvement on the original. 
169, 12 
Treviranus quotes the 'Traite anatomique de la chenille' (La Haye, 1762) by 
Pieter Lyonet (1707-1789) as the source of much of this information. 
169, 27 
For contemporary views on the vocal faculties of animals see: L. Wolff 
'Dissertatio de organo vocis mammalium' (Berlin, 1812): Cuvier 'tiber den 
untern Larynx der Vogel' (Reil's Archiv vol. V sect. I no. 2). Cf. the note on 
the senses III. 327. 
E. A. Armstrong, in 'A study of Bird Song' (O.U.P., 1963) has an interesting 
chapter on bird song as art and play, in which he points out (p. 244) 'that 
underlying every effort to show that birds have aesthetic taste is the difficulty 
of proving that any characteristic of bird song is non-utilitarian.' 
C£ J. M. Bechstein (1757-1822) 'Gemeinniitzige Naturgeschichte Deutsch-
lands' (4 vols. Leipzig, 1801-1807) vol. ii pp. 77-85. 
170,6 
Michelet's version of this sentence begins as follows, 
,~ie £leftiebigte 
megietbe ift ba1)et ... I. Hegel wrote (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 163), 
,~ie £leftimmte megietbe ift ba1)et ••• I. 
170,8 
Michelet inserted these brackets. Cf. 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 163. 
35I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
173,3 
,burd) biefe ~ermittlung hie &attung mit fid) oufammenoufd)He~en unb our 
~!ifteno ou bringenl• 
174,23 
This quotation is taken from part I p. 185 of G. H. von Schubert's 'Ahn-
dungen einer allgemeinen Geschichte des Lebens' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806, 1807, 
1821). In reproducing it Hegel failed to notice a typographical error listed in the 
errata. He should have deleted 'ganz' from ,~ud) bei bem ~iinnd)en ber 
~reme finb hie ~oben nid)t nur in if)rem Umrifl gano ebenfo geftaItet .•. I. 
At that time the best illustration of the anatomy of the Gryllus verriccivorus 
was to be found among the exquisite engravings published by August Johann 
Rosel (1705-1759) in 'Der Monatlichherausgegebene Insecten-belustigungen' 
(4 parts Nuremberg, 1746, 1749, 1755, 1761) pt. II B tab. 9. J. F. Blumenbach, 
in his 'Handbuch der vergleichende Anatomie' Gottingen, 1805) also notes the 
insect's large testicles, ,~et) hiefer fef)en namHd) oumaf)l hie mad)tig groflen 
~eftifel mit if)ren biinbebuei~ oUfammengefaIteten &efiiflen, ben eben fo groflen 
~t)erftOcfen mit ben aud) gleid)fam biinbeltueis barin bettf)eilten 
~t)etn, 
auffalenb af)nHd)I. 
The ,~remel or ,~remfel is evidently the genus 'Tabanus' mentioned in the 
'Handbuch der Zoologie' (2 vols. Nuremberg, 1820) which G. A. Goldfuss 
prepared for Schubert's lectures on natural history (vol. I pp. 428-429). c£ c. 
N. Colyer and C. O. Hammond 'Flies of the British Isles' (London, 1951) ch. 
VI (Tabanidae). In England the fly is sometimes known as a 'brimse': see 'The 
Historie of Serpents' (London, 1608) p. 769, a curious book by Edward Topsell 
(d. 1638), 'Those great horse-flies or ox-flies and brimsees that in summer 
season vex cattle'. 
174,27 
Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert (1780-1860) was one of the most gifted of 
Schelling's followers. He was born at Hohenstein in the Saxon Erzgebirge, 
the son of an impecunious clergyman, and was educated at the grammar 
schools of Greiz and Weimar. In the latter town he came under the influence of 
Herder, who gave him private tuition. In accordance with the wishes of his 
father he began to study theology at Leipzig in 1799, but when he moved to 
Jena in 1800 Schelling's lectures inspired him to take up medicine, and he 
qualified in this discipline in 1803. 
He thought of emigrating to South Africa, but married instead, and prac-
tised as a doctor at Altenburg for a couple of years. As he often took no pay-
ment for his services to the poor however, he was soon in the direst economic 
straits, so that the publication of a novel, and the editing ofPierer's 'Medicini-
sche Annalen' were necessary in order to supplement his income as a general 
practitioner. He sold up everything in 1805, and went to hear Werner lecture 
352 

NOTES 
at Freiberg. From then on he devoted himself to natural science. In 1809 he 
was appointed director of a new school (Realschule) in Nuremberg. In 1816 
he became tutor to the children of the hereditary archduke of Mecklenburg-
Schwerin, and in 1817 professor of natural history at Erlangen. He finished his 
teaching career as professor of natural history at Munich (1827-1853). 
As an attempt to synthesize the fmdings of the natural sciences the 'Ahn-
dungen einer allgemeinen Geschichte des Lebens' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806, 1807, 
1821) lacks form, order and precision. Schubert's taste for mystical speculation 
found fruitful expression in his later works on psychology 'Ansichten von der 
Nachtseite der Naturwissenschaft' (Dresden, 1808), 'Symbolik des Traumes' 
(Bamberg, 1814), 'Altes und neues aus dem Gebiete der innern Seelenkunde' 
(Leipzig, 1816), 'Die Geschichte der Seele' (Stuttgart, 1833), which he considered 
to be his main work, and 'Die Krankheiten und Storungen der menschlichen 
Seele' (Stuttgart, 1845). His ability to work in a precise, methodical and em-
pirical manner found expression in his comprehensive 'Handbuch der Natur-
geschichte' (Nuremberg, 1816-1823). 
He enjoyed hiking, and published a delightfully humorous 'Wander-
biichlein eines reisenden Gelehrten' (1823, 3rd. ed. Erlangen 1848). In 1836-7 
he visited Palestine with his wife, and wrote an account of the journey, 'Reise 
in das Morgenland' (Erlangen, 1838). The best of his purely literary productions 
is his autobiography (3 vols. Erlangen, 1854-1855), which he dedicated to 
Schelling, ,ilenn roa£I bet aIte 6d)iilet auf ~tben 'f)at unb gerootben ift, ba£l 
tletbanU et niid)ft @ott biefem £e'f)tet'. 
F. R. Merkel 'Der Naturphilosoph Gotthilf Heinrich Schubert und die 
deutsche Romantik.' (Munich, 1913). 
174, 31 
Jakob Fidelis Ackermann (1765-1815) was born at Riidesheim and educated 
at the grammar school in Cologne. In 1784 he began to study medicine at 
Wiirzburg, and later moved to Mainz, where he took his doctorate in 1787. 
Before returning to Mainz as a don in 1789, he travelled in Germany, Italy and 
Austria, and spent some time at Pavia, where he attended lectures by Johann 
Peter Frank (1745-1821), Antonio Scarpa (1747-1832), and Alessandro Volta 
(1745-1827). In 1792 he was appointed professor of botany and in 1796 pro-
fessor of Anatomy at Mainz, and when the French changed the organization 
of the university in 1798, Ackermann gained further promotion. In 1804 he 
was appointed professor of anatomy and chirurgy at Jena, and in 1805 pro-
fessor of anatomy and physiology at Heidelberg. 
He is best known for his opposition to F. J. Gall's phrenology (see the note 
II. 430), which he expressed in his 'Die Gall'sche Hirn-, Sch1idel-, und 
Organ-Lehre vom Gesichtspunkt der Erfahrung aus beurtheilt und widerlegt' 
(Heidelberg, 1806), but apart from the work mentioned here by Hegel, he 
produced several interesting and original books. He was one of the first doctors 
M 
353 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OJ! NATURE 
to make a scientific investigation of cretinism: see 'Ueber die Kretinen, eine 
besondere Menschenart in den Alpen' (Gotha, 1790), and his contributions to 
vitalist theory in 'Versuch einer physischen Darstellung der Lebenskraft organi-
scher Karper' (2nd. ed. Jena, 1805) were widely recognized. In his 'De combu-
stionis lentae phaenomenis, quae vitam constituunt' (Jena, 1804) he attempted to 
explain organic phenomena, by means of the laws of physics and chemistry, as 
a process of gradual combustion. 
Ackermann's first work on sexual differentiation was, 'De discrimine 
sexuum praeter genitalia' (Mainz, 1788, German tr. by J. Wenzel, Mainz, 
1788). Hegel is here referring to his 'Infantis androgyni historia et ichnographia. 
Accedunt de sexu et generatione disquisitiones physiologicae' (Jena, 1805), 
which must have been published while Hegel was delivering the lectures at 
Jena in the winter of 1805-6. 
Cf. 'A Mechanical and Critical Enquiry into the Nature of Hermaphro-
dites' (London, 1741), by James Parsons (1705-1770): I P. V. Troxler 'Versuche 
in der organischen Physik' (Jena, 1806) no. 6: J. H. Autenrieth 'Ueber die 
Verschiedenheit beyder Geschlechter und ihrer Zeugungsorgane' (Reil's Archiv. 
vol. VII sect. i no. I): F. Jacoby 'Dissertatio de mammalibus hermaphrodites, 
alterno latere in sexum contrarium vergentibus' (Berlin, 1818). 
174, 35 
Hoffmeister '(Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 165) indicates that this sentence 
is a translation from a French source, perhaps J. F. Lobstein (1777-1835), 
'Recherches et observations sur la position des testicules' (Paris, 1801), and 
that Hegel gives the original in the margin, 'Les conduits ejaculateurs traversent 
la prostate et s' ouvrent separement dans l' uretre au fond d' une lacune appelee 
veramontanum (?),. 
Hegel has mistranslated 'Veru montanum'. The 'Crista galli' is the osseous 
protuberance running down the middle of the spongy lamina of the ethmoid. 
It was given this name by earlier anatomists because of the resemblance it bears 
to a Cock's comb: see Andreas Vesalius (1514-1565) 'De corporis humani 
fabrica' (Basel, 1546) bk. I ch. 6. Hegel is referring to the elongated, cutaneous 
eminence on the inner surface of the urethra, which occurs where the bulbous 
part of this tube passes through the prostate. This feature was referred to as the 
'Crista galli gallinacei' by Philipp Verheijen (1648-1710), in his 'Anatomia 
corporis humani' (Louvain, 1683, German tr. Leipzig, 1704) tab. x, but it was 
generally known to the German anatomists of Hegel's day as ,bet @)cf)Ue~fen~ 
fo~f', or ,bet ~a~nenfo~f bet miinnHd)en ~atnro~te'. In English writings of 
the time it is referred to as the caput gallinaginis, or verumontanum. 
175,8 
,bas auffd)itlenenbe ~eq'. This phrase appears to be peculiar to Hegel. It 
354 

NOTES 
was probably suggested to him by the fact that erection is partly the result of 
the distension of the venous plexuses with blood. 
175,13 
The parallel development of the male and female sexual organs in the 
embryo and foetus, and their basic similarity, was generally known and re-
cognized in Hegel's day. See J. F. Pierer's 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' 
vol. III p. 513 (Leipzig, 1819). 
Hegel does not touch upon the comparative anatomy of these organs, although 
the placing of this discussion in the dialectical progression indicates that these 
remarks are meant to apply to the whole field of zoology treated in § 370. J. F. 
Blumenbach gives the subject a much fuller treatment in his 'Handbuch der 
vergleichenden Anatomie' (Gottingen, 1805) pp. 429-484. 
175, 16 
Embryology did not take on its modem form until the research organized 
by professor Ignaz Dollinger (1770-1841) at Wiirzburg bore fruit in K. E. 
von Baer's 'Ueber Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere' (2 vols. Konigsberg, 
1828, 1837): see the note III. 229. The best survey of the state of this science 
at the close of the eighteenth century is to be found in 'Grundriss der Zer-
gliederungskunst des ungeborenen Kindes in den verschiedenen Zeiten der 
Schwangerschaft' (2 vols. Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1792, 1795) by G. F. Danz. 
ef. K. F Burdach (1776-1847) 'Dissertation de primis momentis formationis 
foetus' (Regiom., 1814). 
Hegel inserted a note in the margin at this juncture (Jenenser Realphil-
osophie' II p. 165) which shows that he considered two further theories, 
I~euet, ~ ail et, einfad)e morfteUung unb fo bie organifd)e 91atur 
nid)t a n a 1 tJ fi e tt in if)te abftraften imomente; 2etlegen ins \rf)emif d)e -
unfiiglid)e Sfleinigfeiten; fonbern if)re Sfraft eben aUgemein; nid)t ®iiure, 
Sf ali, of)ne fid) ab&uftum~fen.' 
175,24 
A fuller knowledge of the ovum, the spermatozoon, cell division, and the 
three layers would have enabled Hegel to write more lucidly at this juncture. A 
marginal note in the original manuscript ('Jenenser Realphilisophie' II p. 166) 
shows that his main conception of the subject matter was sound enough, and 
that his primary concern was to avoid the purely chemical approach to embry-
ology championed by L. N. Vauquelin (1763-1829) in 'Annales de chemie' 
vol. IX p. 64, and J. F. John (1782-1847) 'Tabellen des Thierreichs' (Berlin, 
1814) tab. I A. 
Hegel writes, ,~eH ift imittel, wefentHd) Die metmittlung. 3ebes :Organ 
b i e n t, aber &ugleid) witb basfe1be auf einfad)e 
~eife &uftanbe gebrad)t 
(Q;mbrtJonen leben). 910twenbigfeit irgenbeiner ~unftion witb wibetIegt 
355 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
burd) ben ~aU, ltJo biefe ~unftion nid)t ftatt qat. ~er Unterfd)ieb ber %eile ift, 
ba~ Mefe ~nftalten gar nid)t einfad)er (fein fonnen) -
WCafd)inen fonnen 
tJereinfad)t ltJerben unb finb um fo tJoUfomner; nid)t fo ber :Organi~mu~. 
~idlid)feit ift, biefe WComente fo entltJicreIt 3U qaben. 
~a~ aTefuItat ift bM blo~e unorganifd)e ~eben -
ltJie @lauben an ein mid)ts 
3U qaben -
lBeltJei5 qilft nidJts.' 
C£ F. J. Cole 'Early Theories of Sexual Generation' (Oxford, 1930). 
175, 32 
Michelet quotes this in the original Greek. See 'The Metaphysics' (tr. H. 
Tredennick, London, 1947) I p. 417 (1044a 34-36). 
176,5 
,~ie @attung erqiilt fid) nur burd) ben Untergang ber 3nbitJibuen Me im 
~roce~e ber lBegattung iqre lBeftimmung erfiiUen'• Nicolin und Poggeler, in 
their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959) p. 306 make ,erfiiUen' 
singular. This is dearly a mistake. 
178, 13 
See the note III. 361. 
178, 19 
'Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles de Quadrupedes' (Paris, 1812) vol. I 
p. 58 'Heureusement l'anatomie comparee possedoit un principe qui, bien 
develope, etoit capable de faire evanouir to us les embarrass: c' etoit celui de la 
correlation des formes dans les etres organises. au moyen duquel chaque 
sorte d'etre pourrait, a Ie rigeur, etre reconnue par chaque fragment de chacune 
de ses parties.' 
180, 36 
This remark almost certainly owes something to Lessing's 'Laokoon, oder 
fiber die Grenzen der Malerei und Poesie' (1766): see the English translation 
of this work by E. C. Beasley and H. Zimmem (Bohn's Standard Library, 
1879). Lessing sets out to defme by analysis the limitations of poetry and the 
plastic arts, and enunciates the fruitful principle that each art is subject to 
definite conditions, and that it can accomplish great results only by limiting 
itself to its special function. 
182, 30 
In the following paragraphs Hegel makes his own translation of the original 
French. The English version is a translation of the German text. 
Cuvier (op. cit. p. 58 et seq), 'Tout etre organise forme un ensemble, un 
systeme unique et dos, dont toutes les parties se correspondent mutuellement, 
356 

NOTES 
et concourent ala meme action definitive par une reaction reciproque. Aucune 
de ces parties ne peut changer sans que les autres changent aussi; et par consequent 
chacune d' elles, prise separement, indique et donne to utes les autres. 
Ainsi, comme je l' ai dit ailleurs, si les intestins d' un animal sont organises 
de maniere a ne digerer que de la chair recente, il faut aussi que ses machoires 
soient construites pour devorer une proie; ses griffes pour la saisir et la dechirer; 
ses dents pour en decouper et en diviser la chair; Ie systeme entier de ses organes 
du mouvement pour la poursuivre et pour l' atteindre; ses organes de sens pour 
l' apercevoir de loin; il faut meme que la nature ait place dans son cerveau 
l'instinct necessaire pour savoir se cacher et tendre des pieges a ses victimes. 
Telles seront les conditions generales du regime carnivore; tout animal dispose 
pour ce regime les reunit infailliblement, car son espece n' auroit pu subsister 
sans elles; mais sous ces conditions generales il en existe de particulieres, rela-
tives a la grandeur, a l' espece, au sejour de la proie, pour laquelle l' animal est 
dispose; et de chacune de ces conditions particulieres resultent de ces circon-
stances de detail, dans les formes qui resultent des conditions generales; ainsi, 
non seulement la classe, mais l' ordre, mais Ie genre, et jusqu'a l' espece, se 
trouvent exprimes dans la forme de chaque partie. 
En effet, pour que la machoire puisse saisir, illui faut une certaine forme de 
condyle; une certain rapport entre la position de la resistance et celIe de la 
puissance avec Ie point d' appui; un certain volume dans les muscles temporaux 
qui exige une certaine grandeur dans la fosse qui les re<;:oit, et une certaine 
convexite de l' arcade zygomatique sous laquelle ils passent; cette arcade 
zygomatique doit aussi avoir une certaine force pour donner appui au muscle 
masseter. 
Pour que l' animal puisse emporter sa proie, il lui faut une certaine force 
dans les muscles qui soulevent sa tete, d' OU resulte une forme determinee dans 
les vertebres OU les muscles ont leurs attaches, et dans l' occiput ou ils s'inserent. 
Pour que les dents puissent couper la chair, il faut qu'dles soient tranchantes, 
et qu'dles Ie soient plus ou moins, sdon qu'dles auront plus ou moins exclusive-
ment de la chair a couper. Leur base devon etre d'autant plus solide, qu'elles 
auront plus d' os, et plus gros os a briser. Toutes ces circonstances influeront 
aussi sur Ie devdoppement de to utes les parties qui servent a mouvoir la ma-
choire. 
Pour que les griffes puissent saisir cette proie, il faudra une certaine ... force 
dans les ongles . . . etc.'. 
183, 29 
The following paragraph is translated from euvier op. cit. pp. 61-62, 'Nous 
voyons bien, par exemple, que les animaux a sabots doivent tous etre herbivores, 
puisqu'ils n'ont aucun moyen de saisir une proie; nous voyons bien encore que, 
n' ayant d' autre usage a faire de leurs pieds de devant que de soutenir leur corps, 
ils n' ont pas besoin epaule aussi vigoureusement organisee . . . leur regime 
357 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
herbivore exigera des dents a couronne plate pour broyer les semences et les 
herbages; ... cette sorte de couronne necessitant des mouvemens horizontaux 
pour la trituration Ie condyle de la machoire ne pourra etre un gond aussi serre 
que dans les carnassiers'. 
184, 12 
Cuvier op. cit. pp. 62-64, 'On conc;oit bien encore en gros la necessite d'un 
systeme digestif plus complique dans les especes OU Ie systeme dentaire est plus 
imparfait ... Mais je doute qu' on eut devine, si l' observation ne l' avoit appris, 
que les ruminans auroient tous Ie pied fourchu ... Par exemple, Ie systeme 
dentaire des animaux a sabots, non ruminans, est en general plus parfait que 
celui des animaux a pied fourchu ou ruminans .. .' 
The subsequent sentence seems to have been added by Hegel as a general 
summary of Cuvier's subsequent observations. 
184, 16 
Volcher Coiter (1534-1576) was born in Groningen. In 1555 the town granted 
him a scholarship for the study of medicine, and as his main interest was 
anatomy, he left for Italy, the 'De corporis humani fabrica' (Basel, 1543) and 
the teaching of Andreas Vesalius (1514-1565) having at that time made the 
schools of anatomy at Padua, Bologna and Pisa the most famous in Europe. 
At Pisa he worked under Gabriele Falloppio (1523-1562), who was at that 
time preparing his 'Observationes anatomicae' (Venice, 1561) and from whom 
he gained his interest in osteology and learnt the value of exact observation and 
precise description. At the Sapienza in Rome he met Bartolommeo Eustacchi 
(d. 1574) who had already conceived the idea of improving on Vesalius's work 
('Tabulae anatomicae' ed. J. M. Lancisi, Rome, 1714), and who introduced him 
to the study of comparative anatomy. He finally settled down in Bologna, where 
he did research on comparative anatomy under Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522-1605), 
and on embryology under Giulio Aranzio (1530-1589). He took his doctorate 
at Bologna and taught anatomy and chirurgy there until he was imprisoned by 
the Inquisition in 1566. 
On his release from prison he left Italy, and in 1568 gained the post of 
physician in ordinary to Louis duke of Bavaria. In the following year he was 
appointed town doctor in Nuremberg. He died suddenly on June 2, 1576, when 
he was about to take up an appointment as military doctor in the army of the 
Elector Palatine. 
Coiter did important work on the development of the bones in the human 
foetus: see his 'Tractatus anatomicus de ossibus foetus abortivi et infantis 
dimidium anni nati' ed. H. Eyssonius (1620-1690) (Groningen 1659). His 
'Tabulae externarum et internarum humani corporis partium' (Nuremberg, 
1572) contains excellent descriptions of the bones and muscles of the auditory 
358 

NOTES 
organs, the optic nerve, the ganglia of the spinal nerves, and the processes which 
come into play when the eye is injured. 
Treviranus is referring to the work which Coiter appended to Falloppio's 
'Lectiones de partibus similaribus corporis humani' (Nuremberg, 1575), in 
which he provided descriptions and illustrations of the skeletons of various 
animals. Coiter's writings are most easily accessible in 'A choice selection of 
medical and biological treatises taken from the works of Volcher Coiter', by 
B. W. Nuyens and A. Schierbeek, published as vol. 18 of 'Opuscula Selecta 
Neerlandicorum de Arte Medica' (Amsterdam, 1955). 'De quadrupedum 
sceletia' appears in an English translation, on pp. 173-218 of this work. 
Treviranus evidently has in mind the following passage on the goat (p. 179), 
'It is necessary that the poplites should bend inward, for use in walking; the fore 
limbs have to serve as feet. They consist of three large bones, articulating with 
each other in order. The first of these corresponds to our humerus. The second 
upper one corresponds to the ulna, to which, however, the radius is fmnly 
attached . . . Between this bone and the third there are three small bones, well 
suited for the articulations of the second with the third bone, which the other 
quadrupeds lack.*' 
*Note by the editors. 'This bone is formed by syntose of two metatarsalia, 
the so-called cannonbone. Coiter did not quite understand this.' 
184, 17 
Pieter Camper (1722-1789) was born in Leyden, studied there, and took his 
doctorate there in philosophy and medicine in 1746. He then travelled to 
England, and to Paris where he met the chirurgeon Antoine Louis (1723-1792) 
and the obstetrician Andre Levret (1703-1780). On his return to the Netherlands 
he was appointed professor of anatomy and chirurgy at Franeker (1749) where 
he found four undergraduates in the medical faculty. In 1755 he took up a 
similar appointment at Amsterdam, and in 1763 became professor of medical 
theory, anatomy, chirurgy and botany at Groningen. On his being appointed 
rector magnificus of Groningen University in 1766 he delivered an oration 
'De pulchro physico'. 
In 1773 he retired from university teaching to his country estate. In 1775 he 
entered politics in support of the house of Orange. His bluff forthright manner 
proved to be highly successful, and by 1784 he was a member of the Council of 
State. As a personality he is mainly remarkable for his manysidedness, 'He 
wanted to be everything', says his biographer (A. Louis 'Eloges' Paris, 1859), 
'and he was'. In the history of medicine he is mainly remembered for the 
excellence of his work in the fields of comparative and pathological anatomy. 
He made an important contribution to chirurgy through his discovery of the 
use of elastic bandages, and his 'Ueber die beste Form der Schuhe' (Vienna, 
1782) was twice published in English (tr. J. Dowie, London, 1861, 1871). Cf. 
'The Works of the late Professor Camper' (tr. T. Cogan, London, 1794). He 
359 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
enjoyed a great reputation in his own day, and it was to him and Blumenbach 
that Goethe first communicated his discovery of the intermaxillary bone. 
J. C. Fabricius (1745-1808), after investigating various skulls, had suggested 
that the negro might well have originated from a cross between the white man 
and apes. Camper opposed this theory in his 'Naturgeschichte des Orang-Utang 
und einiger andern Affenarten des Africanischen Nashorns und des Rennthiers' 
(Amsterdam 1782 tr. Herbell, Dusseldorf, 1791). Treviranus is evidently refer-
ring to the following passage in this work (p. 103), 
,~et)m ffienntf)iere 
finb gar feine 
~abenoeine in ben 6d)enfeln, fo roie aud) feine in ben 
roiebetfauenben ;tf)ieren bon gan5 ~urolJa, aud) nicfJt im Sfameel, in ber 
@itaffe unb ben ,\)itfd)en au!3 2lfien gefunben roetben. 3m 3af)re 1774 roat 
id) 5u boteilig mit meinet 
~reube uoer bie 
~ntbedung, baa bieie 
~eoentof)ten allen roiebetfauenben ;tf)ieten mangeln; benn id) fanb 
nad)f)et, baa fd)on (£oitet ('De Quadruped Sceletis' Hauptst. 2) f)ieran gebad)t 
f)atte. Unterbeffen f)ielt id) biefe fur eine aUgemeine 
~af)rf)eit, oi!3 id) 
ben 12 ()ftooer 1778 ba!3 @erilJlJe be!3 Heinen afiatifd)en ffief)d)en!3 erf)ielt, unb 
oalb fanb, baa e!3 nid)t aUein biefe ~eoentof)ten f)atte, fonbern baa fie aud) 
in ffiudfid)t be!3 ;tf)ier!3 fef)r grofl roaren/ 
184, 23 
Cuvier (op. cit. p. 64), '11 est impossible de donner des raisons de ces rapports; 
mais, ce qui prouve qu'ils ne soit point l' effet du hasard, c' est que toutes les fois 
qu'un pied fourchu montre dans l' arrangement de ses dents quelque tendance a 
se rapprocher des animaux dont nous parlons, il en montre aussi une dans 
I' arrangement de ses pieds. Ainsi les chameaux qui ont des canines, et meme 
deux ou quatre incisives a la machoire superieure, ont os de plus au tarse, parce 
que leur scaphorde n' est pas soude ou cuborde.' 
184, 29 
Cuvier (op. cit. p. 65), 'La moindre facette d'os, la moindre apophyse a un 
caractere determine, relatifa la cla~se, aI' ordre, au genre, et al' espece auxquels elle 
appartient, au point que toutes les fois que l' on a seulement une extremite d' os 
bien conservee, on peut avec de I' application, et en s' aidant avec un peu d' adresse 
de l' analogie et de la comparison effective, determiner toutes ces choses aussi 
surement que si l' on possedoit I'animal entier. J' ai fait bien des fois l' experience 
de cette methode sur des portions d'animaux connus, avant d'y mettre entiere-
ment rna confiance pour les fossiles, mais elle a toujours eu des succes si infaillibles, 
que je n' ai plus aucun doute sur la certitude des resultats qu' elle m' a donnes.' 
184, 35 
'Ex ungue leonem'. 'EK TW QVVXWV TOV A€VTa ytyvwaKEw.' 'The lion is 
known by his claws.' Plutarch ascribed this saying to the Greek poet 
Alkaios (seventh century B.C.). Lucian said that it derived from the sculptor 
360 

NOTES 
Phidias. See Thomas Cooper (1517?-1594) 'Bibliotheca Eliotae' (1559), 'To 
esteeme the lion by his talons: A prouerbe signifying, to perceiue by a little 
what the whole matter meaneth'. Ben Jonson (1573?-1637) 'Cynthia's Revels' 
Act v (Everyman ed. p. 227), 'Ex ungue; you know the old adage, as these, so 
are the remainder'. 
185, 16 
See the note III. 336. J. A. Schmidtmiiller, in his 'Ueber die Ausfiihrungs-
gange der Schilddriise' (Landshut, 1804) attempted to re-establish the traditional 
view that this organ functions as a gland. J. F. Meckel (1781-1833), in his 
'Handbuch der menschlichen Anatomie' (4 vols. Halle, 1815-1820) vol. 4 
§ 2328 had called it in question, and Hegel is evidently basing these statements 
on his authority. See J. F. Pierer 'Anatomisch-physiologisches Realworterbuch' 
vol. 8 pp. 317-319 (Altenburg, 1829). 
'Thyroidaea Glandula, a large gland ... Anatomists are uncertain whether it 
be conglobate or conglomerate; nor has its excretory duct yet been detected. 
Its use is consequently unknown.' R. Morris and J. Kendrick 'The Edinburgh 
Medical and Physical Dictionary' (Edinburgh, 1807). 
185, 32 
Aristotle did not propound a classification of animals in a definite and tabular 
form, but from a study of his 'Historia animalium', 'De generatione animalium', 
and 'De partibus animalium', the following classification may be arrived at: 
A. Blood-holding animals, i.e. Vertebrata 
(i) viviparous Enaema, i.e. Mammals 
(ii) Birds 
(iii) four footed or legless Enaema which lay eggs, i.e. Reptiles and 
Amphibia 
(iv) Fishes 
B. Bloodless animals, i.e. Invertebrata 
(i) soft-bodied Anaema, i.e. Cephalopoda 
(ii) soft-shelled Anaema, i.e. Crustacea 
(iii) Insects 
(iv) shell-bearing Anaema, i.e. Echini, Gastropoda and Lamelli-
branchia. 
Michelet, in a footnote, refers here to the 'Historia Animalium'; see D. W. 
Thompson's translation (Oxford, 1910). 
186,3 
See the note III. 366. 
186,6 
See the note III. 275. 
M* 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
186, IO 
Jean-Baptiste Antoine Pierre de Monnet, Chevalier de Lamarck (1744-1829), 
the great French naturalist. In 1793 he was given the job of reclassifying the 
collection of lower animals in the Paris Museum of Natural History. It was 
probably while engaged in this work that he first felt impelled to abandon his 
belief in the immutability of the species. He found that it is often very difficult 
to draw a clear line between two closely related species, and concluded from this 
that species in general are the result of gradual improvements in organization 
rather than acts of special creation. He expressed his views on this subject in his 
'Philosophie zoologique, ou Exposition des Considerations relatives a l'histoire 
naturelle des Animaux' (2 vols. Paris, 1809). There is an English translation of 
this work by Hugh Elliot 'Zoological Philosophy' (London, 1914). 
Hegel evidently has in mind the following passage in this work (p. 117), 
'Pour eviter toute equivoque, ou l' emploi d' aucune consideration hypothetique 
... je divisai la totalite des animaux connus en deux coupes parfaitement dis-
tinctes, savoir: 
186, 12 
Les Animaux a vertebres, 
Les Animaux sans vertebres'. 
See Cuvier's 'Le Regne Animal distribue d'apres son Organisation' (4 vols. 
Paris, 1817) vol. I pp. 55-61. Cuvier distinguishes between 'Animalia verte-
brata', 'Animalia mollusca', 'Animalia articulata' such as insects and worms etc., 
and 'Animalia radiata' or zoophytes. 
He gives the following account of the principle he employed in making these 
divisions, 'D' apres ce que no us avons dit sur les methodes en general, il s' agit de 
savoir quels sont dans les animaux les caracteres les plus influens dont il faudra 
faire les bases de leurs premieres divisions. II est clair que ce doivent etre ceux 
qui se tirent des fonctions ani males ; c' est-a-dire, des sensations et du mouve-
ment, car non-seulcment ils font de l'etre un animal, mais ils etablissent en 
quelque sorte Ie degre de son animalite.' 
186, 14 
,hie ffiiicfentoitvelfliule'. 'The phylum Chordata (or the chordate animals) 
includes all those animals which at some time or another during their life-
history possess a notochord. A notochordis an axial stiffening rod extending along 
the length of the animal and lying immediately above the alimentary canal and 
below the central nervous system. It may persist throughout life (as in the lance-
let, lamprey, and certain fishes) or be replaced, either wholly or partially, in the 
adult animal by a backbone or vertebral column. If this happens the animals are 
called vertebrates.' Grove, Newell and Carthy 'Animal Biology' (Univ. Tutorial 
Press, 1962) pp. 298-299. 

NOTES 
186, 25 
See the note III. 3 17. 
186, 36 
Lamarck (op. cit. pp. 138, 161-162), 'On sait que la colonne vertebrale est la 
base essentielle du squelette, qu'il ne peut pas exister sans elle ... D' ailleurs, 
aucun des animaux sans vertebres ne respire par des poumons cellulaires; aucun 
d'eux n'a de voix, ni consequemment d'organe pour cette faculte; enfin, ils 
paroissent, la plupart, depourvus de veritable sang, c' est-a-dire, de ce fluide 
essentiellement rouge dans les vertebres, qui ne doit sa couleur qu' a l'intensite 
de son animalisation, et surtout qui eprouve une veritable circulation ... 
Outre la colonne vertebrale, ici se perd encore l'iris qui caracterise les yeux des 
animaux les plus parfaits ... Les reins de meme, ne se trouvent que dans les 
animaux vertebres ... Dorenavant, plus de moelle epiniere, plus de grand nerf 
sympathique.' 
187, II 
Lamarck (op. cit. p. 214), 'Mais c'est dans la division des animaux sans vertebres 
qu' on voit s' aneantir Ie coeur, Ie cerveau, les branchies, les glandes conglomerees, 
les vaisseaux propres a la circulation, l' organe de l' oute, celui de la vue, ceux de 
la generation sexuelle, ceux meme du sentiment, ainsi que ceux du mouvement'. 
187, 36 
,an betJd}iebene 3nbibibuen bedf)eilt'. Treviranus wrote ,in betJd}iebene. 
3nbibibuen bedf)eilt'. 
188,4 
Lamarck (op. cit p. 165), 'lIs respirent par des branchies ... lIs ont tous un 
cerveau; des nerfs non noueux, c' est-a-dire, qui ne presentent pas une rangee 
de ganglions Ie long d'une moelle longitudinale; des arteres et des veines; et 
un ou plusieurs coeurs uniloculaires. Ce sont les seuls animaux connus qui, 
possedant un systeme nerveux, n' ont ni moelle epiniere, ni moelle longitudinale 
, 
noueuse. 
188,27 
Lamarck (op. cit. p. 128) enumerates fourteen divisions in all, four of Verte-
brata and ten ofInvertebrata. 'On aura, pour la classification de tous les animaux 
connus, les quatorze classes suivantes, que je vais encore presenter dans un ordre 
contraire a celui de la nature. 
1. Les Mammifieres. } 
2. Les Oiseaux. 
Animaux vertebres. 
3. Les Reptiles. 
4. Les Poissons. 

189,21 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
5. Les Mollusques. 
6. Les Cirrhipedes. 
7. Les Annelides. 
8. Les Crustaces. 
9. Les Arachnides. 
10. Les Insectes. 
II. Les Vers. 
12. Les Radiaires. 
13. Les Polypes. 
14. Les Infusoires. 
Animaux invertebres. 
Snakes either have no limbs or merely the claw-like vestiges of the hinder 
pair. In regarding them as related to fish, Hegel is evidently following Aristotle; 
see 'Historia Animalium' (tr. D. W. Thompson, Oxford, 1910) 505b etc. They 
may be regarded as degenerate on account of their loss of limbs, and it is now 
thought probable that their bodily form arose in correlation with a habitat 
among dense vegetation, in which limbs do not appear to be such efficient 
organs for motion as lateral undulations. 
In Hegel's day their 'rudimentary feet' were a matter of discussion largely on 
account of the recent edition of the 'Historia mirabilium', attributed to Apol-
lonius Dyscolos (fl. c. 140 A.n.), in which mention is made of a snake with these 
features. This work had been edited and translated by W. H. Xylander (1532-
1576) in his 'Historiae Commentitiae' (Basel, 1568), and was re-issued by L. H. 
Teucher (Leipzig, 1792). The best edition of it is to be found in 'Physici et 
medici Graeci minores' (Berlin, 1841) vol. I by J. L. Ideler (1809-1842). 
Aristotle, in his 'Historia Animalium', (op. cit. 508a 8 ... II) says quite 
clearly that, 'the serpent genus ... is devoid oflegs', but in this later work the 
Stagyrite is quoted as saying that on Paphos there was a two-legged snake 
which resembled a crocodile. 
189,23 
The Duck-billed platypus (Ornithorhynchus) was described by Franc;:ois 
Peron (1775-1810) and Charles Lesueur (1778-1846) in their 'Voyage de 
Decouvertes aux terres australes, 1800-1804' (2 vols. Paris, 1807) vol. I p. 34, 
and this work was almost certainly the ultimate source of Hegel's information. 
It is now taken to be an established fact that both mammals and birds have 
evolved from reptilian ancestors, but along evolutionary lines which have been 
distinct from the beginning. The eggs of the three main groups of mammals-
Prototheria, Metatheria, and Eutheria-can be arranged, according to the 
amount of yolk present, to form a graded series. Those of the Prototherians are 
the largest, and those of the Eutherians the smallest. The eggs of the Duck-billed 
364 

NOTES 
platypus, although much smaller than those of any reptile, are really quite large, 
for they measure from 4 to 6 mm in diameter. 
189,24 
The Ostrich was sometimes known as the Camel-bird. Thomas Scott (1747-
1821) in his notes on the book of Job observes that, 'The Ostrich is called by the 
Persians the Camel-Bird'-'The Holy Bible ... with original notes' (London, 
1788-1792). G. A. Goldfuss (1782-1844) in his 'Handbuch der Zoologie' (2 
vols. Nuremberg, 1820) II p. 234 notices that its urinary bladder and the 
muscular ring (' .\larnbra~egi1JfeC) of this organ are large, and collect the urine, so 
that the bird is able to urinate in the same way as mammals. Cf. Fourcroy and 
Vauquelin 'Analyse de I'urine de l'austriche' ('Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.' XVII pp. 
310-3 19,18II). 
190,4 
Lamarck (op. cit. pp. 155-158). This characterization ofFish is Hegel's own, 
but, as he indicates, it is based on certain observations made by Lamarck viz.: 
'Les Poissons. Animaux respirant par des branchies, ayant la peau Ii sse ou chargee 
d' ecailles, et Ie corps muni de nageoires ... On ne retrouve plus en eux l' organe 
respiratiore des animaux les plus parfaits ... Ces animaux, ainsi que ceux des 
rangs posterieurs, n' ont ni trachee-artere, ni larynx, ni voix veritable ... Ainsi, 
les poissons offiant, dans leur organisation ... Ie sens du tact incapable de faire 
connoitre 1a form des corps; et se trouvant vraisemblablement sans odorat, car 
les odeurs ne sont transmisses que par l' air.' 
190, 16 
Lamarck (op. cit. pp. 155-158), 'Leur foetus, enferme dans une enveloppe 
inorganique (la coque de l' oeuf) qui bientot ne communique plus avec la mere, 
peut s'y developper sans se nourrir de sa substance.' 
190, 3 I 
Lamarck (op. cit. pp. 150-151), 'Cependant, si l'on considere que les oiseaux 
aquatiques (comme les palmipedes), que les echassiers et que les gallinaces ont 
cet avantage sur tous les autres oiseaux, que leurs petits, en sortant de l' oeuf, 
peuvent marcher et se nourrir; ... on reconnoitra qu' (ils) ... doivent con-
stituer les trois premiers ordres des oiseaux, et que les colombins, les passereaux, 
les rapaces et les grimpeurs, doivent former les quatres derniers ordres de la 
classe ... (parceque) leurs petits, en sortant de l' oeuf ne peuvent marcher, ni se 
nourrir eux-memes.' 
190, 36 
See John Hunter (1728-1793) 'On certain Receptacles of Air in Birds, which 
communicate with the Lungs, and are lodged both among the Fleshy Parts and 
365 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
in the Hollow Bones of those Animals' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 64 p. 205, 
1774). 
191, 8 
Cf. E. A. Armstrong 'A Study of Bird Song' (Oxford Univ. Press, 1963), and 
the note III. 351. 
191, 34 
For a survey of contemporary views on hair see J. F. Pierer 'Medizinisches 
Realworterbuch' vol. III pp. 777-791 (Leipzig, 1819). Cf. J. H. Kneiphof 
'Abhandlung von den Haaren' (1754, German tr. Rotenburg, 1777): J. K. 
Pfaff 'De varietatibus pilorum' (Halle, 1799): C. A. Rudolphi 'Dissertatio de 
pilorum structura' (Greifswald, 1806). 
192,40 
Lamarck (op. cit. pp. 142-143), 'Lf'~ mammi}ieres onguicuIes; ils ont quatre 
membres, des ongles aplatis ou pointus a l' extremite de leurs doigts, et que ne 
les enveloppent point. Ces membres sont en general, prop res a saiser les objets, 
ou au moins a s'y accrocher. C'est parmi eux que se trouvent les animaux les 
plus parfaits en organisation. 
Les mammi}ieres ongules; ils ont quatre membres, et leurs doigts sont envelop-
pes entierement a leur extremite par une corne arrondie, qu' on nomme sabot. 
Leur pieds ne servent a aucun autre usage qu'a marcher ou courir sur la terre, 
et ne sauroient etre employes, soit a grimper sur les arbres, soit a saiser aucun 
objet ou aucune proie, soit a attaquer et dechirer les aut res animaux. Ils ne se 
nourrissent que de matieres vegetales. 
Les mammi}ieres exongules; ils n' ont que deux membres, et ces membres sont 
tres-courts, aplatis et conformes en nageoires. Leurs doigts, enveloppes par la 
peau, n' ont ni ongles, ni corne. Ce sont de to us les mammifieres ceux dont 
l' organisation est la moins perfectionnee. Ils n' ont ni bassin, ni pieds de derriere; 
ils avalent sans mastication prealable; enfin, ils vivent habituellement dans les 
eaux; mais ils viennent respirer l' air a leur surface. On leur a donne Ie nom de 
cetaces.' 
193,6 
This 'consequently' no') evidently assumes the characterization of the con-
tinents given in the Addition to § 339. 
193,7 
It is clear from this paragraph that Hegel was aware of the main develop-
ments in zoological classification taking place in the first decades of the last 
century. The standard classification of the late eighteenth century was of course 
366 

NOTES 
the avowedly artificial system of Linnaeus ('Systema naturae I2th ed. 1766), in 
which animals were divided into six classes, Mammals, Birds, Amphibia, Fishes, 
Insects and Worms. The amount of research inspired by this system may be 
judged from the fact that Lamarck, in his 'Philosophie zoologique' (2 vols. 
Paris, 1809), recognized ten times as many animal genera as his Swedish pre-
decessor. New affinities came into evidence as data accumulated, and by the tum 
of the century attempts were being made to establish natural systems of classifi-
cation in all branches of zoology. 
Johann Hermann (1738-1800), in his 'Affmitatum Animalium Tabulam' 
(Argentorati, 1777) was the first to show how the form of one part of an 
animal's body determines or influences the form of the other parts, but this book 
attracted little attention. Karl Heinrich Kielmeyer (1765-1844), who was in 
charge of the scientific collections at Stuttgart after 1816, attempted to base 
zoology on comparative anatomy and physiology. It was evidently his work 
which inspired Cuvier and as Hegel points out, it was Cuvier's law of the 
correlation of the parts of an animal's body which opened up the possibility of 
a comprehensive natural system of classification. Cuvier classified the animal 
kingdom by dividing it into four branches, characterized by different types of 
anatomical structure:-
i. Animalia Vertebrata: Mammalia, Birds, Reptiles, Fishes. 
ii. Animalia Mollusca: Cephalopoda, Pteropoda, Gastropoda etc. 
iii. Animalia Articulata: Annelides, Crustacea, Insects etc. 
iv. Animalia Radiata: Intestinal Worms, Polypii, Infusoria etc. 
While Hegel appreciated the value of this system, he found it difficult to 
reject the rival classification put forward by Lamarck, whose grading of animals 
in accordance with their capacity for feeling, sensibility and intelligence, offered 
him precisely the teleological interpretation he was looking for. Lamarck's 
zoological 'scala naturae' was as follows:-
A. Apathetic Animals: i. Infusoria ii. Polypii iii. Radiaria iv. Tunicata 
v. Vermes. 
B. Sensitive Animals: 
vi. Insecta vii. Arachnida viii. Crustacea 
ix. Annelida 
x. Cirripedia xi. Conchifera 
xii. Mollusca. 
C. Intelligent Animals: xiii. Fishes xiv. Reptiles xv. Birds xvi. Mammals. 
Hegel accepted this' development from the simplest organization to the most 
perfect, in which nature is the instrument of spirit', and interpreted it as best he 
could in the light of Cuvier's comparative anatomy, by emphasizing the part 
played by 'the various circumstances and conditions of elemental nature' in 
animal formation. He failed to follow developments in embryology and his-
tology however (note III. 229), the importance ofK. F. Heusinger's 'System der 
Histobgie' (2 pts. Eisenach, 1822), and ofK. E. von Baer's Beobachtungen und 
Reflexionen tiber die Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere' (Konigsberg, 1829) 
was evidently unknown to him, and his interpretation of the significance of 
367 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
animal physiology in zoological classification is therefore somewhat crude. 
Only eight years after his death Theodor Schwann (1810-1882), in his 'Mikro-
skopische Untersuchungen' (Berlin, 1839, Engl. tr. London 1847), was able to 
indicate the cellular structure of animals and plants, and state, ,ba~ es ein 
gemeinlames (futtoidelungs+,rinci+, fut bie betld)iebenften 
@:lementatt~eile 
bet ()tganismen giot, unb ba~ bie 3eUenoilbung bieles @:nttoidelungs+,rinci+, 
iW. Hegel's exposition, based as it was upon Cuvier, Lamarck and Bichat, gives 
no indication that such a break-through was imminent. 
The immediate origins of the divisions of the animal kingdom diagnosed by 
Hegel are as follows:-
(a) Worms (Vermes) formed the sixth class of the Linnaean system. Linnaeus 
seems to have used the class for all those animals he was unable to identify with 
any certainty, and it included what are now known as Mollusca, Coelentera, 
Protozoa, Tunicata and Echinodermata. O. F. Muller (1730-1784), in his 'Von 
Wiirmern des sussen und salzigen Wassers' (Copenhagen, 1771) tried to classify 
these animals with more precision. In Lamarck's system they constituted the 
fifth class, and were divided into four orders, Molles (Tape-Worms and Flukes), 
Rigiduli (Nematoids), Hispiduli (Nais etc.) and Epizoariae (Lernaens etc.). 
Shell-:fish were placed in the third order of the class Vermes in the Linnaean 
classification of 1748 and named 'Testacea', whilst naked Mollusca were placed 
in the second order under the heading 'Zoophyta', together with Echinoderms, 
Hydroids and Annelids. Ten years later Linnaeus replaced the name 'Zoophyta' 
by 'Mollusca', which was thus in the first instance applied, not to the Mollusca 
at present so termed, but to a group consisting chiefly of other organisms. 
Gradually, however, the term Mollusca was used to include those Mollusca 
formerly placed among the 'Testacea', as well as naked Mollusca. G. S. Poli 
(1746-1825), in his 'Testacea utriusque Siciliae, eorumque historia et anatome' 
(3 vols. Parma, 1791-1795 and 1826-1827) divided Mollusca according to their 
means of motion. Cuvier's 'Memoires pour servir a l'historie et a l' anatomie des 
mollusques' (Paris, 1816) was the standard work on them in Hegel's day. Cuvier 
divided them into Cephalopoda (Cuttles), Gastropoda (Snails, Whelks, Slugs), 
Pteropoda (Sea-butterflies), Acephala (Clams, Mussels, Oysters), Brachiopoda 
(Lamp-shells), Nuda (Sea-squirts, Tunicata) Cirrhopoda (Sea-acorns). The last 
three classes were removed from the 'branch' during the nineteenth century, 
but the rest of his classification remained intact. 
(b) Insects were classified by Linnaeus in accordance with the nature of 
their wings, as Coleoptera, Hemiptera, Lepidoptera etc. J. C. Fabricius (1745-
1808) took their masticatory organs as the basis of his classification, see his 
'Systema Entmologiae' (Flensburg and Leipzig, 1775), and J. K. W Illiger 
(1775-1815), in his edition of J. G. Kugelmann's 'Verzeichniss der Kifer 
Preussens' (Halle, 1798) attempted with some success to combine the principles 
of Linnaeus and Fabricius. M. J. C. L. Savigny (1778-1851), in his 'Memoires 
sur les Animaux sans Vertebres' (Paris, 1816), established the homology of the 
368 

NOTES 
jaws of all insects. C£ J. O. Westwood (1805-1893) 'Modem Classification of 
Insects' (2 vols. London, 1839-1840). 
(c) Fishes were so carefully classified on the basis of their external and internal 
parts by Peter Artedi (1705-1734), see his 'Ichthyologia' (ed. Linneaus, Lugd. 
Bat. 1738), that it was not until Cuvier and Valenciennes began to publish their 
'Histoire naturelle des Poissons' (22 vols. Paris, 1828-1840), in which classifi-
cation was based upon the skeleton, the form of the gills, the form of the upper 
jaw and the fins, that any great advances were made. Cuvier's classification was 
based to some extent on the work of Alexander Monro (1733-1817), see his 
'The Structure and Physiology of Fishes Explained' (Edinburgh, 1785, Germ. 
tr. ed. Camper, Leipzig, 1787). Mark Eliezer Bloch (1723-1799), in his 'Systema 
Ichthyologiae' (ed. Schneider, Berlin, 1801) put forward a classification based 
on the number of fms, but this led to many unnatural combinations and 
distinctions. 
Reptiles were known as 'oviparous quadrupeds' until Linnaeus drew attention 
to their living partly in water and partly on land, and renamed them Amphibia. 
M. J. Brisson (1723-1806), in his 'Regne animal divise en neuf classes' (Paris, 
1756) emphasized the importance of their creeping, and gave them the name 
Reptiles (Latin refere, to creep). J. N. Laurenti, in his 'Specimen medicum 
exhibens Synopsin Reptilium emendatum' (Vienna, 1768) classified them in 
accordance with their ways of moving, as Salientia (leaping), Gradientia (walk-
ing) and Serpentia (creeping). The first natural system of classification was that 
propounded by Michael Oppel (1782-1820) in his 'Ordnungen, Familien, und 
Gattungen der Reptilien' (Munich, 1811). Cuvier's classification into Chelonia, 
Sauria, Ophidia, Batrachia, was based on osteological considerations. Blasius 
Merrem (1761-1824), in his 'Versuch eines Systems der Amphibien' (Marburg, 
1820) distinguished three orders, Testudinata, Loricata, and Squamata, and 
diagnosed the sub-divisions in accordance with modifications of the limbs. 
L. J. Fitzinger, in his 'Neue Classification der Reptilien' (Vienna, 1826) drew up 
a 'tabula affinitatum generum' in order to demonstrate 'the progress of nature', 
but in fact had no clear idea of genetic affinity, and merely based his groupings 
on morphological resemblances. 
Birds formed the second of Linnaeus' classes, and were divided by him into 
six orders, Accipitres, Picae, Anseres, Grallae, Gallinae, Passeres. M. J. Brisson 
(1723-1806), in his 'Ornithologia' (4 vols. Paris, 1760) diagnosed twenty six 
orders, and his generic divisions were far more natural than those of Linnaeus, 
but his work was done without any reference to anatomical structure. In 
Cuvier's classification, which was standard in the 1820'S, Birds formed the second 
class of Animalia Vertebrata, and were divided into six orders: Accipitres, 
Passeres, Scansores, Gallinae, Grallae, Palmipedes. There is little evidence of 
Cuvier's ever having dissected Birds however. 
The first tentative attempts at working out a natural classification of Birds 
were made by C. L. Nitsch (1782-1837) in his 'Osteographische Beytrage zur 
369 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Naturgeschichte der Vogel' (Leipzig, 18II). In 1820 Nitsch proposed a classifi-
cation based upon the nasal glands (Meckel's 'Deutsches Archiv fur die Physi-
ologie' vi pp. 251-269), and in his 'Observationes de avium arteria carotide 
communi' (Halle, 1829), he drew attention to the classificatory potential of the 
vascular system. In two papers published in the' Abhandlungen der Berlinischen 
Akademie: Physischer Klasse' (1813 pp. 237-259, 1817 pp. 178-198), Blasius 
Merrem (1761-1824) outlined the most satisfactory ornithological classification 
available to Hegel. He divided Birds according to the presence or absence of the 
crista on their sternum, and formulated the following classiftcation:-
A. Aves Carinatae: i. Aves aereae 
ii. Aves terrestres 
iii. Aves aquaticae iv. Aves palustres 
B. Aves Ratitae 
In his second paper, he supplemented this classification by reference to the 
nature of the feathers, the position of the furcula and coracoids, the number of 
lumbar vertebrae and corpals, and the direction of the iliac bones. 
Mammals were divided into seven orders by Linnaeus, Primates, Bruta, 
Ferae, Glires, Pecora, Belluae, Ceta. Cuvier divided them into Bimana, Quad-
rumana, Carnivora, Marsupialia, Rodentia, Edentata, Pachydermata, Ruminantia 
and Cetacea. Hegel's classification evidently owes something to the work of 
Thomas Pennant (1726-1798), 'History of Quadrupeds' (London, 1781, Germ. 
tr. Bechstein, Weimar, 1799) and J. c. P. Erxleben (1744-1777), 'Systema regni 
animalis' (Leipzig, 1777), who emphasized the importance of the feet and the 
teeth in classification. G. C. C. Storr (1749-1821), in his 'Prodromus methodi 
mammalium' (Tubingen, 1780) distinguished three orders of Mammals, based 
on the nature of their hands, feet and fms. 
In Hegel's day therefore, zoology was in a state of radical transition, the old 
artificial systems of classification were being discarded, and various attempts 
were being made to work out natural systems. By 1850 the advances made in 
palaeontologyy, embryology, histology, osteology and cytology had prepared 
the ground for the Darwinian synthesis, but in 1830 theories of evolution such 
as that put forward by Lamarck in the introduction to his 'Histoire naturelle des 
animaux sans vertebres' (Paris, 1815) were still a matter of speculation. Hegel 
should certainly have followed the developments initiated by Bichat and Cuvier 
more carefully than he did, but in rejecting evolution (note III. 229), he was 
making a perfectly competent assessment of the empirical zoology of the 1820'S. 
Cf. F. W. Assmann 'Quellenkunde der vergleichenden Anat(mi~' (Braunsch-
weig, 1847) for a detailed survey of the literature of this period; D. G. Ritchie 
'Darwin and Hegel' (London, 1893). 
195, 12 
Michelet's source for this passage is to be found in Hoffmeister's 'Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II pp. 167-169. Much of the original has been omitted. 
370 

NOTES 
195, 30 
See the note III. 253. 
195, 33 
Hans Adolf Goeden (1785-1826) was a doctor of medicine, and practised in 
this capacity at Bunzlau, at Gumbinnen in Lithuania, at Lowenberg in Silesia, 
and at Friedland in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, where he died on November 14, 1826. 
From his practical work he gained experience in the curing of inflammations, 
typhus, arthritis, nervous fever, delirium, scarlet fever etc. and published ac-
counts of his fmdings in various books and articles. 
His development is interesting, because it is in many ways typical of the period 
through which he lived, and historians of medicine have undoubtedly failed to 
give his writings the attention they deserve. In his early works he was clearly 
influenced by the theorizing of Schelling and the Brunonians: see 'Andeutung 
der Idee des Lebens' (Berlin, 1808), 'Ein Fragment zum System der Krankheiten 
des Menschen' (Berlin, 1806), and 'Theorie der Entziindung' (Berlin, 18 I I). 
Through the influence of professor Ernst Horn (1772-1848) of Berlin, he then 
began to publish theoretical works of more practical application: see 'Ueber die 
Natur und Behandlung der Typhus. Ein Versuch in wissenschaftlich-erfahrenem 
Sinne', with a preface by Horn (Berlin, 18I1): 'Bemerkungen uber die Natur 
und Behandlung der Gicht' and 'Ober Febris nervosa epigastrica' in Horn's 
'Archiv fur medicinische Erfahrung' (Berlin, 181I and 1812). At this period he 
also published 'Von dem Wesen der Medizin, eine Einladungschrift zu seinen 
Vorlesungen' (Berlin, 1812), and it was evidently this which helped to form 
Hegel's main conception of his work. 
In the last decade of his life, he devoted himself to detailed analyses of spe-
cific diseases and cures: see 'Von der Arzneykraft der Phosphorsaure gegen den 
ansteckenden Typhus' (Berlin, 1815), 'Die Geschichte des ansteckenden Typhus' 
(Breslau, 1816), 'Von dem Wesen und der Heilmethode des Scharlach-Fiebers' 
(Berlin, 1822), and 'Von dem Delirium Tremens' (Berlin, 1825). These works 
show a steady development of the idea that the main worth of medical theory 
lies in the effectiveness of its application. His last work was 'Thomas Sydenham, 
uqer seine Bedeutung in der Heilkunst' (Berlin, 1827), in which he evaluated 
the use Sydenham made of the Baconian method: cf. Sir G. Newman 'Thomas 
Sydenham, reformer ofRnglish medicine' (London, 1924). 
Hegel refers to him as 'ein ~ett ~t. @iibe', evidently on purpose. Goeden had 
criticised Hegel's treatment of disease and healing in the Heidelberg edition of 
the 'Encyclopaedia', in an article published in Oken's 'Isis oder Encyclopadische 
Zeitung' (Jena, 1819) pp. I127-I138, entitled 'Critische Bemerkungen ueber 
Hegel's Begriff vom Wesen der Krankheit und der Heilung'. Very few of the 
natural scientists of Hegel's day paid any attention whatever to his 'Encyclo-
paedia' or to his lectures, and the outcome of Goeden's bothering to do so was 
by no means encouraging. 
37I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
In dealing with Goeden's criticism, Hegel concentrates upon his theory of 
medicine. By the 1820'S it was becoming evident that the generalizations made 
by the Brunonians and their followers, and the systematization of diseases at-
tempted in works such as Cullen's 'Synopsis nosologiae methodicae' (Edinburgh, 
1769), were no longer to be defended. Goeden himself was in the process of 
abondoning many of his early tenets. Hegel was therefore justified in attacking 
his argument to the extent that it was based on outdated suppositions. He was 
not justified in ignoring the main points of Goeden's criticism however, which 
were (i) that he had attempted to explain disease in terms of sensibility, irrita-
bility and reproduction, and (ii) that he had ascribed the organism's being in a 
diseased state to its being in conflict with its 'inorganic potency'. 
The application of cytological discoveries of the 1830'S and 1840's to pathol-
ogy: see Rudolf Virchow (1821-1902) 'Die Cellularpathologie' (Berlin, 1850), 
Sir Richard Owen's discovery (1835) of Trichina spiralis, a parasitic nematode 
which becomes encysted in the muscles of man and the pig, Agostino Bassi's 
discovery that silkworm rot is caused by a parasitic cryptogamic fungus ('Del 
mal del sengo calcinaccio 0 muscardino' 2 vols. Lodi, 1835-1836), and Pasteur's 
breakthrough in the field of microbiology etc. were soon to prove the per-
tinence of Goeden's criticism. 
196,3 
,~ai3 im Beben @:ini3 unb oerfcf)molcren ift, unb innerlicf) oerborgen.' Goeden 
wrote ,~ai3 im Beben @:ini3 unb oerfcf)molcren ift, unb innerlicf) oerbunben', 
,~erborgen' has the meaning of 'concealed', 'latent', 'occult', ,oerbunben' of 
'connected', 'bound', 'joined', 
196, 35 
,~ie 6cf)abHcf)feit.' 
197, 12 
For a lucid and exhaustive survey of the history of epidemic diseases see 
Heinrich Haeser (18II-1885) 'Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medicin und der 
epidemischen Krankheiten' vol. III (Jena, 1882), 
197, 19 
The erroneous idea that syphilis was brought from America was given wide 
currency through the popularity of 'De morbis venereis' (Paris, 1736, English 
tr. London, 1737, German tr. Leipzig, 1784) by Jean Astruc (1684-1766). Cf. 
Philipp Gabriel Hensler (1733-1805) 'Geschichteder Lustseuche die zu Ende des 
fiinfzehnten Jahrhunderts ausbrach' (Altona, 1783): Christoph Girtanner (1760-
1800) 'Abhandlung fiber die venerischen Krankheiten' (Gottingen, 1793). 
In 1494 Charles VIII of France invaded Italy in order to take the throne of 
Naples, and entered the city on February 12, 1495 without having encountered 
372 

NOTES 
the slightest opposition. The ease of this campaign gave his army plenty of time 
for indulgence, the effects of which became most apparent after the battle of 
Fornova. When Charles' army was disbanded, his Swiss and German mercen-
aries spread syphilis north of the Alps. 
A detailed account of the early history of syphilis is to be found in H. Haeser 
(op. cit. III pp. 213-32S) and 'Historisch-pathologische Untersuchungen' 
(Greifswald, 18S7) vol. I p. 183. William Beckett (1684-1738) questioned the 
American origin of syphilis in 'An attempt to prove the antiquity of the venereal 
disease long before the discovery of the West Indies' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
vol. 30 p. 844 et seq. London, 1720). In Germany the disease was first mentioned 
in 1472, when a chorister was expelled from St. Victor's at Mainz because he 
was suffering from 'the French disease', 'Supplicans, ut a choro sequestratus in 
domo sua se continere possit, propter fetulentum morbum qui dicitur Mala 
Franzos'. 
Petrus Anglerius (14S7-lS26), in a letter written on Aprils, 1488 ('Epistolae', 
Amsterdam, 1670), mentions that in Spain syphilis was known as 'bubas', in 
Italy as 'morbus gallicus'. 
197,20 
This may be a reference to the Scythian invasion of Media under Madyas 
(Herodotus bk. I chapters I03-lOS). After plundering the temple of Aphrodite 
Urania at Ascolon in Syria, the Scythians were stricken, 'with a disease which 
made them women instead of men'. 
197,27 
See J. R. 1. Kerckhove 'Histoire des maladies observees a la grande armee 
fran~aise pendant les camp agnes de Russie en 1812 et d'Allemangne en 1813' 
(Utrecht, 1823): c.]. von Scherer (178S-1829) 'Historia morborum, qui in ex-
peditione contra Russiam facta legiones Wuerttembergicas invaserunt' (Tiibin-
gen, 1820, German tr. Weber, Tiibingen, 1829): M.J. Lemazurier 'Medicinische 
Geschichte des russischen Feldzugs von 18I2' (lena, 1823). 
197, 28 
Hegel is evidently referring to the typhus epidemic among the Russian 
prisoners who were moved through Bavaria to Strassburg after the battle of 
Austerlitz (December 2, 180S). An account of this outbreak is to be found in 
Joseph Pichler's 'Darstellungsversuch der im Markgrafthum Mahren gegen 
Mitte December 180S ausgebrochenen und bis halben Juni 1806 gewahrten 
Epidemie' (Briinn, 1807). 
197, ]I 
In 180S, Johann Fabricius discovered Stegomyia jasciata, a mosquito which is 
now known as Aedes aegypti, and which M. Audouard (1821), Beaupertheuy 
373 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(1853) and in 1881 the Cuban physician Carlos Juan Finlay (1833-1915) sug-
gested, but did not prove, was the agent in the transmission of yellow fever. It 
was not until the first decade of the twentieth century that this suggestion was 
confirmed by experiment. 
In Hegel's day research on yellow fever still included detailed accounts of its 
geographic distribution: see C. C. Mathai 'Untersuchung iiber das gelbe Fieber. 
Mit einer Uebersichtskarte der Verbreitung des gelben Fiebers' (Hanover, 1827), 
R. C. B. Ave-Lallement 'Das gelbe Fieber, nach dessen geographischer Ver-
breitung' (Breslau, 1857). 
On the outbreaks in America see: B. Rush 'Account of the bilious remittent 
yellow fever in Philadelphia 1793' (Philadelphia, 1794, German tr. Tiibingen, 
1796): J. Hardie 'An account of the malignant fever lately prevalent in the city 
of New York' (New York, 1799): B. Washington 'Observations on yellow-
fever of the district of Columbia' (New York, 1824). On the outbreaks in the 
Spanish maritime districts see: R. Jackson 'Remarks on the epidemic yellow-
fever, which has appeared at intervals on the south coasts of Spain since the year 
1800' (London, 1821): Cadet de Metz'De l'airinsalubre et de la fievre d'Espagne' 
(Paris, 1822). 
For contemporary views on the nature and cure of this disease see: E. Doughty 
'Observations and inquiries into the nature and treatment of the yellow-fever' 
(London, 1816): C. Powell 'A treatise on the nature, causes and cure of the 
endemic or yellow fever' (London, 1814). 
198,26 
Hegel's basic interpretation of disease appears to be very similar to that 
promulgated by George Fordyce (1736-1802), in his 'Elements of the Practice 
of Physic' (2 vols. London, 1768-1770): 'A disease is such an alteration of the 
chemical properties of the fluids or solids, or of their organisation, or of the 
action of the moving power, as produces an inability or difficulty of performing 
the functions of the whole, or any part of the system, or pain, or preternatural 
evacuation.' Soon after Hegel's death however, advances in cytology, bacteri-
ology, parasitology etc. were to bring about a radical change in the general 
view of this subject. 
In this triadic assessment of the forms of disease Hegel makes use of three 
medical theories prevalent in the second half of the eighteenth century. In § 359 
he has made it quite clear why he is unable to accept purely chemical explanations 
of disease. In his treatment of 'noxiousness' however he comes very close to 
doing so, although his exposition does not rule out the possibility of accounting 
for epidemics and plagues by means of micro-organisms. The discovery of 
oxygen by Priestley in 1774 encouraged the development of chemical nosology: 
see A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809) 'La medecine eclairee par les sciences physiques' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1791); John Rollo (d. 1809) 'An account of two causes of diabetes 
mellitus' (2 vols. London, 1797);J. B. T. Baumes (1756-1828) 'Traite elementaire 
374 

NOTES 
de nosologie' (Paris, 1801); G. C. F. Kapp (1780-1806) 'Systematische 
Darstellung der durch die neuere Chemie in der Heilkunde bewirkten Veran-
derungen und Verbesserungen' (Erlangen, 1805). 
The distinction between acute and chronic diseases was a commonplace at that 
time, although there were suggestions that the division would be better if the 
distinction were between febrile and non-febrile diseases. 
Several attempts were made to arrange diseases in classes, genera, species etc: 
see F. B. de Sauvages (1706-1767) 'Traite des classes des maladies' (Paris, 173 I); 
'Nosologia methodica' (5 vols. Amsterdam, 1763); K. Linnaeus 'Genera mor-
borum' (Upsala, 1763); J. B. M. Sagar (1702-1781) 'Systema morborum 
symptomaticum' (Vienna, 1771); R. A. Vogel (1724-1774) 'Academicae 
praelectiones de cognoscendis et curandis praecipuis corporis humani adfectibus' 
(Gattingen, 1772). The most famous system of nosology was that propounded 
by William Cullen (1712-1790) however; see 'Synopsis nosologiae methodicae 
in usum studio sorum' (Edinburgh, 1769: Eng. tr. Edin. 1800, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 
1786). Eighteenth century 'nosology' corresponded to the artificial systems of 
botanical and zoological classification put forward at that time by Linnaeus etc., 
but whereas in other fields natural systems tended to develop out of these clas-
sifications, the study of diseases changed so completely in the first half of the 
nineteenth century, that very little of these earlier nosological theories survived. 
The extremely general nature of Hegel's classification seems to indicate that he 
realized that a radical re-assessment of this subject was about to be undertaken. 
198, 29 
The beginnings of modern psychiatry are to be found in the work of G. E. 
Stahl (1660-1734) andJ. G. Langermann (1768-1832): see Stahl's 'Theoria medica 
vera' (Halle, 1708, Germ. tr. Halle, 1802), Langermann's 'Diss. de methodo 
cognoscendi curandique animi morbos stabilienda' (jena, 1797), and K. W. Ideler 
'Langermann und Stahl als Begriinder der Seelenheilkunde dargestellt' (Berlin, 
1835). Vitalists such as J. A. Unzer (1727-1799) 'Gedanken vom Einfluss der 
Seele in ihrem Karper' (Halle, 1746) and R. Whytt (1714-1766) 'An essay on the 
vital and other involuntary motions of animals' (London, 1751), developed 
Stahl's teaching, and laid the foundations of the varied and specialized inves-
tigations of this subject made during Hegel's lifetime. 
English psychiatrists were at that time the most advanced in Europe, (see 
D. H. Tuke 'Chapters in the History of the Insane in the British Isles' 2 vols. 
London, 1892), and many of their works were translated; see Thomas Arnold 
(d. 1816) of Leicester, 'Observations on the nature, kinds, causes and prevention 
of insanity, lunacy or madness' (Leicester, 1782, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1784); 
William Perfect (b. 1740) of West Malling, 'Select cases in the different species 
of insanity, lunacy or madness' (London, 1787, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1789); and 
William Pargeter (1760-1810) of Reading, 'Observations on maniacal disorders' 
(Reading, 1792, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1793). Pargeter even discusses the healing 
375 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
powers of bathing, massage and music (St. Bartholomew's Hospital Journal vol. 
60 pp. 52-60, I956). In France the outstanding psychiatrist of this period was 
J. E. D. Esquirol (I772-I840), 'Des maladies mentales' (2 vols. Paris, I838, Germ. 
tr. Berlin, I838). 
J. C. Reil (I759-I8I3) dealt with psychiatry in his 'Rhapsodien tiber die 
Anwendung der psychischen Kurmethode auf Geisteszerrtittungen' (Halle, 
I803), in which he distinguished between purely mental disorders, and disorders 
of the mind having their roots in physical causes. It may well have been ReiI's 
work which encouraged Hegel to formulate this third form of disease. 
J. C. Hoffbauer (I766-I827), in his 'Untersuchung tiber die Krankheiten der 
Seele und die verwandten Zustande (3 vols. Halle, I803, I807) treated mental 
disorders from a more purely psychological point of view, and consequently 
emphasized the importance of moral treatment. J. c. A. Heinroth (1773-I843), 
in his 'Lehrbuch der Seelengesundheitskunde' (2 vols. Leipzig, I823, I824) took 
sin to be the origin of all disorders of the soul, and defended his standpoint with 
great ability: c£ the fantastic mysticism of C. J. H. Windischmann's 'Ueber 
Etwas, was der Heilkunst Noth thut' (Leipzig, I824), ,~ie Sh:anf~eit ~at i~ren 
eigentlid)en unb innerften @lit in ber burd) Buft unb )8egierbe &uniid)ft ent" 
&frnbeten unb tuilb getuorbenen @leete, unb ber 2lt&t, ber ba~ 1illefen unb bie 
Sfriifte be~ (£;!orci~mu~ nid)t fennt, entbe~rt ba§ tuid)tigfte ~eilmitte1. ~a~er 
bebarf e§ ciner d)riftHd)en ~ei1funbe.' 
In Napoleon's penal code the insane were still classed with animals, 'Ceux 
qui laisseront divaguer des insenses ou furieux ou animaux malfaisans ou feroces' 
etc. (Code penal, I804, art. 574). This may throw light on the point of Hegel's 
observation that diseases of the soul are 'rooted in the universal subject, and 
especially in man.' 
For a good modern survey of this subject see R. Hunter and 1. Macalpine 
'Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry I535-I860' (Oxford, I964). 
200,7 
R. Morris and J. Kendrick ('The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Dictionary' 
Edin., I807) have the following note on coction: 'Coction, concoction or 
digestion. The ancients distinguished concoction into several stages, but without 
any good reason. With them the term coction also signified that alteration, 
whatever it might be, or however occasioned, which is made in the supposed 
crude matter of a disease, by which it was either rendered more fit to be dis-
charged, or no longer hurtful to the body. Their reasoning on this subject is 
now unintelligible.' 
The three stages in digestion were chylification (X7JAwats), haematosis 
(a~fta:TWats), and homonosis (6ftotwats): see M. Hofmann (I621-1698) 
'Dissertatio de alimentorum coctione prima, s. fermentatione, chylosi dicta 
salva et laesa' (Altdorf, 1662): H. Conring (1606-1681) 'Dissertationes de san-
376 

NOTES 
guinis generatione et motu' (Helmstadt, 1641): Galen 'On the natural faculties' 
bk.3 ch. i (tr. A.J. Brock, London, 1916). 
The fullest treatment of 'coction' as a product of disease is to be found in 
'Apologia apologiae pro Germanis contra Galenum' (Amsberg, 1626) p. 313, by 
Caspar Hofmann (1572-1648), professor of medicine at Altdorf. 
200, 32 
For late eighteenth century views on the nature of fever see C. Kramp 
'Fieberlehre nach mechanischen Grundsatzen' (Heidelberg, 1794), R. Robertson 
'An essay on fevers' (London, 1790, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1796), A. P. Wilson 
'A treatise on febrile diseases' (London, 1799, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1804), J. C. F. 
Harless 'Neue Untersuchungen fiber das Fieber fiberhaupt' (Leipzig, 1803). Cf. 
Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802), 'Zoonomia; or, the laws of organic life' (2 vols. 
London, 1796; Germ. tr. 3 vols. Hanover, 1799) vo1.11 pp. 537-625. 
200, 35 
Michelet's version of this line is as follows: ,.8ug!eid) a!5 biefe 6ucceHion ber 
iJunctionen ift ba5 iJieber bie iJ!uibifation berfe!ben', Hegel wrote ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 172, ,.8ug!eid) a15 biefer iJ!u~ ber iJunftionen ift e5 bie 
me ttl e gun g, hie iJ!uibifation berfe!ben/. 'In constituting this flux of functions, 
fever is at the same time its motion or fluidification.' 
201, 14 
,'Ila5 iJieber ift 5 u e rft iJ r 0 ft, 6d)ttlere in Sfot'fe, Sfot'fttleg, .8iegen im 
lRfrcfgrate, ~autframt'f uub 6d)aubet', Hegel's arrangement of this paragraph 
is somewhat different ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 172), and he speaks of 
,iJieberfroft'. 
On the symptoms of fever see P. G. Schroeder 'Dissertatio de frequentionibus 
febrium prodromis' (Gottingen, 1765). 
201, 36 
See Anton de Haen (1704-1776) 'De sudoribus im morbis acutis' ('Ratio 
medendi' 15 vols. Vindob. 1758-1773) pt. viii ch. i. 
Hegel may have had in mind Aristotle's remarks on 'Sweat in Parts of Animals' 
III v. (tr. E. S. Forster, Loeb. London, 1937) pp. 252-255. 'In some cases, the 
sweat consists of a blood-like residue: this is due to a bad general condition in 
which the body has become loose and flabby, and the blood watery owing to 
insufficient concoction, which in its turn is due to the weakness and scantiness 
of the heat in the small blood vessels.' 
For Hippocrates' observations on the nature of sweat, see W. H. S. Jones' 
translation of his works (Loeb, London, 1923-1931) vol. ii p. 14, vo1. iv p. 144. 
Cf. Lucretius 'De Rerum Natura' ed. C. Bailey (3 vols. Oxford, 1947) pp. 562-
563, 1696. 
377 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
203,25 
,&eiftig'. See J. Elliot (1747-1787) 'Observations on the affinities of sub-
stances in spirit of wine' ('PhiL Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1786 p. 155), and the note 
III. 226. 
204, 4 
John Brown (1735-1788), the formulator of this 'system', was born at Bunde 
in Berwickshire, where his father worked as a casual labourer. After attending 
a parish school for a few years, he helped his father at weaving, and at the age 
of thirteen went back to school as a pupil teacher. As a boy, he was cheerful, 
boisterous and high-spirited, an excellent boxer and wrestler, and remarkable 
for his memory and the ease with which he learnt Latin. 
At the age of eighteen he went up to Edinburgh, and attended lectures on 
philosophy and divinity. Five years later he returned to his old school as usher, 
but fmding the work uncongenial he returned to Edinburgh, and was allowed 
to attend lectures given in the medical faculty, free of charge. He soon mastered 
the principles of medicine as they were then taught, and became immensely 
popular among the undergraduates on account of his private tutoring and love 
of good company. He married in 1765, and supplemented his income by run-
ning a boarding house, but he was rarely out of debt. His influence upon 
university life should have opened the way to promotion, but he had an un-
fortunate knack of unwittingly putting his colleagues irretrievably in the 
wrong, and the university refused to appoint him. 
In 1778 he delivered a course of lectures exposing the errors of William 
Cullen (1712-1790) and the other professors of medicine. In 1779 he took his 
doctorate at St. Andrew's, and in the following year published his epoch-
making 'Elementa medicinae' (Edinburgh, 1780). He struggled on in Edinburgh 
for a further six years, but was rarely solvent, and in 1786 he left for London. 
At one time Frederick the Great considered inviting him to Berlin. He lived 
a happy family life and his cheerfulness rarely forsook him, but he was always 
hard-pressed for money, and at one period he was even imprisoned for his debts. 
In 1787 he published two critical works, 'Observations on the present spasm, as 
taught in the university of Edinburgh', and 'Observations on the principles of 
the old System of Physic' (Italian tr. Pavia. 1792). In 1788 he translated his 
'Elementa medicanae' into English in only three weeks: see 'The elements of 
medicine' (2 vols. London, 1788). Thomas Beddoes' edition of this work 
contains a good account of Brown and his writings (2 vols. London, 1795); the 
best German edition of it is by C. H. Pfaff(1773-18SZ) John Brown's System 
der Heilkunde' (3rd ed. Copenhagen, 1804). 
Brown died suddenly of an apoplexy on October 7, 1788, leaving a wife and 
eight children. The most influential English writer to adopt his system was 
Erasmus Darwin (173 1-1802): see, 'Zoonomia, or the laws of organic life' 
(London. 1794, Germ. tr. Hanover, 1795). The fullest account of the system in 
378 

NOTES 
English is to be found in John Thomson's 'An Account of the life, lectures, and 
writings of William Cullen' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1832-1859) vol. ii pp. 222-487. 
The best account of Brown's influence, which was very extensive in Germany 
and Italy, is given by B. Hirschel in his 'Geschichte des Brown'schen Systems 
und der Erregungstheorie' (Dresden and Leipzig, 1846). The system certainly 
stimulated academic passions; in Gottingen in I802 for example, a troop of 
Hanoverian horse had to be used to put down the rioting which broke out 
between the Brunonians and their opponents. 
204,24 
Brown based his system on three main concepts, which he defined in pt. i 
ch. 2 of 'The Elements of Medicine' : 
(i) Excitability (;i;ttegbatfeit), he regarded as the state of organization preva-
lent in the solids and fluids constituting the organism's predisposition to ex-
citement. Some of Brown's followers thought that excitability depended solely 
upon the state of the muscular fibres, and took it to be the same as irritability 
(see the note III. 302), but this view was not generally accepted. 
(ii) Excitement (;i;ttegung), he regarded as the degree of action, the vigour of 
the system, or the energy of the vital principle present in the organism at any 
given time. William Cullen (I7I2-I790) had made the term familiar, but Brown 
seems to have adopted it because at that time its use did not imply the acceptance 
of any particular hypothesis. 
(iii) Stimuli (ffiei5e), he took to be all those internal and external powers such 
as passions, heat, food, medicines, contagions, pains etc. which produce excite-
ment by acting upon excitability. 
He considered the organism's excitement to be in a state of perpetual variation 
brought about by the various stimuli. What he called the direct debility of the 
organism was the result of its lack of stimulus, of food or of heat etc. Indirect 
debility was the exhaustion it experienced after the taking of wine or opium etc., 
or after strenuous activity. Asthenic diseases, which were the result of an ex-
haustion of excitability, were therefore subdivided into direct and indirect 
asthenia. 
According to Brown, the health of an organism depends upon its maintaining 
a due balance or proportion between its stimuli and its excitability; just as 
debilitation gives rise to asthenic diseases, so invigoration gives rise to sthenic 
diseases, in which there is a morbid accumulation of excitability. Consequently, 
the Brul10nians regarded health and disease as states exhibiting a quantitative 
difference in degrees of excitability, but as being devoid of any qualitative dif-
ference. They regarded an excessive accumulation of excitability in a state of 
fever for example, as being as likely a cause of death as the excessive exhaustion 
of starvation. According to this theory, successful diagnosis merely requires that 
a doctor should be able to determine the amount of increased or decreased 
379 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
stimulation necessary in order to restore the balance between stimuli and excit-
ability which constitutes health. 
For an account of the chemical theories of medicine prevalent at the time see 
the note III. 374. 
205,9 
At this juncture (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 173) Hegel inserted a note in 
the margin indicating certain exceptions to this theory of medicine. 
'Chronic illness (constitutes) determinatenesses not susceptible to fever. This 
course cannot predominate in the case of lingering fever. 
Simply a general shake-up is often as effective as the antidote. As an example 
of a pre-Brunonian medicament, mention the use of moxa (Span.) as a cure for 
gout. Hoven admitted this.' 
'Moxa' is not a Spanish, but a Japanese word (mogusa). The material resem-
bles cotton-wool, and is prepared from the leaf-down of a species ofW ormwood 
(Artemisia Moxa). It was used for curing many disorders by being burnt on the 
skin, but in the case of gout there was little evidence of its having proved a 
radical cure. 
Friedrich Wilhelm David von Hoven (1759-1838) was doctor at the Wiir-
temberg court and then professor at Wiirzburg. Hegel is evidently referring to 
his 'Versuch iiber das Wechselfieber und seine Heilung, besonders durch die 
Chinarinde' (2 pts. Winterthur, 1789, 1790). 
205, II 
Homoeopathy (O/LOWS, like; 1TC1.8oS, disease) is a system of medicine based 
originally upon the theory that diseases are curable by those drugs which produce 
effects on the body similar to symptoms caused by the disease (similia similibus 
curantur). It was worked out by Samuel Friedrich Christian Hahnemann (1755-
1843), whose varied scientific interests, unsettled existence and eccentric second 
marriage led his colleagues to suspect the reliability of his medical knowledge 
and the validity of his theorizing: see Karsch 'Die Wunder der Homoopathie' 
(Sondershausen, 1862). For a sympathetic portrait of him see 'F. C. S. Hahne-
mann. Ein biographisches Denkmal' (anon. Leipzig, 1851). 
The main principles of his teaching are to be found in his 'Organon der 
rationellen Heilkunde' (Dresden, 1810, French tr. Dresden, 1822); see also 
'Reine Arzneimittellehre' (6 pts. Dresden, 18II-1820), 'Die chronischen Krank-
heiten' (2 pts. Dresden, 1828). The lack of precise knowledge of the ways in 
which medicaments bring about their results, and the acceptance of a 'life-force' 
as the fundamental principle of living being, were the main factors in the 
formulation of Hahnemann's theories. The principles of his teaching were 
heavily criticized in F. G. Gmelin's 'Kritik der Principien der Homoopathie' 
(Tiibingen, 1835) and]. Stieglitz's 'Ueber die Homoopathie' (Hanover, 1835). 
380 

NOTES 
For a history of the theory see Aug. Rapon 'Histoire de la doctrine medicale 
homoeopathique' (Lyons, 1847). 
206, 24 
For a fairly exhaustive bibliography of works relating to emetics published 
between 1613 and 1765 see George Rudolph Boehmer 'Bibliotheca scriptorum 
Historiae Naturalis' (Leipzig, 1785-1789) pt. i vol. ii pp. 234-240. Cf. Robert 
Burton (1577-1640) 'The Anatomy of Melancholy' pt. 2, sect. 4, memb. 2, 
subsections 1-3. 
Nicholas Culpeper (1616-1654), in his translation of 'The London Dispen-
satory' (London, 1649) has a whole section 'Parts of living animals and excre-
ments', devoted to disgusting animal remedies. English pharmacopoeias only 
ceased to prescribe excrements in 1721: see A. C. Wootton 'Chronicles of 
Pharmacy' (2 vols. London, 1910) vol. ii pp. I-F. Samuel Frederick Gray 
(fl. 1780-1836) in 'A Supplement to the Pharmacopoeias' (London, 1818, 6th ed. 
1836) enumerates no less than eighty two different animal substances: see James 
Grier 'A History of Pharmacy' (London, 1937) pt. iv ch. xiii. 
207,2 
'The Elements of Medicine' (ed. Beddoes, 2 vols. London, 1795) pt. I ch. iii 
(sect. XIX-XX), 'As there is always some excitability, however small, while 
life remains, and as the action of the exciting powers always takes place in some 
degree, I conclude that they have all more or less of stimulant effect, and that 
this must be either excessive, in due proportion, or too small ... The same 
conclusion applies to all other exciting powers, though poisons, contagions, and 
a few other powers, may to some seem exceptions. But poisons either do not 
produce the universal diseases, which are our present subject: or, if they do, by 
producing the same effect as the ordinary exciting powers, their mode of 
operation must also be allowed to be the same.' 
C£ pt. II ch.l (sect. 146 z), 'To poisons, if they act as general stimulants, all 
the reasoning that has been employed with respect to the other noxious powers, 
will apply.' 
207,34 
Hegel refers to mesmerism as ,IDCognetismusi • In Great Britain it was generally 
known as 'animal magnetism', and was little understood. R. Morris and 
J. Kendrick, in 'The Edinburgh Medical and Physical Dictionary' (Edinburgh, 
1807) describe it as follows, 'A sympathy lately supposed by some persons, to 
exist between the magnet and the human body; by means of which the former 
became capable of curing many diseases in an unknown way, somewhat re-
sembling the performances of the old magicians. The fanciful system, to call it 
by no worse name, of animal magnetism, appears to have originated in 1774, 
from a German philosopher, named Father Hehl, who greatly recommended 
381 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
the use of the magnet in medicine.' Although in the past, mesmerism has been 
frowned upon in this way by orthodox medicine, largely because of its prosti-
tution by charlatans, it is now recognized to be a most useful method of therapy. 
Friedrich Anton Mesmer (1734-1815) began his academic career with a 
dissertation on the influence of planetary and telluric forces on the human body, 
see, 'De planetarum influxu in corpus humanum' (Vienna, 1766). This led him 
on to study the therapeutic powers of natural and artificial magnets, see 
'Memoire sur la decouverte du magnetisme animal' (Paris, 1779). He had some 
difficulty in getting his discoveries recognized. C. d'Eslon's 'Observations sur 
Ie magnetisme animal' came out as early as 1780, but in Germany it was not 
until about 1787, when G. Bicker and Arnold Wienholdt (1749-1804) began to 
publish their 'Magnetischen Magazin fur Niederdeutschland' (8 vols. Bremen, 
1787-1789), that mesmerism began to attract much interest. By 1812 the 
Prussian government thought it worthwile to set up a commission under 
C. C. Wolf art (d. 1832) to visit Mesmer at Frauenfeld and investigate the 
matter. The main result of this move was the publication of Wolfart's 'Mes-
merismus oder System der Wechselwirkungen' (Berlin, 1814), 'Erlauterungen 
zum Mesmerismus' (Berlin, 1815), and 'Jahrbucher des Lebensmagnetismus' 
(5 vols. Leipzig, 1818-1823). 
Mesmerism also attracted the attention of the philosophers of nature of 
course, who began to speak of a 'recapitulation at a higher level of the lower 
forces of nature', 'organic polarities', 'spiritual coition', 'ghostly generation' 
etc.: see Eschenmayer, Kieser and Nasse, 'Archiv fur den thierischen Magnetis-
mus' (12 vols. Leipzig and Halle, 1817-1824). Many doctors of the time tended 
to regard mesmerism as a bogus phenomenon: see J. Stieglitz (1767-1840) 
'Ueber den thierischen Magnetismus' (Hanover, 1814), C. H. Pfaff, (1773-1852) 
'Ueber und gegen den thierischen Magnetismus' (Hamburg, 1817). 
For contemporary English views on the subject, see 'A letter to a Physician 
in the country on animal magnetism' (London, 1786): J. Martin 'Animal 
magnetism examined' (London, 179 I). 
209,4 
,~et %ob be~ 3nbibibuutW au~ fid) ;elbft'. See Jacques Choron 'Der Tod 
im abendlandischen Denken' (tr. Birkenhauer, Stuttgart, 1967). H. G. Boehm 
'Das Todesproblem bei Hegel und Holderlin' (Hamburg, 1932). 
210,28 
,3nteteH e (ba~ 3toi; d) en; e t)n)'. Hegel is here giving the literal meaning 
of 'interest'. 
211, 16 
,Uebet biefem %obe bet inatut, aw bie;et tobten ~iiUe, ge~t eine fd)onete 
inatut, ge~t bet &eift ~etbot/ 

NOTES 
212,24 
The significance of the Phoenix as a religious symbol is discussed in Hegel's 
'Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion' (tr. Speirs and Sanderson, 3 vols. 
London, 1962), vol. II pp. 83-84. See also 'The Philosophy of History' (tr. Sibree, 
Dover Publications, 1956) pp. 72-73, 'But the next consideration which allies 
itself with that of change, is, that change while it imports dissolution, involves 
at the same time the rise of a new life-that while death is the issue oflife, life is 
also the issue of death. This is a grand conception ... the Phoenix as a type of the 
Life of Nature; eternally preparing for itself its funeral pile, and consuming 
itself upon it; but so that from its ashes is produced the new, renovated, fresh 
life'. 
213,26 
,ein mUb bet inatut'. 
213,29 
'And thus much concerning God; to discourse of whom from the appearances 
of things, does certainly belong to Natural Philosophy.' Newton added this 
sentence to the general scholium which concludes the 'Principia Mathematica' 
as the second edition of the work was being printed (1713): J. Edelston 'Corres-
pondence of Sir Isaac Newton' (London, 1850) p. ISS. 

INDEX TO TEXT VOL. 3 
abdomen. II7. 126. ISO. 188; abdominal 
cavity. 159. cerebrum, II7. gland. 125. 
muscle. 130. reproduction. 127 
absolute idealism. 10 
absorption. 75.84.125.157. 161; cutaneous. 
159. of water. 87. self-, 205 
accidence. 22. 156 
accident. 179 
accretion. 47. 72 
Acephala. 177 
acid. 75. 121. 152; benzoic. lactic. uric. 165; 
choloidic. 164; phosphoric. 165; plant. 
66; principle. 126 
acidification. 161 
Ackermann. J. F .• 174 
action. II6. 142 
activation. 108 
activity. 130. 152. 153. ISS. 195; animal. 
174; disjunctive. ISS; of fish. 180; geo-
logical. 12; isolated. 199; lymphatic. 121; 
morbid. 201; organic. 165.207; outward. 
163; plant. 91; purposive. 154. 182; 
reciprocal. 108 
acute disease. 198.200.205 
adaptability. 191 
adnascence. 82; adnate wood. 82 
Aeneid. 133 
aerolite. 36 
Africa. 24. 56. 181. 193 
agate. 19 
age. 194 
agent. 204. 205. 206 
agglomeration (infusorial). 36 
agility. 130 
Agricola. G. A.. 57 
ailment. 172 
air. 35. 39. So. 72. 75. 77. 84. 106. 107. II9. 
120. 122. 125. 138. 140. 147. 149. ISO. 
152. 158. 165. 169. 187. 188. 190. 191, 
192; and plant. 51. 75. 86; atmospheric. 
135; element. 34. 85. 106; excess of. 195; 
principle of. 140 
alated seed. 64 
albumen. 156. 164. 165 
Algae. 71. 73. 88 
aliment. 124; alimentary canal. 154. 158. 
I8S. process. 124. ISS 
alkalinity. 126. 152 
Allium. 57. 58 
alluvium. 25; rock. 29; terrain. IS. 19. 20. 
31 
Alnus glutinosa, SI 
Alps. 19.20 
amber. 75 
ambigenous calyx. 62 
America. 19.24. 56. lSI. 193. 197 
Amici. G. A.. 76 
ammonia (muriate of). 165 
amphibia. 20. 135. ISS. IS6. ISS. 190; 
viviparous, ISO 
Amphidae. IS9 
amputation. 123 
amygdaloid. 20. 28 
analogy. 96, 167. IS4 
anastomosis. 61. 123. 124 
Anatolia. 19 
anatomy. 109. 129. 171; anatomical com-
munication. 129. investigation. 122 
anchylosis. 123 
Andes. 19 
Andreasberg. 30 
anger. 162 
angiosperm. 64 
angle. 25 
animal. 16. 17. 22. 32. 36, 43. 4S. SS. 65. 75, 
76. 93. 97. 101. 102. 105. 107. 109. II9. 
137.139.144.146. 147. I4S. 151. 156. 159. 
164. 166. 168. 170. 173. 176. 179. 205. 
209; activity. 174; being. 66. 102, 164; 
carnivorous. IS3. 192; classification. 177. 
180. ISS; cold-blooded. 134; compared 
with plant. 80; complexity. 158; death. 
171; death cry. 140; developed. 179; 
digestion. 161; diseased. 208; existence. 
13; extinct. 32; feeling. 4S; fluid. 159; 
form. 32. 
I S9; formation. 31. 161; 
genera. lSI; growth. 46; health. 197; 
herbivorous. 
165; 
hibernation. 120; 

INDEX TO TEXT 
higher, 125, 162, 182; homed, 184; 
individuality, 163; juice, 126; kingdom, 
19, 158, 193; life, 22, 47, 51, 135, 145, 
187; lower, 140, 157, 162; lymph, 153, 
161, 162, 163; matter, 155, 156, 159; 
movement, 103; nature, 14, 32, 149, 156; 
need, 167; northern, 23; organ, 165 ; 
organism, 9, 58, 101, 102, 108, 110, 138, 
150, 162, 176; particularity, 46; per-
fection, 109, 182; power, 55; self-identity, 
152; shape, 65; simplicity, 126; skin, 149; 
soul, 107; species, 181; subjectivity, 104; 
substance, 94, 203; surroundings, 167; 
symmetry, 130; type, 177, 181; unity, 
103; vegetable nature, 107; vitality, 48; 
warmth, 47, 106; world, 18, 32, 178, 179, 
185,186,193 
animalcule, 36, 37, 158 
animality, 38, 152, 156, 161, 164 
animalization, 120 
animated sensibility, 114 
animating aliment, 124, force, 123 
animation, 12, 14, 34, 36, 44, 66, 84, 112, 
113, 125, 136, 142, 150, 152, 167, 179, 181, 
195, 196, 200, 208, 213; crystal of, 127; 
duality of, 48; free, 166; force of, 68; 
punctiform, 34; subjective, 9, 34; uni-
versal, 23,37,40 
'Annales du Museum d'Histoire naturelle', 
160 
annual: plant, 60, 64, 83; variation in baro-
meter, 35 
annular vessel, 72 
anomalism, 40 
ant, 75 
antecedent, 108, II8 
anther, 52, 59, 63, 72, 94, 95, 96, 97, 100; 
dust, 95; movement, 49 
anthropology, 16 
Antifera, 160 
antimony, 31 
antithesis, 26, 28, 32,62,70, 73, 79, 141, 142 
anus, 149 
anxiety, 179 
Aphis, 95 
Aphrodite, 158 
apical, 88 
apicule (of Conferva), 55 
apophysis, 98, 184 
apoplexy, 150 
appetite, 103, 144, 166, 167, 170, 194, 198 
Apple, 57, 59, 99 
N 
appropriation, 133 
Apricot, 78 
aquatic animalcule, 158; bird. 190; plant, 
73; vegetation, 55 
aquatiline leaf, 88 
aqueous element, 101; process, 17, 88, 153 
aquiferous (nature of plant), 87 
arabesque, 22 
arborescence,3a 
argillaceousness, 20, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32 
Aristotle, 107, 145, 146, 175, 178, 185, 186 
arm, 105, 129, 130, 149, 190 
Armadillo, 191 
armour, 191 
Arno, 19 
arom:l, 84, 86, 99 
arrow, 139 
art, 33, 167, 182, 189 
arterial blood, 124, 150, 159; system, 124 
artery, 112, 120, 123, 125, 133, 150, 187; 
contraction of, 122; exhalatory, 159; 
jugular, 134; opening of, 124; wall, 122; 
whitlow, 123 
articulation, 56, 188 
artificial light, 50; system, 178 
Arunx cordifolium, 52; maculatum, 51, 52 
Asclepiad, 96 
asexuality, 168, 175 
Asia, 19, 20, 24, 56, 193 
Asparagus, 160 
assimilation, 68, 77, 84, 104, 107, 136, 146, 
151, 152, 157, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
170, 173; function of, 78; organic, 
157; plant, 54; process of, 83, 159 
Asteria, 158 
asthenia, 143,201,204 
asymmetry, 130 
Atlantic, 37 
atmosphere, 34, 35, 87, 122, 157, 163; 
atmospheric fluctuation, 35, pressure, 37, 
process, 119 
atom, 10, 122 
attack, 192 
augite, 28 
August, 37 
Autenrieth, H. F., 63 
Autenrieth, J. H., 113, 116, 124, 129, 150, 
151,156,159,208,209 
autonomous movement, 106 
autopsy, 117 
autumn, II7 
Averrhoa Carambola, 53 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
axil (botanical), ,8 
axis, 61, 69; magnetic, 16; of Earth, 16, 18, 
21; axial rotation, 35 
Baltic,37 
Bamboo-cane, 81 
Bambusa arundinacea, 8 I 
baptism, 68 
bark (of tree), 19, 67, 73, 75, 78, 79, 80, 84, 
8,,97,IOO, 109,141;-ringjng,90 
Barnes, T., 57 
barometer, 35 
basalt,2B 
base metal, 30 
bass-relief, I B9 
bast, 71, 72, 73, 7B, BI 
Bat, 192; vampire, 189 
battle, 105 
Bauhin, J., 100 
beak, 160 
bean, 69 
Bear, 20 
bearing young, 148 
beauty, 182 
Bee, 168 
beer, 160 
Beet, 69 
Beetle, 182 
Bengal,19 
benzoic acid, 165 
Berlin, 94, 95 
Berzelius, J. J., 164 
Betula alba, 81 
Bichat, M. F. X., 117, 118, 126, 129, 130, 
131,150 
bile, 121, 125, 126, 153, ISS, 157, 161, 162, 
163, 164, 165, 183, 195, 200; secreting 
organ, 158; biliary vessel, I5B; biline, 165 
biped,190 
bird, 20, 105, 158, 160, 165, 169, 180, 186, 
188, 190, 191; aquatic, 189; colour, 149; 
flight, 147; migration, 167; mute, 165; 
song, 106; tropical, 48 
birth, 17,99, 133 
bite, 182 
bitterness, 28; of sea, 36; -salt, 37 
bitumen, 32; bituminous schist, 29 
blight, 36 
blood, 101, 106, 113, 119, lao, 121, 127, 132, 
133, 137, 14B, ISO, 154, 156, 157, 161, 
IB5, 186, 188, 201, 206; animation, US; 
arterial, 124, 150, 159; circulation, 76, 
123, 133, 134, 135, 151, 200; colour, 187; 
congealed, 159; digestion, 121; diseased, 
195; effusion, 17,; elaboration, 120; 
globule, 121, 122, 123; heat, 52; inflamed, 
201; irritation, 122: -letting, 97, 199,207; 
living, 112, 122, 157; motion, 123, 134; 
nutriment, 121; red, 123; system of, Ill; 
temperature, IB9; vaporization, 149; 
venous, 121, 124, ISO, 151; vessel, 113. 
125 
blooming (of sea), 37 
blossom, 58, 64, B3, 91, 92, 95 
blotting paper, 57 
Blumauer, J. A., 133 
Blumenbach, J. F., 166 
blush,162 
body and soul, 210; connectedness of, 129 
Boletus cetatophorus, 39 
bone, 20, 46, Bo, 113, 125, 127, 132, 133. 
151, 159, 165, 178, IB3, 197, 201, con-
stituent, 161; -fibre, 33; formation, 115, 
133; fossil, 19, 182, 184; fracture, 159,161; 
gemmation, 118; -marrow, 120; pro-
duction,113 
Borsdorfer apple, 57 
Bosian garden, 94 
bosom, 162 
botany, 58, 60, 61, 93 
boulder, 20 
bouquet, 139 
Brachiopod, 15B, 168 
brain, 116, 117, lIB, 12B, 130, 133, 140, 143, 
144,145,146,165,177, IB7, 195; animal, 
183; blood content, 
ISO; 
chemical 
analysis of, 152; communication, 116; 
plant, 92 
branch, 19, 45, 56, 58, 59, 71, 73, 92, 97; 
collateral, 92; growth, 57 
brandy, 207 
Brazil,75 
bread,156 
breast, 129, 180, 190, 191; swelling of, 128 
breathing, 135, 140, 180, 187, 192; of child, 
120 
breccia, 20, 32 
bregmatic bone, 115 
Bremen, 19, 77 
bristle, 191 
Brocken,20 
Bromeliaceae, 56 
brood bulb, 57 

INDEX TO TEXT 
Brown, J., 204, 206 
brown spar, 31 
Brunonian system, 204 
Bryophate, 94 
Bryophyllum calycinum, 58 
bud,45,57,64,67,70,78,83,90,91,96,98, 
102,114;grafting,57 
buddage, 89 
building: cell, 168; burrows, lairs, nests, 167 
bulb, 57, 58, 69, 89; bulbaceous plant, 69, 
70,79 
burning glass, so 
burrow, 167 
Butterfly, 176 
Cactus, 71; grandiflorus, 49 
caecal appendage, 168 
calcareousness, 25, 26, 29, 31, 32, 33; 
calcareous series, 28, 32 
callosity, 63 
calyx, 61, 62, 64, 91; ambigenous, 62; bell-
shaped,61 
cambium, 79 
cambric, 149 
Camel, 184, 189 
Camper, P., 184 
canal, 158 
Candolle, A. P. de, 51 
canine teeth, 183 
Cape of Good Hope, 19 
capillary, ISO; action, 77; tube, 77; vessel. 
123 
caprice, 180 
caprification, 99, 100 
Caprificus, 100 
capsule,59,64,97 
caput mortuum, 143 
carapace, 186 
carbon, 80, 87, 124, 143, 150,204; carbon-
ate of lime, 165, of soda, 165; carbona-
tion, 150; carbon dioxide, 87, 122, 150; 
carbonization (of blood), 121; carbon 
series, 21; carburetted hydrogen, 52 
cardiac muscle, 122; ventricle, 190 
Carnation, 62, 64 
carnivorous animal, 183, 192 
cartilage, 113, 123 
casing (ligneous), 99 
Caspian, 197 
Cassia, 53 
Cat, 105, 159 
catalepsy, II7 
category, 45, 54 
caterpillar, 39, 168 
Cattle, 192, 197 
caudex,69 
cauline leaf, 59, 61, 62, 63 
cause, 45, 122 
cavity (medullary), II3 
celestial sphere (heavenly body), 35 
cell, 54, 68, 70, 75, 79, 81; building, 168; 
medullary, 72 
cellular: structure, 39; tissue, 40, 53, 58, 67, 
71,72,73,74,77,79, 81,91,94,112, II6, 
125,160,161 
centre, 24, 25, 103, 139 
cephatic cerebram, 117 
cerebellum, II6, 117 
cerebrality, III, 125, 175; cerebram, II6; 
cerebra-spinal system, 118 
Cermium,55 
cervical muscle, 183; spinal cord, 134 
Cetacea, 189, 192 
Chaemerops humilis, 94, 95 
chalk, 29, 89, 135 
Chamisso, A. von, 37 
chaos, 22 
Chara, 73, 77 
characteristic, 177, 178 
cheek bone, lIS 
Chelidonium, 77, 89 
chemical: abstraction, 41; action, 74, 151; 
agent, 165; analysis, 54, 143, 162; being, 
152; 
body, 
II; 
composition, 
164; 
decomposition, 103, 194; explanation, 
124, 156; factor, 204; influence, 74; 
interpretation, 93, 152; matter, 65-66; 
nature, 87; operation, 162; principle, 35; 
process, 10, II, 22, 34, 106, 122, 152, 
154, 213; relationship, 152, 161; research, 
161; significance, 26; sphere, 144, 166; 
state, 87 
chemico-organicmoment, 121 
chemism, 17, 74, 152, 155, 1740 203 
chemistry, II, 66, 86, 122, 143, 156 
chest, 134, 149, 191 
chewing, 182, 192 
Chicken, 160; droppings, 206 
child, 44, 68, 120, 133, ISS, 184, 206; 
un-
born, 207 
China, 19 
china-clay, 3 I 
choice, 146 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURB 
choloidic acid, 164 
chromatic constituent, 86 
chronic disease, 198, 200, 201 
chrysalis, 168 
chyle, 121, 154, ISS, 156, 162 
chyme, 121, 161, 162 
cinchona, 206 
circle, 122 
circulation: blood, 76, 120, 123, 134, 135, 
lSI, 186, 200; closed, 107; digestive, 89; 
in insect, 188 ;inteI1lal, 67; movement, II2; 
oscillatory, 124; sap, 76, 78, 79; system, 
78; vessel, 187 
citric acid, 66 
civilization, 24 
class, 158, 177, 180, 183, 184 
classification, 177, 181, 187; animal, 180, 
185, 188, 191; bird, 190; disease, 204; 
geological, 28; plant, 186 
Clavaria militaris, 39 
claw, II4, 125, 151, 168, 178, 182, 183, 191, 
192 
clay, 27,28, 30,31 
cleavage, 72 
climate, 51, 85, 97, 99, 100, 148, 178, 181, 
193, 197; climatic change, 147, migration, 
146, sensitivity, 167 
climbing, 131, 192 
clipped foliage, 57 
clitoris, 175 
coagulation, 120, 150 
coal, 29, 31, 32 
cobalt, 30 
Cobitis fossilis, 149 
cocoon, 168 
coction, 200 
cognition, 151 
cohesion, 10, 104, 106, n6, II8, 121, 138 
Coiter, V., 184 
cold, 51, 52, 85; -blooded, 134; excess of, 
195; sensation of, 201 
colour, 62, 84, 86, 91, 100, 101, 110, 138, 
148, 186, 203 
combination, 157, 165 
combustibility, 26, 98, 101 
comet, 34, III; eccentricity, 24; transience, 
36 
cometary course, 124, dement, 38, life, 16, 
process, II9 
comfort (animal), 167 
coxnmunication, 116, 117 
compact limestone, 20 
compactness, 29 
comparative anatomy, 178 
comprehension, 21, 122 
concentration, 130 
conceptacle, 64 
conception, 175 
conchyliaceousness, 32 
concoction, 148,201 
concrescence, 25 
condyle, 183 
Conferva, 50, 55, 56, 76 
congenital defect, 194 
conglobulation (of blood), 122 
consciousness, 33, II6, 137, 146, 173, 212 
constituent, 1I2, 157 
constringency, 87 
consumption, 133, 153, 198 
contentment, 140, 191 
contiguity, 93, 95, 96, 98, 101 
continent, 16, 23, 24, 181 
continuity, 33 
contraction, 25, 59, II8, 134, 1440 173, 176 
control (voluntary), 1I7 
contusion, 159 
cooling, 206 
copper, 30; -pyrites, 31 
copulation, 56, 94, 195 
coral, 38 
cord: pistillary 94; tactile, II 6 
core, 26 
coriaceousness, 186 
cork, II9 
corn, 147 
corolla, 61, 63, 91 
corona, 124 
corpora cavernosa, 175 
corpse, lIS 
Corti, B., 76 
cortical substance, 80 
cosmic connection (of Earth), IS 
costa (lateral), 60 
cotyledon, 59, 60, 64, 69 
coupling, 56,63, 168 
Crab, 168 
cranium, II3, 115, 123 
creation, 22, 176 
creativeness (unconscious), 136 
Creeper, 190 
crista galli, 174 
crown (of teeth), 183 
cruor, 187 
Crustacea, 38, 186 

INDEX TO TEXT 
crying, 128, 129 
crystal, 23, 25, 29, 32, 39, 167; euclase, 31; 
fractured, 162; mineralogical, 65; of 
animation, 127, Earth, 12, 36, land, 38, 
life, 33; organic, 48; shape, 65 
crystalline: accretion, 47; form, 17 
c~t~tion,23,26, 33 
Cucurbitaceae, 81 
cultivated plant, 59 
curdling, 154 
cure (disease), 198, 199, 200 
cutaneous process, 149, 196 
cuticle, 75, 88 
Cuvier, G. L. C. F. D., 160, 167, 178, 182, 
184, 186 
Cyclamen, 69 
cyclosis, 76 
cylindrical bone, 113 
Cynips Psenes, 99 
darkness, 140 
Date-palm,60 
Dauphine, 3 I 
day, 35 
dead neutrality, 33 
death, 10, WI, 135, 150, 171, 172, 176, 195, 
198,208,209,210,211,212; germ of, 209; 
of nature, 211; various kinds of, 171; 
violent, 140, 177 
debilitation, 204, 207 
debris, 20 
decompose, 159; decomposition, 157, 158, 
160, chemical, 103, 194, of water, 149 
deer, 146, 147 
deficiency, 141, 144, 170, 194 
defoliation, 85 
defunction, 98 
delirium, 201 
demolition (of rocks), 20 
dendrolite, 18 
dental system, 184 
Desfontaines, R. L., 53 
desire, 140 
development: stages, 177; scale, 181 
dew, 52 
diagnosis, 200 
dialectic, 142 
dicotyledon, 70, 80, 81, 178, 186 
diet, 156, 161, 183,207 
differentia specifica (of animal), 104 
diffusion, 94 
digestion, 89, 99, 117, 120, 121, 124, 133, 
135, 140, 150, 152, 153, 156, 158, 159, 
160, 161, 16z, 163, 165, 166, 168, 182, 
187, 188, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 207; immediate, 158, 160, 
161, 162; self-, 206 
digestive heat, 126; organ, 125; process, 
96, 110, 154; system, III, 112, 120, 125, 
184 
Dioecia, 93, 94, 97 
Dionea muscipula, 53 
direction (unity of). 139 
discharge: excrement, 161; menstrual, 175 
disease, 113, 117, 133, 136, 170, 176, 179, 
193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 200, 203, 206, 
208, 209; acute, 198, 200, 205; asthenic, 
143, 204; chronic, 198, 200, 201; classifi-
cation, 204; constitution of, 200; original, 
209; pulmonary, 200; stages of, 199; 
sthenic, 204; syphilitic and lymphatic, 115 
disoxidation, 21, 89 
disposition, 194 
dissolution, 21, 36,201,209; dissolvent, 120 
diuretic, 160 
diurnal patrern, 35 
diversity (of sensation), 139 
Divine (the), 211 
division (plant propagation), 56 
Dog, 133, 161, 192 
dorsal,62 
double flower, 59 
drama, 180 
dream, 21 
drill, 131 
drink, 151, 157, 160, 164 
drive, 141, 144, 145, 146, 147, lSI, 167, 
205; mechanical, 166; sexual, 191 
Drosera rotundifolia, 49 
duality, 140 
Duck,I60 
Duck-billed platypus, 189 
duct, 168; ejaculatory, 174 
Duhamel, H. L., 89 
dung, 164, 165 
duodenum, 121 
Dupetit-Thouars, L. M. A., 57 
duplication, 130 
Eagle, 147 
ear, 129, 130, 140 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
earth (element, soil), 25, 26, 29, 35, 36, 39, 
57, 68, 69, 70, 72, 75, 84, 85, 89, 95, 99, 
106, 121, 148, 188; absolute, 26; disso-
lution, 36; fruitfulness, 179 
Earth (planet), 12, IS, 16, 17, 18,32, 34, 35, 
43, 48, 106, 167; axis, 21; constitution, 
creation, eternality, 18; inorganic, 23; 
firmness, II4; formation, 26; geognostic 
structure, 20; history, 16, 22; indivi-
duality, 26; life, 33; physical formation, 
25; relations, 17; shape, 36; structure, 23, 
24; universal life-process, 80 
earthquake, 147 
Earth-worm, 185 
earthy element, 139; substance, 132 
East Friesland, 19 
eating, 157, 164 
ebb and flow (of sea), 36 
Ebel, J. G., 18, 27 
Eckleben, H. J., 95 
eduction, 27 
Eel,II9 
effusion (of blood), 175 
egg, 34, 40, 120, 169, 190, 195 
ego, 49, 85, 104, IIO, 137 
egression (vegetable), 48 
Egypt, 19 
eighth nerve, II7 
ejaculatory duct, 174 
elaboration (of juice), 168 
elastic: pressure, 122; vibration, 123 
elasticity, II9, 123, 139; as pressure, 35; 
mechanical, 52; organic, 118 
Eldon (Elveden, Suffolk), 135 
electricity, 17, 143, 144, 151; electric 
factor,204 
element, IS, 17, 28, 29, 34, 35, 47, 85, 
106, 126, 148, 178, 181, 187, 188, 191, 
197 
elemental being, 51; nature, 177 
Elephant, 20, 192, 193 
elytron, 150 
emanation (noxious), 36 
embryo, 37, 69, 78, 99 
embryonic formation, 79 
emerald,31 
emergence (of living being), 38 
emetic, 199, 207 
empiricism, 18, 72, 143, 156; empirical 
aspect, 21, determinate being, 177, data, 
22, physicists, II I, science, 178 
end, 145, 146, 155,165,167; and means, 108, 
132;self-determining,166;self-producing, 
107 
energy: healthful, 205; muscular, 200 
England, 20, 135 
English ship, 159 
entrails, II I 
environment, 147, 178, 196, 197, 198 
epic genre, 180 
epidemic, 197 
epididymus, 168 
equator, 30, 35 
equilibrium, 122, 124, 130, 131, 134, 143, 
185,186,194 
Erlangen, 77 
Erman, P., 118, 119 
Eskimo, 181 
etemality, 176, 211 
ethereality, 13 
etheric oil, 80, IOI 
ethics, 86 
euclase, 31 
Eucomis punctata, 58 
Euphorbia, 77 
Europe, 19, 24, 197 
evacuation, 117, 158 
evil, 144 
evolution, 23 
excernation, 163 
excitability, 194 
excitation, 194 
excrement, 161, 164, 165, 166 
excretion, 36, 126, 132, 154, 158, 164, 166, 
168, 190, 200, 201; excretory gland, 75; 
excretory organ, 164, 165 
exercise (bodily), 131 
exhalation, 122,132,149, 152; mephitic, 197; 
exhalatory artery, 159, vessel, 124 
ex ovo, 34 
expansion, 59, 144 
explanation, 1 II 
extensor, 112 
external nature, 105, relation, 137, world, 
102;extemality,Ilo, 126,136 
extinct (animals), 20, 32 
extra-terrestriality, 16 
extremity (bodily), 129 
'ex ungue leonem,' 184 
eye, 121, 123, 128, 129, 130, 139, 140, 1S2, 
186 
eye-teeth, 184 
390 

INDEX TO TEXT 
face, 162 
facet (of bone), 184 
faculty, 52, 167 
faeces, ISS 
farina, 72 
fascicle, 71, 72, 73, 80, 81, 82, II6 
fat, II4, 120, 132 
fate (natural), 177 
fault-plane, 30 
fauna,24, 181 
feather, 148, 149, 189 
fecundity, 176 
feeling, 52, 103, 104, II6, II7, 120, 137, 
138, 139, 140, 168, 175, 179; animal, 48; 
of deficiency, 205, love, 176, need, 144, 
unity, 191 
feet, 127, 168, 183, 184, 185, 188, 189, 190, 
191,192 
felspar, 26, 27, 28 
female, 131, 144, 168, 173, 175, 209, 210; 
human, 191; genitals, 174, 187; uterus, 174 
fermentation, 21, 37, 101, 121, 154 
Fern, 64, 79 
ferric ochre, 3 I 
ferruginous stone, 20 
fertility, 34, 36, 38, 88; fertilization, 34, 50, 
52, 58, 93, 95, 97; fertilizing organs, 
(plant),95 
fever, 194,198,200,202,210; asthenic, 201; 
inflammatory, 201; lingering, 201; ner-
vous, 143; symptoms, 210; yellow, 197 
fibre, 71, 73, 81, 85; nerve, 129; plant, 54, 
65, -vessel, 73, 75 
fibrilla, 76 
fibrin, 124, 187 
fibula, 184 
Fieldfare, I 58 
Fig tree, 99, 100, 147 
filament,52,59,63,94,95,187 
filter, 120 
fin, 127, 180, 190, 192; -footed, 188 
fme arts, 131 
fmger, 103, II8, 139; -tip 207 
Fir,93 
fire, 28, 103, 121, 150; dissolution in, 21; 
element, 17, 34, 101, 150; internal, 51; 
kingdom of, 13; of blood, 122; pure, 120 
firm land, 23 
Fish, 19, 37, 106, 158, 180, 185, 186, 188, 
189, 190; colour, 148, 149; fossil, 19; 
flying, 189;rnigration, 146, 167 
fission, 22 
fissure, 2 I, 25 
fiabelliforrn leaf, 60 
fiag,27 
Flax, 81 
flesh, 157, 159, 182, 183 
fletz, 18, ::n, 26, 29, 31 
flexor, II2 
flint, 20 
Flitter-mouse, 189 
flora, 24, 181 
flow (sap), 77 
flower, 57, 59, 61, 62, 78, 83, 91, 96, 100, 
168; -bud, 85, 86, 90; colour, 86, 100; 
double, 59, 63; female, 97; form, 65; 
-life, 101; male, 97 
fluid, 102, 137, 188, 193, 202; colours of, 
149; magnet, 52, 106; neutral, 120; 
organic, 157 
fodder, 164, 184 
foetus, 186, 190 
foliaceousness, 67; folia floralia, 6 I; foliage, 
75; foliation, 27,29, 79 
Fontana, F., 51 
food, II 7, 121, 126, 133, 135, ISS, 157, 
160,161,162,163,164,165,168,206 
force, 122; cardiac, 133, 134; living, 132; 
moribund, II3; natural, 200; nocturnal, 
121; self-enveloped, II4; vital, 205, 206 
forest, 181; buried, 19 
formalism, 142 
formation, 41, 109, 173; process of, 16, 47, 
66,67,131 
Forster, J. R., 149 
fossil bone, 19, 182, 184 
Foureroy, A. F., 165 
fracture (osseous), 159, 161 
France, 20; inhabitants, 178, 186, 197 
freedom, 11,48,144,198,212 
Freiberg, 3 I 
fresh water, 36; Conferva, S5 
Frischholz, J., 31 
Fritillaria regia, 57 
Frog, 133, 147, 190 
frontal bone, II 5 
fructification, 18, 62, 90, 94 
fruit, 56, 58, 59, 64, 78, 83, 90, 91, 94, 97, 
99; formation, 98; -bearing tree, 99; 
fruitfulness (of earth), 90, 179; fruiting, 
79,97 
fulcrum, 115 
Fungus, 39, 40, 43,70, 71,73, 88 
fusion, 20, 152 
391 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Gadfly, 174 
galaxy, 37 
galena, 30 
Gallinaceae, 190 
gall-stone, 195 
galvanic battery, II9; galvanization, 39 
Ganges, 36 
ganglion, II2, II7, 130, 188; semi-lunar, 
II8; system, 1I7; thoracic, II8 
gangue, 25 
Garden snail, 187 
gas, 86, 88; gaseous matter, 158 
gastric juice, 121, 126, 153, 154, 157, 159, 
164 
gelatine, 125; gelatinous being, 43 
gemma, 58, 71, 78; gemmation, 95, II8 
gemmula,57 
generatio: aequivoca, 34, 36; univoca, 36 
generation, 93, 173, 176; principle of, 209; 
spontaneous, 36 
generic: life, 79; process, 66, 91, 92, 96, 
107, 108, 166, 170, 171, 172, 176, 177, 
2II,212 
Genesis, 22 
genital, 164, 16S, 174, IS7 
genius, 189 
genus, 17, 41-43, 47, 52, 68, 108, 121, 131, 
157, 16g, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, ISO, 181, IS3, 184, 191, 193, 
194,195,210,211,212 
geognosy, 17,20,21 
geography (physical), 23 
geology, 24,25; geological nature, 12, 15; 
geological organism, 9, 16, 21, 32, 34, 45, 
46; geological studies, 27 
germ, 24, 26, 39, 55, 67, 68, 74, 88, 91, 92, 
97,98 
Germany, 20, 24,197; inhabitants, 197 
germination, 69, 83, 85, l00;-bud, 39 
Giant's Mountains, 20 
Gilbert, L. W., lIS 
gills, 150, 187, IS8, 190 
ginglymus, IS3 
gland, II2, 120, 127, 162, 168, 174, 175; 
glandular element, 1I3, organ, 
168, 
structure, 125 
glass: bead, 160; container, 160; cylinder, 
lIS; powdered, S9; vessel, 97 
Gleditsch,]. G., 94, 95 
globe (of Earth), 23; globularity, 65; 
globule (nerve), 151 
glove, 158 
gneiss, 20, 27, 31 
God, 213 
Goeden, H. A. (not Gode), 195, 196 
Goethe,]. W. von, 46, 54, 5S, 59,60, 62,63, 
64,83,115,148,149 
gold, 30, 31 
Gorgonia, 39 
grading (of mammals), 192 
grafting, 57, 77, 90 
grain: cereal, 160, 183; geological, 25, 30; 
plant, 55, 56,68,71,73,96 
granite, 20, 26, 27, 29; mass, 27; rock, 21; 
regenerated, 21; transformation, 28; 
veined, 27; graniticity, 25, 29 
granularity, 31, 101 
grape, 88 
grasping, 126, 129 
Grass, 70, 79, 81, 147, 183 
Grasshopper, 174 
gravity, 10, 35, 103, 105, 106, 13S, 196,21 I; 
specific, 35; sphere of, 213 
Greater Celandine, 77 
greatness (human), 144 
green, 56, 62; chromatic neutrality, 91; 
leaf, 86; plant, 87; greenery, 206 
greenstone, 28 
greywack, 2S, 29, 30; -slate, 28 
grief, 198 
growth, 98, 100, 188; Conferva, 50; plant, 
67,91; vegetable and animal, 46 
Gryllus veruccivorus. 174 
gum, 39, 75,78,156 
gymnastics, 131 
gypsum, 29, 30 
gyrus, 77 
habit, 130, 178, ISO, 185 
habitat, 167 
hair, 149, 165, 189, 191; black, 148; curly, 
189; human, 191 
Haller, A., 130, 133, 134, 135 
hand, lIS, 127, 129, 130, 192 
hardness, 33, 137, 139 
Hare, 146, 147 
harmony, 130, 144 
Harz, 2S, 30 
hatching, 191 
Hazel,93 
head,117, 126,135, 169, 187, 188; good, 68; 
heaviness in, 201; sensibility, 127 
392 

INDEX TO TEXT 
headache, 117, 201 
healing, 202, 204; agent, 204 
health, 143, 164, 179, 194, 195, 
202,205 
197, 200, 
herucing, 104, 130, 138, 140, 187,211 
heart, 112, 118, 122, 124, 125, 130, 133, 
169, 180, 187, 188, 189, 195, 208; -heat, 
134, 135; contraction of, 134; force, 
134; muscle, II9;pulsation, 123; ventricle, 
122 
heat, 24, 35, 50, 51, 52, 101, 106, 120, 121, 
138, 139, 148, 151, 154, 195; animal, 104, 
125; digestive, 126; dissolution, 121, 126; 
excess, 194; mediation, 126; organic, 159; 
spontaneous generation of,36 
Heaven (and Earth), 18 
heavens, (motion of), 35; heavenly body, 
II, 49, 213 
Hedgehog, 191 
Hedysarum girans, So 
heel,114 
Heinl, J. L., 27 
Helmont, J. B. van, 89 
hemisphere, 16, 181 
Hemp, 81, 93 
hepatic: process, 120, 199; system, 124, 125 
Heraclitus, 194 
herbivorous animal, 165, 183, 192 
hermaphrodite, 95, 174; plant, 93 
Hermbstadt S., 51 
hero, 149 
Herodotus, 197 
Hexandria, 70 
hibemation, 120, 146 
higher: animal, 162, 182, 188, 191; class, 
168, 187, 190; development, 181; faculty, 
167; feature, 164; grade, 167; nature, 
144; organization, 161; organism, 176, 
181,185 
hill (as water- collector), 36 
hind-leg, 192 
history: dramatized, 189; Earth's 16,21,22; 
event in, 32; of disease, 197, government, 
nature, science, 18 
Holland,19 
Holothuria, 158 
homoeopathy, 205, 207 
homogeneity, 161, 164,203 
honey, 168 
honey-dew, 36 
hoof, 183; cloven, 184; hoofed animal, 192 
Hop, 93 
horizon, 25 
horn, II4, 192; horned animal, 183, 184 
hornblend, 27, 28 
horn silver, 31 
hornstone, 20, 28 
Horse, 24, 191, 192; -dung, 165; neighing, 
105 
horticulture, 86 
hot house, 86 
Hufeland, C. W., 50 
human: being, 86, 130; iJody, 149; excre-
ment, 164; organism, 109, 197; skin, 149; 
soul, 107: humanity (African), 24 
Humboldt, A. von, 20, 39 
humidity, 87 
humour, 198 
Hungary, 20 
hunger, 105, 148, 150, 169 
husk, 99, 114 
hybrid,98 
Hydra, 158 
hydrochloric acid, 207 
Hydrodictyon,55 
hydrofluate of lime, 165 
hydrogen, 10, 143, 144, 157,204; hydro-
genation,66 
hypochondria, 121,205 
hypothesis, 21, 119, 134, 160 
Hymenaea Courbaril, 75 
ice, 207 
Ice plant, 52 
idea matrix, 92, 97 
idealism, 102, 142 
igneous: element, 28, 126; essence, 157; 
form; 29; origin, (rock), 17; principle, 
28; process, 119, 153; ignition, 162 
iliac bone, lIS 
illness, 179, 205 
image, 213 
imagination, 26, 33, 122 
imbibition, 120 
immature plant, 88 
immobility, 122 
immortal being, 212 
impregnation, 9, 93, 95, 97 
impulse, 88,94,98, 141; impulsion, 139 
inanimate: existence, 9; organism, 33, 46 
incisor, 183, 184 
N· 
393 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
inclination (of vein), 25 
India,121 
indigestibility, 164, 203 
induction, 40 
indulgence, 103 
induration (of wood), 67, 69 
inertia: circulatory, 119; venous, 162 
infection, 54,68, 74, 125, 126, 152, 154, 156, 
194, 197, 199 
infInite (spurious), 122 
UtBatnrnability, 162 
inflammation, 113, 1I7, 201, 207; inflam-
matory fever, 201 
inflorescence, 61, 90,92 
influx (oxygen), 150 
Infusoria, 34, 40, 182, 187: infusorial 
animalcule, 36, 37. 38 
ingestion, 126 
inhalation, 122, 149 
injection, 161 
inner life, 130 
inorganic: being, 13, 22, 41-43, 88, 106, 
125, 156, 157, 163, 199, 194; cause, 205; 
Earth, 23; externality, 164; nature, 12, 
66, 84, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 113, 
118, 1I9, 120, 125, 131, 136, 137, 138, 141, 
143,146,147,155,166,171,177, 179,181, 
182, 185, 188, 190, 192, 193, 195, 196, 
205; potency, 163,202,208; secretion, 80, 
121; things, 147 
inosculation, 94 
Insect, 75, 99, 100, 135, 147, 150, 158, 167, 
168,186,187,188,190; frozen, 135; hum 
of, 105 
insecurity, 179 
insensibility, 113 
insolubility, 89 
instinct, 136, 141, 145, 146, 147, 151, 166, 
167, 183; mechanical, 169, 190; rational 
156 
integument (of seed), 96, 99 
intelligence, 130 
interest, 210 
internal: differentiation, 203; organ, 129 
interstice, 118 
intestine, 154, 158, 168, 182, 195; intestinal 
canal, 126, 159, 168, system, 1I2, worms, 
40, 146 
introjection, 115 
intuition, 27, 77, 103, 1I5, 137,145,166,173, 
178,213 
intussusception, 47, 50, 87, 104 
invalid, 123 
invertebrate, 186. 187 
invigoration, 84, 204 
involution, 98 
ipecacuanha, 159 
iris (anatomical), 186 
Iris (plant), 63 
iron, 24, 29, 30, 156; -glance, 31; stone, 3 I ; 
tube, 160 
irrespirable gas, 88 
irritability,I06, 109,110,111,112,115, 122, 
125, 127, 149, 181, 187, 198, 206, 208; 
elastic, 1I9, organic, 120, principle of, 121, 
system of, 129; irritation, 163, 168, 194. 
195 
'Isis' (Oken's periodical), 195 
island,23 
isolation, 200 
Jatoba (Jatai) tree, 75 
jaundice, 200 
jaw-bone, 182, 183, 185 
jelly, 38, IIO, 158, 187 
Jews (lawgiver of), 121 
joy, 104, 140;joyfulness, 105 
jugular artery, 134 
juice, 121, 126, 160 
July, 37 
jumping, 131 
Jungfrau, 19 
Jupiter, 22 
Jussieu, Ao L. de, 70, 186 
Kannstadt, 19 
Kant, I., II, 145 
Karlsruhe (botanical garden), 95 
kidney, 129, 186 
Kiel,77 
king (of beasts), 192 
kingdoms (mineral, vegetable, animal), 12 
kitchen-salt, 37 
kissing, 128, 164 
Klaustal, 30 
knot (nerve), II7 
knowledge, 147 
Kolreuter, Jo Go, 94 
labia pudendi, 174 
Labiatae, 81 
laboratory, 151 
394 

INDEX TO TEXT 
laceration (of rock), 20 
lachrymal gland, 129 
lactic acid, 165 
La Gardette, 3 I 
lair, 147, 167 
Lamarck,J. B., 186, 187, 188, 190, 192 
Lamprey, 186 
land, 34,38, 187, 190; distribution, 16; 
filiation, 23 
land & animal, 180, 188, 189 
larva, 168, 16g 
larynx, 130, 190 
lathe, 81 
latitude (Southern), 193 
laughter, 128 
law, 121, 168 
layering, 56 
lead, 30; oxide, 89 
leaf, 13, 58,67,7°,71, 72, 75, 78, 84, 85, 88, 
89, 90, 91, 99, II9, 206; aquatiline, 88; 
cauline, 59; fall, 85, 109; forms, 65; 
plant's form, 59; propagation, 58, 95; 
shape, 60, 64; -stimulation, 53; succulent, 
71; -vein, 70; withering of, 57 
leaping, 130 
leaping point, 122, 143 
Leech,185 
leg, lIS, 130, 149 
Legallois, J. J. C., 134, 135 
legislation (rational and systematic), 22 
Legume, 53,64 
Leipzig, 94 
Lemon, 59 
level, 148, 167 
Lichen, 34,39,40,71,73, 88 
life, 9, 10, II, 12, 14, 15, 34, 36, 40, 45, 66, 
121, 122, 133, 136, 141, 142, 143, 144, 
148,152,179,182,195,203,211; animal, 
107, 187; crystal of, 33; dissolution of, 
37; dual, 200; essence, 33; generation of, 
195; idea of, 178; immediate action of, 
153; inner, 206; intensive unity of, 134; 
of nature, 179, plant, 65; organic, 187; 
possibility of, 34; -process, 35, 54; 
pure, 200; real, 45-46; solar, 16; -span, 
16g; subjective, 38; totality of, 33; 
universal, 41, 74; -vessel, 67, 72, 73, 79; 
-lessness, II ° 
ligament, 129 
ligature, 129, 134 
light, 10, II, 35, 38, So, 70, 71, 72, 74, 84, 
91, 101, 102, 103, 107, 138, 139, 140, 149, 
203 ; action, 148; and plant, 48, 52, 84, 85. 
86, 87; artificial, So; assimilation of, 92; 
element, 85; internally durable, 38; of air, 
120; physical, 37; power of, 48,70; -ray, 
74; refraction of, 152; relationship with, 
148; spiritualized, 85; veneration of, 48 
ligneous: fibre, II4; plant, 57; ring, 81; 
self (of plant), 87 
lignification,46,53,80 
Lilium bulbiferum, 57, 58; Lily, 147 
limbs, 114,126, 130,182,192,201 
lime, 26, 31, 132, 165; carbonate of, 165; 
hydrofluate of, 165; phosphate of, 94, 
133,161,165 
limestone, 20, 21, 3 I; compact, 20; for-
xnation, 32;prnr.utive, 26,29; quarry, 32; 
saline, 20; secondary, 29; stratification, 
32; transition, 29 
Lime-tree, 64 
limit, 141 
line, 99, II4, u8, 167, 175; linear diffusion, 
114;linearity,23,91 
linen, 159 
linin,71 
Link, H. F., 52, 53, 57, 58, 65, 68, 69, 70, 72, 
73, 75, 77, 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 87, 88, 92, 
94,95,96 
LllInaeus,C.von,70,75,93,186 
Lion,20,147,165,192,193 
lip (of pudendum) , 174 
liquid, 168; coloured, 75; fermented, 101 
lithomarge, 3 I 
lithophyte,38 
liver, U9, 121, 124, 129, 130, 146, 158, 162, 
168; heat, 120; of Earth, 36; scirrhus, 198 
Liverwort, 73 
living: being, 10, 17,22,45,67,88,93,131 
142, 152, 171, 210; existence, 15. 22; 
force (of blood); 123; movement, 120; 
process, 12, 36 
Lizard,135 
loam,20,29 
locomotion, 129 
lode,29,30 
loins,134 
loneliness, 48 
longitudinal extension, u6 
love, 176 
low: animal, 154, 157, 162, 176; feature, 
164; form, 203 
lunar: course, 124; element, 38; life, 16; 
principle, 24; process, II9 
395 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
lung, II9, 120, 123, 124, 130, 133, ISO, 159, 
162, 180, 186, 195, 200; bird, 190; 
of Earth, 36, plant, 75 
Lupin,53 
lustre (plant), 84 
lymph, 68, 79, 113, 120, 124, 125, 126, 132, 
133, 153, 154, 158, 161, 162, 186, 197, 
201, 203; salivary, 
121; 
lymphatic 
activity, 121, element, II3, stage, 162, 
system, 154, 197, vessel, 120, 129, 133 
magic, 68, 205, 206 
magma(metallic),30 
magnesia (phosphate of), 94, 165 
magnet, 24, fluid, 106; magnetic axis, 23, 
factor, 204, polarity, 143; magnetism, 17, 
23,49,55,143,144, 207 
male, 131, 144, 173, 175,209,210; Bee, 168; 
genitals, 174; hUDlan, 191; sexual organs 
174,187 
malnutrition, 156 
Marnm.al, 20, 38, 192, 158, 168, 180, 186, 
189, 191 
Marnm.oth (bones), 20 
Man, 21, 107, 130, 131, 147, 148, 159, 179, 
181, 185, 191, 192, 195, 198; as instrUDlent 
of spirit, 185; eye, 128; highest stage, 181; 
races of, 22; rationality, 156; southern, 
48; works of, 180 
Mandirola, A., 58 
manganese oxide, 28 
Mangrove, 56 
manure, 85, 89 
Maple, 64 
marble, 31 
marine formation, 48 
marl, 20, 29, 3 I 
marrow (bone), II4, II6, 132 
Martius, K. F. P., 31, 75, 77 
mass, 10 
massif, 19, 20 
mastication, II7, 121, 183, 188 
materiality, 104, ISO 
materia medica, 206 
matter, 10, II, 105, 125, 139, 143; animal, 
156; weighted, 48 
maturation, 95,96,98,99, 100 
means, 132, ISS, 165, 167 
meat, 156, 161, 182 
mechanical: analysis, 54; assimilation, 151; 
diffusion, 30; drive, 166; elasticity, 52; 
explanation, 36, 122, lSI, 156; for-
mation, 23; grasping, 129; instinct, 166, 
167, 168, 169, 190; interpretation, 88; 
movement, 123, 126; nature, 9; objecti-
vity, II4; organism, II; process, 151; 
relationship, 105; secretion, 154; seizure, 
151; sphere, 138, 166; stimulus, 52; 
stratification, 250 
mechanics, 156; mechanism, II, II3, 144, 
146, ISS, process of, II8 
Media, 197 
medial line, 175 
mediation, 43, 54, 96, 101, ISO, 152, 154, 
163, 166, 173, 174, 18S; by nerve, 129; 
digestion, 161; of heat, 126, oxygen, 87; 
process, 157; reproduction, 112 
medical science, 193; medicament, 203, 205; 
medicine, 109, 171, 198, 200, 205, 206; 
digestion of, 200, system of, 204, theory 
of,l42 
Medicus, F. K., 52 
mediUDl, 156 
medullary: cavity, II3; cell, 82; fibre, n6; 
ray, 70, 81 
Melon, 93, 95, 97 
member: of animal, 13, 103, organism, 131 
membrane, 159, 192 
menses, 175 
mental composure, 131 
mephitic exhalation, 197 
Mercurialis, 93 
MesembryanthemUDl crystallinum, 52 
mesmerism, 205, 206, 207 
metal, 25, 29, 31; association, 30; base 30; 
compact, 24; precious, 30; tube, 160; 
metallicism, 29, 32 
metamorphosis, 45, 54, 58, 59,64, lIS, 169 
metaphysics, 175, 212 
meteor, 36 
meteorological process, 17, 18, 33, 35, 152 
Mexico, 20 
Meyer,]. F. C., 78 
miasma, 36 
mica, 26, 27, 29, 31; greasy, 31; -schist, 27, 
28 
Michelet, K. L., 46, 81, 92, 98, 109, 142, 
170,175, 205 
microcosm, 108 
microscope, 76, 122 
middle caudex, 69 
Midge, 99, 100 
midrib,60,64 

INDEX TO TEXT 
migration, 146, 167, 197 
mildew, 36, 39 
milk, 161, 203 
Mimosa, 51, 53 
mineral kingdom, 3 I; mineralogy, 25 ; 
mineralogical constitution, 3 I, crystal, 65, 
moment, 25 
Minerva, 22 
mining, 25, 30 
Mirbel, C. F. B. de, 53 
mirror, 213 
misery, 179 
mist, 159 
Mite, 169 
moisture, 69, 76, 85, 88, 152, 159 
molar, 183 
Moll, K. E. von, 3 I 
Mollusc, 135, 158, 186, 187, 188 
molybdenum, 30 
Monkey, 191, 192 
monocotyledon, 57, 58, 70, So, SI, I7S, IS6 
Monoecia, 93, 97 
monophyllous calyx, 61 
monstrosity, 59, 179 
month,35 
Mont Perdu, 19 
mood (seasonal), 146 
Moon, 34, III, 147; and tides, 36; -light, 50 
morbidity, 200, 201 
morphology, II5 
mosaic, ISO 
Moss, 39, 73, SS, 95 
mother, 203 
motion, 34; abstract, 15; differentiating, 
200; heavenly, 35 
motor: muscle, ISS; nerve, II6, 129, 134; 
organ, 130, 182 
mountain, 20, 23, 24, 25, lSI; core, 25; 
magnetic axis, 23; range, 16,20,24 
mouth, 125, 12S, 130, 149, 15S, 164 
movement, 106, IS7, 188, 2II; animal, 49; 
autonomous, 104, 143; living, 120; 
muscular, II9, 19S; plant, 49; rotatory, 
II9; spontaneous, II9 
mucilage,7I,161 
mucus, 165 
Mud fish, 149 
muriate of ammonia, 165, of soda, 165 
murrain, 197 
muscle, II2, II6, II9, 123, 125, 127, 129, 
130, 132, 140, 159, 161, 169, 201; activity, 
lIS; cervical, 183; contraction, 52, II9; 
fibre, 52, II2; energy, 200; motor, 188; 
movement, II9, 198; pulsation, 122; 
slackness, 208; sphincter, 168; stomach, 
160; system, II8; temporal, 183; venter, 
IS8 
music, 131, 180, 189 
Musk-Melon, 97 
mystical action, 68 
nagelflue, 20 
Naiad,36 
nail,II4 
naphtha, 207 
Naples (mal de), 197 
natron, 2S, 165 
natural: philosophy, 204; science, 177; 
naturalist, I7S 
nature, 9, 15, 16, 27, 40, 60, 61, 68, 81, 108, 
IIO, II 7, 120, 140, 141, 146, 164, 171, 
I7S, IS3, IS4, IS9, 193, 210, 213; ani-
mation, 33; artistry, 33; centre, lOS; 
change of, 146; consideration of ISS; 
elemental, 177; existence of, 104; ex-
ternal, 66, 169, 179, 197; force, 200; 
form, ISO; instrument of spirit, 177; 
life, 145; organic, 32, feeling for, lIS, 
plasticity, 33; power of, 179, 187; 
process of 32; production of, 18; purpose 
of, 
167, 
212; 
self-externality, 2II; 
spheres, 145, 176, 179; subjectivity, 2II; 
supreme point of, 102; understanding, 
22; universality, 18, 107; variety of, III; 
works of, ISO 
nausea, 206 
necessity, 2 I 
neck,118,I34, 185 
Neckar,I9 
nectary, 63 
need, lOS, 141, 144, 145, 146, I48, 15 I, 166, 
167,169,172 
negativity,S7,IIO, 139,141 
Negro, 148 
Neptunism, 17, 30 
nerve, 33, 71, II3, II4, 1I9, 12:/, 127, 128, 
130, 143, 144, 151, 161, 201; action of, 
151; and brain,IIS; eighth, 117; motor, 
II6, 129; sensory, II6; sympathetic, 
1I7,IS6 
nerve-: branclI, 134; fibre, II6; filament, 
II4; nodulation, 188; pulp, 112, II9; 
397 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
sheath, 1I9; thread, 80, 1I8; trunk, 1I6, 
128,129,134 
nervous: activity, 133; fever, 143; system, 
52, III, 116, 134, 135, 188,201 
nest building, 147, 167, 190 
nest (geology), 27, 29 
neutrality,25,29,32,33,36,132,138,152 
New world, 16, 24 
night, 51 
nisus formativus, 136, 164, 166, 167, 169, 
170, 173, 190 
nitrogen, 32, 87, 122, 143, 152,156,157,204 
node (plant), 55, 56, 60, 61, 73, 76, 80; 
flower, 91; formation, 79, 89; vegetable, 
144; modulation, 79, 91, 96 
nodulation: lung, 120; neurology, 188 
non-physical relationships, 129 
'Nordic Archive for Natural Science,' 159 
northern: hemisphere, 
181; land, 23; 
plants, 51 
nose, 129, 140, 188 
nosology, 193 
notochord,I86 
nourishment, 89, 1I2, 130 
noxiousness, 36, 196, 197 
nucleus, 1I4, 115 
numerical determination, 65 
nutriment, 77, 121, 154, 156, 157, 163, 165, 
167,207 
nutrition, 59, 68, 124, 125, 158, 168, 178; 
elaborated, 88; excessive, 61; plant, 67; 
process of, 42; sap, 75 
Oak, 89,93; fossilized, 19 
Oats, 147 
objectivization, 54 
observation, 178 
occiput, 183 
occupation, 130 
odour, 36, 101, 157, 160, 161 
oesophagus, 158, 168, 187 
oil, 75, 89, 98, 132, 156; etheric, 101; 
pistil, 53; vegetable, 120 
Oken, L., 74, 80, 92, lIS, 144 
old: age, II3, 208, 209, 210; world, 16,24 
Olive, 90 
olivine, 28 
'Omne vivum ex ovo', 36 
opercula, 94 
Ophidia, 189 
opium, 159,207 
opposite, 123 
opposition, 157 
orbicule, 27 
orbit (planetary), 16 
order, 177, 184 
ore, 25, 29, 30 
organ, 126, 145, 154, 156, 157, 169, 178, 
191; animal, 165; class, 177; digestive, 
159; diseased, 193, 198; distinct, 160; 
excretory, 165; glandular, 168; healthy, 
194; hearing, 187; male, 174; mastic-
atory, 188; motor, 182; plant, 54, 88; 
respiratory, 158; rudimentary, 185; sex-
ual, 187; smell and taste, 139; urinary, 
165; vocal, 186 
organic: assimilation, 157; being, 22, 40, 
41, 42, 47, 107, 132, 136, 137, lSI, ISS, 
173, 194, 208; difference, 32; elasticity, 
II 8; feeling, II 5, fermentation, 21 ; 
fluidity, ISS, 157; form, 33; formation, 
29, 32, 143; genesis, 76; life, 35, 37, 68, 
87, 88, 157, 187; matter, 65, 66; nature, 
99, 172; plasticity, 33; process, 67; 
totality (of plant), 58; world, 32; unity, 26 
organics, 9 
organism, II, IS, 16,47, 102,107, 1I3, lIS, 
1I9, 131, 136, 137,142,144, lSI, 153, ISS, 
162, 166, 182, 196, 197, 198, 201, 202, 
205; activity, 162, 163, 165,207; contex-
ture, 127; dead, no; diseased, 205, 206, 
207, 209; external, 120; function, 109; 
geological, 16, 34, 45; healthy, 195, 200; 
higher, 176, 181; individual, 193; inner, 
140; internal, 12 5; intra-reflected, 126; 
life, 1I3; mechanical, II; objective, 34, 
45; outer, 1I8, 127; reaction, 204; self-
embodying, 108; self-producing, 36; 
universal, 125; viscera, 186; vitalized, 40 
orifice: insect, 150; Polyp, 158; Salpa, 160; 
stomach, 117 
Ornithorhynchus, 189 
oryctognosy, 24, 25 
oscillation (of Conferva), 50 
osseous: 
nucleus, 
114; substance, 
3 I ; 
system, II I, II 3, 129; ossification, 208, 
209 
osteology, 184 
Ostrich,189 
Otaheiti, 149 
outer world, 136 
ova, 174; ovary, 94, 168, 174, 175; oviduct, 
174;oviformity,174 

INDEX TO TEXT 
overlayer, 19 
Ox, 191 
Oxalis sensitiva, 53 
oxidation, 21; oxide (lead), 89 
oxygen, 10, 87, 88, 120, 124, 143, 144, 150, 
157, 159, 204, oxygenation, 66, 124, 150, 
Oyster, 19 
pabulum vitae, 150 
pad (cartilaginous), 183 
pain, 104, 105, 140 
painting, 180, 189 
Palm, 19, 70, 71, 79, 93 
palm (of hand), II8 
pancreas, 125, 161, 168, 187; pancreatic 
juice, 121, 125, 126, 154, 161, 162, 165 
papilla, 77 
paracorolla,63 
parallelogram, 56 
paralysis, 195, 207 
parasite, 56 
parenchyma, 71, 78, 81, 82 
parent, 191 
paries, 77 
Paris, 182 
parody (of man), 192 
Parrot, 149 
pars lumbaris, 118 
Passeres, 190 
passing away (ofliving being), 17 
past (the), 16, 17, 33 
patient, 133 
Peacock, 206 
Pear, 57, 59 
peat, 29, 31 
pebble, 89 
pedicel,94 
Pelargonium, 60 
pelt, 148 
pelvis, 117, 192 
penis, 168 
peoples (system of), 24 
perception, 74, 137 
percolation, 36, 89 
perennial (plant), 64, 85 
perfection, 182, 185; animal, 109, 135; of 
organism, 177, 181; of teeth, 184 
pericarp, 99 
periosteum, II4, lIS, 133 
peristaltic movement, 121 
permeation, 29, 127 
perpetuum mobile, 122 
Peru, 20 
petal, 59, 62, 63, 97 
petiole, 53, 56, 57, 58, 83; petiolule, 64 
petrifaction, 18, 19, 31, 32, 33, 67 
Pfaff, c. H., 159 
Phanerogam, 73 
philosophy, 21,22,27,72, 87, III, 144, 189, 
195, 204, 213; of nature, II, 74, 92, 196, 
213 
Phoenix, 212 
phosphate: of lime, 94, 133, 161, 165, 
magnesia, 94,165, soda, 165 
phosphorescence, 34, 37, 38 
phosphorus, 155; phosphoric acid, 165 
physical: characteristics (of continents), 16; 
geography, 23; nature, 9; sphere, 210 
physician, 199,200,201,207 
physics, 105 
physiology, 63, 68, 109, 122, 130, 154, 162, 
171 
physis, 146 
Phytozoa, 56 
Pigeon, 160, 190 
pigment, 39 
pinnate leaf, 53, 59 
pistil, 49, 52, 53, 59, 63, 71, 94, 95, 96, 97, 
209; pistillary cord, 94 
pith, 70, 71, 73, 78, 80, 81, 82 
place, 105,106,140, 148 
plague, 197 
plain, 181 
planet,74, III; middling, 16; process, 74; 
series, 16 
plant, 13, 14, 18, 20, 22, 32, 44, 45, 46, 48, 
58, 75, 102, 108, 109, II4, 132, 144, 148, 
154,156,157,164,167,178,187;acid,66; 
activity, 91; aerial form, 101; and air, 86, 
animal, 80, light, 84, 85, 86, 87, 91; 
aquatic, 73; aroma, 86; articulation, S4; 
basic life, S8; brain, 92; breaking into 
leaf, 78; cellular structure, 39; colour 
86; difference, 60; digestion, 89; dioe-
cious, 93; -fibre, 8 I; fmal act of, 92; 
form, 83; growth, 89, 91; higher, 43; 
idea matrix, 92; immature, 88 ; impotence, 
58; in colder regions, 53; -like part, 209; 
movement, 50; non-ligneous, 79; nourish-
ment, 89; objectivization, 54; odour, 101; 
officinal, 206; parts, 46; physiology, 54; 
propagation, 95; process, 66,85; quality, 
399 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
46; relation to elements, 107, externality, 
104; respiration, 87; self-consumption, 
89; shape, 54, 65; sterile, 97; stimu-
lation, 53; structure, 84; subordination, 
101; thermic qualities, 51; tropical, 90; 
type, 55; unity, 54; vigour, 86; vital 
process, 65; whole, 68 
Plate (river), 20 
platinum, 119 
pleasure, 105 
plexus, 118, 123, 124, 130 
Pliny, 100 
plumage, 148, 149, 191 
Plumiera, 58 
plumule, 55, 69 
Poa bulbosa, 58 
poet, 49, 189; poetry (prosaic), 189 
point, 23, 37, 49, 54, 103, 114, 130, 139, 154, 
175; living, 37; of animation, 44, life, 34, 
selfhood, 48, totality, 25 ; utricle, 55 
poison, 74, 97, 98, 168, 203, 205, 207 
Poland,20 
polarization, 16, 55, 70, 74, 143 
pollen, 52, 53, 59,63,72,94,95,96,97,98, 
99; pollination, 62, 100 
Polygamia, 93 
Polyp, 3, 8, 58, 135, 158, 168, 187 
Pontedera, J., 99 
poor soil, 59 
Poppy, 63 
porphyry, 20,28, 31 
portal: system, 112, 120, 121, 123: vein, 121 
Portulaca oleracea, 49 
positivity, 87, 139 
potash, 26, 28, 88, 165 
potato, 48 
potency, 162, 179; elemental, 148; external, 
142; inorganic, 202, 208; potentiation, 
143 
Pothos,58 
power of: animality, 156, nature, 146, 179, 
process, 16 
practical relationship, 104, 105, 141 
precious metal, 30 
predetermination, 167 
pregnancy, 128 
presupposition, 15, 136 
pressure, 35, 37, 122 
prey, 158, 168, 182, 183, 192; bird of, 190 
prickle (of Cactus), 71 
primitive: limestone, 26, 29; massif, 20; 
peoples, 146; rock, 19, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31 
primordial: porphyry, 28, sandstone, 30 
primordium: of calyx, 62, new plant, 83 
process, 48, 136, 161 
procreation, 95, 168, 172 
progeny, 191 
progression (Notional), 31 
propagation, 156, 168; bud, 57; of Con-
ferva, 55, plant, 56, species, 164, tree, 58 
prose (poetic), 189 
prostate, 174 
Proteus, 213 
prototype, 182 
pruning, 97 
psammophyte, 89 
psychic nature, 106 
puberty, 128 
pubescence, 150 
public, 156 
pudendum, 174 
pulmonary: circulation, 120; consumption, 
198; disease, 200; process, 120, 199; 
respiration, 190; system, 112, 119, 124 
pulp, 159 
pulsation, 112, 121, 122, 124; pulse beat, 123 
pulverization, 97 
pumping,lS2 
Pumpkin,69,93,95 
punctiformity, 12, 26, 32, 91; of awareness, 
104; punctiform animation, 34 
pupa, 169 
purgation, 199,207 
purpose, 145, 146, 166, 185,212; purposive 
action, 167, activity, 145, 154; purposi-
veness, 145, 165, 182, external, 155 
Puss moth, 168 
putrefaction, 37, 39, 85, 161 
pyramid,23 
Pyrenees, 19,20 
quadruped,20 
quartz,26,27,28,30,31 
quicksilver,30,206 
quill,149 
quintuplicity, 138, 140 
Quito, 20 
quivering, 119, 124 
Rabbit, 134 
radiation, 114 
radical, 152 
400 

INDEX TO TEXT 
radicle, 69, 70 
raUl, 35, 36, 53, 159 
rampancy, 96 
range (of rock), 28 
Ranunculus bulbosus, 70 
raphe, 72 
rash, 38 
ratio (inverse), 142-
Raumer, K. G. von, 29 
Raven, 149 
reason, 10, 68, 155, 213, infinite, 141; 
rational, 179, region, 24, will, 144; 
rationality, 21, 22,140,156,206 
recapitulation (of inorganic nature), 108 
receptacle, 158 
receptivity, 142-
rectum, 164, 165 
red blood, 150 
refraction (of light), 152 
remedy, 143, 199,206 
reproduction, 95, 109, 110, Ill, 113, 114, 
122, 125, 127, 130, 153, 166, 181, 198, in 
OpposItIon, 
125, of members, 
112, 
plant, 55, p6; reproductiveness, 107, 187; 
reproductive organs, 55, 187, system, 125 
Reptile, 185,190 
research (historical), 197 
resin, 19,39,75,94,98,162 
resonance, 106 
respiration, 66, 119, 122, 133, 147, 160, 190, 
of plant, 87, pulmonary, 190; respiratory 
system, 188, organ, 150, 158, process, 149 
rest, 148 
restoration, 207 
revolution, 18,20,21 
Rhine, 36 
Rhizophora mangle, 56 
Rhone, 36 
Rice, 147 
Richerand, A. B., 117, 132. 
Riegelsdorf, 30 
rigidity, 34, 117 
Rigikulm, 20 
ring (wood), 80, 82. 
ripeness, 99; internal, 89, of fruit, 98, seed, 
89 
river, 2.4, 36 
Rivularia,55 
rock-: crystal, 2.9, salt, 29, species, 17, 
structure, 27,type,25, 
Rodent, 192 
root, 13, 19, 56, 57, 58, 59, 67, 69, 70, 72, 
74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 84, 85, 88, 89, 92, 97, 
100, 144; exudence, 85; fibre, 57, 76; 
gemma, 58; growth, 72, 91; stock, 19 
rosary, 124 
Rose, 59,63 
Roth, A. W., 55 
Rotifer, 135 
rotten wood, 38 
rotundity (plant), 91, 99 
roughness, 139 
Rudolphi, C. A., 39, 53, 68 
Ruminant, 161, 184 
rumour,38 
running, 192 
Russia, 20,197; natives, 197 
ruttishness, 105 
Saalfeld, 30 
sac, 158, 168 
sadness, 129 
sailor, 37 
St. Fabian and St. Sebastian's Day, 90 
St. John's Day, 83; sap, 90 
St. Petersburg, 95 
salinity, 37; earth, 28, limestone, 20 
saliva, 126, 154, 162; gland, 129; lymph, 
121 
Salpa, 37, 160 
salt, 10, 80, 89, 152, 157, 165, 207; kitchen, 
37; soluble, 206; water, 37 
saltpetre, 52, 206 
Salzburg, 31 
sand, 2.0, 28,31,85,89; sandiness, 28 
sandstone, 20, 21; alpine, 20; beds, 29, 36 
sap, 48, 65, 73, 74, 75, 76, 80, 85, 93; 
circulation, 76; flow, 90; gland, 63; 
vital,67 
Sarracenia,63 
satellites (of Earth), 34 
satiation, 105, 107, 150, 165 
satire (on man), 192 
satisfaction, 104, 107, 15 I, 155 
saturation, 121 
Saussure, N.-T. de, 87, 88 
savour, 84 
Sayn-Altenkirclten, 31 
scalariform: tissue, 82.; vessel, 81; scalari-
formity,72 
scale,185,187,190,191 
scape (scapus), 69 
scar, 147 
40I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
scarlet-fever, 150 
scent, 84, 86,91 
Scheel, P., 159 
Schelling, F. W.]., 48, 92,142,144 
Schelver, F. J., 61, 95. 97, 98. 99. 100 
schist, 20. 28. 29. 30, 32 
Schrader.]. C. C., 89 
Schubert, G. H. von, 174 
Schultz, C. F. L., 140 
Schultz, K. H., 47, 54,72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 121 
Schweigger,J. S. C., 140 
scientific works. 189 
scion, 100 
scirrhus (ofliver). 198 
Scripture. 18 
scrotum. 174. 175 
sea, 23, 34, 35, 36. 37. 75. 86. 159; ani-
mation of 38; -current 23; distribution 
of, 16; level, 20; -shell (fossilized), 19 
seam, 25 
seasons. 5 I, 146 
secondary limestone. 29 
secretion. 54, 1540 159, 167, 202; critical, 
201; gland (of Earth) 36, 
seed,38. 39,40. 56,57.64. 83,88,94,96,97, 
98, 99, II4, 175; capsule, 64; Cermian, 
55; fertility, 57,70,93; germination, 89; 
grain, 68; male, 62; maturity, 92; 
power, 68; production, 154; ripe, 89,94, 
95; vessel, 71 
seizure, 158, 192; mechanical, 151; of prey, 
182, 
self-: consciousness, II7, 137. 167; conser-
vation, 13 ; determination, 128; dis-
solution, 15; engendering, 44; mediation, 
15; preservation, II2; production, 67; 
repulsion, 55 
semen, 175 
Senegal,19 
sensation, 13, 104, 105, 107, IIO, II3, II5, 
116,128,137,139, 169,187,211 
sense, 84, 137, 1J8; nerve, II6. 129; organ, 
II6. 129, 140 
sensibility, 47, 52, 106, 109, IIo. III, II3, 
II6, II7, II8, 125,127, 128,137,139,175, 
181,187,198; immediate, II5; system of, 
129 
sensitivity, 52, 140 
sensuality, 103 
sentience, 48, 52, 84, 104, 106, 112, 128, 132, 
136, 165, 166, 167, 169, 172, 173, 204; 
sentient being, IIO, creature, 129, 128, 
nature, 139, subject, 127 
separation, 165 
September, 165 
serpentine, 20, 28 
serum, 123, 187 
sex, 187, 209; change, 175; difference, 86, 
93, 95; differentiation, 80, 96, 154, 170, 
176; -drive, 173, 174, 191; impulse, 198; 
opposition, 195; organ, 92,187; part, 91, 
93,94,98,209; process, 93, IIO; -relation-
ship, 43, 55, 93, 94, 127, 170, 172, 203; 
sexlessness, 94; sexuality. 94; union, 95 
shame (and blushing), 162 
shape, 109, III, 126 
sheath (of nerve-fibre), II6 
shell, 31, 32, 148, 190; -fish, 149, 187 
shoulder, 159; -blade, 183 
shower (rain), 87 
shrubs, 56, 57, 90 
shudder, 201 
Siberia, II9 
sickness, 10 
sidereal connection, 33 
sight, 104, IIO, 128, 138, 139, 140, 187; 
sense of, 85, silica, 26, 28, 81, 135, 165; 
silicate, 26; siliceous agate, 19, formation, 
27, series, 28, 32, schist, 20, 30; siliceous-
ness, 26 
Silesia,20 
siliqua,64 
silver, 30 
site (of plant) 47, 
skeleton, 20, II2, II3, II4, 127, 186; 
plant, 72, 80 
skin, 112, II3, 125, 127, 147, 151, 154, 157, 
158, 159, 187, 190, 197, 198; bird, 190, 
191; fleshy, 186; human, 191; mam-
malian, 191; marking, 148; sensibility, 
140; twitching, 201 
skull-bone, II5 
slate, 27 
sleep, 21, 85, 107, 121, 146, 148, 206. 207 
slime, IIO 
Sloth, 192 
smell, 78, 91, 138, 139. 140; petal. 62; sea. 
37; sense of, 190 
Smith, P., 159 
smoothness, 139 
Snail, 19, 135, 187 
Snake. 185, 189 
snout, 191 
402 

INDEX TO TEXT 
snow, 35 
soda, 165; muriate of, 165 
softness, 139 
soil, 87, 89; and plant, 89; chalky, 89; 
dry, 100; good, 68; poor, 59; rich, 89 
solar: life, 16; system, II, 16, I03, III 
solubility, 71; solution, 21; solvent juice, 
160 
soma, ISS 
Sommerring, S. T. von, 123 
somnambulism, II7 
song (bird), 106, 169 
Sorbus:aucuparia,6I;hybrida, 6o, 61 
soul, 13, 16, 23, 38, 42, 48, 49, 103, 104, 
127, 128, 129, 137, 142, 151; and body, 
210; diseases of, 198; incomposite, 102; 
internal circuit of, 50; location, 103; 
objectivity, 48; threefold, 107 
sound, 138, 139 
South America, 19,24 
southern latitude, 86, 193 
space, 13, 16, 49, 103, 104, IOS, 137, 140, 
2U; and time, I06; spatiality, I03, 212 
spadix, 51 
Spain, 197 
Spal1anzani, L., 95, 97,154, 160 
spar (calcareous), 30 
sparryiron-ore,30,3I 
spathe, 51 
species, 177, 183, 184 
specUic: gravity, 10, 35, 106, 121; tem-
perature, 5 I 
speculation, 10, 166 
speech, 128, 164 
sphenoid, II 5 
sphere (metaphysical), 13, 23, 41, 85, 94, 
I07, II3, 138, 139, 143, 144, 145, 154, 
157, 165, 166, 176, 179, 200, 2IO, 2II, 
213; shape, 23, 160 
sphincter, 168 
spice-island, 86 
Spider, 147, 168, 169 
spine: of hedgehog, 191; osseous, 185; 
twinges in, 201; spinal column, II5, 186; 
cord, n6, II9, 134, 135, 186; element, 
58; marrow, u8; sinew, U7 
Spinoza, B. de, 10, 143 
spiral-vessel, 68, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 79, SI, 
82,85 
spiricle, 73, 74 
spirit, 18, 24, 68, 74, lIO, 137, 146, 151, 
157, 172, 176, 177, 182, 185, 189, 210, 
2II, 212, 213; spiritual aptitude, 131. 
being, 130, function, 74, gradation, 64, 
life, IS, 54, sphere, 210; spirituality, 59, 
128,131 
spirituosity, 203 
spitting, 164 
Spix,]. B., 31, 75 
spleen, 121, 129, 150, 153, 162, 187 
spontaneous generation, 36 
sporangium, 71 
spore, 39 
Sprengel, K. P.]., 73 
spring (season), 90, 121 
spring (water), 17,36,37; inexhaustible, 36 
thermal, 36 
sprouting, 91, 92, 98 
squarnation, 149 
stage (metaphysical), 25, 32, 44, 54. 64. 101, 
161,162,181,203,213 
stalk, 13, 53 
stamen, 52,63,94,95,209 
star, 10, 37, 38, I03 
state (the), 86 
statue, 189 
Steffens, H., 26, 32 
stem, 56, 57, 58, 70,71,74,78,81,82,88,92 
sterility, 168 
sternum, II4 
sthenic disease, 204 
stigma, 95, 96, 98 
still-birth, 33 
stimulant, 89,206; stimulation, 37, 52, n2, 
uS, 141, 145, 146, 153, 193, 195, 199, 
205, external, I09, of plant, 53, theory of, 
142; stimulus, 154,203,204, external, 143, 
mechanical, 52, negative and positive, 
207 
sting, 168 
stolon, 56, 95 
stomach, 76, II7, n8, 121, 126, 129, 130, 
133, 154, 159, 16o, 162, 168, 195, 198; 
muscle, 160; ruminant, 161; waIl, 160, 161 
stomate, 75, 88 
stone, 25, 135, 194; fruit, 59; stomach, 160 
stool, 144 
stratum (ligneous), 82; stratification, 17, 20, 
23,25,29,31,46 
Strawberry, 56 
strength, 149, 192,209 
stria, 72, 186 
structuring (qualitative), 69 
style, 63, 98, 133 
403 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
subject, Ill, 144, 151; aCtIVIty, 
IIO; 
animal, 109; subjective animation, 34, 
being, 106, 107, life, 15; subjectivity, 108, 
109, 121, 131, 169, 170, 210, and nature, 
2II, infinite unity, 138, of organic being, 
45, plant, So, point of, 103, punctiform, 
40, self-subsistent, 47, vegetable, 45 
subject (and predicate), 32 
subvariety (of plant), 57 
succulence, 58 
suckling,190,191 
suffocation, 195 
Suffolk,135 
sugar, 101, 156 
sulphur, 89, 165; sulphureousness, 32 
summer, 120 
Sun, 10, 34, 74, 102, 103, III, 135, 136, 
145, 167; action of, 149, and tides, 36, 
fructifying power, 35, influence on 
plants, 49, of animal being, 103 
Sunflower, 49 
sunlight, 50 
surface,99,114,116,139;ofskin,140 
swallOwing,117,182,192 
sweat,201 
sweetness, 78 
swimming, 18o 
Swine, 192: -gargets, 40 
Switzerland, 20 
syenite, 27 
syllogism, 43, 66, 107, 155, 174 
symmetry, 126,129,130 
sympathy, 128, 146; sympathetic nerve, 
III, 112, 117, 118, 130, 186 
symptom (fever), 201 
synovia, 123 
synthesis (of sexes), 95 
syphilis, 197 
Syria, 19 
system (absolute), 180 
tabashir, 67 
tactile cord, II6 
tail feathers, 149 
talc, 28 
talking, 184 
taming (of animals), 192 
tantalum, 30 
Tapeworm, 195 
tapping (trees), 90 
tap-root, 75 
taste, 78, IIO, 138, 139, 140, lSI; organ of, 
128 
tears, 128 
technical skill, 13 I 
teeth, II5, 128, 151, 178, 182, 183, 184, 191, 
192; eye, 184; canine, 183; of children, 
184, Whale, 18 S 
temperate zone, 181 
temperature (atlnospheric), 3S 
temporality, 21, 212 
tendon, 208 
tension, 36, 136, 148, ISS, 210; existent, 42; 
of Earth, 3S 
tentacle, 158, 168 
terrestrial: course, 
124; elements, 32; 
influence, 88; organism, 12, 15, 48; 
process, 17,48; terrestriality, 68 
terror, 198 
testicle, 174, 175; testicular formation, 17 S 
tetrad,140 
texture (of petal), 62 
thallus, 71 
theoretical: emanation, 106; process, 128, 
137,148,166; relationship, 104 
therapy, 202 
thermal spring, 36; thermic quality (of 
plant), 51; thermometer, 51 
thirst, 128, 147, ISO, 159, 169 
thorax, II7, II8, 126, 127, ISS; thoracic 
duct. 120, 154, system, 191 
thorn, 59 
thought, 30, 77, 103, 106, 107, 141, 173, 
187,189,212 
thread, II8 
throat, II7 
Thrush, 158 
Thuringian Mountains, 30 
thyroid gland, ISO, ISS 
Tiger, 20, 16S, 193 
tight-rope walking, 131 
Tillandsia usneoides, S6 
time, 13,21,22,49, 104, lOS, 137, 140, 14S. 
2II; animal, II9; liberated. 103; self-
realizing. 106 
tin, 29. 30 
tiredness, 201 
tissue. lIS. 133; cellular, 67. 71, 94. 12S. 
160, 161;1anuginous, 39; spongy, 17S 
titanium. 30 
Toad,13S 
toe. 192 
tone (sound), 106 
404 

INDEX TO TEXT 
tongue, 110, 128, 140, 184 
topaz, 31 
Torch-thistle, 49 
torpor, 24 
torsion, 72 
torture, 133 
touch, 116, 138, 190 
trachea, 150, 169, 190 
transformation, 74, II5, 132, 152, 154, 156, 
159,161,162,168, 169 
transition, 25, 27, 31, 37, 107, III, II4, 123, 
138, 156, 157, 160, 176, 188, 189; calyx-
corolla, 62; individuality-universality, 
208; fungus (soft-ligneous), 39; leaf-
stem, 59; -limestone, 29; natural being-
spirit, 212; organic being, 33; plant-oil, 
98; species, 29; vegetable-animal, 101 
transmission (of volition} , II9 
transmutation (of granite), 27 
transparency, 137, 155 
transpiration (of Earth), 36 
transversal band, 72 
Trapa natans, 69 
trap rock, 28, 29 
traveller, 19 
Trebra, F. W. H. von, 30 
tree, 85, 89, 192; artificial propagation, 58; 
grafted, 57; planting, 59; -line (Swiss) 
20; sap-pressure, 90; whole, 68 
Tremella,55 
Treviranus, G. R., 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 
lI2, II8, II9, 133, 134, 135, 149, 150, 
158,159,161, 165, 168, 169, 183, 184, 187 
Treviranus, L. C., 77 
triad, 25, 26, 28,66,138,140 
Triandria, 70 
trituration, 160 
tropical: Africa, America, Asia, 56; birds, 
48; plants, 90 
Troxler, 1. P. V., 144 
trunk (elephant), 192; (tree), 70, 71, 85 
truth, 10, 151, 165, 2II 
tube, 68, 125, 154 
Tulip, 58, 59,62,97 
Turkey, 160 
Tuscany, 19 
tusk,20 
twig, 56; -fibre, 73; foliate, 83 
type: animal, 177, 178, 181, 193; plant, 55; 
univer~,109,182,184,185 
typhus, 197 
Tyrol,31 
Ukraine, 197 
umbelliferous plant, 81 
unconsciousness, 167 
underwater insect, 150 
Ungulata, 184 
unhappiness, 144 
universe (natural), 143; universal life, 33, 44 
unselfishness, 191 
uranium, 30 
urethra, 174, 175 
uric acid, 165 
urine, 160, 165, 206; urinary organ, 165, 
vessel, 160 
uterus, 174, 175 
utricle, 55, 71, 73, 74 
vagina,I75 
valley, 20, 23, 24 
Vampire-bat, 189 
vaporization, 149; vapour (elaborated) 124 
variant (plant), 57 
vascularity, 
39; 
vascular 
fascicle, 
94, 
system, 201; cf. vessel 
vaulting, 131 
Vauquelin, L. N., 165 
vegetable: vegetability, 
132; vegetable 
being, 31, 44, lIS, diet, 156, growth, 
46-47, gum, 156, juice, 206, life, 22, 38, 
101, 145, 208, matter, 98, 154, nature, 32, 
148, 179, 191, 206, oil, 120, organism, 9, 
45, 66, II3, point, thread, surface, 37, 
process, 132, 149, reproduction, lI2, 
sap, 79, soul, 107, system, 125, universality 
39,140; vegetation, 18,23 
vegetarianism, 121, 156 
vein, 112, 120, 123, 125, 127, 133, 151, 187; 
wall, 122; veinlet, 123 
vein (mineralogy), 25, 28, 33; veined 
granite, 27 
venereal disease, 197 
venous: blood, 121, 124, 150; inertia, 162; 
system, 130, 162 
venter, 150; muscle, 188 
ventricle (cardiac), 122,180, 188, 190 
Vertebrate, 186, 187, 188 
vertebration, 115, II7, 178, 183, 186 
vesicle, 73, 174 
vessel, 75, 81, 150; annular, 72; coiled, 174; 
lymphatic, 133; periosteal, 133; pitted,72 
plant, 57; punctate, 72; urinary, 160; cf. 
vascularity. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
vibration, 104, 191; elastic, 123; inward, 
106; of air, 106 
victuals, 121, 164 
vie: animale, 126, 186; organique, 126, 186 
'Vienna Yearbooks,' 77 
vigour (plant), 86 
violence (lethal), 208 
viscera, 47, 58, 67, 108, IIO, II4, II9, 124, 
125, 127, 158, 161,182,186,187; visceral 
process, 67, reproduction, 126 
vision, 86, 139 
vital: force, 205, 206; function, 195; 
motion, 198; process (of plant), 65; sap, 
67,75,78,79; swelling, 175 
vitality, II3, 132, 173, 174,206,208; inner, 
207; of brain, II 8, germ, 92; pure, 122; 
tremulation of, 76 
vitalization, 18, 36,48 
vivification (of arterial blood), ISO 
viviparousness, 58, 180 
vocal faculty, 104, 105, 106, 169 
voice, 106, 128, 129, 130, 140, 169, 186, 191, 
2II 
volatility, 84 
volcano, 17, 36, 121; activity, 25-26; origin 
of basalt, 28; process, II9 
volition, 119; cf. will 
voltaic pile, II9 
Voltaire,]. F. M. A., 19 
vomit, 161 
Vorticella, 158 
vulcanism, 17 
Wader, 190 
waking, 107, 146 
~g,184,19O,192 
wall: artery and vein, 122; stomach, 160, 
161 
warm-blooded animal, 106 
warmth, 137; animal, 27, 106; plant, 51 
waste product (plant), 75 
water, 28, 36, 71, 77, 84, 87, 88, 107, 119, 
125, 132, 147, 149, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
161,180, 187,188,190, 192,203;absorp-
tion of, 68; action on plant,s I; concrete, 
138; decomposition of, ISO: destruction 
by 32; dissolution of, 35; in, 21; element 
17, 34, 85; filiation into, 23; fresh, 36; 
hot, 135; oleaginous content, 89; organic, 
66; realm of, 13; spring and salt, 37 
Water-: algae, 88; horsetail, 76; Melon, 
97; net, 55; nut, 69; thread, 55 
wax, 98 
weakness, 149, 209 
weapon (animal), 168, 178, 192 
weather: influence of, 52; premonition of, 
147 
Weber, F., 77 
web (Spider's), 168 
weight, 48, 105 
Werner, A. G., 17, 22, 25 
Whale, 38, 185 
Wheat, 69 
whim,180 
whidow, 123 
whorl (of branches}, 56 
Wild Rose, 59; plants, 59 
will, 116, 123, 144; cf. volition 
Willdenow, C. L., 49, 56, 57, 58,69,70,71, 
81,83,85,88,93,95 
Willow, 147 
wing, 127, 188, 190 
winter, 51,78,90, 121, 146, 167 
wolfram,30 
womb,99, 120, 133 
wood, 70, 71, 73, 77, 79, 80, 100, 109, II3, 
II4, 157; as heat conductor, 51; growth, 
83; new, 90; production, 57 
wood-: fascicle, 81; fibre, 67, 70,72,74, 
77, 80,91, 144; formation, 80, 82; layer, 
81; sap, 77, 78, 79 
Woodlouse, 169 
wool,191 
work,I92 
Worker-bee, 168 
world (external), 102, 132 
Worm, 135, 158, 186, 187; intestinal, 146, 
195 
writing, 130 
year (periodic movement), 35 
yellow fever, 197 
young; fish, 19; mammals, 191 
zinc, 30 
zoology, 109, 170, 171, 177, 178, 181 
Zoophyte, 19, 38, 158 
Zoospore, So 
zygomatic; arch, 183; bone, II 5 
406 

INDEX TO NOTES VOL. 3 
Abernethy, J., 341 
abiogenesis, 244 
absorption (cutaneous), 341. 342 
Academy membership. 289 
acidic fermentation, 338 
Ackermann, J. F., 337, 353, 354 
acotyledon,275,276 
Actuarius, J., 349 
Adams, G., 248, 249, 296 
Adamson, R., 30I 
Adelung, J. c., 217 
Aedes aegypti, 373 
Aeppli, W. A. 331 
aerolite, 245 
aesthetics, 356 
Agardh, C. A., 267 
Agricola, G. A .• 268 
ahimsa, 313 
air, 288; receptacle, 365 
Aladdin's lamp, 274 
Aldrovandi, U .• 358 
Algae, 266 
algebra, 280 
Alkaios. 360 
alkaloid, 342, 343 
Allen, G., 245 
Alps (Swiss), 221, 287 
America, 224, 232 
Amici, G. B., 280, 282 
Amman, P., 292 
Ammon, F. A. von, 333 
amputation, 343 
Anderson, C., 234 
Andes, 223 
Anglerius, P., 373 
animal: chemistry, 347; classification. 361; 
life, 310; magnetism, 309, 3Il, 381-382; 
plant-like, 300; pole, 231; remains, 
223-224; survival. 325 
animism. 230 
annual ring, 267 
Anscombe, G. E. M •• 327 
anthropology, 331. 348 
anthroposophy. 331 
antiseptic surgery. 330 
Aphis. 246, 296. 334 
Aphrodite. 339 
apothecary. 289 
Apple (classification). 269 
Aquinas. St. Thomas. 332 
Aranzio. G .• 358 
Arber. A .• 275 
Ardieu. F. L. H.. 319 
Argyroneta.336 
Aristotle, 214. 215. 217. 244, 246. 247. 288. 
300, 301. 315. 318. 332. 335. 356. 361. 
377 
Armstrong, E. A., 351. 366 
Arnold. T., 375 
Artedi. P .• 368 
Artemisia Moxa, 38{) 
arthritis. 371 
artificial system. 367 
Arum maculatum. 261 
Asparagus. 334 
Ass. 344 
Assmann. F. W .• 370 
Asterias. 340 
asthenic disease. 329 
Astruc.].,372 
atom, 336 
Aubuisson, J. F. d', 227. 238 
Audouard, M., 373 
Autenrieth, C. F., 303 
Autenrieth, H. F., 272, 273, 303 
Autenrieth, J. F., 303 
Autenreith, J. H., 272, 303, 308, 317, 336. 
339,346,354 
autogeny, 224 
Av6-Lallement, R. C. B., 374 
A verrhoa. Carambola, 262 
Azara, F. d' 224 
Baber, E. C., 336 
Bacteria, 290, 300; bacteriology, 374 
Baer, K. E. von, 229, 231. 307, 355, 367 
Bailey, C., 377 
407 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Bailey, E. B. 236 
Baillie, M., 253 
Baldinger, E. G., 316 
Baldwin, R., 268 
bandage (elastic), 359 
Banks,].,335 
Bardeleben, K. von, 306 
Barnes, T .• 268 
Barrow. J. 341 
Bartram, W., 266 
basalt: constituents, 238; origin, 219, 226. 
237 
basilary bone, 304 
Bassi, A., 372 
Bassi, L. M. c., 295 
bast, 283 
Bat, 304 
Batrachospennum. 226 
Batsch, A.]., 300 
Bauhin, G., 298 
Bauhin, Jean, 298 
Bauhin Johan, 298 
Bauhin,]. G., 298 
Baumes, J. B. T., 374 
Beasley, E. C., 356 
Beattie, ]., 3 19 
Beaupertheuy, J. D .• 373 
Bechstein,]. M., 283. 351, 370 
Beckett, W. 373 
Beddoes, T., 378, 381 
Bee, 350 
Beede, 336 
Bendyshe, T., 253 
Bergman, T. 0., 237. 238 
Beroldingen, F. von, 222 
Berzelius, J. J., 330, 337, 346, 347 
Besler, M. R., 215 
Bible, 219, 313 
Bichat, M. F. X., 310, 3Il, 314, 315, 317, 
318, 319, 346, 368. 370 
Bicker, G., 382 
Bigelow, M., 244 
bile, 337, 338 
biosphere, 218 
Bird, 369, bird song. 351 
Birkenhauer, 382 
Blane. G., 312 
Blasius, G. 350 
blastoderm, 231 
Bligh, W .• 340, 341 
Bloch, M. E., 333, 369 
blood, 346; circulation. 322, 323; cor-
pusde, 282, 314; living, 336; pressure. 
315; venous. 313 
Bliicher. G. L. von, 320 
Blumauer,]. A., 321 
Blumenbach,]. F .• 253, 263, 314, 332, 348, 
349, 350, 352, 355. 360 
blushing. 245 
Bockrnann,]. L., 309 
Boehm, H. G., 382 
Boehmer, G. R., 381 
Boerhaave, H., 302, 337, 338 
Bois-Reymond, E. H. du, 248 
bone: chemical content, 347; diseases, 305; 
growth. 321 
Bonnard, A. H., 227 
Bonnet, C., 215, 230. 296 
Borsdorf, 269 
Bose. C. (1645-1700). 292 
Bose, C. (1672-1730). 292 
Bose, C. (1704-1733). 293 
Bosian Garden (Leipzig), 293-293 
botany~talian),270 
Bottcher, J. F., 305 
Bourdon.]., 336 
Boussingault.]. B. D .• 254, 277, 290 
Boyer, A. B., 344 
Boyle, R., 325 
Bradley, R., 268 
Bradley, T., 342 
Bradner Stuart,].. 342 
br~n, 309, 323, 324. 342 
Brandes, H. W., 247 
Bremer, P., 259 
Breslau, H., 321 
brewing, 260 
Breyne, J. B .• 224 
Brimse (Tabanus), 352 
Brisson, M.]., 369 
British Association. 279 
Brock. A.]., 377 
Brodie, B., 316, 322 
Brongniart, A., 238 
Brown,]., 328. 329, 378. 379 
Brown. R., 276. 279, 282 
Bruce,]., 325 
Bruce, R., 262 
Brugnatelli, L. G., 327, 345 
Brunonian system, 328, 329, 330,379 
bryology, 250 
Bryophyllum calycinum, 269 
Buch, L. von, 234, 238, 239 
Buchanan, G .• 331 
408 

Buchholz, H. von, 333 
Buckland, W., 242 
bud,268 
Buffon, G. L., 220, 230 
Biihler, J. G., 313 
Bull, T., 324 
Bullard, F. M., 234 
Bungardt, C. M., 320 
Burdach, K. F., 302, 343, 355 
Biirk, A., 303 
Burmann, I., 262 
Burton, R., 320, 381 
Burton, R. F., 274 
Busch,J. M., 319 
Butler, S., 321 
Buttercup, 275 
Buttmann, P., 229 
Biittner, C. W., 348 
Byron, Lord, 341 
Cabanus, P. J. G., 301 
Cactus, 277; grandiflorus, 257 
Cajori, F., 246 
calyx, 292 
cambium, 268 
Camel-bird, 365 
cameralistics, 282, 303 
Camerarius, R. J., 294, 297 
Camper, P., 306, 359, 369 
Canary Islands, 249 
Candolle, A. P. de, 259, 276 
cannonbone, 359 
caput gallinaginis, 354 
caput mortuum, 329 
carbon, 287; dioxide, 287 
Carlisle, A., 253 
Carlsbad decrees, 320 
Carminati, B .. , 345 
Carthy, J. D., 362 
Cat, C. N. Ie, 326, 327 
cataclysm, 220 
caterpillar, 351 
Caulinia fragilis, 280 
Caussin, J. J. A., 274 
cell division, 355 
cellular tissue (of plant), 264 
Celsius, A., 260 
Ceramium, 266 
Chaemerops humilis, 292, 295 
Chamisso, A. von, 248, 249 
INDEX TO NOTES 
Chandler, J., 288 
Chantrans, J. G., 258 
Chara, 281 
Charpentier, J. F. W., 225, 227 
Cheiroptera, 327 
chemistry, 287, 290, animal, 347, industrial, 
260, inorganic, 348, pneumatic, 288; 
chemical analysis, 330, change, 346, 
explanation (of disease), 374 
Cheder, J. H., 298 
Cheyne, G., 314 
Chicken droppings, 348 
Chladni, E. F. F., 245 
chordate animal, 362 
Choron, J., 382 
Choulant, J. L., 335 
chrome, 348 
chronic illness, 380 
chronology (geological), 220 
chyle, 338; chylification, 376 
chyme, 345 
Cinelli, G., 270 
circulation (in plant), 280, 282 
classification: botanical, 259, 275-277,291; 
Cryptogamia, 266; geological, 227, 228, 
237; pomological, 269; zoological, 361, 
366-370 
claviceps, 246 
Clias, P. H., 321 
clinic, 303 
Clossius, C. F., 305 
Cobbold, T. S., 333 
Coccideae, 246 
Cockaigne, land of, 321 
coction, 376,377 
coenaesthesis, 326 
Coffyn, C., 310 
Cogan, T., 359 
Cohen, 1. B., 217 
Coiter, V., 358, 359, 360 
cold (plant), 262 
Cole, F. J., 355 
Colyer, C. N., 352 
comparative anatomy, 355 
conchology, 224, 243 
Conferva glomerata, 281; scalaris, 266 
conjugation, 266 
Conring, H., 376 
contagion, 245 
continents (origin), 232 
Conybeare, W. D., 242 
Cook, A. B., 229 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Cook, J., 335 
Cooper, T., 36I 
Copland, J., 309 
Comer, E. J., 252 
Comford, F. M., 332 
Corti, B., 280, 28I, 282 
Corvisart, J. N., 344 
Cotta, H., 282 
Cotton, C., 32I 
cow-dung, 347 
Cox, E. M., 265 
cramp, 342, 343 
Creli,L. F. F. von, 345 
cretinism, 354 
Crioceris lilli, 334 
crista galli, 354 
Cronstedt, A. F. von, 236, 238 
Croone, W., 3I2 
Crow, W. B., 265 
Cruikshank, W., 34I 
Crumpe, S., 343 
Cryptogamia, 266, 276 
crystal, 215-217, 24I, 252, 3I7, formation, 
226; crystallization, 244 
Cullen, W., 230, 3I3, 372, 375, 378, 379 
Culpeper, N., 38I 
curator (university), 320 
Curtis, W., 245 
Cusa, N. of,289 
cutaneous absorption, 34I-342 
Cuvier, G. L. C. F. D., 220, 225, 259 350, 
35I, 356, 357, 358, 360, 362, 367, 368, 
369,370 
cytology, 285, 299, 372, 374 
cytoplasm, 282 
Dalton, J., 247 
Daniel, C. F., 322 
Danz, G. F., 355 
Darlington, W., 265 
Darwin, C. R., 220, 259, 277 
Darwin, E., 230, 332, 333, 377, 378 
Daubeny, C. G. B., 234 
Davy, H., 29I, 3I5 
deafness, 272 
death, 300, 382 
debilitation, 329 
decoction, 345 
Dedial, H., 302 
degeneration, 364 
Delatour, C. C., 226, 338 
delirium, 37I 
Delius, C. T., 24I 
Deluc, J. A., 260 
Denmark, 222 
dentistry, 305 
Derosne, C., 343 
Desaguiliers, J. T., 247 
Desault, P. J., 3IO 
Descartes, R., 297, 300 
Desfontaines, R. L., 259, 264-
desire, 300 
Desmarest, N., 237 
Deyeux, N., 337 
dialectic, 285, 299 
Diamond Plant, 262 
Dickson, R. W., 253 
Dickson, S., 333 
diclinism, 294 
dicotyledon, 275, 276 
Diel, A. F. A., 269 
Diels, H., 229 
diet, 308 
Dietrich, Baron, 240 
digestion, 337, 338, 340, 376 
Dijkgraaf, S., 327 
dioecism, 294 
Dionaea muscipula, 262 
disease, 300,374; asthenic, 329; British, 273; 
epidemic, 372; sthenic, 329 
distillation, 260 
Dog, 344 
Dollinger, 1., 229, 23I, 346, 355 
dolomite, 239 
double vision, 326 
Doughty, E., 374 
Dowie,J., 359 
Driesch, H., 23I 
Drosera rotundifolia, 256, 266 
Duck-billed platypus, 364 
Dugdale, J., 325 
Duhamel, H. L., 289, 263 
dung (cow), 346 
Dunn, E. J., 24I 
Diintzer, H., 307 
Dupetit-Thouars, L. M. A., 267 
Dutrochet, R. H. J., 284-
Dwarf Fan Palm, 292 
Dyscolos, A., 364 
dysentry, 342 
Dyticidae, 336 
4IO 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Earth,218 
earthquake, 334 
Ebel, J. G., 220, 221, 222, 223, 225, 235 
echinoderm, 339 
Ecker, A., 306 
Eckleben, H. J., 293, 295 
Edelston, J., 383 
egg (mammalian), 365 
ego, 257, 301 
Ehrenberg, C. G., 248 
Einhof, H., 346, 347 
Eiselen, E., 320 
elastic bandage, 359 
electricity, 258; electric telegraph, 317 
element, 217 
Elephant, 224 
Elliot, H., 362 
Elliot, J., 327, 378 
Ellis, D., 336 
Ellis, J., 262 
Elveden (Suffolk), 234-235 
embryo 231, 355 ; embryology, 229, 355,367 
emetics, 381 
empiricism, 278 
encasement, 230 
Engelhardt, M. von, 239 
England, 222; geology, 224 
Engstrom, G. von. 237, 238 
entomology, 272, 330 
epidemic disease, 372 
epigenesis, 229, 23 I 
Erman, P., 311,312 
Erxleben, J. C. P., 370 
Eschenmayer, C. A. A. von, 382 
Escher, H., 221 
Eschscholtz, J. F. von, 249 
Esenbeck, C. G. N. von, 251 
Eslon, C. d', 382 
Esquirol, J. E. D., 376 
estate management, 282, 283 
ether, 217 
Eustacchi, B., 358 
evil, 330 
evolution, 229, 231 
Ewart, A. J., 282 
excitability, 379, 381 
excitement, 379 
experimentum berolinense, 294 
'ex ungue leonem', 360 
eye, 343, 359 
Eysenhardt, H.W., 253 
Eyssonius, H., 358 
Fabricius, J. C., 360, 368, 373 
Fabroni, G. V. M., 343 
faeces, 346 
Fahrenheit, G. D., 260 
Falloppio, G., 358, 359 
Faraday, M., 279 
Farber, E., 313 
farewell-rock, 242 
Farey, J., 224 
Farrel, R., 309 
Fauchard, P., 305 
Faust, 274, 287 
feather, 335 
feet (of snakes), 364 
fermentation, 226, 337, 338 
Ferrein, A., 3 18 
fertile seed, 294 
fertilization, 272, 295 
fever, 342, 343; chronic, 380; symptoms, 377 
Fichte, J. G., 330 
Fieldfare, 272, 340 
Fig, 298, 299, 334 
Finlay, C. J., 373 
Fischer, H., 214 
Fischer, K. P., 307 
Fish, 335, 369 
Fitzinger, L. J., 369 
Flajani, G., 316 
lietz, 22 I, 227 
Focke,J. L. A., 316 
foetus, 322, 355, 358, 365 
folia Iioria, 272 
Fontana, F., 260, 261 
Fordyce, G., 338, 374 
Forestry Institute (Dreissigacker), 283 
Forster, E. S., 377 
Forster, J. G. A., 316, 334, 335 
Forster, J. R., 334-335 
fossil, 218, 224, 233, 243; bones, 225, 356 
Fourcroy, A. F., 330, 337, 338,347,364, 374 
fowling, 271 
Fraas, C., 283 
Franciscan order, 270 
Frank, J. F., 328 
Frank, J. P., 303, 353 
Frederick the Great, 378 
French revolution, 276 
Friesland, 222 
Frischholz, J., 243 
Frischlin, N., 214 
Frog, 344 
Froriep, L. F., 254 
4II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Froriep, R., 254 
Fuchs, L., 298 
FWlgUS, 246, 252 
Fiichsel, J. C., 218, 227 
Gabuccini, G., 333 
Galambos, R., 327 
Galen, 300, 338, 377 
Gall, F. J., 353 
Galland, A., 274 
Galvani, L., 251,311; galvanic battery, 324 
Garden Snail, 325 
Garlic, 342 
Garrison, F. H., 323 
gas, 288 
gastric juice, 345 
Gaultier, G. A., 334 
Gauthier, A., 309 
Gehlen, A. F., 346 
Gehler, J. S. T., 245, 247, 325 
generation, 244, 279; generatio aequivoca, 
244, univoca, 247 
geodesy, 217, 227 
geognosy, 218, 227 
geography: division of, 233; human, 217; 
physical, 217, 227 
geology; chronology, 220; nomenclature, 
221; stratigraphic, 220; surveying, 236 
geometry, 280 
geomorphology, 217 
Gerhard, W., 330 
Gesner, K. von, 298 
Gilbert, L. W., 224, 247, 248, 312 
Gillipsie, C. G., 219 
Girtanner, C., 372 
gland,336 
Gleditsch, J. G., 256, 292, 293, 294, 295 
Glockner, H., 228, 321, 330 
Gloebel, K., 265 
glucina, 348 
Gmelin, F. G., 380 
Gmelin, L., 337 
God, 214, 230, 383 
Goeden, H. A., 371,372 
Goethe, J. W. von, 219, 220, 254, 258, 
264, 265, 270, 271, 272, 274, 276, 279, 
299, 305, 306, 307, 308, 326, 335, 350, 
360 
Goeze, J. A. E., 246, 333 
gold,241 
Gold, F., 310 
Goldfuss, G. A., 225,333,339,352,365 
Goldsmith, 0., 308 
Goldwitz, S., 337 
Goodfield, J., 220 
Gopfert, E., 221 
gout, 380 
Graffenried, L. A., 298 
grafting, 268 
granite, 235 
Gras, L., 342 
Gray, S. F., 381 
Green, T., 257, 262, 272, 280 
Green, W. L., 232 
Greenough, G., 226 
greenstone, 236 
Gren, F. A. C., 329 
Grew, N., 263, 278, 284, 294 
greywack,236 
Grier, J., 381 
Grimm, J. K. P., 247 
Grove, A. J.. 362 
Gruithusen, F. P. von, 312 
Gryllus verruccivorus, 352 
Guiaud, J. E. M., 333 
Gully, J. M., 216, 248 
Guthrie, 218 
Guths-Muths, J. C. F., 320 
Giitder, C., 308 
gymnastics, 319 
gynophore, 277 
haemadynamics, 3 I 5 
haematosis, 376 
haemoglobin,336 
Haen, A. de, 377 
Haeser, H., 302, 323, 330, 372, 373 
Hahnemann, S. F. C., 380 
hair, 335, 366 
Haldane, E. S., 329, 331 
Halder, 261 
Hales, S., 289, 315 
Halle, J. H., 323 
Haller, A. von. 230,289,302,314,318,322, 
324, 325, 341, 349 
Hammond, C. 0., 352 
Hann, J., 247 
Hansen, A., 271 
Hardie, J., 374 
Harless, J. C. F., 260, 316, 377 
Harper, F., 266 
Hartenstein, G., 217 
Harvey, E. N., 248 
412 

Harvey, W., 230, 247, 315 
Hastings, W., 257 
Hatchett, c., 216 
Hatfield, E. J., 232 
Hausmann, J. F. L., 217, 238 
Havers, C., 315 
Hayata, B., 265 
headache, 308 
health, 321, 379 
heart, 314, 315, 323 
heat, 261, 279 
Hedwig, J. J., 250, 263 
Hedysarum gyrans, 257, 258 
Hehl, Father, 381 
Heiland, F. M., 319 
Heim, E. L., 235 
Hcim, J. L., 215, 227, 235, 236 
Heinroth, J. C. A., 376 
Helleborus foetidus, 272 
helminthology, 333 
Helmont, J. B. van, 287, 288, 289 
Helvetius, J. H., 342 
Hemimyaria, 248 
Henschel, A. W., 272 
Hensler, P. G., 372 
Heraclitus, 300 
Herbell, J. F. M., 360 
Herder, C., 307 
Herder, J. G. von, 258, 306, 352 
Herder, F. G. von, 307 
Hermann, J., 367 
hermaphrodite, 354 
Hermbstadt, S., 259 
Herodotus, 373 
Hervey, J., 255 
Heuermann, G., 341 
Heusinger, K. F., 367 
Hewson, W., 314, 346 
Heyse, J. C. A., 329 
Hill, J., 259, 268 
Hillard, G. S., 306 
Hinckley, J., 263 
Hintze, C., 242 
Hippocrates, 338 
Hire, J. N. la, 267 
Hirschel, B., 329, 379 
Hirst, F. W., 223 
H.M.S. Bounty, 341 
histology, 367 
history, 225, 263 
Hitzig, J. E., 249 
Hobohn, M., 320 
INDEX TO NOTES 
Hoffbauer, J. C., 376 
Hoffinann, F., 218, 234, 334 
Hoffmeister, J., 225, 285, 286, 299, 301, 
302, 313, 316, 327, 35~ 370 
Hofinann, C., 349, 377 
Hofinann, M., 376 
HOlderlin, J. C. F., 217 
Holland, 222 
Holmes, S. J., 232 
Holothuria, 339 
Holy Alliance, 320 
Home, E., 321, 326, 344, 345 
homoeopathy, 380 
homonosis, 376 
honey-dew, 245 
Hom, E., 214, 371 
Hornbostel, A., 321 
Hornschuch, F., 251 
Horstadius, S., 231 
Hoven, F. W. D. von, 380 
How, W. D., 251 
Howe, H. M., 289 
Hufeland, C. W., 258, 303, 308 
Humboldt, A. von, 224, 234, 244, 252,256 
Humboldt, F. H. A. von, 287, 323 
humerus, 359 
humus, 338 
Hunter, A., 325 
Hunter, J., 260, 305, 365 
Hunter, R., 376 
Hutton, J., 219, 220, 235 
Huxley, T. H., 307 
Hydra viridis, 339 
Hydrophilidae, 336 
hypnotism, 309 
hypochondriasis, 313 
Ice Plant, 262 
Ideler, J. L., 364 
!deler, K. W., 375 
'Iliad', 250 
Illiger, J. K. W., 368 
impulse, 332 
Indian, 313 
induction, 279 
inflammation, 329, 343 
Infusoria, 248, 300 
Ingenhousz, J., 287, 291 
Inghirarni, F., 229 
inorganic chemistry, 348 
Insect, 295, 368 
413 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
insectivorous plant, 266 
instinct, 332, 350 
intermaxillary bone, 306, 360 
Intestinal worm, 253 
Invertebrate, 361, 362, 363, 364 
Ipecacuanha, 342 
iris, 363 
irritability, 251, 272, 302, 324 
'Isis' (Oken's periodical), 279 
isomorphism, 241 
Italian botany, 270 
Jackson, R, 374 
Jacobi, F. Ho, 331 
Jacoby, F., 354 
Jahn, F. L., 319,320 
Jameson, R, 218, 220, 222, 226, 236 
Jefferson, To, 223 
Jenner, Eo, 258 
Tohn, J. F., 347, 355 
Johnson, J., 320, 321 
Johnston, Wo H., 329 
Jones, Wo Ho So, 298, 377 
Jonson, Bo, 361 
Joseph I (Bavaria), 242 
Jussieu, B. de, 276 
Jussieu, Ao L. de, 276 
Kalb, Co von, 307 
Kant, I., 214, 217, 263, 330 
Kapp, Go Co F., 375 
Karsch, Dro, 380 
Keferstein, Co, 218, 222, 226, 227, 238, 247 
Keill, Jo, 341 
Kelch, Go To, 345 
Kempelen, Wo de, 319 
Kempis, To a, 288 
Kendrick, J., 245, 302, 304, 308, 361, 376, 
381 
Kepler, J., 326 
Kerckhove, J. Ro L., 373 
Kern, Wo, 217 
Kessler, Ao Eo, 309 
Kew Gardens, 268 
Kielmeyer, K. Ho, 367 
Kieser, Do Go, 279, 306, 382 
Kilian, Co Go, 328 
King, To Wo, 336 
kingdom (of nature), 215 
kinic acid, 348 
Kirkland, To, 343 
Kirwan, R, 291 
kitten, 344 
Klaproth, Mo Ho, 239, 256, 290 
Klopstock, F. G., 289 
Klugel, G. So, 326 
Kneiphof, J. H., 366 
Knight, T. A., 244, 236, 267, 281 
Knox, T. Mo, 228, 255 
Kobell, F. von, 226, 241 
Koenig, C. D. E., 278 
Kolreuter, J. G., 262, 293, 295 
Konig, E., 215 
Kopke, Eo, 307 
Kopp, Ho, 288 
Kotzebue, A. von, 320 
Kotzebue, 00 von, 248, 249 
Kramp, C., 377 
Krempelhuber, A. von, 250 
Kriinitz, J. Go, 308 
Kugelmann, J. G., 368 
KUhn, C. G., 316 
Kuhn, Do, 264, 271, 350 
lacteal juice, 277 
lactiferous duct, 264 
Lakon, G., 271 
Lamarck, J. Bo, 220, 230, 231, 243, 259, 
362,363,365,366,367,368,370 
Lamettrie, Jo 00 de, 300 
Lancisi, J. Mo, 358 
Lane, Jo Ho, 216, 248 
Langermann, J. Go, 375 
larva, 351 
larynx, 318 
Latham, J., 340 
lactiferous: tissue, 282; vessel, 277 
Laurenti, J. No, 369 
Lavoisier, A. L., 343 
Leach, Mo, 250 
leaf: and lung, 280; propagation, 268, 269, 
270 
Legallois, J. J. c., 323, 324 
Lehmann,J. G., 222, 227 
Leibnitz, G. W., 229, 330, 342 
Lemazurier, M. J., 373 
Lemon, 270 
Leroux, J.-J., 242, 344 
Lessing, Go Eo, 356 
Lesueur, Co, 364 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Leuckart, R., 330, 333 
Levret, A., 359 
Lewes, G. H., 306, 307 
Lichen 250, 252 
Liebsch, W., 328 
life-force, 349 
life-vessel, 285 
Liffmann, 1. A., 328 
light, 279; and organism, 286, plant, 214, 
255,256,259,287 
Lily, 334, Beede, 334, Thrips, 334; Lilium 
bulbiferum, 269 
Lindley,]., 267, 276 
line (measure), 312 
lingering fever, 380 
Link, H. F., 215, 251, 261, 263, 264, 268, 
270 271, 278, 283, 284, 287, 289, 290, 
296, 
Linnaeus, C. von, 215, 230, 252, 259, 264, 
266, 275, 276, 280, 291, 294, 312, 333, 
349,368,369,370,375 
Linnaeus, c., 258 
Liothrips vaneeckei, 334 
Liscovius, K. F. S., 319 
Lister, J. 1., 330 
Lister, M., 224 
liver, 346; fluke, 333 
Lizard, 324, 344 
Lobstein, J. F., 354 
lode (slope of), 241 
Loder,]. c., 306 
logic, 214, 253, 254, 279,295,301,329,331, 
332 
Lomon6sov, M. V., 293 
Loschge, F. H., 319 
Louis, A., 359 
Lucae, S. T., 346 
Lucas, E., 269 
Lucas, N. I., 351 
Lucian, 360 
Lucretius, 377 
luminescence, 247, 248 
lung (and leaf), 280 
Lyell, c., 220, 233, 234, 235 
Lyonet, P., 351 
Maas, A., 337 
Macalpine, I., 376 
Maclury, J., 337 
Macrobius, 229, 255 
Madagascar, 267 
madder, 342, 344 
Magellen, J. H., 237 
Magendie, F., 317, 318 
magic, 274 
magma, 240, 241 
magnesium silicate, 238 
magnetism, 265 
Malacarne, V., 322 
Malpighi,M.,253, 263,278,297,350 
Mammal,370; egg, 364 
Mammoth, 224 
Mandirola, A., 270 
mankind (races of), 349 
Manu, (laws of), 313 
Marchantia polymorpha, 285 
Maria Theresa, 295 
Marine worm, 339 
Mariotte, E., 247, 289 
Martin, J., 382 
Martius, K. F. P., 232, 242, 243, 263, 280, 
281 
Martyn, T., 252 
Marx, K. H., 349 
Mascarene islands, 267 
Masters, M. T., 265 
materialism, 300 
Mathai, C. c., 374 
Maury, J. C. F., 305 
mechanical drive, 350 
Meckel, J. F., 229, 231, 304, 336, 342, 345, 
346,361,370 
medicine; entomological, 330; history, 
278; theory, 372 
Medicus, F. K., 252, 262, 263 
Melon, 296 
Mendelsohn, E., 217 
Merck, J. H., 306 
Mercurialis annua, 294 
Meredith, J. C., 214 
Merkel, F. R., 353 
Merrem, B., 369, 370 
Merzdorf, J. F. A., 326 
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum, 261 
Mesmer, F. A. 308, 382; mesmerism, 381, 
382 
metals (paragenesis of), 241 
metamorphosis, 264, 272, 273 
Metternich, Prince, 320 
Metz C. de, 374 
Meyer, G. F. W., 250 
Meyer, J. C. F., 282, 283 
Meyer (court physician; father of Hein-
rich M., 1767-1828),290 
415 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Miasma, 245 
Michaelis, C. F., 295, 296, 337 
Michelet, K. L., 232, 254, 285, 291, 292, 
296, 297, 302, 304, 305, 307, 312, 313, 
315, 316, 317, 327, 339, 351, 336, 361, 
370, 377 
Micheli, P. A., 252 
microbiology, 330 
microscope, 249, 250, 280 
middle caudex, 275 
mildew, 251 
Miller, P., 252 
Millington, T., 294 
Milton, J., 331 
Mimosa, 259, 264, 293 
mineralogy, 226, 237, 290; mineral deposits, 
242,mining, 240, 242 
Mirbel C. F. B. de, 263, 264, 284, 285 
Missel Thrush, 340 
Mobius, M., 251, 259, 265, 267, 294 
Mohl, H. von, 254, 277, 281, 285 
Mohr, D. M. H., 281 
Molbech, C., 232 
Moll,K. E. von, 243 
Moller,]. N., 232 
monoclinous plant, 294 
monocotyledon, 275, 276 
monoecious plant, 295 
Monro, A., 315, 369 
Monson, G., 257 
Mont-Perdu, 223 
Moore, P., 218 
Moreau-Saint-Mery, M. L. E., 224 
Morison, R., 292 
More, A. L., 222 
Morren, C. F. A., 286 
Morris, R., 245, 302, 304, 308, 361, 376, 381 
Mosche, C. F., 242 
Moss, 250, 277 
motion, 257 
Mountain Ash, 271 
moxa, 380 
Mulberry, 294 
Miiller, J., 299 
Miiller, F. M., 313 
Miiller, ().F.,246,248,300.325,368 
Miinchhausen, (). von, 252 
Murchison, R. I., 236 
Murray, A., 305 
Murray, J., 219, 291 
Murray, J., 261 
Musa paradisiaca, 277 
muscle, 251, 312, 31S 
Musk Melon, 296 
Mustel, N.-A., 263 
mysticism, 288, 353 
Naiad, 246 
Naididae, 246 
Napoleon, 264. 311, 319, 347 
narcotine, 343 
Nasse, C. F., 323, 382 
natural sciences (synthesis), 353 
nature (life in), 253 
'Naturphllosophie', 263, 265, 272, 279, 283 
284,291, 329, 353 
Naumann, C. F., 242 
Naumann, J. A., 340 
Necker, N. J. de, 252 
nectary, 295 
Needham,]., 232 
Needham, J. T., 244, 248 
Negro, 360 
Neptunism, 218, 227. 235, 238 
Neumann,]. S. B .• 290 
neurology, 349; nerve, 302, 312; nervous 
fever, 330, 371 
Newell, G. E., 362 
New Holland, 341 
Newman, G., 371 
Newton, I., 246, 383 
Newton, J. F., 314 
Nicholson, W., 219, 223 
Nicolin, F., 217, 291. 356 
nisus formativus, 350 
nitrate (in soil), 290 
nitrogen, 287 
Nitsch, C. L., 369. 370 
nosology, 313, 372, 375 
notochord, 307, 362 
Nuyens. B. W., 359 
Nysten, P. H., 347 
()ak,289 
obstetrics. 303 
ocean, 232 
()ceanus, 250 
()ehlenschlaeger, A., 274 
()enothera biennis, 256 
()ersted, H. C., 279 
()ken, L., 249, 269. 272. 278. 279. 291. 306 
307,308,371 
416 

Oldenburg, H., 221 
'omne vivum ex ovo', 247 
opium, 343, 344 
Oppel, F. W. von, 234 
Oppel, M., 369 
optic nerve, 359 
Orange, 270 
Orang-Utang, 360 
organic; life, 310; plasticity, 243 
Ornithorhynchus, 364 
oryctognosy, 233 
osteology, 304, 358 
ostitis, 305 
Ostrich, 337, 365 
Oudemans, C. A. J. A., 252 
ovum, 355 
Owen, R, 279, 306, 307, 308, 372 
Ox (synovia of), 315 
oxalic acid, 252 
Oxalis sensitiva, 262 
oxygen, 244, 287, 336 
palaeontology, 225, 233 
Palissy, B., 246 
Pallas Athena, 228 
Pallas, P. S., 224, 245, 333 
pancreatic juice, 338 
Pander, C. H., 229, 231 
Panelli, G., 270 
Paracelsus, 288 
paragenesis (of metals), 241 
parasitology, 333, 374 
Pargeter, W., 375 
Paris basin (geology), 224 
Parkinson, J., 233, 243 
Parmentier, A. A., 337 
paronychia, 316 
Parsons, ]., 254 
Partington, J. R, 231, 289 
Pasteur, L., 244, 330, 372 
pathology, 300 303 
Peacock, G., 315, 
Pearson, G., 343 
Peine, E., 292 
Pennant, T., 370 
Pennock, C. W., 330 
Percy, P. F., 323 
Perfect, W., 375 
periosteum, 304 
periostitis, 305 
Peron, F., 339, 364 
Peschel, 0., 233 
o 
INDEX TO NOTES 
Peyssonel,]. A., 300 
Pfaff, C. H., 343, 378, 382 
Pfaff, J. K., 335, 366 
Pfeffer, W., 295 
Pfleiderer, W., 214 
Phalaena vinula 
pharmacopoeia, 381 
pharmacy, 381 
Phidias, 361 
Philip, A. P. W., 323 
Phillips, J., 242 
philosophy, 277; of History, 233; of Right, 
228,255 
Phoenix, 383 
phosphorus, 347 
phrenology, 353 
physical geography, 217, 227 
physiology, 310 
phytotomy, 263 
Pichler, J., 373 
Pierer, J. F., 303, 313, 329, 335, 336, 342, 
345,348, 350, 352, 355, 361, 366 
pigmentation, (of skin), 334 
Pinkerton, J., 218, 233 
pistil,293 
pituitary gland, 336 
Piveteau, J., 220 
Planck, M., 301 
plant; anatomy, 278, 284; blight, 245; 
cell, 284; classification, 275-277, 291; 
cytology, 285; embryo, 285; flowering, 
251; heat, 261; innocence, 217; nutrition, 
290, 291; pathology, 300; propagation, 
268; sexuality, 272, 273, 293, 294; soul, 
293; temperature, 260, 261; tissue, 284; 
type, 264; vessel, 263, 284 
plasmogeny, 244 
Plato, 229, 300 
Playfair, J., 219 
Plenck, J. J., 342 
Pliny, 298 
Plot, R, 243 
Plutarch, 360 
pneumatic chemistry, 288 
Poa Bulbosa, 269 
Poggeler, 0.,217,291, 356 
Pohl, J. E., 257 
Pois, G. Le., 342 
poison, 381 
Poli, G. S., 334, 368 
pollen, 272; pollination, 295 
pomology,269 
4I 7 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Pontedera,J., 293,297 
Poplar, 269 
poplite, 359 
porphyry, 237 
Portulacca Oleracea, 256 
Potato, 255, 256 
Pouteau, C., 341 
Powell, c., 374 
Powell, R., 337 
Pozzi, G., 338 
preformation, 229, 232 
presumption (speculative), 223 
Prichard, J. C., 242 
Priestley, J., 244, 287, 326, 374 
primitive rock, 227 
Pritchard, A., 248 
Probst, J. E., 292 
protoplasm (movement), 282 
Protozoa, 300 
Przibram, H., 216 
psychiatry, 375 
psychology, 353 
Pulteney, R., 259 
'punctum saliens', 230, 315 
putrefaction, 337 
pylorus, 344 
Pyrosorna, atlanticurn, 339 
Rackham, H., 298 
radication, 284 
Radl, E., 232 
Ramdohr, C. A., 340 
Ramond, L. F. E., 223 
Ramsay, W., 333 
Ranunculus Bulbosus, 275 
Rapon, A., 381 
Rastall, R. H., 241 
Raudi, M., 270 
Raumer, K. G. von, 277, 239 
Raven, 344 
Ray,].,275 
Read, H. H., 235 
reason, 300 
Reaumur, R.A.F., 245, 260, 338, 340 
Redi, F., 244, 338 
Redwing, 272, 340 
Rees, G., 337 
Reil,]. C., 214, 216, 244, 257, 312, 327, 337, 
349, 354, 376 
religion, 255 
Reptile, 369 
reproduction, 303 
resiniferous duct, 264 
respiration, 323 
revolution (geological), 220 
Reynaud, J., 232 
rheumatism, 305 
Richard, A., 342 
Richerand, A. B., 309, 321, 346 
Ricinus communis, 294 
Riesengebirge, 225 
Ringelmann, C. F., 305 
Rinman, S., 237 
Ritchie, D. G., 370 
Ritter, c., 218 
Ritter, G. H., 261 
river, 246, 247 
Rivinus, A. Q., 349 
Rivularia endiviaefolia, 258 
Robertson, J., 246 
Robertson, R., 377 
Robina Pseudacacia, 268 
Robiquet, P. J., 343 
Roche, F. G. de la, 326 
rock; classification, 222, 227; dating, 224 
Romer, F. A., 242 
Roschlaub, J. A., 328, 329 
Rosel, A. J., 339, 352-
Rollo, J., 374 
Roose, T. G. A., 337 
root, 287 
Roscher, W. H., 246 
Rose, H., 264, 276, 280, 292 
Rose of Jericho, 293 
Rosenroth, C. K. von, 288 
Ross, A., 299 
Roth, A. W., 265, 266 
Rousseau, J. B. C., 341, 342 
Rowlandson, A., 335 
Ruckert, E., 229 
Rudolphi, C. A., 251, 252, 263, 333, 335, 
343,366 
Rumphius, G. E., 262 
Rush, B., 303, 374 
Russia, 224; agriculture, 293 
Saccardo, P. A., 270 
Sachs, ]., 271 
Sagar, J. B. M., 375 
sal ammoniac, 344 
saliva, 337, 338 
Salpa, 248 
418 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Sand, K. L., 320 
Sanderson, J. B., 330, 383 
sandstone, 241 
Sandvnch,Lord,335 
sanitation, 33 I 
sap; circulation, 263; sugar content, 260; 
-wood,283 
Sarracenia, 272 
satire (anti-clerical), 321 
Saussure, H. B. de, 287 
Saussure, N. T. de, 261, 286 
Sauvages, F. B. de, 375 
Savigny, M. J. c. L., 368 
Saw-fly, 351 
scarlet-fever, 371 
Scarpa, A., 303, 353 
Scarron, P., 322 
Schacht, H., 277 
Scheel, P., 343, 344 
Schelling, F. W. J., 242, 253, 255, 265, 272, 
279, 291, 306, 328, 329, 331, 352, 353, 
371; Schellingianism, 3Il, 331, 353 
Schelver, F. J., 272,296, 297, 298, 327 
Scherer, C. J., von, 373 
Schierbeek, A., 359 
Schiller, F. von, 258 
Schleiden, M. J., 279, 282, 285, 299 
Schlotheim, E. F., 225, 243 
Schmid, G., 219, 305, 306 
Schmidtmiiller, J. A., 336, 361 
Schneider, J. G., 369 
Schonberger, F. X., 217 
Schopenhauer, A., 31I 
Schrader,J. C. C., 289,290 
Schreger, B. N. von, 316 
Schreiber, K. F. A. von, 281 
Schroder, F. J. W., 326 
Schrodinger, E., 216 
Schroeder, P. G., 377 
Schroter, M., 253, 265, 329 
Schubert, G. H. von, 352, 353 
Schuebler, G., 261 
Schultz, C. F. L., 320, 326 
Schultz, K. H., 216, 252,254,277,282,314 
Schuster, J., 271 
Schwann, T., 279, 299, 368 
Schwarzschild, H., 309 
Schweigger,J. S. C., 326 
science teaching, 265 
Scott, J., 325 
Scott, R., 252 
Scott, T., 365 
Scrope, G. J. P., 234, 235 
Sea: -mouse, 339; sickness, 303: urchin, 231 
secretion, 331 
sedentary habits, 32 I 
Seemann, B., 265 
seismic disturbance, 222 
self-consciousness, 301 
Semmelweis, 1., 330 
Senebier,J., 214, 260, 261, 287, 337, 344 
senses (rationality of), 327 
sensibility, 265, 302 
Serre, J. J. J., 305 
Sertiirmer, F. W., 343 
Sewall, T., 342 
sex-relationship, 300 
sexual: differentiation, 354: organs, 354, 355, 
sexuality, (of plant), 272, 273, 295, 297 
Shakespeare, W., 264, 275 
Shaw, P., 231 
shell (origin), 223 
Shell-fish, 368 
Sibree, J., 233, 255, 383 
Silliman, B., 220 
Simson, F. H., 33I 
sixth sense, 326 
skeleton, 308, 319 
skin, 334, 341 
skull; bones, 304; vertebral analogies, 279 
sleep, 259, 332 
Smeaton, W. A., 348 
Smith, A. L., 250 
Smith, J. A., 215, 300, 301 
Smith, J. E., 276, 291 
Smith, P., 343, 344 
Smith, W., 224, 242 
Smithers, L. C., 274 
Snake, 364 
soap, 260 
soil (richness of), 271 
solar system, 2 18 
Solovine, M., 287 
Soltau, D. W., 217 
Sommerring, S. T. von, 300, 304, 306,316, 
345,346 
somnambulism, 308, 309 
Song Thrush, 340 
Sorbus, 271 
soul, 214, 230,300,301, 318, 376 
South Africa, 352 
space, 257 
Spallanzaui, L., 244, 295, 296, 297, 326, 
327,337,338,344,345 
4I 9 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Spangenberg, G. A., 309 
speech,326 
Speirs, E. B., 330, 383 
Sperges, J. von, 242 
spermatozoon, 355 
sphenoid, 304 
Spinach, 294 
spinal: column, 308; cord, 323; marrow, 
323; nerve, 359 
Spinoza, B. de, 214, 264, 329 
Spix, J. B., 232, 242, 280, 340 
spiritus, nervorum, 349 
spleen, 313, 346 
spontaneous generation, 248 
Sprengel, K. P. J., 244, 278, 284 
spring water, 246 
Stahl, G. E., 230, 231,338,375 
stamen, 293 
star, 250 
Star-fish, 340 
Steenstrup, J. J., 333 
Steffens, H., 235, 243, 279, 306 
Stegomyia fasciata, 373 
Steinbuch, J. G., 326 
Steno, N., 221 
Stevens, N. E., 300 
sthenic disease, 329, 379 
Stieglitz, J., 380, 382 
stimulation theory, 328; stimulus 379 
Stinking Hellebore, 272 
Stock, J. G., 341 
Stolpiansky, P., 294 
Stomach, 342 
Storr, G. C. c., 370 
stratigraphic geology, 220 
Struthers, L. G., 329 
Stuart (F.P.? D. ?), 344 
Stuart, M., 219 
Stuckeley, G., 346 
Sturm, J., 251 
Sturm, L. c., 292 
Sudhoff, K., 214, 216, 349 
Sue, P., 316 
sugar, (fermentation), 338 
Sultzberger, J. R., 333 
Swabian dialect, 214 
Swammerdam, J., 229 
sweat, 377 
Swine-garget, 253 
Switzerland,221 
symmetry, 318 
synovia, 3 I 5 
syphilis, 305, 343, 372, 373 
Tabor, H., 237, 238 
Tahiti, 335 
Tauler, J., 288 
Taylor, R., 299 
teaching, 279 
telescope, 249 
Temkin, 0., 303 
temperaments (four), 338 
temperature (plant), 260, 261 
tetrahedral theory, 232 
Teucher, L. H., 364 
Thaer, A., 346, 347 
Thenard, L. J., 226, 338 
theology, 219 
Thilow, J. H., 345 
thirst, 341 
Thompson, D. W., 315, 335, 361, 364 
Thompson, S., 250 
Thompson, J., 338, 343, 379 
Thompson, T., 242, 341 
Thompson, W., 268 
Thorpe, W. H., 350 
Thrush,340 
Thumrnig, L. P., 270 
thyroid; gland, 361; hormone, 336 
Ticknor, G., 306 
Tiedemann, F., 216, 248, 260, 280, 281, 337, 
340, 346 
Tillandsia usneoides, 266 
Tilloch, A., 234, 348 
time, 220, 257 
Timor, 340 
Tissort, M., 303 
tobacco, 260, 344 
Tofoa, 340 
toothache, 304 
Topsell, E., 352 
torus, 277 
Toulrnin, S., 220 
Tournefort,J. P. de, 289, 293,300 
Tradescantia virginica, 282 
transition, 299, 300 
Trapa Natans, 274 
trappean formation, 236 
Trebra, F. W. H. von, 226, 240, 241 
Tredennick, H., 356 
Trembley, A. 246 
Treviranus, G. R., 230, 253, 257, 258, 260 
420 

INDEX TO NOTES 
264, 266, 312, 322, 324, 325, 336, 339, 
343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 350, 351, 
359,360,363 
Treviranus, L. c., 245, 251, 281, 282, 284 
Trichina spiralis, 372 
Trinci, C., 270 
trituration, 337, 338 
Troja, M., 321 
Troll, W., 271 
Trommsdorff, J. B., 343 
Troxler, I. P. V., 326, 331, 354 
Tuke, D. H., 375 
Tulk, A. 279 
Tunicate, 248 
Turdus 
(iliacus, 
musicus, 
pilaris, 
vis-
civorus), 340 
turpentine, 268, 269, 341 
Tuscany, 221 
typhoid, 330 
typhus, 273, 330, 371, 373 
ulna, 359 
understanding, 228 
Underwood, E. A., 217 
Underwood, M., 245 
Unger, F., 251, 277 
unicellular Protozoa, 300 
uniformitarianism, 220 
University Curator, 320 
Unzer, J. A., 375 
urine, 341, 342, 344, 347, 348 
'Urteil', 301 
Usteri, P., 274 
Vallisneri, A., 337 
vascular structure (plant), 263 
Vater, A., 342 
Vaucher, J. P., 258 
Vauquelin, L. N., 330, 347, 348, 355, 364 
vegetable; kingdom, 276; mummy, 268, 
269; physiology, 287 
vegetal pole, 23 I 
vegetarianism, 3 13, 314 
vegetation (American), 232 
vegetative force, 248 
vein (geological), 234 
Veith, H., 221, 241 
venous blood (colour), 313 
Vera, A., 285, 314 
Verheijen, P., 354 
vertebral analogies of skull, 279, 306, 307 
Vertebrate, 361, 362, 363, 364-
verumuntanum, 354 
Vesalius, A., 254, 358 
Vicq-d'Azyr, F., 347 
vie organique, 317 
Vieth, G. U. A., 320 
Vincent, J. B., Bory de St., 261 
Virchow, R., 372 
Virgil,322 
vis: formativa, 244; vitae, 349 
vision (Schultz's theory), 326 
vital: force, 290; principle, 328, 349; sap, 
277,285 
vitalism, 349, 375 
vocal faculty, 351 
Vogel, R. A., 375 
voice, 318 
Voigt, J. H., 258 
Voigt, J. K., 226, 227 
volcano, 234 
Volger, G. H. 0.,247 
Volkmann, J. J., 325 
Volta, A., 353 
Voltaire, F. M. A. de, 223, 330 
voluntary; division, 246; movement, 258 
vomiting, 342 
Vulcanism, 219 
vulcanology, 235 
Wasstrom, 0., 247 
Wachsmuth, G., 247 
Wall, D., 221 
Wallace, W., 214, 253, 254, 301 
Wallroth, F. W., 250, 251 
Walther, D., 327 
Walther, P. F. von, 346 
Warren, J., 255 
Wartofsky, M. W., 217 
Washington, B., 374 
Wasielewski, W., von, 276 
Wasp, 350 
water, 288 
Water: horsetail, 280; Melon, 296; worm, 
246 
Watt, R., 344 
Weaver, T., 218, 226, 233, 242 
Weber, F., 281 
Weber, J. G., 373 
Weevil (Willow), 334 
Wehmann, F. A., 292 
42I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Wenzel,J.,354 
Werner, A. G., 218,219,222,226,227,228, 
233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 
242, 352 
Westwood, J. 0., 369 
Wheeler, L. R., 232 
Wheeler, W. M., 350 
Whewell, W., 265, 308 
White, G., 245 
White, G. W., 219 
Whittaker, E., 217 
Whytt, R., 302, 375 
Wicksteed, P., 332 
Wieland, C. M., 258 
Wienholdt, A., 309, 382 
Wilkinson, Dr. (Bath), 324 
will,300 
Willdenow, C. L., 256, 267, 268, 271, 274, 
275,280,294 
Wille, W., 303 
Willett, E. E., 247 
Williams, H. M., 224 
Willis, R., 230,315 
Willow, 269, 288, 334 
Wilm, E. C., 350 
Wilson, A, P., 371 
Windischmann, C. J. H, 376 
Winogradsky, S., 290 
Wohlbold, H., 308 
Wolf art, C. C., 309, 382 
Wolff, C. F., 229, 231, 264, 267 
Wolff, F., 341 
Wolff, L., 251 
Woodward, J., 243 
Wootton, A. C., 381 
Worms, 368 
wrath,339 
Wrisberg, H. A., 316 
Xylander, W. H., 364 
yellow fever, 373, 374 
Young, T., 315 
Zallinger, J. B., 300 
Zeder, J. G. H., 333 
Zeus, 247 
Ziermann, J. C. L., 309 
Zimmer, J. C., 322 
Zimmermann, E. A. W., 266 
Zimmermann, J. G., 255, 302 
Zimmermann, K. J., 336 
Zimmern, H., 356 
ZinserIing, A. E., 274 
Zittell, K. A. von, 233 
zoology, 300, 366-370 
Ziickert, J. F., 242 
422 

