HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY 
OF NATURE 
EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND EXPLANATORY NOTES BY 
M. J. PETRY 
M.A., D.Phil.(Oxon.) 
VOLUME II 
LONDON· GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LTD 
NEW YORK . HUMANITIES PRESS, INC 

FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1970 
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. All rights 
are reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of 
private study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under 
the Copyright Act, 1956, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, electrical, chemical, mechan-
ical, optical, photocopying recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the copyright owner. Enquiries should be 
addressed to the Publishers. 
This translation © George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1970 
SBN 04 100022 6 
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
in 12 on 13 point Bembo type 
BY UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED 
WOKING AND LONDON 

CONTENTS 
SECTION TWO 
PHYSICS § 272-273 
9 
Chapter One: Physics of Universal Individuality § 274 
II 
A The free physical bodies 
11 
1 The Sun, light and its reflection (Light) § 275-278 
12 
2 The bodies of opposition § 279 
25 
a. 
The Moon 
26 
b. 
The Comet 
28 
3 The planet as the body of individuality (The body of 
individuality) § 280 
30 
B 
The elements § 281 
33 
1 Air § 282 
35 
2 
The elements of opposition 
38 
§ 283 
a. Fire 
38 
§ 284 b. Water 
39 
3 Earth (The individual element) § 285 
41 
C 
Meteorology (The process of the elements) § 286 
42 
§ 287 1 The tension of the process 
47 
§ 288-289 2 The dissolution of diremption 
50 
Chapter Two: Physics of particular individuality § 290-292 
55 
A 
Specific gravity § 293-294 
57 
B 
Cohesion § 295 
62 
§ 296 
1 Adhesion 
63 
§ 296 
2 
Coherence 
64 
§ 296 a. 
Quantitative 
64 
§ 296 b. 
Qualitative 
64 
§ 297-299 3 Elasticity 
65 
C 
Sound § 300-302 
69 
D 
Heat § 303-307 
82 
Chapter Three: Physics of total individuality § 308-309 
94 
A 
Shape § 310 
96 
§ 3 II 
1 Shapelessness 
98 
§ 312-314 
2 
Magnetism 
99 
§ 315 3 Crystallography 
II2 

CONTENTS 
B 
The particular properties of bodies (The specification of the 
individual body) § 316 
n6 
I 
Relationship to Light 
121 
§ 317 a. 
Transparency 
121 
§ 318-319 b. 
Refraction of light 
125 
§ 320 
c. 
The theory of colours 
135 
i. Prismatic colour 
141: 
ii. Entoptic, epoptic and paroptic colours 
155 
Itt. Chemical colours 
156 
2 
The properties of opposition (Difference in particularized 
corporeality) § 321 
161 
§ 321 
a. Smell as specified airiness 
161 
§ 322 
h. 
Taste as specified water 
163 
3 Electricity (Totality in particular individuality; electricity) 
§ 323-325 
164 
C 
The chemical process § 326 
178 
§ 327 
1 Synsomation 
182 
§ 328-329 
2 
The real process 
184 
(I 
Combination) 
191 
a. 
Galvanism § 330 
191 
b. 
The process of fire § 331 
205 
c. Salt formation (Neutralization, the process of water) 
§ 332 
208 
d. Elective affinity (The process in its totality) § 333 
210 
3 The process of separation (Separation) § 334-336 
213 
NOTES 
223 
INDEX TO TEXT 
442 
INDEX TO NOTES 
455 
The words in roman are those of Hegel's headings which appeared in the 
first edition of this work. The words in italics did not appear as headings 
in the text, but such identification of these passages was made on the 
contents page of the first edition of the work 

SECTION TWO 
Physics 
§ 272 
Matter has individuality to the extent that it is determined 
within itself by having being-for-self developed within it. It 
is through this determination that matter breaks away from gravity 
and manifests itself as implicidy self-determining. This is its 
s immanent form, by which it determines spatiality in the face of a 
gravity which formerly received this determination as something 
opposed to matter, and as a centre to which matter merely aspired. 
Addition. Bodies are now subject to the power of individuality, and this 
section will be concerned with the reduction of free bodies to the power of 
10 the individual point of unity by which they are digested. Gravity is the 
essential being-in-self of matter, or mere inner identity, and as such 
passes over into the manifestation of essence, for essential externality 
constitutes its Notion. As such, it is the totality of the determinations of 
reflection; these are thrown into separation as shapeless elements however, 
15 for although each appears as a particular and qualified material, it is not 
yet individualized. These materialized determinations of form are to be 
grasped in a double manner: in their immediacy, and in their positedness. 
In the solar system they appear in their immediacy, and then exist as 
essentially posited. Parents are an immediacy in that they are parents for 
20 example, but they are also posited by having given life to their children. 
Similarly, light exists as the sun, and then also issues forth from external 
conditions. Primary light is in itself, and is generated in the Notion; it also 
has to be posited so that its determinate being may differentiate itself as a 
particular mode of existence. 
2S Physics has as its content: 
A. The universal individuality of immediate, free, 
physical qualities. 
9 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
B. The particular individuality of the relation of 
form, as a physical determination, to gravity, 
and of the determination of gravity by this form. 
C. Total or free individuality. 
Addition. This part of nature embraces fmite corporeality, and is there-
5 
fore the most difficult to grasp. The greatest difficulty is always encoun-
tered where there is difference, because there the Notion is no longer 
present in its immediacy as it is the first part, and does not yet display the 
concrete reality of its third part. In this second part, the Notion is ob-
scured, and only shows itself as the connecting bond of necessity, for + 
what appears is Notionless. In the first part, differences of form are con-
nectionless and mutually independent; in the second part individuality 
is differentiated and in a state of opposition; it is only in the third part 
that individuality is mistress over differences of form. 
10 

CHAPTER ONE 
Physics of universal individuality 
§ 274 
Physical qualities in their primary immediacy are external to 
one another in an independent manner as the heavenly bodies, 
which are now physically determined. Secondly, they are related 
to the individual unity of their totality as the physical ele-
s ments. Thirdly, they are the process, which gives rise to what 
is individual in these elements-the meteorological process. 
A 
The free physical bodies 
Addition. The determinations of the Notion now take on materiality; 
the being-for-self of matter finds its point of unity, and as it is therefore 
the being-for-self of being-for-self, and the transition of the determina-
10 tions, the disappearance of these determinations into one another has 
+ itself disappeared, and we enter logically into the sphere of essence. This 
is a return into selfin its other; its determinations appear within each other, 
and intro-reflected in this way, now develop as forms. These forms are 
identity, variety, opposition, and ground. This is therefore an advance 
15 upon the primary immediacy of matter, in which space and time, motion 
and matter, passed over into one another, until in free mechanics matter 
fmally appropriated the determinations as its own, and so revealed itself 
as self-mediated and determined. Impact is no longer external to matter, 
which is now differentiated as internal and immanent impact. It differen-
20 tiates and determines itself by itself, and is intro-reflected. Its determina-
tions are material, and express the nature of being material, and as it only 
consists of these determinations, it manifests itself within them. There 
are material qualities which belong to the substance of matter, and matter 
is whatever it is only through its qualities. In the first sphere the determi-
25 nations are still distinguished from the substance, they are not material 
determinations; substance as such is still shut up within itself and un-
manifest; and it was this which resulted in its merely seeking for its unity. 
II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
1. Light 
(The Sun, light and its reflection) 
Matter in its primary qualified state is pure self-identity, 
unity ofintro-reflection; as such it is the primary manifesta-
tion, and is itself still abstract. As existent in nature, it is inde-
+ 
pendent self-relation opposed to the other determinations of 
totality. This existing and universal self of matter is light, 5 
which as individuality is the star, and as moment of totality, the 
sun. 
Addition. The apriori Notional-determination of light is now the primary 
consideration. In the second instance we have to discover the mode and 
manner in which this Notional-determination occurs in our sensuous 10 
perception. As immediate, free, and independent motion returned into itself. 
matter is the simple self-equality of integrality. As motion has returned into + 
itself, the celestial sphere has perfected and concluded the independent and ideal 
life within it. This completed being-in-self is the precise constitution of its inte-
grality. As existent it is in itself; that is to say that this being-in-self of the totality + 
is itself present. It contains the moment by which it is for another; that which is 
for itself is the power of its centre, or its self-containedness. This simple power 
is itself present however, and as it is the other of this determinate being, that 
which is merely internal is to the same extent external. As immediate, pure 
totality, matter therefore enters into the opposition between that which it is in 20 
itself, and that which it is for another as determinate being; for its determinate 
being does not yet contain its being-in-self. Apprehended as this incessant 
rotation of self-relating motion, as the return to being-in-and-for-self, and as this 
being-in-self which is there opposed to existence, matter is light. Light is the 
self-contained totality of matter; as mere purity of power it is the self-conserv-
25 
ing and intensive vitality which is the concentration of the celestial sphere. Its 
rotation is precisely this immediate opposition of directions constituting self-
relating motion, in the flux and reflux of which all difference extinguishes it-
self. As existent identity it is pure line, and relates itself only to itself 
Light is this purely existent power, which fills space. Its being is absolute velo-
30 
city, the presence of pure materiality, the being-in-self of real existence, or 
actuality as a transparent possibility. That which fills space has two aspects + 
however, and if this filling subsists in being-for-self, light does not fill 
12 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
space, for the rigidity of that which offers resistance will then have lapsed. 
Light is present only in space therefore, and is certainly neither indivi-
dualized nor exclusive. Space is merely abstract subsistence or implicit being, 
while as existent being-in-self, or determinate being which is in itself, and is 
s consequently pure, light is the power of being external to itself possessed by 
+ universal actuality as the possibility of confluxing with everything; it is the 
affinity with all which yet abides in itself, and by means of which determinate 
being surrenders none of its independence. 
When matter passes into being-for-self as light, and so begins to mani-
10 fest itself, weighted matter also manifests itself Pressure, in which tmity 
is sought through tendency towards another, is a merely hostile or dis-
cordant manifestation however; within it matter is certainly being-for-
other, but it is this as exclusiveness, and as separation of the other from 
itself As well as this mutual negation between the many, we now have 
15 affirmative manifestation, for being-for-other is common to all. Light 
brings us into tmiversal interrelation; it is by its being in light that every-
thing may be easily penetrated by us, and grasped theoretically. 
We have to grasp this manifestation in its primary determinateness, in 
which, within itself, it is completely tmiversal, and as yet tmdetermined. 
20 Its determinateness is indeterminateness, identity, intro-reflection, a com-
plete physical ideality, contrasting with the reality of the weighted matter 
which we take to be differentiated and exclusive. This abstract manifesta-
tion, which is material identity with self, is not yet opposed to another; it 
is determinateness and oscillation, but only within itself. The being-for-self 
2S of being-for-self as self-relating affirmative identity, is no longer an ex-
clusiveness; the rigidity of the tmit has melted, and as the indeterminate 
continuity of manifestation, has lost its opposition. This is the pure intro-
reflection which, in the higher form of spirit, is the ego. The ego is infmite 
space, the infinite equality of self-consciousness with itself, the abstract 
30 and empty certainty of myself, and of my pure self-identity. The ego is 
merely the identity of my own attitude as subject, to myself as object. 
Light corresponds to this identity of self-consciousness, and is the exact 
image of it. It is not the ego however, for in itself it is not self-dimming and 
refractive, but is merely abstract appearance. If the ego were able to main-
3S tain itself in a state of tmdisturbed equability, as the Indians would like it 
+ to, it would pass away into the abstract transparency of light. Self-con-
sciousness only has being as consciousness however; consciousness posits 
determinations within itself, and self-consciousness, in so far as it is its own 
object, is the pure reflection of the ego of consciousness into itself The ego 
40 resembles light in its pure self-manifestation, but it is at the same time the 
13 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
infmite negativity of its return into self, out of itself as object. As the 
infmite point of subjective individuality, it therefore excludes its other. 
Light is not self-consciousness therefore, because it lacks the infmity of 
return into self; it is mere self-manifestation, but only for another, not 
~~~ 
5 
Light therefore lacks the concrete unity with itself which is possessed 
by self-consciousness as the infmite point of being-for-itself; consequently 
it is merely a manifestation of nature, and not of spirit. Secondly, this ab-
stract manifestation is therefore at the same time spatial; it is absolute 
expansion in space, but is not the resumption of this expansion into the 10 
unifying point of infmite subjectivity. Light is infmite spatial diffusion, 
or rather the infmite generation of space. As the determinations of nature fall 
apart through their separation, this pure manifestation also exists for itself, 
but as a false existence. Pure identity is not granted such a detached 
existence in the infmite concreteness of spirit; for in self-consciousness 15 
this thought is subsumed under the absolute subjectivity of the self. 
Thirdly, light has to encounter its limit; yet the necessity of its striking 
something other than itself is not the same as the absolute limitation of 
being-for-self by which matter offers resistance. In that light is abstract 
identity, difference is external to it as the absence of light. This consists of 20 
the remaining reflective determinations of essence, expressed as physical 
bodies. Light is the primary consummation of that in which everything 
is made manifest. It is only the abstract understanding which regards tlllS 
physical universal as supreme. Self-determining and concrete rational 
thought demands a self-differentiating universal which determines itself 25 
within itself without losing its universality in this particularization. Light 
is the beginning of material manifestation, and only constitutes its acme 
in an abstract sense. It is because of ills abstraction that light now fmds a + 
linnt, or deficiency; and it is through this limit that it first manifests itself 
Determinate content must come from elsewhere; in order that something 30 
may be manifest, there must be something which is different from light. 
Light as such is invisible, and in that nothing may be seen in it, pure light 
resembles pure darkness; it is obscure and tenebrous. If we see in pure light, 
then we are pure vision, but we do not as yet see anything. It is limit which 
contains the primary moment of negation and therefore of determination, 35 
and so gives rise to reality. As concreteness is the prime verity, not only 
the one, but both abstractions go to make up existence. Light only mani-
fests itself as such after it has differentiated itself as light by distinguishing 
itself from shade. 
After having developed the Notion of light, the question of its reality 40 
14 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
naturally presents itself When we say that we have to consider the exis-
tence of light, we are referring in fact to its being-for-other; but light 
itself is the positing of being-for-other, so that in the existence of light we 
have to take into account the being-for-other of this being-for-other. 
5 How is visibility visible? How does this manifestation manifest itself? A 
subject is necessary in manifestation; how does it exist? Light can only be 
called material in so far as it exists for itself in the form of independent 
individuality, and this individuation depends upon the corporeality of 
light. Light constitutes the existence or physical import of the body of 
10 abstract centrality, the real nature of which is a luminous body. This self 
illuminating body is the sun. At this juncture, this is an empirically presented 
fact, and is all that we have to say of the sun at present. This body is the 
primordial and uncreated light, it is immediate, and does not arise from 
the conditions of fmite existence. The stars are also self-illuminating bodies, 
15 and their existence merely entails the physical abstraction of light. The 
existence of abstract matter is precisely this abstract identity of light. The 
stars are points of light, and do not shift out of this abstraction; this in-
ability to assume concrete being is not impressive, it is a defect, and it is 
consequently absurd to regard the stars as superior to plants for example. 
20 The sun is not yet concrete being. Religiosity wants to deck out the sun 
and moon with people, animals, and plants, but only a planet can rise to 
+ these things. Introverted natural objects, and concrete shapes able to main-
tain themselves in the face of the universal do not yet exist on the sun. 
There is nothing but luminous matter in the stars and the sun. The con-
25 nection between the sun as a moment of the solar system, and as self-
illumination, consists in its having the same determination in both cases. 
In mechanics the sun is merely the self-relating corporeality, and this 
determination is also the physical determination of the identity of abstract 
manifestation. That is why the sun shines. 
30 
Further enquiry may be made into the finite causes of the existence which 
shines in this way. If we ask how we receive the light of the sun, we are 
assuming that it is something which is generated. In this determination we 
see light associated with fire and warmth, as it is in our ordinary experience 
of it as terrestrial light, where it occurs as a combustion. We might think 
35 therefore, that the means by which the burning heat of the sun is main-
tained, were essential to any explanation of sunlight, and that these means 
might be explained by analogy with the terrestrial igneous process, in 
which fire has to consume matter in order to exist. It should be remem-
bered however, that the conditions of the terrestrial process which occur 
40 in individualized corporeality do not yet occur here in the relations of 
IS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
free qualities. This primary light has to be distinguished from fIre. Ter-
restriallight is for the most part cOlUlected with heat. Although sunlight 
is also warm, this heat does not belong to sunlight as such, but arises out 
of its contact with the earth. Sunlight, by itself, is cold, as we know from 
high mountains and balloon ascents. We have even empirical evidence of + 
flameless light, in the phosphorescence of rotten wood for example, as 
well as in electric light, where the fusion which electricity gives rise to is 
the result not of light, but of an explosion. There are also metals which + 
glow without burning when they are scratched or rubbed together with 
iron; minerals of this kind may even be more numerous than those which 10 
do not give off light. Consequently, terrestrial light itself furnishes ana-
logies from which one may infer that solar illumination is independent of 
the chemical process. 
Light must also show itself to be a product of course. The physical 
conditions of solar light do not concern us here, because they are merely 15 
empirical facts, and are not a determination of the Notion. Nevertheless, 
one could say that as the sun and the stars are rotating centres, their rota-
tion constitutes a self-frictionalization. In its motion, the life of the sun is + 
merely this process of phosphorescence, in which light is given off; con-
sequently, the mechanical explanation of it has to be sought in the axial 20 
rotation of the sun, for this is its abstract relation to sel£ In so far as light 
has to be produced physically, we can say that all the bodies which belong 
to the solar system contribute to the production of their centre, and so 
posit their own luminary; neither of these two moments is without the 
other, for each is posited by the other. General Alix, a Frenchman who 25 
lived for a long time in Cassel, published a paper in which he explained 
the way in which the luminous matter of the sun is generated, from the 
assumption that the solar body is perpetually giving offlight through its 
illumination, and so continually losing. When he was questioned as to the 
origin of the hydrogen which is perpetually developing on the planets 
the general replied that as hydrogen is the lightest gas, it is not to be found 30 
in the air, but that it furnishes the material which replenishes that which 
is lost by the sun. There is some truth in this idea, for the planets do project + 
their material development out of themselves, and so form the body of the 
sun, but the idea of ordinary physical and chemical mediation has to be 35 
excluded here. The life of a star is perpetually being kindled and renewed 
by the elements which assemble themselves in the unity of its determinate 
being, by positing the ideal nature of multiplicity within their centre. In 
the terrestrial process, that which is individual is consumed in the simplicity 
of the flame; similarly, in the sun, multiplicity concentrates itself into the 40 
16 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
simplicity of solar light. The sun is therefore the process of the whole 
+ solar system, the culminating point in which it bursts forth. 
§ 276 
As the abstract self of matter, light is absolute levity, and 
as matter, it is infinite self-externality. It is this as pure 
5 manifestation and material ideality however, in the self-
externality of which it is simple and indivisible. 
Remark 
To oriental intuition, it is the pure selfhood of conscious-
ness which constitutes the substantial identity of spiritual 
and natural, and this constitutes the self-identical thought 
10 which in the abstract form of the true and the good is one 
+ with light. There is an attitude of mind which is said to be 
realistic, and which denies that ideality is present in nature; 
it should be asked to concern itself among other things with 
light, which is pure manifestation, and nothing but mani-
15 festation. 
The resultant self-identity now has matter within it as the 
primary abstract self of centrality, and is the simplicity of existent 
ideality. We have shown in the in.troduction, that in order to 
prove that this thought-determination is light, an empirical pro-
20 cedure has to be adopted. Here as everywhere, that which is 
immanently philosophical is the inherent necessity of Notional 
determination, which then has to be illustrated by some 
natural existence or other. Here I shall merely make a few 
remarks on the empirical existence of pure manifestation as 
25 light. 
Weighted matter is divisible into masses, since it is con-
crete, quantitative being-for-self; but in the quite abstract 
ideality of light there is no such difference; a limit to the 
infinite expansion of light does not destroy its absolute 
30 continuity in itself. The conception of aggregations of dis-
crete and simple light-rays and particles, out of which a 
light which is limited in its diffusion is supposed to arise, 
belong to the barbarous categories which have continued 
17 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to dominate physics, since Newton made them current. The + 
most limited experience will show us that it is as impossible to 
isolate light into rays and compress its beams into bundles, as it 
is to pack it into sacks. The indivisibility of light in its in-
finite expansion, is physical extrinsicality maintaining its 5 
self-identity; the understanding also has this abstract iden-
tity as its principle, and should therefore be the last to 
pass it off as being incomprehensible. 
Astronomers have taken to speaking of appearances in the 
heavens which occurred 500 years or more before we per-
10 
ceive them. In order to do this it is necessary on the one 
hand to look upon the empirical appearances of the propa-
gation of light, which are valid in one sphere, as taken over 
into another sphere in which they have no significance, al-
though such a determination of the materiality of light is not 15 
incompatible with its simple indivisibility. On the other hand, 
we can see there a past transformed into a present event, 
as in the ideal process of memory. 
+ 
It is one of the tenets of optics that each point on a visible 
surface radiates beams of light in all directions, so that a 20 
material hemisphere of infini te dimensions is formed from 
each point. It should be remembered moreover that each 
person sees this surface from a different position. If this 
were the case, the immediate result would be that each of this 
infinity of hemispheres would resemble a hedgehog, and 2S 
penetrate all the others. A condensed and confused mass 
would be produced between the eye and the object, and the 
light which ought to render the object visible, would in 
fact do the opposite. This whole way of conceiving of the + 
situation is self-defeating however, and resembles the re-
30 
presentation of a concrete body as a composition of various 
matters, in the pores of one and all of which, all the others 
exist, persist, and circulate. What is more, this conception + 
of matter as being penetrated from all sides, contradicts 
the hypothesis that the supposedly real nature of substances is a 3S 
discrete materiality, and tends rather to confirm that the 
relationship between them is of a completely ideal nature. 
It indicates moreover, that this relationship occurs here between 
the object which is lighted and manifested, the principle which 
lights and manifests, and that to which the object becomes mani-
40 
18 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
fest. In itself, tlns relationship is a relationless intro-reflection, and 
consequently, all further forms of mediation used in explanation 
and exposition, such as corpuscles, waves, oscillations etc., as well 
as fine strands and bundles of rays, are to be removed from it. 
5 Addition. It is in so far as the self-centredness of light animates and indi-
vidualizes the things of nature so as to heighten and give coherence to 
their exclusiveness, that it makes its appearance in the individualization of 
matter, for its primarily abstract identity is merely the sublation and return 
into self of the particularity of the negative unity of individuality. Gravity, 
10 acidity, and sound, are also manifestations of matter, but they do not have 
the purity of light, and they are not manifested without inherent and de-
terminate modification. We can not hear sound as such, we merely hear 
a determinate sound, a certain pitch; it is always a determinate acid that 
we taste, never acidity as such. Only light exists as this pure manifestation, 
15 this abstract and unindividualized universality. Light is incorporeal, it is 
in fact immaterial matter; although this appears to be a contradiction, it 
+ is an appearance which cannot depend upon us. Physicists used to say that 
light might be weighed. Large lenses were used in order to concentrate 
it into focus, which was then directed onto the scalepan of a pair of ex-
20 tremely sensitive balances. The balances were usually unmoved, and when 
they were, it was discovered that this was brought about solely by the 
+ heat that was concentrated within the focus. Matter is weighted in so far 
as it still seeks its unity as place, but light is matter which has found itself. 
Light contains the moment of unity with self, and displays an absence 
25 of elision or finitude, consequently it was one of the first objects to be 
venerated, and has been regarded as the element in which mankind has 
become conscious of the absolute. It is the contrast between thought and 
being, subject and object, which exhibits the highest opposition however, 
and this was not to be found in light. The posited opposition between 
30 man and nature belongs only to the fullest form of self-consciousness. The 
religion of light is more sublime than that of the Indians or Greeks, but it 
is also the religion in which man has not yet risen to an awareness of 
+ opposition, to self-knowing spirituality. 
It is interesting to consider light. One always tends to think that with 
35 natural objects, the individual is this present reality. Light is a contradiction 
of this however, since it is the expression within nature of the simplicity 
+ of thought itsel£ In nature it is the understanding which occurs; the forms 
of the understanding exist within nature. If one wants to imagine light, 
one has to discard all determinations relating to composition etc. Physicists 
19 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
who postulate particles of light, are in no way superior to the man 
who built a windowless house, and wanted to carry the light into it in 
sacks. A bundle of rays is nothing but a convenient expression, for these + 
rays are the whole of light, which is merely limited externally, and which 
is no more divided into bundles of rays than is the ego or pure self-
5 
consciousness. The same principle applies if I talk about my own time, or 
the time of Caesar. This particular time has also been the time of all other 
things, but I speak of it here with regard to Caesar, and confme it to him, 
without his having had a ray or bundle of exclusive and inherently real 
time about him. The Newtonian theory, according to which light diffuses 10 
itself in lines, or the wave-theory, according to which it diffuses itself in 
waves, like Euler's ether and the vibration of sound, are material repre-
sentations which are quite useless in the cognition of light. The shade in 
light is supposed to be a series of curves passing through the motion of 
light which may be calculated mathematically. This abstract determination 15 
has merely been hauled in here, but it is now generally supposed to be a 
triumphant advance upon Newton. This is not a physical determination + 
however, and neither of these two theories will do here, because any thing 
empirical is necessarily invalid. Corpuscles of light or ether are as non-
existent as nerves composed of series of globules which set one another 20 
in motion by receiving and imparting an impulse. 
+ 
The propagation of light falls within time, because as activity and 
change, light cannot dispense with this moment. Light is immediate ex-
pansion, but through its materiality, its luminous corporeality, it relates 
itself to another body, and a division, or at least a kind of disjunction is 25 
therefore present within its continuity. The sublation of this division con-
stitutes motion, and it is in the relationship between terms of this kind 
that time also occurs. The distances which light is supposed to traverse fall 
within time, for illumination, whether through penetration of a medium 
or the transmission of reflection, is an affection of matter requiring time. 30 
In the sphere of our planetary system therefore, i.e. in a more or less 
transparent medium, the propagation of light involves a time-determina-
tion, because the rays are refracted by the atmosphere. The continuation 
of this in distant regions without an atmosphere, and in the apparently 
empty space around the stars, is a different matter however. One might 35 
say that these spaces have a content only as inter-stellar distance, which 
means in effect that they are empty, and are merely negations of union. 
Laws governing the propagation of light which had been deduced prin-
cipally from the observation of Jupiter's satellites, have been applied by 
Herschel to stellar spaces; but Herschel himself admits that these distances 40 
20 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
+ are merely hypothetical. From the periodic appearance and disappearance 
of certain stars and nebulae, Herschel concluded that because of the time 
which light takes to reach us, there is a difference of 500 years between 
the time when we see them, and the time when these changes actually take 
5 place, and that there is something completely spectral about being thus 
affected by something which has long since passed away. One must accept 
the condition of time without becoming involved in these further con-
+ sequences. 
§ 277 
Light, as universal physical identity, relates itself to the matter 
10 qualified by the other moments of the Notion. It does this in the 
first instance as something different from this matter (§ 275), 
and therefore as something which is distinct from and external 
to it. The matter is therefore determined as the negation of light, 
or as a darkness, and in so far as it also subsists for itself, and is 
15 different from light, light only enters into relation with its surface, 
which as the initiation of opacity, is therefore made manifest. If 
this surface is smooth and devoid of any further particularization 
however, it also, inseparably, manifests itself, and becomes ap-
parent to another surface. As each therefore appears to the 
20 other, and only the other appears to each, the extro-positing of 
this manifestation is the abstract infinity of intro-reflection, 
through which there is as yet nothing which appears to itself 
as self-subsistent. In order that something may ultimately 
appear and become visible, further particularization of some 
25 physical kind or another, such as roughness or colour etc., must 
therefore be present. 
Addition. Matter, in contrast to this pure self, is the equivalent lack of 
self, or darkness. Its relation to light is that of sheer opposition. 
Consequently the one is positive and the other negative. For dark-
30 ness to be positive, corporeal individualization is required. The body 
is individualized, and regarded as such, it is merely the negative aspect of 
its abstract identity with itself Darkness vanishes before light; the dark 
body is the only corporeality to oppose it, and it now becomes visible. 
In order that I may see, there must not only be light, but also a body; 
35 something to be seen. Consequently light is only visible as a lighted body, 
although when the dark matter which becomes visible through light is 
21 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
taken in its affIrmation, it is shape as an abstract aspect of the body. There 
is an external relation between light and darkness, and the existence of 
light first occurs on the boundary between them, in the being-for-other 
of which something is illuminated. The limitation of light in space should 
be considered only as a point of arrest in the direction pursued by the 5 
light, for it would cease to be if its connection with the central body were 
severed. The limit is therefore posited by the dark body which is lit up. 
The darkness of weighted matter is specified matter in that it is externally 
related to light; yet the primary specification here is the spatial difference 
of surfaces; matter may be rough, flat, jagged, in such and such a position 10 
etc. Visible things are distinguished as spatial shapes; this only gives rise 
to light and shade however, and as yet there is no question of colour. In 
this primary abstract manifestation, corporeality, which is otherwise par-
ticularized into manifold shape, is reduced to surface; it exhibits no 
particularization here, for it is merely the positing of manifestation as such, 15 
and is consequendy a merely spatial determination. 
§ 278 
The manifestation of objects to each other, as limited by their 
opacity, is the self-externality of spatial relation, which, as it has 
no further determinations, is therefore direct or rectilinear. 
Since surfaces are so related to each other, and can occupy various 20 
positions, the manifestation of one visible object to another in a 
smooth surface is increased by a third and fourth surface etc. The 
image of the object, the location of which is taken to be the mir-
ror, is reflected by another surface, i.e. the eye or another mirror 
etc. In these particularized spatial determinations, equality can 25 
be the only law of manifestation, and it entails the equality of the 
angle of incidence with the angle of reflection, as well as the 
unity of the plane of this angle. Nothing whatever is present 
whereby the identity of this relation might be changed. 
Remark 
In this paragraph, the determinations which may already seem 30 
to belong to more determinate physics, contain the transition from 
the universal limitation of light by dark matter, to its more deter-
minate limitation by the particular spatial determinations of this 
matter. This determination is usually lumped together with the 
22 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
representation of light as ordinary ma tt er. Yetit contains nothing 
but the fact that as inseparable self-externality, the abstract 
ideality of this pure manifestation is able to receive determinate 
limits as the result of its own spatiality. This limitability, 
5 which is the result of particularized spatiality, is a necessary deter-
mination, which is devoid of furthur content, and excludes all 
material categories of transmission, and of the physical reflection 
of light etc. 
The phenomena which have given rise to the clumsy concept 
10 of what has been called fixed polarization or the polarity of light, 
+ are associated with the determinations presented in this paragraph. 
In simple mirroring from a single plane, the so-called angle of 
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection; consequently, when a 
second mirror is introduced to communicate the illumination 
15 reflected from the first, the position of the first plane as related to 
the second has its influence upon the position, brightness, or 
darkening of the object as it appears in the second reflection, 
through the direction of the first reflection, and the position of 
the second plane. For the natural undisturbed clarity of the twice 
20 reflected brightness of light, the normal position is therefore 
necessary, so that the planes of all the respective angles of inci-
dence and reflection may coincide. Conversely, the darkening 
and disappearance of a twice reflected brightness follow with 
equal necessity if the two planes stand in what one has to call a 
25 negative or perpendicular relation to one another (cf. Goethe 
'The Science of Nature' vol. 1 sect. 1 bottom of p. 28 fr, and sect. 3 
+ Entopt. Colours VIII. XIX. p. 144 et seq.). Malus has concluded 
from the modification in the brightness of the mirroring which 
this position brings about, that molecules of light, even in their 
30 various aspects, are in implicit possession of different physical 
properties. From this it has also been concluded that the so-called 
+ rays of light are four-sided. It is upon this basis, together with 
the further implications of entoptical colour phenomena, that a 
vast maze of extremely complicated theory has been built. It 
35 constitutes a prime example of the strange conclusions physics 
can draw from experience. Malus's polarization theory origi-
nated in the first phenomenon, from which the only valid con-
clusion to be drawn is that the bright condition of the light in the 
second reflection can only occur if the angle of reflection occurs 
+ on the same plane as the angle of the first. 
23 

, 
~ 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
Addition. As light encounters matter and makes it visible, it enters generally 
into the preciser determinateness of the various directions and quantitative 
differences of degrees of brightness. This reflection of light is a more difficult 
determination than one might think. To say that objects are visible is to 
say that light is reflected in all directions. In their visibility, objects are for 5 
another, to which they are therefore related. Consequently, this visible 
aspect of them is in another, which means that light is not irrelative, but 
involves another with itself, and therefore that the objects are in another. 
Here we have the precise nature of the reflection of light. The sun shines, 
and light is therefore for another. Within its dimensions, this other, which 10 
might for example be a surface, becomes a surface of sunlight. It therefore 
shines, although in the first instance it can give off no light of its own, its 
shining being merely derived. Yet as the surface behaves at each point 
like the sun, it is being-for-other, both externally and therefore in the 
other. This is the main determination of reflection. 
15 
We can only see something in a surface therefore, in so far as spatial 
shapes such as roughness occur on it. If it is smooth, no visible difference 
will be present. That which is visible here is not something which belongs 
to the surface itself, for the surface is not differentiated. It is merely some-
thing else which becomes visible, it is not a determination of the surface, 20 
i.e. the surface mirrors something. Uniform smoothness has no spatial 
difference, and as we see nothing determinate on an object if roughness is 
lacking, we therefore see nothing in the smoothness but a general gleam, 
which is a general abstract shining, an indeterminate illumination. It is 
consequently this smoothness which manifests the unturbid image of the 25 
other. On a smooth surface one therefore sees another determinate object, 
for this object is only visible in so far as it is for another than itsel£ If the 
surface combines smoothness with opacity, (transparency also mirrors 
however, c£ § 320 Add.), and this other object is placed before it, the 
object will be visible within it, for to be visible is to be in another. If we 30 
place another mirror in front of the first, and a light in the middle, the 
light will be visible in both mirrors at once, but in each only with the 
determination of the other. An image of itself will likewise be visible in 
each, because each mirror is visible to the other. If the mirrors are placed 
at an angle to one another, the progression here is infmite, for one is then 35 
able to see the objects as many times as the breadth of the mirrors allows. 
If one tries to explain this by mechanical representations, one merely 
plunges into the wildest confusion. If we call the two mirrors A and B, 
and ask what is visible in A, the answer is B. But B is that in which A is 
visible. Therefore A is visibJe in A in that it is visible in B. What is visible 40 
24 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
in B then? A itself, and A as visible in B. What then is visible in A? B, and 
that which is visible in B, i.e. A itself, and A visible in B etc. We therefore 
have a perpetual repetition of the same relation, although in each repe-
tition the terms have a particular existence. A great deal of light can also 
+ be concentrated upon a single point by means of mirrors. 
Light is active identity, and posits the identification of everything. As 
this identity is still entirely abstract however, there is as yet no real identity 
of things. Things are for another, and posit themselves as identical with 
another in another. This positing of identification is therefore external to 
10 things, which are indifferent to being illumined. It is therefore necessary 
that they should be posited for themselves in concrete identity; light 
should become their own, and so complete and realize itself. Light is still 
entirely abstract selfhood, and is therefore the not-self, the free self-identity 
which is devoid of all opposition within itsel£ The other to which light 
15 relates itself in its free existence as solar body, is external to light. Conse-
quently, light resembles the understanding, for its material is external to it. 
Until now we have merely called this negative term darkness, but it also 
has an immanent determination of its own. In its abstract determination, 
this physical opposition still has its own independent existence, and it is 
+ this that we now have to consider. 
2. The bodies of opposition 
§ 279 
Dark matter is primarily the negation of light, and constitutes 
the opposition to its abstracdy identical ideality; it is 0 P po sit ion 
in its own self. It has material reality, and within itself falls 
apart into a duality of (1) corporeal variety, which is the 
25 material being-for-self of rigidity, and (2) the opposition as 
such. By itself, this opposition is not controlled by individu-
ality, but is merely sunk within itself, and so constitutes 
dissolution and neutrality. This duality marks the difference 
between the lunar and cometary bodies. 
Remark 
30 
As relative centres of corporeality within the gravitational 
system, both these bodies also have a peculiarity which is 
based on the same concept as their physical peculiarity, and 
25 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which may be stated here with more exactness, i.e. neither 
turns upon its axis. As the body of rigidity is a formal being- + 
for-self, its independence is caught up in the opposition, and 
consequently it does not constitute individuality. It is 
therefore satellitic, and subservient to another body, in 5 
which it has its axis. The body of dissolution is the antithesis 
to that of rigidity, for it behaves aberrantly, and displays 
the same contingency in its eccentric revolution as it does 
in its physical existence. Comets present themselves as a + 
superficial concretion, which may disperse again with equal 10 
contingency. 
The moon has no atmosphere, and therefore lacks the 
meteorological process. It exhibits only high conical moun- + 
tains, in which craters correspond to valleys, and afford 
evidence of the internal combustion of this rigidity. Its + 
form is crystalline, and Heim, one of the limited number + 
of profound geognosts, has indicated that the Earth also + 
had this form in its original and purely rigid state. The 
comet appears as a formal process, an unstable and vaporous 
mass; not one has given indication of a nucleus or anything 20 
rigid within it. The ancients regarded comets as mere 
momentary meteoric formations like fire-balls and shooting 
stars. Nowadays astronomers are not so reticent and stand-
offish as they used to be with regard to this view. So far, 
only a few cases of their return have been confirmed; the ap-
25 
pearances of others have been calculated and expected, but 
have failed to materialize. The idea that the solar system is in 
itself a true system on account of its essentially coherent totality, 
necessarily rules out the formal interpretation of the co-
mets, in which their appearances are regarded as being in 30 
accidental opposition to the entirety of this system when 
they cross and impinge upon it. It is therefore possible to 
conceive of the other bodies of the system as protecting 
themselves against comets, i.e. as having to maintain and 
preserve themselves as the necessary moments of an organism. 35 
There are better grounds of reassurance to be found in this 
conception, than those that have so far been advanced against 
the potential menace of the comets, for by and large these 
reassurances have merely been based upon the fact that in the 
vastness of the heavens, the comets have so much space through 40 
26 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
which to move upon their ways, that there is only a minimal 
chance of their encountering the Earth. The plausibility of this 
argument is not increased by its being transformed into a theory 
+ of probability. 
5 Addition. As this is a free opposition, these two logical sides to it exist 
here as external to each other. Consequently the two terms do not meet 
accidentally in the solar system; if one has thoroughly grasped the nature 
of the Notion, it will not seem strange that even such things have to 
display themselves as having entered into the sphere of the Idea, by which 
10 alone they are legitimatized. They constitute the moments of the dissolving 
Earth which have been rendered independent. The Moon resembles the 
hard core of the Earth, the comet is a durable meteor, a part of its 
+ atmosphere which has become independent (see below § 287). As it is 
an animated whole, the Earth can and must release its crystalline and 
15 moribund essence. It therefore discharges this moment, which constitutes 
its inner determination, so that the Moon remains the regent of the 
Earth's individual process, just as the Sun remains regent of its universal pro-
+ cess. On the other hand, it is part of the Notion of dissolution that this moment 
has freed itself, flown off into independence and severed its connection with the 
+ Earth. 
Rigid being-for-self is concentrated into itself, opaque, and by itself in-
different; the independence of this being-for-self is rigid in so far as it is 
still immobile. The principle of rigidity, of brittleness, is puncticity, each 
point of which is individuaL This is the mechanical appearance of simple 
25 rigidity, the physical determination of which is combustibility. Real being-
for-self is self-relating negativity, the process of fire, which consumes 
itself by consuming another. Rigidity is only implicitly combustible how-
ever, it is the possibility, and not yet the efficacy of fire. Consequently 
the process of fire, which is the active inter-relation of difference, is not 
30 to be found here, where we still have the free inter-relation of qualities. 
Clouds and animated changes of atmosphere may be seen on Mercury 
+ and Venus, but the Moon has neither clouds, seas, nor rivers, for if there 
were water surfaces and silver threads upon it, they would be very easy 
to pick out. Ephemeral points of light are often seen on the Moon, and 
35 are thought to be volcanic eruptions. Air is undoubtedly one of the con-
ditions of these phenomena, although the lunar atmosphere has no hu-
+ midity. Heim, the brother of the doctor, has attempted to show that in 
the era which preceded the geological revolutions of which we have 
evidence, the form of the Earth must have resembled that of the Moon. 
27 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
The Moon is crystalline, but it lacks water, and it might be said that by 
attempting to quench the thirst of its rigidity by integrating itself with 
our sea, it causes the ebb and flow of the tides. The waters rise, having a 
mind to escape to the moon, and the Moon is about to clasp them unto 
itself Laplace ('Exposition du systeme du monde' vol. II pp. 136-I38), 5 
has discovered by observations and theory, that lunar tides are three times 
as strong as solar tides, and that the flow is at its strongest when the two 
coincide. Consequently the position of the moon in the syzygies and 
quadratures is qualitatively the most significant factor. 
+ 
Rigidity which is bound up within itself, is as impotent as the abstract 10 
neutrality and susceptibility to determination found in the corresponding 
fluidity. Since the opposition exists only as opposition, it has no fixity, 
and merely collapses internally. As the extremes enter actively into the 
determination of opposition, a middle is necessary in order to bring them 
together and support them. If rigidity and neutrality were united in this 15 
third term, we should have a real totality. The comet is a translucent, 
transparent, aqueous body, which certainly does not belong to our atmo- + 
sphere. If it had a nucleus it would be recognizable by its shadow, but 
comets are thoroughly permeated with brightness. The stars may be seen 
through a comet's tail, and even through the comet itself. One astronomer 20 
thought that he had seen a nucleus, but it turned out to be a fault in his 
telescope. As its ellipse has an exaggerated elongation, the comet makes + 
an almost parabolic orbit about the Sun; it then disperses again, and re-
produces itself in another form. The most certain and regular return is 
that of Halley's comet, which appeared last in 1758, and is to be expected 25 
again in I835. An astronomer has shown by calculation that many of 
these appearances may be reduced to an orbit which could belong to a 
single comet. Halley's comet has been seen two or three times, but ac-
cording to calculation it ought to have appeared five times. Comets inter- + 
sect the planetary orbits in all directions. The independence with which 30 
they are credited should enable them to touch the planets. If people are 
frightened by this they can draw no consolation from the vastness of the 
heavens and the consequent improbability of this happening, for each 
point is as susceptible to being touched as any other. It is necessary to + 
conceive of the comets as being parts of our solar system however. It 35 
should be apparent therefore that they do not arrive as unfamiliar guests, 
but have been engendered here, and that their orbits are determined by 
the system. The other bodies consequently preserve their independence 
of the comets, because they are equally necessary moments of this system. 
The comets have their centre in the Sun. The Moon, because of its 40 
28 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
rigidity, has a greater affinity with the planets, for it represents the nucleus 
of the Earth for itself, and also contains the principle of abstract indivi-
duality. In an abstract manner therefore, comet and Moon reproduce the 
Sun and planet. The planets are the middle term of the system; the Sun 
5 is one extreme, and the dependent bodies of the opposition, which is still 
disintegrated, are the other (U-S-P). This is the immediate and purely 
formal syllogism; but it is not the only one. The other, more determinate 
relation, is that in which the dependent bodies are the mediating terms 
the Sun the one extreme, and the Earth the other (S-U-P), for the Earth, 
10 relates itself to the Sun through its dependence. As the middle term, the 
dependent body must have the two moments of extremity within it 
however, and as it is their unity, it must be divided within itself. Each 
moment must belong to one extreme; as the lunar moment belongs to 
the planets, the cometary moment must belong to the Sun, because the 
15 comet, having no internal fixity must relate itself to the formal centre. 
The courtiers who are personally attendant upon the sovereign have little 
independence because of the closeness of their relation to him, while the 
ministers and their subordinates act with more regularity and consequently 
with more uniformity, as functionaries. The third syllogism is that in 
+ which the Sun itself is the middle term (P-U-S). 
This physical relationship between the heavenly bodies, together with 
their mechanical relation, constitutes cosmic nature, which is the founda-
tion, the completely universal life, in which the whole of animate nature 
participates (see above § 270 Add.). One ought not to speak of the Moon's 
25 influence upon the Earth as if this were an external action however. 
Universal animation is much more passive with regard to individuality, 
and the dominion of the sidereal powers becomes less effective as the 
strength of individuality increases. It is through participation in this 
universal life about us that we sleep and wake, and that our morning and 
+ evening moods are not the same. The periodicity of the Moon's phases 
may be traced in living things, particularly in sick animals. Yet a healthy 
animal, and to an greater extent, a spiritual being, will sever itself from 
this universal life, and oppose it. The position of the Moon is supposed 
to have an influence upon the demented, and upon lunatics however. 
35 The effect of the weather may also be felt in scars when the wounds have 
left a certain weakness behind. Although much has recently been made of 
cosmic conditions and relationships, the evidence brought forward has 
consisted, for the most part, of empty turns of phrase, generalities, or 
+ completely isolated instances. The influences of the comets can scarcely 
+ be denied. I once made Mr. Bode sigh by saying that we know from 
29 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
experience that comets are followed by good vintage years, as was the case 
in ISU and ISI9, and that this double experience was just as good, if not 
better, than that regarding the return of the comets. What makes comet-
wine so good is that the water-process abandons the Earth, and so brings 
about an alteration in the state of the planet. 
5 
3. The body of individuality 
(The planet as the body of individuality) 
§ 2S0 
The opposItIOn which has returned into itself is the 
Earth, or the planet in general. This is the body of individual 
totality, in which rigidity is opened up into the separateness 
of real differences, and this dissolution is held together by 
the self-like point of unity. 
10 
Remark 
The axial rotation of the planets, combined with their 
moving around the central body, is the expression of ani-
mation, and is the most concrete form of motion. Similarly, 
the luminous nature of the central body is abstract identity, 
the truth of which, like the truth of thought, is the con-
15 
crete Idea of individuality. 
Astronomy has not yet discovered the actual law govern-
ing the planetary series, i.e. the primary determinateness of 
the distances between these bodies. The attempts made in + 
natural philosophy to demonstrate the rationality of the 20 
series from its physical constitution, and by analogies with 
a series of metals, have been equally fruitless, and can hardly 
be regarded as providing a satisfactory basis for research. It is 
however irrational to regard contingency as the basic factor 
here, as Laplace does when he treats Kepler's attempts at + 
grasping the order of the solar system according to the 
laws of musical harmony, as the mere aberration of a be-
mused imagination, and so fails to appreciate the deep faith 
which Kepler had in the inherent rationality of this system; 
a faith which was the sole foundation of the brilliant 30 
discoveries made by this extraordinary man. 
Newton's + 
30 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
application of numerical tonal relations to colours, which is 
utterly inept, and which, with regard to the data, is completely 
+ erroneous, has on the other hand won fame and approval. 
Addition. The planet is the veritable prius, the subjectivity in which these 
5 differences are merely moments of an ideal nature, and in which life first 
has determinate being. The Sun is subservient to the planets, just as the 
Sun, Moon, comets, and stars in general, are merely aspects of the Earth. 
The Sun therefore has neither engendered nor thrown off the planets; 
the whole solar system is an entirety, for the Sun and the planets are en-
10 gendered reciprocally. Just as the ego, although it is not yet spirit, fmds 
its truth within spirit, so light fmds its truth in the concrete being of the 
planet. Taken alone and by itself, the ego in its asserted supremacy is an 
empty negation, and not spirit. The ego is certainly an absolute moment 
of spirit, but not to the extent that it isolates itself. 
15 
There is little more to be said here about the body of individuality, 
and that which follows is nothing more than the explication of this indi-
viduality. We are concerned here with the abstract determination of it. 
It is the property of the Earth or of organic being to digest the completely 
universal astral powers which appear to have independence as heavenly 
20 bodies, and to bring them under the sway of individuality, so that these 
gigantic members reduce themselves to moments. Quality, in its totality, 
is individuality, as the infinite form which is one with itself. If there is any 
talk of pride of place, it must be this our Earth which we regard as su-
+ preme. If one reflects quantitatively, one can certainly let the Earth sink 
25 away beneath one as, 'a drop in the ocean of infmitude'; size, however is a 
very external determination. We now come to stand upon the Earth 
+ therefore, which is not only our physical, but also our spiritual home. 
There are a number of Earths and planets which together form an 
organic unity, and many correspondences and resemblances can be 
30 adduced in connection with them, although they do not yet accord 
+ completely with the Idea. Schelling and Steffens have drawn a parallel 
between the planetary series and that of metals. This is an ingenious and 
pregnant comparison, but it is not a new idea, for the representation of 
Venus by copper, Mercury by quicksilver, the Earth by iron, Jupiter by 
35 tin, and Saturn by lead, is a commonplace, just as it is to call the Sun 
golden and the Moon silver. There is something completely natural about 
this, for metals are the most compact and independent bodies to be found 
on Earth. The planets do not belong to the same field as the metals and 
the cheInical process however. Cross-references of this kind are external 
31 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
comparisons, and decide nothing. They merely sparkle before the imagi- + 
nation without furthering the scope of knowledge. Commonsense and 
instinct enabled Linnaeus to classify plants; others have done the same with 
animals. Metals are arranged according to their specific gravity, but in 
space the planets arrange themselves, and if one searches amongst them for 5 
a law resembling that found in a mathematical series, one merely fmds 
that the same law is repeated in each term. The whole conception of a 
series is unphilosophical however, and contrary to the Notion. The for-
mations of nature occur in masses, and are not ranged in such a scalari-
form manner; the universal diremption comes first, and then follows 10 
the further subdivision within each genus. The 24 classifications of 
the plants drawn up by Linnaeus are not a natural system, and the great 
divisions were seen more clearly by the Frenchman Jussieu, when he 
divided plants into monocotyledons and dicotyledons. Aristotle did much + 
the same with regard to animals. It is because they do not constitute a + 
static series that the planets also demand such an interpretation. In his 
'Harmonia Mundi' Kepler treated the distances between the planets as 
tonal relationships, a thought which had already been developed by the 
followers of Pythagoras. 
+ 
It is a matter of history that Paracelsus said that all terrestrial bodies are + 
composed of the four elements of mercury, sulphur, salt, and virgin earth, 
and that these correspond to the four cardinal virtues. Mercury is metalline, 
and as metal is abstract matter; it is self-identical in its fluid corporeality, 
and corresponds to light. Sulphur is rigidity, the possibility of com-
bustion; fire is not alien to it, but constitutes its self-consuming actuality. Salt 25 
corresponds to water, which is the cometary principle, and its dissolution 
constitutes indifferent reality, or the subsidence of fire into independence. 
Finally, virgin earth is the simple innoxiousness of this movement, the 
subject which constitutes the extinction of these moments; this was the 
accepted expression for the abstract earthiness of pure silica. If this 30 
is interpreted as a chemical theory, it will soon be discovered of course 
that there are many bodies in which there is no mercury or sulphur. 
The essential point of such assertions is however that there are four 
moments to real corporeality, not that these materials are really present. 
Such theories should not be taken literally, for if they are, Jacob Boehme 35 
and others may well be thought of as nonsensical and lacking in experience. + 
32 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
B 
The elements 
§ 28r 
The determinations of the elemental totality, which are, 
by themselves, an immediacy of freely independent bodies, 
are contained in the body of individuality as subordinate 
moments. As such, they constitute its universal physical 
5 elements. 
Remark 
In recent times, chemical simplicity has been arbitrarily 
accepted as the definition of an element. This definition has nothing 
to do with the Notion of a ph ysical element, which is a real mat-
ter, and is not yet volatilized into chemical abstraction. 
10 Addition. So far we have looked at nature in general, and seen the cosmic 
forces as independent and objective corporealities which nevertheless 
remain fIxed in their connections. We now pass over to a consideration of 
these bodies as moments of individuality. It is precisely individuality 
which brings their existence into a fuller truth. Light, as positing the 
15 identical, is not confmed soIdy to the illumination of dark matter, but 
subsequently advances into real activity. The particularized matters are 
not merely mutually apparent, so that each remains what it is, but they 
change themselves into one another. This positing of themsdves as iden-
tical and of an ideal nature is also the activity of light. Light kindles, 
20 stimulates, and generally governs the elemental process. This process 
bdongs to the individual Earth, which is at fIrst however, still the abstract 
universal individuality, and which has to solidify to a much greater extent 
in order to become true undividuality. Here the subjective principle of 
individuality, which is an infmite self-relation, is still exterior to the 
2S universal individuality which is not yet reflected into itself, i.e. to the 
stimulating and animating principle of light. Here we have anticipated the 
occurrence of this relation, but before we consider the elemental process, 
we shall have to consider the nature of its individualized differences as they 
are by themselves. It was only by us that the body of individuality was 
30 determined as having the moments of the solar system within it; in its 
further determination as such, it is autonomous. In the planet, the bodies 
B 
33 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the solar system are no longer independent, but are predicates of a 
subject. There are now four of these elements, and their order is as fol-
lows. The air corresponds to light, for it is passive light which has sunk to 
the level of a moment. The elements of opposition are ftre and water. 
Rigidity, which is the lunar principle, is no longer indifferent being-for-
5 
self, but as an element entering into relation with something other than 
itself, i.e. individuality, it is the full process of active and restless being-for-
self, and is therefore liberated negativity, or ftre. The third element, water, 
corresponds to the cometary principle. The fourth is earth once again. 
The history of philosophy makes it clear that the main importance of 10 
Empedocles consists in his having been the ftrst defmitely to have grasped 
and distinguished these basic forms in their physical universality. 
+ 
The elements are universal natural existences, which are no longer inde-
pendent, and yet are still not individualized. In chemistry, an element is 
to be understood as a general constituent of bodies, all of which are sup-
15 
posed to consist of a defmite number of these elements. The assumption 
here is that all bodies are composite, so that thought has as its object the + 
reduction of the infmite variety of qualifted and individualized corporeali-
ties to a few incomposite and therefore general qualities. On the basis of 
this criterion, the concept of the four elements, which has been a common-
20 
place since the time ofEmpedocles, has been rejected as a puerile phantasy, 
the elements being regarded as composite! No educated person, and cer-
tainly no physicist. or chemist is now permitted, under any circumstances, 
to mention the four elements. The search for the sort of simple and 
universal existence present-day chemists have in mind is a matter only for 25 
chemistry. The chemical point of view will be treated later on. Chemistry 
assumes the individuality of bodies, and then attempts to break down this 
individuality and the point of unity in which the differences are contained, 
and to free these differentiae from the force which constrains them. The 
combination of acid and base gives rise to a salt, which is their unity, the 30 
third term. As crystallization, this third term also has shape however, so 
that it is not just the simple abstract unity of chemical elements, but indi-
vidual unity of form. If the body is merely the neutrality of its differences, 
we shall be able to point out its aspects when we break it down. These 
aspects are not universal elements and original principles however, they 35 
are merely qualitatively, i.e. specilically determined constituents. The indi-
viduality of a body is much more than the mere neutrality of these aspects 
however; it is infmite form which is the main thing, particularly in living 
existence. When we have exhibited the constitutents of a vegetable or 
animal, they are no longer its constituents, for the vegetable or animal 40 
34 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
will have been annihilated. Consequently, in its attempt to attain 
simplicity, chemistry destroys individuality. If that which is individual is 
neutral, as a salt is, chemistry will be able to exhibit its distinct aspects, for 
chemical analysis will only destroy the merely formal unity of its differ-
s ences. If an organism is broken down however, it is not only the unity 
which is destroyed, but also the organism one is attempting to under-
stand. In dealing with the physical elements, we are not in the least con-
cerned with elements in the chemical sense. The chemical standpoint is 
certainly not the only one, it is merely one particular sphere, with no right 
10 whatever to impose itself upon other forms, as if it were their essence. It is 
merely the becoming of individuality that we have before us here, and at 
first, only the universal individual, the Earth. The elements are the diverse 
matters, which constitute the moments of this becoming of the universal 
individual. In short: we must not confuse the standpoint of chemistry with 
15 that of the still wholly universal individuality. The chemical elements 
exhibit no order whatever, and are quite heterogeneous as regards one 
another. The physical elements on the contrary are universal matters, 
particularized solely in conformity with the moments of the Notion. There 
are consequently only four of them. The ancients certainly asserted that 
20 everything is composed of these four elements, but they only had the 
+ abstract thought of this truth before them. 
We now have to examine these physical elements more closely. In 
themselves they are not yet individualized, they are shapeless, and they 
therefore fall apart into chemical abstractions. Air breaks down into oxy-
2S gen and nitrogen, water into oxygen and hydrogen. Fire does not break 
down, for it is the process itself, the only material residue of which is 
luminous matter. At the other extreme of subjectivity, living matters such 
+ as plant-saps, and even animal fluids, may be analysed into these abstract 
chemical substances, and the specific residue is the smaller part. It is the 
30 inorganic physical individuality of the intermediary moment which is the 
+ most difficult to deal with however. This is because matter here is speci-
fied through its individuality, which at the same time is still immediate and 
lacking in life and sentience; as quality therefore, it is immediately identi-
cal with the universal. 
+ 
I. Air 
§ 282 
3S The element of undifferentiated simplicity is no longer 
the positive identity with self and self-manifestation of 
35 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
light as such; it is mere negative universality reduced to the 
selfless moment of an other, and consequendy it also has weight. 
As negative universality, this identity is the unnoticed but 
insidious and consuming power to which individual and orga-
+ 
nic nature are subject. It is in fact air, a fluidity which is transp a-
5 
rent and passive with regard to light, but which sublimates all 
individuality within itself, and which by its mechanical elasti-
city, pervades everything. 
Addition. (a) The inner self of the individual body is the bond of its indi-
viduality or the reciprocal relation of its moments. This selflike nature, 10 
considered by itself as free and devoid of all posited individualization, is air. 
Nevertheless, this element contains the implicit determination of being-
for-self, or puncticity. Air is the universal as posited in relation to sub-
jectivity, to infmite self-relating negativity, to being-for-self, and is 
therefore the universal as a subordinate moment in the determination of 15 
relativity. Air is indeterminate and absolutely determinable; it is not yet 
determined within itself, but is merely determinable through its other; 
this other is light, because light is the free universal. Air is thus related to 
light; to light it is absolute transparency, it is passive light; in general, it is 
the universal posited as passivity. In the same way, the good, as the uni-
20 
versal, is also passive, for it is first actualized through subjectivity, and does 
not activate itself. Light is also implicitly passive, but is not posited as such. + 
As it is merely implicit individuality; air is not dark but transparent; 
opacity first occurs in terrestrialness. 
(b) In its second determination, air is related to individuality as simple 25 
activity and effective identity, while light was merely abstract identity. 
The lighted object posits itself in another in a merely ideal manner: 
but air is this identity which is now among its equals, and relates itself 
to physical materials, which exist for one another and touch one 
another in accordance with their physical determinateness. The univer-
30 
sality of air is consequently the effort which it makes to posit the real iden-
tity of the other to which it relates itself. The other which air posits as 
being identical with itself is however individualization and particulariza .. 
tion in general. Yet air itself is mere universality, and consequently it does 
not come forth in its activity as an individual body having the power to 35 
decompose this individualization. Air is therefore purely corrosive, and 
is hostile to the individual, which it posits as a universal element. Never-
theless, the destruction is not apparent; it is motionless, and does not 
manifest itself as violence. It slinks in everywhere, without any connection 
36 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
with air: like reason, it insinuates itself into the individual and dissolves it. 
Consequently, it is the air which gives rise to odours, for odour is merely 
this invisible and ceaseless process between individual being and air. 
Everything evaporates and disperses into its parts, and the residue is 
+ odourless. Organic being also comes into conflict with the air through 
respiration, the elements in general being in a state of conflict with it. A 
wound, for example, only becomes dangerous through exposure to the 
air. Only organic life has the determination of perpetually restoring itself 
in the process of its destruction. Inorganic being, which cannot endure this 
10 conflict, must decay, and although that which is of greater consistency 
conserves itself, it is ceaselessly attacked by the air. Animal forms which 
are no longer alive, may be preserved from decay if they are removed 
from contact with the air. This destruction can be mediated however, as 
when humidity brings the process to a certain product. This is only 
15 mediation however, for it is still the air as such which destroys. As the 
universal, the air is pure, but it is not an inert purity, for that which 
evaporates into the air does not preserve itself there, but is reduced to 
simple universality. In mechanical physics it is supposed that when such 
a body has been dissolved, fme particles of it continue to float about in the 
20 air, and can no longer be smelt simply because they have been so finely 
dispersed. Physicists are in fact reluctant to allow these bodies to disinte-
grate, but we ought not to feel so much compassion for matter, for it is 
+ only in the understanding's system of identity that it has permanence. Air 
purifies itself and converts everything into air; it is not a mish-mash of 
+ matters, and neither odorousness nor chemical investigation suggests that 
it is. The understanding employs the expedient of tenuity of course, and 
has an overriding prejudice against the word 'transmute', but empirical 
physics has no right to assert the existence of that which is not given by 
perception. If it wishes to proceed purely empirically, it has to admit that 
30 this body passes away. 
(c) Air offers resistance, as does matter in general, but it does so merely 
quantitatively as mass, and not by means of punctation or individuality 
as do other bodies. Biot in his 'Traite de Physique' vol. 1. p. 188 says there-
+ fore that, 'Tous les gaz permanents, exposes a des temperatures egales, 
35 sous la m~me pression, se dilatent exactament de la m~me quantite'. 
Since air only offers resistance as mass, it is indifferent to the space 
it occupies. It is not rigid, but lacks cohesion, and has no exterior 
shape. To a certain degree it is compressible, for it is not absolutely spaceless 
i.e. it is an extrinsicality which is however not atomistic, and in which the 
40 principle of individuation might seem to have assumed existence. This is 
37 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
why different kinds of gas occupy the same space, and it is this that con-
stitutes the appearance of penetrability which is part of the universality of 
air, and by virtue of which it is not individualized within itself. If a glass 
container is filled with atmospheric air, and another is filled with steam, 
and the contents of the second container are poured into the first, the first 5 
will take as much of the steam as it would if it contained no air at all. Air 
may be so compressed by mechanical force, and so posited as such an 
intensity, that its spatial extrinsicality is completely sublated. This is one of 
the frnest of discoveries, and is of course used in lighters, in which tinder 
is placed at the bottom of a cylinder which is filled with a piston, so that 10 
when the piston is forced in, the compressed air emits a spark which lights 
the tinder. If the tube is transparent, the spark may be seen. The whole + 
nature of air becomes apparent here in the universal self-identity of its 
destructiveness. This invisible odourizing element is here reduced to a 
point, and active being-for-self, which was formerly implicit, is therefore 15 
posited as the being-for-self of being-for-self. This is the absolute origin of 
fire, the active universality which consumes and takes on form where 
indifferent subsistence ceases. It is no longer universal, but is a restless self-
relatedness. The great value of this experiment is that it demonstrates the 
connection between air and the fire within it. Air is a slumbering fire, and 20 
in order to bring fire forth from it, one merely has to modify its existence. 
2. The elements of opposition 
§ 283 
(a) Primarily, the elements of opposition are being-for-self, 
not however the indifferent being-for-self of rigidity, but a 
moment posited within individuality as the being-For-self of 
itsrestlessness,i.e.fire. In itselfair is fire, and it shows this when it 25 
is compressed. It is posited in fire as negative universality or 
self-relating negativity. Fire is materialized time, or selfhood 
in which light is identical with heat. In its simple restlessness 
and destruction, into which, as in friction for example, the 
self-consumption of a body breaks forth, and in the con-
30 
verse but identical activity, by which it penetrates into a body 
and destroys it from without, fire is the consumption of another 
which simultaneously consumes itself, and as such passes over 
into neutrality. 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
Addition. Air is already the negativity of particularity, although this is 
not apparent because it is still posited in the shape of undifferentiated 
sameness; but in its isolated individuality, differentiated from other modes 
of existence, and posited within a determinate place, it is fire. Fire exists 
5 only as this relationship to a particular, which it not only exhausts, ren-
dering it tasteless and odourless by transforming its matter into an insipid 
indeterminateness, but whose particularity as matter it destroys. Heat is 
merely the appearance of this destruction in the individual body, and is 
therefore identical with fire. Fire is existent being-for-self, which is 
10 negativity as such. It is not however the negativity of another, but nega-
tion of the negative which results in universality and sameness. Primary 
+ universality is lifeless affirmation; fire is the true affirmation. Not-being is 
posited within it as being, and vice versa, so that fire is time. Fire is simply 
conditioned as one of the moments, and like air, exists only in relation 
15 to particularized matter. It is activity which is only in opposition, it is not 
the activity of spirit. In order to consume, it must have something to 
consume, and if it has no material, it disappears. The life process is also 
the process of fire, for it also consists of the consumption of particularities, 
+ although it is ceaselessly reproducing its material. 
20 
That which is consumed by fire is sometimes concrete, and sometimes 
in opposition. To consume concrete being is to bring it into opposition, 
to animate or ignite it. The oxidation in the causticity of an acid works in 
+ this way. This is how concrete being is brought to the extreme point of 
consuming itself, and so into a state of tension with another. The other 
25 aspect of this process is that the determinate, differentiated, and indi-
vidualized particularity which is present in all concrete being, is reduced to 
the unity and indeterminateness of neutrality. This is why every chemical 
process will produce water and give rise to opposition. Fire is air posited 
with a difference, it is negated unity, and an opposition which is however 
30 also reduced to neutrality. The natural element into which fire subsides, 
and by which it is extinguished, is water. The manifest unity of the triumph 
of ideal identity to which particularized being is brought, is abstract, the 
selfhood of light. Since terrestrialness remains over as the foundation of 
+ the process, and it is here that all the elements make their appearance. 
§ 284 
+ 
(b) The other element of the opposition is neutral. It is 
opposition which has coincided with itself in a thorough-
going equilibrium; consequently, although it lacks the 
39 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
being-for-self of individuality, and is therefore devoid of 
rigidity and internal determination, it dissolves all mechan-
ical determinations posited within it. Its shape is limited 
only from without, and it is there that it seeks it through ad-
hesion. In itself its process is quiescent, for it is simply 'the 5 
possibility of dissolubility. In its ordinary state, it constitutes an 
internal indeterminateness, but in an extraordinary condition it can 
assume the form of gaseousness or rigidity. This element is water. 
Addition, (a) Water is the element of selfless opposition, it is passive being-
for-other, while fire is active being-for-other. Water has existence as 10 
being-for-other therefore. In itself, and throughout its being, it exhibits 
neither cohesion, odour, taste, nor shape; its determination consists in its 
not yet being anything in particular. It is abstract neutrality, not indi-
vidualized neutrality like salt; since very early times it has therefore been 
called, 'the mother of everything particular'. Like the air it is fluid, but + 
this is not an elastic fluidity which expands on all sides. It is more terrestrial 
than air, and tends towards a centre of gravity. It comes close to attaining 
individuality, because in itself it is concrete neutrality, although it is not 
yet posited as such. Air, on the other hand, is not even implicitly concrete. 
Water is therefore the real possibility of difference, although this does not 20 
yet exist within it. As it has no centre of gravity within itself, it is merely 
subject to the direction of gravity, and since it lacks cohesion, each point is 
pressed in the vertical, linear direction. As no part of it is able to offer 
resistance to this, water settles into horizontality. Consequently, mechani-
cal pressure from without leaves no permanent mark upon it; the point 25 
brought under pressure is unable to maintain itself as such, but communi-
cates itself to the others, which annul the pressure. Water is still trans-
parent, but because it is more terrestrial, it is no longer so transparent as 
air. As it is neutral, it is the dissolvent of salts and acids. Whatever is dis-
solved in water, loses its shape; its mechanical relationship is sublated, and 30 
only its chemical relationship remains. Water is indifferent to varieties of 
shape, and a possibility with regard to its elastic fluidity as steam, its 
liquidity in drops, and its rigidity as ice. The whole of this is merely a 
state, and a formal transition however. In that they are merely produced 
externally by a change of temperature, these states depend upon a condi- 35 
tion independent of water itsel£ This is the first consequence of the passi-
vity of water. 
(~) A second consequence is that water is not compressible, or only very 
slightly so, for there is no absolute determination in nature. It offers 
40 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
resistance only as a mass, not as an internal individualization, that is to say, 
in its ordinary state as a liquidity liable to form drops. Compressibility 
might be regarded as the consequence of passivity; it is precisely on ac-
count of its passivity however, that water is not compressible, and does 
s not alter its spatial magnitude. Since air is active intensity, though only as 
the universal power of being-for-self, it is indifferent with regard to its 
extrinsicality or determinate space, and can therefore be compressed. A 
spatial change in water would therefore imply an intensity which it 
does not possess; if its spatial magnitude is changed, this happens in con-
10 junction with a change in its condition. In its elastic fluidity, and as ice, 
water takes up more room precisely because its chemical quality has been 
+ changed. Physicists are not justified in attributing the increased space 
+ occupied by ice to the bubbles of air which occur within it. 
(y) A third consequence of this passivity is the ease with which water 
1 s separates, as well as its tendency to adhere and so make things wet. It clings 
to everything, and enters into closer relationships with the bodies it 
touches, than with itself. It separates itself from its whole, and is not only 
able to receive any shape from without, but is in essence prone to distri-
bute itself throughout such external firmness and connection, precisely 
20 because it lacks anything of this kind within itsel£ Its relation to oily and 
+ fatty substances is of course an exception to this. 
Summarizing the character of the three elements under consideration, it 
must be said that air constitutes the universal ideality of everything alien 
to it; that it is the universal in relation to its other, and that it effaces all 
2S opposing particularity. Fire is the same universality, but it appears as such, 
and therefore has the form of being-for-self, it is existent ideality there-
fore, or the nature of air which has passed into existence; by appearing, it 
reduces its other to an appearance. The third element is passive neutrality. 
These are the necessary thought-determinations of these elements. 
3. The individual element 
(Earth) 
§ 285 
30 Primarily, the element of developed difference, and its 
individual determination, is terrestrialness as such. In its 
distinctness from the other moments, this element is as yet 
indeterminate; as the totality which holds together the variety of 
these moments in individual unity however, it is the power which 
+ kindles and sustains their process. 
B* 
41 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
C. 
The)rocess of the elements 
(Meteorology) 
§ 286 
The individual identity which binds the different ele-
ments, as well as the variety which they exhibit both 
amongst themselves and with regard to their unity, is a 
dialectic which constitutes the physical life of the Earth, 
the meteorological process. It is in this process alone that the 5 
elements, as dependent moments, have their subsistence, 
their existence being generated and posited within it, after having 
been developed out of implicitness as moments of the Notion. 
Remark 
Just as the determinations of ordinary mechanics and of 
dependent bodies are applied to absolute mechanics and the 10 
free bodies of centrality, so the finite physics of sing Ie 
individual bodies is taken to be the same as the free and 
independent physics of the terrestrial process. It is taken to 
be a great scientific accomplishment that the determinations 
which appear in the processes of isolated bodies may also 15 
be recognized and demonstrated in the universal process of 
the Earth. It is only in the field of these isolated bodies that the 
determinations immanent within the free existence of the Notion 
are reduced to a relationship in which they are mutually external, 
and exist as mutually independent circumstances. The activity also 20 
appears as an externally regulated contingency, so that its pro-
ducts, too, remain the external formations of corporealities as 
persisting in their independence. This likeness, or rather analogy, 
may be demonstrated by making an abstraction from particu-
lar differences and determinations. It is this abstraction which 25 
elicits superficial generalities such as attraction, for c e s, an d law s , 
which fail to account for both particularity and determi-
nate conditions. Concrete modes of these activities appear in 
isolated corporeality, and when these are applied to a sphere in 
which diverse corporeal existences are no more than moments, 30 
42 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
the external circumstances peculiar to the former sphere tend to be 
pardy overlooked, and pardy distorted by the analogy. In general, 
these applications of categories draw upon a field of fini te rela-
tions, which they make us of in a sphere in which relations are 
5 infinite, and therefore conform to the Notion. 
Consideration of this field suffers from a basic defect, which has 
its origin in the fixed conception of a substantial and un-
alterable variety of elements. This conception is taken over 
by the understanding from the processes of isolated sub-
10 stances and used without discrimination. Where more 
complex transitions also appear in these finite processes, 
where for example, water is fixed in a crystal, or light and 
heat vanish etc. reflection has recourse to nebulous and mean-
ingless expressions concerning dissolution, ligation, latence, and 
15 suchlike (see below § 305 Rem. and Addition). This way of think-
ing may be seen in the wholesale transformation of phe-
nomenal relationships into partly imponderable 'stuffs' and 
'matters', a transformation which pitches each physical 
existence into the chaos already mentioned (§ 276 Rem.), in 
20 which pores are postulated, through which matters are 
supposed to enter and leave one another, so that not only 
the Notion, but even commonsense is put to rout. It is 
mainly simple experience which is pushed aside, for assertions 
of this kind still assume an empirical existence, even when they 
25 can no longer lay claim to empirical evidence. 
Addition. The main difficulty 'one encounters in grasping the meteoro-
logical process comes from confusing physical elements with individual 
bodies. The first are abstract determinatenesses, for they are still lacking in 
subjectivity, and what is true of them, is therefore not yet true of sub-
30 jectivized matter. The natural sciences fall into the~ greatest confusion when 
these differences are overlooked. The attempt is made to put everything 
on the same level. Everything can of course be treated from a chemical 
point of view, but everything can also be treated from a mechanical point 
of view, or as electricity. When bodies are treated at one stage, this does 
3S not exhaust the nature of other bodies however, as for example when 
vegetable or animal bodies are treated chemically. This division, by which 
each body is treated according to its particular sphere, is essential. The 
appearance of air and water in their free elemental connection with the 
Earth at large, is quite different from what it is when they are submitted 
43 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to the conditions of a completely different sphere. In a parallel situation, 
one might wish to observe the human spirit, and to this end one might 
bring customs officers or sailors under observation; one would then 
encounter the spirit in its submission to finite conditions and precepts 
which would not exhaust the nature of it. Water is expected to reveal its 5 
nature in the retort, and to display no further characteristics in its free con-
nections. The attempt is usually made to demonstrate the universal 
appearances of physical objects, such as water, air, and heat. 'What are 
they? What do they do ?' are the questions that are asked. It is not thought 
determinations, but the modes of material existence that are expected to 10 
constitute this 'what'. Existent material forms have two sides, for they are 
air, water and heat, conjoined into another object. Phenomenal ap-
pearance is the result of both these aspects. The other object with which 
air and water etc. combine, is always a particular, so that the effect also 
depends upon the nature of this particularity. This is why the fact 15 
may not be ascertained in universal appearance, but only in relation to 
particular objects. If one enquires as to the effect of heat, the answer is that 
it should cause expansion; but it also causes contraction. It is impossible to + 
mention any universal appearance to which no exceptions might be 
found; some bodies give rise to one result, and others to another. The 20 
other appearances of air and fire etc. are therefore of no significance in the 
determination of the present sphere. The appearances of finite indi-
vidual relationships are taken as a basic universal, and then used to explain 
the free meteorological process; this is a p.£T(J.f3aais ds f1»..o ylvos. + 
Lightning, for instance, is supposed to be no more than the flash of an 25 
electrical discharge produced by friction in the clouds. Yet there is no 
glass, sealing-wax, resin, rubber, or rotation etc. in the sky. Electricity is + 
the scapegoat which has to be released everywhere; it is well known 
however that electricity is completely dispersed by moisture, and that 
lightning occurs in air impregnated with humidity. Assertions of this kind 30 
transfer fmite conditions into the free life of nature, particularly when 
living matter is under consideration, and a sensible person will not be 
taken in by such explanations. 
+ 
The physical process is determined by the transmutation of the ele-
ments into one another. This transmutation is quite unknown to fmite 35 
physics, in which the understanding always holds fast to the persistence of 
abstract identity, whereby the elements, being composite, are merely dis-
persed and separated, not really transmuted. Water, air, fire, and earth, 
are in conflict within this elementary process. Water is the existent material 
of the process, and as it is neutral, mutable, and determinable, it plays the 40 
44 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
principle role. Air, as the unobstrusive destructive principle positing that 
which is of an ideal nature, is the activity which sublates determinate 
being. Fire is the appearance of being-for-self, the ideality which attains 
the moment of appearance in which destruction becomes evident. The 
5 simplicity of the relationship is therefore that water is transformed into air 
and vanishes; conversely, air becomes water, and breaks out of being-for-
self into the inert neutrality of its opposite, which for its part tenses itself 
to become being-for-self. The ancients, one might mention Heraclitus and 
+ Aristotle, regarded the process of the elements in this way. There is no diffi-
10 culty in acquainting ourselves with this process, for it is evident in experi-
ence and observation. The formation of rain is the main point. Physics itself 
admits that rain has not been satisfactorily explained. The difficulty origi-
nates solely in the physics of reflection however, which despite all obser-
vation, holds fast to its double assumption that (a) 'That which takes place 
15 within free connections, must also be possible within conditioned and 
external circumstances.' (b) 'That which takes place within conditioned 
connections, also takes place within free connections; consequently that 
which maintains its self-identity in the former case, is also a merely impli-
cit identity.' We maintain on the contrary, that once water has evaporated, 
20 the form of the vapour vanishes completely. 
If one now applies mechanical determinations and the determinations 
of fmite phenomena to this, the first thought that arises is that the water 
must be preserved, and that it is only the condition of its form which 
changes. This accounts for Gren's statement (Physics, § 945) that, 'Evapo-
25 ration can take place in the complete absence of air. Saussure has shown 
that at equal temperatures, and at its maximum elasticity, air laden with 
water vapour has a lower specific weight than dry air. This would not be 
the case if water were dissolved in air in the same way as a salt is dissolved 
in water. Water can only be held in air as a specifically lighter elastic 
+ vapour therefore.' The particles of water are also said to be filled with air 
when in a vaporous state, and therefore to be merely finely distributed, to 
be simply driven apart quantitatively. This vapour occurs at a certain 
temperature, and condenses into water again if this temperature is not 
maintained. According to this theory, rain is merely a reconglomeration 
35 of that which has been present all along, but which has been impercep-
tible because of its minuteness. Rain and mist are supposed to be explained 
by nebulous ideas of this kind. This theory has been most fully refuted 
by Lichtenberg, who took the diadem from a prize-essay on rain which had 
+ been crowned by the Berlin Academy, and made it laughable. Lichten-
40 berg followed Deluc, who made a valid observation upon this point, 
45 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
although he slipped into fantasy by connecting it with the creation of the 
world, and pointed out in fact, that on the highest Swiss mountains, the 
hygrometer indicates that in the time immediately preceding the forma-
tion of mist and clouds which are about to transform themselves into rain, 
it is possible for the air to be completely dry. Rain comes, so to speak, out + 
of dry air, a fact for which physics can offer no explanation. This happens 
in the summer as well as in the winter, and it is during the summer, pre-
cisely when evaporation is at its height, and humidity ought therefore to be 
at a maximum, that the air is driest. This theory makes it quite impossible 
to say where the water stays. One might suppose that the water vapours 10 
would rise because of their elasticity, but it is even colder at these higher 
altitudes, so that once they had risen, they would very soon be reduced to 
water again. Air, therefore is not merely dried as an oven is, by the exter-
nal removal of humidity; on the contrary, its dehydration is to be com-
pared with the disappearance of what is called crystallization-water into 15 
the crystal, for humidity reappears in the same way as it disappears. 
The second is the chemical approach, in which water is regarded as 
breaking down into its basic elements of hydrogen and oxygen. It is true 
that in such a gaseous form it can have no effect upon the hygrometer, 
because hydrogen attracts heat, which gives rise to gas. But on the other 20 
hand, the old question naturally arises as to whether or not water in 
general is composed of oxygen and hydrogen. A flash of electricity cer-
tainly turns them both into water, but water is not composed of these 
two gases. One would be more justified in saying that these gases are 
merely two different forms in which water is posited. If water were merely 25 
a compositum of this sort, all kinds of water might be divided into these 
parts. Ritter, a physicist who died in Munich, made a galvanic experiment 
by which he demonstrated irrefutably that water cannot be considered as 
being composed of parts. He took a U-shaped glass tube, filled it with 
water, and dropped some quicksilver into it in order to separate the water 30 
contained within the two branches. Having maintained communication 
between the branches by means of a metal wire passed through the mer-
cury, he brought the water into contact with a galvanic pile. The water 
contained in one branch changed into hydrogen, and that in the other 
into oxygen, so that only one of these gases occurred in each branch of the 35 
tube. If the two branches had not been separated by the mercury, it might 
have been possible to say of this phenomenon that the hydrogen had 
drifted one way and the oxygen the other. This way of arguing around a 
conclusion-though no one sees the alleged transference of the two gases-
is not possible here. If evaporation also decomposes water, one might well + 
46 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
ask what becomes of these gases. The air could be augmented by oxygen, 
but the quantities of oxygen and nitrogen within it are almost always the 
same. Humboldt has taken air from the mountains, and the so-called bad 
air of a dancing-hall, which is supposed to contain a greater quantity of 
s nitrogen, and after submitting them both to chemical analysis, he found 
+ no difference in the proportion of oxygen they contained. It is in the 
summer in particular, when evaporation is at its height, that the air 
ought to contain more oxygen, but this is not the case. Nor is hydrogen 
to be found anywhere at this time; the clouds are not formed at a very 
10 high altitude, but there is no evidence of hydrogen either above or below 
them. Streams may be dry for months, and there may no longer be a 
trace of moisture in the ground, but one will still fmd nothing of this 
element in the air. These methods of presentation run counter to obser-
vation therefore, and are merely a cultivation of ideas which have been 
15 transplanted from another field with more wishes than wisdom. When 
General Alix wanted to account for the source of the material which the 
Sun is perpetually consuming, he said that it was replenished by hydrogen. 
This is also an empty representation of course, but nevertheless it shows 
some insight, in that Alix thought he should show where this hydrogen is 
+ conserved. 
The representation of heat and crystal-water etc. as reduced to latency 
is a siInilar conception. It is said for example that heat is still present, even 
when there is no evidence of it, and it may no longer be seen or felt etc. 
That which is not subject to observation does not exist in this field how-
25 ever, for existence is just that being-for-other which causes itself to be 
noticed; and this is precisely the sphere of existence. Reduction to latency 
is therefore an utterly empty form, for that which is transformed is taken 
to be a non-existence which nevertheless exists. It is in this way that thought 
which is based upon the understanding falls into the most glaring inc on-
30 sistency in its efforts to maintain the identity of things, and is led into 
faulty conceptions which are as false in their thought as they are untrue to 
experience. Philosophy does not ignore conceptions of this kind, but is 
fully aware of their indigence. It is the same in spirit: a man with a weak 
+ character is weak; virtue is not latent within him, for he lacks it entirely. 
§ 287 
35 
The process of the Earth is kindled perpetually by its 
universal self, which is the activity of light, or its original 
solar relationship. It is then further particularized into climates 
47 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
and seasons according to the position of the Earth in relation to the 
Sun. One moment of this process is the diremption of individual 
identity, or the tension established in the rigidity and self-
less neutrality of the moments of independent opposition. 
Through this tension, the Earth tends to resolve itself on 5 
the one hand into the crystalline form of a Moon, and on 
the other into the fluid body of a Comet, while the moments 
of individuality seek to realize their connection with their 
independent origins. 
Addition. As the universal principle ofideality, light is here no longer the 10 
mere antithesis to darkness, and so no longer the ideal nature of the posit-
ing of being-for-other; it is the ideal nature of the positing of real being, 
the positing of real ideality. This real and active relationship of solar light 
to the Earth gives rise to the difference between night and day etc. The 
Earth would not have a process if it lacked this connection with the Sun. 15 
The more precise manner in which this effect appears, is to be considered 
under two aspects, for it is both a simple variation of condition, and a 
qualitative alteration in the actual process. 
The difference between heat and cold, winter and summer, belongs to 
the first of these aspects, in which changes of temperature depend upon 20 
the position of the Earth in relation to the Sun. The variation in condi-
tion is not merely quantitative however, but also appears as an internal 
determinateness. Since the Earth's axis always maintains the same angle 
with the plane of its orbit, the change from summer to winter is really no 
more than a quantitative difference, for the Sun may be seen to rise higher 25 
and higher every day, and after it has obtained its highest point, to sink 
again to its lowest. If the extremes of heat and cold depended only upon this 
quantitative difference and on solar radiation, they ought to occur at the 
solstices, during the months of June and December. The change in con-
dition is attached to specific nodes however. The equinoxes etc. form 30 
qualitative points, and the thermal increase or decrease which they ini-
tiate is not merely quantitative. Consequently, the lowest temperatures 
occur between January IS and February IS, and the highest in July 
or August. In the former case, one might conclude that extreme cold + 
takes some time to reach us from the poles, but Captain Parry informs us 35 
that even there the situation is the same. After the autumnal equinox we + 
have cold spells and storms in early November; in December the cold 
becomes less severe again, until the lowest temperatures are reached in 
the middle of January . The pattern at the vernal equinox is the same, and 
48 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
cold spells and storms follow fine weather at the end of February, for 
March and April behave in much the same way as November. A drop in 
temperature in July, immediately after the summer solstice, is also a 
common occurrence. 
5 
Qualitative change is now the essential factor, and consists of the ten-
sion within the Earth itself, and between the Earth and the atmosphere. 
Its process is the alternation between the lunar and cometary moments. 
Cloud-formation is not a mere ascent and vaporization therefore; the 
essence of it is this striving of the Earth toward one extreme. Cloud-for-
+ mation is an incidental by-product of the reduction of air to neutrality; 
but clouds can form for weeks without the occurrence of thunderstorms 
and rain. The true disappearance of water is not merely a privative deter-
mination, but is a conflict within water itself, a drive and impetus to-
wards the consuming element of fire, which as being-for-self, is the 
15 sharpness with which the Earth tears itself asunder at this extremity. Heat 
and cold are here merely accessory conditions, which do not belong 
to the determination of the process itself, and therefore have an accidental 
effect, as for example in the formation of hail. 
The specific gravity of air is increased by this tension, for the increase in 
20 air-pressure, which causes the quicksilver in the barometer to rise, merely 
shows that the intensity or density of the air has increased; for the quantity 
of air has not been augmented. One might think that it was the water 
absorbed by the air which causes the barometer to rise, but it is precisely 
when the air is filled with vapours or rain that its specific gravity is 
25 diminished. Goethe says ('The Science of Nature' vol. 2, section i p. 68), 
'The formation of water ceases when the barometer is high. The atmo-
sphere can either carry moisture, or decompose it into its elements. When 
the barometer reading is lower, what often appears to be a limitless for-
+ mation of water can take place. By exercising its power and increasing 
30 its attractive force, the Earth overcomes the atmosphere, and com-
pletely appropriates its content. Whatever happens to arise in the atmo-
sphere must fall as dew and hoar-frost, while the sky remains comparatively 
clear. What is more, the level of the barometer does not cease to respond 
to the winds. The quicksilver is high when the wind blows from the 
35 north and east, and lower when it blows from the west and south. In 
the first case humidity drifts to the mountains, in the second, from the 
+ mountains to the lowlands.' 
49 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
§ 288 
The other moment of the process consists of the being-for-self 
towards which the sides of the antithesis tend, sublating 
itself as negativity driven to its limit. It thus constitutes + 
the self-igniting destruction of the distinct subsistence sought 
by the two sides. It is through this that the Earth has estab-
lished the essential inter-connectedness of these sides, and as-
5 
sumed its real nature as fertile individuality. 
Remark 
Earthquakes, and volcanoes and their eruptions, may be regarded 
as belonging to the process offire in which rigidity passes over 
into the negativity of a being-for-self, in the process of becoming 
free. Such phenomena also occur on the Moon. Clouds, on the 10 
other hand, may be regarded as rudimentary cometary bodies. 
The thunderstorm is the completest manifestation of this 
process however, for it is as rudiments, or moments and em-
bryonic expressions of itself, that it contains the other mete-
orological phenomena of which it is composed. Deluc drew 15 
conclusions from his observations, and in Germany the 
penetration of Lichtenberg has enabled him to point out + 
inconsistencies in the theories of dissolution, but despite this, 
physics has so far been unable to reach satisfactory conclusions 20 
with regard to the formation of rain, lightning, and thun-
der. It has had as little success in explaining other meteoro-
logical phenomena. This is especially true of aerolites, in 
which the process even progresses as far as a rudimentary 
terrestrial nucleus. So far, very little has been done in physics to 25 
provide a satisfactory explanation of these commonplace pheno-
mena. 
Addition. The sublation of tension is, as rain, the Earth's reduction to 
neutrality, its relapse into unresisting indifference. The tensioned shape-
lessness of the cometary element also passes over into becoming in being-
30 
for-sclfhowever. Similarly, pushed to this extreme point of opposition, the + 
opposites simultaneously collapse into one another. However, their unity 
breaks forth as insubstantial fire, which has as its moments pure "fluidities 
50 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
+ instead of material forms. This is aerial fire, a flash which suffers immediate 
extinction and is not fed. Thus both sides sublate themselves within them-
selves; their being-for-self is simply the destruction of their determinate being. 
The existence of the self-destruction is realized in the Bash, and it is this 
5 spontaneous ignition of the air which constitutes the climax at which the 
tension collapses. 
This moment of self-destruction may also be found in the tension of the 
Earth itsel£ The Earth tenses itself within itself in the same way as organic 
bodies do; it converts itself into the animation of fire, as well as into the 
10 neutrality of water, into volcanoes, and springs. Consequently the prin-
ciples of vulcanism and neptunism which are employed in geology, are 
+ both essential, and belong to the process of terrestrial formation. The 
fire submerged within it melts the crystalline composition of the Earth, and the 
crystal becomes volcanic as spontaneous combustion takes place. Volcanoes 
15 are not susceptible to mechanical explanation therefore, but are to 
be considered as subterranean storms, accompanied by earthquakes. 
Conversely, the thunderstorm is a volcano in the clouds. There is no 
doubt that external circumstances are also necessary to an outbreak, but 
when recourse is had to releases of captive gases etc. in the explanation of 
20 earthquakes, use is being made of mere fabrications, or of conceptions 
+ borrowed from the sphere of ordinary chemistry. It is quite evident that 
an earthquake of this kind belongs to the living totality of the Earth. This 
can be seen from the fact that animals and the birds in the air sense its 
approach some days before, just as we notice a sultriness before a thunder-
+ storm. The whole organism of the Earth goes to produce these pheno-
mena, just as mountain-chains determine the formation of clouds. There 
are many circumstances therefore, which point to the fact that none of 
these phenomena is isolated, but that each event is an integral part of the 
whole. The level of the barometer is therefore determined by the great 
30 increase or decrease in the specific gravity of the air during these atmo-
spheric changes. Goethe has compared barometrical readings taken at the 
same latitudes on different meridians in Europe, America, and Asia, and 
has discovered that changes take place simultaneously right around the 
Earth (see below Addition to § 293). This is a most remarkable discovery, 
35 but because of the limitations of the data, the co-ordination of it is difficult 
to pursue. The physicists have not yet got round to making simultaneous 
observations, and both in this field and in the field of colours, they have 
failed to follow up the work done by the poet. 
The mechanical point of view also fails to explain the formation of 
40 springs. They are a special process in which of course terrain plays a 
51 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
determinate part. Hot springs are said to be the result of the continuous 
combustion which follows once carboniferous seams have caught ftre, 
but hot springs are, like other springs, living eruptions. Their reservoirs 
are said to be situated high in the mountains. Rain and snow have an 
influence upon them of course, and in an extended drought springs can 5 
dry up. Springs must be likened to clouds which tum to rain without 
lightning, while volcanoes have their atmospheric counterpart in light-
ning. The crystal of the Earth is perpetually reducing itself to this abstract 
neutrality of water, just as it transforms itself into the animation of ftre. 
+ 
The entire condition of the atmosphere, including the trade-winds is 10 
likewise, a vast living whole. Goethe considers the paths of storms to be 
more topical or local however ('The Science of Nature' vol. II p. 75). In + 
Chile, each day exhibits the meteorological process in its completeness. 
At about three in the afternoon a storm develops, and as is usual at the 
equator, the winds and the barometer readings are constant. In the tropics 15 
therefore, the trade winds blow constantly from the east. When their area 
is ftrst approached from Europe, these winds blow from the north east, 
but as one comes closer to the line, they veer further round towards the 
east. On the line, a dead calm has generally to be reckoned with. South of 
it the winds gradually assume a southerly to south-easterly direction. 20 
Beyond the tropics one loses the trade-winds and comes into the region of 
variable winds again, as in our European seaways. In India, barometer + 
readings are almost always the same; with us they are irregular. Parry + 
observed no thunderstorms in the polar regions; but almost every night 
he saw the northern lights in all directions, and often in opposite quarters at 25 
once. All these phenomena are isolated, formal moments of the complete 
process, and appear within the whole as contingencies. The aurora borealis 
is merely a dry luminescence which lacks the further materiality of the 
thunderstorm. 
+ 
Goethe is the ftrst to have spoken intelligibly about clouds, and he 30 
distinguishes three principle forms. Delicately curled or fleecy clouds 
(cirrus), are either in a state of self-dissolution, or in the initial stage of 
formation. The rounder forms which may be seen on summer evenings are 
those of cumulus; fmally, there is the broader form (stratus) which is the 
immediate source of rain. 
+ 
Shooting stars and aerolites also constitute isolated forms of the total 
process therefore. The air proceeds into water through the rudimentary 
cometary nature of the clouds, and it is in accordance with the same 
principle that this atmospheric independence can advance to other materials 
such as lunar matter, petrifted formations, and metals. The primary con-
40 
52 

PHYSICS OF UNIVERSAL INDIVIDUALITY 
tent of clouds is mere humidity, but they also contain fully individualized 
matter, and these results transcend all conditions attaching to the processes 
between particular bodies. Livy says, 'lapidibus pluit', but until thirty 
years ago, when stones fell upon the heads of people at Aigle in France, no 
5 one believed him. Since then the phenomenon has been observed more 
+ frequently. The stones have been examined, compared with older ob-
jects also thought to have been of meteoric origin, and found to have the 
same composition. There is no point in enquiring into the origin of the 
nickel and iron contained in the aerolite. According to one theory, the 
10 Moon has dropped something; someone else inentions the dust from the 
highways, the hoofs of the horses etc. Aerolites are accompanied by an 
explosion in the clouds. The transition is accomplished by a fireball, which 
expires and blows up with a bang, and is followed by a hail of stones. 
There is no variation in the composition of the stones, and the same amal-
15 gam may also be found in the earth. Pure iron does not occur as a fossil, 
but deposits of iron having a content like the stones from Aigle are very 
common, and occur in Brazil, Siberia, and also in Baffm's Bay. They also 
contain a sort of stone, and have a nickel content. The atmospheric origin 
+ of these stones may also be traced in their exterior construction. 
20 
The water and fire which transform themselves into this metal are em-
+ bryonic moons, which are the movement-into-self of individuality. 
Aerolites exhibit the Earth's tendency towards the assumption of lunar 
characteristics, just as the transient forms of meteors exhibit its cometary charac-
teristics. The dissolution of the real moments is the essence of both tendencies. 
25 The meteorological process is the manifestation of this tendency towards 
individualization, in which free qualities are led back into the concrete 
point of unity in spite of their inclination to extrinsicality. At first, these 
qualities were still determined in their immediacy as light, rigidity, 
fluidity, and terrestrialness, so that gravity had first one, and then another 
+ quality. In these basic parts, weighted matter is the subject, and the 
qualities are the predicates; hitherto this has been our subjective act of 
judgement, but this form has now become existent, the Earth itself being 
posited for the first time as individuality. Previously, individuality was an 
empty word, for it was immediate, and not yet self-producing. This 
3S return, which is the whole of this self-supporting subject, is the process 
which constitutes the fertility of the Earth. This universal individual is completely 
indigenous to its moments, and as the determinate being of these moments is 
complete, it no longer has anything either inward or outward which is alien to 
it. In themselves its abstract moments are the physical elements, which are 
+ themselves processes. 
53 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OJ! NATURE 
§ 289 
In the first instance, gravity is the Notion of matter, and 
deploys its moments as independent but elemental realities, 
so that the Earth is the abstract ground of individuality. In 
its process, the Earth posits itself as the negative unity of 
juxtaposed and abstract elements, and therefore as real 5 
individuality. 
Addition. The Earth exhibits its real nature in this selfhood, and so dis-
tinguishes itself from gravity. Whereas previously we had only the 
general determinations of weighted matter, we now have qualities which 
differentiate themselves from it. Weighted matter now relates itself to 10 
determinateness therefore; previously it did not do so. This selfhood of 
light, which was formerly opposed by weighted corporeality, is now the 
selfhood of matter itself This infmite ideality is now the nature of matter 
itself, and a relationship is therefore posited between this ideality and the 
subdued being-in-self of gravity. The physical elements are therefore no 15 
longer mere moments of a single subject; the principle of individuality is 
pervasive, and is therefore the same at all points of this physicality. Instead 
of one general individuality, we therefore have a multiplication of indi-
vidualities which also partake of the form of the whole, for each has the 
form of the whole within it. It is these into which the Earth individualizes 20 
itself, and which have to be considered in the second part of the physics. 
54 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
CHAPTER TWO 
Physics of particular individuality 
Former elemental determinatenesses are now subject to the 
individual unity, which is therefore the immanent form by which 
matter is independently determined in opposition to its gravity. 
In its search for a point of unity, gravity makes no infringement 
5 upon the extrinsicality of matter, i.e. space, or rather a specific 
quantity of space, is the measure of the particularizations of the 
differences of weighted matter, or masses. In themselves, the 
determinations of physical elements do not yet constitute a con-
crete being-for-self, and consequently they are not yet op-
10 posed to the being-for-self to which weighted matter aspires. Now 
however, through its posited individuality, matter is in its very 
extrinsicality a centralization, and is opposed to this extrinsicality 
and to its tendency towards individuality. It differentiates itself 
from the ideal centralization of gravity, and constitutes an im-
15 manent determining of material spatiality, which is distinct 
from that of gravity and the direction of gravity. This part of 
physics is the mechanics of individualization, because in it, 
matter is determined by immanence of form, and in accordance 
with the nature of space. Primarily this gives rise to a relation-
20 ship between the two, i.e. between spatial determinateness as such, 
and the matter which belongs to it. 
Addition. As the unity of gravity is not the same as the other material 
parts, the individual point of unity pervades the differences as selfhood, 
and constitutes their soul. Consequently, they are no longer external to 
25 their centre, but the centre is the light which they have within themselves. 
The selfhood of light is therefore the selfhood of matter itself. The stand-
point of individuality which we have here, is that quality has returned 
into itsel£ We have two kinds of unity, which stand at first in a relative 
ss 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
relation to one another. We have not yet reached their absolute identity, 
for selfhood itself is still conditioned. It is here that extrinsicality, as op-
posed to and determined by being-for-self, makes its ftrst appearance. 
Being-in-self therefore posits another centre and another unity, and so 
brings about a liberation from gravity. 
§ 29I 
5 
This individualizing determination of form is at first implicit 
or immediate, and therefore not yet posited as totality. Conse-
quendy the particular moments of form are mutually indifferent 
and external to one another as they attain existence, and their 
form-relation is a relationship of distinct terms. This is a cor-
10 
poreality of finite determinations, conditioned from without, 
and disintegrating into many particular bodies. Consequendy 
difference appears pardy in the comparison between various 
bodies, and pardy in the relation between them, which although 
it remains mechanical, is of a more real nature. Independent 15 
manifestation of form, which needs neither comparison nor 
solicitation, first appears in shape. 
Remark 
As is the case everywhere in the sphere of finitude and con-
ditionality, this sphere of conditioned individuality is the most 
difficult to separate from the further context of the concrete ob-
20 
ject, which has to be firmly distinguished for what it is. This 
difficulty is increased by the fini tude of the content of the object 
standing in contrast and contradiction to the speculative unity of 
the Notion, which can be the only determining principle. 
Addition. For us, this is the initial production of individuality, which is 25 
therefore itself only primary individuality, and is consequently con-
ditioned and as yet unrealized. It is merely universal selfhood, which 
arises out of the absence of individuality, and is therefore abstract indi-
viduality, which in the mere differentiation from its other, is still inwardly 
unfulfilled. Its otherness is not yet appropriated by it, and is therefore a 30 
passivity, and it is of course precisely because individuality is not yet a 
totality, that it is distinct from the gravity which it determined. In order 
that selfhood may be free, it is necessary that it should posit its own dif-
ference, but this difference is as yet only a presupposition. It has not yet 
56 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
deployed its determinations within itself, whereas total individuality has 
deployed the determinations of the heavenly bodies within itsel£ Here 
we have only the derivation of shape. As the determining principle, in-
dividuality merely posits single determinations in the first instance, and it 
5 is only with the positing of the totality and the singularity of these deter-
minations, that individuality which has developed its entire determinate-
ness is posited. The goal is reached therefore when selfhood becomes the 
whole, and we shall fmd this selfhood fulfilled in sound. As it is im-
material, sound passes away, and so presents another form of abstraction. 
10 Nevertheless, it is shape in its unity with matter. Here we have to con-
sider the most fmite and external aspects of physics; aspects of this kind 
do not have the same interest for us as does the Notion, or the totality 
which is the realization of the Notion. 
§ 292 
The determinateness imposed on gravity is (a) simple and ab-
15 stract, and is therefore present in it as the purely quantitative 
relationship of specific gravity; (b) cohesion, i.e. a specific 
mode of the relation of material parts. (c) This relation of ma-
terial parts, as an independent, existent ideality is (i) sound, or 
the merely ideal nature of sublation, and (ii) heat, or the real 
20 nature of sublated cohesion. 
A 
Specific gravity 
§ 293 
The simple abstract specification of matter is its specific 
gravity or density. In this, the weight of the mass is related 
to the volume, and it is by means of this that material self-
hood tears itself away from the universal gravity of its abstract 
25 relationship to the central body, ceases to be the uniform 
content of space, and opposes abstract extrinsicality with 
a specific being-in-self. 
Remark 
Differences in the density of matter are explained by pos-
+ tulating pores. Densification is accounted for by the invention 
57 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of empty interstices therefore, and these are spoken of as if 
they were actually present, although they have not been de-
monstrated by physics, despite its claim that it bases itself upon 
experience and observation. The fact that a bar of iron which is 
balancing on its fulcrum will lose its equilibrium when it is mag-
5 
netized, so that the weight of one of its poles will show itself 
to be greater than that of the other, is an example of the existence 
of the specification of gravity. One part is so infected here, that 
it becomes heavier without changing its volume. Consequendy 
the specific gravity of the matter increases, without any aug-
10 
mentation of its mass. Physics attempts to explain density in 
its own way, by assuming certain propositions, i.e. (1) That 
given an equal number of material parts of equal size, there 
will be no difference in weight. From this it follows (2) 
that it is the measure of the number of parts which deter-
15 
mines the weight. It also determines the space, so that (3) 
two entities of equal weight also fill the same amount of 
space. Consequently, (4) when two entities of equal weight 
have different volumes the amount of space they occupy as 
materials is the same, and their difference is assumed to be 20 
the result of their pores. The first three propositions make it 
necessary to postulate the pores in the fourth. These propositions 
are not based upon experience however, they are based merely 
upon the understanding and its proposition of identity. They are 
therefore formal apriori inventions, as the pores are. Kant has 25 
already opposed intensity to the quantitative determination 
of amount, and posited a constant number of parts with a 
higher propensity for filling space, instead of more parts in 
an equal volume. In this way he has initiated a so-called 
dynamic physics. The determination of intensive quantum + 
would be just as valid as that of extensive quantum, although 
the popular conception of density mentioned above has confined 
itself to the latter category. In this instance however, the de-
termination of intensive magnitude has the advantage of 
implying measure, and above all of indicating a being-in-
35 
self which in its Notional determination is immanent deter-
minateness of form, and which only appears, by means of 
comparison, as a general quantum. Dynamic physics gets 
no further than regarding these differences as extensive or 
intensive, and so fails to express any reality (§ 103 Rem.). 
40 
58 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
Addition. In the determinatenesses we have dealt with, gravity and space 
were still not separated, so that the difference between bodies was merely 
one of mass, which is merely a difference of one body from another. In 
this case, difference is measured by the amount of space filled, the greater 
5 number of parts corresponding to the larger space filled. A different 
measure now occurs in being-in-self, where different weights occupy 
equal spaces, or the same weights occupy unequal spaces. This immanent 
relationship constitutes the selfhood of a material thing, and is in fact 
specific gravity. This is being-in-and-for-self, which relates itself only to 
10 itself, and is completely indifferent to mass. As density is the ratio of weight 
to volume, one side may be posited as the unity just as well as the other. 
We treat the volume of a cubic inch of water as being equal to that of a 
cubic inch of gold, but their weights are quite different, for gold is nine-
teen times heavier than water. One could also say that a pound of water 
15 occupies nineteen times more space than a pound of gold. That which is 
purely quantitative gives way here to qualitativeness, for matter now has 
its own determination within itsel£ Specific weight is a fundamental de-
termination therefore, and pervades bodies completely. Each part of cor-
poreal matter contains this specific determinateness, whereas in the sphere 
20 of gravity, this centrality merely belonged to a single point. 
Specific gravity belongs to the Earth generally, to the universal indi-
vidual, as much as it does to particular bodies. In the process of the ele-
ments, the Earth was merely an abstract individual; specific gravity is the 
first indication of individuality. As process, the Earth is the ideality of 
2S particular existences. Its individuality also shows itself as simple deter-
minateness however, which appears in specific gravity, and which in the 
form of the barometic level, is an index of the meteorological process. 
Goethe has occupied himself a good deal with meteorology. The baro-
meter in particular has claimed his attention, and he takes delight in pre-
30 senting his views upon it. His work is important, particularly his compila-
tion of a comparative table of barometrical readings covering the whole 
of December 1822, and taken in Weimar, Jena, London, Boston, Vienna 
and Topel (situated at a high altitude near Toplitz), which he has presented 
+ as a series of graphs. The conclusion he wants to draw from this is not 
3S only in that in all areas the variations in the level of the barometer exhibit 
the same relationship, but that these variations follow the same course at 
the various heights above sea-level. It is well known that the barometer 
will give a lower reading on a mountain than it will at sea-level, and that 
given a constant temperature, for the checking of which one has to have 
40 a thermometer handy, one is able to ascertain the height of mountains 
59 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from these differences. Consequently, if the heights of the mountains are 
taken into consideration, barometrical variations at high altitudes are 
found to be analogous to variations at sea-level. 'When,' says Goethe 
('The Science of Nature' vol. II p. 74), 'in a line from Boston to London, 
and from there via Carlsruhe to Vienna etc. the rise and fall of the baro-
5 
meter constantly follows an analogous sequence, this cannot possibly de-
pend on an external cause, but must be attributed to an inner one! And 
on p. 63, 'When the rise and fall of the barometer are considered (the 
numerical ratios alone are evidence of the close correlation), one is struck 
by the perfectly proportionate rise and fall of the column of quicksilver 10 
from the highest point to the lowest. If for the time being, we accept the 
influence of the Sun as being productive merely of heat, we fmd that we 
are left with only the Earth. It is therefore not outside, but within the 
terrestrial globe, that we look for the causes governing barometric varia-
tion; they are neither cosmic nor atmospheric, but telluric. There are 15 
variations in the attractive power of the Earth, and consequently it draws 
to a greater or lesser extent upon the vapour which envelops it. This 
vapour has no weight, and exerts no pressure, but when it is more power-
fully attracted, it appears to press and weigh down more heavily.' Accord-
ing to Goethe, the atmosphere has no weight, but there is no difference 20 
between being attracted and having weight. * 'The attractive power 
develops in the whole mass of the Earth, evidently from the centre to the 
surface which is known to us, and then from the sea to the highest peaks, 
diminishing in the regions beyond these peaks. At the same time, it reveals 
itself in a purposefully limited pulsation.' The main point is, that Goethe 25 
rightly attributes the variations to the specific gravity of the Earth as such. + 
We have already noted (§ 287 Addition), that the formation of water 
ceases when the barometer rises, and takes place when it falls. The Earth 
shows its determining power, as well as its individuality, in its specific 
gravity. As the barometer rises, tension increases, and as there is then a 30 
*Ifwe want to reduce Goethe's conception to Hegelian thought, we shall merely have to replace 
a variable power of attraction, which apparently must in fact always be the same, by a variable elas-
ticity, or rather more precisely, by contraction and expansion, tension and emollescence (§ 287 Add.). 
If we then wish to speak of a variation in the power of attraction as gravity, it will be specific gravity, 
and not gravity as such. By absorbing all the water vapours into itself, the air becomes more elastic, 
and generally denser and heavier, and so exerts more pressure upon the quicksilver, and causes the 
barometrical column to rise. The formation of water is an emollescence of the atmosphere however, 
and by exerting less pressure, allows the barometer to fall. It is this variation in the pressure of the 
atmosphere upon the quicksilver which Goethe calls a variation in the attractive power of the 
Earth, and looked at in this way, even the empirical physicists can have no objection to Goethe's 
thesis. 
Note by Michelet. 
60 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
greater concentration of the Earth into itself, matter has some of its ab-
stract gravity drawn out of it. Specific gravity has in fact to be grasped 
as being drawn out of universal gravity by individuality. 
A pound of gold used to be thought of as having the same number of 
5 parts as a pound of water, the only difference being that they were packed 
together nineteen times as tightly, so that water had nineteen times more 
pores, empty space, or air etc. than gold. Such empty representations are 
+ the stock-in-trade of reflection, which is incapable of grasping an im-
manent determinateness, and which, as it wants to maintain the numerical 
10 equality of the parts, is obliged to fill in the rest of the space. Ordinary 
physics has also reduced specific gravity to the antithesis of repulsion and 
attraction: bodies are said to be denser where matter is subject to more 
attraction, and less dense where repulsion predominates. These factors 
have no meaning in this context however. The antithesis of attraction and 
15 repulsion as two independent forces existing for themselves, belongs only 
to the reflective understanding. If attraction and repulsion were not in 
simple equilibrium, one would be involved in contradictions in which the 
falsity of this reflection becomes apparent, as we have seen above in con-
nection with the motions of the heavenly bodies (§ 270 Remark and 
20 Addition). 
§ 294 
At first, density is merely a simple determinateness of 
weighted matter, but as matter remains the essential extrinsicality, 
the determination of the form is still a specific mode of the spatial 
interrelation of its elemental multiplicity. It is in fact cohesion. 
25 Addition. Like specific weight, cohesion is a determinateness which dis-
tinguishes itself from gravity. It is more comprehensive than specific 
weight however, for it not only constitutes another general centrality, 
but a centre related to a plurality of parts. Cohesion is not merely a com-
parison of bodies according to specific weight; their determinateness is 
30 now posited so that the relation between them is of a real nature, the bodies 
touch each other. 
61 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
B 
Cohesion 
§ 295 
In cohesion, immanent form posits the spatiality of the sepa-
rate existence of material parts in another way from that which is 
determined by the direction of gravity. This is therefore a specific 
mode of the consistence of the material parts, and is first posited 
in these parts as generally different, for it has not yet returned into s 
itself as self-enclosed totality or shape. Consequently, it appears 
only in the face of uniformly and coherently varied masses, and 
therefore displays itself in its mechanical response to other 
masses, as a distinctive mode of resistance. 
Addition. We have seen that pressure and impact constitute a purely 10 
mechanical relatedness. In the present kind of pressure and impact how-
ever, bodies no longer act merely as masses, as they do in a mechanical 
relationship, but in this independence of quantity, they display a particular 
mode of self-preservation, and of the positing of their unity. The proxi-
mate mode to this consistence of material parts was gravity, through which 1S 
bodies have a centre. The mode now being considered is immanent, and 
is manifested by the bodies through the mutual accordance of their 
particular weight. 
Cohesion is a word to which many of the current philosophies 
of nature have given a very indeterminate meaning. There has been 20 
a lot of chat about cohesion, without there being any progress beyond 
opinion and a vague groping around an indeterminate Notion. Total 
cohesion is magnetism, and occurs first in shape. Abstract cohesion 
is not yet the syllogism of magnetism, which distinguishes extremes, and 
yet posits their point of unity, so that both extremes and unity maintain 2S 
their distinctness. Consequently magnetism does not yet belong here. 
Nevertheless, although magnetism and cohesion belong to completely 
different stages, Schelling has lumped them together. In itself, magnetism + 
is a totality, even if it is still an abstract totality, for although it is linear, 
its extremes and its unity are already developing themselves in differen-
30 
tiation. This is not yet the case with cohesion, which belongs to the 
becoming of total individuality, while magnetism belongs to total indi-
viduality. Cohesion is therefore still in conflict with gravity; it is still a 
62 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
moment of the determination opposed to gravity; it is not yet the totality 
of this determination. 
§ 296 
In cohesion, the unity of form of manifold extrinsicality is in 
itself manifold. (a) Its primary determinateness is completely in-
s determinate consistence, in so far as that which in itself is co-
hesionless coheres. It is therefore adhesion to another. (b) The 
coherence of matter with itself is (i) purely quantitative. It is 
ordinary cohesion, which is the strength of consistence in resisting 
weight. It is also (ii) qualitative, in that it is able to yield to the 
10 pressure and impact of external force, and precisely by this means, 
to show independence of form. The internal mechanizing geo-
metry of this, which operates in accordance with the specific mode 
of spatial forms, produces the property of maintaining a specific 
dimension within the consistencies, i.e. punctuality, which 
15 constitutes britdeness; linearity, which constitutes rigidity in 
general, and more particularly, tenacity; and superficiality, 
which constitutes ductility or malleability. 
Addition. As passive cohesion, adhesion is not being-in-self, but affmity 
with more than self or with another, just as light is when it shines or shows 
20 itself in something else. This is why water in its neutrality, is adhesive and 
makes things wet, i.e. more specifically, because of the absolute displace-
ability of its parts. Hard bodies which definitely have inner cohesion also 
adhere in so far as their surfaces are not rough but perfectly smooth, so 
that all their parts can make complete contact with one another. These 
25 surfaces are then devoid of all difference, not only in themselves, but also 
in their relation to the other, which is equally smooth, so that they can 
both posit themselves as identical. Polished glass plates for example, adhere 
very strongly, particularly if water is poured between them and com-
pletely fills in every kind of unevenness on their surfaces. A considerable 
30 weight will then be required in order to pull them apart again. Gren says 
therefore ('Physics', § 149-150), 'The strength of adhesion depends in 
+ general upon the number of points of contact.' Adhesion has various 
modifications. Water in a glass clings to the sides for example, and stands 
higher at the sides than it does in the middle. In a capillary tube, water 
35 rises entirely of its own accord etc. 
In that which concerns the cohesion of matter within itself as specific 
63 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
being-in-self however, coherence, as mechanical cohesion, is therefore 
merely the interior consistence of a homogeneous mass as opposed to the 
positing of a body within this mass. In other words, it is a ratio of the in-
tensity of the coherence to the weight of the body. Consequently, if a 
mass is pulled or pressed by a weight, it counteracts this with a certain 5 
quantity of its being-in-self. The amount of weight determines whether 
the mass retains or relinquishes its coherence. Consequently, glass and 
wood etc. can bear a certain number of pounds without breaking, and it 
is not necessary that the pull should be exerted in the direction of gravity. 
The grading of bodies according to their coherence bears no relation to 10 
their grading according to specific gravity. Gold and lead for example, 
are specifically heavier than iron and copper, but they are not so firm. * 
Similarly, the resistance which a body offers to impact, is not the same as 
when it merely has to offer resistance in the single direction towards which 
the impact drives. The breaking of impact forms an angle with this di-
15 
rection and is therefore a surface force; it is this that gives rise to the 
infmite force of impact. 
+ 
True qualitative cohesion consists of homogeneous masses with an 
immanent and characteristic form or limitation, and becomes explicit here 
as the abstract dimensions of space. That is to say, that the characteristic 20 
shaping can be nothing other than a mode of specific spatiality which the 
body displays in itself, for coherence is the identity of the body in its 
extrinsicality. Qualitative coherence is therefore a specific mode of juxta-
position, i.e. a determination of space. Individual matter itself contains 
this unity as a consistence opposed to the general unity which it seeks in 25 
gravity. Matter now maintains the characteristic directions of various sides 
*Schelling says in his 'Journal for Speculative Physics' (vol. II, pt. 2, § 72), 'The augmentation + 
and diminution of cohesion stand in a determinate inverse relation to the augmentation and diminu-
tion of specific weight. The ideal principle' (form, light), 'conflicts with the force of gravity, and as 
this has its greatest preponderance at the centre, it is also there that it manages most easily to combine 
rigidity with the greatest specific weight, so that it brings A and B' (subjectivity and objectivity), 
'under its control, within a smaller degree of difference. Specific gravity is overcome as this degree 
increases, but it can also increase so far, that cohesion sets in. At a certain point cohesion diminishes, 
and specific gravity predominates again, until both finally disappear together. According to Steffens, 
we see specific gravity diminish in the metallic series from platinum and gold etc. to iron, while 
active cohesion increases, and reaches its maximum in iron. We then see it give way again to a con-
siderable specific gravity, in lead for example, and finally diminish, together with specific gravity, 
in the metals which are still lower down the metallic scale.' This is taken out of the blue. Specific 
gravity certainly contributes to cohesion, but if, by taking a determinate progression in the relation-
ship between cohesion and specific gravity as his point of departure, Schelling is attempting to base 
the difference of bodies in general upon difference in cohesion, one has to insist that although nature 
certainly tenders the rudiments of such a progression, it also gives the other principles free rein, 
posits these properties in a state of reciprocal indifference, and certainly declines to limit itself to such 
a simple and purely quantitative relationship. 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
within itself, and these differ from the vertical direction of gravity. This 
cohesion is an individuality, but it is at the same time still a conditioned 
individuality, because it is only through the influence of other bodies that 
it makes its appearance. It is not yet free individuality of shape which is 
s the total individuality of the forms which it posits. Total shape is there in 
its mechanical determination of sides and angles of course, but matter 
merely has primary character as the inner shape of this totality, i.e. it is 
simply a shape, and is not yet there in its developed determinateness. 
This also becomes apparent through its only displaying its character by 
10 means of another. Coherence is therefore merely a mode of resistance to 
another, the precise reason for this being that its determinations are merely 
isolated forms of individuality which do not yet stand forth as totality. 
A brittle body may not be hammered or stretched; it will not yield in a 
linear direction, but preserves itself as a point and is not continuous. It is 
IS in fact internally fashioned hardness. Glass shatters on account of its 
brittleness, as do most combustible materials. Brittleness is one of the pro-
perties which distinguishes steel from iron; steel and cast iron both have 
a granular fracture. When it is cooled quickly glass is extremely brittle, 
but not when it is cooled slowly; powder is obtained by breaking the 
zo former kind. Metals on the contrary have more continuity, but they also 
vary in degrees of brittleness. A tough body shows itself to be fibrous, and 
instead of breaking, continues to hold together. Iron may be drawn into 
wire, although there are exceptions to this. Forged iron is more malleable 
than cast iron, and can be given a linear form. Here we have the ductility 
zs of bodies, the fmal characteristic of which is that ductile bodies may be 
beaten into sheets. There are metals which may be beaten into mere sur-
faces, while others crack. Iron, copper, gold, and silver may be worked 
into sheets, they are softness which gives way, and which is neither brittle 
nor tough. There are irons suitable only for surfaces, or only for lines, 
30 while others such as cast iron maintain themselves only as point. The 
plane becomes surface, or the point in it becomes the whole; so similarly, 
no general malleability is in its turn the ductility of the whole. It is an unshaped 
interior which affirms its general consistence as the consistence of the mass. It 
should be noted that these moments are merely single dimensions, each of 
3S which constitutes a moment of the real shaped body. No one of these 
+ moments constitutes shape however. 
§ 297 
(c) When one corporeality gives way to the violence of another, 
and at the same time asserts its distinctiveness, it is giving way to 
c 
65 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
another corporeal individual. In its coherence, the body in 
itself is also a juxtaposing materiality however, and as the whole 
is submitted to violence, the parts of this materiality do violence 
to, and give way to one another. As they are equally indepen-
dent however, they sublate the negation to which they have been 5 
submitted, and re-instate themselves. This giving way, with its 
own exterior self-preservation, is therefore direcdy bound up 
with this inner activity of giving way and preserving itselfin the 
face of itself, i.e. with elasticity. 
Addition. Elasticity is cohesion displaying itself in motion. It is the whole 10 
of cohesion. We already encountered it in the first section, where we dealt 
with matter in general, in which numbers of bodies press and touch one 
another in mutual resistance, negating their spatiality, and at the same 
time re-instating it. That was abstract elasticity, and was directed out-
wards. This elasticity is internal to the self-individualizing body. 
15 
§ 298 
As matter, material parts were merely in search of ideality, 
and it is here that this ideality reaches existence as the point of 
unity which is for itself, and in which, in their actual attraction, 
these parts would merely be negated. In so far as the parts are 
merely heavy, this point of unity is in the first instance external 20 
to them, and is therefore merely implicit. It therefore implies 
that these parts suffer a negation, within which this ideality is now 
posited. It is still a conditioned ideality however, for it is only one 
side of the relationship, the other side of which is the subsistence 
of the juxtaposed parts, the negation of which consequendy 25 
passes over into their re-establishment. Consequendy, elasticity 
is merely a change of specific gravity which returns to its former 
state. 
Remark 
Wherever the question of material parts arises, one should not 
think of them as atoms or molecules, i.e. as separated and self-
30 
subsistent, but as merely quantitatively or contingendy distin-
guished, so that their continuity is essentially inseparable from 
their distinctness. Elasticity is precisely the existence of the di-
alectic of these moments. That which is material has its indif-
66 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
ferent and specific subsistence as its place. The ideality of 
this subsistence is therefore continuity posited as unity of a real 
nature, i.e. a unity in which two material parts which formerly 
subsisted external to one another, and which are therefore to be 
5 thought of as occupying different places, now occupy one and 
the same place. This is the contradiction, and it has material 
existence here. It is the same contradiction which lies at the basis 
of Zeno's dialectic of motion, the only difference being that in 
motion the contradiction concerns abstract places, while here 
10 material places and parts are involved. In motion, space posits 
itself temporally, and time spatially (§ 260). Zeno's antinomy is 
insoluble, and motion falls into it if places are isola ted as spatial 
points, and moments of time as points of time. The solution of 
the antinomy, i.e. motion, can only be grasped through the in-
15 herent continuity of space and time, and the simultaneity of the 
autonomous body's both being and not-being in the same place, 
so that it is simultaneously in another;just as the same point of 
time at once is and is not, i.e. is simultaneously another point 
+ of time. In elasticity therefore, the material part, atom or mole-
20 cule, is posited as in the affirmative and subsistent occupation 
of its space, and at the same time, as being equally non-subsistent 
as a unified quantum of size which is both extensive and merely 
intensive. 
+ 
Contrary to the unity of material parts which is posited in 
25 elasticity, another so called explanation of it is provided by pos-
tulating the porosity which has so often been mentioned. Al-
though it will certainly be admitted in abstracto that matter is 
perishable and not absolute, difficulties occur in the application 
of this principle if matter is in fact grasped as negative, and 
30 negation is posited as im plid t within it. Pores certainly constitute 
negation, for whatever one says, one has to come back to this deter-
mination. They are looked upon as a negative which merely sup-
plements matter however, as the negative which is where 
matter is not, not the negative of matter itself. Consequendy, 
35 matter is in fact regarded as merely affirmative, and as abso-
lutely independent and eternal. This error has its origin in 
the general error of the understanding, which regards meta-
physics as a mere figment of thought, which fringes actuality, 
and is therefore external to it. Consequendy a faith in both the 
40 non-absoluteness and in the absoluteness of matter, is professed 
67 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
at one and the same time. If it is accepted, the first tenet does 
not apply within the bounds of science; it is essentially the second 
which is prevalent in science. 
Addition. When one body posits itself in another, and they therefore 
have a certain common density, it follows firstly, that the specific gravity 5 
of the one in which the other posits itself is altered. The second moment is 
the resistance which is produced, the negating, the abstract self-preserva-
tion. The third moment is the reaction of the body, by which it repulses 
the first from itself These are the three moments known as softness, hard-
ness, and elasticity. The body no longer gives way in a merely mechanical 10 
manner, but does so inwardly, through altering its density. Softness of 
this kind is compressibility. Consequently matter is not immutable and im-
penetrable. When the weight of the body remains the same while its 
volume diminishes, its density increases. Density can also be decreased 
however, by heat for example. An increase in density also takes place in 15 
the tempering of steel, although as contractility this is the opposite of 
elasticity. Elasticity is retreat into self for the subsequently immediate 
re-establishment of self When the coherent body is struck, pushed, or 
pressed, the spatiality of its materiality is negated together with its place. 
Consequently, there is a negation of material extrinsicality, as well as the 20 
negation of this negation, in which materiality is reinstated. This is no 
longer the general elasticity already considered, in which matter merely 
reinstates itself as mass, it is far more of an inner reaction. It is this imma-
nent form of matter which here affirms itself in accordance with its 
qualitative nature. Each particle of coherent matter consequently behaves 25 
as centre. This single form is common to the whole, it penetrates matter 
like a fluid, and is unattached to extrinsicality. If an impression is made 
upon matter, so that the body receives a negation from without which 
effects its interior determinateness, an interior reaction is posited within 
the body by means of its specific form, and the impression made is there-
30 
fore cancelled. In form, every particle has its particular place, and is the 
preserver of this particular relationship. In general elasticity, the body 
affirms itself merely as mass, but it is here that motion persists within itself, 
not as reaction outwards, but as reaction inwards, until the form has re-
instated itself This is the oscillation and vibration of the body, which is 35 
now internally continuous, despite the abstract reinstatement of general 
elasticity having been accomplished. It is true that the motion began ex-
ternally, but collision has touched the inner form of the body. This 
fluidity of the body within itself is total cohesion. 
68 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
§ 299 
The ideality which is posited here is an alteration which consists 
of a double negation. The negating of the extrinsic subsistence 
of the material parts is itself negated as the reinstating of their 
juxtaposition and their cohesion. As the exchange of mutually 
5 cancelling determinations, this single ideality is the inner vibra-
tion of the body within itself, i.e. sound. 
Addition. The determinate being of this oscillation within itself seems 
to differ from the determination we had in elasticity. The being-for-other 
of this determinate being is sound, which is therefore the third deter-
+ mination. 
+ 
c 
Sound 
§ 300 
Through density, and through the principle of its cohesion, a 
body possesses a specific simplicity of determinateness; which 
in its initially interior form, by emerging from its submergence 
in material extrinsicality, becomes free in the negation of the 
15 self-contained subsistence of this state of juxtaposition. This is the 
transition of material spatiality into material temporality. In 
vibration, this form is therefore the ideality of materiality; it 
is consequendy simple form existing for itself, and makes its 
+ appearance as this mechanical animation. Vibration of this kind 
20 is the momentary negation of parts; and the equally momentary 
negation of this negation; these two connected moments function 
inseparably, so that in this form the body oscillates between its 
subsistence, and the negation of its specific gravity and cohesion. 
Remark 
The clarity or lack of clarity in tone itself, and that which dis-
25 tinguishes it from the mere ring obtained by striking a solid body, 
and noise etc. depends upon the homogeneity of the vibrating 
69 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
body. It also depends upon the specific cohesion of the body, and 
upon the determination of its further spatial dimensions, i.e. 
whether it is a material line or surface, and then again, whether it 
is a bounded line or surface, or a solid body. Water has no 
cohesion and no tone, its movement is merely the external 5 
friction of freely displaceable parts, and gives rise only to a 
murmuring sound. Glass rings on account of the continuity 
existing in its inner inflexibility, while metal, on account of its 
flexible continuity, rings resonantly etc. 
The transmissibility of sound, what might be called its 10 
soundless propagation, as distinct from the repetition and oscil-
lation of vibration, reveals an ideality which freely penetrates all 
kinds of inflexibility etc., as well as various specific bodies. Solid 
bodies are more open to it than is the air; it penetrates for many 
miles into the Earth, and according to calculation, travels ten 15 
times faster through metals than it does through air; it takes 
account only of the abstract materiality of these bodies, and 
while it brings their parts into negation and causes them to vibrate, 
it remains indifferent to the specific determinations of their den-
sity, cohesion, and further formations. In itself this idealization is 20 
merely the transmission of sound. 
The qualitative nature of sound in general, and of tone or 
self-articulating sound, depends upon the density, cohesion, and 
further specified modes of cohesion of the sounding body, for the 
ideality or subjectivity which constitutes vibration is a negation 25 
of these specific qualities, which it has as its content and deter-
minateness. This is why vibration is specified, together with sound 
itself, and why instruments have their characteristic tone and 
timbre. 
+ 
Addition. As it is associated with weighted matter, sound belongs to the 30 
mechanical sphere. Form, as wresting itself from weightedness, and yet 
as still attached to it, is therefore conditioned. It is the free physical ex-
pression of ideal nature, although it is still linked to the mechanical sphere. 
It is freedom from weighted matter, but is at the same time of this matter. 
Bodies resound only when they are struck, they do not sound of their own 35 
accord as organic bodies do. The external impact of motion is self-
propagating because inner cohesion displays its self-preservation in oppo-
sition to it, as it does to the simple relations of mass according to which 
cohesion ought to be treated. Weare in no way unfamiliar with these 
70 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
appearances of corporeality, which are at the same time very varied how-
ever, and it is therefore difficult to present them in the necessity of their 
Notional connection. As we find them trivial, we disregard them, but 
they also have to display themselves as necessary moments, having their 
5 position within the Notion. When a body sounds, we feel that we are 
entering a higher sphere, for tone affects our innermost feelings. As tone 
is itself inwardness and subjectivity, it speaks to the inner soul. Sound by 
itself is the self of individuality; it is not of an abstractly ideal nature like 
light however, but is as it were mechanical light, manifesting itself only 
10 as the time taken by motion in cohesion. Individuality includes matter 
and form. Sound is this total form, which makes itself known in time; 
it is the whole of individuality, which is nothing more than that this soul 
is now posited in its unity with materiality. It dominates this unity as a 
quiescent subsistence. That which displays itself here is not based on 
15 matter, for it does not have its objectivity in a material being. It is only 
the understanding which, for purposes of explanation, assumes an ob-
jective being, and speaks of material sound in the same way as it speab 
+ of material heat. The natural man marvels at sound, because a being-in-
+ self reveals itself within it, and he presumes that it is something soul-like 
20 rather than material. We have here a phenomenon similar to that met 
with in motion, where mere velocity or, in the case of the lever, distance, 
shows itself to be a mode which can replace quantitative materiality. A 
phenomenon such as this, in which a being-in-self assumes physical exis-
tence, holds no surprises for us, for it is precisely thought-determinations 
25 showing themselves to be active principles, which constitute the basis of 
the philosophy of nature. 
The preciser nature of sound need only be sketched, for this deter-
mination of thought has to be treated empirically. There are plenty of 
words, such as sound, tone, noise, and creak, hiss, rustle etc., for language 
30 has a completely superfluous richness for its determination of material 
phenomena. Once a sound is given, there is no difficulty in making a 
+ sign which directly corresponds to it. Pure fluidity is not resonant. The 
impression certainly communicates itself to the whole, but the trans-
mission originates in complete formlessness and lack of inner determina-
35 tion, and is in itself form. Compact continuity, and the homogeneity of 
matter within itself, are necessary for the production of a clear tone, so 
that metals (particularly precious metals) and glass give a clear ring. 
These properties are developed by smelting. On the other hand, if there 
is a crack in a bell for example, we hear not only its vibration, but also 
40 the other properties of material resistance, rigidity, and lack of uniformity, 
71 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
SO that the sound is not clear, but a mere noise. Stone slabs, despite their 
being so brittle, also have a tone. Air and water do not ring of their own 
accord however, although they are also able to transmit sound. 
It is difficult to grasp the origin of sound. Specific being-in-self, di- + 
vorced from gravity, emerges as sound. It is the plaint of ideal nature in 5 
the midst of violence, but as it preserves itself against this other, it is also 
its triumph over it. Sound is produced in two ways: (a) by friction, (b) by 
vibration proper, or the elasticity ofbeing-in-sel£ Vibration is also present 
in friction, for while it lasts, a multiplicity is posited in unity, the different 
juxtaposed material parts being brought momentarily into contact. The 10 
position, and therefore the materiality of each part is sublated, although 
this coincides with each reinstating itsel£ It is precisely this elasticity which 
gives evidence of itself in sound. When the body is rubbed however, the 
grating itself is heard, and this tone corresponds more to what we call 
sound. If the vibration of a body is posited by a body which is external 15 
to it, it is the vibration of both bodies which reaches us; each disturbs the 
other, and obliterates all purity of tone. In this case, the tremor is forced by 
each on the other, rather than being independent. This is what we call a 
noise, and it may be heard in the clattering or mechanical grinding of bad 
instruments, in the scrape of the bow upon the violin for example, or in + 
the quivering of the muscles in a bad voice. The other tone is of a higher 
nature, and is the vibration of the body within itself, its inner negation 
and self-restoration. Sound itself is resonance, the unhindered inner vibra-
tion of the body freely determined by the nature of its coherence. There 
is also a third form, in which the external stimulation and the sound 25 
emitted by the body are alike, i.e. human song. It is in the voice that this 
subjectivity or independence of form first occurs, and this purely tremu-
lous motion consequently possesses something which is in conformity 
with spirit. The violin too does not reverberate; it sounds only when its 
strings are touched. 
30 
If we have sound in general in mind, and ask why it relates itself to 
hearing, we have to reply that this is because hearing is a sense which be-
longs to the mechanical sphere; it is in fact the sense which relates itself 
to the flight from materiality, and the transition to that which is im-
material, spiritual, and of an ideal nature. On the other hand, everything 3' 
associated with specific gravity and cohesion, relates itself to the sense of 
feeling. The sense of touch is therefore the other sense of the mechanical 
sphere, that is to say, in so far as this sphere contains the determinations 
of materiality itsel£ 
+ 
The particular note produced by a substance depends upon the nature 40 
72 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
of its coherence; and these specific differences also have a connection with 
the pitch of this note. Strictly speaking, particular determinateness of tone 
can only be obtained by comparing the various tones of the body itself 
however. With regard to the first point, it should be remembered that 
5 silver and bronze have their specific and determinate ring, as do metals 
in general. Rods consisting of various substances, but of equal thickness 
+ and length, give different notes. Chladni has noticed that whalebone 
gives A, tin B, silver D an octave higher, Cologne pipes E, copper G, 
+ glass C in an even higher octave, deal C sharp etc. I remember Ritter 
10 having done a lot of research into the sound given offby the various parts 
of the head which have a hollow ring. By tapping upon the various bones 
of the same, he discovered a variety of notes, which he arranged into a 
+ defmite scale. There are also whole heads which sound hollow, but this 
kind of resonance was not enumerated on the scale. It might be worth 
15 asking whether or not one can really hear a difference in the case of 
those heads which are said to be hollow. 
According to the researches of Biot, not only the air, but every other 
body transmits sound. If, for example, one taps an earthenware or metal 
pipe belonging to a water-system, the sound may be heard several miles 
+ away at the other end of the pipe. Two sounds will then be distinguish-
able, for that conducted by the material of the pipe will be heard much 
sooner than that conducted by the column of air. Neither mountains, 
water, nor forests, will check the sound. The transmission of sound by 
the earth is remarkable; by putting one's ear to the ground for example, 
+ it is possible to hear a cannonade taking place ten to twenty miles away. 
What is more, sound travels through the ground ten times faster than it 
does through the air. This transmission is also remarkable in a more general 
way, for it shows the complete untenability of the physicists' postulate of a 
+ phonic substance which moves rapidly through the pores of bodies. 
§ 30I 
30 
In vibration, oscillation as an external change of place has 
to be distinguished; this, as a change of spatial relationship to 
other bodies, constitutes motion in the ordinary, proper sense. 
Although this oscillation is different however, it is at the same time 
identical with the inner motion determined previously, which is 
3S subjectivity becoming free, the manifestation of sound as such. 
As the result of its abstract universality, the existence of this 
ideality displays merely quantitative differences. Consequently 
c* 
73 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
in the realm of sounds and notes, the further differences of har-
mony and disharmony rest upon numerical relationships, 
and their more or less complex and remote agreement. 
Remark 
The vibration of strings, columns of air, bars etc., is an alter-
nating transition from the straight line into the arc, and also into 5 
converse arcs. This is merely an apparent external change of place 
in relation to other bodies, and is directly bound up with the 
inner, alternating change of specific gravity and cohesion. The side 
of the material line lying against the centre of the arc of oscillation 
is shortened, while the outer side is lengthened. Consequently, 10 
the specific gravity and cohesion of the latter side are diminished, 
while those of the former side are simultaneously increased. 
+ 
As regards the power of the quantitative determination in the 
ideal nature of this realm, we should remember the phenomena 
produced when a vibrating line or plane is submitted to mechan-
15 
ical interruptions. The quantitative determination introduced in 
this way imparts its elf to the oscillation of the whole line or plane 
beyond the mechanical point of interruption, and gives rise to 
nodes of vibration within it. In Chladni's experiments these 
phenomena are made visible. It is here that one has to consider the + 
harmonizing notes which neighbouring strings will give rise to in 
one another if they are brought into specific quantitative relation-
ships to the sounding string. Tartini was the first to draw atten-
tion to some of the most important phenomena in this field. He 
noticed that when notes which in respect of their oscillations stand 25 
in certain specific numerical relationships to one another, are 
sounded together, they give rise to further notes, which are 
different, and which are produced only by these relationships. 
+ 
Addition. Vibrations are the tremulations of matter within itself. Matter 
is not annihilated within this negativity, but maintains itself as sonority. 30 
A sonorous body must be a material physical surface or line; it must also 
be limited, so that the vibrations travel along the whole line, are checked, 
and return. A stone merely sounds when it is struck; there is no sonorous 
tremulation, because although the shock certainly propagates itself, it 
does not return to itsel£ 
35 
Notes are therefore the modifications of sound elicited by the recursive 
74 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
regularity of vibrations; this constitutes the more important variety of 
sounds which shows itself in music. Unison occurs when two strings make 
the same number of vibrations in the same time. On the contrary, the 
different notes of a string or wind instrument, depend upon the difference 
5 in thickness, length, and tension, of the strings or columns of air from 
which the sound is elicited. Consequently, if two of three determinations 
of thickness, length, and tension are equal, the note will depend upon the 
difference of the third factor and since vibration in tension is easiest to 
observe in strings, this is generally the basis used for calculating various 
10 vibrations. Variation in tension is effected by carrying the string over a 
bridge, and attaching a weight to it. If only the length is varied, then the 
+ shorter a string is, the more vibrations it will perform in a given time. 
In the case of wind instruments, the shorter the pipe in which a column 
of air is made to vibrate, the higher will be the note; in order to shorten 
15 the column of air one merely has to slide in a piston. By dividing the 
string of a monochord, one fmds that the number of vibrations occurring 
in a given time is inversely proportional to the parts of the determinate 
length of the string; a third of the string vibrates three times more rapidly 
than the whole string. The minute vibrations of high notes may no longer 
20 be counted because of their great rapidity, but by taking into account 
the length of the string, their numbers may be determined by analogy 
+ with great exactness. 
As notes are a mode of our sensation, we find them either agreeable or 
disagreeable; this objective mode of euphony is a determinateness which 
25 enters into this sphere of mechanism. What is most interesting here is the 
coincidence between that which the ear takes to be a harmony, and certain 
numerical ratios. Pythagoras was the first to discover this correlation, and 
it induced him to express the relationships of thought itself in the form of 
+ numbers. That which is harmonious rests upon the facility of consonances, 
+ and like architectural symmetry, is a unity perceived amid difference. 
Do the harmony and melody which can call forth our feelings and passions 
by their enchantment, depend upon abstract numbers? It seems reinark-
able, and even astonishing, but this is the only determination present, and 
within it we may see a glorification of numerical ratios. The simpler 
35 numerical ratios, which constitute the ideal nature of the basis of that 
which is harmonious in notes, are more readily grasped; and these are 
primarily those based on the number two. Half the string p;oduces the 
octave above the note of the whole string, i.e. the key-note. If the lengths 
of two strings are in the ratio of 2 : 3, so that the shorter is two-thirds the 
40 length of the other, and therefore vibrates three times in the time taken 
75 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
by the other to vibrate twice, the shorter string will give the fifth of the 
longer. If! of a string vibrates, it yields the fourth, which mak.es four 
vibrations while the key-note mak.es three; t gives the major third, 
with five vibrations against four; i the minor third, with six vibrations 
against five etc. If one makes t of the whole string vibrate, one has the 5 
fifth an octave higher. If one makes i vibrate, one has the octave above 
that. A fifth of the string yields a third of the third octave above, or the 
double octave of the major third; i yields the third of the next octave: 
i the sixth. A sixth gives the higher fifth of the third octave etc. The key-
note vibrates once while its octave vibrates twice therefore; the third 10 
vibrates Ii- times, and the fifth It, and is the dominant. The ratio of the 
fourth is already more difficult: the string vibrates It times, which is more 
complicated than It and Ii, and is also the reason for the fourth being a 
more vivid note. In an octave, the numerical ratio of the vibrations is as + 
follows therefore: if C vibrates once, D vibrates, }, Et Ft, Gl, Ai, Wa5, 15 
C 
hi h 
0 
0 
I 
24 
27 
30 
32 
36 
40 
H 
48 If 
hOnk 
2; w c 
IS equlva ent to 24, 24, 24,24, 24, 24, 24, 24. 
one tIS 
of a string as being divided into five parts, and causes the only fifth which 
has been divided off to vibrate, nodes are formed in the rest of the string, 
as it divides itself into the other parts. If small pieces of paper are placed 
on the points of division, they remain there, while they fall off if they are 20 
placed elsewhere. At these points the string does not vibrate therefore; 
these are in fact the vibration nodes, and they entrain further consequences. + 
A column of air also forms nodes of this kind, in a flute for example, 
when the vibrations are interrupted by holes. Now the ear picks out 
divisions based upon the simple numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, and fmds that they 25 
give rise to agreeable sensations. These numbers can express specific rela-
tionships analogous to the determinations of the Notion, despite the fact 
that the other numbers, are intrinsically multiple compositions and there-
fore become indeterminate. Two is the production of one out of itself; 
three is the unity of one and two, and this is why Pythagoras used them 30 
as symbols for Notional determinations. If the string is divided into two, + 
it is too much of a monotone to produce difference or harmony. If it is 
divided into 2 and 3 however, it will produce harmony as the fifth: it is 
the same with the third, which is divided into 4 and 5, and the fourth, 
which is divided into 3 and 4. 
35 
The harmonic triad consists of the key-note, the third, and the fifth. This 
gives a defmite system of notes, but is still not the scale. The ancients 
tended to keep to this form, but now something further is required. If, for + 
example, we start with an empirical note C, then G is the fifth. As the 
choice of C as the key-note was arbitrary however, every note may be 40 
76 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
taken as the basis of a system. In each note's system, notes therefore occur-
which also occur in the systems of others, although the third of one system 
may be the fourth or fifth of another. This gives rise to the relationship 
in which one and the same note, which fulfills different functions in 
5 different scales, and which therefore runs through them all, is isolated 
and considered separately, and given a general position and a neutral 
designation such as G etc. This need to consider a note abstractly also 
appears as another formal need, consisting of the ear's propensity to pro-
gress by a series of notes which ascends and descends by equal intervals. 
10 When this is combined with the harmonic triad, it gives rise to the scale. 
How, as a matter of history, it became customary, as it is now, to regard 
the succession of notes C, D, E, F, as fundamental, is unknown to me. 
+ Perhaps the organ has contributed. The relationship of third and fifth is 
of no significance here, where the arithmetical determination of unifor-
15 mity, which is by itself limitless, is the only determining factor. The har-
monic limit to this ascent is given by the ratio I : 2, or the key-note and its 
octave. It is from between these limits therefore, that one must also pick 
out the absolutely determinate notes. The parts of the string from which 
these notes are to be produced must be greater than half of it, for if they 
20 were less than this, the notes would be higher than the octave. Now in 
order to bring forth the said uniformity, one has to interpolate notes into 
harmonic triad which are related to one another much as the fourth is to 
the fifth. In this way the whole tones arise, forming a complete interval 
like that in the progression from the fourth to the fifth. The interval be-
2S tween the key-note and the third is filled by the second, which is produced 
when i of the string vibrate. This interval between key-note and second 
(from C to D), is the same as that between the fourth and the fifth (from 
F to G), and between the sixth and the seventh (from A to B). The second 
(D) is therefore also related to the third (E), and this is also approximately 
30 a whole tone, although it only expresses roughly the same ratio as that 
existing between C and D, the two ratios not being in exact agreement. 
The fifth bears the same ratio to the sixth (G to A), as D to E. The ratio 
of the seventh (from h of the string) to the octave above (B to C), is as 
the ratio of the third to the fourth (E to F) however. In this advance from 
3S E to F, and from B to C, there is an inequality which is even greater than 
that in the other intervals into which the so-called semitones are inserted for 
the sake of equality, i.e. the black notes of the pianoforte. It is precisely in 
the intervals between E and F, and B and C that this progression is inter-
rupted. One has a uniform succession therefore, although it is never 
40 completely uniform. The other intervals are also called whole tones, but 
77 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
as we have seen, they are not perfectly equal, and are further distinguished 
as greater and lesser, or major and minor tones. The intervals from C to 
D, F to G, and A to B, are major, while the intervals from D to E, and 
G to A, although they are certainly equal to each other, differ from the former 
in not being quite a whole tone. In musical theory, this small difference s 
between the intervals is called the comma. The basic determinations of + 
fifth, fourth, third etc. must remain the foundation however, and the formal 
uniformity of progression has to give way to them. An ear which is attuned 
to purely mechanical arithmetical progression, in which there are no 
ratios (1,2,3,4), and which can merely pass from 1 to 2, must give way 10 
as it were, to an ear which is attuned to the absolute ratios in the division 
of tonality. The difference is, after all, very slight, and the ear submits to 
the predominance of the inner harmonic ratios. 
It is in this way that the first opposition to occur here is formed by the 
harmonic foundation and the uniform progression of its moments. As 15 
the two principles are not in exact agreement, it is to be feared that their 
difference will become more apparent through a further development 
of the tonal system, i.e. when a note in one particular scale is made the 
key-note of another scale (and in itself it makes no difference which note 
this is, for they can all be used in this way), for which the same notes have 20 
to be used, probably through several octaves. When G is the key-note for 
example, D is the fifth; but in the key ofB, D is the third; and in the key 
A, it is the fourth etc. As it is the same note which is successively the third, 
the fourth and the fifth, it may not be played with complete correctness on 
instruments in which the notes are fixed. The difference here becomes 25 
increasingly apparent in further developments. Notes which are right in 
one key do not fit into another, which would not be the case if the inter-
vals were equal. The keys thereby acquire an inner diversity, which de-
pends upon the nature of the ratios of the notes which constitute their 
scale. It is known for example, that when the fifth in the scale of C (G) is 30 
made the key-note, and its fifth (D) is taken as the key-note to produce a 
further fifth etc., the eleventh and twelfth fifths are no longer true on a 
piano, and fail to fit into the system in which these notes were tuned in 
accordance with C. Relative to C these are therefore false fifths. It is to this 
that changes in further tones and semitones etc. are related, and it is 35 
because of it that there are even earlier emergences of impurities, dif-
ferences, and discordances. This confusion may be cleared up to a certain 
extent by spreading the inequalities in a uniform and equitable manner. 
Completely harmonic harps have been constructed for example, in 
which each system, C, D, etc., has its own semitones. Recourse has been + 
78 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
had (a) to a slight diminution of each fifth from the very beginning, in 
order to spread the difference uniformly. As sensitive ears could detect the 
defect here however, one had to (b) limit the range of the instrument to six 
octaves, although even within these limits there are aberrations enough in 
S instruments with fixed and neutral notes. In general (c) the keys in which 
dissonances of this kind occur are either used sparingly by performers, or 
else the particular combinations containing notes which are strikingly false 
+ are avoided. 
It only remains to make mention of the way in which harmony appears 
10 objectively, i.e. its essential efficacy. There are appearances here which seem 
at first to be paradoxical, for no basis can be found for them in the mere 
audibility of notes, and they are only to be grasped through numerical 
ratios. Firstly, if one causes a string to vibrate, it will, by vibrating, divide 
itself of its own accord into these ratios. This is an immanent and charac-
15 teristic ratio of nature, an activity of form within itsel£ One can hear not 
only the key-note (1), but also the fifth of the higher octave (3), and the 
third of the octave above that (5), and a practised ear is also able to pick 
out the octave of the key-note (2), and its double octave (4). The notes 
which are represented by the whole numbers 1,2,3,4,5, may therefore be 
20 heard. As there are of course two fixed points on strings of this kind, a 
node of vibration forms in the middle, and then relates itself to the ends 
once more, giving rise to the phenomenon of different but harmonious 
+ sounds. 
Secondly, notes can be elicited from a string not by touching it, but by 
2S touching other strings. It is said to be understandable that a string, when 
touched should produce its own note, but it is more difficult to see why, 
when various notes are played, it often happens that only one note is 
audible; or why, when two notes are played, a third is audible. This also 
depends upon the nature of the relation between these numerical deter-
30 minations. (a) One phenomenon is that when one selects notes which have 
a certain relationship to each other, and touches all their strings at once, 
only the key-note is heard. For example, the organ has a register in which 
five pipes may be brought into play by the touching of one key. Each pipe 
certainly has its particular note, and yet the result of these five notes is 
3S merely a single note. This takes place when these five pipes or notes are 
as follows: (1) the key-note C; (2) the octave of C; (3) the fifth (G) of the 
next octave; (4) the third C; (5) the third (E) of the third octave. Only the 
key-note is then audible, because the vibrations coincide. The various 
notes have of course to be selected at a certain pitch, which is neither too 
40 high nor too low. The reason for this coincidence is as follows. When the 
79 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
lower C vibrates once, its octave vibrates twice. The G of this octave 
vibrates three times while the key-note vibrates once, for the proximate 
fifth vibrates r! times, and this G therefore vibrates three times to the 
once of the key-note. The third C vibrates four times, and its third vi-
brates five times, to the once of the key-note, for the third vibrates! as s 
quickly as the key-note, while the third of the third octave vibrates four 
times as quickly again, and therefore makes five vibrations. These vibra-
tions are therefore so composed that those of the other notes coincide with 
that of the key-note. The strings of these notes are in the numerical ratio 
of r,2,3,4,5, and all their vibrations fmish simultaneously, for after five 10 
vibrations of the highest note, the lower notes have completed precisely 
four, three, two, or one vibration respectively. It is because of this 
coincidence that only the single C is audible. 
(b) The other case, noticed by Tartini is similar, and equally remarkable. + 
If one plucks two different strings of a guitar, a third note is heard, as well 1 S 
as the other two, and this is not just a mixture of the first two, or a merely 
abstract neutrality. If C and G are played together at a certain pitch for 
example, the C of the octave below will also be heard. The reason for this 
is as follows. When the key-note vibrates once, the fifth vibrates r! 
times, or three times while the key-note vibrates twice. When the key-
20 
note vibrates once, the second vibration of the fIfth has already begun 
while this first vibration is still taking place. But the second vibration of 
C, which begins during the second vibration of G, ends at the same time as 
the third vibration of G; consequently the recommencement of the vi-
brations of the two strings takes place simultaneously. 'There are periods,' 2S 
says Biot ('Traite de Physique' vol. IIp. 47), in which vibrations reach the 
ear simultaneously, and others in which they do so separately.' It is the + 
same when one person takes three steps in the time taken by another to 
take two, so that after the first has taken three steps, and the second 
has taken two, they are both stepping off together. It is in this way that a 30 
periodic coincidence occurs after every two vibrations of C. This coinci-
dence is twice as slow or half as quick as the vibration of C. When the 
vibrative determination of one note is half the speed of another however, 
the lower octave occurs, which vibrates once while that above it vibrates 
twice. This can best be demonstrated on a well-tuned organ. The lower + 
octave may also be heard on a monochord for example, although this note 
is beyond the range of the instrument itself. Abbot Vogler has based a 
special system of organ-building upon this principle; numerous pipes, 
each of which has its own note, produce a further clear note when played 
together, and no separate pipe or key is required for this effect. 
80 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
If harmony is considered only from the standpoint of hearing, and no 
attention is paid to numerical relationships, it is quite impossible to ex-
plain how notes which are heard at the same time, are heard as a single 
note, although they are in themselves different. In the consideration of 
5 harmony one should not confme oneself solely to hearing therefore, one 
must recognize and understand its objective determinateness. This leads 
on into physical and then into musical theory. In so far as the note is this 
ideality in the sphere of the mechanical however, what has been said here 
belongs here. It has to be recognized as a mechanical determinateness 
10 therefore, and it is that which constitutes this mechanical determinateness 
which has to be apprehended. 
§ 302 
Sound is the alternation between the specific juxtaposition of 
material parts and their negatedness. It is the mere abstract 
ideality of this specificness, or perhaps one might say, merely the 
1 s ideal nature of its ideality. In its own immediacy however, this 
alternation is consequendy the negation of materially specific 
subsistence; and this negation is therefore the real ideality of 
specific gravity and cohesion, i.e. heat. 
Remark 
Sonorous bodies will grow hot when they are struck or rubbed 
20 together, and it is in this phenomenon that heat originates with 
sound in conformity with the Notion. 
Addition. The being-in-self which reveals itself in sound, is itself 
materialized. It dominates matter, and acquires a sensuous existence by 
submitting it to violence. As notes, being-in-self is merely conditioned 
2S individuality, it is not yet real totality, and its self-preservation is therefore 
+ only one aspect of its being. The other aspect is however that this materi-
ality, which is pervaded by being-in-self, is also destructible. Consequently, 
this internal disturbance of the body within itself contains not only the 
ideal nature of a sublation of matter, but also the real sublation of it by 
30 heat. Instead of the body displaying itself in a specific manner as self-
conserving, it tends to pass over into negating itself. The reciprocity of its 
internal cohesion is at the same time the posited negation of this cohesion, 
an incipient sublation of its rigidity; and this is precisely the nature of heat. 
81 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
There is therefore a direct relation between sound and heat. Heat is the 
consummation of sound, and distinguishes itself materially as the negativity 
of this material being; sound itself is able to break or melt things, and a + 
shriek will even shatter a glass. Sensuous intuition certainly separates 
sound from heat, so that it may be surprising to see them brought together 5 
in this way; yet a bell will become hot by being rung for example, and 
this is a heat which is developed within it by its own interior vibration, it 
is not external to it. The instruments get warm as well as the musician. 
+ 
D 
Heat 
§ 30 3 
Heat is matter's restoration of itself to formlessness, it is the 
fluidity of matter and the triumph of its abstract homogeneity 10 
over specific determinatenesses. As a negation of a negation, its 
abstract and merely implicit continuity is posited here as 
activity, or existent dissolution. Heat therefore appears formally, 
i.e. in relation to spatial determination in general, as expansion; 
it does this in that it sublates the specifying of the indifferent 15 
occupation of space constituted by boundedness. 
+ 
Addition. When real connection yields to force and dissolves, the dis-
ruption and shattering are merely the dissolution of passive quantitative 
cohesion, although the cohesion here has also displayed its own type of 
determinateness (§ 296). The other form of dissolution however, which is 20 
heat, is related only to specific qualitative cohesion. The most important 
factor in sound is the repulsion of external force through the subsistence 
of form, and of the parts contained by form. In heat however, attraction 
comes to the fore, so that at the same time as the specific and internally 
coherent body repulses force, it also yields inwardly to it. If the cohesion 25 
and rigidity of the body are overcome, the ideal nature of the subsistence 
of the parts will be posited, and they will therefore be altered. By becom-
ing fluid in this way, the body gives birth to the heat in which sound 
perishes, for fluidity resembles mere rigidity, brittleness, and pulveriza-
tion, in that it is no longer resonant. Heat merely disperses bodies into a 30 
permanent connection, it does not shatter them into masses. It is the inti-
mate internal dissolution of the repulsion by which the body maintains the 
82 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR TNDIVIDUALITY 
juxtapOS1tlOn of its parts. Consequently, the unity engendered within 
bodies by heat is more intimate than unity of form, but it is without 
determination. This dissolution is the triumph of form itself; the external 
force which constitutes the inert matter which maintains itself within 
5 repulsion, annuls itsel£ This dissolution is mediated by cohesion, for without 
cohesion force is only able to shatter; a stone for example, is merely 
breakable. Mere rigidity presents the transmission of heat with an ob-
stacle, for transmission requires the inner fluidity of connection and ex-
pansibility which constitute the inner elasticity whereby the particles posit 
10 themselves within each other. It requires in fact the opposite of rigidity or 
inflexibility, and at the same time, the destruction of the connection in 
which the parts subsist. In fusion, form preserves itself as soul, but never-
theless, fire also posits the destruction of form. 
It is therefore as the repulsion of external force, and the yielding to it 
15 as an inner state, that sound and heat are opposed, and this is precisely 
why sound also passes over into heat. This opposition is still in evidence in 
higher natures such as organisms, where the subject possesses and preserves 
its ideality, and where it is drawn outwards by heat into real existence. It 
is in plants and flowers that the variety, as well as the pure abstract for-
20 marion and brilliance of individual colour may be seen most clearly. The 
self of the plant or flower is drawn forth by external light, and poured into 
existence as sheen. The colours of animals are generally duller however. 
Birds display the most gorgeous colours, and there are tropical birds whose 
self hood is drawn forth, plantwise, by the light and heat of the climate, 
+ into the vegetative covering of their plumage. Northern birds are drab-
ber, but better songsters however, witness the nightingale and the lark, 
which are not to be found in the tropics.* With tropical birds it is there-
fore the heat which, rather than preserving the integrity of this being-in-
self, this issuing forth of their inner ideality as song, melts it and pours it 
30 forth as the metallic sheen of colour; i.e. sound is mastered by heat. It is 
+ 
*Spix and Martius ('Travels', vol. II, p. 190-191), 'It was in these forests (of Brazil, beyond 
Santa Cruz) that we first noticed the song of a greyish brown bird, probably a thrush, which haunts 
the bushes and the damp floor of the forest, and which in its singing frequently repeats the scale 
from Bl to A2 with such regularity, that not a single note is missed. It usually sings each note four 
or five times, and then passes imperceptibly on to the following quarter tone. It is customary to 
deny that the songsters of the American forests have any harmonic faculty, and to concede tllem a 
superiority only in respect of their gorgeous colouring. Although it is generally true that the gentle 
inhabitants of the torrid zone are more distinguished by the beauty of their colours than by the power 
and richness of their song, and seem to have nothing to match the clear and melodious flutings of 
our nightingale, yet this small bird illustrates the fact, as others might, that they do at least possess 
the rudiments of melody.-It is indeed conceivable, that once the almost inarticulate grunts of 
degenerate men have ceased to sound through the forests of Brazil, many of the feathered songsters 
there will pour forth finer melodies.' 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
true that bird-song is a higher determination than sound, but nevertheless, 
the opposition also comes into evidence here through the song, and the 
heat of the climate. 
§ 304 
This real negation of the body's own nature is therefore its state 
of not belonging affirmatively to itself in its determinate being, so 5 
that its existence is rather a community with other bodies, and 
the communication of itself to them, i.e. external heat. The 
passivity of corporeality in regard to heat rests upon the im plici t 
continuity of material being, which is present in specific gravity 
and cohesion. It is because of the primary ideality of this contin-
10 
uity, that in the positing of this community, the modification of 
specific gravity and cohesion is unable to form any actual barrier 
to transmission. 
Remark 
Incoherent substances such as wool, and those such as glass or 
stones, which are either brittle or implicitly incoherent, are 15 
worse conductors of heat than metals, which are characterized by 
the compact uninterruptedness of their internal continuity. Simi-
larly, it is because of their lack of cohesion, and more generally 
because of their incorporeal materiality, that air and water are such 
bad conductors of heat. It is mainly the transmissibility of the heat 20 
which appears t'o leave a body after being initially present in it, and 
which therefore appears to be independent, and to have come to the 
body from without; together with the further mechanical de-
terminations connected with this which may be introduced into 
the diffusion of heat, such as reflection by a concave mirror; and 25 
thirdly, the quantitative determinations which occur in connec-
tion with it, which has given rise to heat being envisaged as a 
material substance having an independent existence (cf. 
§286 Rem.). However, there is at least a certain reluctance to call 
heat a body, or even a corporality, which would already imply 30 
that in its appearance, a particular existence is at once 
capable of various categories. Consequently, the apparently limited 
particularity of heat , and the fact that it can be distinguished from 
the bodies in which it occurs, do not justify the application to it of 
84 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
the category of matter, for as this category is essentially a totality 
in itself, it would at least imply weight. The said appearance of 
particularity is mainly due to the external way in which heat ap-
pears in relation to the bodies involved in its transmission. 
5 The conception of heat as a particular and independent existence 
could have been completely discarded long ago, on account of 
Rumford's experiments with the heating of bodies by friction. 
By his experiments with the boring of cannon for example, Rum-
ford demonstrated irrefutably, that in its origin and nature, heat is 
-1- simply a modal condition of matter. By itself, the abstract 
conception of matter implies the determination of continuity, 
which makes transmission possible, and which as activity, consti-
tutes the actuality of this transmission. This implicit continuity 
becomes activity as the negation of form, i.e. of specific gravity 
15 and cohesion, and subsequently of shape. 
Addition. In the world of appearance, sound and heat are themselves 
appearances. Transmissibility and having been transmitted constitute the 
predominant moment in the nature of a condition, which is an essentially 
communal determination, dependent upon environment. Heat there-
20 fore is transmissible because it is determined as an appearance, and not 
merely as such, but within the field in which the reality of matter is pre-
supposed. It is a being which is at the same time show, or a show which is 
still being. The being is the coherent body, the show is its dissolution, the 
negation of coherence. Heat is not matterltherefore, it is the negation of tllls 
25 reality. It is no longer the abstract negation of sound however, nor is it yet 
the completed negation of fire. As materialized negation or negative 
materialization, it is a presence, and has the shape of universality, com-
+ munity. It is the general determinate being of passivity, for it is still real 
subsistence as much as it is negation. As this merely apparent negation, 
30 heat is not for itself, but is dependent upon another. 
Heat therefore is essentially diffusible, and so posits an equality between 
bodies. This diffusion is therefore externally determinable by surfaces, and 
heat may therefore be concentrated by means of burning-glasses and concave 
mirrors. I believe Professor Pictet of Geneva has experimented in the same 
+ way with cold. Now since bodies are themselves capable of being posited 
as apparent, they cannot ward off heat, for the potential negation of their 
coherence is implicit within their nature. Implicitly therefore, they are 
that wmch reduces determinate being in heat, and it is precisely this 
implicitness which constitutes their passivity. It is precisely that which is 
85 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
passive, which is merely implicit; a person who is merely implicitly 
rational, is a passive person for example. The condition communicated is 
therefore a determinateness which is posited through another in accor-
dance with this implicit aspect of the body. It is a general phenomenal 
manifestation of its mere implicitness, although as activity it must also be 5 
actuaL This mode of appearance is therefore twofold; it is an active ini-
tiating manifestion, and it is passive. One body may have inner sources of 
heat therefore, while another may receive it from without, as something 
not generated within it. The transition from the original production of 
heat in the alteration of cohesion, to the external relationship of something 10 
already present being added to something else, as in the transmission of 
heat, reveals the absence of selfhood in these determinations. On the other 
hand, gravity or weight cannot be transmitted. 
As the general nature of heat consists in the idealization of specific and 
real juxtaposition, and we regard it as being based upon this negation, 15 
we can no longer postulate a calorific matter when considering this 
aspect of it. The postulation of such a matter, like the postulation of 
material sound, is based upon the principle that that which makes a + 
sensuous impression, must also have a sensuous subsistence. Now al-
though the Notion of matter has been extended to the point at which its 20 
basic determination of gravity has been abandoned on account of its 
having been asked whether this calorific matter is weighable or not, the + 
objective subsistence of a matter which is indestructible and self-contained 
in its independence, which comes and goes, and which can increase and 
diminish in any given place, continues to be presupposed. The meta-
25 
physics of the understanding gets no further than this conception of 
external accretion, and makes it the original relationship, especially of 
heat. Caloric is supposed to add itself, be accumulated, and lie latent wherc 
it does not appear, and yet heat is subsequently present. There are experi-
ments designed to display the materiality of heat, and trifling inferences 30 
have often been drawn from the most tenuous of their circumstances, but + 
the researches of Count Rumford, in which he attempted to calculate the 
heat of cannon barrels, told heavily against them. The general opinion 
was that the intense heat which occurs in the metal fragments, is drawn 
from the proximate bodies by the strcngth of the friction. Rumford 35 
maintained that it is generated in the metal itself, for he found that when 
he enclosed the whole in wood, which as a bad conductor of heat did not 
let the heat through, the fragments of metal which fell out were just as 
glowing hot as they were when there was no such covering. The under-
+ 
standing creates substrata for itself which we do not recognize through the 40 
86 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
Notion. Sound and heat do not exist on their own account as does weight-
ed matter, and the postulated materiality of heat and sound is a mere 
fiction, introduced into physics by the metaphysics of the understanding. 
Sound and heat are conditioned by material existence, and constitute their 
5 negativity; they are no more than moments, but as determinations of 
what is material they are quantitative, and may therefore be determined by 
degrees, according to their intensity. 
§ 30 5 
In itself, the transmission of heat to various bodies contains only 
the abstract continuation of this determination through indeter-
10 minate materiality. In transmission therefore, heat has no inter-
nal qualitative dimensions, only the abstract antithesis of positive 
and negative, quantum and degree, which it displays as an abstract 
equilibrium, a standard temperature, in the bodies among which 
the varying degrees of temperature are distributed. As heat is an 
15 alteration of specific gravity and cohesion however, it is at the 
same time bound up with these determinations, and like tempera-
ture communicated from without, is conditioned with regard to 
the determinateness of its existence by the particular specific 
gravity and cohesion of the body to which it is communicated. 
20 This is specific thermal capacity. 
Remark 
Specific thermal capacity, combined with the category of 
matter and stuffhas given rise to the conception ofa material 
heat which is latent, imperceptible, and unexcited. As it 
may not be perceived, such a determination lacks the warrant 
25 of observation and experience, and as inferred, it rests upon 
the supposition of the material independence of heat 
(cf. § 286 Rem.). In its way, this postulate makes the independence of 
heat as a matter empirically irrefutable, precisely because the 
postulate itself is not empirical. If one points out the disappearance 
30 of heat, or its appearance where it was not formerly present, the 
first is explained as a mere concealment or a fixation in a state of 
OOperceptibility, and the second as an emergence from mere 00-
perceptibility. It is in this way that the metaphysic ofindependence 
87 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is set up against the experience mentioned, and the experi-
ence is indeed presupposed a priori. 
The import of the determination of heat which is given here, is 
that it is empirically confirmed that the determination which is 
by itself necessary through its conformity with the Notion, i.e. the 5 
alteration of specific gravity and cohesion, displays itself pheno-
menally as heat. The close connection between them makes 
itself abundantly apparent in the various productions and the 
equally various disappearances of heat in fermentation and other 
chemical processes, in crystallizations, and in the dissolution of the 10 
same, in the inner and outer mechanical disturbances which have 
already been considered, such as the ringing of bells, beating of 
metals, frictions etc. The friction of pressure and rapid movement, 
such as occurs when savages rub together pieces of wood for exam-
+ 
pIe, or in the ordinary striking of a light, momentarily draws the 15 
material extrinsicality of the body together into one point, so that 
a negation of the spatial subsistence of ~its material parts bursts 
forth in heat and flame, or in the throwing off of a spark. The other 
difficulty lies in grasping the connection between heat and specific 
gravity and cohesion as the existent ideality of material being: 20 
in grasping heat moreover as an existent negative, which itself 
contains the determinateness of that which is negated, which has 
the further determinateness of a quantum, and which, as the ideality 
of a subsistence, is its self-externality and self-positedness within 
another, which is in fact transmission. The task here is the same as 25 
that throughout the whole of the philosophy of nature; it is 
merely to replace the categories of the understanding by the 
thought-relationships of the speculative Notion, and to grasp and 
determine the phenomenon in accordance with the latter. 
Addition. Each body has a specific heat, just as it has a particular kind of 30 
sound, depending upon its specific cohesion. When qualitatively dif-
ferent bodies are brought to the same temperature, i.e. have the same 
quantity of heat applied to them, they are heated differently. Each body 
appropriates the temperature of the air differently. When the air is cold 
for example, iron will become much colder thm stone, and when th.e air 35 
is warm, water is always cooler. It is reckoned that in order to raise water 
and mercury to the same temperature, thirteen times more heat is re-
quired for the former. The melting-point elicited by transmitted heat is 
equally variable; for example, much less heat is required in order to 
88 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
liquefy mercury than is required for any of the other metals. The body 
displays its specificity as soon as heat is imparted to it, and this raises the 
question of the form of the being-in-self which appears here. The forms 
of being-in-self are cohesion, punctiformity, lineality, and superficity, 
5 together with the simple determinateness of specific gravity. It can only 
be the simple mode of being-in-self which displays itself in specific heat. 
Heat is the sublation of the specific extrinsicality of cohesion; in its sub-
sistence however, the body is at the same time still preserved within its 
specific being-in-self. Now being-in-self, together with self-sublating 
10 cohesion, is still only the universal and abstract being of specific gravity. 
Consequently, it is specific gravity which displays itself here as affirmative 
being-in-sel£ 
It is in this way that thermal capacity is related to specific gravity, which 
is the being-in-self of bodies opposed to mere gravity. This is an inverse 
15 relationship, for bodies with a higher specific gravity heat up much easier, 
i.e. become hotter at the same temperature, than do those of lower spe-
+ cific gravity. It is said therefore, that calorific matter becomes latent in the 
latter bodies, and free in the former. Similarly, it is maintained that calori-
fic material has been latent, when it is quite clear that the heat did not come 
20 from without, but has generated itself internally (see § 304 Addition). Heat 
is also supposed to become latent when cold is brought forth by the eva-
poration of naphtha. It is said that at zero, frozen water loses the heat which 
is applied to make it fluid; as its temperature is not raised by this heat, the 
calorific material is said to have become latent within it. The same is said to 
25 occur in the elastic steam into which water transforms itself; for water does 
not get hotter than SooR, and at a higher temperature merely evaporates. 
On the contrary, vapours and elastic fluids at a particular temperature, 
generate greater heat while precipitating than they do while they remain 
in their expanded state, i.e. expansion does duty for temperature as in-
30 tensity (cf. § 103 Add.) Recourse is had to the expedient oflatency, when-
ever the phenomena make it abundantly clear that the heat has occurred 
through an internal change in cohesion. An example of this may be found 
in water which is some degrees below zero and which rises to zero as it 
freezes. Calorific material is supposed to be perpetually coming and 
3S going; but as heat cannot be allowed to disappear if it is held to be sub-
stantial and independent, it is said to be still present, but simply latent. 
How can something be present however, ifit does not exist? This 'some-
thing' is merely an empty figment of thought, and it is precisely the 
aptitude heat has for being transmitted which tends to prove the depen-
+ dence of it as a determination. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
It might be thought that a high specific gravity must also produce more 
heat, but it is the bodies of higher specific gravity which are still simple in 
their determinateness, which have an occluded, unindividualized being-
in-self, and which have not yet progressed to further immanent determi-
nations. On the contrary, the opposition which individuality offers to 5 
heat is of a higher kind. Consequently, organic being is much less apt 
to receive external heat. Generally speaking, the importance and interest 
of specific gravity and thermal capacity disappear in higher organic 
natures such as plants and animals, and on the whole therefore, differences 
between types of wood are of no significance in this respect. Specific 10 
gravity and thermal capacity are of prime importance with regard to 
metals however. Specific gravity is not yet cohesion, even less is it indi-
viduality; it is on the contrary merely an abstract general being-in-self, 
which is not immanently specified, and is therefore most easily penetrated 
by heat. It is a being-in-self, which is most easily and readily receptive with 15 
regard to the negation of specific relatedness. That which is coherent and 
more individualized however, endows its determinations with a much 
greater permanence, so that they do not receive heat so readily. 
By starting from the specific determinedness of material being-in-self, 
we have considered the cohesive aspect of the generation of heat. This is 20 
(a) the characteristic origin of heat, which can become apparent through 
vibration, and also for example, as the spontaneous combustion of fer-
mentations, which take place of their own accord. One of the Empress 
Catherine's frigates caught fire of its own accord in this way; even 
roasted coffee ferments, and the heat rises until flames occur; this is 25 
probably what happened too in the ship. Flax, hemp, and tarred rope 
finally set fire to themselves. The fermentation of wine or vinegar also + 
generates heat. The same occurs in chemical processes, for the dissolution 
of crystals always involves an alteration in the state of cohesion. It is 
known however that heat has a double origin in this mechanical field of 30 
gravitational relationship. (b) The second source of heat is friction as such. 
Friction merely disturbs the parts of the surface, it is not a thoroughgoing 
vibration. It is friction of this kind which is the common and usual source 
of heat. But this also must not be regarded as purely mechanical however, 
as it is in the 'Gottingen Literary Advertiser' (1817 sect. 161), 'It is known 35 
that a body wi11lose a part ofits specific heat when it is submitted to heavy 
pressure, or rather, that when submitted to heavy pressure, a body can-
not contain the same amount of specific heat as it can when the pressure 
is not so great. This accounts for the development of heat by the striking 
and rubbing of bodies, by the rapid compression of air, and similar means.' + 
90 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
This liberation of form is still conditioned however, and as yet, is neither 
the truly independent totality of the self, nor the immanent self-preserving 
activity of unity. That is why heat can be produced in an external and 
mechanical way by friction. As it rises into flame, heat is the free triumph 
5 of pure ideality over this material extrinsicality. That which is struck from 
steel and flint is only a spark, for the more resistance there is in the interior 
hardness of the body, the stronger is the disturbance in those parts of it 
exposed to friction. Wood is consumed however, for it is a material which 
+ can further heat. 
§ 306 
10 As temperature in general, heat is primarily the dissolution of spe-
cified materiality, a dissolution which is still abstract, and condi-
tioned by the existence and determinateness of heat. In its self-
fulfilment, and the actuality of its realization however, this con-
sumption of bodily peculiarity attains to the existence of pure 
15 physical ideality. This is the liberating negation of material being, 
and it comes forth as ligh t, or rather as flame; as bound to matter, 
and as negation of it. Fire is posited here as it was when it first 
developed out of the immediacy of matter (§ 283): conditioned 
from without, it propagates itself out of the moments of the 
20 Notion existing within the sphere of conditioned existence. What 
is more, it destroys itself in this finitude, together with the condi-
tions which it consumes. 
Addition. Light as such is cold, and the light which gives so much heat in 
summer, does so in conjunction with the Earth's atmosphere. It is quite 
25 cold on a high mountain, even at the height of summer, and it is there 
that the eternal snow lies, although these regions are nearer the Sun. It is 
only through its contact with other bodies that light produces heat, for 
light is self hood, and that which is touched by light also acquires selfhood, 
i.e. displays an incipient dissolution, or heat. 
§ 307 
30 
Real matter is imbued with form, and in the totality of its 
development, passes over into the pure ideality of its determina-
tions, into abstracdy self-identical selfhood, which externalizes 
itself as flame in this sphere of external individuality, and so 
91 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
disappears. The conditionality of this sphere consists ofform as 
a specification of weighted matter, and of individuality as hav-
ing been initially implicit only as totality. The real dissolution 
of immediacy is accompanied by the reciprocal indifference of 
specified material beings, and it is this moment which is posited in 5 
heat. Consequently, form is now a totality which is immanent 
within material being which offers it no resistance. As infinite 
self-relating form, selfhood as such has therefore entered into 
existence; it maintains itself in the externality which is subject to + 
it, and as the freely determining totality of this material being, 10 
constitutes free individuality. 
Addition. The transition now has to be made to real individuality or 
shape, the moments of which have been seen in that which preceded. The 
assembling of form within itself, the soul which escapes as sound, to-
gether with the fluidity of matter, are the two moments constituting the 15 
real Notion of individuality. In its submission to infinite form, gravity is 
the totality of free individuality, in which material being is completely 
permeated and determined by form. The shape which is developed within 
itself into determining a multiplicity of material beings, is absolute 
centrality, which unlike gravity, no longer has multiplicity merely 20 
external to it. As nisus, individuality is so constituted, that initially, it 
posits its moments as individualized figurations. Whereas the figurations 
of space, the point, line and surface, were merely the negations of space 
however, they are now described by form within a matter which it alone 
determines. They are no longer described in their simple spatiality, but as 25 
differences within material connection, and as the real spatial figurations 
of matter completing themselves in the totality of the surface. In order 
that sound may form within materiature as force, and not escape from it as 
soul, there has to be a posited negation of the firm subsistence of matter. + 
The existence of this negation is posited in the dissolution of matter by 30 
heat. The penetrability of matter, which was at first posited through the 
Notion, is posited here in its resulting existence. A beginning was made 
with being-in-self as specific gravity, in which matter was taken as so 
constituted within its immediacy, that form might build itself into it. It 
was on account of this implicitness, that matter was susceptible to pene-
3S 
tration and dissolution; its existence in cohesion also had to be shown 
however. This cohesion is itself sublated in the dissolution of its extrin-
sicality, and that which remains is specific gravity. As primary subjecti-
vity, this was simple abstract determinedness, which is the note when 
92 

PHYSICS OF PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY 
determined as totality within itself, and which is heat in its fluidity. The 
prime immediacy must display itself as sublated and as posited, and one 
must therefore always return to the beginning. It is through matter that 
cohesion constitutes the conditioned being of form. As opposed to this 
5 conditioned being, cohesion itself is the intermediary which brings forth 
heat within the negation. It therefore negates itself by negating the mere 
implicitness of being which is the simple conditioned way in which form 
exists. It is easy to make mention of these moments, but it is difficult to 
regard them individually if one wants to develop within existence that 
10 which corresponds to the determinations of thought, for each of these 
determinations also has its corresponding existence. This difficulty is 
particularly noticeable in chapters such as this, where the whole is merely 
a nisus, so that the determinations come forth only as separate properties. 
In accordance with the Notion, the abstract moments of individuality 
15 such as specific weight and cohesion etc., have to precede free indivi-
duality, so that this may proceed out of them as their result. In total 
individuality, where form accedes to its sovereignty, all moments are now 
realized, and form dwells within it as determinate unity. Shape requires 
soul, and the unity of form with itself, together with the determinations 
20 of the Notion as its being-for-other. Form is free in its positing of these 
differences, and is at the same time their unconditioned unity. The free-
dom of specific gravity is only abstract, for it is also related indifferently 
to another, and falls into external comparison. True form is related by 
itself to another, and not through a third term. As the materiature is 
25 mGlted by heat, it is receptive of form, and as finite form, the conditioned 
being of sound is therefore sublated. This form fmds no further opposi-
tion, as it would in a further relation. Heat is the shape liberating itself 
from shape, it is a self-substantiating light which contains the moment of 
passive shape as sublated within it. 
93 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
CHAPTER THREE 
Physics of total individuality 
§ 308 
In that itis weighted, matter first constitutes the totality of the 
Notion in an implicit manner, and so lacks intrinsic form. Ini-
tially the Notion is posited within it in its particular determina-
tions, and exhibits a finite individuality falling apart into particu-
larities. As the totality of the Notion is now posited, the centre of 5 
gravity is no longer a subjectivity sought by matter, but is 
immanent within it as the ideality of these form-determinations, 
which are initially immediate and conditioned, but which from 
now on are developed as moments, out of the core of the Notion. 
Material individuality, being thus identical with itself in its de-
10 
velopment, constitutes an infinite being-for-self, although it is 
at the same time conditioned, for it is only the primary im-
mediacy of subjective totality. Consequently, although it is 
infinite in this being-for-self, it contains relationship to another, 
and it is only in process that the externality and conditionedness 15 
involved in this, are posited as self-sublating. It is thus that this 
individuality becomes the existent totality of material being-for-
self, which implicitly is then life, and which in the Notion, 
passes over into life. 
Addition. The two distinct moments of a real physical body are form as 20 
an abstract whole, and whatever material it determines. In themselves, 
these are identical, and are therefore capable of passing into one another in 
accordance with the Notion, for form is pure self-relating physical iden-
tity, and has no determinate being, and fluid matter also exists as this 
non-resistant universal identity. Within itself, matter resembles form 2S 
through its lack of difference, so that it is itself form. In its universality, 
matter is determined as being determined within itself, and this deter-
mining is the precise function of form, in which matter is implicit. We 
started with individuality in general, and this individuality was then 
94 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
posited in the finitely restricted determinateness of its differentiation from 
gravity. Thirdly, individuality returns into itself out of differentiation, 
and this third moment also has three shapes or determinations. 
+ 
Total individuality is: 
5 (a) the Notion of immediate shape as such, and the abstract 
principle of this appearing in free existence, i.e. magnetism. 
+ (b) It determines itself into difference ,into the particular forms of 
corporeal totality; heightened to its extreme, this individual 
particularization is electricity. 
10 (c) The reality of this particularization constitutes thechemically 
differentiated body and its relatedness; it constitutes the indi-
viduality which, while realizing itself as a totality, has bodies as 
its moments, i.e. the chemical process. 
Addition. In shape, infmite form is the determining principle of the 
15 material parts, which are now no longer merely related indifferently in 
space. This is the Notion of shape, but as shape is not quiescent subsistence 
but is self-differentiating, it does not remain with it, but unfolds its 
essence into real properties. These properties are not held within the 
unity in an ideal manner, but are also endowed with a particular exis-
20 tence. These differences are determined as having qualitative indivi-
duality, and constitute the elements. They are specified by belonging to 
the sphere of individuality however, and are therefore united with indi-
vidual corporeality, or rather transformed into it. In this way, the defect 
still attaching to form has implicitly overcome itself within the Notion. 
25 Necessity now demands a further positing of this implicitness however, 
influencing the way in which shape engenders itself, so that the transition 
also has to be made within existence. It is as the result of this transition that 
shape is engendered. A return is made to the primality therefore, although 
this now appears as being engendered. Consequently, this return is at 
30 the same time a progressive transition, and the chemical process therefore 
contains in its Notion the transition into the organic sphere. At first, we 
found process in the sphere of mechanics, as motion; then in the process of 
the elements, and now in the process of individualized matter. 
95 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
A 
Shape 
§ 310 
As total individuality, body in its immediacy is quiescent 
totality. It is therefore a form of the spatial assemblage of material 
being, and initially therefore, it constitutes a further form of 
mechanism. Shape is thus the material mechanism of indivi-
duality, which is now unconditioned and free in its determining. It s 
is the body which is determined by the activity ofimmanent and 
developed form, not only in the specific mode of its interior 
consistence, but also in its external limitation in space. It is 
in this way that form itself is made manifest, and shows itself as 
something more than a characteristic of the resistance offered to 10 
an alien force. 
+ 
Addition. Formerly, being-in-self only displayed itself through an 
external impetus and the corresponding reaction. Here on the con-
trary, form manifests itself neither through external force, nor as the 
destruction of materiality. The body has a concealed and tacit geometer 15 
within it, which as form is all-pervading, and which, without impulse, 
organizes it both externally and internally. This interior and exterior 
limitation is necessary to individuality, as is the surface of the body, which 
is limited by its form. The body is sealed off from others, and displays its 
specific determinateness in its quiescent subsistence, independendy of 20 
external influence. The crystal is certainly not mechanically compounded; 
nevertheless, mechanism is resumed here as an individual factor, for this is 
precisely the sphere of the quiescent subsistence of extrinsicality, despite 
the relation of the parts being determined by immanence of form. That 
which is shaped in this way is withdrawn from gravity and can grow 25 
upwards for example. It is possible to observe the thoroughgoing reticu-
lation of natural crystals. We do not yet fmd soul here as we find it in life 
however, because the individual here is not yet distinct from itsel£ It + 
is this distinctness which constitutes the difference between inorganic and 
organic being. Individuality is not yet subjectivity; if it were, the infmite 30 
form which is differentiated within itself and holds together its differen-
tiation, would also be for itsel£ This first occurs in sentient being; here 
96 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
however, individuality is still immersed within matter; it is not yet free, 
it merely is. 
The determinateness attained in inorganic shape, as distinguished from 
organic being, now has to be considered more closely. In the shape which 
5 we have here, the spatial determinations of form are primarily those of the 
understanding, i.e. straight lines, plane surfaces, and definite angles. The 
reason for this has to be given here. The form which deploys itself in 
crystallization is a mute vitality, which is active in a truly remarkable 
way within that which is purely mechanical. Within stones or metal, 
10 which appear to be externally determinable, it displays itself in charac-
teristic shapes as an organic and organizing tendency. These shapes grow 
forth freely and independently, and those who are not used to the sight of 
these regular and delicate formations, will take them to be the work of 
human art and labour, rather than the products of nature. The activity 
15 which gives rise to the regularity of art is motivated by an external pur-
pose however, and in the case in question we should not think of the 
external purposiveness of an alien material being moulded to a person's 
purpose. In the crystal, form is not external to matter, for the matter itself 
is the end, and operates in and for itself. There is therefore an invisible 
+ germ in water, a constructive force. This shape is regular in the strictest 
sense, but as it is not yet a process in itself, it is merely a regularity within 
the whole, the various parts of which constitute this single form. It is not 
yet organic shape outstripping the determinations of the understanding, 
for it lacks subjectivity, and its form is therefore still inorganic. In or-
25 ganic being however, shape is so constituted, that the whole shape ap-
pears in each part, not so that each particular part is only understandable 
with reference to tlle whole. In living being therefore, each peripheral 
point is the whole, so that each part of a person's body is sentient. This 
explains why organic shape is not based on straight lines and plane sur-
30 faces, which only belong to the abstract direction of the whole, and are not 
in themselves totalities. As each part of a curve can only be grasped 
through the whole law of the curve, a living shape will display curves, 
while this is never the case with shapes which may be grasped by the 
understanding. The roundness of organic being is not that of the circle 
35 or the sphere however; for these are once again curves which may be 
grasped by the understanding, as the relation of all peripheral points to the 
centre is itself that of abstract identity. The curved line which is apparent 
in organic being must be differentiated within itself, but its differentials 
are in tum subject to equality. Consequently, living existence exhibits the 
40 elliptical line, into which the equality of both parts enters once again, and 
D 
97 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
what is more, does this in the direction of the major and minor axes. 
More precisely, it is the oval line which dominates here, and which only 
exhibits this equality in a single direction. It was on the basis of this, that 
Moller made the valuable observation that all organic forms such as those 
of feathers, wings, the head, and lines of the face, as well as all the shapes 5 
of leaves, insects, birds, fishes, etc., are modifications of either the ellip-
tical or the undulant line, which he therefore also calls the line of beauty. + 
Curved lines do not yet occur in inorganic being however, which dis-
plays geometrically regular figures with equal and correspondent angles, 
everything being necessitated by the progression of identity. This secret 10 
tracing of lines, and determining and limiting of surfaces by parallel 
angles, is the figuration now to be considered. 
This shape has to be regarded in its individual determinations, of which 
there are three to be distinguished. Firstly there are the abstract moments of 
shape, which are in fact shapeless; secondly, there is restricted shape in its 15 
state of process and of becoming, in the activity of shaping in which shape is 
not yet completed, i.e. magnetism; thirdly, there is real shape, the crystal. 
§ 3II 
I. Shape in its immediacy is posited as internally formless; 
at the one extreme it constitutes punctiformity and britdeness, 
at the other, self-globulizing fluidity. It is therefore shape as 20 
inner shapelessness. 
Addition. The determinations of form controlled by this interior 
geometry are firstly the point, then the line and the surface, and finally the 
overall volume. A brittle body is pulverizable and singular, properties 
we have already encountered as constituting a simple mode of cohesion. It 25 
is granular, as is particularly evident in grains of platinum. It stands op- + 
posed to globularity, the general self-rounding fluidity which effaces every 
dimension within itself, and which, while it is certainly the complete 
realization of all three dimensions, is a totality in which determinateness is 
not developed. The globular shape is universal, and has a formal regu-
30 
larity. It is freely poised, so that as universal individuality, it is also the 
shape of the free bodies of the heavens. Fluid matter globulizes itself, for as 
it is inwardly indeterminate, atmospheric pressure is the same on all sides 
of it; consequently, the determination of its shape is also the same on 
every side, and no differentiation is posited in it as yet. The shape is a 35 
real principle however, and is not merely an abstract determination, i.e. it 
is a real totality of form. 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
§ 312 
2. As the implicit totality offormative individuality, a brittle 
body opens itself to the difference of the Notion. The point 
first passes over into the line, where form posits itself in the 
opposition of the extremities. These extremities have no sub-
5 sistence of their own as moments, but are merely maintained by 
their relation, which appears as their middle term and the 
point of indifference in their opposition. This syllogism 
constitutes the developed determinateness of the principle 
of figuration, which in this still abstract rigour constitutes 
+ magnetism. 
Remark 
Magnetism is one of the determinations which inevitably 
became prominent when the Notion began to be aware of 
itself in determinate nature, and grasped the Idea of a 
philosophy of nature. This came about because the magnet 
15 exhibits the nature of the Notion, both in a simple straight-
forward way, and in its developed form as syllogism 
(§ 1 8 1). Its pol e s are the sensibly existent ends of a real line such 
as a rod, or a dimensionally more fully extended body. Their 
reality as poles is of an ideal nature however; it is not 
20 sensibly mechanistic, for the poles are simply indivisible. The 
point of indifference, which constitutes their substantial 
existence, is their unity as determinations of the Notion, 
and consequendy it is from this unity alone that they derive their 
significance and their existence. Polarity is the relation between 
25 mere moments of this kind. Apart from the determination 
posited here, magnetism has no further particular property. The 
phenomenon of an individual magnetic needle swinging 
sometimes north and sometimes south, is an aspect of the 
general magnetism of the Earth. 
30 
There is an unwarranted ambiguity about the statement 
that all bodies are magnetic however. It is true that all 
shape of a real nature which is not merely brittle involves 
this principle of determination. It is not true however, that all 
bodies are also capable of displaying the existence of this 
35 principle in its bare abstractions as magnetism. To attempt 
99 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to demonstrate a Notional form within nature in this way, 
so that it carries the universal existence of its abstractness 
into determinateness, it not a philosophic endeavour, for 
nature is the Idea in the element of extrinsicality, and like 
the understanding, it holds fast to the dispersed moments 5 
of the Notion and so expresses their reality. In higher + 
things however, it unites the different forms of the Notion 
into the highest concretion of unity. (see Rem. § seq.). 
+ 
Addition. (a) The union of globularity and brittleness gives rise to the 
first generally real shape. Posited within brittleness as centrality, infinite 10 
form posits its differences, and while giving them a subsistence, still holds 
them in unity. It is true that space is still the element in which they 
exist; it is this simplicity of character which constitutes the Notion 
however, this is the tension which in its diremption remains this pervasive 
universal, 
and which, when separated from the general being-in-self 15 
of gravity, is itself the substance or existence of its differences. Mere 
inner shape does not yet exist in itself, it exists by splitting mass; the 
determination which is posited here however derives from shape itself. 
This individualizing principle is the end which translates itself into reality, 
but it is still distinct as end, and as yet unfulfilled. Consequently, it only 20 
expresses itself as the process of the two principles of brittleness and fluid-
ity; it is in this process that form impregnates the determinability of 
indeterminate fluidity. This is the principle of magnetism, the tendency 
towards figuration which has not yet come to rest, or the shaping form as a 
yet unrealized tendency. Primarily, magnetism is only the subjective 25 
being of matter therefore, the formal existence of differences in the unity 
of the subject, the activity of cohesion, by which it brings different 
material points under the form of unity. The sides of magnetism are still 
simply bound to subjective unity therefore; their opposition is still not 
present as an independence. In points of brittleness as such, the difference 30 
is still completely unposited. As we now have total individuality how-
ever which is supposed to be present spatially, and which has to posit 
itself in differences in that it is concrete, the point now distinguishes itself 
from a point while relating itself to it. This relation is linear, and is not 
yet the plane, or the totality of three dimensions, for the shaping tendency 35 
does not yet exist as a totality, while in reality, the two dimensions im-
mediately become the three dimensions of the surface. We therefore have 
the complete abstraction of spatiality as linearity, and this is the first 
general determination. But the straight line is the natural line so to speak, 
100 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
the line as such; in the curved line we already have a second determination 
and this would at once involve the positing of the plane. 
(b) How is magnetism manifest? The motions which are present in it are 
only to be grasped in the ideality of their nature, for magnetism cannot be 
5 interpreted sensuously. Sensuous comprehension merely binds together 
multiplicity in an external manner; it is true that this external unifica-
tion also takes place in the two poles and the point of indifference which 
unites them, but these merely constitute the magnet, which is not yet 
magnetism. In order to ascertain what is contained in this Notion, we must 
10 first remove completely the sensuous image of a loadstone, or of iron 
which has been rubbed with it. The phenomena of magnetism also have 
to be compared with its Notion however, in order to fmd out whether or 
not they correspond to it. Here the differentials are not posited in an 
external manner as being identical, but posit themselves as being so. In 
15 so far as it is true that the motion of the magnet is still external, and that 
negativity still has no real and independent sides however: in so far, that 
is to say, as the moments of totality are not yet liberated so as to be dif-
ferentiatedly independent in their relation to one another, the centre of 
gravity is not yet dispersed. Consequently, the development of these 
20 moments is still posited as an externality or merely by means of the im-
+ plicit being of the Notion. Poles occur because the separable point opens 
itself to the differences of the Notion. In the physical line, which has 
difference of form within it, these poles are the two live ends, each of 
which is posited so that it is only in its relation to its other. Each only has 
25 a significance through the being of the other. They are external to one 
another however, and each is the negative of the other; their unity also 
exists in the space between them, and it is here that their opposition is 
sublated. This polarity is often applied indiscriminately, where it is com-
pletely out of place, for nowadays everything is full of polarity. This 
30 physical opposition is nothing sensuous and determinate; one cannot cut 
down the north pole for example. If one divides a magnet in two, each 
piece in itself will be a whole magnet: the north pole immediately arises 
+ again in the broken part. Each pole posits the other and excludes it from 
itself; the terms of the syllogism can only exist in the connection, they 
35 carmot exist for themselves. Here therefore, we are wholly in the field of 
the supersensual. If anyone is of the opinion that thought is not present in 
nature, he can be shown it here in magnetism. Magnetism on its own ac-
count is therefore a very striking phenomenon, but it becomes even more 
remarkable when one attempts to comprehend it. That is why it was taken 
40 to be a main principle and given pride of place in the philosophy of 
101 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATUJ<F 
nature. The reflection certainly speaks of magnetic matter, which in itself + 
however is not present in the phenomenon: that which operates here is 
not anything material, it is pure immaterial form. 
If we have a magnetized iron bar with a north and south pole which we 
are able to distinguish, and move small non-magnetic iron bars towards it, 5 
a motion will eventually become apparent if these small bars are able to 
move freely and are not submitted to mechanical restraint. The small bar 
may be balanced on a needle for example. In this case, one of the ends of 
this small bar will join up with the north pole of the magnet, while the 
other end will be repelled by it; consequently, the small bar itself will 10 
become a magnet by acquiring a magnetic determinateness. This deter-
minateness is not confmed to the extremities however, for iron filings will 
hang from a magnet up to its midpoint. A neutral point will then be 
reached however, at which attraction and repulsion of this kind no longer 
occur. It is in this way that one may distinguish between passive and active 15 
magnetism. The absence of any effect upon un magnetic iron may also be 
defmed as passive magnetism. A free centre resembling that which we 
encountered earlier when considering the Earth, is now posited by this 
neutral point. If one removes the small bar from its first position, and 
places it at the other pole of the magnet, that end which was formerly 20 
repelled by the first pole will then be attracted by it, and vice versa. There 
is still no determination present here to show that the ends of the magnet 
in themselves are opposed, for this in an empty spatial difference, which has 
no more intrinsic significance than that between the two ends of a line. 
If we then compare these two magnets with the Earth however, we fmd 25 
that at one end they point in a direction which is roughly north, while at 
the other they point south. It now becomes apparent that the two north 
poles of the two magnets repel each other, as do the two south poles, 
while the north pole of the one and the south pole of the other attract 
each other. The direction north derives from the path of the sun, and is 30 
not peculiar to the magnet. Since a single magnet with one of its ends 
pointing north has the other pointing south, the Chinese are quite as 
justified in saying that the magnet points south as we are when we main-
tain that it points north, for it is one and the same determination. This is + 
also merely a relation of two magnets to one another, for it is the mag-
35 
netism of the Earth which determines the bar magnet. We should realize 
however, that that which we call the north pole of a magnet (a nomen-
clature which has given rise to much confusion because of the contra-
dictory ways in which it is now used) is in fact the south pole according 
to the nature of the matter, for it is the south pole of the magnet which 40 
102 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
moves towards the north pole of the Earth. This phenomenon constitutes 
the entire theory of magnetism. The physicists say that it is not yet known 
+ what magnetism is, and that it might be a current etc. All this belongs to 
the metaphysics which are not recognized by the Notion. There is nothing 
5 mysterious about magnetism. If we take pieces of loadstone, not a line, 
the magnetic impulse still falls invariably into the ideal nature of the line 
which forms the axis. In such a fragment, which might have the form of a 
cube or of a sphere etc. various axes might occur. This accounts for the 
Earth's having various magnetic axes, none of which coincides directly 
10 with that of its rotation. In the Earth, magnetism becomes free, for the 
Earth does not attain to the character of a true crystal, and as that which 
gives birth to individuality, fails to get beyond the abstract yearning of its 
urge towards shape. As the Earth is now a living magnet whose axis is 
not fixed to a defmite point, the direction of the magnetic needle is ap-
15 proximately that of the true meridian, although it does not coincide with 
it exactly. It is this difference which gives rise to the declination of the 
magnetic needle to the east and west, a declination which varies at 
different times and in different places, and is in fact an oscillation of a 
+ more universal nature. With regard to the general significance of the 
20 relation of the magnetic needle to such an axis, the physicists now 
dispense with such an iron rod, or what amounts to the same thing, 
a specific existence in the direction of the axes. They have discovered that the 
data may be sufficiently accounted for by assuming that at the centre of the 
Earth there is a magnet of infinite intensity and no extension, i.e. a magnet which 
25 is not a line in which one point is stronger than another, as is the case with mag-
+ netic iron, at the pole of which iron filings are much more strongly drawn than 
they are at the centre, and in which there is a regular decrease in this attraction 
+ from the poles to the centre. In the Earth however, magnetism constitutes this 
+ complete generality, this ubiquitous whole. Two secondary points arise here. 
30 
(c) The kind of bodies in which magnetism is manifest are a matter of com-
plete indifference to philosophy. It occurs principally in iron, but it also 
occurs in nickel and in cobalt. Richter thought he had obtained pure cobalt 
and nickel, and claimed that even these had magnetic properties. Others 
maintain that there is still some iron present in them, and that this is the 
+ sole reason for their being magnetic. It is no concern of the Notion that 
iron, because of its cohesion and inner crystallization, should be the ele-
ment which causes this tendency towards figuration as such to display 
itself within it. There are other metals which also become magnetic at 
particular temperatures. Consequently, the appearance of magnetism with-
40 in a body is related to its cohesion. It is generally only metals which may 
T03 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
be magnetized however. This is because a metal is not absolutely brittle, 
and has within it the compact continuity of simple specific gravity, which 
is precisely the abstract shape that we are now considering. Consequently, 
metals are conductors of heat and magnetism. Magnetism as such does not 
appear in salts and earths, because they are neutralities in which differen-
5 
tiation is paralysed. This leads us on to enquire into those properties which 
make iron of all metals the most conducive to the appearance of magne-
tism. The'cohesion of iron is able to preserve the tendency towards shaping 
as an implicit tension, without realizing any result, precisely because in 
this metal there is a certain equilibrium between brittleness and continuity. 10 
It can be brought from a state of extreme brittleness to that of extreme 
malleability, and unlike the compact continuity of the precious metals, it 
is therefore able to unite these extremes. Magnetism is precisely the brittle-
ness which is open to continuity however, and which has the peculiarity of 
having not yet passed over into compact continuity. Consequently, iron 15 
is subject to the activity of acids to a much greater extent than are those metals 
which have the highest specific gravities, and which, like gold, lack any 
apparent difference on account of the compactness of their unity. On the 
other hand, it easily maintains its reguline shape, while those metals of 
lower specific gravity crumble readily and semi-metals can scarcely main- + 
tain their metallic shape, when attacked by acids. In iron, this existence of 
a north and south pole which are external to and distinct from the point of 
indifference, is yet another instance of the naivety of nature, which sets forth 
its abstract moments in individual things in a way which is equally abstract. 
It is in this way that magnetism appears in iron ore; although it is mag-
2S 
netic iron-stone which appears to be the specific body in which magnetism 
reveals itself There are magnets which act on the compass needle and yet + 
will not magnetize other iron. Humboldt discovered one in a serpentine 
rock near Bayreuth. In the mine, each potentially magnetic body, and + 
even magnetic pyrites, is not yet magnetic, and only becomes so once it 30 
has been extracted. The stimulation of the light in the atmosphere is 
therefore necessary to the positing of differentiation and tension. 
+ 
(d) This leads us to enquire into the circumstances and conditions under 
which magnetism appears. If iron is heated until it is molten, it loses its 
magnetism; this also happens when it is fully oxidized as it is in the case + 
of calcined iron, for the cohesion of the metal's reguline state has then 
been completely destroyed. Forging, hammering etc., also introduces 
modifications. Forged iron readily becomes magnetic, and loses the pro-
perty with an equal facility. Steel on the other hand, in which iron assumes 
an earthy and granular fracture, is much harder to magnetize, but keeps 40 
104 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
+ the property longer. This may well explain the greater brittleness of steel. 
The fugitive nature of the magnetism is apparent in its production, for it 
comes and goes, and is by no means stable. The mere stroking of iron 
will render it magnetic, and what is more, at both poles; but it must be 
5 stroked in the direction of the meridian. The same effect may be obtained 
by striking or knocking it with the bare hand, or by shaking it in the air. 
The vibration of cohesion creates a tension; and this constitutes the shaping 
impulse. After some time, even iron rods which have merely been stood 
on end in the open air, become magnetic. In fact all kinds of iron objects, 
10 iron ovens, iron crosses on churches, weathervanes etc., readily acquire a 
magnetic property, and only very weak magnets are enough to demon-
+ strate their magnetism. In fact the greatest difficulty has been found simply 
in producing non-magnetic iron, and keeping it in this state. This can only 
be done by making it red hot. When an iron bar is rubbed therefore, a 
15 point occurs at which one of its poles is non-magnetic, and on the other 
side the other pole is similarly ineffective at a certain point. These are 
+ Brugmann's two points of indifference, and they differ from the general point 
of indifference, which itself falls a little off centre. Is latent magnetism also 
going to be foisted upon these points? Van Swinden called the point at 
+ which the action of each pole is greatest the point of culmination. 
If a small unmagnetized iron rod is balanced on a needle, its ends form-
ing a horizontal maintained by the equilibrium, one end will dip as soon as 
the rod is magnetized (§ 293 Rem.). In the northern hemisphere it is the 
northern end which dips, and in the southern hemisphere, the southern 
25 end. The motion is more pronounced at higher latitudes because of greater 
proximity to the geographical locality of the poles. When the magnetic 
needle fmally forms a right-angle with the line of the magnetic meridian 
at the pole, it assumes a vertical position, that is to say that it becomes a 
straight line representing a pure specification and distance from the Earth. 
30 This is inclination, which thus varies according to time and place. On his 
expedition to the north pole, Parry experienced this to such an extent, 
+ that he was no longer able to make use of the magnetic needle. In 
inclination, magnetism displays itself as gravity, and in a way which 
is even more remarkable than the attraction of iron. Considered as 
+ mass and lever, the magnet has a centre of gravity, so that although masses 
which fall on both sides of it are in a state of free equilibrium, they are also 
specified and therefore unequal in weight. Specific gravity is here posited in 
the simplest manner; it is not changed, it is merely determined differently. 
The Earth's axis also has an inclination to the ecliptic; but this belongs strictly to 
+ the determination of the heavenly bodies. 
n* 
res 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
It is in the pendulum however, that the genuine distinctness of the specific 
and universal moments of gravity occurs allover the Earth. In this case, the 
force of defInite masses varies from place to place; the same masses may be seen + 
to behave differently, their specific gravity being greater at the poles than it is at 
the equator. Under these circumstances, bodies can only be compared in so far 
5 
as they exhibit the force of their mass as a free and constant dynamic power, 
which remains equal to itself. The magnitude of the mass enters into the pen-
dulum as a motive force; consequently, the motive force of the volume in the 
pendulum with a greater specific gravity must increase the nearer this pendulum 
is to the poles. Centripetal and centrifugal force are supposed to act as separate + 
forces on account of the rotation of the Earth, but it makes no difference 
whether we say that a body has more centrifugal force and so escapes more 
forcefully from the direction of falling, or that it falls more strongly. It is a 
matter of indifference whether it is called falling or projection. Now although 
the force of gravity does not vary when height and mass remain the same, in t 5 
the pendulum, this force itself is specified, and so acts as if the body fell from 
a greater or lesser height. Consequently, the difference in the extent of the 
pendulum's swing at different latitudes is also a specrncation of gravity itself + 
(see § 270 Rem. 1267,31 Add. 1274,1). 
In so far as this self-relating form exists at first in this abstract 20 
determination of the identity of subsistent differentiations, so 
that it has not yet been paralysed into becoming a product within 
the totality of shape, it is, as ac ti vi t y in the sphere of shape, the 
immanent activity of free mechanism, and as such determines 
relationships of place. 
25 
Remark 
A word should be said here about the identity of magnetism, 
electricity, and chemism, which is now generally accepted, and + 
which in physics, has even become fundamental. The oppo-
si tion of the form within individual material being also goes on 
to determine itself with greater reality in electricity, and with 30 
even more completeness in chemism. The same universal totality 
of form lies, as their substance, at the basis of all these particular 
forms. As processes moreover, electricity and chemism are the 
activities of an opposition which is of a more real nature, and which 
106 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
physically is more determined than that of magnetism; what is 
more, these processes have as their principal content alterations 
in the relationships of material spatiality. This side of this con-
crete activity is at the same time a mechanizing determination; 
5 implicitly, it is magnetic activity. The empirical conditions 
necessary for making magnetism as such appear within these 
more concrete processes, have been discovered in recent times. It 
is therefore to be regarded as an important advance in empirical 
science, that the identity of these phenomena should have been 
+ generally recognized. This identity has been given various names, 
such as electro-chemism, magneto-electro-chemism etc., yet it 
is equally important that the particular forms in which the 
universal exists, and the particular phenomena of these forms, 
should also be distinguished from each other. The name 
15 'magnetism' should therefore be reserved for the express form and 
for its manifestation; a manifestation which is in the sphere of 
shape as such, and which therefore relates itself only to the 
determinations of space. Similarly, the word 'electricity' 
should be applied oruy to those phenomenal determinations ex-
20 pressly defined by it. Magnetism, electricity, and chemism, were 
formerly regarded as wholly separate and independent forces 
having no connection with each other. It is philosophy which has 
grasped the idea of their identity while expressly maintaining 
that they are different. The latest way of regarding the matter 
25 in physics seems to have swung to the other extreme and to treat 
the phenomena as identical, so that it is now necessary to estab-
lish the fact and manner of their distinctness. The difficulty lies 
in the need to reconcile their identity with their distinctness, and 
is to be resolved only by the nature of the Notion, not by identity, 
30 which merely confuses the names of these phenomena under the 
+ heading of magneto-electro-chemism. 
Addition. The second point concerning the linearity of magnetism (cf. 
prevo § Add. (aJ II. 100,9) is the question of the determinate modes o.f this 
activity. Since there is as yet no specific determinate being in matter, but 
35 only spatial relationships, change is nothing more than motion, for motion 
is precisely this change of spatial being within time. It is precisely because 
it is still immersed within matter without having attained to actualization 
however, that this activity must have a material substratum to support it; 
for in the substratum, the form is present only as the direction of a single 
107 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
straight line. In living existence however, matter is determined by ani-
mation itsel£ Here too, it is true to say that the determinateness is im-
manent, and merely determines gravity in an immediate manner, without 
any further physical determination. The activity penetrates into matter 
without being communicated to it by any external mechanical impulse 
5 
however, and as theform which is immanent to matter, it is a materialized 
and materializing activity. As this motion is not indeterminate, but has 
in fact very defmite determinations, it is either convergence or divergence. 
Magnetism differs from gravity however, in that it submits corporeality 
to a completely different direction from that of the gravitational vertical; 10 
a typical determination of its effect is to be found in its preventing iron 
filings from falling where they would under the influence of gravity 
alone, and of remaining there. This motion is different from that of the 
heavenly bodies in that it is not rotatory, not a curve, and is not therefore 
devoid of attraction and repulsion. Within a curve, such as that of the 1 S 
heavenly bodies, convergence and divergence are one, and attraction and 
repulsion are therefore also indistinguishable. Here however, these two 
motions have distinct existences as convergence and divergence, for we 
are dealing with finite individualized matter, in which the moments held 
within the Notion are seeking freedom; their unity, which also emerges 20 
in contrast to their difference, only constitutes their implicit identity. 
The universal of the two moments is quiescence, and this quiescence con-
stitutes their indifference, for the point of quiescence is necessary to their 
separation, and therefore to specific motion. In motion itself however, 
the opposition is that of activity in a straight line, for the only determinate-
25 
ness present is that of simple divergence and convergence along the same 
line. The two determinations always remain simultaneous, they neither 
alternate nor divide on two sides, for here we have spatiality which is 
not temporal. Consequently the body which is determined by attraction 
must be precisely the same body simultaneously determined by repulsion. 30 
The body approaches a certain point, and in so doing has something com-
municated to it; it is itself determined, and being determined in this way, 
has to move simultaneously from the other side. 
The connection between electricity and magnetism has been studied 
mainly as it displays itself in the voltaic pile. Thought grasped this con-
+ 
nection long before it was discovered experimentally; and in general it is 
just this searching out and exhibiting the identity of the Notion as the 
identity of phenomena which constitutes the work of the physicist. Philo-
sophy does not grasp this identity in a superficial and abstract manner 
however, it does not present magnetism, electricity, and chemism, as one 40 
108 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
and the same thing. Philosophy has maintained for some time now, that 
magnetism is the principle form, and that electricity and the chemical 
+ process are merely other forms of this principle. Magnetism was formerly 
isolated and relegated into the background; its importance to navigation 
5 was recognized, but there was a general ignorance of its importance in 
the system of nature. Its comlection with chemism and electricity has been 
touched upon. Chemism is the totality into which bodies enter in accord-
ance with their specific particularity. Magnetism however is merely 
spatial. Yet in certain circumstances, magnetic poles, too, differ electrically 
10 and chemically. Conversely, magnetism is easily generated by the gal-
vanic process, for the closed circuit responds very sensitively to magnetism. 
The differentiation is posited in electro-galvanic activity and in the 
chemical process, and is a process of physical opposites. It is therefore quite 
natural that these concrete opposites should also be manifest at the lower 
15 level of magnetism. The electrical process too is quite clearly a motion, 
but it is also a conflict of physical opposites. What is more, the two poles 
are free in electricity, while in magnetism they are not. In electricity 
therefore, there is an opposition between particular bodies, so that the 
existence of the polarity within it is quite different from that of the merely 
20 linear polarity of the magnet. Yet if metallic bodies in which there are no 
prior physical determinations present are set in motion by the electrical 
process they will display this process within themselves in their own 
manner. This manner is the simple activity of motion, which is in fact 
magnetism. In each phenomenon, we have therefore to pick out the elec-
25 tric and the magnetic moment etc. It has been said that all electrical activity 
is magnetism, and that magnetism is the force which is fundamental to 
the differentials, as well as to the persistence of differentiation, and the 
+ simple relatedness of it. This is of course the case in the electrical and 
chemical processes, although in a more concrete manner than it is in mag-
30 netism. The chemical process is the shaping process of matter individual-
ized in a real manner. The shaping tendency itself is therefore a moment 
of chemism. It is mainly in the galvanic circuit that this moment becomes 
free; there is tension throughout the circuit, but it does not pass over into 
the product as it does in chemical being. This tension is concentrated at 
35 the extremities; and so it is here that an influence upon the magnet is 
apparent. 
In this connection it is also interesting to note that when the activity 
of the galvanic process sets a magnetically determinate body in motion, it 
allows it to deviate. This gives rise to the antithesis in which the magnet 
40 deviates either to the east or to the west, according to the deviation of the 
109 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
~outh and north pole. With this in mind, my colleague Professor P. Brman 
has devised an ingenious apparatus in which a galvanic circuit is freely 
suspended. A strip of cardboard or of whalebone is so cut that a small + 
copper or silver container may be fitted into one of its ends, or perhaps 
also into the middle. This container is filled with acid, into which a zinc 
5 
strip or wire is inserted. This strip is then led round to the other end of 
the whalebone, and from thence back to the other side of the container. 
This gives rise to galvanic activity. If the whole apparatus is then rendered 
mobile by being suspended by a thread, it will exhibit differentiation when 
the poles of a magnet are brought to bear upon it. Erman called this sus-
10 
pended mobile galvanic battery a 'rotation circuit'. Its +E wire is aligned 
north-south. To quote him, 'If one approaches the north end of the ap-
paratus from the east, with the north pole of a magnet, this end will be 
repulsed. If the same north pole is brought up from the west however, 
attraction will take place. The total result is the same in both cases, for 15 
whether it is attracted or repulsed, a rotation circuit at rest in a south-
north position always turns to the west, i.e. from left to right, once it is 
brought under the influence of the north pole of a magnet placed beyond 
its arc. The south pole of a magnet produces the opposite effect.' Bast-
west chemical polarity, and north-south magnetic polarity run counter here; 20 
in the Earth, the second of these achieves a wider significance. The tran-
sience of magnetic determinateness also comes into evidence here. If the 
magnet is held over the galvanic circuit, the determination is quite 
different from that which results when it is held on the same level; the 
apparatus turns completely round. 
25 
§ 314 
The activity of form is none other than that of the Notion in 
general; it is the positing of differentiated identity and of 
identical differentiation. Here therefore, in the sphere of 
material spatiality, that which is identical in space is posited as 
differentiated through its divergence from itself in repulsion, 30 
and that which is differentiated in space is posited as identical 
by being brought into convergence and contact through attrac-
tion. As this activity constitutes magnetism merely on account 
of its still existing abstractly within a material being, it only 
animates a linearity (§ 256). In this linearity, the two determin-
35 
ations of form can emerge separately only within the difference 
of the two ends. Consequendy, the active magnetic difference 
lIO 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
of the form consists merely in one of the ends or pol e s positing 
its identity with the same third term, i.e. with that which the 
other pol e repels from itsel£ 
Remark 
The law of magnetism is expressed by saying that like poles 
s repulse each other and unlike poles attract, like poles being 
hostile to each other while unlike poles are friendly. The only 
determination implied by this likeness is however that poles are 
like if they are both equally attracted or repulsed by a third term. 
However, the precise determination of this term too is simply 
10 that it repulses or attracts, either these like poles, or some other 
term. All these determinations are purely relative, and are de-
void of distinct, sensible, neutral existence. It has already been 
observed (Rem. § 312). that terms such as north and south contain 
no such original primary or immediate determination. Con-
15 sequently, the attraction of unlike and the repulsion of like 
poles, are certainly not the secondary nor yet the particular phe-
nomenon of a presupposed magnetic principle which already has 
its own determinateness. They express nothing but the nature of 
magnetism itself, and are therefore expressions of the pure nature 
20 of the Notion, when it is posited within this sphere as activity. 
Addition. A third question therefore presents itself here. What is ap-
proached and what is diverged from? Although magnetism is this diremp-
tion, the fact is not yet evident. When something is put into relation with 
something else which is still in a state of indifference, this second term is 
25 affected in one way by one extremity of the first, and in another way by 
the other extremity. The infection consists of the second term's being 
made the opposite of the first, in order that as other (and as posited as 
other by the first term), it may be posited as being identical with this first 
term. Consequently, it is the activity of the form which first determines 
30 the second term as an opposition; the form therefore comports itself with 
regard to the other as an existing process. The activity relates itself to 
another, which it posits as its opposite. This other was initially only 
another through our subjective comparison; it is now form determined 
as other, and then posited as identical. Conversely, the other side exhibits 
35 the opposite side of the determination. It has to be assumed that linear 
activity has also been imparted to the second term, and that one side of it 
III 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
has been infected as opposition; consequently, its other extremity is at 
once identical with the first extremity of the first term. If this second 
extremity of the second material line is now brought into contact with 
the first extremity of the first, it is identical with this extremity, and is 
therefore repulsed. Sensuous conception, as well as that of the under-
5 
standing, is unable to comprehend magnetism. To the understanding, 
identity is nothing but identity, and differentiation nothing but differen-
tiation, which implies that the side on which two things are identical is 
the side on which they are not different. One fmds in magnetism however 
that it is precisely to the extent that identity is identical that it is posited as 10 
being differentiated, and to the extent that differentiation is differentiated 
that it is posited as being identical. The difference consists in the terms 
being themselves and their opposites. The identity in both poles posits its 
differentiation, and the differentiation in both poles posits its identity. 
This is the transparently active Notion, which is as yet unrealized how-
15 
ever. 
This is the activity of total form as the posited identity of opposites. It is 
the concrete activity contrasting with the abstract activity of gravity, in 
which these opposites are already implicitly identical. On the contrary, 
the activity of magnetism consists in first infecting the other in order to 20 
give it weight. Although it can attract, gravity is not active as magnetism 
is, for that which it attracts is already implicitly identical. Here however, 
the other is first made capable of attracting and being attracted, so that 
only here does form become active. When something is drawn, some-
thing is simply done, and that which is drawn is involved to the same 25 
extent as that which draws. 
+ 
Magnetism now constitutes the middle term between the two extremities 
of subjectivity which contains its elfin a point, and fluidity which is a mere 
liberating of the form, which becomes a material product in the crystal, 
and which is already displayed in the ice-spicula for example. Magnetism + 
persists as this being-in-self and accomplished self-realization. It is the 
impotence of nature which separates off the motive activity in magnetism; 
it is left to the power of thought to relate such a part to the whole. 
§ 315 
3. The activity which has passed over into its product is shape, 
and is determined as crystal. The differentiated magnetic poles 35 
are reduced to neutrality in this totality, and the abstract linearity 
of the place-determining activity is realized as the plane and as 
II2 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
the surface of the whole body. More precisely, rigid punctiformity 
is on the one hand extended into developed form, while on the 
other hand, a limit is set to the formal extension of the sphere. 
It is the one form which operates (a) in limiting the sphere and so 
5 crystallizing the body outwardly; and (b) in shaping puncti-
formityand so thoroughly crystallizing the inner continuity of 
+ the body through the passage of the folia, i.e. its nuclear 
shape. 
Addition. This third moment is, in the fIrst instance, shape as the unity 
10 of magnetism and sphericity; the still immaterial determining becomes 
material, and with this the restless activity of magnetism reaches complete 
quiescence. Attraction and repulsion no longer occur here, for everything 
+ is now set in its place. Initially, the tension of the magnet passes over 
into the crystal of the Earth, which is the universal independence, 
15 in which the line passes over into the spatial completeness of the sphere. 
As real magnetism however, the individual crystal is this totality, in 
which the drive has ceased, and the oppositions are neutralized into the 
form of indifference. Magnetism then expresses its differentiation as the 
+ determination of surface. Consequently we no longer have inner shape, the 
20 being of which would require another, but a shape which is there by itself. 
All fIguration contains magnetism, for it is a complete limitation in space 
posited by the immanent drive of its overseer, which is form. This is 
an inarticulate activity of nature, which deploys its dimensions timelessly; 
it is the intimate vital principle of nature which expounds without action, and 
+ of whose figures one can only say that they are there. The principle is omni-
present in the fluid sphericity, and fmds no opposition there. It is the unobtru-
sive formative principle which links together all the indifferent parts of the 
whole. Magnetism as such is not present in the crystal, although it is in the 
crystal that it fmds its fulfIlment. The inseparable sides of magnetism, which 
30 have a subsistent determinate being and are at the same time discharged here 
into indifferent fluidity, are the shaping which dies out in this indifference. 
When one is dealing with the philosophy of nature, one is therefore 
justift.ed in saying that magnetism is a completely universal determination; 
but it is wrong to follow this up by attempting to show that magnetism 
35 as such is present in shape. As an abstract drive, the determination of mag-
netism is still linear. In its completeness however, magnetism is the prin-
+ ciple which determines spatial limitation in every dimension. Shape is an 
immobile matter extending into all dimensions; it is the neutrality of 
infmite form and of materiality. It is here therefore that form displays its 
113 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
control over the whole mechanical mass. The body certainly still has 
weight with regard to the Earth; this primary substantial relationship is 
still preserved, and even man, who is absolute lightness as spirit, does not 
cease to have weight. Consequently, the outer connection of parts is now 
determined from within by a principle of form which is independent of 5 
gravity. This is the first instance of the purposiveness of nature itself. This + 
purposiveness is a relation between various indifferent moments constituting a 
necessity, the moments of which have a stable determinate being, or the 
being-in-self which is present.-This purposiveness is an act of intelligence 
on the part of nature itself, and consequently does not resemble the 10 
understanding in merely imposing a form on matter from without. 
The preceding forms are not yet purposive, they are merely determinate being, 
which as such has no relation to another. The magnet is not yet purposive, for 
its two poles merely have a simple necessity for each other, and are not yet 
indifferent. Here however there is a unity of indifferents, or of moments each 15 
of which has a free existence in relation to the other. The lines of the crystal 
constitute this indifference, one may be separated from the other without 
ceasing to exist, but it is only through their relation to one another that they 
have a significance, and it is purposiveness which gives them this unity and 
significance. 
20 
As the crystal is this quiescent end, motion constitutes something 
other than its end; the end is not yet a temporal matter. The separate con-
cretions still lie there in a state of indifference, and the acuminations of the + 
crystal may be split off and separated from each other. Now this is not 
the case with magnetism; consequently, it is wrong if we also call the 25 
acuminations of a crystal poles because they, too, are opposites determined 
by a subjective form, for the differences in a crystal have reached 
a state of quiescent subsistence. As shape is the equilibrium of + 
differentials, it also has to display these differentiations within itself; 
to the extent that it does this, the crystal contains the moment which represents 30 
its external relation, and displays its character in the break-up of its mass. 
Shape itself must also submit to differentiation, and be the unity of these 
differentials, so that the crystal has an interior as well as an exterior shape 
as the two wholes of its form. This double geometry or shaping is 
as it were Notion and reality, soul and body. The crystal is built up + 
of layers, but its fracture cuts across all layers. The inner determination + 
of form is no longer merely the determination of cohesion, but 
all the parts belong to this form; matter is thoroughly crystallized. 
The crystal is likewise bounded externally, and regularly enclosed 
in an internally differentiated unity. Its planes are completely smooth 40 
114 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
and mirrorlike, and have edges and angles forming shapes ranging 
from simple regular equilateral prisms etc. to those which are outwardly 
irregular, though a law is traceable even in these. There are of course 
fine-grained earthy crystals, the shape of which is predominantly super-
5 ficial; as punctiformity, the precise nature of earth is the shape of shape-
lessness. When pure crystals such as Iceland spar are struck so that they are 
free to fracture in accordance with their inner form however, they reveal 
in the smallest of their particles their previously quite indiscernible shape. 
Huge rock-crystals three feet long and a foot thick, and still preserving 
10 their hexagonal shape, have been found in the St. Gotthard pass, and on 
+ the island of Madagascar. It is the permeation of this nuclear shape which is 
their most remarkable feature. Iceland spar is rhomboid; if it is fractured, 
its parts are found to be perfectly regular, and if the fractures take place 
in accordance with its inner texture, all the planes are mirrorlike. No 
15 matter how often it is fractured, it will always display the same features; 
the ideal nature of its form is soul-like and omnipresent in its permeation 
of the whole. This inner shape is now a totality. In cohesion it was a single 
determination such as the point, line or surface, which dominated. Now 
however, shapes are formed in all three dimensions. Werner called this the 
+ passage of the folia, but it is now known as fractural texture or nuclear 
shape. The nucleus of the crystal is itself a crystal, and its inner shape is a di-
mensional whole. The nuclear shape may vary; there are gradations in foliar 
shape from flat or convex folia to a completely determinate nuclear shape. In 
its outer crystallization, the diamond is octahedral, and although its clarity is 
25 of a very high order, it is also internally crystallized. It disintegrates into lam-
ellae, so that if one attempts to polish it, it is difficult to leave acute acu-
minations. There is a way of striking it so that it fractures in accordance 
+ with the nature of the passage of its folia however, and its planes are then 
perfectly mirrorlike throughout. Hauy has mainly concentrated upon 
+ describing the forms of crystals, and others after him have added to his 
work. 
Finding the connection between the inner and outer form (forme primi-
tive et secondaire), and deriving the latter from the former, constitutes 
an interesting and delicate part of crystallography. All observations have 
35 to be referred to a general principle of transformation. The outer crystal-
lization does not always accord with the inner; not all rhomboid Iceland 
spars have the same outward determination as they have internally for 
example and yet both their figurations are the expression of a single unity. 
Hauy, as is known, has traced the geometry of this relation between inner and 
+ outer shape in fossils, but he was unable to demonstrate its inner necessity, and 
lIS 

, 
HEGELS 
PHILOSOPHY O~ NATURE 
also failed to show that the shape had any connection with specific gravity. He 
assumes the nucleus, and postulates what he calls 'integrant molecules' which 
arrange themselves on its planes by a kind of aggregation. The outer shapes are + 
then presumed to arise out of this aggregation by the decrement of the layers of 
the base, while the law of this aggregation is still determined by the primitive 5 
shape. Crystallography also has to determine the relationship between crys- + 
talline shapes and chemical substances, for one shape is more characteristic 
of a chemical substance than another. In the main, salts are both outwardly + 
and inwardly crystalline. Metals on the other hand, as they are not 
neutral bodies, but are merely abstractly undifferentiated, tend to be con-
10 
fined to formal shape; their nuclear shape is more hypothetical, and has 
only been perceived in bismuth. Metal is still substantially uniform, but + 
a weak acid works upon its surface, and an incipient crystallization is 
certainly apparent in the resultant 'waterings' of tin or iron for example. + 
The figurations are not regular however, and only the rudiment of a 15 
nuclear shape is discernible. 
B 
The specification of the individual body 
(The particular properties of bodies) 
§ 316 
The figuration which, as the individualization of mechanism 
determines space, passes over into physical specification. 
The individual body is in itself the physical totality; this 
totality is to be posited in the body as difference, but as differ-
20 
ence determined and contained within individuality. As the 
subject of these determinations, the body contains them as 
properties or predicates; it does this so that they are at the same 
time related to their untrammelled and universal elements how-
ever, and form processes with them. The chemical process first 25 
constitutes the specific positing of these determinations; within 
this subject they are still implicit and have not yet been led back 
into individuality, so that they merely constitute relationships 
with these elements, not the real totality of process. These deter-
minations differ from one another on account of their elements, 30 
the logical determinateness of which has been indicated in their 
sphere (§ 282 et seq.). 
n6 

PHYSICS OP TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
Remark 
According to an ancient and general OpInlOn, each body 
consists of four elements. In more recent times, Paracelsus 
has regarded them as being composed of mercury or fluid-
+ ity, sulphur or oil, and salt, which Jacob Boehme called 
+ the great triad. It has of course been very eas.y to refute 
these opinions and others of their kind, when these names 
have been taken to mean the individual empirical substan-
ces to which they refer in everyday usage. It should not be 
overlooked however, that in their essence they contain and 
10 express the determinations of the Notion. One ought 
+ rather to admire the strength of the yet unliberated thought 
which, when dealing with such sensuous and particular 
existences, grasped and held fast to nothing but the uni-
versal significance of its own determination. Consequently, 
15 it is also quite irrelevant to refute these doctrines in an 
experimental manner (see above Add. to § 280, II. 32,30). 
What is more, as this manner of conceiving and determining 
draws its strength from the energy of reason, which does 
not allow itself to be completely forgotten, and is not led 
20 astray by the sensuous play and confusion of appearance, 
it is immensely superior to mere investigation, and to the 
undigested enumeration of the properties of bodies. The 
merit and glory of this investigation is thought to be its 
+ ceaseless provision of new facts, instead of the bringing of 
25 such a plurality of particulars back to the universal through the 
recognition of the Notion within them. 
Addition. In crystal, infmite form has only established itself within 
weighted matter in a spatial manner, and still lacks the specification of 
difference. Now however, the determinations of form themselves have to 
30 appear as differentiated matter, and so constitute the reconstruction and 
recomposition of the physical elements through individuality. The in-
dividual body or the element of earth is the unity of air, light, fire and 
water; and it is the way in which these elements exist in earth which con-
stitutes the specification of individuality. Light corresponds to air, and the 
35 light which is individualized by the darkness of the body is the specific 
obscuration of a colour. In so far as the combustible and igneous principle 
is a moment of the individual body, it constitutes its smell. It is the 
II7 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
continuous but insensible course of its consumption, it is not what is called 
its oxidization or combustion in a chemical sense however, it is the indi-
vidualization of the air in the simplicity of its specific process. As indi-
vidualized neutrality, water is salt and acid etc., and constitutes the body's 
taste. Its neutrality is already an indication of the solubility of the body, 
5 
or of its real relationship with something else, which constitutes the 
chemical process. Colour, odour, and taste are properties of individual 
bodies; they do not exist independently for themselves, but are inherent 
within a substratum. In the first instance, they are only wheld within an 
immediate individuality, and they are therefore mutually indifferent; 10 
the properties are therefore material, as is the case with pigments for 
example. Individuality is still weak, and is unable to retain its hold upon 
the properties; the unifying power of life is not yet present here as it is in 
organic being. As particular existences these properties also have the general 
significance of preserving their connection with that from which they 15 
originate: colour is related to light, by which it is bleached; odour is a 
process involving air; and taste, likewise, keeps up a relation with its 
abstract element, which is water. 
The mere names of the properties which are about to be discussed 
bring sensation to mind; this is particularly true in the case of smell and 20 
taste, for the physical properties belonging to the body are not merely 
objective, but also designate the subjectivity of their existence for the 
subjective senses. Consequently, as these elementary determinatenesses 
come forth within the sphere of individuality, their relationship with the 
senses also has to be noticed. This immediately gives rise to two questions. 25 
Firstly, why is it that the relationship between the body and the subjective sense 
occurs at this particular juncture? Secondly, to which objective properties 
do our five senses correspond? Colour, odour and taste have just been 
mentioned, but they only constitute the three which corresponds to the 
senses of sight, smell, and taste. Hearing and touch do not occur here, so 30 
that one might well ask where these other two senses have their correspond-
ing objective properties. 
(a) The following observation may be made with regard to the relation-
ship here. We have an individual and self-contained shape, which because 
of the self-sufficiency it enjoys as a totality, is no longer a differential im-
35 
plied by another, and which therefore has no practical relationship with 
another. The determinations of cohesion are not indifferent to another, 
but are merely related to another; shape on the other hand is indifferent 
to this relation. It is true that shape may also be treated mechanically, but 
since it is self-relating, its relation to another is merely contingent, and 40 
1I8 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
never necessary. Such a relationship between it and another might be 
called a theoretical relationship, but it is only sentient, and at a higher 
level, thinking natures, which have such a relationship to something. The 
precise condition necessary for such a theoretical relationship, is that the 
5 sentient being should maintain its freedom with regard to the object by 
being related to another, and at the same time to itsel£ This also means 
that the object is left inviolate. Two individual bodies such as crystals cer-
tainly leave one another alone, but only because they are not related to 
one another. In order to be related, they have to be chemically determined 
10 by means of water; otherwise they are only related by a third term, i.e. 
the ego which compares them. Consequently, this theoretical relation-
ship is based solely upon the absence of any mutual relation. A true 
theoretical relationship is only present where an actual relation between 
two sides occurs in conjunction with the freedom of its constituent term, 
15 and it is precisely this relationship which exists between sensation and its 
object. Consequently, the completed totality now under consideration is 
given freedom by its other, and is related to it only in this way. That is to 
say that in the sphere which we are about to consider, physical totality 
exists for sensation, and as it also deploys itself in its determinate modes, 
20 it also exists for the distinct modes of sensation, or the senses. That is why 
the relationship between figuration and the senses is considered here, al-
though it is not yet necessary to touch upon it (see below § 358), for it 
does not belong to the physical sphere. 
(b) Here we have found that colour, odour, and taste are the deter-
25 minations of shape experienced through the three senses of sight, smell, 
and taste. The sensuous being of the other two senses of touch and hearing 
has already been considered (see above Add. to § 300, II. 72, 31). The 
mechanical individuality of shape as such corresponds to feeling in general, 
and it is here that heat also belongs. We relate ourselves to heat in a more 
30 theoretical manner than we do to shape in general however. We feel shape 
only in so far as it offers resistance to us; we have to press and touch it, 
which is already a practical relationship, for the one side does not leave 
the other alone. In the case of heat however, there is still no resistance. 
As we have seen, hearing corresponds to the mechanically conditioned 
35 individuality of sound. Consequently, the sense of hearing coincides with 
this specialization, in which infmite form is related to material being. 
+ This soul-like element is only related externally to material being how-
ever; it is the form which is merely escaping from mechanical materiality, 
so that it is not yet permanent, but is disappearing in its immediacy. Hear-
40 ing is the sense of the ideal nature of the appearance of mechanical totality; 
II9 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
it has its opposite in touch, the object of which is the terrestrial principle 
of gravity, the shape which is not yet specified within itsel£ We have 
already had the two extremes, the ideality of the sense of hearing and the 
reality of touch, in total shape. Differences of shape confme themselves to 
the other three senses. The specific physical properties of individual shape + 
are not themselves shape, but the manifestations of it which maintain their 
essence through their being for other. It is with this that the pure in-
difference of the theoretical relationship begins to efface itself. The other 
to which these qualities relate themselves is their universal nature or 
element; it is not yet an individual corporeality. At the same time, it is 10 
here that a relation of process and differentiation is formed, although it 
can only be an abstract relation. Nevertheless, as the physical body is not 
merely one particular difference, and does not break down simply into 
these determinatenesses, but is the totality of these differentials, its breaking 
down is merely a differentiation which is implicit within it as its proper-
15 
ties, and in which it remains as a single whole. In this way we have 
differentiated body in general, which as a totality relates itself to other 
similar differentials. The differentiation of these total shapes is an out-
wardly mechanical relationship, since they have to remain what they are, 
and their self-preservation is not yet dissolved. This expression of persis-
20 
tent differentials is electricity, which is at the same time a superficial pro-
cess of this body opposed to the elements. Consequently, on one side we 
have specific differentials, and on the other the totality of differentiation 
in general. 
We now have to present the precise division of that which follows. 25 
Firstly, there is the relationship of the individual body to light; secondly, 
there are differentiated relationships as such, i.e. smell and taste; thirdly 
there is the general differentiation between two total bodies, i.e. electricity. 
Here we shall only consider the physical determinatenesses of the indi-
vidual body as they are related to their respective universal elements, in 30 
regard to which they are, through their individualization, total bodies. 
Consequently, individuality as such is preserved rather than dissolved in 
this relation, and as a result of this, we shall only be considering properties 
here. It is in the chemical process that an actual dissolution of shape first 
occurs, so that which constitutes properties at this juncture, occurs there 35 
as a specific matter. As pigment for example, materialized colour no 
longer belongs to the individual body as a total shape, but is separated 
from it through chemical dissolution, and posited for itsel£ It is certainly 
also permissible to call a property such as this, which exists outside its 
association with the self of individuality, an individual totality. A metal 40 
120 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
would provide an example of one, although it is not a neutral body, but 
is merely undifferentiated. In the chemical process we shall also notice 
that bodies of this kind are merely formal and abstract totalities. These 
specifications occur initially in the Notion on our account, for like shape, 
s they are implicit, and have an immediate being. They are subsequently 
posited through the actual chemical process however, and it is there that 
the true conditions of their existence lie, as do those of shape. 
I. Relationship to light 
§ 317 
The primary determination of shaped corporeality is its self-
identical selfhood, the abstract self-manifestation of itself as 
10 simple indeterminate individuality, i.e. Ii gh t. Shape as such is not 
luminous however, for this property is a relationship to light 
(prev. §). (a) Body as pure crystal, in the perfect homogeneity 
of its neutrally existing inner individualization, is transparent 
and is a medium for light. 
Remark 
15 
The transparency of the air is related to its lack of inner cohesion, 
as is the transparency of the concrete body to the homogeneity 
of its coherent and crystallized shape. In that it is unspecified, 
the individual body is certainly as transparent and translucent as 
+ it is opaque etc.; transparency is its immediate and primary 
20 determination as crystal however, the physical homogeneity 
of which is not yet specified and deepened within itself into any 
further determination. 
Addition. At this juncture, shape is still the quiescent individuality which 
occurs in mechanical and chemical neutrality, though unlike complete 
25 shape it does not possess the latter at all points. Shape, as the pure form, 
by which matter is completely determined and pervaded, is merely self-
identical in matter, and dominates it throughout. This is the first deter-
mination of shape in thought. In materialized being, this self-identity is 
physical; light represents this abstract physical self-identity, so that the 
30 primary specification of shape is its relationship with light. It is because 
of this identity that it has light within itsel£ This relationship, through 
121 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which shape posits itself for another, is strictly theoretical, not practical; 
it is rather of a completely ideal nature. This identity, which is no longer 
merely posited as effort as it is in gravity, but which has acquired its 
liberty in light, and is now posited in terrestrial individuality, is the dawn-
ing of the lighted aspect in shape itsel£ As shape is not yet absolutely free + 
however, but is a determinate individuality, this terrestrial individualiza-
tion of its universality is still not the interior relation of individuality to 
its own universality. It is only sentient being which possesses the universal 
principle of its determinateness with itself as a universality. It is only 
organic being which appears before its other with its universality con-
10 
tained within it. Here on the other hand, the universal of this individuality 
is still another, an element which is external to the individual body. The 
Earth moreover is only related to the sun as a universal individual, and 
this is still a completely abstract relation, while the relation between the 
individual body and light is at least real. In the first instance, the individual 15 
body is certainly dark, for this is the general determination of abstract 
matter which is for itself, but this abstract darkness is overcome by the 
individualization of matter through the pervasion of form. Colours are 
the particular modifications of this relationship to light, so that they will 
also have to be treated here. On the one hand they belong to the real 20 
individual body, but on the other hand they also merely waver outside 
the individuality of bodies. As yet, no objective material existence can -I 
be attributed to these shadowy entities; they are appearances which are 
simply dependent upon the relationship between light and a darkness 
which is still incorporeal. They are in fact a spectrum. Colours are thus in 25 
part completely subjective, and are conjured up by the eye; they are the 
action of a brightness or darkness, and a modification of their relationship 
in the eye, although they certainly also require an external brightness. 
Schulz ascribes a particular brightness to the phosphorus in our eyes, so 
that it is often difficult to say whether the brightness and darkness and the 30 
relationship between them lie in us or not. 
+ 
We now have to consider this relationship between individualized 
matter and light, firstly, as identity which lacks opposition, and which is 
not yet posited as different from any other determination. This is general, 
formal transparency. Secondly, we have to consider this identity as specified 35 
with respect to another, in the comparison of two transparent media. 
This is refraction, in which the medium is not purely transparent, but is 
specifically determined. Thirdly we have to consider colour as a property. 
This is metal, which is a mechanical but not chemical neutrality. 
It should be noticed first of all with regard to transparency, that opacity 40 
122 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
and darkness belong to the abstract individuality of the element of earth. 
On account of their elementary universality and neutrality, air, water, 
and flame are transparent and not dark. Pure shape is transparent for the 
same reason, i.e. because it has overcome darkness, or the abstract, brittle, 
5 unrevealed being-far-self of individual matter, as the non-manifestation 
of itsel£ By so doing, it has established its transparency simply by bringing 
itself back to the neutrality and uniformity, which constitute a relation to 
light. Material individuality is an inward darkening, since it seals itself 
offfrom the ideal nature of manifestation to another. The individual form 
10 which has pervaded its matter as a totality, has thereby posited its mani-
festation however, and so advances to this ideality of determinate being. 
Self-manifestation is the explication of form, the positing of one deter-
minate being for another, so that this relation is at the same time held 
within an individual unity. Consequently the Moon, which is the body of 
15 rigidity, is opaque, while the comet is transparent. Since this transparency 
is the formal factor, the crystal has it in common with the intrinsically 
shapeless elements of air and water. However, the transparency of the 
crystal differs from that of these elements on account of its origin. These 
elements are transparent because they have not yet attained to internal 
20 individuality, the element of earth, obscuration. Shaped bodies are cer-
tainly not light, for they are individual matter, but in so far as the puncti-
form self of individuality is unhindered in its internal formativeness, it has 
nothing further within this dark material being which is alien to it. Con-
sequently, this being-in-self, which has passed over in its purity into the 
25 developed totality of form, is here introduced into the homogeneous 
sameness of matter. Free and unrestricted form, embracing the whole as 
well as the individual parts, is transparency. All the individual parts are 
made completely the same as this whole, so that there is no difference be-
tween them, and they exhibit no isolation within mechanical penetration. 
30 It is therefore the abstract identity of the crystal, its completely undif-
ferentiated mechanical unity, and the neutrality of its chemical unity, 
which constitute its transparency. Although this identity does not shine 
itself, it is so closely related to light, that it comes very close to shining. 
It is the crystal to which light has given birth; light is the soul of this 
35 being-in-self, for mass is completely dissolved in its ray. The archetypal 
crystal is the diamond of the Earth, in which every eye rejoices, and 
+ recognizes as the firstborn son of light and gravity. Light is the abstract 
and completely free identity. Air is the elementary identity. The 
subjected identity is passive with regard to light, and so constitutes 
40 the transparency of the crystal. Metal on the other hand is opaque, 
123 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
since the individual identity within it is concentrated into being-for-
self through a high specific gravity (see Addition to § 320, towards the 
end). Transparency requires that the crystal should have no earthy frac-
ture, for it would then belong to the sphere of brittleness. A transparent 
body may also be rendered opaque without submitting it to chemical 
s 
modifications. This may be done by a merely mechanical change; it is a 
phenomenon which is common enough, and requires only that the body 
should be divided into individual parts. Powdered glass for example, and 
water whipped into foam, are opaque. Their mechanical undifferentiation 
and homogeneity are removed and interrupted, and brought into the 10 
form of individualized being-for-self, while they were formerly a me-
chanical continuum. Ice is already less transparent than water, and once 
it is crushed, it becomes completely opaque. Whiteness arises out of trans-
parency, when the continuity of the parts is converted into a plurality, as 
for example in snow. For us, it is as whiteness that light has its primary 15 
determinate being, and so stimulates our eyes. To quote Goethe ('On the 
Theory of Colours' vol. I, p. 189) 'One might say that the contingent (i.e. 
mechanical) opaque condition of a perfectly transparent body is white. 
In their pure condition, ordinary (undecomposed) earths are white, but 
they become transparent through natural crystallization.' That is why + 
lime and silica are opaque, for although they have a metallic base, it has 
passed over into opposition and differentiation, and so become neutral. 
Consequently, there are chemically neutral substances which are opaque, 
and are therefore not completely neutral, i.e. they contain a residual prin-
ciple which has not entered into relationship with another. Transparency 25 
occurs however, when silica is crystallized into rock-crystal without the 
help of acid, alumina into mica, magnesia into talc, and of course when 
carbonic acid is poured on lime. This phenomenon of a body passing easily 
from opacity to transparency is not rare. A certain stone, hydrophane, is 
opaque, but becomes transparent when saturated with water; the water 30 
neutralizes it, and so effaces its disconnectedness. When borax is dipped in 
olive oil, it also becomes completely transparent through the positing of 
the continuity of its parts. Since what is chemically neutral has a tendency + 
to become transparent, there are also metallic crystals which, in so far as 
they are not pure metals but metallic salts (vitriols), become translucent 35 
by virtue of their neutrality. There are also coloured bodies such as pre-
cious stones which are transparent; they are not completely transparent 
however, simply because the metallic principle to which they owe their 
colour is neutralized, but not completely subdued. 
+ 
124 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
§ 318 
(b) The primary and simplest determinateness possessed by the 
physical medium is its specific gravity, the peculiar nature of which 
is specifically manifest in comparison. The same is therefore also 
true with regard to the peculiar nature of the transparency of the 
5 physical medium, which is only manifest in comparison with 
the different density of another medium. In order to facilitate the 
exposition and illustration of this point, let it be assumed that 
the two media are water and air. In this case, if for example the 
first medium is further from the eye, its action upon the second 
10 will simply be that of densi ty, determining place in a qualitative 
manner. Consequently, the volume of water containing the image 
is seen in the transparent air, as if the same volume of air in which 
the volume of water is posited had the greater specific gravity of 
the water i.e. as if this volume of air were contracted into a cor-
15 respondingly smaller space. It is this that is called refraction. 
Remark 
To speak of the refraction of light is to use a sensuous ex-
pression, which has its validity. It is valid for example when one 
is referring to a rod's appearing to be broken when it is held in 
water, and the expression also lends itself naturally to the geo-
20 metrical demonstration of this phenomenon. The physical 
existence of the so-called refraction of light and lightrays is some-
thing quite different however, and is a phenomenon which is not 
so easy to understand as it might appear to be at first. Apart from 
the invalidity of the usual presentation of this phenomenon, it is 
25 quite evident that the perplexity into which it is bound to fall is 
the result of the distorting assumption that there are luminous 
rays which radiate into a hemisphere from a point. As this theory 
is supposed to explain the phenomenon, attention must be drawn 
to the essential and observable fact that the fIa t bottom of a vessel 
30 which is filled with water appears to be fIa t, and therefore to be 
completely and uniformly raised. This fact stands in com-
plete contradiction to the theory, but as is usually the case in cir-
cumstances like this, the only result is that it is ignored or glossed 
over in the textbooks. It is important to note that in a single 
35 medium, we merely have simple transparency as such, and that it 
125 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is only the relationship of two media of different specific gravi-
ties, which gives rise to a particularization of visibility. This is a 
determination which at the same time merely determines place, 
i.e. is posited by completely abstract density. An active relation-
shi p between two media is not the result of their indifferent 
5 
juxtaposition however. It occurs only when one of these media 
is posited within the other as something which is simply 
visible, as visual space. This second medium is taken over so to 
speak, by the imma terial density of that which is posited within 
it; consequently it displays the visual space of the image within 10 
itself in accordance with its own limitation, and so limits this 
space. It is here that the purely mechanical property of density, 
which is only determinative of space, and which is of an ideal 
nature and has no physical reality, comes expressly to the fore. 
It appears to be effective outside the material being to which it 15 
belongs, because its effect is derived solely by the space occupied 
by the visible object. The relationship cannot be grasped if this 
ideality is not recognized. 
Addition. As we have now considered the transparency of crystal, which 
is invisible in so far as it is transparent, our second consideration must be 20 
the visibility in this transparent body, but at the same time the visibility 
of the opaque body. We have already considered (§ 278) the visible body 
positing itself within an indeterminate transparent one, the linearity of one 
body positing itself in an ideal manner within another, i.e. the reflection 
of light. Further specifications occur within the formal identity of the 25 
crystal however. The transparent crystal which has achieved the ideality 
of its darkened being-for-self, allows other dark bodies to appear through it, 
so that it is the medium, the intermediary, by which one body appears in 
another. Two phenomena occur here, the refraction oflight, and the double 
image displayed by a number of crystals. 
30 
The visibility in question here is that in which something is seen through 
several transparent bodies! and so through various media; for we have 
here the transparency of the individual specifically determined body, 
which therefore occurs only in relation to another transparent medium. 
As specifically determined, the medium has its own specific gravity, as 35 
well as other physical qualitites. This determinateness only fmds expression 
when the medium comes into relation with another transparent medium, 
and the appearance is mediated by them both. In one medium the media-
tion is uniform, and appearance is merely determined by the expansion 
126 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
of light; it is also possible to see in water for example, only not so dis-
tinctly. Consequently, if there is only one medium, there is only one 
density, and also only one determination of place. If there are two media 
however, there are also two determinations of place. It is here that the 
5 most remarkable phenomenon of refraction is produced. It is an everyday 
sight, and appears to be simple and even trivial. Refraction is merely a 
word however. Through each medium taken separately, the eye sees the 
object in a straight line, and in the same relationship with other objects; 
it is only the relationship between the two media which gives rise to the 
10 difference. If the eye sees an object through another medium, so that the 
sight traverses two media, the object appears to be in a different place from 
that in which it would display itself without the specific constitution of 
this second medium. Consequently it has another place in the context of 
light, from that which would be ascribed to it by touch in the context of 
15 material being. This accounts for our being able to see the image of the 
sun even after it has dipped below the horizon. An object in a vessel will 
appear to be displaced and raised if the vase is filled with water. Those 
who shoot fish know that because the place in which they see their prey 
is raised, they must aim below it. 
A 
s 
T 
0 
D 
20 
In this diagram, the angle (ARS) made by the line (AD) from the eye 
(A) to the object as it is seen (D), and the perpendicular through the point 
of incidence (ST), is greater than the angle (AUS) made with the 
127 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
perpendicular, by the line (Ao) from the eye to the point (o) at which the 
object is actually situated. It is usually said that light is refracted when it is 
diverted from its path (OR) by passing from one medium into another, 
so that the object is seen in the changed direction (ARD). When this 
statement is more closely considered, it is found to be meaningless, for a 
5 
single medium does not refract, and it is only in the relation between the 
two media that the principle giving rise to this mode of visibility is to be 
looked for. When the light emerges from one medium, it has not acquired 
any particular quality which has altered it so that it may be redirected by 
the other medium. This following diagram will make this clear. 
10 
b--------------------------,D 
/ 
/ 
/ 
// 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,;: 
/ 
/ 
C------------~~--~~-----D 
A~~--------~------------B 
If there is a medium such as water in the space between AB and the 
position of the eye at point a, the position of 0 will seem to be in the 
direction aqo; that is to say that the medium CDAB will not change the 
direction qo into the direction qp. If this medium between ab and CD is 
removed, it will be ridiculous to assume (i) that 0 is now no longer de-
15 
rived from q, but from r, as if the ray oq had suddenly realized that it had 
air above it, and might emerge at r, so that the eye will see 0 through r. 
Consequently, it is also senseless to say (ii) that 0 is no longer derived 
from q, through which point it could just as well reach a; for 0 emerges 
everywhere, at q just as well as at r etc. 
20 
This is a perplexing phenomenon, because it is a spiritualization of 
sensuous being. The difficulty which it presents has often occupied my 
thoughts, and I shall now explain the way in which I have resolved it. 
128 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
The truth of the matter is that CDAB is not merely transparent, for its 
peculiar nature is also apparent. In other words, the ideal nature of the 
relationship mediates the visibility between AB and a. When we deal with 
visibility, we find ourselves in the field of ideality, for in visibility in 
5 general there are two terms, one of which posits itself ideally within the 
other. Since that which is posited is of an ideal nature and is not yet iden-
tified with the corporeal phenomenon, the principle determining the sight 
is merely determinateness of an ideal nature, which is implicit and therefore 
incorporeal, and is in fact specific gravity. Only spatial relationship 
10 is affected, not colour and other properties. In other words, the im-
material determinateness of the medium CDAB is seen hear as indepen-
dent of the activity of its corporeal existence as such. The difference 
between matters as such does not affect the eye, and even if the lighted 
space, or the medium in which the eye is situated is at the same time ma-
l s terial, this materiality will only affect its determining of the spatial element. 
In order to grasp the matter more precisely, we shall keep to the rela-
tionship between water and air, despite their being merely elementary 
transparencies which are not posited by the form which has overcome 
gravity. We shall posit them as the two neighbouring media, remem-
20 bering that although in their abstract determinateness they occur prior 
to specific gravity, we still have to take all their qualities into considera-
tion if they are to be determined as physically concrete, although in the 
development of their own peculiar nature, these qualities may be dis-
regarded. With water and air as the media between the object and the 
25 eye, we see the body in a different position from that which it occupies. It 
is the reason for this which constitutes the subject of our enquiry. The 
ideal nature of the entire medium CDAB, together with its object 0, 
is posited in the medium CDa in accordance with its qualitative nature. 
What do I see of its qualitative nature however? What is there of it that 
30 enters into the other medium? The answer is that it is its immaterial 
qualitative nature, as water for example, which enters into the other 
medium. It is only its incorporeal qualitativeness, not its chemical nature 
as water, which enters into and determines visibility however. With re-
gard to visibility this qualitative nature is now posited as being effective in 
35 the air, i.e. the water with its content is seen as if it were air. The essential 
point is, that the qualitative nature of the water is visibly present in the air. 
The visual space formed by the water is transported into another visual 
space, which is formed by the air in which the eye is located. What 
particular determinateness does it preserve in this new visual space? 
40 Through what particular determinateness does it become effective, and 
E 
129 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
SO give notice of its visibility? It is not through shape, for it is as a result of 
their transparency that water and air are shapeless with regard to one 
another. Nor is it through cohesion. It is therefore through specific 
gravity. Oiliness and combustibility also make a difference, but we shall 
keep to specific gravity, and not attempt to apply everything to every-
5 
thing. It is only the specific determinateness of the one medium which 
shows in the other. The difficulty is that the quality of specific gravity 
determines place, while here it is liberated from its materiality, and only 
determines the place of visibility. But what is specific gravity, if it is not a 
form which determines space? Here therefore, the specific gravity of 10 
water can have no other effect than to posit the specific gravity of water 
within the visual space occupied by air. The visual space from which the 
eye starts is that of air, and it is this that constitutes its principle and its 
unity. Yet it now has a second visible space before it which is occupied 
by water, and in the place of which it posits the space of the air, reducing 15 
the former to the latter. As it is merely this difference which is of sig-
nificance here, the eye reduces the visual space occupied by the water; for 
the space occupied by the water becomes visible in another space, i.e. the 
space occupied by the air. A certain amount of water is therefore made 
into air, while it retains the specific gravity of water. This means that a 20 
portion of the visible air-space, equal to that of the water is now specified 
by the specific gravity of the water, and given a smaller volume while 
maintaining the same content. While the water-space is now transposed 
into air-space, so that the eye perceives the medium of air instead of that 
of water, the quantum of air remains the same extensive quantum as 2S 
before of course. However, the volume of water only appears to be as 
large as it would if an equal amount, i.e. volume of air had the specific 
gravity of water. Consequently, it is also possible to say that this specific 
amount of air is changed qualitatively and contracted into the space 
which it would occupy if it were converted into water. Air is specifically 30 
lighter, so that when a certain space is filled with air, it contains a lesser 
volume than when it is filled with water. Consequently the space is raised 
and also reduced in size on all sides. This is the way in which this pheno- + 
menon is to be grasped; the explanation of it may appear to be artificial, 
but that is how it is. It is said that the ray propagates itself, and that light + 
traverses the medium. Here however, the whole medium, which is the 
transparent and lighted water-space, is posited within another medium in 
accordance with its specific quality, and not merely as a radiation. It is 
not permissible to think of a material propagation of light therefore, for 
the visibility of the water is ideally present within the air. This presence is 40 
130 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
a specific gravity, and it is solely by means of this specific determinateness 
that water maintains itself and operates within that into which it has been 
transformed, by transforming its transformation into itsel£ It is as if a 
human soul should be transplanted into the body of a beast, and by pre-
5 serving itself, should transform it into a human body. Similarly, it is as 
if the soul of a mouse were to become elephantine within the body of an 
elephant, and at the same time diminish and bedwarf this body into its own 
dimensions. The best illustration of it may be found in the world of 
sensuous activity, in which this relationship is of an ideal nature, while 
10 common thought brings about this belittlement. When a small mind has 
the deeds of a hero forced upon its attention, its narrow mindedness will 
accept this greatness according to its own proportions, and reduce the 
object to its own level, so that it will only see the greatness in the light of 
its own pettiness. When I think about the activity of a hero, this activity 
+ is within me, but only in an ideal manner. Similarly, the air assimilates the 
visual space occupied by the water, and reduces it to its own dimensions. It is the 
assimilation which is the most difficult to grasp, precisely because it is of an 
ideal nature, and yet is also an active and determinate being of a real 
nature. It is precisely through its transparency that the medium consti-
20 tutes this immateriality, this light-like quality, which can be immaterially 
present elsewhere, and yet remain as it 1s. It is thus that the material body 
is clarified into light in transparency. 
The empirical phenomenon is that the objects in a vase of water for 
example, are raised. The angle of refraction was discovered by a Dutchman 
+ Snellius, and it was Descartes who took the matter up. A line is drawn from 
the eye to the object, and although light manifests itself rectilinearly, the 
object is not seen at the end of this linc, but appears to be raised. The place 
in which it is seen is determinate, and another line may be drawn between 
it and the eye. The extent of the difference between these two placcs may 
30 be exactly determined geometrically by dropping a perpendicular from 
the point of incidence to the point on the surface of the water at which 
the first line emerges, and then calculating the angle which the line of 
vision makes with this perpendicular. If the medium in which the eye is 
located has a lower specific gravity than that in which the object is 
35 situated, the object will appear to be further removed from the perpendi-
cular than when it is only seen through the first medium. This means that 
this second medium increases the angle, and this change is determined by 
mathematical physicists from the sine of the angle, as the index of refrac-
tion. If no such angle occurs, but the eye is located on the surface of the 
40 medium, and right on the perpendicular, it is certainly a direct consequence 
131 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the determination of the sine, that the object is not displaced, but 
is seen in its true position. This is expressed by saying that the ray 
which falls perpendicularly upon the refractive surface is not refracted. + 
The fact that the object is still raised is not accounted for in this determi-
nation, for in this case, although it is seen in the same direction, it still 
5 
appears to be closer. The mathematical physicists and the textbooks on 
physics in general, only give the law of the extent of refraction as related to 
the sine, they do not mention the raising itself, which also takes place, 
even when the angle of incidence is nil. It follows from this that the + 
determinations of the sine of the angle are insufficient, for they do not 10 
apply to the phenomenon of the object's appearing closer. From this law 
alone it would follow, that the point from which a perpendicular line may 
be drawn to the eye, would be the point perceived at its real distance, and 
that the other points on this line would only be seen as a gradational 
approach to it. If this were the case, it would also seem as if the bottom 15 
were domed towards the middle like part of a sphere, with its edges 
raised, and a uniformly levelling concave shape. This is not the case how-
ever, for the bottom appears to be perfectly flat, although closer. So much 
for the physicists' explanation. The circumstances do not allow one to 
take the angles of incidence and refraction and their sine, as one's point of 20 
departure. Yet this is what the physicists do, although one is unable to 
regard this determination as the sole cause of the change. According to this 
theory, the perpendicular is not affected when the angle and sine are nil, 
but in this case there is in fact just as much elevation as elsewhere. Conse-
quently, any explanation has to begin with the raising, and the determina-
25 
tion of the angle of refraction among various angles of incidence will then 
follow. 
The refractive power depends upon the various specific gravities of the 
media. It is generally the case that those media with a higher specific 
gravity also give rise to greater refraction. This phenomenon is not solely 30 
dependent upon specific gravity however, there are also other determi-
nations which have an effect upon it, and the principles of oiliness or 
combustibility will also be determinative. Gren cites examples (§ 700) of 
substances, the refractive powers of which are independent of density. For 
example, light is perceptibly refracted by alum and vitriol, although their 35 
specific weights are not noticeably different. If one takes borax and satur-
+ 
ates it with olive oil, both of which are combustible, the refraction does 
not conform to the specific weights of the two bodies. Water and oil of 
turpentine etc. produce the same effect. Biot comments upon this ('Traite 
de Physique', vol. III p. 296), and says that although earthy substances tend 40 
132 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
to comport themselves in accordance with their densities, this is by no 
means true of combustible and gaseous substances. On the following 
page he writes, 'On voit que des substances de densites tres-diverses 
peuvent avoir des forces refringentes egales, et qu'une substance moins 
s dense qu' une autre peut cependant posseder un pouvoir refringent plus fort. 
Cette force depend surtout de la nature chimique de chaque particule. La 
force la plus energique refringente est dans les huiles et resines, et I'des-
+ tillee ne leur est pas infcrieure.' The principle of combustion, which mani-
fests itself here in a characteristic way, is therefore something specific. Con-
10 sequently, oil, the diamond, and hydrogen have a higher refractive index. 
Here however, we have to be content with keeping to and establishing a 
general point of view. Few phenomena are as complicated as this one. The 
particular nature of this complication lies in the advanced spirituality of 
that which is posited here under material determinations. In this pheno-
lS menon, that which is earthly is breached by divinity, although in this 
marriage between the body and the pure inviolable virginity oflight, each 
+ side simultaneously maintains its right. 
§ 319 
The differen t densities which determine visibility, and which 
exist in various media such as air, water and glass etc. are in the 
20 first instance only externally compared and posited in unity; in 
the nature of crystals however, this comparison is internal. On 
the one hand, crystals have a general transparency, but on the 
other hand, they possess in their inner individualization or 
+ nuclear shape, a form which deviates from the formal equality 
2S to which this general transparency belongs. This shape is also shape 
as nuclear shape, but it is likewise a subjective form of an ideal 
nature, which like specific gravity, acts in determining place. Con-
sequently, it also determines spatially manifest visibility in a 
specific manner and is therefore distinct from primary transparency. 
30 It is in fact double refraction. 
Remark 
The category offorce might well be used here, for the rhom-
3S boidal form, which is the commonest form in crystals with an 
internal deviation from this formal equality of shape, thoroughl y 
+ individualizes the interior of the crystal. However, this only takes 
133 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
place when the crystal is not accidentally splintered into lamellae, 
does not come into existence as shape, and when there is not the 
slightest break or flaw in its homogeneity and transparency; when 
it is in fact only active as immaterial determinateness. 
With regard to the transition from a relationship which is pri-
5 
marily posited externally, to the form of this relationship which is 
active as an interior determinateness or force, I can cite nothing 
more apposite than Goethe's words on the relation between the 
external arrangement of two mutually reflecting mirrors, with a 
cube of glass placed between them, and the phenomenon of the 10 
entoptic colours which is produced within this glass. In his 'On + 
the Science of Nature' vol. I part 3, Sect. xxii, p. 148, while con-
sidering, 'natural transparent, crystallized bodies,' he says, 'Nature 
has constructed the same mirroring apparatus in the inner-
most parts of these bodies, as we have constructed by external 15 
physico-mechanical means.' (cf. ibid. p. 147); it has woven an + 
interior damask web. As we have already noticed, this collation of + 
exterior and interior phenomena is not a matter of the refraction 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, but of an external double 
mirroring, and of the corresponding phenomenon in the crystal's 20 
interior. A similar distinction has to be made therefore in con-
nection with what Goethe says on p. 147 of the same work, 'In a 
rhombohedron of Iceland spar, it could be seen quite clearly, that 
the immediate cause of this phenomenon is to be found in the 
variegated passage of the folia, and the interplay ofmirrorings 25 
resulting from this'. This passage is concerned with what one + 
might call rhomboidal force or activity, not with the action of 
existent lamella (cf. 'On the Science of Nature' vol. I part i p. 25). + 
Addition. Of the two images produced by Iceland spar, one is in its 
ordinary position, for it is merely the product of ordinary refraction. The 30 
second is called the extraordinary image; its appearance is raised by the 
shape of the rhomboid, which is a deformed cube, the integrant molecules 
of which have neither the form of a cube nor that of a double pyramid. 
There are two different place-positionings and two different images 
therefore, but they occur within a single shape, for while the shape is 35 
passive in its reception of light, and so simply transmits the image, it also 
asserts its materiality to the extent that the internal contexture of the body 
forms a surface. Goethe has concerned himself extensively with this 
phenomenon, which he attributes to the existence on crystals of fme 
134 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
fissures or lamellae. It is not the fissures, but merely the interior shape 
which gives rise to the displacement however, for colours appear as soon 
+ as there is an actual splintering present (see § seq.). There are other bodies 
through which not only a double line, but even a double pair of lines 
s may be seen. Many more bodies exhibiting double refraction have recently 
been discovered. The phenomenon seen by the sea-shore, in which the 
double image of an object appears, and which is called a mirage by the 
French, but is generally known as the fata morgana, fmds its place here 
+ (Biot 'Traite de Physique' vol. III p. 321). This is a phenomenon of 
10 refraction, not of reflection, and resembles the case of Iceland spar in that 
the object is seen through layers of air which are heated differently and 
therefore have different densities. 
§ 320 
(c) This immaterial being-for-self of form is a force which 
progresses into interior existence, and supersedes the neutral 
15 nature of crystallization. It thus gives rise to the determination of 
immanent punctiformity and brittleness and the resultant co-
hesion, to the still more perfect but formal transparency 
which is displayed by brittle glass for example. This moment of 
brittleness differs from the self-identical manifestation of 
20 light and illumination. It is therefore the internal beginning or 
principle of darkening , ofan as yet unexistent darkness, which 
is however active. It is well known that although brittle glass is 
perfectly transparent, it is the condition for the entoptic colours. 
Darkening does not remain a mere principle, but in contrast to 
25 the simple indeterminate neutrality of shape, and apart from ex-
ternally and quantitatively affected darkenings and reductions in 
transparency, it progresses to the abstract one-sided extreme of 
compactness, which is the passive cohesion of metallic being. There 
is therefore a darkness which also exists for itself, and an actual 
+ brightness which is for itsel£ These, at the same time, are posi-
ted through the intermediation of transparency, in the concrete 
and individualized unity of the manifestation of colour. 
Remark 
Abstract darkness is immediately opposed to light as such 
(§ 277 and Add.) The principle of darkness attains the primary 
135 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
reality of its nature as physically individualized corporeality how-
ever. The process of darkening which has been described is the 
individualization of the principle of brightness , or in this case, 
of the transparent body of passive manifestation in the sphere of 
shape fulfilled in the being-in-self of individualized matter. The s 
transparent body is homogeneous and neutral in its existence; it 
is the principle of darkness which is individualized in itself into 
being-for-self, but which exists only as a force opposed to bright-
ness, rather than a punctiformity, and which is therefore also able 
to exist in a state of perfect homogeneity. The metallic prin-
10 
ci pIe is known to be the material principle of all colouring, or the 
universal colouring matter, if one wants to express it in this 
way. It is only the high specific gravity of metals which has to be + 
considered here, and it is into the extreme intensity of this pre-
ponderant particularization that specific matter withdraws, in 15 
opposition to the disclosed and inner neutrality of transparent 
shape. In the chemical sphere, the metallic principle is to the same 
extent a one-sided and indifferent base. 
In the exposition of the process of darkening, it was necessary to + 
mention the empirical ways in which it appears, and not merely its 20 
abstract moments. It is quite clear that both aspects present diffi-
culties, but physics aggravates its difficulties still further by lump-
ing together determinations or properties which belong to com-
pletely distinct spheres. Although it is essential to search through + 
various conditions and circumstances in order to discover the 25 
simple specific determinateness of universal phenomena such as 
heat and colour etc., on the other hand it is equally essential not 
to disregard the differences bound up with the manifestation of 
these phenomena. Empirical physics cannot establish colour and 
heat etc. in accordance with the Notion, but only in accordance 30 
with their modes of production. There are however vast 
differences between these modes. The preoccupation with a 
search for nothing but general laws leads to essential differences 
being ignored, and to the most heterogeneous things being chaoti-
cally forced together in the light of an abstract view-point, as for 35 
example when chemistry categorizes gases, sulphur, and metals 
etc. as simple bodies. The very desire to discover general laws and 
determinations must have been prejudiced by its failure to consider 
modes of action as particularized by the various media and 
spheres in which they occur. The conditions giving rise to the 40 
136 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
phenomenon of colour are jumbled together in just such a chaotic 
manner, and experiments relating to the most specialized sets of 
circumstances are, as a matter of course, cited in preference to the 
simple and general conditions in which the nature of colour, the 
+ archetypal phenomenon, reveals itself to an unprejudiced intel-
ligence. This confusion, which reigns under the guise of a pre-
cise and well-grounded experimentation, but which is in fact 
crude and superficial, can only be countered by paying attention 
to a phenomenon's different modes of production. One must 
10 therefore know what these modes are, and respect their distinctness. 
First of all, one must see the value of the fundamental determi-
nation that the hindering of illumination is bound up with 
speci6.c gravity and cohesion. With regard to light as such, or to 
the abstract identity of pure manifestation, the determinations 
15 here are the characteristics and specifications of corporeality. Be-
yond these determinations, corporeality retreats further into itself, 
into darkness. It is these determinations which are the immediate 
constitution of the progression from conditioned to free indi-
viduality (§ 307), and which appear here in the relation of the for-
20 mer to the latter. It is interesting to note that in entoptic colours, 
the principle of darkening, which in this case is brittleness, is an 
immaterial punctiformity, which is only active as force. It 
exists in an external manner and gives rise to opacity when a 
transparent crystal is reduced to powder, or when froth forms on a 
25 transparent liquid etc. (§ 317 Add.)-Pressure on a lens, which 
gives rise to epoptic colours, is an externally mechanical altera-
tion of nothing but speci6.c gravity, in which there is no division 
into lamellae and suchlike existing hindrances to illumination. 
When metals are heated so that a change of specific gravity takes 
30 place, 'their surfaces exhibit a succession offleeting colours, which 
can even be fixed there at will'. (Goethe 'Theory of Colours' pt. i 
+ p. 191.) An entirely different principle occurs in the chemical 
determination of colour by acid however; in this case a lightening 
of darkness, a more immanent self-manifestation, a fiery activity 
+ is involved. In considering colours as such, we should in the first 
instance exclude any hindering, darkening or brightening brought 
about by chemical action; for the chemical substance, like the eye 
in the case of the subjective physiological phenomena of colour, is a 
concrete entity containing many further determinations, and 
40 those connected with colour cannot therefore be identified and 
137 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
isolated with any degree of certainty. The identification of any-
thing in the concrete object relating to colour in the abstract, will 
in fact presuppose a knowledge of abstract colour. 
We have been considering inner darkening in so far as it belongs 
to the nature of the body; it is interesting to demonstrate its 
5 
relation to colour since the dimness it produces is not posited as 
existing by itself in an external manner, and cannot therefore be 
exhibited as such. External dimming is not a simple weakening of 
light like that brought about by distance: an obscuring medium + 
existing externally is less transparent however, it is simply a 10 
general translucency. The element of air has no concrete principle 
such as that which is present even in the neutrality of unindivi-
dualized water, but a quite transparent substance such as water or 
pure glass exhibits rudimentary dimness on account of a thickening 
of the medium, especially if there is an increase in the existence of 15 
layers, i.e. in the boundaries dividing it. The prism is the best 
known means for producing external obscuration: its dimming 
action is the result of a twofold circumstance, which depends 
firstly upon its exterior boundary as such, upon its edges in fact, 
and secondly upon its prismatic shape, or the inequality in the 20 
diameters of its profile, which may be drawn from the whole 
expanse of one of its facets to the opposite edge. The prism is a 
dimming agency which does not function uniformly, but in + 
accordance with the various lengths of its diameter between the 
various parts through which the light passes; the incomprehensible 25 
features found in many theories of colour may be traced, among 
other things, to the failure to take this property into consideration. 
Darkening in general is however only one factor, the other is 
brightness, and colour requires a more precise determination of 
the relation between them. Light illumines, the day drives away 30 
darkness; as the simple blending of brightness with present dark-
+ 
ness, this duskiness generally gives rise to grey. In colouring how-
ever these two determinations are combined in such away, that 
although they are held asunder, they are to the same extent posited 
in unity. Although they are separate, each also shows in the other. 35 
This is a combination which has to be called an individualization; 
it is a relationship which resembles that considered in what is 
called refraction, in which one determination is active within 
another, and yet has a determinate being of its own. This is the way 
of the Notion in general, which as a concrete principle contains 40 
138 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
moments in their difference, and at the same time unites them 
within their ideality. It is this determination which makes it 
difficult to grasp Goethe's exposition, in which it is expressed in 
the sensuous manner appropriate to it. Goethe maintains that in a 
5 prism, brightness is imposed upon darkness or vice versa, so 
that although it is dimmed, brightness still pervades darkness as 
independent brightness; and that in the case of the prism, if the 
common displacement is taken into account, it remains in its 
+ position, while it is simultaneously displaced. Where brightness or 
10 darkness, or rather the brightening or darkening agent (both 
terms are relative), has a distinct existence within dim media, the 
dim medium maintains its characteristic appearance, and there is 
no change in the intensity of its brightness or darkness when it is 
placed in front of a dark or bright background, and so has a 
15 brightening effect upon it. The one is posited simultaneously and 
negatively within the other, and both are therefore posited as being 
identical. It is in this way that the difference between colour and 
mere grey is to be grasped. Taking grey shadow as an example 
however, it is probably true to say that it is a rarer phenomenon 
+ than one might think. In the case of the colour square, the same 
difference occurs in green and red; green is the mixture of the 
opposed colours blue and yellow, while red constitutes their indi-
viduality. 
According to Newton's well-known theory, white or 
25 colourless light consists of five or seven colours, the theory 
+ itself not being too clear on this point. It is impossible to 
denounce this barbarous manner of presentation too ener-
getically. Even in its representation of light, it makes use 
of the concept of composition, which is one of the worst 
30 forms of reflection. What is more, brightness is supposed 
to consist of seven darknesses, which is about as sensible as 
saying that clear water consists of seven kinds of earth. 
The ineptitude and incorrectness of Newton's observations 
and experiments complement their inanity, and Goethe has 
+ even shown that they are not entirely above board, but one of 
Newton's most glaring and elementary errors is the false assertion 
that when a monochromatic part of the spectrum produced by 
a prism passes through a second prism, it will also reappear in its 
merely monochromatic form (Newton Opt. Book I pt. i prop. 
+ 5 in fine). 
I39 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
The conclusions, deductions and proofs which Newton 
based upon this impure empirical data are no better. He not only 
made use of the prism, but was aware of the fact that if it is to 
produce colour, this will necessarily involve a boundary dividing 
light from shade (Opt. Lib. II pt. ii p. 230 ed. lat. Lond. 1719). Yet + 
despite this, he was capable of overlooking darkness as an active 
dimming factor. He only mentions this condition in connection + 
with a very special case, and long after he has completed his theory. 
The only purpose served by his mentioning it, is therefore that it 
enables the partisans of the theory to say that it was not unknown 10 
to him, for it cannot be said that it has been accepted with light as 
being fundamental to any consideration of colours. On the con-
+ 
trary, the fact that colour cannot appear without darkness being 
present is omitted from the text-books. The text-books also over-
look the simple fact that if a completely white or single-coloured 15 
wall is viewed through a prism, no colour will be apparent if the 
wall is white, and otherwise, only the colour of the wall. Colours 
will appear however as soon as a nail is driven into a wall, or some 
kind of unevenness is introduced. They will only appear at this + 
particular spot however. To the disadvantages in the presentation 20 
of this theory one has to add that it has led to the ignoring of so 
many experiments which contradict it. 
+ 
This leads on into details of the thoughtless inconsistency 
with which so many of the immediate implications of the 
theory, such as the impossibility of an achromatic telescope, 25 
have been abandoned, while the theory itself has been ac-
cepted. 
+ 
Finally, attention should be drawn to the blindness of the 
prejudice which asserts that this theory is based upon some-
thing mathematical. As if these partly false and one-sided 30 
measurings deserved the name of mathematics. As if the 
quantitative determinations introduced into the conclu-
sions drawn from it provided any sort of justification of the 
theory itself, or for the nature of the subject matter. 
Goethe's erudite elucidation of this darkness in light is as 35 
lucid as it is profound, and there is no doubt that the main 
reason for its not having been more actively adopted, is 
that this would involve the confession of far too much 
thoughtlessness and stupidity. Instead of Newton's absurd 
conceptions having been toned down however, they have 40 
140 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
recently bccn worked up into a further metaphysical gali-
+ matias (cf. above § 278 Rem. 11.23,9) in the discoveries of 
+ Malus relating the polarization of light, in nothing less 
+ than thefour-sidedness of sunbeams, the rotatory movement of 
5 red light-corpuscles from right to left and of blue corpuscles 
+ from left to right, and most brilliandy in the revival of the 
Newtonian fits, the 'acces de facile transmission' and 
+ 'acces de facile reflexion' (Biot, vol. IV p. 88 et seq.). Some 
of these conceptions arose from the application of the formulae of 
10 differential calculus to the phenomena of colour; that is to say that 
while aspects of this calculus were effectively and rationally em-
ployed in mechanics, they have also been perverted by being ap-
+ plied to the determinations of a completely different field. 
Addition. Firstly, what is called double refraction also occurs in the 
15 prism, and it is here that the further determinateness occurs, in which 
transparency passes over into darkening, and so gives rise to colours. The 
britdeness of glass is apparent as a dimming of brightness, even when the 
glass is perfectly transparent. The same effect may be seen in milky glass 
and in an opal; in these cases however, obscurations are produced which 
20 give no indication of outward existence. Light does not dim itself, for it is 
rather that which is undimmed, and consequently the idea of colour is 
primarily involved with what is individual and subjective, with what 
divides itself into its differences while binding them within itsel£ The pre-
ciser deftnition of this belongs to empirical physics, yet as this is concerned 
25 not only with observation, but also with the reduction of observations to 
general laws, it is relevant to the philosophic consideration of colour. 
There are two prevailing ideas about colours; the one with which we con-
cur recognizes the simplicity of light, the other maintains that light is 
composite, which is the crudest of metaphysical propositions, and stands 
30 in direct contradiction to every Notion. It is pernicious, because it is 
symptomatic of the whole way in which things are treated. It is with light 
that we put aside the contemplation of separateness and plurality, and 
have to raise ourselves to the abstraction of existent identity. It is there-
fore necessary to think in an ideal manner when thinking about light, 
3S although the coarsening influence of the Newtonian doctrine has tended 
to make this impossible. Under no circumstances is composition the 
concern of philosophy therefore. Philosophy has to do with the Notion, 
and with the unity of differences, and this is immanent, not external or 
superftcial. In order to bolster up the Newtonian theory, an attempt has 
141 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
been made to dispense with composition by saying that the light pro-
duces these colours by self-determination, just as electricity or magnetism 
polarizes itself into differences. But Newton himself admits (II. 140, 5) that 
colours only occur on the boundary between brightness and darkness. An 
external determination or condition is always present when light deter-
5 
mines itself as colour, and like the infmite resistance postulated in Fich-
tean idealism, it is moreover specific. If light dimmed itself, it would be + 
the inwardly differentiated Ideal. It is however only an abstract moment; 
it is gravitational centrality, the selfhood of gravity which has reached 
abstract freedom. It is the standpoint from which light is to be considered 10 
which has to be settled philosophically. The sphere of physical determina-
tion is therefore still external to light. White is the corporeal fixation 
of brightness, and is as yet achromatic; black is the materialization and 
specification of darkness; colour occurs between these two extremes. 
It is the combination of light and darkness, and particularly the 15 
specification of this combination, which first gives rise to colour. 
Outside this relationship both light and darkness are as nothing. Night holds + 
all powers within it as self-dissolving ferment and deracinating strife, it is the 
all-embracing and absolute possibility, the chaos in which matter has no being, 
and whose annihilation therefore contains all things. Light is purity of form, and 20 
it is in its unity with night, which is the mother and nourisher of all, that it has 
its initial being. All powers stand in awe of night, and shift and tremble quietly 
before it; the brightness of day is the self-externality of night, which has no 
inwardness, and which is shed and dissipated as a spiritless and powerless 
actuality. As has become evident however, the truth lies in the unity of both 25 
and is not the light which shines in the darkness, but that which is penetrated by 
darkness as by its essence, and is thereby substantiated and materialized. It does 
not shine into darkness, and it neither illumines it nor is it blended by it; 
it is rather the inwardly disrupted Notion, which as the unity of light and 
darkness displays itself in the differences of its moments. This is the gay realm 30 
of colours, the living movement of which brings forth a variety of hues and 
constitutes, in its further development, the realized actuality of colour. 
Everyone knows that colour is darker than light; according to the New-
tonian doctrine however, light is not light but is intrinsically dark, and 
only occurs when one mixes together these various colours, which are 35 
supposed to constitute its original elements. To quarrel with Newton + 
appears to be presumptuous; the empirical approach is the only way to 
deal with the matter however, and this has been Goethe's procedure, 
while Newton blurred the issue by his ossified reflective concepts. It is 
only because the physicists have been blinded by this ossification, and have 40 
142 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
therefore been unable to assess experiments, that the Newtonian system 
has been able to survive into the present. I need not expand upon this sub-
ject, for there is every likelihood that in the near future a special series of 
lectures will be given at the University on this extremely interesting mat-
s ter of colours. The monstrous error of Newton, and the thoughtless and 
blind acquiescence of the physicists, will be clearly demonstrated by 
+ experiments. 
Both transparency and the prism as such have to be regarded as condi-
tioned by a dimming medium, and it is at this point that the initial con-
10 sideration of colours is to be taken up. In this free and simple state, colour 
has need of another principle to give it actuality, i.e. a defmiteand uneven figure, 
the sides of which form different angles. It is this which gives rise to the 
varying intensities of brightness and dimming. It is the further lighting 
and dimming which results from the interplay of these intensities, which 
15 give rise to the free colours. In order to obtain these various degrees of 
darkening, we usually use transparent glasses, although these are by no 
means necessary in order to produce colour, and the colour which they 
give rise to is of a more complex composition. One can cause various 
darkenings and illuminations, such as daylight and candlelight to fall 
20 directly on one another, and when the dark shade of one light is lightened 
by the light of another, this immediately gives rise to coloured shadows. 
Consequently, one has the two shadows as well as two illuminations of 
these shadows. The interplay of multifarious and irregular dimmings 
gives rise to a colourless grey, such as we usually see in ordinary shadows, 
25 which constitute an indeterminate lighting. If only a few, perhaps two 
distinct differences in illumination fall upon one another however, this 
immediately gives rise to colour, which is a qualitative difference, while 
shadows only display quantitative differences. Sunlight is too preponder-
ant to allow any other brightness to counter it, and it is by means of sun-
30 light that a whole area has a single and general source of light. If there is 
an interplay of various lightings within a room, even if it is only the blue 
sky which supplements the sun, this gives rise immediately to coloured 
shadows. Consequently, when one begins to concentrate one's attention 
upon the various colourings of the shadows, one is unable to fmd grey 
35 shadows; coloured shadows are everywhere, but they are often so weak, 
that their colours do not individualize themselves. The most beautiful 
shadows are produced by candlelight and moonlight. If a stick is held in 
these two brightnesses, both shadows will be illuminated by both lights, 
i.e. the shadow of moonlight will be illuminated by candlelight and vice 
40 versa. This gives rise to a blue and reddish yellow, while two candles alone 
143 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
give rise to a colour which is clearly yellow. This contrast also appears 
with candlelight at daybreak and twilight, when the sunlight is not bright 
enough to drive out the coloured shadows by the multiplicity of its reflec-
tions. 
+ 
Newton thought he had discovered a striking proof of his theory by s 
painting all the colours on a revolving disc and then spinning it rapidly. 
The result of this experiment is that none of the colours is seen clearly; 
one sees only a whitish shimmer, and this is supposed to prove that white 
light consists of seven colours. What one sees however is a sort of dirty + 
grey, for because of the speed, one is no longer able to distinguish between 10 
the colours. It is the same when one faints, and one's giddiness prevents 
one from retaining a defmite image of the surrounding objects. Will any-
one maintain that one sees an actual circle when a stone is swung round 
on the end of a string? This is the fundamental experiment of the New- + 
tonians, and it is a direct contradiction of what it is supposed to prove, 1 S 
for if these colours were the irreducible origin of white light, the prin-
ciple of dimming which they contain would be completely incapable of 
reducing itself to brightness. The principle of dimming is not an original 
element of light, and the nightwatchman's song, in which light is said to 
drive away darkness, gives a truer account of the matter. Conversely how-
+ 
ever, where the principle of dimming prevails, the weaker element of 
lighting disappears. Consequently, when one places glasses of various 
defmite colours on top of one another and looks through them, one sees 
white if the glasses are lightly coloured, and black if they are darkly 
coloured. This should make the Newtonians say that darkness also con-
2S 
sists of colours, and another Englishman has in fact maintained that black 
is composed of all the colours. This obliterates the particularity of colour. + 
The procedure of the Newtonian reflection is found throughout the whole 
of his physics, and is simply as follows: 
+ 
(a) By starting with the phenomena produced by a glass prism in a 30 
completely dark room, Newton displays his pedantry at the very outset, 
for the foramen ovale and so on are completely superfluous. To use his 
own expression, he then allows 'rays of light' to fall upon the prism. 
Various colours may then be seen through the prism, and the light-
image as such in which the colours are arranged in a particular order may 35 
be seen in another place; violet is at the top for example, and red at the 
bottom. Here we have the phenomenon in its simplicity. Newton then 
says that as one part of the image has diverged more than the other, and 
other colours are visible in the place in which the divergence is greater, 
one colour must have diverged more than another. This is then expressed 40 
144 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
by saying that the intrinsic difference in the nature of colours consists in 
+ the diversity of their refrangibility. Each colour is therefore present in light 
as an original, distinct, and fmished constituent. Consequently, the prism 
for example, merely elicits the appearance of a variety which was already 
5 present, it does not give rise to a procedure which brings this variety into 
being. It might be compared with the scales on the wings of a butterfly 
for example, which become visible with the aid of a microscope, although 
+ they are invisible to the naked eye. This is the way in which he reasons. 
This supple, delicate, infinitely determinable, absolutely self-identical 
10 principle of light, which gives way to every impression, and in its com-
plete indifference simply receives every external modification, is sup-
posed to consist of ftxed elements. One might argue in an analogous 
manner in another fteld. When various keys are played on a piano, they 
give rise to various notes because, in fact, various strings are struck. 
15 Similarly, each note of an organ has a pipe, which produces a particular 
note when it is blown. If a horn or a flute is blown however, various 
notes will be audible, although there are no special keys or pipes to be 
seen. There is, it is true, a type of Russian horn music in which each note is 
produced by a particular horn, so that each performer only produces one 
+ note with his instrument. If, after hearing the Russian horn-music, one 
then hears the same melody played on an ordinary French horn, one 
might emulate Newton by arguing in the following way, 'In this single 
horn there are several hidden horns, which can be neither seen nor felt. 
Here the performer corresponds to the prism however, and causes these 
25 horns to be heard. Since he produces different notes, he must blow into a 
different horn each time, for each note is in itself a ftrm and fmished whole, 
which has its own subsistance and its own horn.' We also know of course, 
that in the case of the horn, its different notes are produced by various 
movements of the lips, and by inserting the hand in the instrument's 
30 mouth etc. This is supposed to be of no effect however, and to be a purely 
formal activity which merely causes the various notes which were already 
there to be heard; it is not supposed to bring forth the variety of the notes 
themselves. We also know that the prism is a sort of condition, by means 
of which the different colours appear, in that different darkenings of light 
35 are imposed upon one another through the different densities presented by 
its shape. Even when one demonstrates that colours also originate under 
these conditions however, the Newtonians continue to insist that with 
regard to light, these various activities do not give rise to varieties in the 
product, but that the products are already there in their entirety before 
40 they are produced. This attitude towards light is identical with the attitude 
145 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
towards the French hom which insists that there are different notes within 
it regardless of whether or not I open or close my lips in a certain way, and 
thrust my hand in such and such a manner into the instrument's mouth; and 
that these activities are not modifications of the sound, but merely a repeated 
blowing into one hom atter the other. It is Goethe's merit to have over-
5 
thrown the prism theory. Newton concludes that, 'what is elicited by the 
prism is originally there'; but it is a barbarous conclusion. There are 
various ways in which the atmosphere has a dimming effect; for example, 
the sun is redder when it rises, because the air then contains more vapours. 
The dimming effect of water and glass is even greater. As Newton does 10 
not take into account the way in which the instrument darkens light, he 
regards the darkening which appears behind the prism as constituting the 
original constituents into which the prism is supposed to decompose light. 
To say that the prism has a dispersive power is irresponsible however, for 
it presupposes the theory which the experiment is supposed to prove. It is 15 
as if, wanting to prove that water in its original state is not clear, I began 
by tying a filthy rag to a stick and stirring the water with it until it was dirty. 
(b) Newton also maintains that the seven colours violet, indigo, blue, 
green, yellow, orange and red, are simple and indecomposable; but it will + 
be impossible to persuade anyone that violet for example is a simple 20 
colour, for it is a mixture of blue and a kind of red. Every child knows that 
green may be produced by mixing yellow and blue, and that if one adds 
a little less red to blue than is necessary for violet, the result is lilac; simi-
larly, that orange is produced by mixing yellow and red. To the New-
tonians however, green, violet, and orange are primary colours, and there 25 
is an absolute difference between indigo-blue and light blue (celadon, 
which has a touch of green in it), although there is no qualitative difference 
between them whatever. No artist is stooge enough to be a Newtonian; 
artists have red, yellow, and blue, and make the other colours out of them. + 
Even the mechanical mixing of yellow and blue as two dry powders gives 30 
rise to green. The Newtonians have to admit that there are many colours 
which are produced by mixing, and in order to justify their theory of the 
simple nature of colours, they say that the colours produced by the pris-
matic spectrum (one might say spectre), are originally different from the + 
other natural colours of the material pigmentations. This is not a valid 35 
distinction however; colour is colour, and is either homogeneous or 
heterogeneous, regardless of how it is produced or whether it is physical 
or chemical. In fact, mixed colours are produced in the prism just as they 
are elsewhere. We have here a specific appearance in its production as 
appearance, which is therefore mainly a mixture of appearances, and has no 40 
146 

----------------
--------------
PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
further connection with chromatic being. If one holds the prism close to 
the wall, it is only the edges of the colour-image which show blue and red, 
the middle remains white. It is said that white light occurs in the middle 
+ because there is an interplay of many colours there. What nonsense! The 
5 extent to which people will pursue an absurdity is quite incredible; and 
drivelling on in this way becomes a mere habit. When the prism is moved 
further away from the wall, the bands become wider, until the white 
fmally vanishes completely and green is produced where they impinge 
upon one another. The object of this Newtonian experiment is to prove 
10 that colours are simply homogeneal (see above Rem. II. 139, 24), but the 
isolated colour which is seen through a prism when a hole is made in a 
wall and light falls on to the opposite wall certainly does not exhibit the 
various colours so perfectly. What is more, it is only natural that the 
colours which are formed at the edges should not be so bright, since their 
15 base is of another colour. The situation is the same when I look at things 
about me through a coloured glass. One should in no wise allow oneself 
to be imposed upon by the authority of Newton therefore, nor even by 
the framework of mathematical proof which, mainly in recent times, has 
been erected around his doctrine. It is thought that by saying that Newton 
20 was a great mathematician, one thereby justifies his theory of colours. It is 
however magnitude alone, and not physical being, which is susceptible of 
mathematical proof. Mathematics has nothing to do with colour, although 
it does enter into optics, and if Newton has measured colours, one can 
scarcely call this a mathematical procedure. The bands vary in breadth, 
25 and he noted the ratio in which they stand to one another. He informs us 
that as his eyes were not sharp enough for the job, he employed a good 
+ and trusted friend to do it for him. Newton then compared these proportions 
with the numerical relationship between musical notes (see above § 280 
+ Rem.), but this is also unmathematical. What is more, even when one is 
30 presented with a large image, it is impossible for the sharpest eyes to 
assess where the different colours begin. A single look at the spectrum 
makes it quite clear that it displays no defmite boundaries (confmia) which 
might be determined as lines. The complete absurdity of the matter be-
comes apparent when we remember that the widths of the edges vary 
35 enormously according to the distances. At the maximum distance for 
example, green has the greatest width, since yellow and blue as such be-
come increasingly narrower as their bands expand and so impinge upon 
one another to a greater extent. 
(c) A third conception of Newton's which Biot has made much of 
40 is that different colours have different tendencies; this is deduced from the 
147 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
fact that when a lens is pressed against a glass, a ring composed of a number 
of superimposed iridescent circles becomes apparent. At one point, for 
example, a yellow ring becomes apparent, and all the other colours are 
absent; the yellow is then said to have the impulse to appear, while the 
other colours are said to have fallen into a paroxysm of self-effacement, 
5 
and to have refused to show themselves. Transparent bodies are supposed 
to let certain rays through, and to stop others. Consequently, it is in the 
nature of colour to have the impulse to appear and to pass through. This 
is a completely empty conception, in which mere appearance is taken up 
into the rigid form of reflection. 
+ 
We have to thank Goethe for the conception of colour which conforms to the 
Notion. Goethe was drawn into a consideration of colours and light very 
early, mainly as the result of his interest in painting. The simple purity 
of his feeling for nature, which is the prime faculty of the poet, was bound 
to resist the barbarity of reflection one encounters in Newton. He has 15 
examined the interpretations and experiments relating to light and colour 
which have been made from plato onwards. He has grasped the phenome- + 
non in its simplicity; the true instinct of reason consists in grasping that 
aspect of the phenomenon in which it displays its greatest simplicity. In its 
further determinateness, the archetypal phenomenon is involved in a whole 20 
multitude of conditions, and if one starts with these conditions, it is difficult 
to understand the essence of it. 
(a) The main feature of Goethe's theory is that light is for itself, and that 
darkness is another principle, which is external to it. White is visible light, 
black is visible darkness, and grey is their primary and purely quantitative 25 
relationship, which is therefore either a diminution or augmentation of 
brightness or darkness. In the second and more determinate relationship 
however, in which light and dark maintain this fixed specific quality in 
face of each other, the deciding factor is which of the two is basic, and 
which constitutes the dimming medium. There is either a bright base 30 
present with a more shaded principle imposed upon it, or vice versa. It is 
this that gives rise to colour. This unity of differences conforms to the 
Notion, and it was Goethe's superior sense which enabled him to say that 
this is so. It is only thinking consciousness which can reckon with the fact 
that rationality implies an identity within the persistence of variety. For 35 
example, only animal sensation is present if selfhood fails to keep aloof 
from the object, and flows together with it. However, if I say that I feel 
something warm etc., consciousness posits an object, and despite this 
division, hold both terms together in a single unity. Thus the relationship 
3 : 4 is something quite different when I merely put these numbers 40 
148 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
together as 7 (3+ 4), or 12 (3 X 4), or 4 -
3 = I, for in the first instance 
three counts as three, and four as four. With colours the mutual relation 
between the principle of brightness and darkness must be the same; the 
medium and substratum must remain separate, so that the medium is in 
5 fact a medium, and does not emit light. (i) Although I can imagine a basic 
shadow with sunlight shining upon it, it is not a medium. Instead of colour, 
disturbing media can also merely produce grey however, as for example 
when I look at a black object through transparent muslin, or through 
black muslin at a white object, for special conditions are necessary in order 
10 to make colour in general defmitely perceptible. Differences of sight and 
setting are also determining factors when colour appears in this way. A 
feeble show of colour will seem to be merely grey if there is near it 
another more specific degree of darkness or brightness, or another more 
pronounced colour. Eyes also differ widely in their ability to perceive 
15 colours; it is possible however to sharpen one's observation; for example, 
+ the brim of a hat seen through muslin appears to me to be bluish. Mere 
dimming has therefore to be distinguished from (ii) brightness and darkness 
reciprocally showing through each other. The sky is night, it is black. As air 
our atmosphere is transparent, and if it were completely pure we should 
20 only see the black sky. It is filled with vapours however, and is therefore 
a disturbing medium, so that it appears to us to be coloured-blue. In the 
mountains the air is purer however, and the sky seems to be blacker. Con-
versely, if we have a bright base such as the sun, and look at it through a 
dark glass such as glass porcelain, it appears to us to be coloured yellow or 
25 red. There is a certain wood, the decoction of which is yellow if held in front 
of something bright, and blue if held in front of something dark. This is 
the simplest of relationships, and is basic to any colour. It is by means of 
it that each diaphanous medium is active, although it may as yet lack any 
defmite colour. There is a kind of opal for example, which is yellow or 
30 red when it is held up against the sky, and blue when viewed against a 
+ dark background. Looking out of my window on January 5, 1824, I saw 
smoke rising from a chimney; the sky was overcast, and the background 
was therefore white. While the smoke was rising against this background, 
it was yellowish; when it began to settle, and had dark roofs and dark 
35 leafless trees behind it, it was bluish; and when it had settled still further, 
+ and had the white walls of the houses behind it, it was yellow again. There 
are also beer bottles which exhibit the same phenomenon. Goethe had a 
Bohemian tumbler, and covered half the inside edge of it with black, and 
+ half with white paper; the glass was then blue and yellow. It is this that 
+ Goethe calls the archetypal phenomenon. 
149 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(b) This kind of dimming may also be brought about by means of the 
prism. If one has a piece of white paper with black figures on it, or a piece 
of black paper with white figures on it, and looks at it through a prism, one 
sees coloured edges. This is because the prism is both transparent and 
opaque, so that it presents the object in both the place in which it is, and 
5 
in another place. Consequently, although no simple dimming occurs, the 
edges become boundaries, and are superimposed upon one another. In the 
passage quoted above (§ 320 Remark II. 140, 5), Newton expresses his 
surprise (Opt. p. 230) at the fact that certain fine lamellae or bubbles of 
glass (P.217) which are perfectly transparent, and show no trace of 10 
shadows, appear to be coloured when viewed through a prism (annulos 
coloratos exhibeant), 'cum e contrario, prismatis refractione, corpora 
omnia ea solummodo sui parte apparere soleant coloribus distincta, ubi 
vel umbris terminentur, vel partes habeant inaequaliter luminosas'. How 
could he see these glass bubbles in the prism independent of that which 15 
surrounded them? The prism always displaces the sharp division between 
the image and its setting; or rather, it posits its limit as limit (see § 92 Add.). + 
This is the situation, although it has not yet been adequately explained. + 
We see a double image in Iceland spar, because while its transparency 
allows the natural image to appear, its rhomboid form displaces it, and the 20 
case must be the same with other glasses. In the prism therefore, I postulate 
two images immediately condensed into one; the ordinary image, which 
remains in its place in the prism, acts from this place and is projected into 
the transparent medium as a mere appearance; and the displaced or 
extraordinary image, which is the dimming medium of the first one. 25 
Consequently, the prism posits within light the diremption of its Notion, + 
a diremption which has its reality through darkness (II. 142. 29). The general 
way in which the prism produces its effect is however (a) by displacing 
the ;entire image, an action determined by the nature of the medium. 
(b) Prismatic shape is also a determining factor however. It certainly 30 
accounts for the size of the image, for it is precisely in prismatic shape 
that there is a further displacement within itself of the image fixed by 
refraction. It is this within itself which is the main point here; for example, 
if the angle points downwards, and the prism is therefore thicker at the 
top than it is at the bottom, the light will fall differently on each point of it. 35 
Consequently, primatic shape produces an additional specific displace-
ment. Although this explanation may also be somewhat inadequate, the 
crux of the matter certainly lies in the image's being simultaneously and 
inwardly projected into another place. This internality is modified still 
further by the chemical composition of the glass. Flint glass and other 40 
150 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
substances exhibit their own peculiar crystallization for example, and 
therefore have their own way of directing an image. 
(c) Even at the distance of a few feet, our eyes only enable us to see the 
edges and borders of objects rather indistinctly. It is very easy for me to 
5 see the colour of the wide edges of a window frame, which on the whole 
seem to be in a grey half-shadow, without blinking; here too is a double 
image. Double images of this kind also occur objectively through what 
is called the inflection of light. The perception of a hair will be doubled or 
even trebled if light is let into a dark room through a tiny aperture. 
10 Of Newton's experiments, only that with the two knife blades is of 
interest; the others which he cites, including the one just mentioned, are 
of no significance. The most remarkable fact about the experiment with 
the two knife blades, is that the borders become broader as the knife is 
+ moved away from the opening in the window (Newton opt. bk.iii, p.pS). 
15 It is apparent from this that the phenomenon is closely related to that 
of the prism, for here too light appears as a limit to its other. Its 
deviation is not brought about by the external force of the prism however, 
for its reality consists precisely in its relating itself to darkness, in inflecting itself 
toward it, and in forming a positive boundary with it, i.e. a boundary on which 
20 one passes over into the other without there being any clear-cut line. The inflec-
tion oflight is present wherever light and darkness meet, and it gives rise to the 
penumbra. The light deviates from its direction, and light and shade blur their 
sharp boundaries and pass into one another. This might be compared to the 
formation of an atmosphere, in so far as odour enters into this formation, as 
25 when one speaks of an acid, metallic, or electric atmosphere etc.; it is the emer-
gence of that which is of an ideal nature and which appears to be bound to the 
+ shape as thing. The boundary also becomes positive therefore, not merely 
a general mixture, but a penumbra, which is bounded on the lighted side by 
light, but which is also separated from darkness by the light on the dark side. 
30 Consequently the penumbra is blackest on the light side, and shades off towards 
the light which separates it from the darkness. As there is a multiple repetition 
+ of this shading, it gives rise to the juxtaposition of the shadow lines. In this 
inflection, light is the freedom of its own refrangibility, although it still requires 
a particular figure in which these syntheses and this neutrality may be presented 
35 as qualitatively determined. 
(d) The relationship between colours in their totality still has to be indi-
+ cated. Colour is now determinate, although its determinateness is now no longer 
general but actual, for it has the difference of the Notion within it, and is there-
fore no longer an indeterminate determinateness. Gravity is universal and im-
40 mediate being-in-self in otherness, and as such contains the inessentiality of 
151 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
immediate difference, a certain mass; the largeness and smallness are quite 
devoid of qualitative difference. Heat on the contrary, as inwardly negative, 
acquires qualitative difference through the various temperatures of heat and 
cold, although in the first instance these merely differ quantitatively. As genuine 
negativity, as actuality, colour contains immediate difference as it is posited + 
and determined through the Notion. We know from sense-perception 
that yellow, blue, and red are the primary colours, and that they are 
accompanied by green, which is a mixed colour. As is shown by 
experience, the relationship here is as follows. The first colour 
is yellow, which, as Mr. Schulz expresses it, is a duller medium 10 
pervasively brightened or illumined by a bright base. That is why the sun 
appears to us to be yellow, with only a superficial darkening. The other 
extreme is blue, which, to use Mr. Schulz's form of expression once again, 
is a brighter medium pervaded by the shadow of its darker base. This ac-
+ 
counts for the sky's being blue where the atmosphere is vaporous, and a 15 
deep dark blue which is almost black-blue when it is seen from a balloon 
or from high mountains such as the Swiss Alps, in which cases one is 
above the dimming medium of the atmosphere. By blinking, one makes + 
the eye's crystalline lens into a prism, by half covering it. One side of a 
flame will then seem to be yellow, and the other blue. In that they have 20 
lenses, telescopes are also prismatic, and consequendy exhibit colours. 
Perfect achromaticism can only be obtained by superimposing one prism 
upon another. Blue and yellow are the simplest colours, and red and green, + 
which no longer belong to this completely simple and general opposition, 
fall between these extremes. Red is the one mediatory colour, into which 25 
both blue and yellow may be intensified. Yellow is readily drawn into 
red by intensified darkening. In the spectrum, red is already present in 
violet, and at the other end, it occurs with yellow in orange. Red occurs 
when yellow is pervaded once again by shade, or blue is pervaded once 
again by light; red is therefore yellow drawn further into shade, or blue 30 
drawn further into brightness. Red is the mediation of yellow and blue, 
it has to be regarded as the active, subjective and individual determin-
ation of both colours; it therefore stands in contrast to green, which 
constitutes the passive mediation of these two. Red is the royal colour, 
it is light which has overcome and completely penetrated darkness; it 35 
strikes the eye, it is active and powerful, and is the intensity into which 
both extremes are concentrated. Green is the simple mixture, the common 
neutrality of yellow and blue; this may be seen quite clearly in the prism 
when there is a superpositioning of yellow and blue. Green is the neutral 
colour, and is therefore the colour of plants, from the greenness of 40 
152 

PHYSICS OP TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
which their further qualitative moments are engendered. Yellow, as 
the first colour, is the simple dimming of light, it is a warm colour, 
and is the immediate determinate being of colour. The second colour 
is mediatory, and the antithesis itself is doubly represented within 
5 it as red and green, which correspond to fire and water, and which 
have already been considered (§ 283 and § 284). Blue is the third 
stage, which is a cold colour; it is the dark foundation which may 
be seen through brightness, a base which does not attain to concrete 
totality. The blue of the sky is, so to speak, the ground out of which the 
10 Earth proceeds. There is a symbolism attached to these colours. Yellow is 
the gay and noble colour, which delights us by its vivacity and purity. Red 
expresses seriousness and dignity, as well as kindness and charm. Blue ex-
+ presses tender and profound feelings. It is easy for red to break into green 
and vice versa, for they constitute the opposition, and are closely related. 
15 An intensified green has a reddish tinge. The extract of a plant such as 
sage looks quite green. If this liquid is a dark green, and is then poured 
into a glass vessel shaped like a champagne glass and held up to the light, 
the lower part of it will appear to be green, and the upper part a most 
beautiful purple. Where the glass is narrow the colour will be green, 
20 which will pass through yellow into red. If this liquid is poured into a 
large broad botde, it is red; while it is being poured out, it looks green. 
It is therefore its intensity which makes it red; or rather, when green is 
intensified, it appears to be red. The light of a flame is blue at the base 
where it is thinnest, and red at the top where its intensity is greatest and 
25 the flame is hottest; the dark part is at the base therefore, the middle of 
the flame yellow. 
(e) That which is objectively necessary is also connected within subjec-
tive vision. When one colour becomes apparent, the eye demands another. 
Yellow demands violet, orange blue, purple green, and vice versa. Con-
+ sequendy, Goethe called these complementary colours. The yellow or bluish 
shadows of morning and evening twilight, in their interplay with moon-
light and candlelight (see above II.I43,33) might be cited here. According 
to an experiment of Goethe's, if one holds a red glass behind a light, one 
then has red lighting. If one then places another candle there, the shadow 
35 on which the red light falls is red, while the other shadow appears to be 
green, which is the complementary colour to red. This is the physiological 
+ phenomenon. Newton should have tried to tell us where the green comes 
from. If one looks at light and then closes one's eyes, one sees a circle of 
the opposite colour to that which one has been looking at. The following 
40 experiment may be made with this subjective image. For a certain time 
153 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
I gazed at the image of the sun in the focus of a lens. The image which I 
continued to see when I had closed my eyes had a blue middle, while the 
rest of its concentric surface was a beautiful sea-green. The middle was 
the same size as the pupil, while that which surrounded it was larger than 
the iris, and somewhat elliptical. When I opened my eyes the image did 
5 
not disappear; seen against a dark background the middle was still a 
beautiful sky blue, and that which surrounded it was green; seen against 
a bright background the middle was yellow however, and that which 
surrounded it was red. If one places a stick of red sealing-wax on a sheet 
of paper and stares at it for some time, a green tint becomes apparent 10 
when one looks away. The purple colour of a rough sea is a complemen-
tary colour; the lighted parts of the waves appear in their own colour 
which is green, while the shaded parts appear in the opposing colour, 
which is purple. In meadows where there is nothing but greenness to be 
seen, the tree-trunks and pathways often seem to have a reddish tinge 15 
when the sky is moderately bright. Mr. Schulz, the government official, 
has made some extremely important and interesting experiments with 
these physiological colours, which he has communicated to Goethe and 
to a few friends here, and which he will soon make known to the public. + 
One has to keep to the archetypal phenomenon indicated by Goethe. 20 
Insignificant appearances brought about by complicated circumstances are 
supposed to call it in question. Even Newton's experiments are confused, 
irrelevant, pettily executed, hashed and messy. His theory of colours is 
regurgitated in hundreds of compendiums. Nevertheless, the view of the 
matter championed by Goethe has never lacked adherents, as he has 25 
shown by the literature he has catalogued. Goethe has been opposed be-
+ 
cause he is a poet and not a professor. The professionals only allow validity 
to the peculiar idiom of certain theories etc., they completely overlook 
what others say, and treat it as if it had not been said. People of this kind 
often want to form a closed circle, to be in exclusive possession of science. 30 
and to extirpate other forms of judgement; jurists are an example of this. 
The law is for everyone however, and so is colour. A closed circle such as 
this develops certain intellectual habits which have a straitening effect. 
If one is not automatized by these habits one is supposed to be uninitiated, 
for only the club members are supposed to understand the matter. This is 35 
not a false supposition, for as one does not employ the metaphysical 
category of the understanding according to which they consider the matter 
ought to be regarded, one certainly does not understand what they under-
stand. Philosophers are usually cold shouldered, although it is in fact their 
task to criticize these categories. 
+ 
154 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
Secondly, there are other phenomena which present us with a further 
kind of darkening. Darkening is the shapelessness of punctiformity, 
brittleness and pulverization, but only in principle, not as the actual sub-
lation of cohesion by dispersal. Consequently, a further darkening occurs 
5 in glass which is rapidly cooled after rapid heating, for this glass is ex-
tremely brittle; and for this reason it is also very fragile. 
(a) It is at this juncture that the entoptic colours occur. In his mor-
+ phology, Goethe has treated this stage in an extremely ingenious manner. 
The phenomenon only occurs in a cube or square plate of this brittle 
10 glass. If one places an ordinary non-brittle glass cube on a black base, and 
faces the bright part of the sky (which in the morning is the west, for the 
darkest part is that which is closest to the sun), the image of this brightness 
will become apparent as it falls upon the small plate and becomes visible 
to the eye as reflection (cf. above § 278 Add. 11.24,26). In summer, when the 
15 sun stands high in the sky at midday, the whole horizon is bright, and then 
this phenomenon will appear anywhere. The brightness will then occur 
in all types of glass, but if brittle glass is used, dark patches will occur in 
the four corners of the small plate, so that the brightness forms a white 
cross. If one then places oneself at a right angle to one's former direction 
20 and looks across the small plate to the south instead of the west, one sees 
four bright spots instead of four dark ones, and a black instead of a white 
cross. Here we have the archetypal phenomenon. If one augments the 
obscuration by means of reflection, rings of colour occur at the four points. 
Consequently one has here the production of obscuration within the 
2S brightness of this transparency. On the one hand, the darkness is brought 
forth by the edge of the plate, on the other, by the refractive nature of 
the medium. In this relationship therefore, darkness and brightness are 
further determined, differentiated, and imposed upon one another, and so 
yield the various colours in an order which is reversed in the other position. 
30 Thus, if the four points are white and the cross black, the first colour 
dimming gives rise to is yellow, which passes into green and blue. Con-
versely, if the cross is white and the corners dark, an increase in darkening 
gives rise to blue first, as the brightness is then driven into the dark foun-
dation. Consequently, here in the transparent medium we have a further 
35 darkening, which is driven on to colour, and depends upon the qualitative 
nature of the brittle body. 
(b) Epoptic colours are related to this phenomenon, and are mechanically 
produced by pressing a lens against a plate of glass (see 11.137, 25; 147, 38). 
The point of contact is at first black, but as pressure is increased, it expands 
40 and differentiates itselfinto various circles of colour, green, red and yellow. 
ISS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY O~ NATURE 
The same happens with ice, when one presses it with a stone. Here it is 
merely the mechanical pressure which produces the colours, and this 
pressure is nothing but a change of cohesion in the nearest parts. It there-
fore resembles heat, which is also a mere change of cohesion. In sound, 
vibration is an expansion of the mechanical impression, a vibration which 
5 
sublates itsel£ Here in glass one has a similar phenomenon, a perenniating 
form of undulation, an unequal resistance to pressure, a persistent in-
equality of cohesion, which gives rise to different darkenings in different 
places. While it was brittleness which gave rise to entoptic colours, here + 
it is the interruption of cohesion. 
10 
(c) If this interruption of cohesion goes still further, we have the paroptic 
colours. Lamellae and tiny fissures occur in this glass, especially in lime 
spar, so that the colour often passes over into an iridescence like that on a 
pigeon's neck. A darkening occurs here which is caused by the diaphanous + 
body's having reached the actual division of its contexture. 
15 
These determinations belong to the transition from brightness to dark-
ness. In this totality oflight and darkness, light no longer conforms to its 
Notion; by abandoning the pure quality which constitutes its essence, it 
has clearly become something else. In other words, physical being comes 
forth as a unity pervaded by light, and as the substance and possibility of 20 
gravity and process. The constant physical colours, which may be ex-
hibited as pigments, are in the third instance this fixed darkening of bodies, 
which no longer appears as an external determination, and as a mere play 
of light over the body. On the contrary, the essence of the darkness of 
matter in these substances is itself merely a darkening of matter within 25 
itself, for light has pervaded the body in an immanent manner, and is 
specifically determined within it. What is the difference between this cor-
poreal colour, and merely bright or darkened translucent colour? Since 
the physical body has an intrinsic colour, gold for example is yellow, the 
question arises of the way in which light enters into this corporeality. 30 
How does light coagulate when it falls upon matter from without, and so 
becomes a pigment bound to a dark corporeality? We have taken bright-
ness as the point of departure for our progress so far, and so we must also 
take it as our point of departure with regard to pigment. The primary 
characteristic of the crystal was its abstractly ideal equality, the trans-
35 
parency traversed by the light which entered it from without. All bodies 
are only bright in so far as they are lighted, and primarily this only occurs 
on their surfaces; they are visible because an external light falls upon them. 
Crystal preserves brightness within itself however, because it has the 
theoretical or ideal nature of the possibility of being in another, and of 40 
156 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
positing itself within it. As this visibility appears not as the real nature of 
brightness, but as this theoretical nature in general, and shape punctualizes 
itself into the inner indifference of the being-in-self of specific gravity, so 
that it progresses to the unified being-for-self of real brittleness, colour is 
5 this progress of visibility into darkness, it is the sublation of free in-
ternal crystallization. Colour is therefore physical being which has come 
to the surface as pure appearance, and which therefore no longer has an 
interior or exterior as heat does in shape. Everything that it is implicitly 
is also there. Consequently, the determinate physical body has a colour. 
10 This obscuration of shape is the sublation of its uniform neutrality; i.e. 
of the form which preserves itself as such even in neutrality, by persisting 
as the pervasive unity of its moments, whose specific distinctness it negates. 
Colour is the sublation of this indifference and indentity, to which form has 
brought itself The obscuration of the form is therefore the positing of an 
15 individual form-determination as a sublation of the totality of differences. 
As mechanical totality, body is form which is thoroughly developed 
within itself The reduction of this form to abstract indifference is the 
chromatic obscuration of the individualized body. This posited deter-
minateness is the liberation of singularity, in which shape now posits its 
20 parts in a mechanical manner as punctiformity. But this liberation is an 
indifference which is inherent within the general continuity of shape. 
The ideality and absolute self-identity of light becomes the form of 
material individuality which returns to precisely this identity. This is how-
ever an identity which, as a reduction of real form to indifference, consti-
25 tutes a specific darkening. It is inner crystallization, which darkens itself 
by sublating differences of form, and so returning to the pure compact 
indifference of a high specific gravity. This compactness of dark matter is 
a being-in-self which, as an inwardly amorphous and merely intensive 
internal identity, is the metallicism which constitutes the principle of all 
30 colouring. It is the luminous side of the body represented as substance, 
and the high specific gravity is precisely the unrevealed being-in-self, the 
simplicity which has not yet disintegrated. Specific gravity has a significance in 
metal, but is practically without significance in other bodies. 
One of the two moments posited here as a distinct determinateness is 
3S therefore pure and abstract identity, which is at the same time the real 
identity of bodies, and also the materialized identity of the light which is so 
posited within the body itself as its peculiar colour. It is in this way that 
this universal element becomes a particular moment, separated from the 
whole; and the other moment is the antithesis. Transparent being is also 
40 undifferentiated, although as it has this characteristic on account of its 
157 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
form, this lack of differentiation is opposed to the dead and dark undif-
ferentiation we have here. As in the case of spirit, it is the predominance 
of form which gives it its internal brightness, while the simple compactness 
of the body with itself, which constitutes the undifferentiation of darkness, 
is due rather to the dominance of material being. We have already en-
5 
countered the separation of matter and form in our consideration of 
epoptic and paroptic colours, where it is the point at which darkness be-
gins, and colours appear. This is also formlessness as separation into single 
points, but to an even greater extent, it is an externally posited mode of 
darkening. In itself, amorphous being is not a plurality but an unshaped 10 
undifferentiation. Consequently, metallic being does not exhibit much di-
versity. Metal is not in itself a multiple body, and is neither combustible 
nor neutral. 
It is empirically verifiable that every metal in its reguline state has its 
particular colour. Schelling says that gold is coagulate light. Iron on the + 
other hand has a tendency towards blackness for it is magnetic. Every-
thing that is coloured may be presented as a metal if its colour is separated 
as a pigment. This is a matter for empirical investigation. When they are 
blended, even the colours of plants, such as indigo, have a metallic sheen 
and a general metallic appearance. The redness of blood may be traced to 20 
iron etc. The colour of a metal may be modified however by being 
brought into a chemical relationship, or even by the action of heat. It is 
by means of the latter, that the infmitely transient nature of colour be-
comes apparent. When silver is melted, there is a point at which the metal 
reaches its brightest lustre; this is its highest degree of fusion, which the 25 
metallurgists call the lightening of silver. It is only a momentary pheno-
menon, and may not be prolonged. Prior to tlns lightening it runs through 
all the colours of the rainbow, which shimmer over it in waves in the 
order red, yellow, green and blue. In a passage which follows that cited + 
above (Rem. II. 137,30) Goethe says, 'If polished steel is heated, it turns 30 
yellow at a certain temperature. If it is quickly removed from the furnace, 
it retains this colour. As soon as its heat is increased, the yellow darkens, 
and when the temperature is increased still further, it changes suddenly 
into purple. It is difficult to retain this colour, for it passes quickly into a 
light blue. It is possible to retain this fine colour by rapidly removing the 35 
steel from the heat and covering it with ashes. This is how blue coloured 
steel products are manufactured. If one continues to hold the steel over the 
fire however, it soon becomes bright blue, and remains so. If a pen-knife is 
held in a flame, a coloured strip will occur across the blade. The part of 
the strip which went furthest into the flame is bright blue, and shades off 40 
158 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
into a bluish-red. Purple occurs in the middle, and is followed by a 
yellowish-red and then yellow. The explanation of this is to be found in 
what has been said above. The part of the blade nearest the handle is 
heated less than the point which is held in the flame. Consequently, all 
5 the colours which would otherwise occur successively, must here occur 
simultaneously, and it is here therefore that one has the best chance 
+ of fixing them.' Here also it is merely a change of density which 
determines chromatic difference therefore, for colour is brought forth 
by the darkness of the body being posited in various determinations. 
10 Consequently, metallicism is the established stability of this physical self-like-
ness. The colour which is contained by metal is still an intimate aspect of the 
light which retains its qualitative purity, and has not yet decomposed. It is in 
fact lustre. Metal is opaque, transparency is the lack of light in something to 
which actual light is alien. 
15 
The chemical significance of metal is therefore that it is oxidizable; it is 
an extreme of form, opposed to the neutrality of the same in its reduction 
to formal undifferentiated identity. A weak acid will easily tum metal 
white therefore. Lead for example is turned into white lead by acetic acid, 
and something similar happens in the case of zinc-oxide. Yellow and 
20 yellowish red have an affmity with the acids, blue and bluish red with the 
alkalies. Not only metals change colour through chemical action however. 
Goethe ('Theory of Colours' part II p. 45 I) says, 'The juices of all blue and 
violet flowers are turned green by alkalies and so made brighter, while 
acids tum them a fine red. The decoctions of red woods, are turned yellow 
25 by acids and violet by alkalies; the infusions of yellow plants are darkened 
by alkalies however, and almost lose their colour entirely through the 
+ action of acids.' Similarly, on p. 201 he says, 'Litmus is a coloured material 
which can be specified into a reddish-blue by alkalies. It is very sensitive 
to acids, which tum it a reddish yellow, but an application of an alkali 
+ will restore its bluish tinge.' 
Here we are considering the particularization of the individual body, so 
that we can only present colour as a moment and a property which never-
theless has the possibility of becoming a substance. Colour does not con-
cern us here in its separation and division as metal therefore. As properties, 
35 colours are still held within individuality, although they may also be ex-
hibited as substances. This is possible here because of the impotence of 
individuality, which is not yet the infmite form which is omnipresent 
within objectivity as its properties. But properties belong to the kingdom 
of death if, even in the organic sphere, they are still presented as sub-
40 stances. For since in living being infinite form is objective to itself in its 
159 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
particularization and identical with itself in its properties, the particular-
ization of this sphere is no longer separable; if it were, the wholeness here 
would be dead and decomposed. 
Colour is now a property which presupposes that it is contained within 
a subjectivity; but as a particularity, it also has being-for-another, for 
s 
every property as such only has being for the perception of a living crea-
ture. We, sentient subjects, constitute this other, our sense of sight being 
determined by colours. For sight there are only colours; shape belongs to 
touch, and is revealed to sight merely through the alternation of shade 
and brightness. Physical being has withdrawn into itself from touch and 10 
from determinate being lacking all quality; it is intro-reflected, and is in its 
otherness. Gravity, like heat, pertains to touch; colour is a general presence 
however, a being-for-other, a propagation which certainly resembles that in 
heat and gravity, but in which at the same time the property remains 
immediately objective. The nature which first developed itself as its sense of 15 
touch, now develops its sense of sight, and so passes over to smell and taste. + 
As colour is for another than itself, this other must leave it to the body; 
consequently it merely relates itself to it theoretically, not practically. The 
sense of sight leaves the property as it is; the property certainly has being 
for it, but the sense does not seize it for itsel£ As the property belongs to 20 
nature however, this must also be a physical relation, it cannot be purely 
theoretical, as it is to the sense of a living being. Consequently, as it is a 
property which belongs to the thing itself, it must also be related to other 
things within the inorganic sphere. Light as a universal element is the 
other to which colour relates itsel£ In so far as light is not individualized, 2S 
and precisely because it is free, it constitutes the other of colour, and so 
makes a single principle with it. The universal is then the power which 
forms and perpetually consumes this particular being; light causes all 
inorganic colour to fade. This is not so in the case of organic beings, which 
are perpetually renewing their colours. This fading is not yet a chemical 30 
process, but an unobtrusive theoretical process, the particular being unable 
to set anything in opposition to this its universal essence. 
For the elements are hostile, 
To the work of human hands, 
+ 
as they are to anything individualized, which they decompose. In colour 35 
however, it is also the case that the abstract universal ideality of the element 
is always individualized. 
+ 
160 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
2. Difference in particularized corporeality 
(The properties of opposition) 
§ 32 1 
(a) The principle of one of the members of this difference (being-
for-self), is fire (§ 283), which is not yet a real chemical process 
(§ 316) within the individual body however, nor any longer a 
mechanical brittleness, but which is rather the implicit combusti-
5 bility of physical particularity. This principle, which is at the 
same time externally differentiated, constitutes the relationship 
with the negative aspect of elementary universality, i.e. the im-
perceptible destructiveness of air (§ 282). It is in fact the process 
of air on corporeality, specific individuality as simple theoretical 
10 process, the imperceptible volatilization of the body in air, i.e. 
odour. 
Remark 
+ 
It is odorous matter, as something existing for itself (§ 126), 
and as an inflammable oily substance, which constitutes the 
odorousness of bodies. In the disagreeable smell of metals for 
15 example, odour exists as a mere property. 
Addition. As it represents itself in the individual body, the opposition 
or second member of this difference consists of smell and taste, which are 
the senses of differentiation, and already belong to the self-developing 
process. They are very closely related, and are not distinguished in Swabia, 
20 so that people there only have four senses. A flower is said to have a 'nice 
taste' instead of a 'nice smell', so that in so far as we also smell with our 
+ tongue, the nose tends to be superfluous. 
If we wish to grasp this transition more precisely, it is as follows. Since 
the metallicism or undifferentiated obscurity at which we have arrived is 
2S chemically combustible and therefore completely oxidizable, it is a base or 
extremity which may only be brought into active opposition by an ex-
ternal agent, which must therefore be another corporeal differential such 
as oxygen etc. This abstract possibility of the combustible substance is 
+ only combustible as calx, i.e. once the substance has been oxidized. Once 
30 the acid has oxidized the metal, it enters into a state of neutrality with it. 
It is neutral with regard to the oxide however, not with regard to the 
F 
161 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
metal itself, i.e. in order to be neutralized, the metal must first be deter-
mined as one side of the opposition. Consequently, metal as such is able 
to constitute one side of the chemical process; its undifferentiation is 
merely a one-sidedness, an abstract determinateness, and precisely for that 
reason, essentially related to the opposition. The opposition into which 
5 
we now enter from differentiation is, in the first instance total however, 
for we have not yet reached the onesided opposition of the chemical pro-
cess, both sides of which are themselves already real corporealities. As we 
now have a total opposition, it is not possible to distingish only one side 
of it within combustion, for we now have a material which is adequate 10 
to the whole process. The combustibility of this material differs from that 
of metal, which as it only constitutes one side of the different sides of the 
process, is combustible in the ordinary sense of the word. As it forms the 
whole possibility of the opposition, this material is the basic principle of 
smell however. Smell is the sensation of this slow and immanent con-
15 
sumption of the body in air. Air itself has no odour, precisely because it 
simply decomposes odours, and everything loses its smell within it, just 
as colours fade away in light. Whereas colour merely constitutes the ab-
stract identity of bodies however, odour is their specific individuality as 
concentrated within differentiation. It is their entire specificality as turned 20 
outwards and consuming itself in this diffusion, for the body becomes 
stale and dead if it loses its odour. This consumption of the body is process 
which has no process; it is not a relationship to fire, as is a flame, which is 
a consuming of an individuality itself within individual shape. It is usually 
the case however, that in inorganic being, such a concentration occurs 25 
only as fire. Fragrancy tends to occur only in organic being, in flowers 
for example. Consequently, as metals are not total bodies, they do not 
smell as such, but only in so far as they consume themselves by being 
integrated into another body, and forming a certain atmosphere about 
themselves. It is in this way that they become poisonous, and so also have + 
a disagreeable taste. This does not happen to the same extent with precious 
metals however, simply because they do not lose their reguline shape so 
easily. It is for this reason that eating utensils are so often made from them. 
Just as light has a particular existence in metal, so fire has a particular 
existence in odour. This is not the real existence of the independent 35 
matter of sulphur however, it is merely the existence of an abstract + 
property. 
162 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
§ 322 
(b) The other moment of the opposition, neutrality (§ 284), in-
dividualizes itself into the specific physical neutrality of salin-
ity, and its determinations such as acid etc. This is the property 
of taste, which at the same time remains in relationship with the 
5 abstract neutrality of water, the element in which the merely 
+ neutral part of the body is soluble. Conversely, the abstract 
neutrality which is contained within this body is separable from 
the physical constituents of its concrete neutrality, and may be 
exhibited as water of crystallization, although this does not of 
10 course exist as water in a neutral body which has not yet been 
resolved. (§ 286 Rem.). 
Addition. The water of crystallization first comes into existence as water 
in decomposition. It is supposed to be latent again in the crystal, but it is 
+ certainly not there as water, for the crystal exhibits no trace of moisture. 
15 
Taste is the third particularity of the body, and as the result of its 
neutrality, it has sublated this relationship to the element once again, and 
drawn itself away from it. Consequently, the process here does not always 
have immediate existence as it does in the case of odour; it rests rather 
upon a chance encounter of the two sides. Water and salt therefore exist 
20 in a state of mutual indifference, and taste is the real process in which 
corporeal individualities pass into one another, and not into the elements. 
Consequently, while combustible matter forms a process which is united 
without difference in a single term, the neutral body may be decomposed 
into acid and base (II. 161,29). As abstract neutrality. water is tasteless 
25 again; it is only with individualized neutrality that taste occurs as the unity 
of opposites which have subsided into passive neutrality. It is therefore 
only neutral bodies such as salts, which decompose into their opposites, 
which have a definite taste. It is with reference to our sense that we call it 
taste, but the other side here is still the element, and the precise condition 
30 for bodies being tasted is that they should be soluble in water. Unlike salt, 
metal is not the unity of opposites, and consequently it cannot dissolve 
itself in water, but is in general an incomplete body which only regains 
its completeness in ore for example. This will be treated as part of the 
+ chemical process. 
35 
Colour, odour, and taste are the three determinations of the particulari-
zation of the individual body. With taste, the body passes over into the 
163 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
reality of the chemical process, although this transition is by no means 
reached as yet. Here, in the first instance, these determinations are still 
related to the universal elements as the properties of bodies, and it is this 
which constitutes their incipient volatilization. The penetration and in-
fection of the power of the universal meets no opposition, because the 
5 
universal is itself the essence of the particular, and is already implicitly 
contained within it. In organic being, it is by means of the inner univer-
sality of the genus that the annihilation of the individual is brought about. 
We shall discover the same bodies in the chemical process, but there they 
will be independent entities in process with one another (see § 320 Add. 10 
II. I59, 3I), they will no longer be in process with the elements. This begins 
already in electricity, and it is to this therefore that we have to make our 
transition. As individualities, these properties are of course also related 
to one another. As we posit their relation by comparing them, the matter 
appears at first to concern us alone; it has a further factor however, for 15 
the individual corporealities relate themselves to others precisely because 
they are particulars. Initially therefore, the individualized bodies do not 
merely subsist in a state of indifference, as in the immediate totality of the 
crystal, nor do they merely constitute physical differences as differentia-
tions of the elements, for they also have a double relationship to one 20 
another. In the first instance, these particularizations are only superficially 
inter-related, and preserve their independence; as such, they therefore 
constitute that electric state, which appears throughout the totality of a 
body. The real relation is the passing of these bodies into one another 
however; it is this which constitutes the chemical process, and which 25 
expresses the deeper aspect of this relationship. 
3. Totality in particular individuality; electricity 
(Electricity) 
§ 323 
Bodies stand in relation to the elements in accordance with 
their determinate particularity; as shaped wholes however, they 
also enter into relationship with one another as physical in-
dividualities. They are independent through a particularity which 30 
has not yet entered the chemical process, and preserves their 
mutual indifference within a wholly mechanical relationship. 
Within this mechanical relationship they manifest their self as 
sound, which is an internal oscillation, a motion of an ideal 
I64 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
nature. Now however it is as their light, in the reciprocal 
physical tension of their particularity, that they exhibit the real 
nature of their selfhood. Nevertheless, although this selfhood is 
at the same time an abstract reality, it is an intrinsically differen-
5 tiated light-electrical relationship. 
Addition. Electricity is a notable phenomenon. Like magnetism, it was 
formerly taken to be isolated, and was regarded as an appendage (see 
above § 313 Add. II. 109,3). We have already indicated the connection 
between electricity and the phenomena most closely connected with it 
10 (prec. § Add.), and we shall now compare it with the earlier stage of 
sound. It was with sound that we entered into shape. At the stage imme-
diately preceding its dissolution within the chemical process, shape is 
pure and self-identical form, and it is this as electric light. It is the abstract 
soul of the body which appears in sound, although this revelation of its 
15 selfhood belongs solely to the field of mechanical cohesion, for the body 
appears as a mechanical totality in the constant motion of its return-into-
self. Here however, we fmd no such mechanical self-preservation, only a 
self-preservation as regards physical reality. The determinate being of 
electrical tension is a physical phenomenon. Just as sound depends upon 
20 the striking of another body, so electricity too is certainly conditioned, 
for two bodies are necessary in order to produce it. The difference is 
however that in electricity, the two bodies are differentiated with regard 
to one another, so that the stimulant also enters into the differentiation. 
In sound on the contrary, there is either only one sounding body, or else 
25 the sounds of both are mutually indifferent. The ground of this progress 
lies in the physically individualized bodies, as the totality of their proper-
ties, having differentiatedly related themselves to one another. Although 
to our senses, these properties fall apart, they are united by the bond of the 
individual body in precisely the same way as our sensuous representation 
30 of things reconnects them into a unity. It is now this individual totality 
which enters into relation, and it is from precisely this standpoint that we 
now have to consider this relationship. As a developed totality, the body 
is however a differentiated totality, and as this differentiation remains a 
totality, it is merely differentiation in general, and therefore requires the 
35 reciprocal relation of two terms. 
As the physical body is now before us as a physical totality, we have the 
immediate implication of a plurality of such bodies, for logic has clearly 
+ demonstrated how the one multiplies itself into the many (§ 97 Add.). 
If this multiplicity of bodies is also in a state of mutual indifference, this 
165 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
indifference will sublate itself, for the bodies are differentiated with regard 
to each other through their having to posit their totalities. In the relation 
which arises out of this positedness, they display themselves as physical 
totalities with regard to one another, and as they are these wholes, they 
must at the time remain what they are. It is precisely because they remain 
5 
what they are that their relation is at first a mechanical one; the bodies 
touch and create friction. This takes place through external force, but as 
they are to remain totalities, this external relationship is not the 
kind of contact we had previously. It is not a shattering brought about 
by the resistance of cohesion; it does not produce sound, nor is 10 
it a force which breaks out into heat or flame, and consumes bodies. 
It is therefore only a slight friction or surface pressure, it is the 
impact by means of which one of the indifferent bodies posits itself 
where the other is. It can also arise when shape is struck and noise is created, so 
that determinate being has its pure inner negativity posited as vibration. It is 15 
through this that there is a positing of a sundered unity, of two terms which 
are independent and indifferent. This constitutes the magnet, both poles of 
which are the free shapes which divide its opposition between them; this they do 
so that its middle exists as a free negativity which in itself has no determinate 
being, and is only there 011 account of its members. Electricity is the pure con-
20 
summation of shape, and so frees itself from it. It is shape which is beginning to 
sublate its indifference, for it is the immediate emergence of determinate being 
which is one the verge ofleaving shape, but is nevertheless still conditioned by it. 
It is not yet the dissolution of shape itself; it is the superficial process, differen-
tiations of which are leaving shape, although they still have it as their con-
25 
dition, and cannot yet stand alone. It is because its necessity is only implicit 
that this relationship appears to be contingent. It is not a difficult 
relationship to grasp, but it can be surprising at first to discover that it is 
electricity, and in order to demonstrate that it is so, we shall have to 
compare this determination of the Notion with the phenomenon. 
30 
§ 324 
Mechanical contact posits the physical differentiation of one 
body in another; as these differentials simultaneously preserve 
their mechanical independence of one another, their mutual 
opposition constitutes a tension. Consequently, the physical 
nature of the body does not enter into this tension in its 35 
concrete determinateness; it is only as the reality of its abstract 
self as light, and indeed as an opposition, that individuality 
166 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
manifests and adapts itselfwithin the process. This sublation of 
diremption, which is the other moment of this superficial 
process, produces an undifferentiated light. As this light is 
incorporeal it immediately disappears, and apart from this 
5 abstract physical phenomenon, produces nothing of sig-
nificance except the mechanical effect of a shock. 
Remark 
It is difficult to grasp the Notion of electricity, partly because 
of the basic determination of an inertia, both physical and mechani-
cal, ascribed to the individual body in this process. It is because of 
10 this that electrical tension is attributed to another principle, i.e. 
the matter which is the source of that light which comes forth 
abstractly for itself, and distinguished from the concrete reality of 
the body which remains independent of it. Secondly, there is the 
general difficulty of the Notion as such, of grasping light in its 
15 relatedness as a moment of the totality. What is more, light here 
is no longer free, as sunlight is, but is a moment of the particular 
body, for implicitly it is the pure self of the body, and enters 
into existence as engendered within its immanence. The origin of 
the primordial light of the sun (§ 275), takes place only in the No-
20 tion as such. This originating also takes place here (as in § 306), 
but the light is differentiated, and arises out of an existence, in 
which the Notion is existing as a particular body. 
It is a familiar fact that through the completion of empi-
rical investigation, the old distinction between vitreous and 
25 resinous electricity, in which difference was defined in terms 
of a specific and sensuous existence, has been idealized into 
the speculative distinction between positive and negative elec-
+ tricity. Empiricism generally attempts to grasp and retain 
the universal in sensuous form, here however we have a re-
30 mar ka ble instance of i ts having su blated its sensuous material. 
There has been a lot of talk recently about the polarization 
oj light, but it would have been more fitting to have re-
served this expression for electricity, instead of applying it 
to the phenomena observed by Malus, in which transparent 
35 media, various mutual positionings of reflecting surfaces, 
and many further circumstances, produce an external difference 
in the appearance of light, but produce no difference in light 
167 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
itself (see § 278, § 319, and § 320). The conditions under which 
positive and negative electricity are produced, a smoother 
or rougher surface for instance, a puff of air and so on, are 
evidence of the superficial character of the electrical process, 
and of the minimal extent to which the concrete physical 
5 
nature of the body is involved in it. The faint colouring of 
both electric lights, their smell and taste, also indicate that 
electricity only constitutes the incipient corporeality of the 
abstract self of light. The tension of its process is physical but 
not concrete, and it is here that it maintains itself. The nega-
10 
tivity which removes the oppositional tension is predomi-
nantly a shock. The self which posits its self-identity through 
its diremption also persists as this totalization in the external 
sphere of mechanics. Light occurs in the discharge-flash, but 
is scarcely able to materialize itself into heat, and according 15 
to Berthollet ('Statique Chimique' pt. I sect. III n. XI), the 
ignition which can take place in this so-called discharge, is 
the direct effect of shock rather than the realization of light 
in fire. 
+ 
Electricity resembles magnetism (§ 314) in that when both elec-
20 
tricities are separated from one another and maintained in different 
bodies, Notional determination occurs, the activity of which 
consists of positing identity in opposition and opposition in 
identity. On the one side this is the mechanizing activity of 
spatial attraction and repulsion, which in so far as it can occur as 25 
a separate phenomenon, establishes the connection between 
electricity and magnetism as such. On the other side, it is a 
physical activity, and manifests itself in the interesting phenomena 
of transmission, or of electrical conduction as such, and as 
induction. 
30 
Addition. This electrical relationship is activity, but as it is not yet pro-
duct, it is an abstract activity; it is only present where the contradiction of 
the tension is not yet resolved, so that each term, while maintaining its 
independence, contains its opposite. 
This is not a simple internal mechanical tension between parts, for it is 35 
essential that it should express itself. This expression must be different from 
the corporeality of the individual, which remains what it is in differentia-
tion. Consequently it only occurs at first in its universal individuality, 
without its real corporeality entering into this process; that is why this 
168 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
expression is still abstractly physical, so that the body only displays its 
differentiation by its general shining. Consequently, the body displays its 
physical soul as light; whereas the light of the sun is immediate and free 
however, this light is elicited by the force of another body. Here there-
5 fore, light is the mode of determinate being in mutually opposed bodies. 
This tensioned light has a tendency to differentiate itself on something 
else, yet precisely because the differentiation is not yet independent, but is 
merely abstract, the differentials only show themselves as light in their 
disappearance. In the flame produced by friction, light is the culminating 
10 point in the destruction of the body; even the spark struck from a stone is 
a sublation of cohesion, and concentration of parts into a single point. 
Electric light is different however, for in this case ideality occurs as a 
preserving factor, a gentle fire; the spark is cold, a mere light, which as yet 
+ has no nutriment. The reason for this is that the particular materiature of a 
15 tensioned body has not yet entered into the process, but is merely deter-
mined there in an elemental fashion as soul. As it is differentiated, light is 
no longer pure however, but is already coloured. The negative spark has 
a tinge of red, and the positive a bluish light. And since light is ideality 
breaking forth from physical being, the other physical determinations of 
20 total individuality, odour and taste, also begin to appear, although in a 
completely ideal and immaterial way. Electricity smells, and when it is 
brought close to the nose for example it makes an impression similar to 
that created by a cobweb. Although it does so incorporeally, it also effects 
taste by means of its lights, one of which tastes more acid, and the other 
+ more alkaline. Finally, figurations are formed. Positive electricity has an 
elongated radiation spark, while the negative spark is concentrated more 
into points. This may be observed when both sparks are brought to bear 
+ upon powdered colophony. 
Reflection habitually regards the corporeal individual as a dead being 
30 which only enters into external mechanical contact or chemical relation-
ship. Consequently, the expression of tension which we have here is 
ascribed not to the body itself, but to another body, of which the first is 
merely a vehicle. It is this second body which has been called electrical 
+ matter. This conception implies that the body is merely a sponge which 
33 allows matter of this kind to circulate within it, while it remains what it is, 
apart from its various degrees of receptivity. This would merely be 
transmission however, it would not be an activity which is immanent 
within the body. What is more, electricity is supposed to be the cause of 
everything in nature, and particularly of meteorological phenomena. 
~() What electricity is supposed to have done cannot be indicated however. 
F* 
169 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Since it is neither matter nor a diffusion of things, it appears on the whole 
to resemble magnetism, in that it is somewhat superfluous. The activities 
of both appear to have an extremely limited effect; magnetism is the prin-
ciple by which the iron needle points north, and electricity gives rise to the 
production of a spark. This occurs everywhere, but that is all, or almost all 
5 
there is to it. Electricity appears then as an occult agent, and resembles the 
occult qualities assumed by the scholastics. If it occurs in storms, it is + 
difficult to see why it should occur elsewhere. Vast natural phenomena such 
as storms should not be thought of on the analogy of our chemical kit-
chens however. How can clouds collide when they are even softer than a + 
sponge? When there is lightning, and the rain is falling so that the whole + 
sky is enveloped in a mantle of humidity, all electrical tension must be 
immediately neutralized, for the falling rain connects the clouds with the 
earth, and is a perfect conductor (see above § 286 II. 44, 22). Even if 
electricity is present here however, its significance, i.e. its necessary is 
connection and relationship with corporeal nature, is not indicated. 
Electricity is in fact the universal scapegoat, everything is electric. It is an 
indeterminate word however, and does not indicate the function of the 
electricity.We, however, regard electrical tension as the intrinsic se1fhood 
of the physical totality of a body which maintains itself in its contact with 20 
another body.What we see is an upsurge of anger in the body; there is no 
one there but the body itself, least of all any alien matter. Its youthfulness 
breaks out, it raises itself on its hind legs; in opposing its connection 
with another its physical nature gathers its forces into the abstract ideality 
oflight. It is not only we who compare bodies, for they compare them-
25 
selves, and in this comparison maintain their physical nature. This con-
stitutes the initiation of organic being, which also maintains its distinctness 
from its means of sustenance. The main point here is that the activity of the 
body consists of its immanent physical refractoriness. 
It should be noticed here that that which we had initially as an immedi-
30 
ate determination, is now positive. As crystal, shape was immediately 
transparent, just as the independent heavenly bodies were immediate 
light. The individual body does not shine in an immediate manner how- + 
ever, and is not in itself light, because as shape it is not abstract ideality. As 
an explicated and developed unity, it includes the determination of the 3S 
heavenly bodies in its individuality as a property, and in its immediacy 
it is therefore merely the shining of another individual body within it, 
which takes place by means of it. Through form, the crystal has certainly 
brought back the difference of material being-for-self into a unity. In 
its determinations, this unity of form is not yet physical identity, however, 40 
170 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
but is merely a mechanical totality which is determined within itsel£ Light 
on the contrary is physical ideality. Crystal is this ideality, but only im-
plicitly, because it is not self-illuminating, and only displays it in its reac-
tion to another. That which it is implicitly now has to be posited however. 
s Posited within developed totality, this ideality will then no longer be the 
mere shining of that which is seen, an alien and incident light, but will be the 
simple totality of the shining of one self in the face of another. This means 
that as unity of form now posits its self-identity, crystal constitutes itself 
here as sun; the light which occurs within it as a differentiated self, dis-
10 plays its totality only in its specificality as a simple physical existence. 
How does electrical differentiation arise? How is this opposition related 
to the physical properties of bodies? Electricity manifests itself wherever 
+ two bodies come into contact, and especially when friction occurs. It is 
not only produced by the electrical machine therefore, for any pressure or 
1 s concussion will posit electrical tension, although contact is an essential 
condition. Electricity is not a specific or particular phenomenon which 
only occurs in amber or sealing-wax etc., it occurs in all bodies which are 
in contact with any other body. It is only necessary to make use of a very 
+ sensitive electrometer in order to be convinced that this is so. The high 
20 spirits of the body appear whenever it is stimulated, and all bodies dis-
play this vitality towards one another. Even if it is mainly positive electri-
city which appears in glass, and negative electricity in resin (Biot and the 
+ French in general still speak of 'electricite resineuse et vitreuse'), this is 
still an extremely narrow distinction, for all bodies are electrical, including 
2S metals, although they have to be insulated. What is more, negative elec-
tricity also occurs in glass; the kind of electricity produced depends upon 
a glass plate's being polished or rough. It is merely factors such as this 
+ which exhibit the difference. Hauy ('Traite de mineralogie' vol. I p. 237) 
says, 'Electricity divides the mineral kingdom into three great sections, 
30 which correspond to the general orders of minerals. Nearly all stones and 
salts of a certain degree of purity become positively electric when sub-
mitted to friction, while combustible substances such as resin, sulphur, 
and even diamonds become negatively electric. Metals are conductors.' 
Consequently, the neutral substance possesses positive electricity; the 
3S differentiated substance which is for itself and belongs to fire and negative 
being, displays negative electricity; and the internally undifferentiated 
substance, which is completely uniform and internally fluid by nature, is 
conductive. Almost all liquids are therefore conductors, oil being the only 
exception on account of its combustibility. Broadly speaking, this consti-
40 tutes the general connection between electricity and specific natural 
171 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
qualities; it is so superficial however, that the slightest modification of 
these bodies suffices to bring about an alteration in electricity. Wax and 
silk for example, are bad conductors; if the first is melted and the second 
heated however, they become good conductors, since the heat makes them 
fluid. Ice is a good conductor; dry air and gases on the other hand are very 
5 
bad conductors. If polished glass is rubbed with a woollen material, it 
becomes positively electric, while if it is rubbed with a catskin it becomes 
negatively so. If silk is rubbed with resin, negative electricity results, 
while if it is rubbed with polished glass, the result is positive. If two very 
similar glass tubes are rubbed together, one becomes positively and the 10 
other negatively electric, and exactly the same takes place if two sticks of 
sealing-wax are used. If one takes two silk ribbons of the same kind and 
strokes one of them in a transversal direction, it becomes negative, while 
if the other is stroked lengthwise, it becomes positive. If two people are 
insulated-if they are not, their electricity will not be individualized from + 
that of the rest of the Earth-and one holds a catskin in his hand and rubs 
the other's clothes with it, the first will become positively electric, the 
second negatively so, the difference being due to the activity of the first 
party. If molten sulphur is poured into insulated metal vessels, the sulphur 
acquires positive, the metal negative electricity. Biot (vol. II pp. 356-359) + 
indicates a principal factor, 'When the surfaces of two bodies are rubbed + 
together, positive electricity seems to occur where the particles are least 
separated, and make fewer deviations from their natural position relative 
to one another. Conversely, that of the two surfaces whose particles are 
more scattered by the other's roughness, is more disposed to negative 25 
electricity. This tendency increases if the surface undergoes a true expan-
sion. When an animal or vegetable substance which is solid and dry is 
rubbed against a rough metallic surface, it becomes negatively electric 
because of the greater displacement of its parts. If such a substance is rub-
bed against very smooth metal however, so that there is very little altera-
30 
tion in its surface, the effect being limited to pressure, and the removal of 
individual particles, it either shows signs of positive electricity, or of + 
none at all. When one rubs the hairy part of a catskin on a polished or 
unpolished metallic surface, the hairs have to give way to the pressure 
whole maintaining their relative position with regard to one another; 35 
consequently, they are positively electric. If the same hairs are woven into 
a material, which involves their being displaced, twisted and pressed back on 
themselves, and are then rubbed against an unpolished (depolie) metallic 
surface, they are not only compressed, but also separated from one 
another by the asperities of the surface. Unless the metallic surface has a 40 
172 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
certain degree of smoothness, this will result in their becoming negatively 
electric.' Colour also makes a difference, 'If a new black silken material is 
rubbed against a white silk ribbon, it becomes negatively electric, the 
reason being evidently, that the black colouring of the material gives rise 
5 to a greater roughness on its surface. If the black material has been used 
however, and its colour has rubbed off somewhat, it becomes positively 
electric when rubbed against a white ribbon. If a white (silk?) ribbon is 
rubbed against a white woollen material, it shows signs of negative elec-
tricity, while if it is rubbed against a woollen material which has been 
10 dyed black, it shows signs of positive electricity.' The qualities which give 
rise to the difference can be either essential or superficial therefore. 
Pohl, in his review of the first three volumes of 'Gehler's Dictionary of 
Physics' edited by Munke ('Berlin Yearbooks for Scientific Criticism' 
+ Oct. 1829 nr. 54 p. 430 ff.), writes, 'It has to be recognized that electrical 
15 opposition, in almost the same way as the opposition of colours, gives 
nothing but faint indications of the extremely changeable chemical 
opposition of oxidation and dis oxidation, which is frequently still quite 
independent of the conditions and the more solid internal qualitative rela-
tionships of the mass involved; also, that where there is a reciprocal inter-
20 action between substances under apparently identical conditions, and where 
the most meticulous and painstaking observation brings to light no 
further modifications, nature, in the nimble dalliance of its playful urge 
towards manifestation, casts the + and -
of electrical opposition to one 
side or the other with an almost complete abandon. This activity might be 
25 compared to the way in which it sends forth the same species, with either 
red or blue corollas, from the seed of a single plant. 
The isolated subsistence of causal relationships is a false hypothesis, 
imported without question into phenomenology; it has been most 
widespread and pernicious and has been driven to its furthest extremes in 
30 the treatment of electrical phenomena, where it has been bandied about 
as the conception of electrical motion and currents. That which is really 
no more than the faint stirring of an incipient chemical process, is re-
garded as a separate self-subsistent fluid X, which persists throughout all 
phenomenal change. Consequently, there is no thought of tracing the 
35 process as such through its further development, and noting the natural 
context of its determinations. As the result of adherence to this conception, 
that which constitutes the true inner movement and development of the 
process itself, is immediately subsumed under the empty schema of the 
simply external movement attributed to this fictitious electrical fluid. It is 
40 regarded as a current and treated exclusively, as if it constituted a second 
173 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
kind of activity within the fundamental electrical substratum, comple-
mentary to the original form of the relation as it expresses itself in tension. 
This view of the matter has obviated any just and natural assessment of 
the phenomena, and has proved to be a source of superficial and erroneous 
conclusions. It is as the result of it that the whole body of electric and 
5 
galvanic theory propounded so far, as well as the individual observations 
which have been made, and including the errors and absurdities of all the 
various kinds of experimentation carried out recently by galvanists and 
electro-chemists, has lost direction. 
Even before 0rsted's discovery, it was hardly reasonable to claim + 
empirical evidence for the assumption that electricity was still actively 
present even when the most sensitive electrometer had failed to yield the 
faintest indication of it. Now however it is completely unjustifiable to 
make this claim if, in situations in which the electrometer has persistently 
shown no response, one now sees immediately that the magnetic needle 15 
indicates the presence, not of the electricity so long assumed to be there, 
but of magnetism.' 
Electricity is infmite form differentiated within itself, and is the unity of 
these differentials; consequently the two bodies are inseparably bound 
together, like the north and south poles of a magnet. Magnetism is mere 20 
mechanical activity however, and is therefore merely an opposition in the 
activity of movement; as it has neither light, colour, odour, nor taste, it 
may be neither seen, smelt, tasted, nor felt. In electricity however these 
fluctuating differentials are physical, for they are in the light; any further 
material particularization of bodies would give rise to the chemical pro-
25 
cess. In so far as the differential is active in electricity, and remains active 
as a differential, it is true that this activity too can only subsist in mechani-
cal being or motion. Like magnetism, it is an approach and a withdrawal, 
and it is this feature of it which explains playthings such as electric rain and 
electric chimes etc. Negative electricity is attracted by positive electricity, + 
but repulsed by negative. In that the differentials unite themselves, they 
communicate themselves to each other; as soon as they have posited a 
unity, they fly apart again, and vice versa. Only one body, devoid as yet 
of physical determinateness, is necessary for magnetism, and it need only 
be the substratum of this activity. In the electrical process, each of the two 35 
distinct bodies has a differentiated determination which is only posited 
through the other, but in the face of which the further individuality of 
the body remains free and distinct. Consequently, the two electricities 
could not exist unless each had its own individual body. In other words, 
one electrical body only has one kind of electricity, but causes the body 40 
174 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
outside it to be charged with the opposite kind; and where there is only 
one kind, the other is at once present. One and the same body does not 
determine its own polarity as in magnetism however. Like magnetism, 
electricity has the basic determination of the syllogism therefore, but in 
+ electricity the opposition has an existence of its own. This is why Schelling 
+ has called electricity a ruptured magnetism. Its process is more concrete 
than that of magnetism, but less concrete than that of chemism. Its ten-
sioned extremities do not yet constitute the actuality of a total process, they 
are still independent, so that their process is still their abstract self Their 
10 physical differentiation does not constitute the whole of corporeality, and 
electricity is therefore only the abstract totality of the physical sphere. 
Consequently, magnetism is in the sphere of shape, what electricity is in 
the sphere of physical totality. 
An electrically charged body can communicate its electricity, particu-
15 larly to conductors such as metals. When a metal is insulted however, it 
can equally well acquire its own electricity as self-differentiation: this is 
also the case with glass, although it is not a conductor. When electricity is 
communicated to various bodies it remains the same however, so that the 
bodies repulse one another. The physicists now make a further distinction 
20 between the transmission of electricity, and electricity which displays 
+ itself through induction. The second of these is as follows:-A is a body 
charged with positive electricity. If an insulated conducting cylinder B is 
then placed close to this electrically determinate body without actually 
touching it, it will also give evidence of electricity. The end of the cylin-
25 der closest to A will become negative, the opposite end positive, and the 
middle neutral however. Two further cases are to be noted here. (a) If B 
is removed from A's electric field its electricity disappears. (b) If B is not 
moved, and its positive end is brought into contact with a third body C, 
which through this transmission takes the positive charge from B, B 
30 remains electric when removed from A's field, but only negatively so. 
The reason for this is that two individual bodies are needed in order to fix 
electricity, for positive and negative both need a body. As long as body B 
is not touched, tension and differentiation are within it as they are in 
magnetism, although this does not constitute its individual determinate-
35 ness. It only receives its determination by being brought into the 
proximity of another body, which already has its own determination. 
Consequently, as a conductor it remains undifferentiated, but as it is at the 
same time in the electrical sphere, it can, as extended, allow the different 
determinations to appear within it. Although it therefore possesses both 
40 electricities, electricity does not exist within it as its own determination. 
175 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
The individual existence of electricity ftrst occurs when the body con-
tains one electricity, and in order for this to be the case, it must be opposed 
by another body. As the undifferentiation of B is removed through this 
contact, and the opposite electricity to that which it turns to body A 
passes over into body C, with which it is in contact, body B becomes s 
charged with the other electricity. What is more, since the opposition of 
these bodies is already united through their proximity, the negative elec-
tricity of body B becomes stronger as its distance from A increases; con-
versely, its intensity weakens as this distance diminishes. If two glass plates 
are rubbed together, while their insulation is maintained, they will show 10 
no trace of electricity when they are pressed close together, although they 
will do so when they are separated. The effect will not be the same with 
insulated metal plates, because their electricity also implicitly neutralizes 
itse1£ If two spheres of the same size and electricity are brought into con-
tact, the electrical intensity at their point of contact is nil, and increases with 15 
the distance from this point. If spheres of unequal size and the same elec- + 
tricity are used, the electricity at their point of contact is also nil; when 
they are separated however, the point of contact on the smaller sphere is 
negative. As the distance between them is increased, this determination 
disappears, and the whole of the smaller sphere becomes positive. It is 20 
inequality in the amount of electricity which produces this opposition. + 
Hauy ('Traite de Mineralogie' vol. I p. 237) also notices that when tour-
maline and many other crystals whose forms are not symmetrical are 
placed in warm water or on hot coals, electric poles are formed at just 
those parts of their extremities which preclude symmetry, while their 25 
middles remain undifferentiated. 
+ 
The ifJects of electricity are mainly to be seen in the removal of tension. 
If the electrilied body is brought into contact with water, the tension 
ceases. The amount of electricity that a body can take up depends upon its 
surface. A bottle can be electrifted until it breaks, for the tension can be-
30 
come too great for the glass to bear. The primary removal of tension takes 
place when the two electricities come into contact. Each is incomplete 
without the other, and they want to totalize themselves. If they are kept 
apart they are in a state of force. The insubstantial opposites have no sub-
sistence; they constitute a spontaneously self-sublating tension. As thus 35 
collapsing into their unity, they are electric light, appearing in its disappearance. 
The essence of this light is however the negativity of the indifferent determinate 
being of shape, which itself has determinate being. The light breaks into shape, 
and by shattering its indifference, draws inner and outer form into a unity. The 
form which has become like itself is the light which bursts forth from within and 40 
176 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
flows together with external light. It is the being-in-self of gravity which des-
troys itself, and which by its disappearance becomes precisely that powerless 
and simple light which is completely identical with its external counterpart. 
+ Plato takes this fusion of internal and external light to be the principle of vision. 
5 Through the connection set up between the tensioned bodies, one dif-
ferentiation invades the other as both electricities integTate. This merely 
produces an ebullition however, the loss of both abstract determinations, 
and the compenetration of these sparks. The main result is the destruction 
of the bodies brought into contact. Electricity shatters pieces of wood, kills 
10 animals, breaks panes of glass, heats and fuses metal wires, volatilizes gold 
+ etc. Volta's pistol shows that the effects brought about by electricity may 
also be produced by mechanical pressure. This instrument is charged with 
two parts hydrogen to one part oxygen, and an electric spark then turns 
+ these gases into water. The decomposition of water constitutes the chemi-
15 cal aspect in the electrical process. It is precisely because the individuality 
of the body does not enter into the tension, that electrical activity can only 
display itself physically in the abstract neutrality of water. It has the power 
of decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen. We already know 
however (see above § 286 Add. II. 46,37), that these gases are not the in-
20 gredients of water, but merely the abstract forms in which water appears, 
for in the galvanic process, there are no bubbles to be seen moving about 
in the glass tube, and if an acid is introduced into the middle of the tube it 
will also remain unchanged. This would not be the case if these gases 
+ moved along the tube. 
§ 325 
25 
The particularization of the individual body is not confined 
to the inert variety and separate activity of the various terms 
from which the pure abstract selfhood of the light-principle 
comes forth into process as the tension between opposites, and the 
resolution of the same into their undifferentiation. Since the 
30 particular properties are merely the reality of this simple 
Notion, the body of the light which constitutes their soul, 
and since the complex of properties constituting the particular body 
is not truly independent, the entire corporeality enters into 
tension, and into a process which is at the same time the becom-
+ ing of the individual body. Shape, which at first proceeded only 
from the Notion, and was therefore only posited implicitly, 
now also proceeds out of the existent process, and presents itself as 
posited existence. This is the chemical process. 
177 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Addition. We began with shape in its immediacy, and recognized it as a 
necessary moment of the Notion; it must also display itself at the end as 
existing however, i.e. as proceeding out of the process. The immediacy of 
the body presupposes the reality of the chemical process. Thus, although 
parents are the immediacy from which one begins, they then also deter-
s 
mine themselves as being posited in the sphere of existence. Shape passes + 
into this third moment in accordance with the Notion; but the third 
moment is rather the ftrst term from which that which was formerly 
the ftrst term ftrst proceeds. This is grounded in a deeper logical progres-
sion. Particularization is not confmed to difference as the tension of ab-
10 
stract selfhood. The body in its particularity is not independent, and is not 
selfSubsistent, it is a link in the chain, and is related to another. This is 
the omnipotence of the Notion, which we have already seen in the elec-
trical process. In this stimulation of one body by another, it is only the 
abstract selfhood of the body which is taken up and made manifest. 1 S 
The process must become the essentially real process of corporeal deter-
minations, which engages the whole of corporeality. The relativity of the 
body must appear, and it is this appearance which constitutes the alteration 
of the body within the chemical process. 
c 
The chemical process 
§ 326 
The moments of the developed totality of individuality are 20 
themselves determined as individual totalities, as wholly particu-
lar bodies, and are at the same time only moments, related to one 
another as differentials. As the identity of non-identical indepen-
dent bodies, this relation is a contradiction. It is therefore essen-
tially a process, the determination of which conforms to the 2S 
Notion, in that it posits that which is different as identical and un-
differentiated, and that which is identical as differentiated, acti-
vated and separated. 
Addition. In order to understand the general position and nature oj the 30 
chemical process, we have to look forwards and backwards. The chemical 
process is the third moment of shape. The second moment was dif-
ferentiated shape, and its abstract process or electricity. Before shape was 
178 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
completed and neutral, it also had a process in magnetism. Just as shape 
is the unity of the Notion and of reality, so the mere primary abstract 
activity of magnetism is the Notion of shape. The second moment is 
electricity, or the particularization of shape in itself and with regard to 
5 its other. The third moment is the self-realizing motivity of the chemical 
process, which is the true reality of the Notion in this sphere. Like mag-
netism, it is a single form, which divides itself into differentials and exists 
as a unity; yet it is not confmed to this. Difference within a single body 
occurs in magnetism. In electricity each differential belongs to a distinct 
10 body; each differential is independent, and the whole of shape does not 
enter into this process. The chemical process is the totality of the anima-
tion of inorganic individuality, for it exhibits whole and physically deter-
mined shapes. Bodies enter into the process not only on account of their 
having odour, taste and colour, but as odorous, gustable, or coloured 
15 matter. Their relation is not motion, but the alteration of their entire 
material differentiation, the passing away of their distinguishing charac-
ter. The light of the body, which constitutes its abstract relation, is not 
merely abstract, but is essentially particularized. Consequently, the whole 
corporeality enters into this process, and the chemical process is therefore 
20 the reality of the electrical process. We have the whole shape therefore, as 
in magnetism, but it is not single, for there are now distinct wholes. The 
two sides into which form divides itself are the whole bodies therefore, 
such as metals, acids, and alkalies, the truth of which consists in their 
entering into relation. The electrical moment here consists of these sides 
25 falling apart into a distinct independence which is not yet present in 
magnetism. The indivisible unity of magnetism is however the governing 
principle here; this identity of both bodies, whereby they return once 
more into the magnetic relationship, is lacking in the electrical process. 
The chemical process is therefore the unity of magnetism and electri-
30 city; these constitute the abstract formal sides of this totality, and conse-
quently do not constitute the same process. Every chemical process has 
magnetism and electricity implicit within it, but these moments are unable 
+ to come forth in their distinctness within what one might call the saturated 
course of this process; they are only able to do so where the process itself 
35 appears in an abstract manner, and does not attain its complete reality. 
This is the case in the universal individuality of the Earth. By itself, the 
chemical process constitutes the universal process of the Earth; but one has 
to distinguish here between the processes of special and of universal 
individuality. The second of these is self-maintaining, and despite its 
40 animation even the chemical process can only appear within it in an 
179 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
abstract universal manner. The Earth in its individuality is not a particular 
existence which can resolve itself and achieve self-neutralization of a real 
nature within another, for it persists in its universal individuality, and 
therefore does not enter into the chemical process which affects the whole + 
shape. It is only in so far as its existence is not universal, and so divides 
5 
itself into its particular bodies, that it enters into chemical process. We 
have seen the chemism of the Earth as the meteorological process. This is 
the process of the physical elements, which as universal determined 
matters are not yet individual corporealities. Since the chemical process 
exists here in this abstract manner, it is here too that its abstract moments 10 
occur, and as this change takes place outside the Earth, it is also here that 
magnetism and the electrical tension of the storm make their appearance. 
Lightning and the northern lights etc. belong to the electricity of the 
Earth however, which differs from ordinary electricity, and is connected 
with completely different conditions (see above § 286 Add. II. 44, 22; 15 
§ 324 Add. II. 169, 38). Magnetism and electricity are merely carried by 
the chemical process, and are first posited through the universal process of 
the Earth itself The Magnetism which determines the individual magnetic 
needle is a variable factor, and depends upon the internal process of the 
Earth, and upon the meteorological process. Parry, on his expedition to 20 
the north pole, found that the magnetic needle became quite indefinite, 
so that if in a thick fog it pointed north for example, this was completely 
fortuitous. The activity of the needle ceased, and one could point it 
wherever one wanted to. Electrical phenomena such as the northern + 
lights etc. are considerably more variable. The northern lights have been 25 
observed at midday, and to the south of England, and even of Spain. They + 
are therefore merely moments of the total process, upon which they are 
dependent. The chemical process, certainly produces electrical tension, 
particularly in its galvanic form, but it also carries a magnetic disposition. 
This dependence of magnetism upon the chemical process is one of the 30 
most remarkable of recent discoveries. The north-south polarity of the 
Earth, the direction of its stationary axis, is determined by the east-west 
polarity of its general revolution as it turns upon its axis. Oersted dis-
covered that in so far as electrical and magnetic activity are related to 
space as directions, they are also opposites which cross one another. The + 
direction of electrical activity is east-west, while that of magnetic activity 
is north-south, although this can also be reversed (c£ above § 313 Add. 
II. 109,37). Magnetism however is, essentially, a merely spatial activity, 
while electricity is already somewhat more physical. The further impor-
tance of this discovery is that it also indicates the conjunction and 40 
180 

PHYSICS OP TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
simultaneity of these moments within the chemical process of individual 
corporeality; the precise reason for its so doing so is that it shows that they 
issue from the galvanic process as the separate and distinct phenomena of 
electricity and chemism. 
5 
Philosophically systematic consideration differs from an empirical 
approach in that it presents the stages of determinations, and not the 
stages of the concrete existences of nature as totalities. Thus, when the 
Earth is, in the first instance, considered as a planet, this does not exhaust 
its concrete nature; on the contrary, the further determination of physical 
10 moments is a further determination of the Earth, that is to say, in so far as 
the Earth as a universal individual is capable of further determination, for 
the ftnite relationships of individual bodies do not apply to it. The case is 
precisely the same with regard to these individual bodies. The progression 
of these stages and their inter-relatedness is one thing, body as such is 
15 another. The individual body unites all these determinations within itself, 
and is as it were a bouquet in which they are bound together. If we apply 
these conditions to the case in question, it becomes evident that on the 
Earth as an independent individual opposed to the Sun, the chemical pro-
cess does in fact display itself, although only as the process of the elements. 
20 At the same time, the chemical process of the Earth is only to be grasped 
as belonging to the past, for separated into their own existence, these 
gigantic members remain at the stage of diremption, and do not pass over 
into neutrality. By appearing within them however, the process brings 
about the reduction of particular corporeal individualities to neutralities 
25 which may be dirempted once again. This process is inferior to the uni-
versal process; we are restricted to it, while the meteorological process is 
the great chemical process of nature. On the other hand, it is also su-
perior to it, because it is the immediate origin of the living process, and no 
member can subsist within the living process, or exist as part of it, with-
30 out having its subsistence in subjective unity. It is subjective unity which 
constitutes the actual being of the living process. The process of the heaven-
ly bodies is on the contrary still abstract, because these bodies preserve 
their independence. Consequently, the individual chemical process is more 
profound, for the truth of particular bodies is actualized as they seek and 
35 attain their unity within it. 
This is the position of the chemical process within the whole. It is 
therefore to be distinguished from the process of the elements and the 
particular process, simply because the particular bodies are not only par-
ticular, but also belong to the universal elements. Consequently, it is 
40 precisely because the universal meteorological process is universal, that it 
181 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
also has to appear within these elements when they are in process as 
particulars. All chemical processes are bound up with the general process 
of the Earth. The galvanic process is also determined by the seasons and 
time of day. Its action is displayed in particular by electricity and mag-
netism, each in its own manner. These activities have their periods apart 
!! 
from the other variations, and these periodic changes have been carefully 
observed and reduced to formulae. Something of the kind has also been + 
observed in the chemical process, but not to the same extent; Ritter for 
example, discovered that a solar eclipse gave rise to variations. This con-
+ 
nection is more remote however, and it is not so constituted that the 10 
elements as such enter into the process. Nevertheless, a determination of 
the universal clements does take place in every chemical process, for 
particular formations are merely subjectivizations of the universal ele-
ments, and do not cease to be related to them. Consequently, if the 
particular qualities operating in the chemical process are altered, this also 15 
brings about a determination of the universal elements. Water is essen-
tially either condition or product; similarly, flre is either cause or effect. 
It is in this way that we reach the Notion of the totality of the chemi-
cal process in general, and have the concept of it as containing the Notion 
within the entirety of its differences; that is to say, as positing its negation 20 
and yet remaining completely by itsel£ Consequently, each side consti-
tutes the whole. Acidity is certainly not alkaline, and vice versa, and both 
are therefore exclusive. Implicitly however, each side is also the other, and 
is the totality of itself and of the other. This is the thirst of the alkali for the 
acid and vice versa. As soon as bodies are activated, they seize hold of one 25 
another, and if they encounter nothing better, they enter into process with 
the air. The implicit identity of one with the other appears in its seeking 
the other, and it is by means of this that it contradicts itsel£ Everything 
has a tendency only in so far as it is this contradiction of itsel£ This con-
tradiction commences in the chemical process, for it is here that implicitly 30 
neutral being gives rise to the infmite tendency towards wholeness, which 
then makes a further appearance in life. The chemical process is therefore 
analogous to life, and the inner activity of life which may be observed 
there can cause surprise. If the chemical process could continue of its own 
accord it would be life, and this is why a chemical interpretation of life is 35 
not so far-fetched. 
§ 327 
First of all we have to account for the formal process, i.e. a + 
combination of elements which are merely di if eren t, not opposed, 
182 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
and which do not require the existence of a third or middle 
term in which to find their implicit unity. The determinateness 
of their existence vis-a-vis one another is already constituted by 
their common principle or genus. They are combined or separated 
5 in an immediate manner, and the properties of their existence are 
+ preserved. These combinations of bodies which are chemically 
inactive with regard to one another, are found in the amalgama-
tion and other interfusions of metals, mixtures and acids and the 
like, of alcohol etc. with water, and so forth. 
+ Addition. Winterl has called this process synsomation. The name does not 
occur elsewhere however, and it has therefore been omitted from the 
third edition. These synsomates are immediate compounds, and lack a 
medium which would give rise to change and undergo change itsel£ 
+ Consequently they do not yet constitute true chemical processes. Fire 
15 certainly enters into metallic amalgams, but it is not yet a medium which 
itself enters into the process. When various incomplete bodies are posited 
within a unity, the question arises as to how they are changed, and we 
have to answer it by saying that it is their particularization which is 
changed. The primary and original determinateness by which they are 
20 particularized, is their specific gravity, and then their cohesion. The com-
pounding of such bodies of the same class is not merely a mixture there-
fore, for in their combination, their differentiation undergoes a modi-
fication. These determinatenesses belong to the universal particularity 
of bodies however, and as they have no true physical differentiation, the 
25 alteration of their particularity is not yet a specifically chemical change, but 
an alteration in their substantial internality. Here change does not yet 
reach the external existence of differentiation as such. Consequently we 
have to distinguish this particular mode of alteration from the chemical 
process, for although it takes place in every chemical process, it must also 
30 have a free existence which is distinct and particularized. The mixture is 
genuine combination, it is not external. When water and alcohol are 
mixed, they permeate one another completely. The weight remains the 
same as when they separate, but the specific density differs from that of 
their merely quantitative unity, for when they are mixed, they occupy less 
35 space than before. When gold and silver are melted together, they also 
occupy less space. The goldsmith to whom Hiero gave gold and silver for 
the making of a crown, was therefore suspected of having defrauded his 
master by keeping some of the metal for himself, for Archimedes cal-
culated the total weight of the alloy from the specific weight of its two 
183 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
components. Archimedes may well have done the goldsmith an injustice 
however. Colour changes, just as specific gravity and cohesion do, so + 
that when brass is produced by the fusion of copper and tin, the redness of 
the copper changes into yellow. Quicksilver amalgamates easily with 
gold and silver, although not with iron and cobalt, and this gives rise to a 
5 
determinate relationship in which each metal saturates itself with the 
other. If there is not enough silver present for example, the unsaturated 
quicksilver will not enter into the relationship, and if there is too much 
silver, a part of it will remain unchanged. The combinations frequently + 
have a greater hardness and density than their component metals, for 10 
differentiation represents a higher being-in-self, whereas the undifferen-
tiated substance is less compact. At the same time, they are however more 
fusible than the metals of which they are composed, and for a correspond-
ing reason, i.e. that that which has difference within it is more open to 
chemical changes and offers resistance to them; just as the most intense 15 
personalities are most obstinate in the face of violence, but open them-
selves freely and unreservedly to a kindred spirit. D'Arcet's soft solder, 
which is a mixture of eight parts bismuth, five parts lead, and three parts 
tin, becomes fluid at a temperature which is lower than that of boiling 
water, and will even be fluidified by the warmth of the hand. There are + 
also earths which by themselves are non-fusible, but which become so 
when they are combined. This is important in metallurgy, for it makes 
foundary work easier. The refining of metals also has to be considered 
here, because it depends upon the different temperatures at which com-
binations will melt. Silver which is combined with copper, is refmed out 25 
with the help of lead for example. The lead becomes molten at a certain 
temperature, and takes the silver out with it; if gold also combined with 
the copper however, it will not be separated. Aqua regia is a mixture of 
muriatic and nitric acid; these acids only dissolve gold when they are 
combined, they cannot do so separately. These synsomates are, therefore, + 
merely alterations of internal and implicit differentiation. The true 
chemical process presupposes a more determinate opposition however, 
and it is from this that a greater activity and a more specific product issue 
forth. 
§ 328 
The real process relates itself at once to chemical differentiation 35 
(§ 200 ff.), for at the same time the whole concrete totality of the 
body enters into this process (§ 325). The bodies which enter into it 
184 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
are mediated by a third term which is not identical with them. The 
initial being of this third term is merely implicit as the abstract 
unity of these extremes; it is the process which posits its existence. 
Consequendy, this third term is composed merely of elements, and 
5 these elements contain difference, for they are pardy the unity of 
abstract neutrality in general, or water, and pardy differentiated 
and divided as air. In nature the different moments of the Notion 
also exhibit themselves in particularized existence, and conse-
quendy, the concrete and abstract sides of the process give rise to a 
10 doubling of both its separation and neutralization. The s ep ara ti 0 n 
is pardy the breaking down of neutral corporeality into its cor-
poreal component parts, and pardy the differentiation of the ab-
stract physical elements into the four chemical moments of nitro-
gen, oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon, which are still more abstract, 
15 and which together constitute the totality of the Notion, by whose 
moments they are determined. Chemical elements therefore 
have three moments: (I) the abstraction of undifferentia-
tion, which is nitrogen; (2) the two moments of the opposi-
tion, which are (a) the element of differentiation which is 
20 for itself as the burning principle of oxygen, and (b) the 
element of the opposition's undifferentiation, which is the 
combustible principle of hydrogen; (3) the abstract moment 
of their individual element, which is carbon. 
Similarly, combination is pardy the neutralizing of concrete 
25 corporealities, and pardy the neutralizing of these abstract chemi-
cal elements. What is more, although there is a difference between 
the concrete and the abstract determination of the process, there 
is to the same extent a union; for as the middle term of the extrem-
ities, the physical elements are the differentiations out of which 
30 the indifferent concrete corporealities are activated. In other words, 
it is through these elements that the corporealities achieve the 
existence of their chemical differentiation, which has a tendency 
towards neutralization, and passes over into it. 
Addition. As a totality, the general nature of the chemical process is that 
35 of the double activity of parting, and of the reduction of that which is 
parted to unity. Since the shaped bodies which enter into the process have 
to come into contact with one another as totalities, so that their essential 
determinateness is contiguous (which is not possible in mere friction, when 
in a state of indifference they merely submit one another to force, as they 
185 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
do in the superficial electrical process), they must coincide in indifferent 
being, which as it constitutes their lack of differentiation, is an abstract 
physical element. This is water as the affirmative principle, and air as the 
principle fire, of being-for-self and negation. The elements which form 
this middle term enter into the process, and determine themselves as 
s 
differentials. Similarly, they fuse themselves together again into the phy-
sical elements. Consequently, the elementary principle here is either the 
active principle in which the individual bodies first display their activity 
with regard to one another, or it appears as passive determinateness through 
its being transformed into abstract forms. The extremes are either bound 10 
to the middle, or they are neutrals like salts, and are therefore decomposed 
into extremes. The chemical process is therefore a syllogism, and it is not 
only its beginning, but also its entire course which is syllogistic; for it 
requires three terms, the two independent extremes, and a middle in which 
its determinateness meets and the terms differentiate themselves. In the 15 
formal chemical process (see prec. §), we only made use of two terms 
however. Fully concentrated acid contains no water, and when it is poured 
on metal, it either fails to dissolve it, or only makes a feeble attack upon it. 
If it is diluted with water however, it makes a vigorous attack upon the 
metal, simply because the third term is then present. It is the same with air. 20 
Trommsdorff says, 'Lead soon tarnishes, even in dry air, but when the air 
is humid, the process is even quicker. Pure water has no effect upon lead 
if the air is excluded, so that if a piece of freshly melted lead, which is still 
very bright, is dropped into a retort filled with freshly distilled water, and 
the retort is then sealed, the lead will remain completely unchanged. On 25 
the other hand, lead immersed in water which is standing in an open 
container, and so has many points of contact with the air, soon tarnishes.' + 
Iron reacts in the same way, so that rust only occurs when the air is 
humid; if the air is dry and warm, iron will remain unchanged. 
The four chemical elements are the abstractions of the physical elements, 30 
which constitute a real existence in themselves. For some time it was 
thought that all bases consisted of such simple substances, just as they are 
now thought to have a metallic consistence. Guiton supposed lime to be 
composed of nitrogen, carbon and hydrogen, talc of lime and nitrogen, 
potash of lime and hydrogen, and natron of talc and hydrogen. Steffens + 
thought he had rediscovered the opposition between carbon and nitrogen 
in vegetables and animals etc. However, such abstractions only occur on + 
their own as chemical differentiation in individual corporealities, because 
process gives the universal physical elements, as a middle term, the charac-
ter of existent differentiation, and so separates them into their abstractions. 40 
186 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
It is in this way that water is dirempted into oxygen and hydrogen. The 
exposition of meteorology (§ 286 Add. II. 46, 17,) has already made it 
abundantly clear that the category of the physicists by which they suppose 
water to be composed of oxygen and hydrogen, is invalid. Similarly, the 
5 air is not composed of two gases oxygen and nitrogen, for they are also 
merely the forms in which the air is posited. These abstractions do not 
integrate themselves into one another therefore, but into a third term, in 
the extremes, which sublate their abstraction and complete themselves as 
the totality of the Notion. The chemical elements are called substances in 
10 accordance with the bases, regardless of their form. With the exception 
of carbon however, none of them may be separated out for itself, for they 
all occur in the form of gases. Yet taken as such, they are material and 
ponderable existences, for when metal is oxidized for example, it gains 
weight through the acquisition of oxygen. This is the case with lead for 
15 instance, for when lead is compounded with the abstract chemical ele-
ment of oxygen, it weighs more than it does in its regulinc state. Lavoisier's 
+ theory is based upon this. The specific gravity of the metal is reduced 
however, and it loses its character of undifferentiated compactness. 
These four elements constitute a totality in that (a) nitrogen is the dead 
20 residue which corresponds to metallicism; it is irrespirable, and does not 
burn, but it may be differentiated and is oxidizable, for the atmospheric 
air is an oxide of nitrogen. (b) Hydrogen is the positive side of the deter-
minateness in the opposition, it is differentiated nitrogen. It is incapable 
of supporting animal life, for animals suffocate quickly within it. phos-
25 phorus does not catch fire within it, and a light or any other burning body 
lowered into it, is extinguished. In itself however, it is combustible, and 
may be lighted as long as atmospheric gas or oxygen has access to it. 
(c) Oxygen is the other moment here; it is negative and active, has its own 
odour and taste, and activates the former two elements. (d) The fourth 
30 element in this totality is carbon, which is a defunct individuality. This is 
ordinary charcoal, the chemical element of the earthy sphere. In its reful-
gent form it is the diamond, which is practically pure carbon, and which 
in its rigid earthy shape is crystalline. Carbon alone subsists for itself, the 
other elements only attain existence through force, and this existence is 
35 therefore merely momentary. It is the~e chemical determinations which 
constitute the forms in which the solidity of substance in general inte-
grates itself. It is only nitrogen which remains outside the process; hydro-
gen and carbon are however the moments of differentiation which lose 
their onesidedness by becoming integrated as physically individual 
+ bodies. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
§ 329 
In its abstraction, the process is the identity of basic division 
and the unification of the differences posited by this division. As 
a progression, it is the return of totality into itself. It is finite 
however, in that its moments also possess bodily independence; 
it is therefore implicit within this totality, that the immediate 
5 
corporealities which it has as its presupposition, are to an equal 
extent only the products of the process. It is because of this im-
mediacy, that the corporealities appear to subsist outside the 
process, which appears to come to them. What is more, the 
moments of the course of the process itselffall apart into their 10 
immediacy and difference. Consequently, the real totality of this 
course becomes a cycle of particular processes, each of which 
has the other as its presupposition, but which for itself takes its 
beginning from without, and extinguishes itself in its particular 
product. It does this without continuing itself in the process, 15 
from its own resources, and so passing immanently into the pro-
cess which constitutes the next moment of the totality. The body 
enters into one of these processes as a condition, and into the other 
as a product, and its chemical character is determined by the par-
ticular process in which it has one or the other position. A 20 
classification of bodies can only be based upon these positions 
within the particular processes. 
The two sides of this course of the process are (i) from the un-
differentiated body, through its activation, to neutrality; and 
(ii) from this union, back to a separation into undifferentiated 25 
bodies. 
Addition. The chemical process is still finite in comparison with the 
organic process, and for the following reasons; (a) The unity of the di-
remption and the diremption itself are simply inseparable within the 
living process, for the unity within it posits itself perpetually as object, 30 
and perpetually appropriates that which it separates from itself, while in 
the chemical process this infmite activity still falls apart into two sides. 
To the chemical process it is an external matter, and a matter of indif-
ference, that the diremptions may be brought together again; one process 
ceased with this diremption, and a new process can now begin again. 35 
(b) The fmitude of the chemical process also consists of each onesided 
chemical process only re-establishing the totality in a formal manner, as 
188 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
for example in combustion, which terminates in diremption through the 
positing of differentiation or oxidation. In a onesided process of this kind, 
neutrality also occurs however, for water is also produced. Conversely, 
in the process which has the neutral principle as its end product, differen-
5 tiation also takes place, although only in an abstract manner through the 
development of gases. (c) Thus the shapes which enter into the process are 
in the ftrst instance quiescent. The process consists of various shapes of 
this kind being posited in unity, or forced out of their indifferent subsis-
tence into differentiation, without the body being able to preserve itsel£ 
10 The implicit unity of the differences is certainly the absolute condition 
of this, but as they still occur as differences, they are only united through 
the Notion, and their unity has not yet entered into existence. Acid and 
caustic potash are implicitly identical; acid is implicitly alkali, which is 
precisely why it thirsts for it, just as caustic potash thirsts for acid. Each 
1 s has the tendency towards integration, for each is implicitly neutral, al-
though it does not yet exist as such. Consequently, the fmitude of the 
chemical process at this juncture consists of the Notion and existence con-
stituting two sides which do not yet correspond to each other; in living 
being however, that which exists is also the identity of the differences. 
20 (d) In the chemical process, the differences certainly sublate their onesided-
ness; this sublation is only relative however, for it falls into another 
onesidedness. Metals become oxides, and a substance changes to acid; 
these are neutral products, which are still onesided. (e) It follows from this 
that the entirety of the process falls apart into different processes. The pro-
25 cess whose product is onesided is itself incomplete, and does not constitute 
the total process. The process is fmished when a single determinateness is 
posited in another; consequently, this process itself is not the true totality, 
but is merely one moment of the entire totality of process. Each totality 
is in itself the totality of the process, but this totality falls apart into dif-
30 ferent processes and products. The Idea of the chemical process in its en-
tirety is therefore a series of sundered processes, which represent the 
different stages and transitional points of its course. 
(f) Another feature of the fmitude of the chemical process, is that it is 
precisely to the different stages of this process that the particular shapings 
35 of the individual bodies belong; in other words, the particular corporeal 
individualities are determined in accordance with the particular stage of 
the entire process to which they belong. The superftciality of the electrical 
process is still very tenuously related to the individuality of the body, for 
the minutest determination is sufficient to make a body positively or 
40 negatively electric. This relation ftrst becomes important in the chemical 
189 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
process. In the various chemical processes one has a number of sides and 
matters which may be distinguished. In order to grasp this complex, one 
has to distinguish between the active and inactive materialities of each 
process; these must not be placed on the same level, but must be well 
separated from one another. The nature of a body depends upon its po-
5 
sition within the different processes, in which it is either generative, deter-
minative, or product. It is certainly also capable of entering into further 
processes, but not as the determining factor. In the galvanic process for 
example, the regulus of the metal is the determining factor; it certainly 
also passes over into the process of fire as alkali and acid, but these do not 10 
give its place within the whole. Sulphur also has a relationship to acid, 
by means of which it is effective, but in its relationship to fire, it is the 
determining principle, and it is through this relationship that it assumes 
its position. In empirical chemistry however, each body is described ac-
cording to its reaction to all chemical bodies, and if a new metal is dis-
15 
covered, the whole gamut of its reactions to other bodies is noted. If one 
looks through chemistry textbooks for the classifications employed there, 
one fmds that the main distinction made is that between what are called 
simple bodies, and bodies which are combinations of these. In the first 
group one fmds nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, phosphorus, sul-
20 
phur, gold, silver, and the other metals lumped together. A merely cursory 
glance will show us that these things are quite heterogeneous however. 
What is more, although compounds are certainly products of the process, 
the so-called simple bodies are also the products of even more abstract 
processes. Finally, it is the dead product which emerges from this or that 25 
process, which the chemists regard as the main thing to be described. The + 
truth is however that it is the process in its series of processes or stages 
which is the main thing; its course is the determining factor, and the 
determinatenesses of the individual bodies only find their significance in 
its various stages. This is however the fmite formal process, in which each 30 
body, through its particularity, displays a modified course of the entire 
process. It is precisely the particular behaviour of the body in its specifically 
modified process which constitutes the subject-matter of chemistry, and 
it presupposes that corporeal determinatenesses are given. Here on the 
contrary we have to regard the process in its totality, and the way in which 35 
it divides bodies into classes, and defmes them as the potentially fixed 
stages of its course. 
As it fixes its stages in the particular corporeal individualities, the totality 
of the process allows these stages themselves to appear as processes of a 
particular kind. The totality which these constitute is a chain of particular 40 
190 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
processes forming a rotation, the periphery of which is itself a chain 
of processes. The totality of the chemical process is therefore a system of 
particular modes of the process. (I) In the formal process of synsomation, 
which we have dealt with above (§ 327), the differentiation is not yet of a 
5 real nature. (2) In the actual process, it is the way in which activity exists 
which has to be discovered. (a) In galvanism, it exists as a variety of un-
differentiated bodies. Here also, the differentiation is not yet present as a 
reality, for the variety is posited through the activity of the differentiation 
of the process. Consequently, we have metals here whose varieties touch 
10 one another, and as they are active in this combination as differentials, 
process is present. (b) In the process of fire, the activity exists for itself 
outside the body, for fire is this immanently consuming and negative 
being-for-self, the restless differential which is active as the positing of 
differentiation. This is initially an elementary and abstract process; its 
15 product is the corporealization of fire, which is the transition to caustic 
alkalies, active acids. (c) The third stage is the process of these activated 
bodies; the first was the positing of oxides, the second the positing of the 
acid. The differentiating activity now has a corporeal existence. This pro-
cess is the reduction to neutrality occurring in the production of salts. 
20 (d) Finally, we have the return of the neutral substance to acid, to oxide 
and to radical, which constituted the point of departure. Undifferentia-
tion comes first therefore; then comes the positing of the various bodies, 
then their opposition, and fmally the neutral body as product. As the 
neutral body is itself one-sided however, it is reduced to undifferentiation 
2S is the presupposition of the chemical process, which has this presupposition as 
its product. In empirical investigation, the forms of the bodies are the prime 
consideration; but it is with the distinguishing of the particular forms of 
process that a beginning has to be made. This is the only way in which 
the empirically infinite multifariousness of the mere product may be 
30 grouped into a rational order, so that the abstract generality in which 
everything is flung together without order may be kept at bay. 
I. Combination 
a. Galvanism 
§ 330 
It is metallicism, a corporeality which with regard to its 
form is immediate and undi1ferentiated, and in which various 
properties are as yet undeveloped and held together in the simple 
191 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
determination of specific gravity, which constitutes the ini tia tion 
of the process, and so of the first particular process. Metals, as 
primary bodies, as merely different, and as not activated into 
mutual antagonism, stimulate the process by imparting their 
immanent determinateness and differentiation to one another 
5 
through the compact unity of their implicit fluidity, and their 
ability to transmit heat and electricity. As they are at the same 
time independent, they enter into a state of mutual tension, which 
is therefore still electrical. Their differentiation can however 
realize itselfin the neutral and consequently separable medium of 10 
water combined with air. Water is either pure, or capable of a 
more concrete effect on account of its salt content, and it is by 
means of its neutrality and its consequent susceptibility to differen-
tiation, that an activity is initiated which is of a real nature and not 
merely electrical, and which arises out of the tensioned conflict of 15 
metal with water. It is through this that the electrical passes 
over into the chemical process. The product of this process is + 
oxidation in general, and ifit progresses so far, the disoxidation 
or hydrogenation of metal. It is at least the development of hy-
drogen; and likewise of oxygen gas, so that it is a positing of 20 
differentials, in which the neutral element is dirempted and also 
enters into abstract existence for itself (§ 328); just as, at the same 
time, the combination of these differentials with the base enters 
into existence in the oxide or hydrate; this is the second kind 
of corporeality. 
+ 
Remark 
In this exposition of the presence of the process at this firs t 
stage, it is easy to grasp the difference between electricity, the 
chemical state of the process in general, the galvanic state in par-
ticular, and the connection between them. Physics refuses to see 
anything in the galvanic process but electricity however, so that 30 
the difference between the extremes and the middle term of the 
syllogism is regarded merely as the difference between a dry and 
a wet conductor, both alike being classed as conductors. Here, 
there is no need to consider more closely the modifications neces-
sary in order that the extremes may also be differentiated fluid-
35 
ities, while the middle is metal; in order that, as stated in this 
paragraph, the form of electricity may be maintained, and some-
192 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
times made to predominate, while at other times chemical action 
may be augmented; in order that in contrast with metals, which 
are so independent that they need water and more concrete neu-
tralitites or the already developed chemical opposition of acids 
5 or caustics to be differentiated and to pass over into their calxes, 
metalloids are so unstable, that when they are brought into 
contact with air, they may pass straight into their differentiation 
and become earths etc. These and many other particularities do 
not alter, but tend rather to confuse the treatment of the archetypal 
10 phenomenon of the galvanic process, which we shall continue to 
call by its original and well-deserved name. Once the simple 
chemical form of this process had been discovered in the voltaic 
pile, the clear and straightforward consideration ofit was muddled 
by the conception of wet conductors. It is mainly on account of 
15 this conception that the plain empirical evidence of the activity 
manifested in and by water as the middle term, is disregarded and 
set aside. Water is regarded as a passive, not as an active conduc-
tor, with the result that electricity too is regarded as complete 
in itself, and as merely streaming through water as it does through 
20 metals; for in this connection metals are also regarded as nothing 
but conductors, and as first class conductors in comparison with 
water. Despite this aberration, Mr. Pohl's 'The Process of 
the Galvanic Circuit' (Leipzig, 1826), displays the active re-
lationship of galvanism from its simplest form onwards, that is 
25 to say from the relationship between water and a single metal, to 
the multiple complexes which arise from the modifying of con-
ditions. Mr. Pohl has carried out this work empirically, yet with 
the full energy of intuition, and with an awareness of the living 
+ activity of nature. Perhaps it is simply because the overriding need 
30 to grasp the general progression of the galvanic and chemical 
process as a totality of natural activity has tended to tax the rational 
intelligence too heavily, that the more modest task of examining 
the empirically presented factual element has hitherto been 
somewhat neglected. 
35 
An outstanding example of the ignoring of facts in this field is 
the conception of water as consisting of oxygen and hydrogen. 
When water is submitted to the active circuit of a pile, oxygen 
appears at one ofits poles and hydrogen at the other. This is taken 
as evidence of decomposition: the hydrogen is considered to 
40 be that part of the water left by the oxygen which has developed 
G 
193 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
around one pole, while the oxygen is thought to have left the pole 
at which the hydrogen has developed, and to have mysteriously 
found its way to the opposite side through a middle which con-
tinues to exist as water. In thus passing to their respective sides, 
the gases are also assumed to have passed through one another. It 
5 
is not only the intrinsically indefensible nature of this theory which 
goes unnoticed; it is also forgotten that given a separation of the 
materiality of two portions of water, which is however so con-
stituted that one side continues to form simply a conducting con-
nection through a metal, the development of oxygen at one pole 10 
and of hydrogen at the other will also take place in the same 
wa y under conditions which make it impossible that there could 
be any completely external way in which this essentially ground-
less and mysterious migration of gases or molecules to their re-
spective sides might take place. A similar disregard of evidence + 
occurs when an acid and an alkali are found to neutralize them-
selves on being brought to their respective and opposing poles. 
In this case too, a portion of the acid is said to neutralize the 
alkali by finding its way to it from the other side, while a portion 
of the alkali is said to neutralize the acid in the converse manner. 20 
When a litmus tincture is placed between them however, this 
sensitive medium will show no trace of any action whereby one + 
might perceive the presence of the acid which is supposed to be 
passing through it. 
Here one might also mention, that it is because water has been 25 
regarded merely as a conductor of electricity, despite the fact 
that a pile mediated by water acts more weakly than one mediated 
by more concrete agents, that one encounters the extraordinary 
conclusion that, 'L'eau pure qui transmet une electricite forte, 
telle que celle que nous excitons par nos machines ordinaires, 30 
devient presqu' isolante pour les faibles forces de l'appareil 
electromoteur,' (Biot 'Traite de Phys.' vol. n p. 506). 'Electro- + 
moteur' is the term used in this theory for the voltaic pile. It is 
only a theorizing which is obstinate enough not to be shaken by 
such a conclusion, which could have the audacity to assert that 35 
water is an insulator of electricity. 
The central feature of this theory is the identification of 
electricity with chemism, and if it is put out by the striking 
difference between them, consolation is sought in the conclusion 
that this difference is inexplicable. And it is of course, for if one 40 
I94 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
presumes their identity, one certainly makes it impossible to ex-
plain their difference. The mere equating of the chemical deter-
minateness of the bodies with regard to one another with positive 
and negative electricity, ought to be enough to make the super-
s ficiality and insufficiency of the theory clear. Even though the 
chemical relationship is deeply involved in external conditions 
such as temperature, and is relative in other respects, the electrical 
relationship is completely transient, movable, and capable of 
being reversed by the slightest circumstance. What is more, 
10 bodies of one side of the chemical relationship such as acids, may 
be distinguished from one another by the exact quantitative and 
qualitative ratios of their being saturated with an alkali (§ 333), 
but even if a merely electrical opposition is somewhat stabilized, 
it will give rise to no trace of this kind of determinability. Yet 
1 s even if the entire visible course of the real nature of corporeal 
change within the chemical process is disregarded, and one con-
siders only its product, the difference between this product and 
that of the electrical process is so striking, that if the identification 
of these forms is assumed, it cannot fail to cause astonishment. 
20 I shall confine myself to quoting Berzelius's naive expression 
of this astonishment in his 'Essai sur la theorie des proportions 
+ chimiques etc.' (Paris 1819). On page 73 of this work he says, '11 
s'eleve pourtant ici une question qui ne peut etre resolue par 
aucun phenomene analogue a la decharge electro-chimique 
2S (the expression 'chemical combination' is dropped in favour of 
electrical discharge), . . . ils restent dans cette combinaison a v e c 
une force, qui est superieure a toutes celles qui peuvent produire 
une separation mecanique. Les phenomenes electriques ordin-
aires ... ne no us eclairent pas sur la cause de l'union per-
30 manente des corps avec une si grande force, apres que l'etat 
d'opposition electrique est detruit.' In the chemical process, 
changes take place in specific gravity, cohesion, shape, colour 
etc., as well as in acid, caustic, alkaline and suchlike properties, 
but all this is set aside and submerged into the abstraction of 
35 electricity. If all these properties of corporeality can be forgotten 
for the electrical positive and negative, philosophy should no 
longer be reproached for its, 'abstracting from the particular, and 
+ its empty generalities.' A now outmoded way of philosophizing 
about nature 'potentialized', or rather dissipated and attenuated 
40 the system and process of animal reproduction into magnetism, 
195 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
and the vascular system into electricity; but this schematizing is 
no more superficial than that perpetrated by this reduction of 
concrete corporeal opposition. It is right that such a philosophical 
procedure should have been rejected, for it merely epitomized 
concrete existence, and because of its abstraction, was unable to s 
deal with singularity. Why should not the same procedure be 
rejected in the case of this other theory? 
There is however another point of difficulty in the difference 
between the concrete process and the abstract schema, and that is 
the strength of combination exhibited by substances such as 10 
oxides and salts etc., which are the result of the chemical process. 
Taken for itself, this strength certainly contrasts very sharply 
with the result of mere electrical discharge, in which the bodies 
which are stimulated into positive and negative electricity main-
tain precisely the same condition, so that each for itself remains 15 
as unconnected as it was before and during the friction, while the 
spark on the other hand disappears. The spark is the actual result 
of the electrical process, and it is with this therefore that the re-
sult of the chemical process will have to be compared if we accept 
the premiss that these processes are equivalents, and face the 20 
difficulty presented by this assertion. It is not possible to remove 
this difficulty by assuming that the force which combines the 
positive and negative electricity of the discharge spark, is merely 
the same as that which unites an acid and an alkali in a salt. The 
spark disappears, and it is therefore no longer possible to compare 25 
it. It is perhaps too obvious that the salt or oxide in the result of 
the process, is a much more concrete thing than the electric 
spark. What is more, the development of light and heat which is 
apparent in the chemical process, has also been attributed to a 
spark of this kind, although with an equal lack of justification. 30 
Berzelius has something to say about the alleged difficulty, 'Est-ce 
l'effet d'une force particuliere inherente aux atomes, comme la 
polarisation electrique?'-i.e. is there not a certain difference 
between chemical and electrical phenomena in bodies? Most 
certainly and undoubtedly!-'ou est-ce une propriete electrique 35 
qui n' est pas sensible dans les phenomenes ordinaires ?', i.e. 
in the stricdy electrical phenomena we have already considered 
(p. 195). This question may be answered quite simply in theaffirma-
tive, for as the chemical element is absent from electricity as 
such, it may not be perceived there. The chemical element is 40 
196 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
first to be seen in the chemical process. As regards the first possi-
bility however, i.e. that of there being a difference between the 
electrical and chemical determination of the body, Berzelius is 
of the opinion that, 'La permanence de la combinaison ne devait 
5 pas Hre soumise a l'influence de l'electricite'. This means that 
on account of their difference, two of a body's properties must 
be quite devoid of any inter-relationship, so that the specific 
gravity of metal is unrelated to its oxidation, and its metallic 
lustre and colour to its oxidation and neutralization etc. The 
10 most rudimentary experience shows that the properties of the 
bodies are essentially subject to the influence of the action and 
change of other properties however. It is the dry abstraction of 
the understanding which demands the complete separation and 
independence of properties which are different, even when 
15 they belong to the same body. As regards the second possibility, 
i.e. that of electricity'S having the power to dissolve strong chemi-
cal compounds, although this is not perceptible in ordinary 
electricity, Berzelius observes that, 'Le retablissement de la 
polarite electrique devrait detruite m~me la plus forte combinaison 
20 chimique'. In support of this he adduces the special instance of a 
voltaic piJe, which he calls an electric battery, which consists 
of only eight or ten pairs of silver and zinc plates the size of a 
five-franc piece, and which is able, with the help of quicksilver, 
to decompose potash, i.e. to preserve its radical within amalgam. 
25 The difficulty was caused by ordinary electricity not showing 
the power in question, as distinct from the action of a galvanic 
pile. The action of such a pile is now substituted for ordinary 
electricity, the only difference being that it is now called a 'batterie 
electrique' while in terms of the theory it was formerly (p. 194) 
30 given the name of an 'appareil electro-moteur'. There is no diffi-
culty in picking out the inconsistency here however, and the 
argument will not bear inspection. In order to remove the diffi-
culty which stood in the way of identifying electricity with 
chemism, at this particular juncture, the galvanic pile is once 
3S again presumed to be merely an electrical apparatus, and its 
activity to be nothing but the generation of electricity. 
Addition. Each single process starts with an apparent immediacy, which 
at another point on the periphery of its circuit is however also a product. 
Metal constitutes the true beginning, for it is inwardly stable, and only 
197 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
appears to differ from another through comparison. Consequently, it is a 
matter of indifference to gold that it differs from zinc, for unlike neutral 
substances or oxides, gold is not differentiated within itself, and may not 
be decomposed into opposed sides. Consequently, metals in the first in-
stance merely differ from one another; they are not merely different for 
5 
us however, for they distinguish themselves from one another in so far 
as they touch one another, and this contiguity is for itself contingent. 
The activity of their differentiation, and the positing of themselves within 
another differentiation, is conditioned by the continuity of their metalli-
cism. A third factor is necessary however, which is capable of differen-
10 
tiation of a real nature, and into which the metals are able to integrate. 
It is by this third factor that their differentiation is sustained. Metals do not 
have the brittleness of resin or sulphur, in which the posited determination 
is confmed to a single point; determinateness is imparted to them as a 
whole, and they communicate their differentiation reciprocally by the one 15 
making it felt within the other. The difference of metals is therefore re-
vealed in their relationship within the process; in itself this is precisely the 
general antithesis of their perfection, compactness, ductility, and fluidity, to + 
their brittleness and their readiness to enter into oxidation. Precious metals 
such as gold, silver and platinum are not calcined by mere air through the prin-
20 
ciple of fire; their process in a free fire is to burn without burning away. They 
do not decompose into the extremes of basicity and acidity, so that they belong 
to neither of these sides. The only change which takes place is that from 
solidity to guttate fluidity, and this is not a chemical change. This is the result 
of their lack of differentiation. Gold appears to display the Notion of this 2S 
solid metallic simplicity in its purest form; it does not corrode there-
fore, and old gold coins remain quite bright. Lead and other metals are 
attacked even by weak acids however. The still more numerous metals 
known as metalloids, are scarcely ever found in their reguline state, and 
oxidize merely by being exposed to the air. Even when they are oxidized 30 
by acids, gold, silver, and platinum do not require the addition of any 
combustible material such as charcoal in order to be restored to their 
original state; their reguline metallicism can be restored merely by putting 
them in the furnace and raising them to a red heat. It is true that quicksilver 
may be vaporized by heat, and that when it is shaken or rubbed while 35 
exposed to the air, it changes into an imperfect dark grey calx, which 
after continuous heating changes into a more perfect dark red calx having 
a sharp and metallic taste. Trommsdotff observes however, that when quick-
silver is shut up in dry air and left to stand, no change takes place on its 
surface, and it does not corrode. He had however seen, 'a small flask of 40 
I98 

PHYSICS Of TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
quicksilver which had belonged to old Buttner for God knows how many 
years,' to which the air had had access through minute holes in paper, and 
which had calcined on top, where a thin ftlm of red mercuric oxide could 
+ be seen. This, and all other mercuric calxes, may be restored to the reguline 
5 state of quicksilver by making them red hot, and without the addition of 
anything combustible. Thus, Schelling ('New Journal for Speculative 
Physics' vol. I sect. 3 p. 96) considers gold, silver, platinum and quick-
silver to be the four precious metals on account of an indifference of essence 
+ (gravity) and of form (cohesion) being posited within them. Metals such 
10 as iron, in which form becomes most fully differentiated from essence, and 
in which selfhood or individuality predominate, are not to be regarded as 
precious metals however, any more than are metals such as lead, the 
imperfect form of which makes them impure and bad, and corrupts their 
essence. This is not an adequate division however. It is because of their 
15 high specilic gravity, as well as their continuity and compactness, that these 
metals are precious. Platinum certainly has a higher density than gold, but it 
+ is a unity of the various metallic moments of osmium, iridium, and palladium. 
Steffens, even before Schelling, (c£ § 296 Add. II. 64, 12 note) maintained 
that the density of metals stands in inverse ratio to their cohesion; but 
20 this is true only of some precious metals such as gold, which have a weaker 
+ speciftc coherence than less perfect and more brittle metals. The more 
differentiated the metals are, the greater is the activity they give rise to. 
If we place together gold and silver, gold and copper, gold and zinc, 
silver and zinc, and add a third body such as water to the air which sur-
25 rounds them, this immediately gives rise to a process which generates 
considerable activity. This is a simple galvanic circuit. It was discovered 
by chance that its circuit has to be closed; if it is not closed, no action or 
+ active differentiation will take place. Ordinarily, we regard bodies as 
being only where they are, and as only exerting pressure through contact 
30 as weighted matters. We saw already in electricity however, that they 
work against one another in accordance with their physical determinate-
ness. The case of the metals is similar, for it is their various natures or 
specilic gravities which are in contact. 
As the simple galvanic circuit is in general no more than the compound-
35 ing of two opposed elements by a third neutral dissolving element in 
which differentiation can enter into existence, metallicism is not the only 
condition of this activity. Fluids can also exhibit this form of the process, 
but as with the metals, it is always the simple determinateness by which 
+ they are differentiated from one another, which is the active principle. 
40 Although Ritter regarded it as a metal, charcoal is a burnt vegetable 
199 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
material; it is able to enter into the galvanic process, and as a residuum in 
which determinateness has been extinguished, it also has an undifferen-
tiated character. Even acids can give rise to the galvanic process on account + 
of their fluidity. If soapy water is connected with ordinary water by a 
piece of tin, it gives rise to galvanic action. If one touches the soapy water 
5 
with one's tongue, and the ordinary water with one's hand, one's sense 
of taste will be affected by the closing of the circuit. When the points of 
contact are changed over however, it is the breaking of the circuit which 
produces this effect. Mr. von Humboldt observed simple circuits produced + 
by hot and cold zinc and humidity. Schweigger constructed similar piles + 
from heated and cold copper bowls filled with a watery sulphuric acid. + 
Even differentials such as these will give rise to galvanic action therefore; 
what is more, when this phenomenon appears in fmely textured bodies 
such as muscles, the differentiation can be very much slighter. 
The activity of the galvanic process is initiated by the emergence of an 15 
immanent contradiction, in which both particularities attempt to posit 
themselves in each other. The activity itself consists in the positing of the 
implicit inner unity of these internal differentials. Electricity continues to 
predominate heavily in the galvanic process, because the metals there are 
posited as differentials which are undifferentiated in their self-subsistence, 20 
and keep to themselves even when they are changing, and it is precisely 
this that characterizes electricity. There must be a negative pole on one 
side, and a positive pole on the other; chemically determined, oxygen 
must be developed at one pole and hydrogen at the other. This has given 
rise to the conception of electro-chemistry. There are physicists who have 2S 
gone so far as to regard electricity as inseparable from chemical action. 
Wollaston has even said that electricity only occurs where there is oxida-
tion. The catskin which brings forth electricity without oxidation when + 
it is rubbed on glass, has been quite rightly cited as evidence to the con-
trary. When a metal is attacked chemically, it is neither dissolved nor de-
+ 
composed into its component parts, so that it displays itself as a neutrality. 
The real differentiation displayed by a metal in oxidation, is a differentia-
tion which comes to it from without through the metal's being combined 
with something else. 
The initial combination of the two metals has no existent middle, for 35 
the middle which is present in their contact is merely implicit. The real 
middle is however that which differentiation has to bring into existence. 
In logic, this is the simple medius terminus of the syllogism, while in 
nature itself it is a duality. In this fmite process, the mediating term, which + 
is orientated towards the two one-sided extremes, and from which these 40 
200 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
extremes are to integrate themselves, must be an existent and not only an 
implicit distinctness. The middle term must therefore have a break in its 
existence. Consequently, atmospheric air or oxygen is necessary for the 
initiation of galvanic action, and if the galvanic pile is insulated from 
5 atmospheric air, it will not become active. Trommsdorff cites the following 
experiment by Davy: 'If the water between the plates is perfectly pure, 
and the air outside is kept from the water by a coating of resin, no gas 
will be given off by the water, no oxide produced, and the zinc in the 
pile will hardly be affected.' Biot (vol. II, p. 528) counters Davy with the 
10 observation that even when it is under an air pump, a pile will still produce 
+ gas, although not so abundantly. This is merely because it is impossible 
to remove all the air however. As the middle is a duality, the activity of the 
pile is increased considerably if instead of sheets of cardboard or cloth, 
hydrochloric acid or sal ammoniac etc. is placed between the metals, for 
15 such a mixture is already implicitly complex chemically. 
This activity is called galvanism because Galvani was the first to discover 
it, although Volta was the first to understand it. In the first instance, 
Galvani made use of the principle in a completely different way, and it 
was Volta who freed the phenomena from organic factors and reduced 
20 them to their simple conditions, although he regarded them as nothing 
more than electricity. Galvani discovered that when one cuts a frog so as 
to lay bare its spinal nerves, and these nerves are then connected with its 
leg muscles by means of two metals, or simply by means of a silver wire, 
the contradiction of these differentials is expressed in the occurrence of 
+ convulsive movements. Aldini used pure quicksilver to show that this 
effect may be produced by a single metal. He also showed that a damp 
hempen cord was often all that was needed in order to effect this active 
connection between the nerve and the muscle, and when he draped 250 
+ feet of such a cord about his house, he was still able to produce this effect. 
30 Someone else discovered that no armature was necessary with large and 
vigorous frogs, for mere contact of the leg with its nerve was enough to 
+ produce jerks. According to Humboldt, where two similar metals are used, 
+ the metallic stimulus may be evoked simply by breathing on one of them. 
If two different metals are brought into contact with a nerve in two 
35 different places, and then connected by a good conductor, this will also 
give rise to the jerking phenomenon. 
This was the first form of galvanism, and it was called animal electricity 
because it was thought to be restricted to organic being. Volta made use 
of metals instead of muscles and nerves, and constructed galvanic batteries 
40 by joining quite a number of these pairs of plates. The determinateness of 
20I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
each pair is opposed to that of the pair following. The pairs are the sum 
of their activity however, so that at one extreme one has the sum of their 
negative activity, and at the other the sum of their positive activity; while 
the point of indifference is in the middle. Volta also distinguished between 
the wet conductors or water, and the dry conductors or metal, as if there 5 
were nothing present but electricity. The difference between water and + 
metal is not the same however, and neither of them plays the part of a 
mere conductor. It is easy to separate electrical from chemical activity. 
The production of sparks gives rise to a brighter effect when the surface 
area of the plates is increased to eight square inches for example. The size 10 
of the surfaces seems to have little effect upon the other phenomena of the 
pile, while only three layers will produce sparks. If a pile is built out of 
forty pairs of zinc and copper plates of this size, and its silver pole is con-
nected with its zinc pole by an iron wire, a fire-rose 3-3t inches in di-
ameter appears as soon as the connection is made. Some of its individual 15 
rays are a good Ii to II inches long; in some places they are linked to-
gether, and they terminate in tiny stars. The communicating wires are so 
firmly welded by the spark, that a considerable force is required to separate 
them. In oxygen, gold and silver act as they do in atmospheric air, iron + 
wires burst into flame and bum away, and lead and tin bum with great 20 
vigour and more vivid colours. If the chemical action here is diminished, 
it becomes distinct from combustion, for a vigorous combustion certainly 
occurred with electricity too, although it did so as a fusion through heat, 
not as a decomposition of water (see above § 324 II. 177, 5). Conversely, 
the chemical action becomes greater and electrical action weaker if the 25 
number of plates is increased to a thousand for example, while their size is 
reduced. Both actions do occur in conjunction however, for the decompo-
sition of water will take place together with a powerful electric discharge. 
Biot has something to say on this ('Traite de Physique' vol. ii p. 436), 'Pour 
decomposer l' eau, on s' est d' abord servi de violentes decharges transmises a 30 
travers ce liquide, et qui y produisaient des explosions accompagnees 
d' etincelles. Mais Wollaston est parvenu a produire Ie meme effet, d' une 
maniere infmiment plus marquee, plus sure et plus facile, en conduisant 
Ie courant electrique dans l' eau par des fils tresses, termines en pointes 
aigues etc.' Ritter, the Munich academician, has constructed dry piles in + 
which electrical activity is insulated. It has been noticed that water only + 
gives rise to a feeble chemical action in a pile which, when differently 
constructed, could display powerful chemical action and high electrical 
tension. The chemists have concluded therefore that in this instance, water 
acts as an electrical insulator, and checks the transmission of electricity. 40 
202 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
It has been argued that as there would be powerful chemical activity if this 
check were removed, and as the actual activity is feeble, the communi-
cation of the activity which brings about the chemical action must be 
hindered by the water. No more absurd conclusion could have been 
5 reached, for water is the most powerful conductor, more powerful than 
metal; and this absurdity comes from attributing the action to electricity 
alone, and thinking only in terms of conductors. 
Galvanic activity expresses itself both as taste, and as the phenomenon of 
light. If a strip of tinfoil is placed under the tip of the tongue so that it 
10 touches the nether lip and projects beyond it, and one then touches the 
upper surface of the tinfoil and the tip of the tongue with silver, one fmds 
that at the moment at which the two metals come into contact, one is 
aware of a distinctly caustic taste like that of iron sulphate. If I wet my 
hands, take hold of a tin beaker filled with alkaline lye, and bring the tip 
15 of my tongue into contact with the liquid, I get an acid taste on that part 
of my tongue which touches this alkaline liquid. If, on the contrary, I take 
a tin beaker, or better still a zinc beaker, place it on a silver base, fIll it 
with pure water, and then put the tip of my tongue into the water, I fmd 
that it is tasteless. As soon as I grasp the silver base with thoroughly 
+ moistened hands however, I notice a weak acid taste on the tongue. If one 
sets a strip of zinc in one's mouth between the upper jaw and the left 
cheek, and a strip of silver between the lower right jaw and the right 
cheek, so that both strips project from the mouth, and then brings the 
ends together when the surroundings are dark, one becomes aware of a 
+ light once the metals touch. The identity exists here subjectively within 
sensation, without the external production of a spark; this is also un-
doubtedly the case with strong batteries. 
Now the product of galvanic activity is in general that which is implicit, 
i.e. the identity of the particular differentials, which in the metals are at 
30 the same time bound up with their undifferentiated independence, attains 
existence, as does also the differentiation of one metal in the other. That 
which is undifferentiated is therefore posited as differentiated. Galvanic 
activity can not yet have a neutral product, for there are as yet no existent 
differentials present within it. As these differentials themselves are not yet 
35 bodies, but are only abstract determinatenesses, the question arises as to 
the forms in which they should become existent here. The abstract existence 
of these differentials is something elemental, which we see in their aerial 
or gaseous appearances, and it is therefore the abstract chemical elements 
which have to be considered here. Water is of course the neutral element 
40 which mediates between the metals, and through which their differentiality 
203 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
can enter into contact. It is also the neutrality which dissolves the dif-
ferentiality of two salts for example. Consequently, each metal takes its 
existent differentiation from water, and determines it twice, once as oxi-
dation and once as hydrogenation. Since the general character of water is 
to be neutral however, the activating and differentiating principle is ab-
s 
sent from it, and occurs in the air. The air certainly appears to be neutral, 
but it is the unrevealed principle of destructive activity, and the stimulated 
activity of the metals must therefore derive from the air. This accounts 
for its differentials appearing in an aerial form. In this process, oxygen is 
the activating and differentiating principle. The more specific result of the 10 
galvanic process is the oxide, a metal posited in differentiation, the first 
differentiation we have. Here the non-differentiated body becomes total, 
although not yet completely so. Although the product of the process also 
has a dual nature as oxidation and hydrogenation, the outcome is not two 
differentiated bodies. Oxidation occurs on one side, as for example when 1 S 
zinc is calcined. On the other side, the gold or silver etc. holds out as a 
compactness against its opposite, so that such a metal remains reguline. 
If it has already been oxidized, it will be disoxidized and restored to its 
reguline state. Since the activation of zinc cannot be the positing of a one-
sided differentiation, and as the other side is probably incapable of dis-
20 
oxidation, the other side of the opposition appears only under the other 
form of water through the development of hydrogen. Ritter discovered 
that hydrogenized metals can be produced instead of oxidized metals, so 
that the other side of the product is also engendered. It is however acid + 
and alkali which constitutes the specific differentiation, as opposition, and 2S 
this is somewhat different from the abstract differentiation we have just 
dealt with. Yet even in this real differentiation, the opposition is due prin-
cipally to the action of oxygen. The metal oxides which result from the 
galvanic process also include earths such as silica, lime, barytes, natron, and 
potash, for whatever appears as an earth generally has a metallic base. It 30 
has been possible to demonstrate the metallic nature of these bases, al-
though there arc many earths which only show faint traces of this metal-
licism. Although this metallic element cannot subsist for itself as in the case 
of metalloids, yet it will always appear in quicksilver amalgams, and it is 
only metallicism which can enter into an amalgam with quicksilver. In + 
the metalloids, metallicism is only a moment therefore, for they oxidize 
themselves again immediately. It is very difficult to obtain reguline wolf-
ram for example. Ammonia has a particular peculiarity, for on the one hand + 
it can be demonstrated that its basis is nitrogen, its other constituent being 
oxygen, but that it also has a metallic base in ammonium (cf. § 328 Add. + 
204 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
II. 186, 30; § 330 II, 192,25 note). Here therefore metallicism is also driven 
to appear in a gaseous form as a quite abstract chemical substance. 
Oxidation is the result which terminates the process. The antithesis to 
this primary, abstract and general negation is free negativity, which is the 
negative being-for-self opposed to that negativity paralysed in the un-
differentiation of metal. In conformity with the Notion, or implicitly, 
the antithesis is necessary, but in existence the occurrence of fire at this 
juncture is fortuitous. 
h. Process of fire 
(The process of fire) 
§ 33 1 
The activity of the preceding process was only implicit within 
10 the differentiated determinateness of the metals brought into rela-
tion there. When this activity is posited as existing for itself, it is 
fire. It is by means of fire that that which is implicitly combustible, 
the third kind of corporeality, such as sulphur, is kindled into 
flame. In general, it is therefore by means of fire that that which 
15 is still in a state of neutrality, of torpid and indifferent differen-
tiation, is activated into the chemical opposition of acid and 
caustic alkali. As these opposites cannot exist for themselves, 
this opposition comes into being merely as the posited cor-
poreal moments of a third form, as a kind of corporeality with 
+ a real nature of its own. 
Addition. As the galvanic process ceases with the production of metallic 
oxide, of earth, the course of the chemical process is interrupted at this 
juncture. The chemical processes have detached existences; if this were 
not so they would constitute life, which is the circular return of the pro-
25 cess. If the product is now to make further progress, activity must come from 
without, just as the metals too were brought together by an external ac-
tivity. It is only the Notion, the inner necessity, which carries the process 
further therefore; it is only the implicitness of the process which is con-
tinued into circular totality. Since the new form we introduce only 
30 originates for us, within the Notion, or implicitly, we have to grasp the 
natural aspect of the factors entering into the process. The oxide which 
concluded galvanism does not constitute the existent product which is, so 
to speak, merely handled through other reagents. In its implicit deter-
minateness, the object of the process is rather to be regarded as original. 
205 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
It is not to be regarded as having become existent, but as having this deter-
minateness of having become, through the simple inner determinateness 
of its Notion. 
Fire as flame is one side of the process, and in it, the unity of differen-
tiation which resulted from the galvanic process, now exists for itself in 
5 
the form of the free restlessness of self-destruction. The other side is the 
combustible substance which is the object of fire, and which has the same 
nature as fire, although it is a physically subsistent body. The product of 
the process consists therefore on the one side, in the existence of fire as a 
physical quality, or conversely, in material being, which is already fire 10 
according to the determinateness of its nature, having fire posited within 
it. The primary process was that of gravity; here we have the process of 
levity, for it is here that fire embodies itself within acid. The physical body, 
as the possibility of being burnt and activated, is not merely a dead reduc-
tion to a state of passive undifferentiation, for it burns itself. Since the 15 
material activated in this way is in itself a plain opposition which contra-
dicts itself, it requires its other, and has being only through the reality of 
its relation with its other. That which is combustible has two shapes 
therefore, for in so far as it enters into difference, this negative being-for-
self posits itself in its own difference. One of these shapes is an ordinary 20 
combustible substance, sulphur, phosphorus etc., while the other is 
neutral. In both of these, quiescent subsistence is merely a mode of 
existence, it is not their nature. In the galvanic process however, undif-
ferentiation constituted the nature of the metal. A remarkable feature of 
these substances is phosphorescence, which is a shining without burning, and 25 
which is displayed by a number of minerals. If these minerals are scratched, 
scraped, or even exposed to sunlight, they remain phosphorescent for a 
certain time. T his transient light-phenomenon is the same as electricity, but + 
lacks its dualism. Primary combustibility is not widespread; it embraces + 
sulphur, bitumen, and naphtha. It is brittle, and lacks a firm undifferentiated 30 
base, so that it is not differentiated from without by compounding with 
a differential, but develops its negativity within itself as an integral part 
of itsel£ The indifference of the body has passed into a chemical differentiation. 
The combustibility of sulphur is this extinguished indifference, it is no 
longer the superficial possibility which remains possible within the process itself 35 
That which is combustible burns, and fire is its actuality; it does not only burn 
however, it burns away, and so ceases to be indifferent and becomes an acid. 
Indeed, Winterl has maintained that sulphur is as such an acid. This is in + 
fact true in that it neutralizes saline and earthy bases and metals without 
the help of the water base (hydrogen) required by other acids. Secondary 40 
206 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
combustibility is the formally neutral body; its subsistence is also a mere 
form, and does not sustain the process by constituting the determinateness 
of its own nature. Salt is physically neutral; the formally neutral bodies 
are lime, barytes, and potash. These are in fact the earths, and as they are 
+ nothing but oxides, they have a metallic base. The galvanic battery made 
+ this clear by its disoxidation of alkaline substance. The alkalies are also 
+ metallic oxides of an animal, vegetable, or mineral kind. The other aspect 
of the base is the carbonic acid which is found in lime for example, and 
which is produced by burning it with charcoal. This is an abstract chemical 
10 substance, it is not an individual physical body however; lime is neutralized 
by the loss of it, but it does not become a real neutral substance, for its 
neutrality is only produced in an elemental and general way. It is not 
permissible to regard barytes or strontian as salts, for that which neutralizes 
them is not a real acid, but is this same chemical abstraction, which ap-
15 pears as carbonic acid. Here we have the two combustibilities which con-
stitute the second side of the process. 
The bodies which enter into conflict in the process of fire come together 
externally as conditioned by the fmitude of the chemical process. The ele-
ments of air and water contribute as the mediating principle, so that in 
20 order to produce acid from sulphur for example, the sulphur is placed in 
+ air between wet walls. Consequently, the process in its entirety has the 
form of a syllogism, with two extremes and a divided middle. The ap-
proximate forms of this syllogism are now the modes of activity by which 
the extremes determine the middle in order to integrate themselves by 
25 means of it. A more exact examination of this would require an extremely 
detailed discussion, and give rise to too great a digression. Every chemical 
process would have to be presented as a series of syllogisms, the terms 
succeeding one another as extremes and middles. What in general happens 
is that the combustibility of sulphur and phosphorus, or of some formally 
30 neutral element is activated in the process. It is in this way that earths are 
brought to a caustic condition by fire; prior to this they are weak salts. 
Even metallic substances, and particularly poor metals such as metallic 
calxes, may be activated by combustion so that they are not oxidized, but 
transformed immediately into acids. The oxide of arsenic is itself arsenious 
+ acid. In its state of activation, an alkali is corrosive and caustic, and an 
acid also attacks and destroys. Sulphur and similar substances contain no 
undifferentiated base; water therefore becomes their basic bond, and acid 
can then subsist for itself, although only momentarily. When an alkali 
becomes caustic however, the water which as water of crystallization was 
40 no longer aqueous, and which constituted the bond of neutralization, loses 
207 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the formal neutrality of its shape through fire, for alkalinity already has its 
own undifferentiated metallic base. 
Neutralization, the process of water 
(Salt formation) 
§ 332 
That which is differentiated is simply opposed to its other, and 
as it is this which constitutes its quality, it has essential being 
only through its relation with this other. Consequently, it is only 
5 
by means of violence that its corporeality has an independent and 
separate existence. This corporeality, in its onesidedness, consti-
tutes the process in which it posits its identity with its negative. 
It only does this through the air however, in which acid and 
caustic alkali lose their strength, and are reduced to formal neu-
10 
trality. The product here is the concrete neutrality of a salt, 
which is real, and is the fourth kind of body. 
Addition. Metal only differs from its other implicitly; this other lies in 
the Notion of metal, and only in the Notion. Since each side now exists 
in opposition however, this onesidedness is no longer merely implicit, 15 
but is posited. Consequently, the individualized body tends to overcome 
its onesidedness and to posit the totality of what it is in accordance with 
its Notion. Both sides are physical realities, i.e. sulphuric, or some other 
acid except carbonic; and oxides, earths, alkalies. These are activated op-
+ 
posites, and do not need to be stimulated through a third term. Each has 20 
within itself the restlessness of self-sublation, of integration into its coun-
terpart, and of self-neutralization. They are incapable of existing for 
themselves however, since they are incompatible with themselves. Acids 
get hot and enflamed when water is poured on them. Concentrated acids 
give off fumes, and absorb water from the air. Concentrated sulphuric 25 
acid increases its volume in this way for example, but becomes weaker. 
If acids are protected from the air, they attack their containers. Caustic 
alkalies are similar in that they become milder. These alkalies are said to 
absorb carbonic acid from the air, but this is an hypothesis, and the truth 
of the matter is that in order to neutralize themselves, they begin by 30 
making carbonic acid of the air. 
+ 
That which enflames both sides is now a chemical abstraction; it is the 
differentiated abstraction of oxygen as a chemical element. Even if they 
208 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
are only water, the bases are the bond of undifferentiated subsistence. The 
activating of both acids and caustic substances is therefore an oxygenation, 
although an acid and an alkali are relative to one another, and express the 
same opposition as that found between positive and negative. In arith-
5 metic, the negative is to be taken partly as implicitly negative, and partly 
as the mere negative of another, so that it is a matter of indifference which 
is negative and which is positive. The situation resembles that found in 
electricity, and in two paths which lead off in opposite directions, but which 
return to the same point whichever way one walks etc. Acid in itself is 
10 certainly negative therefore, but its relationship passes over into relativity. 
That which is acid on one side is alkaline on another. Sulphuret of potash 
+ is said to be an acid for example, although it is hydrogenized sulphur. In 
this case therefore the acid is hydrogenation. This is not always the case 
however, and here it is to be attributed to the combustibility of sulphur. 
15 Sulphur becomes sulphuric acid through oxidation however, and is there-
fore capable of both forms. The same is true of a number of earths, which 
fall into two series: (a) lime, barytes, and strontian, which are metal oxides 
of an alkaline nature, and (b) silica, alumina, and magnesia, which may 
also be accredited with this property, partly by analogy, and partly by the 
20 traces of galvanic activity which they show in their amalgams. Steffens 
+ contrasts alumina and silica with the alkaline series however. According 
+ to Schuster, alum-earth also reacts to alkalies and is therefore acid. On the 
other hand, in its reaction to sulphuric acid it plays the part of a base. 
When alumina is dissolved in alkalies, it may be precipitated by acids, and 
+ so acts as an acid. Berthollet confirms the double nature of alum-earth 
('Statique Chimique', vol. II. p. 302) 'L'alumine a une disposition 
presqu' egale a se combiner avec les acides et avec les alcalis.' p. 308, 
'L'acide nitrique a aussi la propriete de cristalliser avec l'alumine; il est 
probable que c'est egalement par Ie moyen d'une base alcaline'. 'Silica', 
30 says Schuster, 'is an acid, although it is only a weak one, for when it 
combines with potash and natron to form glass, it neutralizes their bases', 
+ etc. Berthollet (vol. II p. 314) notices however that it has a tendency to 
+ combine with alkalies rather than acids. 
Here also, air and water are mediatory, so that although acid can never 
35 be wholly free from water, an acid in a predominantly anhydrous and 
fully concentrated state has a much weaker effect than dilute acid, and if it 
is also denied access to the air, its action can cease completely. The general 
abstract result of this is that an acid will combine with an alkali which has 
not been activated to form a neutral substance which is not an abstract 
40 lack of differentiation, but a unity of two existent substances. They sublate 
209 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
their opposition and contradiction because they cannot maintain it, and 
as they therefore sublate their onesidedness, they posit what they are in 
their Notion, both the one and the other. It is said that an acid does not 
act on a metal immediately, but ftrst turns it into an oxide, which is one 
side of the existent opposition, and then neutralizes itself by combining 
5 
with this oxide which, though differentiated, is not activated into causti-
city. The salt which is produced by this neutralization is primarily the + 
middle term of chemical totality, but it is still not as yet the inftnite 
totality of life; it is a totality which has come to rest, limited by others. 
d. The process in its totality 
(Elective affinity) 
§ 333 
These neutral bodies, entering again into mutual relation, form 10 
the chemical process in its complete reality, for it is real bodies 
such as this which constitute the sides of this process. Water is 
the abstract medium of neutrality, and these bodies need it in 
order to be mediated. As both sides are neutral on their own 
account however, they are not mutually differentiated. It is here 15 
that the particularization of universal neutrality occurs, to-
gether with the particularization of the differentials of bodies 
which are activated into mutual chemical opposition. This 
has been called elective affinity, and is in fact the formation of 
further particular neutralities through the break-up of those 20 
already present. 
Remark 
The most important advance towards a simplification of the 
details of elective affinity, is the law discovered by Richter + 
and Guyton Morveau, which states that neutral compounds 
undergo no alteration in regard to their state of saturation 25 
when they are mixed in solution and between the acids there 
is a mutual exchange of bases. It is on the basis of this law + 
that the particular relationships between acids and alkalies 
have been graded according to the specific quantity of each 
alkali needed to saturate each acid. If one takes a certain 30 
acid, and grades the alkalies according to the quantities in which 
210 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
they have to be applied in order to saturate it, the grading will be 
the same for every other acid. The only factor which changes 
is the quantitative unit of the acids combining with this constant 
series of alkalies. The acids also have a constant grading relative 
5 to the various alkalies. 
Elective affinity itself is moreover merely an abstract relation 
of acid to base. The chemical body in general, and especially the 
neutral body, is at once a concrete physical body with a definite 
specific gravity, cohesion, temperature etc. The strictly physical 
10 properties, and the changes which they undergo in the process 
(§ 328) enter into relationship with the chemical moments of this 
process, and so modify its action by impeding, hindering, or 
facilitating it. Berthollet, while fully recognizing this grading of 
affinity has, in his well-known' Statique Chimique', brought 
15 together and investigated the circumstances which produce 
an alteration in the results which have often been attri-
buted exclusively to the onesided condition of elective 
affinity. He writes, 'The superficiality which has been in-
troduced into science by these explanations, has in general 
+ been regarded as a progress'. 
Addition. The immediate self-integration of acid and alkaline opposites 
into a neutral substance, is not a process. The salt which is produced has 
no process, and so resembles the adherence of a magnet to the north and 
south poles, or the spark of an electric discharge. In order that the process 
25 may be continued, the salts must be brought into an external relation 
once again, for they are indifferent and self-sufficient. They are not active 
in themselves, and only become so when they are submitted to accidental 
circumstances. That which is indifferent may only be brought into con-
tact through a third term, which in this case is water once again. It is 
30 principally at this juncture that figuration and crystallization occur. In 
general, the process consists of the sublation of one neutrality, and of its 
replacement by another neutrality. Consequently, neutrality is here en-
gaged in a conflict with itself, for the neutrality which constitutes the pro-
duct is mediated by the negation of neutrality. The neutralities of certain 
35 acids and bases are therefore in conflict with one another. The affmity of 
an acid with a base is negated, and the negation of this affmity is itself the 
relation of an acid to a base. This negation is also an affinity therefore, and 
this affmity is that of the acid of the second salt with the base of the first, as 
much as it is that of the base of the second salt with the acid of the first. 
211 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Affmities of this kind are the negations of primary affmities, and are said 
to be elective, but this signifies nothing more than that acid and alkaline 
opposites posit their identity here in the same way as the opposites of 
magnetism and electricity. The way in which they exist, appear, and act, 
is the same. One acid expels another from a base, just as the north pole of 
5 
a magnet repels the north pole, while each is related to the same south 
pole. Acids are compared through a third term however, and each acid 
is opposed by its opposite, which is more its base than another. The deter-
mination is not brought about by the general nature of mere opposition, 
for the chemical process is the realm in which kinds of substances are 10 
qualitatively active against one another. The strength of the affmity is there-
fore of prime importance. No affinity is onesided however, and another 
person is related to me to the extent that I am related to him. The acids 
and bases of two salts dissolve their combination and form fresh salts, for 
the acid of the second salt combines more easily with the basis of the first 15 
and drives out its acid, while the identical relationship exists between this 
acid and the base of the second salt, i.e.an acid abandons its base when it 
is presented with another base with which it has a greater affmity. Further 
real neutralities constitute the result, so that the product is of the same 
genus as the beginning, and is therefore a formal return of the neutral 20 
substance to itself. 
In the remark, mention was made of the law of elective affmities dis-
covered by Richter. This law was disregarded until Wollaston and Ber-
+ 
thollet introduced Richter to the English and French, made use of his + 
work, and so made it important. Goethe's theory of colour will suffer the 25 
same fate in Germany, and will not be accepted until a Frenchman or an 
Englishman takes it up, or expounds the same point of view and gains 
acceptance for it. There is no point in grumbling about this any more, 
for amongst us Germans it is always the same, unless it is trash such as 
Gall's phrenology which is being peddled. The principle of stoichiometry, + 
which Richter expounded with a wealth of erudite reflections, may now 
be most conveniently elucidated by means of the following comparison. + 
If I pay for certain goods in golden Fredericks, I might for example need 
one Frederick for a certain quantity of the first article, and two for the 
same quantity of the second article etc. If I pay in silver thalers, I shall 3S 
need more of this sort of coin, si thalers instead of one golden Frederick, 
and I I t thalers instead of two Fredericks etc. The relative value of the 
goods is always the same, and that which is worth twice as much retains 
its relative value, regardless of the money in which its price is quoted. Simi-
larly, as the different kinds of money also stand in a specific relationship 40 
212 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
to one another, the portion of each article they will buy corresponds 
to their relative values. Thus, a golden Frederick is worth 51 times as 
much as a thaler, and if a thaler will buy three of a certain commodity, 
+ the Frederick will buy Sf X 3 of the same commodity. Berzelius has kept 
5 to the same point of view with regard to degrees of oxidation, and has tried 
to work it out into a universal law, for one substance is like another in 
making use of more or less oxygen. For example, one hundred parts of 
tin need to be saturated with 13.6 parts of oxygen in order to become a 
protoxide, 20·4 parts to become white deuteroxide, and 27·4 parts to be-
+ come yellow hyperoxide. Dalton was the fIrst to investigate this, but he 
enveloped his determinations in the worst form of atomistic metaphysics 
by regarding the primary elements or the fIrst simple aggregation as an 
atom, and then attributing weight and weight-ratios to these atoms, which 
he also supposed to be spherical, and to be partly surrounded by a more 
15 or less dense atmosphere of caloric. He has since proceeded to expound 
the relative weights and diameters of these atoms, as well as the numbers 
+ in which they came together to form compound bodies. Berzelius on the 
+ other hand has created a jumble of electro-chemical relationships, which 
+ has been complicated still further by Schweigger. The formal moments of 
20 magnetism and electricity occur within this process in a limited way or 
not at all, for they are abstract forms, and can only come into prominence 
in an incompletely real process. Davy was the fIrst to show that there is 
an electrical opposition between two materials which are actively opposed 
+ chemically. If sulphur is melted in a crucible, an electrical tension is created 
25 between the sulphur and the crucible since this is not real chemical process. 
We have already seen that the most determinate occurrence of electricity 
is in the galvanic process, for this also is not a real chemical process, and 
where it passes into the chemical sphere, the electricity disappears. Mag-
netism can only be produced in the chemical process where there is a 
30 manifestation of spatial differentiation however, and this also occurs 
mainly in galvanism. Once again the precise reason for this is that galvan-
ism is not the absolute activity of the chemical process. 
3. Separation 
(The process of separation) 
§ 334 
The dissolution of the neutral body initiates the reversion to 
+ the particular chemical form, i.e. through a series of pardy 
213 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
particular processes, to the form of undifferentiated bodies. On the + 
other hand, each and every separation of this kind is itself in-
separably linked with a combination, while the processes classi-
fied as involved in the course of combination also contain the 
other moment of separation (§ 328). In order to assign each 
particular form of the process and each specific product to its 
proper place, it is necessary to consider the concrete agents, 
as well as the concrete products of the processes. Abstract pro-
cesses in which the agents are abstract, such as the action of no-
thing but water on metal; or purely gaseous interactions etc., 10 
certainly contain the totality of the process in an implicit man-
ner, but they do not make an explicit display of its moments. 
Remark 
Empirical chemistry is mainly concerned with the par-
ticularity of substances and products, and as it groups these 
in accordance with superficial and abstract determinations, 15 
their particularity remains disordered. In this grouping, it brings 
together metals, oxygen, hydrogen etc., metalloids, which 
were formerly known as earths, sulphur, and phosphorus, and 
places them on the same level as simple chemical bodies. 
The great physical diversity of these bodies immediately gives 20 
rise to the incongruities of this sort of classification however, and 
their chemical origin, or the process by which they are produced, 
displays a similar lack of homogeneity. A similar chaos reigns 
where processes are assigned to a certain stage regardless of 
their degree of abstraction or concreteness. If scientific 25 
form is to predominate here, each product has to be assessed ac-
cording to that stage of the concrete and fully developed pro-
cess which essentially gives rise to it, and from which it 
derives its particular significance. In order to do this, it is 
equally essential to distinguish between the various stages 30 
of abstraction or reality within the process. Animal and 
vegetable substances belong moreover to quite another natural 
order; the chemical process is so inadequate an expression 
of their nature, that it tends mainly to destroy it, and can 
merely make intelligible their relapse into death. These sub-
35 
stances should principally serve to counteract the sort of 
metaphysics which prevails in both chemistry and physics 
214 

PHYSICS Of TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
however, and which employs thoughts or rather confused 
concepts such as the immutability of substances in all circum-
stances, and categories such as composition and subsistence, on 
the strength of which bodies are supposed to be formed from such 
S substances. It is generally admitted that when chemical sub-
stances combine, they lose the properties which they have in 
separation. Yet it is also generally asserted that they are the 
same things with or without these properties, so that both the 
things and the properties are not primarily the product of a 
10 process. A metal is an undifferentiated body, and its affirmative 
determination is so constituted physically, that it displays its 
properties in an immediate manner. Bodies which are further 
differentiated may not be presupposed in this way however, and 
one is therefore unable to see how they comport themselves within 
lS a process, for it is only from their place within the chemical 
process as a whole, that they derive their primary and essential 
determination. The empirical and completely specific particularity 
of a body may also be determined by means of its relation with all 
other particular bodies, but this knowledge may only be obtained 
20 by reiterating the entire litany of the body's relation to all agents. 
In this connection it is most surprising to find the four chemical 
elements of oxygen etc., regarded as substances, and put on the 
same level as gold, silver, and sulphur etc., treated in fact as if 
they had an independent existence like that of gold and sulphur 
+ etc., or as if oxygen had an existence like that of carbon. Their 
place within the process indicates the degree of subordination and 
abstraction by which they are quite clearly distinguished in kind 
from metals or salts, and it is therefore utterly indefensible to 
place this genus on a level with concrete bodies. Its place has 
30 already been determined (§ 328). Water and air are the two ele-
ments which belong to the internal division of the abstract 
middle term (cf. § 204 Rem.) On being abandoned as a middle 
term, they become the means by which the real extremes of the 
syllogism assume the existence of their original differentiation, 
3S which is primarily merely implicit. When this moment of 
differentiation assumes determinate being for itself in this way, 
it constitutes the completely abstract moment of a chemical ele-
ment. The word 'element' is usually taken to mean a basic sub-
stance or substantial principle, but the chemical elements are 
+ rather the extreme limits of differentiation. 
2I5 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Here, as everywhere, the chemical process has to be taken in 
the completeness of its totality. The isolation of particular parts 
and formal and abstract processes, gives rise to the chemical pro-
+ 
cess in general being abstractly represented as nothing but the 
action of one substance upon another . .As the result of this, many 
5 
other phenomena such as the abstract neutralization in which 
water is produced, and the abstract separation in which gas is 
developed, tend to be regarded as by-products or accidental con-
sequences of the whole, or at least as merely connected with it in 
an external way, and not as the essential moments of its relation-
10 
ships. A complete exposition of the totality of the chemical pro-
+ 
cess as a real syllogism would require moreover that it should be 
explicated as a triad of intimately inter-relating syllogisms. These 
syllogisms should not merely connect their termini however; they 
would have to be made explicit as activities which negate their 15 
determinations (cf. § 198), and exhibit the interrelationship of 
combination and separation knit together in one and the same 
process. 
Addition. Whereas the first process culminated in combination, in the 
processes of neutral bodies with one another, this combining occurs to-
20 
gether with the diremptions or decompositions of the neutral bodies, and 
the separating out of the abstract bodies with which we began. It is in this 
way that the pure metal with which we began by considering it in its 
immediate existence, is now brought forth as a product of the total body 
towards which we were advancing. The salt is the real neutral substance 25 
forming the concrete middle which is decomposed here, while in gal-
vanism and the process of fire it was water and air which formed the 
formal middles and were decomposed. The means and stages of this re-
duction are various; principally they constitute the process of fire and the 
saline process. For example, a neutralized acid may be revived by raising 30 
it to a red heat together with the requisite salt. Carbonic acid may be 
extracted from lime in the same way, since at this temperature the lime 
has a greater affmity with 'caloric' than with carbonic acid. This leads on 
to the reduction of metals; sulphur, which as acid is combined with a base, 
is driven off, leaving a reguline metal for example. Few metals occur 35 
naturally in a pure state; most of them are refmed by chemical action. 
We have now presented the entire course of the chemical process, and 
in order that the individual bodies may be assigned to their appropriate 
stages, the determinate series of stages which constitutes the course of this 
216 

PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
process has to be established. If it is not, one is left with an unmanageable 
multitude of substances which, taken on their own, remain in a state of 
inorganic confusion. The individual bodies are the moments and products 
of the process, and as the concrete elements which are now determined in 
5 their individuality, they constitute the following system of determinately 
differentiated corporeality, and determine themselves within the process 
as follows:-
A. Air is individualized and differentiated into various gases, and forms 
a fourfold totality. (a) Nitrogen is here the abstract and undifferentiated 
10 form. (b) Oxygen and hydrogen are the opposed forms of air-the former 
kindling and activating, the latter positive and undifferentiated. (c) Carbonic 
acid gas is the earthy form, for it appears partly as an earth and partly as a 
+ gas. 
B. One of the moments of the opposition is the sphere of fire, which is 
15 the realization of the individuality of fire, together with its counterpart, 
the combustible substance. This also forms a totality. (a) Its base is the impli-
citly combustible and inflammable factor, which is neither an undifferen-
tiated substance only to be posited in a differentiation as a determination, 
nor a positive substance only to be limited by differentiation, but which is 
20 rather an implicit negativity. Fire itself may be regarded as time in action, 
and this negativity as inwardly realized and dormant time, the quiescent 
subsistence of which is mere form. Consequently, this negativity consti-
tutes the quality of the base, and is not a mere form of its being, but the 
+ essential constitution of it. It is sulphur as the earthy base, hydrogen as the 
+ aerial base, and naphtha as the base of vegetable and animal oils etc. (b) Acids 
divide themselves as follows. (i) Sulphuric acid is the acid of combustible 
earthiness. (ii) Aquafortis or nitric acid, which has various forms. (iii) Hydracid 
+ or muriatic acid seems to me to have hydrogen as its radical; the undif-
ferentiated moments of aerial individuality must be activated into acid, and 
30 are therefore already implicitly combustible. Unlike the metals, this is not 
merely due to their abstraction however, for as they are undifferentiated, 
the combustible material is within them, and is not external to them as it 
is to oxygen. (iv) The earthy acids are as follows; (1) abstract, earthy, car-
bonic acid; (2) concrete arsenic acid etc.; (3) vegetable and animal acids, such 
+ as citric acid, blood acid, and formic acid. (c) Finally there are the oxides 
and alkalies in general, which are opposed to acids. 
C. The other moment of the opposition is the realization of water in 
salts, earths and stones, which are the neutralities of acids and oxides. It is 
here, strictly speaking, that the body appears in its totality. The various 
40 kinds of gas are airs, the sphere of fire has not yet reached the stability of 
217 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
totality, and sulphur dominates the other terrestrial bodies as the per-
meating base of this process. The earths are white, thoroughly friable, and 
individualized throughout; they are non-combustible, and lack both the con-
tinuity of metal, and its capacity for developing within a process. There are 
four main earths, and these neutral earthy substances divide themselves into 
5 
a double series. (a) Firstly, there are the neutral substances which have only 
the abstractness of water as the base of their neutrality, and which subsist 
in this neutrality by means of an acid as well as an alkali. The earths 
which form this transition are silica, alumina, and magnesia or talc. 
(i) Silica is as it were the earthy metal and perfectly brittle, and on account of 10 
the abstraction of its singularity, enters into combinations; it does this in par-
ticular with potash, and becomes glass. In the process of fusion it displays 
singularity, just as metal displays colour and compactness. It is the colourless 
substance into which metallicism is annulled as pure form, and its internal 
discreteness is absolute. (ii) Silica is the immediacy and simplicity of the un-
1S 
disclosed Notion, and alumina, which has the possibility of being combustible, 
therefore constitutes the primary differentiated earth. Pure alumina will absorb 
oxygen from the air, but generally, together with sulphuric acid, it is an 
earthy fire, porcelain jasper. It is to fire that it owes its hardness or crystallization. + + 
Water gives rise to exterior cohesion rather than crystalline connectedness. 20 
(iii) Magnesia or talc is the subject of salt, and accounts for the bitterness of sea 
water. It has the intermediate taste of a substance which has become the prin-
ciple of fire and is precisely the return of the neutral substance to that principle. + 
(b) Finally, there is the antithesis to this first series. This is the genuinely real 
neutrality of calcareous substances, the alkalinity and differentiation which 2S 
dissolves its earthy principle anew, and needs only the physical element in order 
to become a process. It is here therefore that the extinguished process re-estab-
lishes itsel£ Lime is the principle of the fire which the physical body engenders 
within itsel£ 
D. The metals are the earthy element to which all determinations except 30 
weight are now external, and in which gravity is identical with light. 
Within light, this being-in-self is real in that gravity constitutes the being-
in-self of indeterminate externality. Metals are coloured therefore, but 
on the other hand their lustre is a pure and indeterminate light which 
shines of its own accord, and effaces colour. The different states of metal, 35 
its continuity and compactness, and then its readiness to enter into process, 
its brittleness, puncticity and capacity for oxidation are all exhibited within 
the compact metalitsel£ Thus, (a) some metals occur in their reguline state, 
while (b) others only occur in an oxidized or earthy state which is hardly 
ever reguline, and when it is, the metals appear in a completely powdery 40 
218 

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -------------
PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
form, like arsenic for example. Antimony and metals of its kind are 
similar, for they are so brittle and hard, that they may easily be pulverized. 
(c) Finally when metal occurs in a vitrified state as a scoria, it has the: mere 
+ form of likeness of texture and resembles sulphur. 
§ 335 
5 
In general, the chemical process is in fact life; in it the indi-
vidual body in its immediacy is sublated as well as produced. 
Consequently, the Notion is no longer an interior necessity, 
+ but makes its appearance. On account of the immediacy of the 
corporealities which enter into the chemical process however, it 
10 is generally encumbered with division. Its moments therefore 
+ appear as external conditions, and that which separates out here, 
disintegrates into mutually indifferent products; fire and activation 
die out in the neutral body, within which they do not revive. 
The beginning and end of the process are not identical, and it is 
15 this which constitutes the finitude of the chemical process, and 
separates and distinguishes it from life. 
Remark 
In order to explain some chemical phenomena, chemistry has 
had occasion to use the determination of teleology. The pheno-
menon of an oxide being reduced to a lower degree of oxidation 
20 so that part of it may become more highly oxidized by com-
bining with the effective acid, is an exam pIe of this. In this reali-
zation of itself, the Notion displays the beginnings of a spon-
+ taneous self-determination, which is not therefore determined 
solely by the external conditions present. 
Addition. There is certainly an appearance of animation here, but it is 
25 lost in the product. If the products of the chemical process spontaneously 
renewed their activity, they would be life, and to some extent therefore, 
life is a perenniating chemical process. The determinateness of any species 
of chemical body is identical with the nature of the body's substantiality. 
Here therefore, we are still in the realm of fixed species. In living being 
30 on the other hand, the determinateness of the species is not identical witll 
the substantiality of an individual, for although the individual is finite in 
its determinateness, it is also and equally infmite. In the chemical process, 
219 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 01= NATURE 
the Notion only displays its moments interruptedly. One side of the en-
tirety of the chemical process contains fixed determinateness having being 
through its lack of differentiation, the other the tendency to have being as 
an opposition to that within it, an opposition in which this determinateness 
then falls away. This quiescent being and this tendency are different from + 
one another however, and the totality is only posited implicitly or within 
the Notion. The unity in which both determinations are at once present 
does not attain existence. As existing, this unity is the determination of life, 
and it is towards this that nature drives. Life is implicitly present within 
the chemical process, but the inner necessity there is not yet an existent 10 
unity. 
§ 336 
The chemical process itself is so constituted however, that it 
posits as negated these immediate presuppositions forming the 
foundation ofits externality and finitude. Within it, the properties 
of bodies appearing as the results of a particular stage are changed 15 
by the process from one stage to another, so that these con-
ditions are reduced to products. In general therefore, the chemical 
process posits the relativity of the immediate substances and 
properties. Corporality which subsists as being indifferent is 
posited as a mere moment of the individuality therefore, and 20 
the Notion is posited in the reality which corresponds to it. This 
concrete unity with self, which brings itself forth from the par-
+ 
ticularization of the different corporealities into a whole, and 
by its activity negates the onesided form of its self-relatedness and 
leads the moments of the Notion back into unity while dividing 25 
and particularizing itself into them, is the organism. The organism 
is therefore the infinite self-stimulating and self-sustaining process. 
Addition. We now have to make the transition from inorganic to organic 
nature, from the prose of nature to its poetry. In the chemical process 
bodies do not change superficially, all aspects of them change, and every 30 
property of cohesion, colour, lustre, opacity, ring, transparency etc. is 
effaced. Even specific gravity, which appears to be the profoundest and 
simplest determination, fails to hold out. It is precisely in this flux of 
accidents within the chemical process, that the relativity of the apparently + 
indifferent determinations of individuality is realized as essence; the body 35 
displays the transience of its existence, and this its relativity is its being. 
220 

---
-
--
PHYSICS OF TOTAL INDIVIDUALITY 
If one wants to say what a body is, one's description of it will only be 
complete once the whole cycle of its changes has been presented; for the 
true individuality of the body does not exist in anyone of its states, and 
is only exhausted and displayed by the full cycle. It is precisely because 
5 totality of shape is merely particular, that it is unable to survive, and as the 
individual body is finite, it receives its due and fails to endure. Thus, there 
are metals which run through the whole series of colours when they are 
oxidized or neutralized by acids, and which are also able to form neutral 
+ transparent salts, for salts in general are the annihilation of colour. 
10 Brittleness, compactness, smell, and taste also disappear; this is the ideality 
of the particularity which displays itself in this sphere. The bodies traverse 
the whole cycle of such possible determinations. For example, as a reguline 
metal, copper is red; copper sulphate is a blue crystal however, the pre-
cipitate of copper hydrate is mountain blue, and there is a muriatic copper 
15 oxide which is white. Other copper oxides are green, dark grey, and 
+ reddish brown etc., and azurite is yet another colour etc. The reaction 
varies according to the agent, and the chemical body is merely the sum of 
its reactions. Consequently, the totality of reactions is merely present as 
a sum, not as an infmite return of the body into itsel£ The body maintains 
20 its determinateness in all the reactions in which it enters into relations with 
other bodies in synsomation, oxidation, and neutralizati.on, but it maintains 
only the implicit being of its specific nature, not its existence. Iron is al-
ways implicitly iron, but it is also only implicitly so, for its mode of 
existence changes. Here we are concerned with the preservation of exis-
25 tence however, not with the preservation of implicitness; more precisely, 
our concern is that implicitness should be in existence, or rather that 
existence should be implicit. The cycle of particular reactions constitutes 
the universal particularity of the body; the existence of the particularity 
is merely implicit however, it is not universal. It is only in the process 
30 of fire that activity is immanent, and as an individual moment of life and 
the activity of this moment, it merely hastens to extinction. It is here 
however that the immediate shape containing particular determinations 
becomes extinct, so that the transition takes place by which the implicit 
universality of determinateness is also posited within existence. This is 
35 organic being in its self-conservation, by which it acts and reacts upon the 
most diverse powers, so that although it is differently determined in each 
reaction, it still maintains itself as a single unity. The implicit being of this 
kind of specific determinateness now also exists, and forms and breaks 
relationships. It does not neutralize itself in these relationships however, 
40 but maintains itself within the process, which it determines together with 
221 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
its other. Where infmite form is still materialized within shape as the soul 
of individuality, it is reduced to a unity which is not in itself infinitely 
free form, but which exists as an enduring being. Infmite form conflicts 
with this quiescence however, for it is resciessness, movement, and activity, 
and it is only as such that it comes forth as what it is in and for itsel£ The 
5 
persistence ofits moments in shape, in which each can exist as an indepen-
dent matter, is certainly also an occurrence of infinite form within existence; 
but here its unity is not yet in possession of the truth of its being. The 
chemical process now displays the dialectic by which all the particular 
properties of bodies are drawn into transitoriness however. It negates the 10 
immediate presuppositions which are the principles of its fmitude. It is 
therefore solely the being-for-self of infmite form which endures, the 
pure incorporeal individuality which is for itself, and for which material 
subsistence is simply a variable. The chemical process is the highest ex-
pression of inorganic being, for it annihilates itself within it, and shows 15 
that its truth is nothing but infmite form. It is therefore through the sink-
ing away of shape that the chemical process constitutes the transition to 
the higher sphere of the organism, in which infmite form assumes the 
reality of its nature. Infmite form is therefore the Notion, which here 
reaches reality. This transition is the raising of existence to universality. 20 
Nature has here reached the determinate being of the Notion therefore, 
and the Notion is no longer merely implicit, and submerged within the 
extrinsicality of its subsistence. This is the free fire (a) as purged of all 
materiature, and (b) as materialized in determinate being. The moments + 
of that which subsists are themselves raised into this ideality, and do not 25 
fall back into limited subsistence, but have their being solely within it. 
It is thus that we have objective time, an imperishable fire, the fire of life. 
Heraclitus also said that the soul was of fire, and that dry souls are the best. + 
222 

NOTES 
NOTES 
10,10 
,t)iet ift bet jBegriff tletootgen'. The exact sense in which Hegel is here using 
,tletootgen' becomes clearer if we remember that in the physics and medicine 
ofhis day the word was also used to describe 'latent' heat and 'occult' inflam-
mation. In general usage it has the meaning of hidden, concealed, secret or 
obscure. 
11,11 
Hegel evidently takes the structure of his logic and of his philosophy of spiri t 
as being parallel to that of his philosophy of nature. Consequently, the transition 
from being to essence, and from subjective to objective spirit, corresponds to 
this transition from mechanics to physics. 
In § 112 of the 'Encyclopaedia' (tr. Wallace 'The Logic of Hegel' Oxford, 
1963 p. 207) he explains the nature of the logical transition at this juncture, 'The 
terms in Essence are always mere pairs of correlatives, and not yet absolutely 
reflected in themselves: hence in essence the actual unity of the Notion is not 
realized, but only postulated by reflection. Essence,-which is Being coming 
into mediation with itself through the negativity of itself is self-relatedness, 
only in so far as it is relation to an Other,-this Other however coming to 
view at first not as something which is, but as postulated and hypothesized.' 
In the 'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, London, 1961) vol. II 
pp. 15-34 he takes the categories of show to be the initiation of essence, but in 
the 'Encyclopaedia', essence begins with the categories ofidentity and difference. 
J. M. E. Taggart, in 'A Commentary on Hegel's Logic' (Cambridge, 1910) p. 91 
ff. discussed the relative merits of these attempts at formulating the transition. 
12,3 
,3n bet 9latut b aj e t) enb.' 
12,12 
Hegel entered the following note in the margin at this point ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 33 note I), '(It has) become power, or passed into itself 
from immedate existence. (It is) in itself, (and has) emerged from the self of the 
Idea as opacity. Power (is) simple being-in-self which, by containing the unity of 
its opposite, is also absolute asunderness.' 
12, 15 
It was evidently the integrality (@ebiegengeit) of motion in the solar system, 
223 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
and of light in space, which led Hegel to formulate this transition from one to 
the other. He had grasped the significance of this common feature as early as 
1801/2, see Jenenser Logik Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (ed. G. Lasson, 
Leipzig, 1923) pp. 228-229 and 366-367, where light is characterized as 'the 
quiescence of motion in itself' ('bas lRu~en bet metuegung in fid) ielOit'). 
The 1803/4 lectures on the philosophy of nature (Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
I ed. Hoffmeister. Leipzig, 1932) open with a discussion of this, 'The solar system 
is the absolute totality and identity of the four motions which have been 
construed. Light is the manifesting essence, the absolute universality, the positive 
unity; the absolute rotatory motion constitutes its infinity, its absolute thought' 
etc. 
12,32 
,bie ~idHd)feit ars eine butd)fid)tige imogHd)feit'. This is Michelet's version, 
Hegel ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II, ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) p. 34 wrote, 
,ars teine bttrd)fid)tige imogHd)feit' i.e. 'as pure transparent possibility'. 
13,6 
,ars bie mit IllHem Juiammenf(iefienbe imogHd)feit'. This is Michelet's 
version, Hegel (op. cit. p. 34) wrote, ,ars mit aHein Juiammenf(iefienbe 
i1]coAHd)feit'. Hoffmeister changes ,aHein' to ,aHem' in his version of text. 
13, 36 
Hegel deals at some length with 'the religion of the good or of light' in his 
lectures on the philosophy of religion (tr. Speirs and Sanderson, 3 vols. London, 
1962) vol. II pp. 70-82: see also 'The Philosophy of History' (tr. Sibree, Dover 
Pub., 1956) pp. 173-181. 
He evidently read the 'Zend-A vesta' in the translation published by A. H. 
Anquetil Duperron (1731-1805), 'Zend-Avesta, Ouvrage de Zoroastre' (3 vols. 
Paris, 1771). Thomas Hyde (1636-1703), in his 'Historia religionis veterum 
Persarum' (Oxford, 1700) was the first European scholar to direct attention to 
this document. 
14,28 
,ift bas mOdteffHd)e nut im @)inne bet IllOfttaction.' The usual meaning of 
'vortreffiich' is 'excellent', 'exquisite', 'capital'. In Goethe and Schiller the word 
still occurs in its older form of ,fildteff(id)', giving indication of its origin in 
,filth:effen' i.e. 'strike home beyond something else'. 
Hegel makes two points by using this word therefore: (i) he indicates the 
224 

NOTES 
position of light in the dialectical progression as, 'the beginning of material 
manifestation', and (ii) he implies that light as such is invisible prior to the 
emergence of its 'limit' or 'deficiency'. 
15,22 
This is a reference to the tales concerning the Man in the Moon and the 
Woman in the Sun, which are thought to have originated in the incident 
mentioned in 'Numbers' XV vv. 32-36. In English folk-lore the Man is said 
to have been banished to the Moon for stealing a dog and a bundle of thorns, 
and in the chancel roof of Gyffm church near Conway, he may be seen in the 
disk of the Moon, surrounded by the Sun and the Stars. Reginald Pecock (c. 
1393-1461) mentions the tale in his 'The Repressor of Overmuch Wijting of the 
Clergy' (ed. Babington, 2 vols. Rolls Series, 1860): cf. 'A Midsummer Night's 
Dream' V i, 'The Tempest' II ii. 
In German folk-lore the Man is said to have been a thief who went to work on 
a Sunday, a craftsman who bound brooms on Maundy Thursday, a farmer who 
erected a fence on Ascension Day, a peasant who stole coal at night, from his 
neighbour's yard. In the county of Mark, he is said to have been a thief, to whom 
God gave the choice of either burning in the Sun or rigidifying in the Moon: 
see J. F. L. Woeste 'Volksiiberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark' (Iserlolm, 
1848) p. 40. 
Tales concerning the Woman in the Sun are not so common, but Karl 
Bartsch (1832-1888) records one in his 'Sagen, Marchen und Gebrauche aus 
Mecklenburg' (2 vols. Vienna, 1879-1880) I p. 460, II p. 198, 'It is not good to 
spin on a Saturday, in fact many say that it is sinful. Whoever does so will be 
sent to the Sun, where they will spin forever, like that godless woman who was 
punished in this way for spinning right through the winter, Saturdays and all. 
When the woman and girls come back with the water at Easter, they can easily 
see the godless sitting in the Sun and spinning.' Hegel probably knew the old 
Swabian saying: 
,~aun is baun 10 fomm i in maun 
~aun i 9'1l:1onne 10 fomm i in b'ionne'. 
(If I've played the loon I'll end in the moon, 
And ifI've spun I'll be sent to the sun'.) 
See 'Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde' (G6ttingen, 1853-
1859) I p. 169. Astronomers themselves have not been free from these super-
stitions. Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), in his 'Epistolarum Astronomicarum' 
(Uraniborg, 1596) entertains the possibility of there being people on the stars, 
saying that he will never believe that such huge bodies were made to no other 
purpose than to illumine the Earth. Sir William Herschel (1738-1822) thought 
H 
225 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
himself, 'authorised upon astronomical principles, to propose the sun as an in-
habitable world': see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1795 pp. 46-72, 'The Scientific 
Papers of Sir William Herschel (ed. Dreyer, 2 vols. London, 1912) vol. I p. 479. 
Cf. E. Hoffmann-Krayer and H. Bachtold-Staubli 'Handworterbuch des 
Deutschen Aberglaubens' (10 vols. Berlin und Leipzig, 1927-1942) especially 
vol. VI columns 510-513. 
16, 5 
The ballooning craze began in November 1782, when the Montgolfier 
brothers made their first experiments with hot air balloons at Avignon. By 
1785 the novelty of such experiments had worn off, and ascents for purely 
scientific purposes were becoming more common. In Hegel's day, 'the art of 
navigating or floating in the air' was known in English as 'aerostation': see 
Charles Hutton (1737-1813) 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 
vols. London, 1796). In German this te-rm (,l2l:etoftatir) was confmed to its 
proper and primary meaning, i.e. the science of weights suspended in the air, and 
'the art of navigating or floating in the air' was known as ,l2l:etonautH' or 
,£uftfcfjiffafjtt~funhe'. See J. S. T. Gehler 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. I 
pp. 219 and 258 (Leipzig, 1825). 
Hegel may have had in mind the balloon ascent made by J. B. Biot (1774-
J862) and L. J. Gay-Lussac (1778-1850) on September 16, 1804, accounts of 
which appeared in L. W. Gilbert's 'Armalen der Physik' (vol. XX pp. 19-37-
1805), W. Nicholson's Journal of Natural Philosophy' (vol. X pp. 278-288, 
1805), and Journal de Physique' (vol. LIX pp. 454-461, 1804) etc. Gay-Lussac 
ascended from the Conservatoire des Arts in Paris, stayed up for six hours five 
minutes, and landed between Rouen and Dieppe. The temperature was 82°F 
at ground level in Paris, and after rising to a height of 23,000 feet, he found that 
it had fallen to 14.9°F. Cf. the account by John Jeffries (1744-1819) of Massa-
chusetts, of ascents made at London, 'A Narrative of Two Aerial Voyages of 
Dr. Jeffries with Mons. Blanchard; with Meteorological Observations and 
Remarks' (London, 1786). 
16, 8 
,hie Q:rfdJiittetung'. The flash accompanying the discharge of electricity from 
the Leyden jar, and the electrical shock transmitted, were known as ,hie elef-
trifcfje ~tfcfjiittetung' (concussio, commotio electrica, commotion electrique). 
Two forms of illumination were recognized 'If the wire presented to the outside 
of the phial be pointed, it will be seen illuminated with a star; but if the pointed 
wire be connected with the coating of the phial, it will appear illuminated with a 
brush of rays': C. Hutton 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 vols. 
London, 1795) vol. II p. 25. C£ J. S. T. Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch, 
226 

NOTES 
vol. IV pp. 377-378 (Leipzig, 1827). A. Masson (1806-1860) made various 
attempts to measure the intensity of this momentary light: see 'Comptes 
rendus' vol. XVIII p. 289, vol. XIX p. 325, J. C. Poggendorff's 'Annalen der 
Physik und Chemie' vol. LXIII p. 158, 'The Electrical Magazine' ed. C. V. 
Walker (2 vols. London. 1845-1846) I pp. 272-274, II pp. 6-7. 
16, 18 
This postulated explanation of the production of solar and stellar light bears 
some resemblance to that put forward by Johannes Hevelius (16II-1687) in 
his 'Cometographia' (Danzig, 1668) p. 380. Hevelius supposed the sun and 
stars to be surrounded with atmospheres, and thought that by whirling on their 
axes with great rapidity, they throw off great quantities of matter. 
When he suggests that these luminous bodies may be self-frictionalizing 
(,fid) feloet ffii~enbel), Hegel probably has in mind electrical machines such as 
that devised by Jesse Ramsden (1735-1800) in 1768, which generated electricity 
by means of friction. These machines were still used at the beginning of the last 
century, although they were being steadily replaced by 'influence' machines 
such as that described by William Nicholson (1753-1813) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' 1788 p. 403. 
The rotation of the sun had been known to astronomers since the early 
seventeenth century, see David Fabricius (1546-1617) 'De maculis in sole 
observatis' (Wittenberg, 16II). Careful observation of the variable stars by 
Sir William Herschel (1738-1822), Nathanial Pigott (d. 1804), and the remark-
able John Goodricke (1764-1786), see 'phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1786, gave rise to 
suggestions that the stars rotate on their axes. Goodricke's suggestion that the 
light-variation of Algol may be due to its being eclipsed by another star 
revolving around it was not confirmed until 1887. In Hegel's day it was generally 
supposed that the periodical stars have vast dark spots or sides, and that their 
apparent disappearance is due to a very slow rotation upon their axes. See the 
careful observations made by J. F. Wurm (1760-1833) and Luthmer, accounts 
of which appeared in 'Astronornisches Jahrbuch oder Ephemeriden fur das 
J ahr. N ebst einer Samrnlung der N euesten in denastronomischen Wissenschaften: 
Beobachtungen, Nachrichten u.s.w.' (ed. J. E. Bode, Berlin, 1774-1825) 1801 
p. 157, 18IO p. 140, 1814 p. 143, 1824 p. 243 etc. 
16,32 
Jacques Alexandre Francois Allix (1776-1836) was the son of a mathematics 
teacher. He joined the army at the age of sixteen. By the age of twenty he had 
risen to the rank of colonel, and during the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars 
he saw service in the Rhineland, Italy, Westphalia, and Russia. He became a 
general in 1812. In 1815 he was arrested for supporting Napoleon during the 
227 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
hundred days, and for a while was under sentence of death, but he was released 
onJuly 24,1815, and left France for Westphalia, the birthplace of his wife. 
During his exile in Cassel, he occupied himself with scientific studies, and 
wrote the book referred to by Hegel: 'Theorie de l'univers ou de la cause 
primitive du mouvement et de ses principaux effets' (paris, 1818, Italian tr. by 
G. Compagnoni, Milan, 1817). Laplace condescended to condemn the theories 
put forward in this work, but in general they attracted little attention from 
scientists, and Hegel probably read the book only because it contained a criticism 
of Newton. 
On December 23, 1818 Allix was given permission to return to France, on 
probation. He answered the critics of his astronomical theories, as best he could, 
in 'De la Theorie de l'univers, lettres y relatives' (Paris, 1819). During the 1820'S 
his displayed his versatility to the full by producing works on agriculture, 'Des 
effets du sulfate de chaux considere comme engrais' (Nevers, 1823), and gunnery, 
'Systeme d'arti1lerie' (Paris, 1827), and, after the 1830 revolution, by publishing 
a translation, 'De la Tyrannie' (paris, 1831), of a work by Vittorio Alfieri (1749-
1803), whom he had met in Italy in 1800. 
See C. Mullie 'Biographie des celebrites militaires' (Paris, 1851). 
17,2 
,!.lie @Sonne ift alio bet I$tocef; bes ganben @Sonnenit)ftems, bet in biefe @S~i~e 
ausid)liigt'• This statement draws together the whole argument of this para-
graph. Solar light is not the same as the light of the flame, but resembles the 
integrated movement of the solar system, and is therefore an integral part of 
this system. 
In his lectures on the philosophy of nature delivered in 180! and 1803-4, 
Hegel took 'the system of the sun' to be the first major sphere. In 1801 he 
treated it as being comprised of the ether, space time motion, and light: ('Samt-
liche Werke' ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923 vol. XVIII a pp. 195-239). In 1803-4 he 
treated it very sketchily, beginning with light, progressing to sun, earth and 
comet, and concluding with celestial motion: (op. cit. ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 
1932, pp. 3-12). 
The key to his maturer views on the sun as the centre of the motion of the 
solar system, and as the source oflight is to be found in the lectures of 1805-6 
(op. cit. ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931 pp. 34-35). Michelet made use of the 
exposition oflight given here, but omitted what follows, 'As emergent being-
for-self which fllis space, light has not developed difference within itself, but 
has it only in a completely abstract manner, as a plurality. To be one constitutes 
its negative existence, and differentiation has being merely as this notionless 
multitude, which is devoid of self-limitation.' (i.e. the stars) ... 'This power of 
light, which is impotent in its being-in-self, is essentially expressive however, 
and so has reality. As such it is sun, which as a celestial sphere is a centre of 
motion, and which as light is a source oflife, although it is not life itself.' 
228 

NOTES 
17, II 
See the note on 13, 36. 
18, I 
Newton. 'Opticks: or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections 
and Colours of Light' (4th ed. London, 1730, ed. Cohen, Dover Publications, 
1952). 
Bk. I pt. I def. i, 'By the Rays oflight I understand its least Parts, and those as 
well Successive in the same Lines, as Contemporary in several Lines. For it is 
manifest that Light consists of Parts, both Successive and Contemporary; 
because in the same place you may stop that which comes one moment, and let 
pass that which comes presently after; and in the same time you may stop it in 
anyone place, and let it pass in any other.' Bk. iii pt. I quo 29, 'Are not the Rays 
of light very small Bodies emitted from shining Substances? For such Bodies 
will pass through uniform Mediums in right Lines without bending into the 
Shadow, which is the Nature of the Rays of Light ... Nothing more is requisite 
for putting the Rays of Light into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission, 
than that they be small Bodies which by their attractive Powers, or some other 
Force, stir up Vibrations in what they act upon, which Vibrations being swifter 
than the Rays, overtake them successively, and agitate them so as by turns to 
increase and decrease their Velocities, and thereby put them into those Fits.' 
Thomas Young (1773-1829), in a series of papers published in the 'Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society' between 1800 and 1804 (1800 pp. I, 
106; 1802 pp. 12, 387; 1804 p. I), revived the wave theory oflight by showing 
that when two undulations from different origins coincide either perfectly or 
very nearly in direction, their joint effect is a combination of the motions 
belonging to each: See ' Miscellaneous Works of the late Thomas Young' (ed. 
G. Peacock, London, 1855). By the 1820'S, A.J. Fresnel (1788-1827), byassum-
ing the transversal nature of these waves, had produced explanations of inter-
ference, refraction and reflection; see 'Bulletin des Sciences de la Societe Philo-
mathique de Paris' 1822 p. 63, 'Memoires de I'Academie' V, 1826, p. 339, W. S. 
Aldis 'A Chapter on Fresnel's Theory of Double Refraction' (Cambridge, 1870). 
When Hegel was delivering these lectures therefore, there was every reason to 
reject Newton's 'barbarous categories', even if one refused, as Hegel did, to 
accept Young's and Fresnel's. Twentieth century research has of course 
reinstated Newton's 'corpuscles' and 'particles' in the form of photons, which 
Planck and Einstein showed to be units of energy proportional in intensity to 
the frequency of the light waves. 
18, 18 
See the note on p. 238 Christian Huyghens (1629-1695), in his 'Cosmotheoros, 
sive De Terris Coelestibus, eorumque ornatu Conjecturae' (Hague, 1698) pp. 
125-139, entered upon speculations of this kind. Edmund Halley (1656-1742), in 
'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1720 pp. 22-26 called attention to what he considered 
229 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to be a paradox, i.e. that the number of fixed stars must be more than finite, and 
some of them more than a finite distance from others. 'And indeed, were the 
whole System fmite: it, though never so extended, would still occupy no part 
of the infinitum of Space, which necessarily and evidently exists; whence the 
whole would be surrounded on all sides with an infinite inane' etc. C£ Francis 
Roberts 'On the distance of the fixed stars' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1694 p. 101); 
Jacques Cassini (1677-1756) 'De la grandeur des etoiles fixes et de leur distance a 
la terre' ('Mem. de l' Ac. des Sc. de Paris' 1717); Hegel's 'Logic' (tr. Wallace, 
Oxford, 1963) §§ 94, 95. 
The distinction which Hegel draws here between 'the empirical appearances 
of the propagation of light', and its 'simple indivisibility' was probably due to 
some extent to the postulation of ether as the medium in which light appears: 
see Sir Edmund Whittaker 'A history of the theories of Aether and Electricity' 
(2 vols. London, 1951). Cf. Hegel's description of the ether in the lectures of 
1801-1802 ('Samtliche Werke' vol. XVIIIa ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923 pp. 196-
201). In the lectures of 1803-1804 (op. cit. vol. XIX ed. Hoffineister, Leipzig, 
1932 pp. 3-4) he replaced the ether by light itself. He later (op. cit. vol. XX ed. 
Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931 pp. 33-34), rejected the ether entirely as a physical 
entity, but took many of its features to be characteristic of light. 
For Hegel's views on memory, see §§ 452-454 of the 'Encyclopaedia' ('Samt-
liche Werke' ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1958, vol. 10). 
18,29 
This is evidently a reference to Newton's 'Opticks' Bk. I, pt. I, axioms 6 
and 7. 
'Ax. vi. Homogeneal Rays which flow from several Points of any Object, 
and fall perpendicularly or almost perpendicularly on any reflecting or refracting 
Plane or spherical Surface, shall afterwards diverge from so many other Points, 
or be parallel to so many other Lines, or converge to so many other Points, 
either accurately or without any sensible Error. And the same thing will happen, 
if the Rays be reflected or refracted successively by two or three or more plane 
or Spherical Surfaces.' 
'Ax. vii. Wherever the Rays which come from all the Points of any Object 
meet again in so many Points after they have been made to converge by Re-
flection or Refraction, there they will make a picture of the Object upon any 
white Body on which they fall.' 
In his exposition of these axioms, Newton defines afocus, and discusses the 
refraction of light by the eye. Hegel has difficulty in accepting the Newtonian 
account of refraction (see § 318), and is therefore forced into raising this ob-
jection to Newton's explanation of vision. Cf. Berkeley's confession, 'In vain 
shall all the mathematicians in the world tell me, that I perceive certain lines and 
angles which introduce into my mind the various ideas of distance; so long as I 
230 

-
NOTES 
myself am conscious of no such thing'-'An Essay towards a New Theory of 
Vision' XII (Dublin, 1709). 
Newton mentions, 'That vulgar Experiment of casting the Species of Objects 
from abroad upon a Wall or Sheet of white Paper in a dark Room' by means of 
a lens. Giovanni Battista della Porta (1538-1615) had given an account of the 
'camera obscura' in his, 'Magiae Naturalis, sive de miraculis rerum naturalium' 
(Naples, 1558, 4th ed. 1589, Eng. tr. 'Natural Magick', London, 1658), and 
Kepler, in his 'Paralipomena ad Vitellionem' (Frankfurt, 1604) (cop. 5. Diopt. 
prop. 60), a commentary on the 'Perspectiva' (Nuremberg, 1535) ofWitelo (c. 
1230-1275), had accounted for it in substantially the same way as Newton. It is 
difficult to imagine how Hegel would have explained the phenomenon. 
George Adams (1750-1795), in his 'Essay on Vision' (2nd ed. London, 1792) 
informs us that, 'Whatever is seen or beheld by the eye, is by opticians called an 
object. They consider every object as made up of a vast number of minute points, 
and that each of these points, by an unknown power, sends forth or reflects 
rays oflight in all directions, and is thus the center of a sphere oflight, extending 
indefmitely on all sides' (p. 39). On pp. 44-47 he goes on to give an elaborate 
account of the experiment just mentioned. C£ William Porterfield's excellent 
'Treatise on the Eye, the Manner and Phaenomena of Vision' (2 vols. Edinburgh. 
1759) vol. I pp. 352-408. 
18, 33 
This 'representation', when applied to the study of gases gave rise to Avo-
gadro's rule: see Amadeo Avogadro (1776-1856); articles in 'Memorie della 
R. Accademia di Torino' vols. 30 and 3 I, and 'Journal de Physique' 1811. It was 
used to explain transparency etc. by Robert Boyle (1627-1691), in his 'Experi-
ments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies' (London, 1684), and by 
Peter van Musschenbroek (1692-1761), in his 'Introductio ad Philosophiam 
Naturalem' (2 vols. Leyden, 1762). 
Hegel probably had in mind Newton's theory of colours when he mentioned 
the 'representation' so disparagingly. Cf. § 298 Remark. Newton had based this 
theory on the assumption that bodies of different colours absorb or reflect the 
various colours of the spectrum according to their density: see 'Opticks' (4th ed. 
London, 1730) Bk. II pt. iii: Biot 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. 
IV: Laplace 'Systeme du monde' (5th ed. Paris, 1824, 1824) vol. I, C£ 'Philo-
sophiae naturalis Theoria reducta ad unicam legem virium in natura existentium' 
(Vienne, 1758) by Roger Joseph Boscowich (1711-1787), in which matter is 
said to consist of physical points possessing the forces of attraction and repul-
sion. 
19, 17 
,biea icf)eint ein m!ibetitJl:ucf) 3U iet)n, abet auf bielen ecf)ein fann es uns 
nicf)t anfommen'. Hegel's point here is that the apparent contradiction is in light 
23 I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
itself, light being the most universal manifestation of matter precisely because 
it is the most immaterial materiality. 
19,22 
Eighteenth century attempts to weigh light originated in the desire to prove 
the materiality of Newton's 'corpuscles'. In 1708 William Homberg (1652-
1715) claimed to have dispersed pieces of amianthus and set a watch spring 
moving by the impact of the sun's rays focused through a magnifying glass 
('Memoires de l' Academie royale des Sciences de Paris' 1708, p. 25). Peter van 
Musschenbroek (1692-1761) repeated Homberg's experiments without ques-
tioning his conclusions, and Peter Joseph Macquer (1718-1784), in his 'Dic-
tionnaire de chymie' (Paris, 1766, Eng. tr. London, 1777, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 
1806) gave an account of similar experiments, which he regarded as proving that 
light has weight. John Michell (1724-1793) and Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) 
carried out carefully regulated experiments which convinced Priestley that they 
had discovered the weight of the corpuscles and not merely observed their 
impact or movement: see his 'History and Present state of discoveries relating 
to vision' (2 vols. London, 1772, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1776) pt. II sect. 6 ch. iii; 
pp. 282-283 of the German edition. 
It was J. J. Mairan (1678-1771) who held that the movement of the balances 
used by these investigations was brought about by the heat concentrated in the 
focus, and by currents of air: see, 'Memoires de l' Academie royale des Sciences' 
1747 p. 630. 
19,33 
Cf. the note on p. 224. In his 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion' (tr. 
Speirs and Sanderson, 3 vols. London, 1962) Hegel treats Zoroastrianism as 
being superior to Hinduism but inferior to the Greek religion in the dialectical 
progression. For an understanding of his regarding it as being 'more sublime' 
than these religions, see his analysis of Judaism (op. cit. vol. II pp. 170-224). 
He takes Genesis I v. 3 to be one of the sublimest passages in the Old Testament, 
,~ai3 m!ott ift bai3 imilfJelofefte, biefet S,)aud; ift fJiet 3ug1eid; ba~ md;t, bie 
£id;twelt, bie unenblid;e mu~gieflung be~ md;t£l, 10 Witb bai3 md;t fJetclbgefe~t 
3U einem m!otte, 3U etwa~ fo ~oti\betger)enben'. 
In Christian tradition, passages such as Milton's 'Hail, holy light, offspring 
of Heaven first-born' etc. ('Paradise Lost' II i ff.) are very common, and have the 
authority of Christ himself: see John VIII 12: cf. Isaiah XLII 6, Luke II 32. 
19,37 
See the note III. 228. 
232 

------------- ---
NOTES 
20,3 
This is a reference to the doings of the Schildbiirgers, the German equivalents 
of the Wise Men of Gotham, the inhabitants of Kampen in Holland, and the 
Danish Molboer. 
In 1598, Hans Kremer (Mercator) of Zierenberg near Cassel published 
'Wunderseltzamen, abentheuerlichen, unerhorten und bisher unbeschriebenen 
Geschichten und Thaten der Schiltbiirger in Misnopotamia' (ed. Felix Bobertag 
in vol. 25 of 'Deutsche National-Litteratur' Stuttgart, no date). Hegel is evi-
dently referring to the building of the Schildbiirger town-hall. The architects 
had forgotten to give it windows, and so decided that the sunlight should be 
caught in sacks and carried into the building, 'So baH) nun hie @locfen ein!3 
gejcf)lagen, ba joUe dnet fein ltJunbet gefe~en ~aben ltJie fie alle angefangen 
~aben ~u atbeiten. ~t1icf)e ~aUen lange Slide, lieHen hie Sonne bret)n fcf)einen 
bw aUff ben >Sob en, fnii.»fften jn bann ei1enb~ ~u unb Heffen bamit in!3 ~au!3, 
ben tag au£l~ufcf)iitten'. 
The home of the Schildbiirgers was taken to be Schildau near Torgau until 
J. H. Campe (1746-1818), in his 'Worterbuch der Deutschen Sprache' (5 vols. 
Braunschweig, 1807-1811), took their name to be cognate with 'Spiessbiirger' 
(a philistine, a square). 
Cf. 'Merrie Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham' (ed. Cunningham, 1889), 
attributed to Andrew Boorde (c. 1490-1549): C. E. Mangor 'Beretning om de 
vidtbekendte Molboers vise Geminger' (Viborg, 1771-1773): W. A. Clouston 
'Book of Noodles' (London, 1888). 
20, 17 
See Newton 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) Bk. III pt. i, quo 29, 'Are not 
the Rays of Light very small Bodies emitted from shining Substances? For such 
bodies will pass through uniform Mediums in right Lines without bending into 
the Shadow, which is the Nature of the Rays of Light'. In the preceding query 
Newton examines hypotheses in which light is supposed to consist in 'Pression 
or Motion, propagated through a fluid Medium', but rejects them because he 
has no evidence of the bending or crookedness of light, and because Huyghens 
had been unable to explain double refraction in Iceland spar by means of his 
wave 'theory. 
Robert Hooke (1635-1702), in his 'Micrographia, or some Philosophical 
Descriptions of Minute Bodies' (London, 1665) pp. 57 and 221, had suggested 
that the waves in light might be transverse, i.e. at right angles to the direction 
of the rays, 'whence it necessarily follows, that all the parts of these Spheres 
undulated through an Homogeneous medium cut the Rays at right angles'. 
Christian Huyghens (1629-1695) however, in his Traite de la Lumiere' (Leyden, 
1690 Eng. tr. Thompson, London, 1912), ignored this suggestion, and postulated 
light waves resembling those of sound, 'composez de particules qui nagent dans 
une matiere beaucoup plus subtile, qui les agite avec une grande rapidite, et les 
H* 
233 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
fait frapper contre les particules de l' ether, qui les environnent et qui sont 
beaucoup moindres qu'elles'. (p. 9). 
By the middle of the eighteenth century, objections were being raised to 
Newton's account of this matter. Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), in a letter 
dated April 23, 1752, objects to the doctrine that light consists of particles of 
matter emitted from the sun's surface. 'Must not the smallest portion conceivable, 
have, with such a motion, a force exceeding that of a 24 pounder discharged 
from a cannon? . . . Yet these particles, with this amazing motion, will not 
drive before them or remove, the least and slightest dust they meet with.' Cf. 
his 'Experiments and Observations on Electricity' (London, 1769) p. 264 
Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), the famous mathematician, in his 'Nova Theoria 
Lucis et Colorum' which was printed on pp. 169-244 of his 'Opuscula varii 
argumenti' (Berlin, 1746) says that if Newton's hypothesis were correct, the 
sun would soon be exhausted, the matter emitted would disturb the courses of 
the planets, transparency would be difficult to explain, and it would be im-
possible to account for the rays' not interfering with one another. He therefore 
postulates an ether, and accepts a wave theory similar to Huyghens', 'Hoc 
igitur medium, per quod lumen diffundi pono, non erit diversum ab eo, quod 
apud philosophos aetheris nomine consideratur: quare uti sonus per aerem, ita 
simili modo lumen per aetherem propagatur. Est ergo aether fluidum subtile 
elasticum, quod omnia loca in mundo ab aliis corporibus relicta adimplet; 
perinde atque aer circa terram in omnia loca, quae ab aliis corporibus relin-
quuntur, penetrat.' (op. cit. ch. I § xxiii p. 181). 
When Thomas Young (1773-1829) revived the wave theory at the beginning 
of the last century (note II. 229), he assumed, from a false analogy with sound 
waves, that the wave disturbance was longitudinal. Hegel is referring here to 
his discovery of interference, which he formulated as follows. 'Whenever two 
portions of the same light arrive to the eye by different routes, either exactly 
or very nearly in the same direction, the light becomes most intense when the 
difference of the routes is any multiple of a certain length, and least intense in 
the intermediate stage of the interfering portions; and this length is different 
for the light of different colours': see 'Miscellaneous Works' (ed. Peacock, 
London, 1855) I p. 202. In 1816 D. F. J. Arago (1786-1853) and A. J. Fresnel 
(1788-1827), while investigating the interference of polarized rays of light, 
discovered that two pencils of light, polarized in planes at right angles to each 
other never interfere under circumstances in which ordinary light shows 
interference phenomena: see 'Memoire sur I'action que les rayons de lurniere 
exercent les uns sur les autres' ('Annales de Chimie' vol. x pp. 288-306, 1819) C£ 
'Quarterly Journal of Science' 1821 vol. XI p. 381. This discovery led to the 
assumption that the wave disturbance in light is transverse: see Young's letter 
to Arago dated January 12, 1817 ('Works' I p. 390).JosefFraunhofer (1787-1826) 
confirmed this assumption at about the same time by discovering the dark lines 
in the solar spectrum: see 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vols. 56 and 61. It was 
234 

NOTES 
then left to A. J. Fresnel (1788-1827) to formulate these discoveries in mathe-
matical terms (note II. 229). 
20,21 
The classical exposition of this neurological theory is to be found in the 
'Demonstrationes anatomico-pathologicae (Amsterdam 1760) vol. I, by Peter 
Camper (1722-1789). Ernst Gottlob Bose (1723-1788), in his 'Dissertatio de 
nervorum actione ex collisione' (Leipzig, 1762) refuted Camper's arguments in 
a competent manner. 
21, I 
Galileo discovered four of Jupiter's satellites in 1610: see his 'Syderius Nun-
cius' (Venice, 1610). C£ Simon Marius (1570-1624) 'Mundus jovialis anno 1609 
detectus' (Nuremberg, 1614). Thomas Harriot (1560-1621) observed the satel-
lites closely from Jan. 16, 1610 until Feb. 26, 1612: see Zach's article 'Berlin 
Royal Academy of Sciences' 1788. In the middle of the seventeenth century 
Jean Dominique Cassini (1625-1712) developed a method of determining 
longitude by means of them: see 'Eclipses des satellites de Jupiter dans les 
derniers mois de l' annee 1676, proposees pour la determination exacte des 
longitudes des lieux OU elles sont observees' ('Journal des Savants' 17 Aug. 1676: 
cf. 16 Feb. 1666,21 March 1672,14 Sept. 1676 etc.). In 1671, the French Academy 
of Sciences sent Jean Picard (1620-1682) to Copenhagen to fix the exact position 
ofTycho Brahe's observatory, in relation to Paris. Picard observed the eclipses 
of Jupiter's satellites with the help of Rasmus Bartholin (1625-1698) professor 
at Copenhagen, whose assistant, Ole Remer (1644-1710), was at that time work-
ing on an edition ofTycho Brahe's tables, the manuscripts of which had recently 
been acquired from Kepler's son, by the Danish king. 
R0mer returned to Paris with Picard, in the hope of getting the tables 
published, and stayed there until 1681. In 1676 he published 'Demonstration 
touchant Ie mouvement de la lumiere trouve par M. Roemer' ('Journal des 
Savants'Dec. 1676), in which he described how he had calculated the speed of 
light from observations of Jupiter's satellites made during the course of several 
years. R0mer published very little, and it was not until the beginning of this 
century that any reasonably complete picture of his work became available: 
see 'Fysisk Tidskrift' 1908 p. 201, 1917 p. 169, 1936 p. 125: 'Det Kongelige 
Danske Videnskabernes Selskabs Forhandlinger' 1910, 1913, 1944: K. Meyer 
'Om Ole R0mers Opdagelse afLysets T0ven' (Copenhagen, 1915). 
The method used by R0mer was as follows :-see I. B. Cohen 'Roemer and 
the first determinations of the velocity of light (1676)' ('Isis' 1939-1940 pp. 
327-379): C. B. Boyer 'Early estimates of the velocity of light' ('Isis' 1941-
1942 pp. 24-40):-
235 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
F E 
H 
Let S be the sun, and ABC D the orbit of the earth. Let Ju be Jupiter, and 
F E the orbit of its satellite. When the earth is at A, the satellite may be seen 
emerging from Jupiter's shadow at F. If the earth stayed at A, the same would 
be seen again, 42t hours later. After 30 orbits of the satellite, the earth is at B 
however. Consequently, the time taken for light to pass from I to B must be 
added to the time calculated for the emergence of the satellite at F. Similarly, 
when the earth is at C, the satellite may be seen entering Jupiter's shadow at E, 
and when the earth is at D, the time taken for light to pass from J to C must be 
subtracted from the time calculated for the entry of the satellite into the shadow 
at E. The movement of Jupiter in its orbit has to be taken into consideration 
throughout of course. By this method, R0mer calculated that it must take light 
16 minutes 26 seconds to pass from G to H. 
236 

-----------------------------
NOTES 
The accuracy of this calculation was confirmed by James Bradley (1693-
1762). Robert Hooke (1635-1703), in his, 'An attempt to prove the motion of 
the earth from observations' (London, 1674) noticed that y Draconis, a star of the 
second magnitude, which passes practically overhead in the latitude of London, 
exhibits variations in position between July and October amounting to 23". 
Bradley observed this star very carefully from December 1725 until August 
1727, and found that the extreme range of its southerly and northerly positions 
was 40". After satisfying himself that this apparent shift could not be explained 
by parallax, nutation of the earth's axis, or an irregular distribution of the 
earth's atmosphere, he took it to be evidence of the aberration of light, and 
communicated his discovery of this phenomenon to the Royal Society in 
January 1729 ('Phil. Trans.' vol. 35 p. 637). 
Bradley's explanation of this appearance was as follows:-
A 
Let S be a star, and the observer be carried along the line BA; let SB be per-
pendicular to AB. If the observer be stationary at B, the star will appear in the 
direction BS. If, however, he traverses the distance BA in the same time as light 
passes from the star to his eye, the star will appear in the direction AS. Since, 
however, the observer is not conscious of his own motion with the earth in its 
orbit, the star appears to have a displacement, which is at all times parallel to the 
motion of the observer. 
In this diagram, BA is to BS as the velocity of the earth in its orbit to that of 
light. Bradley found that the twelve stars he was able to observe closely over a 
period of a year or more had a maximum shift of 40". He therefore took the 
angle BSA to be 20". The radius of a circle is equal to an arc of 57° 18", con-
sequently the velocity of the earth is to the velocity of light as 20" to 57° 18" or 
I to 103 I 3. The time taken for the light of the sun to reach the earth will there-
fore be to 3651 days as 20" is to 360", i.e. 8 minutes 7 seconds. 
237 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATUR~ 
This calculation accorded so well with R0mer's, that in Hegel's day, the 
matter was considered to be settled. See 'Miscellaneous Works and Correspon-
dence of James Bradley, D.D.' (ed. S. Rigaud, Oxford, 1832). There is an excel-
lent account of Bradley's work in Charles Hutton's 'A Mathematical and 
Philosophical Dictionary' (2 vols. London, 1796). 
In 1810 D. F.J. Arago (1786-1853) showed by experiment, that light coming 
from any star behaves in all cases of reflection and refraction precisely as it would 
if the star were situated in the place which appears to occupy in consequence of 
aberration, and the earth were at rest. From this he concluded that the apparent 
refraction in a moving prism is equal to the absolute refraction in a fixed prism. 
He did not publish the results of this work until 1839 however: see 'Comptes 
Rendus' viii p. 326. 
21, 8 
In his first lectures on the philosophy of nature (Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik 
und Naturphilosophie' ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923, p. 201), Hegel takes the stars 
to be the punctualization of the 'absolute matter' of the ether, and says that, 
'They are a motionless picture, a formal model, which represents an eternal past 
in dumb hieroglyphics, and which has life and a present only through the 
comprehension of these characters.' 
He had himself been tempted to speculate upon 'these further consequences' 
therefore, and may have been led to do so by a translation of three of Herschel' s 
papers ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1784 p. 437, 1785 p. 213, 1789 p. 212) published 
by G. M. Sommer as 'Ober den Bau des Himmels, ... nebst einem ... Auszug 
aus Kants ... Theorie des Himmels' (Konigsberg, 1791). Sommer's translation 
of a passage from the second of Herschel's discourses is as follows (p. 31), 
,DlJtild)e @:tld)einungen. ~on bielet tgeotetild)en ~otfteUung be~ ~immeg, 
bie, tuie tuit veteiti3 vemetft gaven, aui3 einem nid)t minbet bet Beit afi3 bem 
maum nad) entfernten @efid)ti3lJunft gefa13t ift .. / Cf. 'The Scientific Papers of 
Sir William Herschel' (ed. J. L. E. Dreyer, 2 vols. London. 1912): A. H. C. 
Gelpke (1769-1842) 'Allgemeinfassliche Betrachtungen iiber das Weltgebaude 
und die neues ten Entdekkungen, welche von Herrn Doktor Herschel darin 
~emacht worden sind' (Hanover, 1806). 
Galileo was the first to suggest that the distances of the fixed stars might be 
computed by their parallax, and in 1782 ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 72 pp. 88 
iii) Herschel gave an account of this method: 'Let 0 E be two opposite points of 
the annual orbit, taken in the same plane with two stars a, b, of unequal magni-
tudes. Let the angle aOb be observed when the earth is at 0: and let the angle 
aEb be observed when the earth is at E. From the difference of these angles, if 
any should be found, we may calculate the parallax of the stars. These two stars 
ought to be as near each other as possible, and also to differ as much in magnitude 
as we can fmd them.' 

NOTES 
After announcing this method, Herschel continued to publish catalogues of 
these double stars for over thirty years, but his theory broke down under the 
weight of his observations, and in 1814 he wrote, 'I am still engaged in a series 
of observations for ascertaining a scale whereby the extent of the universe, as 
far as it is possible for us to penetrate into space, may be fathomed'. 
23, II 
Christian Huyghens (1629-1695), in his 'Traite de la Lumiere' (Leyden, 
1690), was the first to show that the properties of a stream of light coming 
directly from a natural source are not alike on all sides of its direction of propa-
gation. Huyghens knew of double refraction in Iceland spar from Rasmus 
Bartholin's 'Experimenta Crystalli Islandici Disdiaclastici' (Copenhagen 1669). 
He discovered that when the two emergent streams are divided by a second 
crystal, the intensity of each of the subsequent portions will depend upon the 
position with respect to one another of the principal planes of the faces of entry 
into the crystals, and that in certain cases one portion will vanish entirely. He 
also discovered however, that if the emergent streams overlap, they will have 
all the properties of common light. C£ Newton's 'Opticks' (London, 1703) 
Book III pt. I query 25. In the following query Newton concludes from this 
experiment that every ray of light has two opposite sides. 
Jean Baptiste Biot (1774-1862) was the originator of what Hegel calls 'the 
clumsy concept' of fixed polarization. Biot was led to formulate this concept 
as a result of the detailed investigations he made in the years 1812-1814, into 
239 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the colours of crystalline plates, which he attempted to explain in terms of New-
ton's corpuscular theory: see 'Traite de Physique' (Paris, 1816) vol. IV pp. 254-
316. Biot contended that the light corpuscles acquire fixed polarization by 
passing through a crystal which is thick enough to make their axes maintain a 
position with regard to the plane of polarization. He thought of this fixed 
polarization as being preceded by an oscillation of the corpuscles, set up by their 
having entered a doubly refracting body, and concluded from this that the 
colours of thin plates arise from an imperfect or mobile polarization, which would 
be fixed by a thicker crystal. 
The most telling criticism of this theory came fromJ. F. W. Herschel (1792-
1871), who pointed out that the point at which this mobile polarization passes 
over into fixed polarization, and the reason for its doing so, cannot be dis-
covered: see 'Vom Licht' (tr. Schmidt, Stuttgart, 1831), a translation of his article 
on light in the 'Encyclopaedia Metropolitana' (London, 1817-1845). The theory 
tended to be dropped as advances were made in the formulation of the wave 
theory: see Fresnel's and Arago's criticisms of it in 'Annales de Chimie et de 
Physique' vol. XVII. Cf. the articles by Sir David Brewster (1781-1868) in 
'phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1814-18 and the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' 
vol. I p. 289 (1819). Brewster's attitude towards these phenomena is interesting 
because he did not take them to be a clear confirmation of either the corpuscular 
or the wave theory. 
23,27 
Goethe attempted to avoid accepting both the corpuscular and wave theories 
oflight and colour. Consequently, although he was intimately acquainted with 
the history of optics, he had very little influence upon the optical research of his 
day: see 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955): 
'Zur Farbenlehre. Polernischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1958): 'Zur 
Farbenlehre. Historischer Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957). The works Hegel 
refers to here appeared in Goethe's 'Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt' (Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1817). In the 1820 edition of this book (p. 126), Goethe acknow-
ledges with thanks the assistance given him by 'distinguished' scientific friends, 
and adds that, 'Dobereiner, Hegel, Korner, Lenz, Roux, Schultz, Seebeck, 
Schweigger and Voigt have been particularly helpful'. See Goethe's 'Naturwis-
senschaftliche Hefte' (ed. Kuhn, 1962), which form pt. I vol. viii of the edition 
of Goethe's scientific works now being published by the German Academy of 
Natural Philosophy. 
Hegel is evidently referring to the following passage on pp. 28-29 of this work, 
'What now becomes apparent here is what everyone knows and admits, i.e. 
that the comparative strength of reflected light will only be at a maximum when 
that light proceeds on the same plane, and when, despite several reflections, it 
keeps to the original direction in passing from the sky to the surface, the mirror, 
240 

NOTES 
and fmally to the eye. In a case such as this, and on account of the smooth surface, 
sidelight is completely absent, and we see nothing but darkness.' 
In the sections XVIII and XIX mentioned by Hegel, Goethe deals with 'The 
effect of the mirror with regard to brightness and darkness' and 'The effect of 
the mirror with regard to any image'. Goethe describes experiments with 
mirrors which illustrate the general principle just mentioned, and takes the 
phenomena of polarization to be evidence of'obliquated' (obliquitte) light. C£ 
Robert Hooke (1635-1702) 'Micrographia' (London, 1665) p. 221, 'This in-
flextion may be ... an obliquation of the pulse of light whence the ruder part is 
continually promoted, and consequently refracted towards the perpendicular, 
which cuts the Orbs at right angles'. 
23,32 
Hegel credits Johann Tobias Mayer (1752-1830) with this discovery: see the 
footnote II. 360. Mayer published two papers on the refraction and polariza-
tion of light in 'Commentationes Societatis Regiae Scientarum Gottingensis' 
vol. I and II (Gottingen, 1811 and 1813). Newton seems to have been the 
originator of such speculations: see 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) Bk. III 
pt. I query 26. 
23,40 
Etienne Louis Malus (1775-1812) was born at Paris on June 23, 1775. 
In 1793 he was dismissed from the military engineering school at Mezieres, 
and joined the army as a private. After distinguishing himself by his work on 
the fortifications of Dunkirk, he was made a member of the Polytechnic then 
being established under the direction of Gaspard Monge (1746-18 I 8), one of the 
most outstanding French mathematicians and physicists of the day. In 1797 he 
joined the engineer corps, and from 1797 till 1801 saw active service in Germany 
and Egypt. 
He began optical research soon after his return to Europe. After a period at 
Antwerp and on active service in Germany, he supervised the improvement of 
the defences at Strassburg (1806-8), and soon afterwards returned to Paris. 
In 1810 he became a major in the engineers, and in 18n was appointed director 
of studies at the Polytechnic. He died in Paris, of phthisis, on February 23, 
1812. 
He discovered the polarization of light in 1808, and gave an account of the 
discovery in 'Sur une propriete de la lumiere reflechie par les corps diaphanes' 
published in 'Bulletin des Sciences de la Societe Philomathique de Paris' vol. I 
pp. 266-269 (Dec. 1808): c£ 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. 31 pp. 286-297 
(1809), and W. Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' 1812 pp. 95-102. 
After working on the double refraction oflight in Iceland spar, he happened to 
notice that the light of the setting sun reflected from a nearby window gave a less 
intense image than direct sunlight, 'I have found that this singular disposition, 
241 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
which has hitherto been regarded as one of the peculiar effects of double re-
fraction, can be completely impressed on the luminous molecules by all trans-
parent solids and liquids ... If we receive this reflected rayon any doubly re-
fracting crystal, whose principal section is parallel to the plane of reflection, it 
will not be divided into two beams as a ray of ordinary light would be, but 
will be refracted according to the ordinary law.' 
Defenders of the wave theory such as Thomas Young (1773-1829) still 
regarded the waves as being longitudinal, and were therefore at a loss to 
explain Malus's discovery. Consequently, the immediate effect of it was to 
encourage the defenders of the corpuscular hypothesis, and Malus himself, in 
his main work on the subject, 'Theorie de la Double Refraction de la lumiere 
dans les Substances Cristallisees' (Paris, 1810), tried tointerpretthephenomenon 
in the light of this theory. It was not until the idea of transverse waves had gained 
currency that the mature work of Arago and Fresnel became possible (note 
II. 233). 
Hegel was therefore justified in criticizing Malus, although he was not 
justified in ignoring the work of his successors. He seems to have in mind pp. 
30-52 and pp. 205-241 of Malus's main work. For the subsequent development 
of Malus's views on the subject see 'Sur les phenomenes qui dependent des 
formes des molecules de la lumiere' ('Bull. des Sc.' I pp. 341-344 and 353-355: 
'Gilbert's Ann.' 1809 pp. 463-477); 'Memoires sur les phenomenes qui accom-
pagnent la reflexion et la refraction de la lumiere' (Bull. des Sc.' II pp. 320-325: 
'Gilbert's Ann.' 1811 p. 109-113, 1812 pp. 119-131); 'Memoire sur l'influence 
des formes des molecules de la lumiere dans divers phenomenes d' optique' 
('Memoires de la Societe des Sciences, Agriculture, et Arts, de Strassburg' vol. 
I pp. 281-300 (1811)); c£ Thomson's 'Annals of Philosophy' vol. III pp. 81-84 
(1814). 
25,5 
The great solar furnace at Font Romeu in the eastern Pyrenees is built up of 
8,000 small mirrors, and is able to heat two to three tons of material at a time 
to a temperature of 3,500°C (6,300°F): see 'The Times' November 18, 1966. 
25,20 
The development of Hegel's views on light is essential to an understanding of 
these paragraphs. During the Jena period he was evidently searching for a 
dynamical interpretation of light. It looked at that time as though Huyghens' 
and Euler's theory of an ether might replace Newtonianism, and in the lectures 
of 1801-1802 therefore, Hegel took light to be the 'absolute ether', the sublation 
of ether, space, time and motion. Cf. Lars Regner (1746-1810), professor of 
astronomy at Uppsala. 'Versuch fiber die physische Ursache der Fortpflanzung 
des Lichts bey den Himmelskorpern' (Zach's 'Monatliche Correspondenz' vol. 
VI pp. 348-361 (Gotha, 1802)). Two years later he rejected the ether entirely, 
242 

NOTES 
and took celestial motion to be the sublation of light and the heavenly bodies. 
In the lectures of 180S-1806 he returned to some extent to his earlier view 
however, and treated celestial motion as the sublation of ether, space, time and 
mass, and light as the initiation of the succeeding sphere, which he took to include 
magnetism, electricity, heat, crystallization etc. 
Throughout this development he takes light to be the sublation of motion, or 
at least, to be intimately connected with it, and he would certainly have wel-
comed Maxwell's electromagnetic theory had he lived to see it formulated. 
Much of the clumsiness and inaccuracy of § 276 would have been avoided if 
the physics of the day could have provided him with a confirmation of the 
brilliant characterization of light given in § 27S. As it is, one has to admit that 
although he was right in thinking that the research of his day was outdating 
Newton's work, he was wrong in thinking that it was disproving it, just as he was 
wrong in rejecting the hypothesis of light waves and interference, and in re-
garding solar and stellar light as being essentially different. 
The influence upon him of Goethe's optical writings was not entirely beneficial. 
It evidently helped him to realize the crudity of Malus's and Biot's attempts to 
explain polarization (§ 278), but it certainly kept him from appreciating the 
brilliant interpretations of this phenomenon put forward by Arago and Fresnel. 
These paragraphs would still have been acceptable in 181S, and would have 
interested Maxwell in 1870, but they must have caused some raising of the 
eyebrows in 1830. 
26, 2 
Although Hegel goes on to speak mainly of the Moon, this is evidently a 
reference to all the satellites of the planets. At that time fourteen had been 
definitely identified (Earth I, Jupiter 4, Saturn 7, Uranus 2). J. D. Cassini 
(162S-1712) in 166S and 1678, and G. F. Maraldi (166S-1729) in 1707 and 1713 
had noticed spots on the satellites of Jupiter, and from their movement it had 
been concluded that these bodies turn upon their axes: see William Herschel's 
paper 'Observations of the changeable brightness of the satellites of Jupiter 
and of the variation in their apparent magnitudes; with a determination of the 
time of their rotatory motions on their axes' (Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 1797 p. 332). 
Iapetus was at that time taken to be the seventh and most remote of Saturn's 
satellites. Soon after its discovery, Cassini and Maraldi noticed its periodic 
disappearance, and concluded from this that it rotated upon its axis: see 'Me-
moires de l'Academie des Sciences de Paris' 170S Hist. p. II7 Mem. 20: 1707 
p. 296. Herschel made careful observations of Saturn's satellitic system, and came 
to a similar conclusion: see 'On the satellites of the planet Saturn and the rotation 
of its ring on an axis' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1790 p. 427: 'On the ring of 
Saturn and the rotation of the fifth satellite upon its axis' op. cit. 1792 p. I): cf. 
J. H. Schroeter (174S-1816) 'Beitrage zu den neuesten astronomischen Ent-
deckungen' (Berlin, 1788). 
243 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Herschel discovered two of the satellites of Uranus in 1787 ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1787 p. 125), and after noticing the changes in their light, assumed 
that they also turn upon their axes ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1815 p. 298) c£ 
Bode's 'Astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1819 p. 232. 
Hegel might be excused for not accepting this tenuous evidence of the turning 
of satellites upon their axes, but there seems to be no good reason for his having 
chosen to ignore the axial rotation of the Moon. 'The mean time of a revolution 
of the moon about the earth, from one new moon to another, when she over-
takes the sun again, is 29 d. 12 h. 44 m. 3 s. 1 !th.; but she moves once round her 
own orbit in 27 d. 7 h. 43 m. 8 s. moving about 2290 miles every hour; and 
turns once round her axis exactly in the time that she goes round the earth, 
which is the reason that she shews always the same side towards us; and that 
her day and night taken together are just as long as our lunar month.' Charles 
Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 vols. 
London, 1795). 
26,9 
In the Heidelberg 'Encyclopaedia' (ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1956) § 223 p. 
177, and in the 1827 edition of the book, Hegel added here, ,fo baf! man bOn 
biefen Sfot.\:lem IJermutete, baf! bie ~iif)e einei3 grof!en $laneten if)re >Saf)n 
iinbem fonne.' In the 1830 edition this sentence was removed, but Hegel 
failed to qualify the verb which followed. 
26,13 
This was not a fashionable view in Hegel's day. J. N. de L'Isle (1688-1768), 
in his articles 'Sur l' atmosphere de la lune' ('Mem. de l' Acad. des Sciences de 
Paris' 1715 pp. 147, 166, 195, 220) held that the Moon has no atmosphere, and 
this view found an enthusiastic supporter in Johann Tobias Mayer (1723-1762) 
of Gottingen: see his 'Opera inedita' (ed. Lichtenberg, GOttingen 1775). 
Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), in his 'Sur I'atmosphere de la lune prouvee par la 
derniere eclipse annulaire du soleil' ('Mem. de Berlin' 1748 p. 103) held the 
opposite view however. C£ Samuel Dunn (d. 1794) 'Certain reasons for a lunar 
atmosphere' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 1762 p. 578). J. H. Schroeter (1745-1816), 
in his 'Selenotopographische Fragmente' (2 vols. Gottingen, 1791) c£ 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1792 p. 309, backed up the theories of Euler and Dunn with a 
wealth of observations, in which he claimed to have identified the obscuration 
of light by the lunar atmosphere, and his view of the matter predominated until 
well after Hegel's death: see J. S. T. Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' (vol. 
6, Leipzig, 1837) pp. 2406-2409. 
26, 15 
This information is almost certainly drawn fromJ. H. Schroeter's 'Selenoto-
pographische Fragmente' (2 vols. Gottingen, 1791). Schroeter was of the opinion 
244 

NOTES 
that these mountains and craters are of volcanic origin, but that the volcanic 
activity of the Moon has now almost ceased. For a detailed account of contem-
porary knowledge of the Moon's surface see]. S. T. Gehler's 'Physikalisches 
Worterbuch' (vol. 6, Leipzig, 1837) pp. 2409-2443. 
26, 16 
Johann Ludwig Heim (1741-1819) was born at Meiningen. He was educated 
by his father, a clergyman, and then at the town grammar school. Geology 
was his hobby, and although he read theology at Jena, he spent much of his 
spare time investigating the rock structure of the surrounding countryside. He 
took his degree in 1774, and soon afterwards accompanied Prince George of 
Meiningen to Strassburg, where he stayed long enough to make a geological 
survey of the area. On his return to Meiningen he began a career in local govern-
ment, in the course of which he rose to become vice-president of the Protestant 
consistory, and finally, privy councillor to the Duke. 
Heim's first work was 'Ueber die Bildung der Thaler durch Strome' (Weimar, 
1791), in which he attempts to show how valleys may be formed by the force 
of running water. His most important work is his 'Geologische Beschreibung 
des Thiiringer Waldgebiirgs' (3 pts. Meiningen, 1796-1812); see note III. 235. 
He left a fme collection of minerals and stones, which passed to the univer-
sity ofJena at his death. 
Hegel is referring here to his 'Ueber die Aehnlichkeit der ehemaligen Erd-
Oberflache mit der gegenwartigen des Mondes', which was published in 
'Monatliche Correspondenz zur Beforderung der Erd-und Himmels-Kunde' 
(Gotha, 1802) pp. 528-542, a periodical edited by F. X. von Zach (1754-1832). 
Heim's main point in this article is that, 'Astronomy and geology are sisters, 
and in the future they will perhaps walk together, hand in hand. At the present 
however, the latter is still a child, learning to spell in the school of the mineralo-
gist, while the former is already grown-up and ... fully educated.' He points 
out that more international surveys are needed before geologists can build up 
any comprehensive picture of world geology, but he thinks himself justified 
in regarding the distribution of the 'moribund sandstone formation' (note 
III. 241) as world-wide. He takes this formation to be the limit of the 'primitive' 
rocks, i.e. the last of the geological structures formed by chemical rather than 
'mechanical' activity, and to be the transition to fletz-formations (note 
III. 221). 
By studying the features of this sandstone, he built up a picture of the surface 
of the earth as it was before 'mechanical' erosion and transformation began. 
When he discovered something very similar described by J. H. Schroeter in 
his 'Selenotopographische Fragmente' (2 vols. Gottingen, 1791), he was en-
couraged to point out that the examination of this similarity might provide a 
useful field for research. Cf.]. Whitehurst (1713-1788) 'Inquiry into the original 
state and form of the Earth' (London, 1778). 
245 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
For accounts of Heim's life and work see J. G. Meusel 'Das gelehrte Teutsch-
land' (Lemgo, 1796-1834): J. S. Ersch and J. G. Gruber 'Allgemeine Encyclo-
padie der Wissenschaften' Sect. II (31 vots., Leipzig, 1827-1855). 
26,17 
,dnet bet geiftboUen &eognoften'. In the Heidelberg edition of the 'Encyclo-
paedia' (ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1956) Hegel wrote, ,dnet bet tuenigen 
geiftboUen &eognoften' (§ 223 p. 177). 
27,4 
G. C. Lichtenberg (1742-1799) thought that the comet of 1770 passed 
between the Moon and the Earth. This mistake seems to have given rise to late 
eighteenth century speculation on the possibility of a collision between the 
Earth and a comet. J. J. Lalande (1732-1807) dealt with the matter in his 'Re-
flexions sur les cometes, qui peuvent approcher de la terre' (paris, 1773), and 
P. A. Dionis de Sejour (1734-1794), in his exhaustive 'Traite analytique des 
mouvemens apparens des corps celestes' (2 vols. Paris, 1786/9) vol. II pp. 291-
6«, came to the conclusion that although the possibility exists, its dangers are 
negligible. 
H. W. M. Olbers (1758-1840), in his 'Ueber die Moglichkeit, dass ein Comet 
mit der Erde zusammen stossen konne' ('Zach's Monatliche Correspondenz' 
vol. XXII pp. 409-450, Gotha, 1810) gives a survey of eighteenth century views 
on this subject, and comes to the conclusion that there is a 439 million to 1 
chance of such a collision taking place. Cf. H. C. Schumacher (1780-1850) 
'Astronomische Nachrichten' nr. 128 (Altona, 1823 et seq.). 
William Whiston (1667-1752), who is remembered mainly as the original 
of the Vicar of Wakefield and on account of his translation of Josephus, but 
who was known in his own day as a great popularizer of Newtonianism, a 
prolific scribbler, and a religious crank, ranks very high among those who 
concerned themselves with speculation regarding cometary collision. His 'A 
New Theory of the Earth' (London, 1696) was so praised by Locke and Newton, 
that in 1703 he succeeded the latter as Lucasian professor of mathematics at 
Cambridge. It is only fair to remember however, that when he was proposed 
to the Royal Society as a member by Sloane and Halley in 1720, Newton, as 
president, refused him admittance. In this work, which had reached its fifth 
edition by 1736, Whiston put forward the view that the Earth had originated 
in a cometary collision, and in the course of his subsequent eschatological 
surmisals, stated that it was likely to end as it had begun. He created havoc 
in London by suggesting that the comet of October 1736 would bring about 
the end of the world. People streamed out of the city, and the banks had to 
close on account of their funds being inadequate to the sudden demand for 
withdrawals. See Whiston's 'The Astronomical Year: or, on account of the 
many remarkable celestial phenomena of the great year 1736' (London, 1737). 
246 

NOTES 
27,13 
,i~te felbftiinbig geltJotbene mtmofl:J~iite, ein bIeibenbe~ ilReteot'. Hegel 
wrote ,Buff not ,mtmoil:J~iiteJ ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 77). Michelet 
also inserted the reference to § 287. 
27,18 
Michelet's version is as follows, ,10 bafj et bet ffiegent i~te~ $toceff~ 
bleibt, al~ be~ ein3elnen, ltJie bie 60nne be~ aUgemeinen' Hoffmeister ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 77) inserts ,$t03eHe~J after ,aUgemeinenJ. This certainly 
clarifies the meaning of the sentence. 
27,20 
In the margin at this point ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 77 note 2) Hegel 
wrote, 'Aeriformity moon, meteor comet, isolated- thunder-storm the real 
electric explosion'. 
27,32 
The changing marks on Mars, and the stripes across Jupiter and Saturn had 
been observed at that time, and were taken as evidence that these planets 
possess atmospheres. Hegel probably mentions the atmosphere of Mercury on 
account of his having read J. H. Schroeter's 'Hermographische Fragmente zur 
genauem Kenntniss des Planeten Mercur' (Gottingen, 1816), and the atmosphere 
of Venus on account of Schroeter's 'Aphroditographische Fragmente' (Helm-
stedt, 1796): c£ 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1792 p. 309, 1795 p. 117. 
27,37 
This does not contradict the statement made on II. 26 (see note). The Moon 
may well lack the meteorological process of an atmosphere, without being 
devoid of the 'clement' air (see § 282). On these supposedly volcanic eruptions 
see W. Herschel 'An account of three volcanos in the moon' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1787 p. 229): William Wilkins 'An account of an appearance of 
light, like a star, seen in the dark part of the moon' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1794 p. 429). 
28,9 
Pierre Simon Laplace (1749-1827), 'Exposition du systeme du monde' (2 
vols. Paris, 1796, Germ. tr. 2 vols. Frankfurt-on-Main 1797, Eng. tr. J. Pond 
2 vols. London, 1809) bk. I ch. xiii p. 141, 'Les heures des maries sysigies ou 
quadratures, varient avec les distances du soleil et de la lune a la terre, et 
principalement avec les distances de la lune. Dans les sysigies, chaque minute 
d' accroissement ou de diminution dans Ie demi diametre apparent de la lune. 
fait avancer ou retarder l'heure de la pleine mer de 354. Ce phenomene a 
egalement lieu dans les quadratllres; mais il y est trois fois moindre.' 
247 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
28,17 
,'l)et Sfomet ift ein butd){eud)tenbet, butd)fid)tiget m.!oHedotlJet'. 
28,22 
Hegel is here expressing the generally accepted opinion of his day. H. W. M. 
Olbers was convinced by his observation of the comets of December 1798 
('Astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1802 p. 200) and June 1825 ('Astronomisches 
Jahrbuch' 1828 p. 151), that if these bodies had nuclei, they were merely 
nebulous. Stars were often observed through the centres of comets: see 
Herschel's articles in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1795 p. 60 and 1807 p. 266. 
There were claims that comets which had passed before the sun had shown 
opaque centres, but they were not well substantiated: see 'Astronomisches 
Jahrbuch' 1804 pp. 185, 208: 1823 p. 138: H. C. Schumacher (1780-1850) 
'Astronomische Nachrichten' no. 87 (Altona, 1823 et seq.). 
The question was complicated by faulty historical data. Jakob Pontanus 
(1542-1626) had mistranslated an account of the comet of 1454 given by 
George Phrantza (I401-C. 1477) in his 'Chronicle': see 'Propovestiarii Chroni-
con' (Ingolstadt, 1604) bk. IV ch. 16. It was not until the original Greek text 
of this chronicle was published (Vienna, 1796), and attention was drawn to 
the ordinary eclipse of the Moon on May 12, 1454, that text-books dropped 
this example of a comet causing a total eclipse of the Moon: see F. C. Kries 
(1768-1849) 'Uber die angebliche Verfinsterung des Mondes durch einen 
Cometen im Jahre 1454' ('Zach's Monatliche Correspondenz' vol. XXIII 
pp. 196-202, Gotha, 18II). 
28,29 
Edmund Halley (1656-1742), having noticed that the elements of the comet 
Of1682 were nearly the same as those of the comets of 1531 and 1607, concluded 
that all those orbits belonged to the same body, the periodic time of which was 
about seventy years. He predicted therefore, that the comet would return in 
1758, 'Unde ausim ejuisdem reditum sidentur praedicere, anno scil 1758' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1705 pp. 1882-1899). This was a bold prediction at the 
time, but it was justified by the event, for the comet made its appearance as was 
expected, although it did not pass through its perihelion until March 1759. 
A. C. Clairault (1713-1765), in his 'De l'aberration de la lumiere des planetes, 
des cometes et des satellites' ('Mem. de I'Ac. des Sc. de Paris' 1746 pp. 539 and 
816) had predicted a retardation of 618 days due to the attraction of Jupiter 
and Saturn. C£ 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1759 pp. 93-94, 1765 p. 294. 
It passed through its perihelion again on November IS, 1835, and was well 
observed in almost every observatory, although its brightness was found to be 
disappointing. 
Four appearances of the comet were known in Hegel's day, 1759, 1682, 1607 
248 

NOTES 
and 1531. It is also recorded as having appeared in 1066 and 1456. See E. F. 
McPike 'Halley's Comet: its past history and 1910 return' (Washington, 1905). 
28,34 
When Milton likened Satan to a comet which 'from his horrid hair shakes 
pestilence and war', he was expressing a widespread popular fear of this phenom-
enon. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle records the appearance of Halley's comet 
in 1066 as a fitting prelude to the catastrophes of the year, 'At that time, through-
out all England, a portent such as men had never seen before was seen in the 
heavens. Some declared that the star was a comet, which some call "the long 
haired star": it first appeared on the eve of the festival of Letania maior, that 
is on 24 April, and shone every night for a week.' 
Schiller captures the popular attitude very well in the fme lines of the opening 
speech in scene 8 of 'Wallenstein's Lager': 
,Q;5 ift eine 3eit bet ;rtOnen unb 9(ot, 
mm ~imme! gefef)e~en 3eid)en unb ~unbet, 
Unb aU5 ben ~offen, ufutigtot, 
~ongt bet ~ettgott ben Shieg5mantef tuntet. 
ilen Sfometen ftedt et wie eine mute 
ilto~enb am ~immegfenftet aU5, 
ilie gan5e ~eft ift ein stlage~uu~ ..• ' 
In the late eighteenth century however, it became fashionable to satirize these 
superstitions: see Goethe's 'Gedichte Parabolisch' nr. 13 
,ilet ~{)mftet i1Jtingt 5Ut ;rut ~etau5 
,ilet 6tetn fte~t uuet meinem ~au5! 
£) we~!' etc. 
Hegel's attitude toward the fear of a collision between the Earth and a comet is 
evidently a rationalization of this satire. 
29,20 
This paragraph throws light upon Hegel's meaning on p. 27: see the note 
II. 27, 18. 
29, 30 
,bap wit fcf)lufen unb waef)en, be5 WCotgen~ anbet~ geftimmt finb a1~ bes 
muenb~/. Hegel does not use the word ,£aune' (mood) here, although it 
would have illlderlincd his meaning, as it originates from Middle High 
German ,£une/, which meant a psychic changeableness related to the phases 
of the Moon. Cf. Goethe's "Maximen und Reflexionen" no. 1005 ("Werke" 
ed. Petsch, 1932 vol. 14): ,ilie £aune ift ein >8ewuptfofes unb uetu~t auf 
bet 6innHef)teit. Q;~ ift ein ~ibetf1Jtuef) bet 6innHef)feit mit fief) fe!uft'. 
249 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
29, 39 
See F. A. Mesmer (I734-I8I5) 'De planetarum influxu in corpus humanum' 
(Vienna, I766): Andrew Wilson 'Short Remarks upon autumnal disorders of 
the bowels' (Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1765): Alexander Wilson 'Observations 
relative to the influence of climate on vegetable and animal bodies' (London, 
I780, Germ. tr. Leipzig, I78I): H. W. Dirksen 'Die Lehre von den Tempcra-
menten' (Nuremberg, I 804) : J. A. M. Gouffes 'Dissertation sur 1'influcnce des 
climats et de l' atmosphere en particulier' (Paris, I 804) : Francis Balfour 'Observa-
tions respecting the remarkable effects of Sol-lunar Influence on Fever'-
Asiatick Researches' VIII pp. I-33 (Calcutta, I805). 
For a comprehensive treatment of this subject in English see the remarkable 
collection of curious observations in, 'Remarks on the Influence of Climate' 
etc. 'on ... Mankind' (London, I78I), by William Falconer (I744-I824). 
29,40 
Johann Ehlert Bode (I747-I826) was born at Hamburg, and devoted him-
self to astronomy from his earliest years. His first published work was 'Berech-
nung und Entwurf der Sonnenfmsternis vom 5. August I766' (Hamburg, I766). 
His facilities at that time consisted of a home-made telescope and a garret. Two 
years later he published 'Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels' 
(Hamburg, I768, 10th ed. I844) and it was the success of this work which led 
to his being summoned to Berlin in I772 for the purpose of computing ephe-
merides on an improved plan. He worked at first under Johann Heinrich 
Lambert (I728-I777), and in I774 began to prepare the 'Berliner astrono-
misches Jahrbuch' for I 776. After Lambert's death he took over the sole 
responsibility for this work, which he continued to compile until I825 (i.e. 
the volume of I829). In I786 he became director of the Berlin observatory. 
His works were highly effective in diffusing throughout Germany a taste 
for astronomy. His 'Uranographia' (2 pts. Berlin, I80I), which is a collection 
of twenty star-maps accompanied by a catalogue of I7,240 stars and nebulae 
is one of the finest works of its kind ever published, and in order to help the 
general public make use of his yearbooks, he issued 'Erlauterungen fur die 
Besitzer (meiner) astronomischen Jahrbucher' (Berlin, I8I7). 
He is mainly remembered on account of his making known 'Bode's Law' 
which was actually formulated by Christian Wolff (I679-I754), and later by 
Johann Daniel Titius (I729-I796): see 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. I5 
p. I69; von Zach's 'Monatliche Correspondenz' vol. VI p. 504 and vol. VII 
p. 75. This law states that if the distances of the planets from the Sun are ex-
pressed in tenths of the Earth's distance from it, Mercury = 4, Venus = 7 
Earth = 10, Mars = I6, Jupiter = 52, Saturn = IOO, Uranus = I96, and that if 4 
is then subtracted from each number, one is left with the series 0,3,6,I2,48,96,I92. 
The gap between Mars and Jupiter naturally led to the supposition that a 
planetary body might be looked for in this region, and on January I, I80I 
250 

NOTES 
Guiseppe Piazzi (1746-1826) confirmed this by his discovery of Cem, the 
largest of the minor planets: see F. X. von Zach 'Monatliche Correspondenz' vol. 
III pp. 602-607, vol. IV p. 559: 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1802 p. 213. About 
two thousand of these minor planets have since been identified. 
Bode probably sighed at Hegel's suggestion on account of the labour he 
had expended upon attempts to explain cometary orbits: see His 'Allgemeine 
Untersuchungen und Bemerkungen iiber die Lage und Austheilung aller bisher 
bekannten planeten und Kometenbahnen' (Berlin, 1791, French tr. Berlin, 
1801): 'Erlauterungen der Sternkunde' (3rd ed., Berlin, 1808) § 756. C£ A. H. C. 
Gelpke (1769-1812) 'Neue Ansicht iiber den merkwiirdigen Naturbaus der 
Kometen und besonders desjenigen von 18n' (Leipzig, 1812). 
30,19 
In the Heidelberg 'Encyclopaedia' of 1817, Hegel referred here to his in-
augural dissertation 'De Orbitis Planetarum' Qena, 1801), at the end of which he 
had attempted to reduce the distances between the planets to a numerical 
sequence ('Erste Druckschriften' ed. Lasson. Leipzig, 1928) pp. 399-401. 
Knowledge of the discovery of Ceres in January 1801 (see the previous note), 
reduced the acceptability of these calculations, and in 1817 Hegel wrote that, 
,~asid) in einet ftu~etn ~iffettation ~ietubet tletlud)t ~aoe, fann id) nid)t me~t 
fut oefticbigenb anle~en,' (op. cit. § 224 p. 179). 
30 , 25 
Pierre Simon Laplace (1749-1827), 'Exposition du systeme du monde' (2 
vols. Paris, 1796) vol. II p. 263, 'Led astray by his fiery imagination ... Kelper 
explained the order of the Solar System by means of the laws of musical 
harmony. It is evident, even from his mature writings, that he was so taken by 
these fantastic speculations, that he regarded them as the life and soul of 
astronomy.' 
30, 31 
This is a reference to Kepler's 'Harmonice Mundi' (Linz, 1619, ed. M. Caspar, 
Munich, 1940), which clearly played a large part in the formation of Hegel's 
early ideas on astronomy: see His 'Dissertatio philosophica de Orbitis Plane-
tarum' Qena, 1801). 
This work of Kepler's is remembered in the history of science mainly because 
it contains the formulation of his third law, 'That for all planets, the squares 
of the time of revolution round the sun are the cubes of their mean distances 
from it' (bk. V ch. III, Caspar's ed. p. 302). As Hegel notes however, it is 
intrinsically interesting as an attempt to grasp the order of the solar system as a 
series of numerical relationships, and so to interpret it according to the laws of 
musical harmony. 
In his 'Prodromus Dissertationum cosmographicarum continens Mysterium 
251 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
cosmographicum' (Tiibingen, 1596 tr. M. Caspar, Munich, 1938), Kepler 
attempted to explain the solar system stereometrically. Six planets were known 
at that time-Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, and the five 
spaces between them led him to think of the five regular figures of stereometry. 
Beginning with the spherical projection of the Earth's orbit, he drew around it 
the twelve-sided figure, and around this the sphere of Mars. Around the sphere 
of Mars he drew the four-sided figure, and around that the larger sphere of 
Jupiter, which was followed by the cube or six-sided figure, and finally by 
the sphere of Saturn. Inside the Earth's sphere came the twenty- and eight-sided 
figures around the spheres of Venus and Mercury. In this way he reduced the 
order of the solar system to the numerical progression 8,20,12,4,6. The dis-
covery of Uranus in 1781, and the discovery of the minor planets after 1801 
made this interpretation obsolete, and Kepler himself found it necessary to 
supplement it in his later writings. 
The theory of planetary harmony is expounded in book three of Kepler's 
'Harmonice Mundi'. Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520-1591), in his 'Dialogo della 
musica antica et della modema' (Florence, 1581, cf. O. Strunk 'Source Readings 
in Music History' New York, 1950) initiated the modem method of adjusting 
the intervals of the scale by slight variations of the pitch of the notes from the 
Just' intonation, in order to make these notes available in different keys. He 
took the tone to be related to the semitone as 18 to 17, and so put forward a 
flexible method of chromatic tuning which came very close to that employed 
today (99:100). 
Kepler accepted this temperament of Galilei's as establishing the correct 
interrelationship of the various keys, and taking 21600, or the number of 
minutes in a circle, as the numerical definition of G, worked out a progression 
which gives the following values from C: 
C 
C:j!: 
D 
E~ 
E 
F 
F:j!: 
G 
A~ A 
B~ 
B 
C 
1.0 .9444 .8919 .8424 .7956 .7514 .7096 .6702 .6330 .5978 .5646 .5332 .5000 
He then applied the numerical relationships of the scales to the movements 
of the planets, taking the movement of Saturn as the basis of his tonal progression 
(G). By this method he discovered: 
(i) That the relation between the movements of the radius vector, i.e. the 
line joining the Sun and the planet, in aphelion and perihelion, may be ex-
pressed as a harmony. 
(ii) That the relationships between all the planets in respect of these move-
ments in aphelion and perihelion may also be expressed as harmonies. 
(iii) That in certain circumstances, the motions of the planets outside the 
aphelia and perihelia also form an harmonious whole. J. W. A. Pfaff (1774-
1835) noticed that Kepler's musical theory approximated very closely to that 
put forward by J. P. Kirnberger (1721-1783) in his 'Die Kunst des reinen Satzes 
in der Musik' (Berlin, 1771) and his 'Wahren Grundsatze zum Gebrauch der 
Harmonie' (ed. J. A. P. Schulz, Berlin and Konigsberg, 1773) c£ G. L. T 
252 

NOTES 
'Gedanken uber die Temperatur Herrn Kirnbergers' (Berlin, 1775). He applied 
Kepler's principles to the newly discovered planet Uranus, and found that the 
relation between its daily movement in perihelion and that in aphelion comes 
close to being as 1 to .842, i.e. the minor third. He also discovered that the 
movement of Saturn in perihelion is to that of Uranus in perihelion as 1 to 
.682, i.e. almost the fifth. After making similar discoveries with the minor 
planets, he worked out a revised table of planetary harmonies, taking the 
movement of Uranus as its basis ('Schweigger's Neues Journal fur Chemie und 
Physik' 1814 vol. X pp. 36-43). 
31, 3 
Newton 'Opticks' (4th ed. 1730 ed. Cohen, Dover Publications, 1952). 
Newton makes use of this analogy on several occasions: see Bk. I pt. II prop. 
iii expo 7, prop. vi prob. 2: Bk. II pt. I obs. 14; pt. III prop. xvi; pt. IV obs. 5, 
obs. 8. The analogy is certainly not without interest, although Newton makes 
no attempt to work out the tonal sequences with any precision, and also makes 
use of different progressions (c£ op. cit. pp. 128, 154, 295). 
31,24 
,mt bon einem 6to13 bie ffiebe, ;0 mfrHen ltJit bie <nbe, bas @egenltJiiriige, 
a1s bas'3 ~ol)e bettad)ten/ 
31,27 
31, 31 
'Of man, what see we but his station here, 
From which to reason, or to which refer? 
Through worlds unnumber'd though the God be known, 
'Tis ours to trace him only in our own.' 
Alexander Pope (1688-1744) 'Essay on Man' epist. i. 
'An ocean of infmities 
Where all our thoughts are drowned.' 
Isaac Watts (1674-1748) 'The Infmite'. 
Henrik Steffens (1773-1845). Of all Schelling's followers he was the most 
intimately acquainted with the natural science of the day. He was born in 
Stavanger, and brought up, on Rousseauistic principles, in Elsinore and 
Copenhagen. N. F. S. Grundtvig (1783-1872), the Danish Carlyle, was his 
cousin. From his father, who came of a Holstein family, he seems to have 
inherited impulsiveness, restlessness and curiosity, from his mother, who was 
Norwegian, depth of character, intellectual poise, and a basically religious tone 
of mind. Niels Treschow (1751-1833), his headmaster in Elsinore, seems to 
have given him his first lessons in philosophy. 
He matriculated in 1790 and then studied mineralogy, botany and zoology 
at Copenhagen University. He lodged with his mother's family during these 
253 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
years, and 'while walking in the streets of Copenhagen often felt as though he 
wanted to push people from behind in order to make them move quicker'. In 
1796 he went down to Kiel to study Natural Science under the geologist, 
geographer and entomologist J. C. Fabricius (1748-1808). In 1797 he took his 
doctorate at Kiel in mineralogy. It was in the spring of 1798 that Schelling's 
'Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur' (1797) fell into his hands, and this, as 
he later acknowledged, proved to be the turning point of his life. He found in 
Schellingianism a way of thinking which enabled him to organize his already 
wide knowledge of the natural sciences into a coherent system. 
From 1798 until 1802 he travelled widely in Germany, fmanced by a Danish 
scholarship. He heard Werner lecture on geology at Freiberg, and Fichte and 
Schelling lecture at Jena; he also met Goethe, Novalis and A. G. Schlegel. He 
contributed to Schelling's Journal, and in 1801 published his 'Beytrage zur 
innern Naturgeschichte der Erde', under Schelling's auspices. 
In the spring of 1802 he left Germany for Copenhagen, and in the hope of 
getting a university appointment there, delivered his famous lectures at Elers' 
College during the winter of 1802-1803. Grundtvig, Oehlenschlager, 0rsted 
and the Mynster brothers were among those who heard him, and it was at 
these meetings that the romantic movement in Denmark was launched. See 
'Indledning til philosophiske Forel:esninger' (ed. B. T. Dahl, Copenhagen, 
1905); C. I. Scharling 'Grundtvig og Romantiken' (Copenhagen, 1947). The 
university authorities were bewildered, assumed that as he was clearly not an 
ordinary Lutheran he must be an atheist, and elected Niels Treschow to the 
vacant professorship in philosophy. 
The rest of Steffens' life was spent in Germany. He was professor of phil-
osophy, mineralogy, physiology and natural history at Halle 1804-18II, pro-
fessor of physics at Breslau, 18II-18p, and then professor at Berlin. He took 
part in the War of Liberation, and was present at the battle of Leipzig and the 
capture of Paris, although he described himself as 'der ungeschickteste Seconde-
Lieutenant in der preussischen Armee.' 
Hegel seems to have studied the text-book on the philosophy of nature 
which Steffens published as basis for his lectures at Halle; see 'Grundziige der 
philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' (Berlin, 1806) and to have referred to his 
early works on geology; see 'Ueber Mineralogie und das mineralogische 
Studium' (Altona, 1797), 'Beytrage zur innern Naturgeschichte der Erde' (pt. I, 
Freiberg, 1801), 'Geognostische-geologische Aufsatze' (Hamburg, 1810). As 
he began work on his logic however, he seems to have lost interest in the 
intuitive approach to the natural sciences championed by the Schellingians, and 
he never seems to have concerned himself with Steffens' mature work in this 
field, which is distinguished by its comprehensiveness and exactness; see the 
magnificent 'Handbuch der Oryktognosie' (4 vols. Halle, 18II-1824). 
Hegel never mentions Steffens' weighty contributions to the wider culture 
of post-war Germany; see 'Anthropologie' (2 vols. Breslau, 1822; ed. H. 
254 

NOTES 
Poppelbaum, Stuttgart, 1922); 'Die gegenwartige Zeit' (2 pts. Berlin, 1817); 
'Uber die Idee der Universitaten' (Berlin, 1809: ed. Spranger, Leipzig, 1910); 
'Karikaturen des Heiligsten' (2 pts. Leipzig, 1819-1822); 'Von der falschen 
Theologie und dem wahren Glauben' (Breslau, 1823). Steffens' autobiography, 
though not always reliable on details, is one of the main sources for the history 
of the German romantic movement; see 'Was ich erlebte' (10 vols. Breslau 
1840-1844 tr. W. L. Gage, Boston, Mass., 1863). S. T. Coleridge made a close 
study of many of Steffens' works. 
See Harald Beyer's article in 'Norsk Biografisk Leksikon' vol. XIV pp. 457-
471 (Oslo, 1967); Wilhelm Rudloff 'Heinrich Steffens padagogische Anschau-
ungen' (Diss. Jena, 1914); Else Huesmann 'Heinrich Steffens in seiner Beziehung 
zur deutschen Friihromantik' (Kiel, 1929). Martin Meissner 'Heinrich Steffens 
als Religionsphilosoph' (Breslau, 1936); Elisabeth Achterberg 'Heinrich Steffens 
und die Idee des Volkes' (Wfirzburg, 1938); V. Waschnitus 'Heinrich Steffens' 
(Neumiinster, 1939). Ingeborg M011er 'Henrik Steffens' (Oslo, 1948). 
32,1 
'Betrachtungen fiber die besondere Bildung und die inneren Verhaltnisse 
unseres Planetensystems' ('Schellings Werke' ed. M. Schroter, Munich, 1962) 
first supplementary volume pp. 502-560. 
On account of some supposed analogy between the planets and the metals, 
the same signs were used for both, i.e. ~ for Mercury and quicksilver: ~ for 
Venus and copper: b' for Mars and iron: 2.j. for Jupiter and tin: Ii for Saturn 
and lead. There were many variations of this analogy. Philo stratus the Athenian 
(c. 170-245), in his 'The Life of Apollonius of Tyana' (tr. Conybeare 2 vols., 
London, 1903), tells how Apollonius got into philosophical conversation with 
someone who gave him, 'seven rings, named according to the planets, and to 
be worn on the days belonging to them. The golden ring was to be worn on 
Sunday, the silver ring on Monday, the iron ring on Tuesday, the mercurial 
ring on Wednesday, the tin ring on Thursday, the copper ring on Friday, and 
the lead ring on Saturday.' See J. C. Wiegleb (1732-1800), 'Geschichte des 
Wachsthums und der Erfindungen in der Chemie in der altesten und mittlern 
Zeit' (Berlin, 1792) p. 106. This work was a translation of two Latin treatises 
by Torbern Bergman (1735-1784) 'De primordiis Cherniae' (Uppsala, 1779), 
and 'Historiae Chemiae' (Uppsala, 1782), and was the best source for the early 
history of chemistry easily available to Hegel. Cf. Rudolf Koch 'The Book of 
Signs' (tr. V. Holland, Dover Publications, no date). 
32,14 
See the note III. 275. 
32. 15 
See the note III. 361. 
255 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
32,19 
Hegel evidently has in mind the use Ptolemy made of Pythagorean principles: 
see I. During 'Ptolemaios und Porphyrios uber die Musik' ('Goteborgs hog-
skolas arskrift' vol. 40, 1934): L. van der Waerden 'Die Harmonielehre der 
Pythagoreer' ('Hermes' 58, Berlin, 1944): C. v. Jan 'Die Harmonie der Spharen' 
('Philologus' 52, GOttingen, 1894): T. H. Martin 'Hypothese astronomique de 
Pythagore' ('Bullettino di ... storia della scienze' vol. V 1872). 
Kepler mentions Pythagoras seventeen times in 'Harmonice Mundi' (Linz, 
1619, ed. Caspar, Munich, 1940). 
32,20 
Michelet took this passage from Hegel's notes of 1805/6, see Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) pp. 31-32. As Hegel makes 
no mention of Paracelsus but speaks merely of 'the ancients', as he also makes 
no reference to the four cardinal virtues, and as Michelet changed the rest of 
the passage quite considerably, it may be worthwhile to give the original, ,'l)ie 
2U ten fagten, bet itbifd)e srot.\Jet 
befte~e aus ill1etfurius, IE d)1tlefel, 
lEal5 
unb 
aus bet jungftiiuHd)en 
~be. 'l)et ill1etfutius ift bie 
ill1etaUitiit, bie ithifd)e ~atbe, fliiHige lEid)felbftgleid)~eit, an Itleld)er bet $to5en 
fid) iiunetHd) bediiuft unb bie ~ubftan5 unbetii~tt liint, bet IE d) Itl e f el bie 
)3etbtennHd.Jfeit, ban bas ~euet i~m nid)ts ~tembes, fonbem et bie fid) bet .. 
5e~tenbe m!itflid)feit besfelben ift. 'l)as ~al5 (ift) fein 2lufgeloftfein (in bas) 
gleid)giiUige \Reale, .8etfaUen bes ~euets in ~elbftiinbige, hie iungftiiuHd)e 
~tb e, enbHd) bie einfad)e Unfd)ulb biefet )Beltlegung, bas ~ubieft, bas bie 
)3edilgung Mefer ill10mente iW. 
Both Michelet and Hegel are probably confusing the writings of various 
authors. J. R. Partington, in 'A History of Chemistry' vol. II pp. II5-IS1 
(London, 1961) says that Paracelsus recognized the four Aristotelian elements of 
ftre, air, water and earth, but thought that they appeared in the form of the 
three principles of sulphur, mercury and salt. 
Hegel's general interpretation of these 'elements' is clearly the correct one. 
Paracelsus for example regarded sulphur as the principle of combustibility 
(ftre and air), mercury as the principle of fusibility and volatility (water), and 
salt as the principle of ftxity and incombustibility. If Hegel did have Paracelsus 
in mind here, his inaccuracy in matters of detail is probably due to the contradic-
tions in Paracelsus's own writings, the confused doctrines of his followers, such 
as Peter Severinus (1542-1602), Jospeh Du Chesne (1544-1609), and Oswald 
Croll, see 'Basilica Chymica' (Frankfurt, 1609, Eng. tr. London, 1670), or 
vagueness in the general accounts of iatrochemistry available to him. See T. A. 
Rixner and T. Siber 'Leben und Lehrmeinungen beruehmter Physiker am Ende 
des XVI. und am Anfange des XVII Jahrhunderts' (7 vols. Sulzbach, 1819-1826; 
2nd ed. 1829): articles by R. Hooykaas in 'Janus' 1935 pp. 175-187: 1937 pp. 
1-28. 

NOTES 
32,36 
Hegel presents a full-scale assessment of Jacob Boehme in his 'Lectures on the 
History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. III 
pp. 188-216. See 'Boehmes Samtliche Schriften' (II vols. ed. A. Faust, Stutt-
gart, 1942 E). 
Most of Boehme's works were translated into English during the course of the 
seventeenth century, and had a great influence upon English writers: see W. 
Struck 'Der Einfluss Jakob Boehmes auf die englische Literatur des 17. Jahr-
hunderts' (Berlin, 1936). Newton studied the 'Life of Jakob Boehme' (London 
1654) by Durant Hotham (c. 1617-1691) with great care, and took extensive 
notes on Boehme's works (see L. T. More 'Isaac Newton' New York, 1962 
pp. 25 and 159). 
John Pordage (1607-1681), the rector of Bradfield in Berkshire, attempted 
to evolve a consistent physical doctrine out of Boehme's writings, see 'Theologia 
Mystica' (London, 1683, Germ. tr. 1698), 'A Treatise of Eternal Nature' 
(London, 1770). Mrs. Jane Leade (1623-1704), who helped Pordage to form the 
Philadelphian Society on Boehmenist principles in 1670, acquired Francis Lee 
(1661-1719) of St. John's College Oxford as a son-in-law, and it was through 
Lee, who later studied medicine at Leyden, that the writings of this group 
became known in Germany. See F. Roth-Scholtz (1687-1736) 'Ein grundlich 
Philosophisch Sendschreiben vom rechten und wahren Steine der Weissheit' 
in 'Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum' (Nuremberg, 1728). C£ J. F. Pierer 
'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' vol. 8 pp. 237-239 (Altenburg, 1829): G. A. 
Alleman 'A critique of some philosophical aspects of the mysticism of Jakob 
Boehme' (philadelphia, 1932). 
34,12 
Cf. Hegel's 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (3 vols. tr. Haldane and 
Simson, London, 1963) vol. I p. 298 and pp. 310 to 139: F. G. Sturz 'Empedoc1es 
Agrigentinus' (Leipzig, 1805). Hegel also knew of Empedoc1es from Aristotle's 
works: see for example the 'Physics' (tr. Wicksteed and Cornford, 2 vols. 
Loeb, 1929, 1934): see I iv (187a 12-188a 19), 'The other school to which 
Empedoc1es and Anaxagoras belong, start from the first with both unity and 
multiplicity, for they assume an undistinguished confusion, from which the 
constituents are sifted out ... Empedoc1es has only his four so-called elements 
.•. (and) was ... sounder in assuming a small limited number of prime sub-
stances.' W. D. Ross, in his 'Aristotle's Physics' (Oxford, 1936) p. 487 comments 
as follows on this passage, 'Apart from being true to the facts, the theory that 
o/Lom8fj can be produced out of simpler elements distinct from themselves has 
the scientific advantage that it enables us to do with a smaller number of ultimate 
elements, as Empedoc1es in fact does. The principle enunciated is the ancestor of 
Occam's razor.' 
The fragment in which Empedoc1es propounds his theory of the elements is 
I 
257 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to be found in Hermann Diels' 'Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker' (2 vols. 
Berlin, 1906, 1910) vol. I p. 175. 
'Hear the four roots of all things: 
Shining Zeus, life-bringing Hera, Aidoneus, 
And Nestis, whose tear-drops are a well-spring to mortals.' 
J. Burnet, in his 'Early Greek Philosophy' (London, 1908) pp. 263-266 discusses 
the significance of the deities mentioned, and comes to the conclusion that 
Zeus is air, Hera earth, Aidoneus fire, and Nestis water. Cf. Jean Bollack 
'Empedocle. Introduction a l'ancienne physique' (Paris, 1965). 
34, 17 
'unb e!3 ift bann ba!3 3ntereffe be!3@ebanfen!3'. C£ the note III. 382. 
35,21 
In his 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 
London, 1963) vol. II pp. 176-179, Hegel discusses Aristotle's treatment of the 
elements of earth, fire, air and water, and praises him for attempting to assess 
them dialectically. He criticizes Empedocles' interpretation of these elements 
(op. cit. I pp. 313-316) because it tended to call in question the reality of process. 
He takes Anaxagoras' interpretation of the elements to be substantially the same 
as that of early nineteenth century organic chemists (op. cit. I pp. 334-339). The 
treatment of the elements by the Stoics he regards as being merely derivative, 
and of no philosophic interest (op. cit. II pp. 245-246). 
35,28 
'5-.58. ~ffan5-enfiifte, noc~ me~t bas ~nimanfcI;e.' See the notes III. 277, 284, 
329, 336,337 etc. 
35, 31 
,~er bie WCHte, ba!3 l:J~t)fifa1ifcI;e inbitlibueUe ~notganifcI;e, ift ba!3 .\)ad~ 
niidigftel • ,.\)adniidig' has the meaning of 'stiff necked', 'stubborn', 'obstinate'. 
It was given wide currency in German through Luther's translation of the 
Bible: see II Kings XVII 14, Isaiah XLVIII 4. 
35,34 
The various meanings attached to this word by the physicists of Hegel's 
day, the great advances made in pneumatics, pneumatic chemistry and micro-
biology since that time, and Hegel's reference to Greek theories when intro-
ducing this subject, make it very easy to misinterpret this paragraph. 
In section (a), Hegel deals very vaguely with the general properties of gaseous-
ness as they were understood at that time. In contemporary English terminology 
the gaseous state as such was referred to as 'elementary air' which was taken to 
have the 'mechanical properties and effects' of fluidity, weight, and elasticity: 
258 

NOTES 
see for example Charles Hutton's 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dic-
tionary' (2 vols. London, 1796); c£ Newton's 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) 
quest. 3 r. There is an excellent survey of this branch of the subject as it was 
treated in Germany towards the end of the 1820'S in 'Gehler's Physikalisches 
Worterbuch' vol. IV (Leipzig, 1828) pp. 1012-1074. 
In section (b), Hegel deals with the particular properties of gaseousness. 
Joseph Priestley (1733-1804), in his 'Experiments and observations on different 
kinds of air' (London, 1772, Germ. tr. 3 pts. Leipzig and Vienna, 1778, 1779), 
and John Pringle (1707-1782), in his 'A discourse on the different kinds of air' 
(London, 1774) laid the foundations of modem pneumatic chemistry. By the 
end of the 1820'S, twenty four separate gases had been identified, but Hegel 
refused to regard these discoveries as affecting his theory of gaseousness. Much 
of the corrosion, disintegration and dispersion described by him would now be 
explained chemically or in the light of microbiology. 
In section (c) Hegel deals with the characteristics of gaseousness which should 
have been presented in section (a), and uses an experiment with atmospheric air 
to illustrate the transition to fire. 
As so many of the characteristics of gaseousness are dependent upon temper-
ature, this § should have beenprecededby§§ 303-306. Cf.JohnDalton (1766-1844) 
'On the expansion of gases by heat' ('Memoirs of the Manchester Literary and 
Philosophical Society' 1802), 'Upon the whole therefore I see no sufficient reason 
why we may not conclude, that all elastic fluids under the same pressure expand 
equally by heat-and that for any given expansion of mercury, the corresponding 
expansion of air is proportionally something less, the higher the temperature.' 
36,4 
,hie tlethadjUoje, abet idjleidjelthe ulth 3e~telthe Wladjt'. 
36,22 
Cf. 'Hegel's Science of Logic' (2 vols. tr. Johnston and Struthers, London, 
1961) II pp. 460-465: 'Hegel's "Philosophy of Right''' (tr. Knox, Oxford, 1962) 
pp. 86-104: 'The good is the Idea, as unity of the Notion of the will with the 
particular will.' 
3705 
As late as 18I1 Sigismund Hermbstadt (1760-1833) had to make the point 
that there is no such thing as a general odorous matter (ffiie c~fto ff, spiritus rectus) 
modified into the various smells, but that all odours are particular, and are in 
fact effiuvia, disseminated by the air ('Magazin der Berliner Gesellschaft natur-
forschender Freunde' Berlin, 18I1. IV s. III vol. IV): cf. G. F. Hildebrandt 
(1764-1816) 'Anfangsgriinde der Chemie' (3 vols. Erlangen, 1794-1802) vol. 
III pp. 895 and958: K. G. Hagen (1749-1829) 'Grundsatze der Chemie' (Konigs-
berg, 1796) p. 99. 
259 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Johann Georg Steinbuch in his 'Beitrag zur Physiologie der Sinne'( Nurem-
berg, 18II) p. 304, considers the possibility of there being 'odorous rays' 
(lRiec~ftra~len), by means of which smells are propagated. 
Robert Boyle (1627-1691) seems to have initiated research into the rate at 
which bodies dissipate into the air. He notices for example that a grain of musk 
will perfume a room for twenty years despite constant changes of air. ('Essays of 
Strange Subtilty' London, 1673): cf. A. von Haller 'Elementa physiologiae 
corporis humani' (Lausanne, 1757-1760) vol. V bk. 14 sect. 2 § 3. 
37,23 
Hegel deals at some length with the philosophy of identity in his 'Logic' 
(tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) §§ !O3, II8: c£ 'Hegel's Science of Logic' (tr. 
Johnston and Struthers, London, 1961) vol. II pp. 37-43, and Hegel's treatment 
of Schelling in 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 
3 vols. London, 1963) esp. pp. 524-540. 
Hegel may well have in mind the following passage in Schelling's 'Fernere 
Darstellung aus dem System der Philosophie' (1802) ,$lie etoige 91atur a110 
ober hie etoige Wlaterie ~aIt aUe g:ormen ebenfo in fief), toie hie abfo1ute Grin~eit 
itber~au+,t aUe g:ormen, namIief) fo, bae in jeber fitr fief) ®n~eit unb ~ieI~eit 
ein~, jebe a1fo fitr fief) ein Uniberfum ift.' ('Schellings Werke' ed. M. Schroter. 
Erster Erganzungsband, Munich, 1962 p. 477). 
In German philosophical terminology 'matter' is generally regarded in the 
Aristotelian manner as the still unshaped and primary substance opposed to 
form: see C. Baeumker 'Das Problem der Materie in der griechischen Philoso-
phie' (Munster, 1890); F. Liebe 'Vorstellungen vom Aufbau der Materie im 
Wandel der Zeiten' (Vienna, 1953). Cf. B. Russell 'The Analysis of Matter' 
(Dover Publications, 1962). 
37,25 
,$lie 2uft reinigt fief), tlertoanbeIt mUe5 in 211ft, ift nief)t eammeI1unum bon 
Wlaterien'. A ,eammeIfunum' is a hotchpotch, a mish-mash, a gallimaufry, a 
hash, a medley. The word was coined by North German university students 
about 1650, and originally meant a meal consisting of sour or pickled oddments. 
37, 34 
Jean Baptiste Biot (1774-1862) began his investigations on gases in 1806, when 
he worked with D. F. J. Arago (1786-1853) on their refractive properties. The 
passage quoted by Hegel is taken from his 'Traite de physique experimentale et 
mathematique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. I p. 188. In it, Biot in his turn is quoting 
a conclusion reached by L. J. Gay-Lussac (1778-1850) after much experimen-
tation (see the following note). 
260 

NOTES 
38, I2 
As early as 1662, Robert Boyle (1627-1691) had shown that the pressure 
of a given mass of gas varies inversely as the volume provided that the tem-
perature remains constant. In 1802 ('Annales de Chimie' vol. 43 p. 137 ff: 
'Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. XII p. 255) John Dalton (1766-1844) and 
1. J. Gay-Lussac (1778-1850), by investigating the expansion of gases with 
change of temperature, discovered that the volume of a gas under constant 
pressure increased by 1/267th part of its volume at o°C for each 1°C rise in 
temperature. 
F. Delaroche (1743-1812) and J. E. Berard (1789-1869) experimented with 
air, oxygen, hydrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and 
ethylene, and discovered that equal volumes of the permanent gases have the 
same thermal capacity, but that the thermal capacities of compound condensable 
gases vary. From experiments on air at pressures of 740 mm. and 1000 mm., 
they found the specific heats to be 269 and 245 respectively, and concluded that 
the specific heat diminished with increase of pressure. ('Annales de chimie' 1813 
vol. 85 p. 72). 
P. 1. Dulong (1785-1838), building on Laplace's suggestion ('Annales de 
chimie' 1816 p. 238) that the rapid compressions and rarefactions occurring in the 
propagation of sound are perfectly adiabatic and that it is therefore necessary to 
take account of the rise of temperature due to compression in calculating the 
velocity of sound, compared the velocities of sound in different gases ('Annales 
de chimie' 1829 p. 156). As the result of these experiments and observations, he 
discovered that the changes of temperature at the same . compression, stand in 
inverse ratio to the specific heats of a constant volume, and concluded from this 
that equal volumes of all gases under the same conditions evolve on compression 
the same quantity of heat. By this means he showed that the heat evolved in the 
compression of a gas is proportional to the energy expended in compressing it. 
This confirmed the conclusion reached theoretically by N. L. S. Carnot (1796-
1832), and published in his 'Reflexions sur la puissance motrice du feu et les 
machines propres a developper cette puissance' (Paris, 1824 Germ. tr. Leipzig, 
1892, Eng. tr. Thurston, London, 1890), 'The motive power obtainable from 
heat is independent of the agents employed to realize it. The efficiency is fixed 
solely by the temperatures of the bodies between which, in the last resort, the 
transfer of heat is effected.' 
By the end of the 1820'S therefore, scientists were well on the way to laying 
the foundations of modern thermodynamics. Hegel evidently ceased to follow 
developments in this branch of science after about 1810, when the caloric theory 
of heat had still not been conclusively refuted (see 'Annales de chimie' 1813 p. 
72). 
The pneumatic tinder-box or tachopyrion which he mentions here, was 
fIrst devised by a worker in the munitions factory at :Etienne. Joseph Izarn 
(I 766-c. 1834) gave an account of the gadget in his 'Lithologie atmospherique' 
26I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(Paris, 1803), and Joseph Mollet (1758-1829), professor of physics at the uni-
versity of Lyons published a short note on it in Journal de Physique' vol. 58 
p. 457 (paris, 1804). M. A. Pictet (1752-1825), in 'Sur l'echauffement des 
projectiles par leur frottement contre l' air' ('Bibliotheque Britannique' vol. 23 
pp. 331-336, Geneva, 1803) mentioned an earlier English version of this gadget. 
A certain M. Dumotiez of Paris gave it the name of 'briquet pneumatique' 
(Journal de Physique' vol. 62 p. 189 Paris, 1806), and put it into commercial 
production. The transparent cylinder mentioned by Hegel was one of Dumotiez' s 
gimmicks. He also manufactured a miniature model, which fitted into the top 
of a walking cane. It was realized that the piston had to be forced in rapidly, but 
no particular attention was paid to this fact in the early attempts at explaining 
the phenomenon. Paul Erman (1764-1851) performed various experiments with 
different kinds of tinder, some of which were repeated by L. W. Gilbert 
(1769-1824): see 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. 18 pp. 240-249 and p. 407 
(Halle, 1804). U. R. T. Le Bouvier-Desmortier (1739-1827) reported that given 
a certain kind of tinder, when the cylinder is filled with hydrogen, carbon 
dioxide, nitrogen, or oxygen, no combustion takes place. (Journal de Physique' 
Aug. 1808). 
39, 12 
,~ie etfte 2I:Ugemein'f)eit ift tobte 2I:ffitmation/. This characterization of air 
should be compared with § 282. 
39,19 
Cf. §§ 257-259: also § 350 and § 351. See 'De combustionis lentae 
phaenomenis, quae vitam constituant' (Jena, 1804) by J. F. Ackermann 
(1765-1815). 
39,23 
Cf. § 334 Addition sect. h. 
39,34 
John Mayow (1640-1679), in his 'Tractatus quinque medico-physici' (Oxford, 
1674, Germ. tr. Jena. 1799, Eng. tr. Edinburgh 1907) put forward ideas on 
combustion which are very similar to modern ones. He noticed the similarity 
between the processes of respiration and combustion, and showed that one 
constituent of the atmosphere, which he termed 'spiritus nitro-aereus' is essential 
to combustion and life, and that the second constituent, which he termed 'spiritus 
nitri acidi', inhibi ts combustion and life. See J. A. Schere 'Beweis, dass J. Mayow 
vor hundert Jahren den Grund zur antiphilogistischen Chemie und Physiologie 
gelegt hat' (Vienna, 1793). 
Georg Ernst Stahl (1660-1734), in his 'Zymotechnia fundamentalis' (Halle, 
1697) postulated 'phlogiston' in an attempt to explain fire. According to his 
262 

NOTES 
theory, combustibility is due to this' element', which is present in all combustible 
bodies in an amount proportional to their degree of combustibility. All sub-
stances which can be burnt he therefore regarded as being composed of phlogis-
ton and some other substance, and the operation of burning he took merely to 
be a liberation of phlogiston. 
In 1774 J. Priestley obtained oxygen by igniting mercuric oxide, and gave it 
the name 'dephlogisticated air'. A. L. Lavoisier repeated Priestley's experiment 
and then showed that combustion is simply an oxidation, the oxygen of the 
atmosphere combining with the substance burnt. These discoveries should have 
put an end to Stah1's theory, but it lingered on. Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 
could still write in 1796 that, 'Fire is a distinct fluid, capable of being transferred 
from one body to another.' ('A Math. Phil. Dict,' 2 vols., London, 1796), and 
Hegel's treatment of fire as an element might have passed muster in certain 
circles as late as 1815. 
Nevertheless, if this defmition of combustion is closely considered, it will be 
found to be not incompatible with Lavoisier's discovery, and not irretrievably 
at odds with Carnot's defmition of heat (note II. 261). Hegel is probably at-
tempting to avoid a purely chemical explanation of combustion, and in so far 
as this exposition is preceded by a consideration of gaseousness and superseded 
by a treatment of liquidity, it has its merits. 
39, 35 
,'l)a~ anbere ((£:lement) ift ba~ ineuttalel • This version is suggested by Nicolin 
and O. Poggeler in their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959). They 
have taken it from § 228 of the Heidelberg Encyclopaedia (ed. Glockner, 
Stuttgart, 1956) p. 180. Michelet's version: ,'l)a~ anbere ift bas ineutrale
l
• 
40, 15 
Cf. The assessment of Thales in 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (tr. 
Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London 1963) I pp. 171-185; see also pp. 191, 
194,291- 2,313-315. 
41,12 
In regarding the formation of steam and ice from water as a change in 
chemical quality, Hegel was evidently influenced by the experiments performed 
by G. C. Lichtenberg (1742-1799). Lichtenberg boiled water to remove the air 
from it, and then froze it in a vacuum. He discovered that it formed a spumes-
cence full oflarge bubbles, and concluded that the gas must have originated from 
the breakdown of the water: see J. C. P. Erxleben (1744-1777) 'Anfangsgriinde 
der Naturlehre' (6th edit. ed. G. C. Lichtenberg, Gottingen, 1794) § 426 
Zusatz. Cf. the note II, 268. G. F. Parrot (1767-1852) performed similar 
experiments and came to the same conclusion as Lichtenberg: see his 'Grundriss 
der theoretischen Physik' (3 pts. Riga and Leipzig, 1809-1815) pt. 2 p. 66. G. W. 
263 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Muncke (1772-1847) however, in his 'Ueber das Schiesspulver' (Marburg, 1817) 
described a number of experiments of this kind in which water from melted 
snow always gave rise to ice with bubbles in it, while boiled water did not. 
In Hegel's day, the difference between these results was usually ascribed to 
the different temperatures of the ice. Lichtenberg said that the ice was 'very 
cold', and Parrot that it was reduced to -18°R, while Muncke supplied no 
details as to temperature. C£ 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. III p. 
II2 (Leipzig, 1827). 
41, 13 
The pressures exerted by steam, gunpowder and freezing water constituted 
the most powerful expansive forces known at that time: see P. van Musschen-
broek (1692-1761) 'Tentam experimentorum in Acad. del Cimento captorum' 
(Leyden, 1731); G. F. Parrot (1767-1852) 'Grundriss der theoretischen Physik' 
(3 pts. Riga and Leipzig, 1809-1815) pt. 2 p. 59; 'Transactions of the Royal 
Society of Edinburgh' vol. II. 
Parrot (op. cit. II p. 67) attributed this expansion to the air contained in the 
water, but this was questioned by G. W. Muncke (1772-1847) in his 'Ueber das 
Schiesspulver' (Marburg, 1817) p. 97, who found that ice devoid of air still 
expanded at the same rate. John Dalton (1766-1854), in his 'A new System of 
Chemical Philosophy' (London, 1808, Germ. tr. 1808 vol. I p. 155), tried to 
explain this expansion as a change in the aggregation of the constituent parts of 
water and ice. The maximum density of water occurs at about 4°C. Above this 
point water continuously expands, and at no temperature is it less dense than 
ice. In 1849 James Thomson (1822-1892) showed that ice can be melted by 
increase of pressure, and calculated that every additional atmosphere of pressure 
the freezing point of water is lowered by .0075°C. 
41,21 
Hegel only deals with water in this paragraph, but if these remarks are taken 
to apply to the liquid state in general, the reason for his treating water as an 
'element' becomes more apparent. 
John Dalton (1766-1844), in his 'On the Force of Steam or Vapour from 
Water and various other Liquids' (1801) came to the conclusion that, 'There 
can scarcely be a doubt entertained respecting the reducibility of all elastic 
fluids of whatever kind into liquids; and we ought not to despair of effecting 
it in low temperatures and by strong pressures exerted on the unmixed gases'. 
Cf. Michael Faraday's experiments, 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1823 pp. 160-165 
and 189-198, and his 'Historical statement respecting the liquefaction of gases' 
('Quarterly Journal of Science' 1824 pp. 229-240). 
Nevertheless, there was still no certainty with regard to the principle involved 
in liquidity. Faraday failed to liquefy hydrogen, oxygen, fluoboric and phos-
phuretted hydrogen gases; T. von Grotthuss (1785-1822) attempted to explain 
264 

NOTES 
fluidity by means of the influence of Galvanism upon atoms ('Gilbert's Annalen 
der Physik' vol. 61 p. 63); Laplace postulated the three forces of attraction, heat, 
and repulsion in accounting for the arrangement of the 'molecules' in solid, 
fluid or gaseous states ('Annales de Chimie et Physique' vol. XXI p. 22); H. F. 
Link (1767-1851) tentatively put forward theories involving attraction and 
repulsion etc: see 'Ueber Naturphilosophie' (Leipzig, 1806) p. 175, and 'Gilbert's 
Annalen der Physik' vol. 47 p. 1. 
Hegel seems to have accepted the main point, i.e. that there is an 'element' of 
liquidity, and then merely illustrated this basic state from its most common 
natural occurrence as water. 
4J, 35 
In the ordinary terminology of Hegel's day this 'element' was known not as 
,~tbigfeit, but as ,~eftigfeit' (soliditas, solidity). The relation between solidity 
and the other 'elements' was generally treated as a matter of cohesion and 
elasticity: see Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. IV pp. 198-199 (Leipzig 
1827). 
44,18 
See for example Thomas Charles Hope (1766-1844). 'Observations on the 
contraction of water by heat, at low temperatures' ('Transactions of the Edin-
burgh Royal Society' 1805 vol. V pp. 379-405). C£ Thomas Birch (1705-1766) 
'History of the Royal Society' (4 vols. London, 1756-7) iv pp. 253-263. 
44, 24 
'shift into another genus.' See Aristotle 'De Caelo' (tr. Stocks, Oxford, 1922) 
Book I i, 268b I, 'We cannot pass beyond body to a further kind ... For if we 
could, it would cease to be true that body is complete magnitude.' 
44,27 
This is a reference to the frictional electrical machines, the first of which was 
devised by Otto von Guericke (1602-1686) about 1663: see his 'Exper. nova de 
vacuo spatio' (Amsterdam, 1672) p. 240. These machines were usually operated 
manually, and transformed mechanical work into electric energy in the form of 
electrostatic charges of opposites sign delivered to separate conductors. Jesse 
Ramsden (1735-1800) and Edward Nairn (1726-1806) designed the most 
popular English versions of these machines. After William Nicholson (1753-
1815) had described his 'influence' machine ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1788 p. 403), 
these frictional machines rapidly became obsolete. See J. Gray 'Electrical 
Influence Machines, their Development and modem Forms' (London, 1903): 
J. Clerk Maxwell 'Treatise on Electricity' (2nd ed. Oxford, 1881) vol. I p. 294; 
'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. III pp. 413-473 (Leipzig, 1827). 
1* 
265 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
44,33 
As early as 1708, a certain Dr. Wall suggested that the light and crackling 
produced when amber is rubbed, might constitute the same phenomenon as 
lightning and thunder ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' XXVI 1708 no. 314). J. A. 
Nollet (1700-1770), in his 'Les:ons de physique experimentale' (6 vols. Paris, 
1743 :1750, Germ. tr. 3 pts. Leipzig, 1771) vol. IV p. 314 showed approval for 
the hypothesis that thunder and lightning are in the hands of nature what 
electricity is in the hands of man, and that the clouds correspond exactly to man's 
electrical machines. J. H. Winkler (1703-1770) put forward a very similar view 
in his 'Von der Starke der elektrischen Kraft des Wassers in glasernen Gefassen' 
(Leipzig, 1746). 
Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), by flying a kite from a wire string in a 
thunderstorm, and by charging phials etc. by means of the electricity conducted 
by the wire, showed that the clouds change from positive to negative electricity 
several times in the course of one thunder-gust, and that atmospheric electricity 
is essentially the same as that produced in the laboratory: see: 'New experiments 
and observations on electricity' (London, 1751, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1758): 'Dr. 
Benjamin Franklins nachgelassene Schriften' (3 vols. Weimar, 1818). 
It is not at all clear why Hegel should have chosen to ignore this evidence, 
although there was no distinct idea at that time of the nature of the electric 
potential in the atmosphere. Hegel is thinking perhaps of the 'Neue Ideen tiber 
Meteorologie' (Berlin, 1788), by J. A. Deluc (1727-1817), in which it is suggested 
that lightning is not stored in the clouds and then discharged, but is engendered 
at the very moment at which it appears. 
45,9 
Aristotle 'The Physics' (tr. Wicksteed and Cornford, 2 vols. Loeb, 1929, 
1934): see esp. 205a, 'It is impossible that all the universe, even if it be limited, 
should be or should become any single one of the elements as Heraclitus sup-
posed, when he said that all things sometime become fire. Against this the same 
argument can be urged as applies to the undifferentiated unity or matrix such as 
some physicists have assumed in addition to the elements; for things always 
change from one term of an opposition to the other, from hot to cold, for 
instance.' Aristotle gives a more fully worked out account of this in 'De Gener-
atione et Corruptione' (tr. Forster, Loeb, 1955) 328b-334b. 
F. E. D. Schleiermacher (1768-1834), Hegel's colleague at Berlin, first collected 
the fragments of Heraclitus in a systematic manner: see his 'Herakleitos der 
dunkle, von Ephesos' (F. A. Wolf and P. Buttmann 'Museum der Alter-
thumswissenschaft' vol. I, Berlin, 1808). Hegel probably has in mind the 
following fragments: 
20. This world, which is the same for all, no one of gods or men has made; 
but it was ever, is now, and shall be an ever-living Fire, with measures kindling, 
and measures going out. 
266 

NOTES 
21. The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea; and half of the sea is 
earth, half whirlwind. 
22. All things are an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, even as wares 
for gold, and gold for wares. 
23. It becomes liquid sea, and is measured by the same tale as before it 
became earth. 
24. Fire is want and surfeit. 
25. Fire lives the death of air, and air lives the death of fire; water lives the 
death of earth, earth that of water. 
26. Fire in its advance will judge and convict all things. 
The numbering given here is that found in I. Bywater's 'Heracliti Ephesii 
Reliquiae' (Oxford, 1877). Hermann Diels' 'Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker' 
(ed. Kranz, Berlin, 1934) gives the generally accepted order of these fragments. 
C£ G. S. Kirk 'Heraclitus. The Cosmic Fragments' (Cambridge, 1954): P. 
Wheelwright 'Heraclitus' (Princeton, 1959). 
45,30 
Friedrich Albrecht Karl Gren (1760-1798) was born at Bernburg, where his 
father, a Swede by birth, had been settled long enough to have become natura-
lized. He was educated for the ministry, but after his father's death, he took 
up apothecary work, and by 1779 was in charge of his own apothec at 
Offenbach. 
In 1780 W. B. Trommsdorff (1738-1782), ofErfurt, advised him to take up 
medicine. In 1782 therefore, he began his university studies at Helmstadt. In 
1783 he moved to Halle, where he studied under W. J. Karsten (1732-1787), and 
took his doctorate in 1787. He subsequently married Karsten's daughter, and 
settled down in Halle as a university teacher. His 'Systematisches Handbuch der 
gesammten Chemie' (4 pts. Halle, 1787-1791) proved to be very serviceable, 
and had run to a fourth edition by 1819. It is a lucid and thorough work, and 
contains useful bibliographies covering the whole field of chemistry. 
Hegel is here referring to his 'Grundriss der Naturlehre zum Gebrauch 
akademischer Vorlesungen' (Halle, 1788), which has all the merits of the former 
work, and ran to six editions. As is usual with Hegel, this quotation is not word-
perfect, but seems to have been taken from the fourth edition of the book (Halle, 
1801). E. G. Fischer (1754-1831) edited the fifth edition (Halle, 1808), and made 
certain changes in the terminology. In the sixth edition (ed. K. W. G. Kastner, 
Halle, 1820), the numbering of the paragraphs was completely changed. 
The work by Horace Benedict de Saussure (1740-1799) mentioned by Gren is 
'Essais sur l'Hygrometrie' (Neuchatel, 1783, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1784). A critical 
edition of this book has been published by A. J. von Oettingen: 'Versuch lib';:: 
die Hygrometrie' (Leipzig, 1900). 
Saussure was born at Geneva, and under the influence of his father, Nicolas 
de Saussure (1709-1790), an eminent agriculturalist, and his maternal uncle, 
267 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Charles Bonnet (1720-1793), devoted himself in his early years to botany. In 
1762 he published his first botanical work, and in the same year was appointed 
professor of philosophy at the academy of Geneva, a post which he held until 
1789. In the autmnn of 1768 he visited England, and was elected Fellow of the 
Royal Society. 
From 1773 onwards he began a systematic study of the geology and topo-
graphy of the Alps, and gave an account of his expeditions and observations in 
'Voyages dans les Alpes' (4 vols. Geneva 1779-1796). His geological observations 
made him a fum believer in the neptunian theory (note III. 218). 
In his 'Essais sur I'Hygrometrie', se Saussure describes a new hygrometer of 
his own construction, based on the fact that a hair will stretch when it is 
moistened, and contract when dried. J. A. Deluc (1727-1817), in his 'Idees sur la 
meteorologie' (2 vols. London, 1786/7), and in two papers read to the Royal 
Society ('Phil. Trans.' 1791 pp. 1 and 389), pointed out the unreliability of this 
instrument. Gren and Hegel were evidently unaware of this criticism. 
According to de Saussure, water vapour is essentially a combination of water 
and heat. He assumes however, that this vapour is dissolved in the air, and that it 
reappears as soon as the air is saturated, through the agency of electricity. 
45,39 
As the result of the controversy between James Hutton (1726-1797) and 
J. A. Deluc (1727-1817) concerning the cause of rain (see the following note), 
the Berlin Academy chose this topic as subject for a prize essay. Johann Diedrich 
Otto Zylius (1764-1820), a private tutor from Mecklenburg, was awarded the 
prize for his 'Priifung der Theorie des Herrn Deluc vom Regen' (Berlin, 1795). 
For further details relating to Zylius, see J. G. Meusel 'Das gelehrte Teutschland' 
(Lemgo, 1796-1834). 
In this work Zylius defended Hutton's dissolution theory (Auflosungstheorie), 
against Deluc's theory of transformation. He had already criticized De1uc's 
doctrine of evaporation and rain in an article published in Gren's Journal der 
Physik' (vol. VIII, 1794), and Lichtenberg's objections to the critics of the 
phlogiston theory in an earlier article (Gren's Journal' vol. VI, 1792). Con-
sequently, Lichtenberg had good reason to pitch into his prize essay once it was 
published. 
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742-1799): physicist, satirist, aphorist, 
humorist, traveller, art critic, linguist, philologist, Lichtenberg was one of the 
most brilliant and many-sided figures of the German enlightenment. There is an 
excellent characterization of him by Martin Cooper in 'The Listener' (October 
15, 1964): c£ 'Lichtenberg's Commentaries on Hogarth's Engravings' (ed. 
Herdan, Cresset Press, 1966). He dealt most fully with Zylius' work in 'Ver-
theidigung des Hygrometers und der Luc'schen Theorie vom Regen' (ed. 
L. C. Lichtenberg and F. Kries, Gottingen, 1800). He evidently had some doubt 
as to the advisability of publishing this work, partly on account of the 
268 

NOTES 
uncertainty of his own views (see pp. 200--201), and partly on account of the 
boisterous and acid nature of his criticism. The best account of his views on rain 
is to be found in his edition of the 'Anfangsgriinde der Naturlehre' (6th ed. 
G6ttingen, 1794) by J. C. P. Erxleben (1744-1777). As Hegel notes, Lichtenberg, 
in the main, accepted Deluc's theory, mainly because he was convinced of the 
incompetence of those who had questioned it (see p. xliv), but also because it 
accorded well with the phlogiston theory (see pp. 378-381). Despite the literary 
brilliance of Lichtenberg, Zylius' doctrine won the day; his 'Ober den gegen-
wartigen Zustand unserer Kenntnisse von den wassrigen Lufterscheinungen' 
(Haarlem, 1804), was crowned by the Pieter Teyler (1702-1778) Institute a 
decade after his first attempts to refute Deluc, and by the early 1830'S the 
theories of his opponents were no longer regarded as worthy of serious con-
sideration: see 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. VII pp. 1212-1220 
(Leipzig, 1834). 
46,5 
Jean Andre Deluc (1727-1817), the Swiss geologist and meteorologist. In 
1773 he came to England, and received the appointment of reader to Queen 
Charlotte, which he continued to hold for forty four years, and which afforded 
him both leisure and a competent income. He died at Windsor on November 
7, 1817. 
As a philosopher, he was a great admirer of Francis Bacon: see his 'Bacon tel 
qu'il est' (Berlin, 1800). As a geologist he was a determined opponent of the 
vulcanists: see his 'Lettres physiques et morales sur les montagnes' (La Haye, 
1778), and 'Traite elementaire de geologie' (Paris, 1809, Eng. tr. London, 
1809). 
James Hutton (1726-1797), in a paper read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh 
in 1784, put forward the view that the amount of moisture which the air can 
retain in solution increases with augmentation of temperature, and concluded 
from this that when two masses of air of different temperatures mix, a portion 
of the moisture must be condensed and appear in visible form. After investiga-
ting available data regarding rainfall and climate in various regions of the globe, 
he came to the conclusion that rainfall is everywhere regulated by the humidity 
of the air and the causes which promote mixtures of different aerial currents 
in the higher atmosphere: see 'The theory of rain'-'Transactions of the Royal 
Society of Edinburgh' vol. I p. 41 (Edinburgh, 1788): F. A. C. Gren's Journal 
der Physik' vol. IV pp. 413-471 (Leipzig, 1791). 
Hutton initiated the modern view of rain in this paper, but he had called in 
question the theory put forward by Deluc in his 'Recherches sur les modifi-
cations de l'atmosphere' (2 vols. Geneva, 1772), and in his 'Idees sur la meteor-
ologie' (2 vols. London, 178617). He was therefore obliged to defend his 
argument in 'Answers to the objections ofDeluc, with regard to the theory of 
rain' ('Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin.' vol. II p. 39). 
269 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Deluc contended that the amounts of water discharged by the air on certain 
occasions are too great to be explained from Hutton's hypothesis. He objected 
strongly to the theory that water is dissolved in the air, and contended that when 
water evaporates, it changes into a new kind of gas, which cannot be detected 
hygroscopically, but which can change back into water. 
To the meteorologists of the day, this contention appeared to be confirmed 
by the synthesis of water from 'dephlogisticated air' and 'inflammable air' by 
Henry Cavendish (1731-1810), see his 'Experiments on Air' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' Jan. 1784, lxxiv pp. II9-153), and by Lavoisier's famous 'Memoire ou l'on 
prouve par la decomposition de l' eau, que ce fluide n' est point une substance 
simple' ('Memoires de l'Academie des Sciences' April, 1784). 
In 1787 the Dutch chemist Martin van Marum (1750-1837), working with 
the great frictional machine in the Teyler Institute at Haarlem, managed to 
decompose water by means of electric sparks. As the oxygen combined with the 
metal wire however, he thought he had produced only hydrogen: see 'Ver-
handelingen uitgegeeven door Teylers Tweede Genootschap' (Haarlem, 1787) 
Stuk iv p. 144. Soon afterwards J. R. Deiman (1743-1808), Adrien Paets van 
Troostwyk (1752-1837) and John Cuthbertson (d.c. 1845) showed that both 
hydrogen and oxygen are produced by the decomposition of water: see Rozier's 
'Observations sur la Physique' Nov. 1789, vol. xxxv pp. 376-380: Gren's 
'Journal der Physik' 1790 ii p. 131: Nicholson's 'Journal of Philosophy' 1797 i 
p.241. 
Deluc called these discoveries to witness in support of his theories (see his 
'Neue Ideen iiber die Meteorologie' Berlin and Leipzig, 1797 pt. i p. 186 ff), 
and was enthusiasticially backed by Lichtenberg and W. A. Lampadius (1772-
1842). Lampadius proceeded to put the theories to the test in a number of very 
detailed observations: see his 'Versuche und Beobachtungen iiber die Elek-
trizitat und Warme der Atmosphare' (Berlin and Stettin, 1793). Their work 
evidently convinced Hegel, although during the first decades of the new century 
the opposing views steadily gained recognition: see especially John Dalton 
(1766-1844) 'Meteorological Observations and Essays' (London, 1793, 2nd ed. 
London, 1834). 
46,40 
Johann Wilhelm Ritter (1776-1810). Vera (,Philosophie de la Nature, de 
Hegel' I p. 434) takes Hegel's description of Ritter as 'a physicist who died in 
Munich' to be 'somewhat crude'. There seems to be no reason why Hegel 
should have intended it to be derogatory however. 
Ritter was born at Samitz near Hainau in Silesia, and died in Munich on 
January 23, 1810. Before going up to Jena in 1795, he worked as a pharma-
ceutist. Novalis and Herder were two of his closest friends. After university he 
lived as a private gentleman in Gotha and Weimar, and in 1804 was called to 
Munich as a regular member of the Bavarian Academy. In his short period as a 
270 

NOTES 
teacher and research worker he was very active, and made discoveries oflasting 
importance in the spheres of galvanism and physiological electricity. His work 
was little recognized in his own day however. C£ note II. 285. 
Hegel has probably taken the account of this experiment from Ritter's 
'Beytdige zur nahern Kenntniss des Galvanismus' (4 vols. Jena, 1800-1805) 
vol. II pp. 1-54. Ritter first described it in an article published in 'Voigt's 
Magazin fur den neuesten Zustand der Naturkunde' vol. II art. 2 (Sept. 1800). 
Hegel's account is not quite accurate: plate I figure i in Ritter's book makes it 
quite clear the wires do not join through the mercury, and in describing the 
experiment, Ritter speaks of ,bas ~eroinbungsmittel oet)ber ~ n ben a unb 0' 
etc. 
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) discovered the electric battery in 1800, and so 
placed in the hands of investigators the means of maintaining a steady electric 
current. Before that date they had been restricted to the study of the isolated 
electric charges given by frictional electric machines. It was not long before this 
technical advance gave rise to the first discoveries relating to electrolysis. At 
almost the same time as Ritter, William Nicholson (1753-1815) and Anthony 
Carlisle (1768-1840) found that hydrogen and oxygen were evolved at the 
surfaces of gold and platinum wires connected with the terminals of a battery 
and dipped in water. The volume of the hydrogen was about double that of the 
oxygen, and, since this is the ratio in which these elements are combined in 
water, it was concluded that the process consisted essentially in the decomposition 
of water. ('Tilloch's Phil. Mag.' 1800 VII pp. 337-347: 'Nicholson's Journal' 
1801 IV pp. 179-187). 
The conclusion that Ritter drew from his experiment, i.e. that water is a 
chemically simple body, was plausible enough under the circumstances. He 
should however have taken into account the impurities in the water, and the 
chemical changes effected in the mercury and the wires. The first exact quanti-
tative study of electrolytic phenomena was made about 1830 by Michael 
Faraday (1791-1867): see his 'Experimental Researches' (London, 1833). Cf. 
Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) 'Chemical Agencies of Electricity' ('Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807 pp. I-56). 
C£ J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. 4 p. 21 (London, 1964). 
Partington does not discuss this experiment, but mentions another made by 
Ritter, in which the two quantities of water in the tube were separated by con-
centrated sulphuric acid. In this case he was able to criticize the conclusions 
drawn by pointing out that Ritter was not aware that hydrogen could pass 
through the acid. 
47,6 
Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859) and Louis Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778-
1850) published the results of the joint researches mentioned here by Hegel in 
1805: see 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. xx pp. 38-95 (Halle, 1805): 
271 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Journal de Physique' vol. LX pp. 129-168 (Paris, 1805). The samples of air 
were taken from the Theatre franfi:ais however, not from a dancing-hall (Gilbert, 
pp. 87-88, Journal p. ISS), and the conclusion drawn was that 'hie ~uft nut 
fe~t getinge ~etf c~iehen~eiten in i~tet WHi c~ung (hei9t), not that there was 'no 
difference'. By using the eudiometer they found that the air contained about 
21% oxygen, a negligible amount of hydrogen, and that there was very little 
variation in its composition. 
47,20 
See note II. 227. 
47, 34 
This attack is evidently directed at the work of Joseph Black (1728-1799) 
of Edinburgh. Black noticed that if a piece ofice below freezing-point is gradu-
ally heated at a uniform rate, its temperature may be observed to rise regularly 
till the freezing-point is reached. He also noticed that at this point, its tem-
perature ceases to rise, and that during the period in which the melting takes 
place, heat may be supplied without producing any rise in temperature, although 
the same quantity of heat supplied to an equal mass of water would raise its 
temperature to nearly 80cC. It was this heat absorbed in producing a change oj 
state without a rise of temperature that Black called 'latent': see his 'Lectures 
on the Elements of Chemistry' (2 vols. ed. J. Robinson, Edinburgh, 1803, Germ. 
tr. Crell, 4 vols. Hamburg, 1804-5) II op. 108. 
Hegel can hardly be questioning the facts of this and similar experiments. He 
is probably questioning Black's assumption (op. cit. II p. 4) that heat is an im-
ponderable fluid. 
48,34 
Hegel notes in his diary that he discussed this with his teacher at the Stuttgart 
Grammar School, Heinrich David von Cless (1741-1820), when out walking 
with him on July 4, 1785, ,Untet anhetn mad)te id) hie ~tage: toatum es 
im SuHus unh 5l!ugust ~ei~et lei, afS im Suni, too hod) hie 60nne un5 
fid) am meiften 
nii~ete.' See Karl Rosenkranz 'Hegel's Leben' (Berlin, 
1844) pp. 433-434; J. Hoffmeister 'Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung' 
(Stuttgart, 1936) pp. 10-11. Cless explained the phenomenon by stating that 
the stimulation by the sun reached a maximum at midsummer, that this set off 
a reaction in the earth which only reached its maximum a month or so later, 
and that the heat could therefore only be attributed indirectly to the sun itself. 
48,36 
Sir William Edward Parry (1790-1855), on his second expedition to discover 
the North-west Passage (May .I821-0ctober 1823) recorded the following 
temperatures :-
272 

NOTES 
July 1821 
76°W 54°N Mean I07R 
Dec. 1821 65°W 66°N Mean -20oR 
Jan. 1822 65°W 66°N Mean -24°5R 
June 1822 65°W 66°N Mean 009R 
July 1822 65°W 66°N Mean 2°R 
Dec. 1822 64°W 69°N Mean -18°6R 
Jan. 1823 64°W 69°N Mean -2108R 
June 1823 
64°W 69°N Mean o02R 
July 1823 
64°W 69°N Mean 3°6R 
See Journals of a Voyage' etc. (London, 1821-1828), published by the authority 
of the Admiralty. This did not constitute information as to the temperature at 
the 'poles' however, cf. 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. 9 pp. 654-
656 (Leipzig, 1828). What is more, Parry noticed an interesting difference in the 
diurnal changes of temperature, 'The times of maximum and minimum altitude 
appear, however, decidedly to lean to four and ten o'clock, and to follow a law 
directly the reverse, as to time, of that found to obtain in temperate climates, the 
column being highest at four, and lowest at ten o'clock, both A.M. and P .M.' See 
'Narrative of an attempt to reach the North Pole ... in the year 1827' (London 
1829) pp. 53-54· 
Cf. 'Analysis of a Journal of a Voyage' etc. in 'The Edinburgh philosophical 
Journal' vol. V pp. 177-208 (Edinburgh, 1821). 
49,10 
,'Ilie m.\oUenbUbung ift ein @)~ie1 bet ffiebuction bet 2uft ~u ineuttalitCie 
49,29 
C£ Michelet' note II. 60. 
49,37 
This passage is taken from Goethe's 'Meteorologische Nachschrift' to 'The 
Climate of London' (2 vols. London, 1818) by Luke Howard (1772-1864), 
which is to be found in 'Goethe, die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft) sect. I 
vol. 8 pp. 320-322 (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962). This volume also contains 
lines by Goethe in honour of Howard (pp. 233-9), and Howard's account of 
himself, which he sent at Goethe's request (pp. 287-195). 
50,3 
,fief) ag bie auf !:lie @)~itle getriebene inegatil)itCit auffJebt'. 
50,17 
See the notes II. 268-270. 
273 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
50,31 
Hegel, in a marginal note ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' ii p. 7S note I) charac-
terizes this 'extreme point of opposition' as 'electrical tension' (,S,pannung a(s 
(,t{eUri3itiit') . 
51, I 
On the original text ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 7S), it is 'purely electrical 
phenomena' (,teinet (,t(eftti3itiiten'), not 'the unity', which have these 'pure 
fluidities' and not 'material forms' (,geftaltete 9Raterie') as their moments. 
51, 12 
See the note III. 21S. 
51,21 
See the note III. 234. 
51,25 
Interest in animals as weather prophets increased greatly after D. B. Quatre-
mere d'lsjonval (1754-1S30) forecast, from his observation of spiders, that the 
winter of 1794-5 would be particularly severe. This prophecy had an important 
effect on the fate of Holland. Charles Pichegru (1761-1S04), at the head of the 
French army of the Rhine-and-Moselle, crossed the Meuse on October IS, 1794, 
and after taking Nijmwegen, drove the Austrians beyond the Rhine. In accor-
dance with the ordinary tactics of the time, he should then have taken up winter 
quarters, but acting on Quatremere d'lsjonval's advice, he prepared for a 
winter campaign. Beginning this at the end of December, he crossed the Meuse 
and the Waal on ice, and driving the English troops before him, took Utrecht 
and Amsterdam, and soon occupied the whole of Holland. The Dutch ships 
were frozen in the Helder, and were easily taken. See D. B. Quatremere 
d'lsjonval'L'Araneologie' (La Haye, 1797): W. C. Orphal (1773-1S23) 'Die 
Wetterpropheten im Thierreiche' (Leipzig, IS05): K. L. Scharfenberg 'Wetter-
anzeige' (Vienna, ISI9): J. Weber 'Die Spinnen sind Deuter des kommenden 
Wetters' (Landshut, 1800): Luke Howard (1772-1864) 'The Climate of London' 
(2 vols. London, 1818) vol. I table 29. Cf. III. 146, 34. 
52,9 
C£ the notes III. 215, 218. 
52,12 
See Goethe's 'Meteorologische Nachschrift' to Luke Howard's 'The Climate 
of London' (2 vols. London, 181S): 'Goethe, die schriften zur Naturwissen-
schaften' sect. I vol. 8 (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) pp. 330-331, ,m!ie toit nun 
oben 
bie 
Utfad)en 
bet 
58atometet,,~etiinbettlngen teUurifd) genannt 
~aben, io mod)ten toit 
~intoiebet Me @etoittet3uge to,pii d) b.i. ottlid) 
274 

NOTES 
nennen, unb fonnen ba~et nid)t anbets aIs oiUigen, baa eine ~aUifd)e @efeU~ 
fd)aft auf hie @eltJittet im oefonbeten 3U ad)ten untemommen ~at.' 
Goethe is here referring to the programme for a systematic investigation of the 
paths of storms proposed by the Halle Natural Science Society in 1820: see 
'Schweigger's Neues Journal fur Chemie und Physik' vol. 27 article 4 (Nurem-
berg, 1820). Cf. F. W. Remer 'G6the's Witterungs-Deutung' (Berlin, 1834): 
W. ·Wasielewski 'Goethe's meteorologische Studien' (Leipzig, 1910). 
52,22 
See Edmund Halley (1656-1742) 'A historical Account of the tradewinds' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' no. 183 p. 152). In German these winds are known as 
,~affatltJinbe' (Spanish viento de pasada). Their English name evidentlyorigi-
nates from the phrase 'to blow trade', i.e. in constant course or way. In Hegel's 
day, in both German and English, they were often not distinguished from the 
Monsoons: see J. C. P. Erxleben (1744-1777) 'Anfangsgriinde der Naturlehre' 
(ed. Lichtenberg, 6th ed. G6ttingen, 1794) 717: T. Forrest (1729 ?-1802?) 'A 
Treatise on the Monsoons in East India' (London, 1784). 
52,23 
Francis Balfour (fl. 1812) and John Farquhar (1751-1826) took barometer 
readings in Bengal in 1795, and found that there was no change from 6 a.m. 
until 7.30 a.m., that there was a rise from 7.30 until 8.00, a fall from 8 a.m. 
until 3 p.m., no change from 3.00 until 8 p.m., a rise to the level reached at 
9 a.m., and then no further change until sunrise: see 'Asiatick Researches' vol. 
IV p. 217 (Calcutta, 1792). George Wright claimed that the barometrical 
oscillations on Ceylon were so regular, that one could tell the time from them: 
see 'Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' 1822 pp. 386-389. C£ William Roxburgh 
(1751-1815) 'Meteorological Diary kept at Fort St. George on the coast of 
Coromandel' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1780 p. 246). 
52,29 
See Sir William Edward Parry (1790-1855), Journals of the First, Second and 
Third Voyages for the discovery of a North-West Passage' (5 vols. London, 
1828). These journals contain many descriptions of the aurora borealis see I p. 
227, III p. 169, IV pp. 209-210, V pp. 45-46 and 172-176. 
The last of these passages, in which Parry describes the displays seen between 
Sept. 15, and Oct. 5, 1825, as he was sailing down Davis's Strait to the 
Orkneys, is by far the best. Hegel probably has in mind the description of the 
display of Dec. 22, 1824 however (V pp. 45-46), 'At seven (in) the morning, it 
became more brilliant, and stationary, describing a well-defined arch, extend-
ing from the E.S.E. horizon to that at W.N.W., and passing through the zenith. 
A very faint arch was also visible on each side of this, appearing to diverge 
275 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from the points in the horizon, * and separating to twenty degrees distance in 
the zenith. It remained thus for twenty minutes, when the coruscations from 
each arch met, and after a short but brilliant display of light gradually died away.' 
The auroras are now thought to be caused at heights varying between forty 
and six hundred miles, by jets of atomic matter, shot from the sun, and deflected 
towards the north and south poles by the magnetic field of the Earth. 'American 
scientists plan to create this summer an artificial auroral display, as bright as a 
full moon, by firing an electron accelerator on board an Aerobee rocket ... The 
underlying purpose of the experiment ... is to help the mapping of the earth's 
magnetic field, by tracing the field line.' 'The Times' January 6, 1967. A close 
approximation to the modern theory is to be found in the 'Traite physique et 
historique de l'aurore boreale' (Paris, 1733) by J. J. de Mairan (1678-1771). 
Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) put forward the view that the sea consists of 
non-electric water and electric salts, and that the clouds in the equatorial regions 
take up this electricity and transport it to the poles, discharging it as a lumi-
nescence when they come in contact with the colder and damper air-streams of 
those regions: see his 'Experiments and observations on Electricity' (London, 
1769) p. 49; cf. 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 48 pp. 358, 784, vol. 51 p. 403. 
Richard Kirwan (1733-1812), in an article published in 'Transactions of the 
Royal Irish Academy' vol. II 1788, revived an older theory by suggesting that 
the aurora is formed by the combustion of matter: (hydrogen formed at the 
equator). 
Hegel is evidently rejecting these theories in favour of the electromagnetic 
hypothesis put forward by John Dalton (1766-1844) in his 'Meteorological 
observations and essays' (London, 1793), and supported by J. B. Biot (1774-
1862), 'Journal de Physique' vol. 93, 'Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. 67-
and C. Hansteen (1784-1873), 'Magazin for Naturvidenskaberne' (Christiana, 
1824) p. 85: 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' vol. 23 p. 83, vol. 24 p. 235: 
'Schweigger's Journal' vol. 16 p. 188. 
52,35 
This is a reference to several passages on clouds to be found in 'Goethe, die 
Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' pt. I vol. viii (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962). 
Goethe distinguishes four main types of clouds: stratus, cumulus, cirrus and 
nimbus (op. cit. pp. 73-93). 
Goethe's views on this subject, as he warmly acknowledges, were greatly 
influenced by the writing of Luke Howard (1772-1864): see 'The Times' 
March 21, 1964. Howard first gave detailed descriptions of the cloud-types in 
his 'On the modifications of Clouds' (London, 1803), a work which also contains 
three plates illustrating his categorization. His main work on the subject was 
however 'The Climate of London' (2 vols. London, 1818), and it was this book 
*'I am aware that this appearance is usually referred to the effect of viewing the phenomenon 
in perspective, but I here describe appearances only.' 

NOTES 
which so impressed Goethe, Howard's descriptions of the various clouds are to 
be found in the second volume (pp. 329-338):-
'I. The Cirrus. A cloud resembling a lock of hair, or a feather. 
2. The Cumulus. A cloud which increases from above in dense, convex or 
conical heaps. 
3. The Stratus. An extended, continuous, level sheet of cloud, increasing 
from beneath. 
4. The Cirrocumulus. A connected system of small roundish clouds, 
placed in close order, or contact. 
5. The Cirrostratus. A horizontal or slightly inclined sheet, attentuated at its 
circumference, concave downwards, or undulated. Groups or patches 
having these characters. 
6. The Cumulostratus. The Cumulus flattened at top, and overhanging its 
base. 
7. The Nimbus. A dense cloud, spreading out into a crown of Cirrus, and 
passing beneath into a shower.' 
C£ 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. XXi pp. 137-159 (1805). 
Cf. Elizabeth Fox Howard 'Goethe and Luke Howard, F.R.S.' (Leominster, 
1932, Germ. tr. Hennigsdorf, 1932): 'The Friends' Quarterly Examiner' Quly, 
1932), James Boyd 'Goethe's Knowledge of English Literature' (Oxford, 1932) 
pp. 125-128. 
53,6 
At Veii and near S. Sabina in 207 B.C.: see XXVII 37, 'Before the consuls set 
out (for their provinces) there were nine days of rites, because stones had rained 
from the sky ... Then again the nine days of rites were repeated, because in 
Arrnilustrum it seemed to rain stones.' 
At Cumae in 202 B.C.: see XXX 38, 'At Cumae the orb of the sun seemed 
diminished, and a shower of stones fell'. 
At Remens in 173 B.C.: see XLII 2, 'At Lanuvium the vision of a great fleet 
was said to have been seen in the sky, and at Privernum it was said, dark coloured 
wool had grown from the earth. In the Veientine country about Remens there 
was said to have been a shower of stones.' 
At Reate in 169 B.C.: see XLIII 13, 'Reate imbri lapidavit.' 
See 'T. Livi Patavini Historiarum Libri qui supersunt, ex editione G. A. 
Ruperti' (20 vols. London, 1828). Cf. J. F. H. Dalberg (1760-1812) 'Ueber 
Meteor-Cultus der Alten, vorzuglich in Bezug auf Steine, die vom Himmel 
gefallen sind' (Heidelberg, 18n). 
The stones fell at Aigle in Normandy on April 26, 1803. J. B. Biot (1774-
1862) was sent by the French Institute to investigate the matter, and his report 
constitutes the best account of the incident: see 'Relation d'un voyage fait dans 
Ie departement de I'Orne pour constater la realite d'un meteore observe a 
l' Aigle' (Paris, 1803): cf. 'Memoires de I'Institut' vol. VII. 
277 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
This occurrence was widely publicised, but it was not the first of its kind to 
change the views of the scientists of Hegel's day. On June 16, 1794 stones fell 
at Siena: see A. Soldani (1733-1808) in 'Atti dell' Accademia di Siena' vol. IX: 
D. Tata (1723-c. 1800) 'Memoria sulla pioggia di pietre nella Campagna 
Sanese' (Naples, 1794). On December 13, 1795 a large stone smelling of sulphur 
landed near W oodcottage in Yorkshire: see 'The Gentleman's Magazine' (Feb. 
1796): c£ 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1802: 'Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. 
XIII p. 291. 
53, 19 
Ernst Florens Chladlli (1756-1827), in his 'Ueber Feuer-Meteore und fiber 
die mit denselben herabgefallenen Massen' (Vienna, 1819) collected accounts of 
all the instances of aerolites then known, and initiated the modern approach by 
suggesting that these bodies were extra-terrestrial in origin. J. A. Deluc (1727-
1817) denied their extra-terrestrial origin, questioned the possibility of their 
being atmospheric formations, and insisted on the necessity of their having been 
ejected by volcanoes ('Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. VI p. 13). J. T. Mayer 
(1752-1830), in his 'Lehrbuch der physischen Astronomie' (Gottingen, 1805) p. 
334 put forward the theory of their atmospheric origin accepted here by 
Hegel, and C. J. Diruf'Ideen zur Naturerklarung der Meteor- oder Luftsteine' 
(Gottingen, 1805), and W. von Freygang 'Idees sur Ie phenomene des Aero-
lithes' (Gottingen 1804) developed it. 
The theory that 'the Moon has dropped something' was put forward by 
H. W. M. Olbers (1758-1840) in 'Zach's Annalen der Physik' vol. XIV p. 38. 
It was repeated by A. J. P. von Scherer (1783-1835) in Oken's 'Isis' 1833 sect. 
IV-VI p. 481. 
For descriptions of fire-balls which Hegel may have consulted see: 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 30 p. 978-Worcester, March 19, 1719: 'phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1741 p. 870, 1742 pp. 1,188-southern England, Dec. II, 1741: 
'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1759 pp. 218, 259-the north country, Nov. 26, 1758: 
'Mem. de l' acado des sciences' 1771 p. 67o-Paris, July 10, 1771: 'phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1784 pp. II2, 20I-Great Britain, Aug. 18, 1783. 
53,21 
,unreife 9Ronbe'. 
53,30 
,in biefen Udf)eilen'. 
53,40 
Hegel entered a long note in the margin at this juncture, part of which is as 
follows ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' IIp. 79), 'Universality: all moments sublated-
division. In its implicit state, gravity is a falling from unity, then a projection, 
then a vibration, motion; then it is singularity in general, character, shape, 
278 

NOTES 
electricity, dissolution of heat-heat, expansion, expansible fluidity, chemical, 
physical element. Shape divides or determines itself: intensity, hostility.' 
This is part of his attempt to rationalize the transition from 'Formation and 
Chemism' (op. cit. pp. 33-79) to 'Physics' (op. cit. pp. 79-103). 
For the state of German meteorology at the time, of Hegel' s death, see Ludwig 
Friedrich Kamtz (1801-1867) 'Grundzuge der Meteorologie' (3 vols. Halle, 
1831-1836): G. Schubler (1787-1834) 'Grundsatze der Meteorologie' (Leipzig, 
1831), 'Correspondenzblatt des wurtembergischen landwirtschaftlichen Vereins' 
(1825-1834) etc. 
57,29 
'No body is absolutely or perfectly dense; or no space is perfectly full of 
matter, so as to have no vacuity or interstices; on the contrary, it is the opinion 
of Newton, that even the densest bodies, as gold etc. contain but a small portion 
of matter, and a very great portion of vacuity; or that it contains a great deal 
more of pores or empty space, than of real substance'. Charles Hutton 'A 
Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 vols. London, 1796) I p. 366. 
Cf. Newton's 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) bk. III pt. 1 question 31. 
58,30 
Kant 'Metaphysische Anfangsgrunde der Naturwissenschaft' (Riga, 1786). 
See especially the second main part of this work, in which Kant postulates 
attraction and repulsion as being basic forces, without which matter could not 
exist. He was not the fIrst to do this however. Newton's hypothesis (see the 
previous note), led Godwin Knight (1713-1772) to put forward similar views 
almost forty years before Kant ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1748). C£ Thomas 
Young (1773-1829) 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1805 I p. 82: John Robison 
(1778-1843) 'System of Mechanical Philosophy' (ed. Brewster, 4 vols. Edin-
burgh, 1822) IV vol. 4 I. 258. 
59, 34 
See 'Goethe, die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' pt. I vol. 8 (ed. Kuhn, 
Weimar, 1962) pp. 328-330, 'Meteorologische Nachschrift'. This data for 
December 1822 was evidently collected by Heinrich Ludwig Friedrich Schron 
(1799-1875), see his 'Meteorologische Jahrbucher' (Jena, 1822-1827), who 
succeeded J. F. Posselt (1794-1823) as director of the astronomical department at 
Jena. Goethe had encouraged his meteorological studies since about 1819, when 
he fIrst arrived in Jena. 
Goethe writes 'Tepl', not 'Topel'. The place referred to is evidently the spa 
Teplitz, which is situated in the southern Erzgebirge, some twenty seven miles 
S.S.E.ofDresden. 
60,26 
See Goethe (op. cit. pp. 321-322). These remarks were evidently written 
down in the summer of 1822, after Goethe had read 'The Climate of London' 
279 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(2 vols. London, 1818-1820) by Luke Howard (1772-1864). Schron's observa-
tions seemed to Goethe to confirm the conclusions he had reached from reading 
this English work. 
61,8 
,eold)e (eete )8otfteUungen finb ba~ cheval de bataille bet mef(epon'. 
62, 28 
Schelling 'System der gesammten Philosophie und der Naturphilosophie 
insbesondere' (Manuscript from 1804). 
'§ 147:!let aOloluten (2:o~ii1ion al~ g:otm be~ in~1id)"leloft"eet)n~ 
entl1Jtid)t ag g:otm bet \8eltJegung bet 9J1agneti~mu~. :Obet: bie 
aofolute (2:o~iifion leloft, aftib, Ieoenbig angeld)aut ift 9J1agnetgmu~.' 
See 'Schellings Werke' (ed. Schroter, Munich, 1962) supplementary volume 
no. 2 pp. 252-258. 
63,32 
Friedrich Albrecht Karl Gren (1760--1798), see the note II. 267. Hegel is 
evidently referring to his 'Grundriss der Naturlehre' (4th ed. Halle, 1801). 
In § 149 of this work, Gren discusses the cohesive properties of uniform (not 
necessarily homogeneous) bodies, and mentions the experiment with the glass 
plates cited here by Hegel, ,Ilfu~ betld)iebenen og~et angefteUten )8etlud)en 
ld)eint ba~ @efet} 5U folgen: ba~ bie etiide bet (2:oLJiifion oet) betld)iebenen 
\l!aaten bon einetiet) Sfot1Jern, foltJo~I bon gIeid)attigen ag ungleid)artigen, 
mit bet 9J1engc bet \8etfr~tung~1Juncte im )8et~iiItni~ fte~e.' 
He adds (§ 150), that no law had yet been discovered for the cohesion of dis-
similar bodies, ,~~ ift nod) fein @elet} oefannt, nad) ltJeld)em fid) bie @to~e 
bet Sftiifte be~ 3ufammen~ange~ oet) Sfot1Jern bon ungleid)et Ilfrt tid)tete'. 
64, 17 
Cf. §§ 265-266. When surfaces were considered merely with regard to 
adhesion and cohesion, no reference being made to mass, their properties were 
taken to be the result of certain forces. The English and French physicists of 
Hegel's day had no ready-made term for these phenomena, and spoke merely 
of the 'attraction' and 'repulsion' of a surface. In German, the term 'g:liic~en­
fraft' was widely used, and had a considerable literature centred around it: see 
G. F. Parrot (1767-1852) 'Entretiens sur la Physique' (6 vols. Dorpat, 1819-
1824) vol. I p. 93 f.: K. W. G. Kastner (1783-1857) 'Grundriss der Experimental-
physik' (2nd ed. Heidelberg, 1820-1822), vol. I p. 76 f.: J. F. Fries (1773-1843) 
'Mathematische Naturphilosophie' (Heidelberg, 1822) p. 450 £, 'Lehrbuch der 
Naturlehre' (Jena, 1826) vol. I 7. 
Kastner and Fries postulated two forces (attraction and repulsion), and Fries 
attempted to treat the subject mainly as a matter of geometry. Cf. Gehler's 
'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. IV (Leipzig, 1827) pp. 350-353. 
280 

NOTES 
64,27 
Schelling 'Zeitschrift fiir spekulative Physik ... Zweyter Band zweytes 
Heft' (Jena und Leipzig, 1801). This quotation is taken from Schelling's 'Dar-
stellung meines Systems der Philo sophie' . Hegel alters the punctuation of the 
passage slightly, and omits Schelling's references to §§ 56 and 58 of the same 
work. 
Schelling is here summarizing a part of Steffens' 'Beitrage zur innern Natur-
geschichte der Erde' (pt. I Freiberg, 1801), which was then about to be pub-
lished. 
65,36 
Michelet's version of these two sentences is shortened, and differs some-
what from the original, which is as follows, 
,(5;~ ift 3U oemeden, bafl 
biefe 9J1omente nur ein3elne '!limenfionen finb, beren ieber 9J1oment be~ 
realen St'or\Jer~ alS eine~ gefta1teten ift. Buft, lillaHer, ~euer finb ba~ @efta1t1ofe 
ober bie aufgegooene @efta1t, St'or\JerHcf)feit iioergau\Jt, ba~ einen (£garaUer 
iioergau\Jt gat. '!lie @efta1t ift nicf)t ogne dne berfeloen, 10 ltJenig al~ bie 9J1aHe 
ogne lilleicf)geit, ober 6cf)ltJere, ober (5;lafti3itiit ift.' (Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
IIp. 47). 
67,19 
See the note I. po. 
67,24 
In the 1827 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia', this paragraph began with the 
following sentence, 'Sound is the continued changing of these determinations, the 
oscillation of the moments of elasticity.' Michelet noted the deletion of this 
sentence, but misplaced it: see the errata. 
69,10 
At the beginning of the last century, this transition from cohesion to sound, 
rather than from air to sound, would not have been accepted without dispute. 
In making it, Hegel was evidently influenced by the work of E. F. F. Chladni 
(1756-1817): see 'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802) p. 4, 'In most text-books of 
physics sound is treated in connection with the air, but this is a completely inept 
procedure, for other elastic bodies sound, and transmit the sound of alien 
bodies, quite as well as the air does, and many sound more readily than the air. 
It would therefore be more fitting if this part of natural science were treated as a 
matter of motion, and more precisely, if it were considered in connection with 
the oscillations of the pendulum, to which it is very closely related.' 
69, 10 
,'!ler mang', in § 300 Hegel deals with sound in general and with noise. In 
the terminology of his day these were known as 'ber 6cf)aU' and 'ba~ @eriiufd)'. 
In § 301 he deals with musical sounds, which were known as ,ber mang' 
281 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
Strictly speaking therefore, the correct heading for this section would be ,bet 
ed)aU'. See the definitions of these terms given by Gustav Schilling (1805-1881) 
in 'Encyclopadie der gesammten musikalischen Wissenschaften, oder Universal-
Lexicon der Tonkunst' (6 vols. Stuttgart, 1834-1838). 
E. F. F. Chladni, in the preface to his 'Neue Beytrage zur Akustik' (Leipzig, 
1817), mentions the trouble he had had with the French translator of his 'Die 
Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802) on account of there being only one word in French for 
,ed)aU', ,Sflang' and ,%on' (son), ,~n iiotigen~ ief)t einiid)t~boUet mann, ben 
id) fragte, wie eine gewiHe etwa~ betwicfelte 3bee wof)l lonnte awgebtiicft 
wetben, Wo aoet ba~, Wa~ et mit botid)lug, immet nid)t gancr ba~ au~btiicfte, wa~ 
id) eigentHd) iagen wonte, iiuflette enbHd): Notre diablesses de langue ne veut 
pas se preter a l' expression de toutes les idees possible. II faut meme que1quefois 
sacrifier une idee aux caprices de la langue'. Cf. 'Traite d' Acoustique par 
E. F. F. Chladni' (Paris, 1809). 
69, 19 
,eeelenf)aftigfeit' cf. the note III. 318. 'I will not say, with Plato, the soul 
is an harmony, but harmonical, and hath its nearest sympathy unto musick.' 
Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682) 'Religio Medici' (London, 1643) pt. II sect. ix. 
70,29 
,f)ietmit . . . f)aoen bie 3nfttumente if)ten eigentf)umHd)en Sflang unb 
timbre'. E. F. F. Chladni, in his 'Neue Beytrage zur Akustik' (Leipzig, 1817) 
p. 58 notes that, ,!J:inigen !J:tiai} f)at bie ftancroiiid)e ejJtad)e batin, bafl man 
bie qualitatil.1e )8etid)iebenf)eit be~ Sflange~ in .\)iniid)t aUf bie 1lliiitfung, 
wofiit man im stleutid)en feinen oeftimmten 2!u~brucf f)at burd) ba{l m50tt 
timbre oecreid)nen fann'. By the 1830'S however, the German term , Sflangfaroe' 
had come into use: see Gustav Schilling (1805-1881) 'Encyclopadie der gesamm-
ten musikalischen Wissenschaften' (6 vol. Stuttgart, 1834-1838) vol. VI p. 647. 
71, 18 
See Peter van Musschenbroek (1692-1761) 'Introductio ad philosophiam 
naturalem' (2 vols. Leyden, 1762) vol. II p. 2191. It was mainly this work which 
spread the idea that sound consists of a tremulation of minute particles, 'in 
motu tremulo partium minimarum'. 
71 , 19 
,stler natiit1id)e menid)': see I Corinthians ii 14, 'But the natural man re-
ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned'. 
71,32 
At the beginning of the last century, nearly all German books and articles on 
sound (ecf)aU) made this point. J. F. Pierer, in his 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' 
282 

NOTES 
vol. VII p. 193 (Altenburg, 1827) gives fifty three German words meaning much 
the same as 'noise'. 
72,4 
Thomas Young (1773-1829) thought otherwise. See his 'A Course of Lectures 
on Natural Philosophy (2 vols. London, 1807) I p. 378, 'The origin of a simple 
sound, without any alteration, requires very little investigation: it appears that 
the only condition necessary for its production is a sufficient degree of velocity 
in the motion or impulse which occasions it'. 
72,20 
,mei lcf)lecf)ten Snfttumenten f,Joti man jo bai3 StlalJlJetn bai3 mecf)anilcf)e 
mnlcf)lagen' . 
, StlalJlJetn', as applied to musical instruments, was at that time a purely 
technical term, and referred to the sounds produced by key-board instruments, 
in which there was a scraping of the keys, due to their being too close together, 
or a knocking, due to the fillets on which the keys rested, or which they struck 
when they were played, being inadequately covered with leather or cloth. See 
Gustav Schilling (1805-188r) 'Encyclopadie der gesammten musikalischen 
Wissenschaften' (6 vols. Stuttgart, 1834-r838) vol. IV p. II9. 
72 , 39 
See the note III. 327. 
73,7 
Ernst Florens Friedrich Chladni (r756-r827) was born at Wittenberg, where 
his father was professor oflaw. He tells us ('Die Akustik' p. xiv), that as a small 
child he was not allowed to leave his father's house, and that this awoke his 
interest in geography books, and his desire to travel. 
At university he wanted to study medicine, but his father persuaded him to 
read law at Wittenberg, and he later took his doctorate in this subject at Leipzig. 
After his father's death, he felt free to follow his natural bent and study the 
natural sciences. At the age of nineteen he began to play the piano, and this led 
him on to the study of musical theory. His first important publication was 
'Entdeckungen fiber die Theorie des Klanges' (Leipzig, 1787); see the note 
II. 285. 
After making various attempts to improve upon the glass harmonica, 
he fmally constructed a new instrument between June 2, 1789 and March 
8, r790, which he called a 'Euphon' ('Leipziger allgemeine musikalische 
Zeitung' 182r p. 529, 1822 p. 805). During the 1790'S he attempted to construct 
a key-board instrument having the qualities of wind and stringed instruments, 
and in 1799 fmally succeeded in doing so ('Leipziger allgemeine musikalische 
Zeitung' r824 p. 825). He called this second invention a 'Clavicylinder'. 
283 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
These instruments and a number of articles on musical theory ('Neue Schr. 
der Gesellsch. Naturf. Freunde zu Berlin' vol. I pp. 102, 125, vol. II p. 274, 'Acta 
Acad. Moguntinae' 1794-5 no. 5), had made him known by the turn of the 
century, but it was his 'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802), the book quoted here by 
Hegel, which brought him fame. In this book, he gave accounts of many novel 
experiments, and presented a survey of the phenomena of sound which, to-
gether with the supplementary 'Neue Beytrage zur Akustik' (Leipzig, 1817), 
remained the standard work on the subject until well after Hegel's death: see 
'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. VIII pp. 178-505 (Leipzig, 1836). 
In 1808 Chladni visited Paris, and was well received by Laplace and Ber-
thollet etc., who arranged for an interview with Napoleon. This meeting lasted 
for almost two hours, during which Chladni gave an account of his discoveries. 
The main result of the interview was that the Emperor made a grant of 6000 
francs towards the translation of Chladni's main work into French ('Traite 
d' Acoustique' Paris, 1809). 
In the spring of 1810 Chladni left Paris for Switzerland and Italy, and fmally 
returned to Wittenberg in the summer of 1812. In the winter of 1815-1816 
he lectured on acoustics and meteors at Berlin (see the note III. 245). He died 
at Breslau in 1827, just as the hall of the Berlin Singing Academy, which he had 
designed, was being completed. On account of the excellence of its acoustics, 
this hall was in great demand for broadcasting and gramophone recordings until 
only twenty years ago. It was destroyed by bombing in 1944. 
V. Kohlschiitter 'E. F. F. Chladni', in R. 1. C. Virchow's and F. von Holt-
zendorff-Vietmansdorf' s 'Sammlung gemeinverstandlicher wissenschaftlicher 
Vortrage' New Series, pamphlet 261 (Berlin, 1897). 
73,9 
'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802) pp. 107-108. As part of his investigation of 
longitudinal vibrations, Chladni cut the following substances into two foot 
rods, the thickness of which he found to be a matter of indifference, and elicited 
the following notes;-
Whalebone, approximately 
English tin 
Fine silver (15 lothig) 
Nutwood, Yew 
Brass, Oak, Plumwood 
Clay pipe shanks (Cologne pipes) 
Copper almost 
Pearwood, Red beech, Maple 
Mahogany, almost 
Ebony, Beech, Elm, Alder, Birch 
Lime, almost 
A 
B 
D an octave higher 
F 
F# 
E-G 
G 
A~-A 
B~ 
B~ 
B 

Cherry 
Willow, Pine 
NOTES 
Glass, Iron, approximately 
Deal, a little higher than 
B 
C two octaves higher 
q~ 
q~ 
Chladni suggested that these differences in pitch and tone might be due to the 
various degrees of brittleness and specific weight. 
Hegel probably referred to this table in the French version of it given by J. B. 
Biot in his 'Traite de Physique' (Paris, 1816) vol. iv p. 85. He misquotes Chladni 
on the note given by glass, and refers to his ,St'f)onerne %obof£ltlfeifenftiele' as 
, St'oInifd)e $feiffen/. See M. H. Klaproth and F. Wolff'Chemisches Warterbuch' 
vol. v p. 167 (Berlin, 1810), 'A clay suitable for the making of pipes is found in 
the former archbishopric of Cologne and in the Liege area. It is transported from 
these areas and worked in Holland.' 
73, 13 
Johann wilhelm Ritter (1776-1810), see the note II. 270. These experi-
ments were probably inspired by the teaching of Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828), 
see the note II. 430. Most of Ritter's published writings are sober works 
concerned with galvanism; see 'Galvanismus' Weimar, 1798) 'Beytrage zur ... 
Galvanismus' (4 vols. Jena, 1800-1805); 'Das Electrische System der Karper' 
(Leipzig, 1805). His collected papers 'Physische-Chemische Abhandlungen' (3 
vols. Leipzig 1806) show no signs of flippancy or eccentricity. The 'Fragmente 
aus dem Nachlasse eines jungen Physikers' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1810) contains a 
delightful collection of fantastic speculations, observations and experiments 
however. As it also contains a considerable amount of material relating to sound 
(I pp. 221-8, II pp. 225-269), and there is also evidence that Hegel had read the 
book (see the note II. 297), the attribution of these experiments to Ritter was 
not entirely unwarranted. I have discovered no direct evidence of his having 
performed them however. 
Georg Heinrich Ritter (1765-1823), who studied at Gattingen, Wiirzburg, 
Vienna and Strassburg, was court physician and spa doctor at Wiesbaden for 
some years, and put forth works on the cultivation of vines and domestic 
animals, as well as a number of ordinary medical treatises, published 'Cranologie 
und Cranoskopie, nach Englischen Schriften' in 'Auslandische medicinische 
Litteratur' (Berlin, 1823) vol. XIII p. 460. It is unlikely however that Hegel 
had this article in mind. 
See A. C. P. Callisen 'Medicinisches Schriftsteller-Lexicon' (33 vols. Copen-
hagen and Altona, 1830-1845) vol. XVI pp. 154-160, vol. XXXI pp. 474-479. 
73,20 
Jean Baptiste Biot (1774-1862), the French physicist. At the age of only 
twenty three, he was appointed professor of mathematics at Beauvais. In 1800 
he became professor of physics at the College de France, and only three years 
285 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
later, he was elected member of the Academy of Sciences. In 1856 he was 
elected member of the French Academy. He was an extremely prolific writer, 
and his researches extended to almost every branch of physical science. 
Hegel is here quoting his 'Traite de Physique experimentale et mathematique' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. IIp. 4, 'Enfin Ie son se transmet aussi a travers les corps 
solides. Le mineur, en creusant sa galetie, entend les coups du mineur qu' on 
lui oppose, et juge ainsi de sa direction. Si I'on se place a I'une des extremites 
d'une longue file de tuyaux metalliques, comme on peut Ie faire dans les 
aqueducs, on entend tres-distinctement les coups de marteau frappes a l' autre 
extremite, et meme on entend ainsi distinctement deux sons, I'un plus rapide, 
transmis par Ie metal, l' autre plus lent, transmis par l' air.' 
73,25 
Hegel is underestimating these distances. The cannonade at Mainz in 1792 
was heard very clearly near Einbeck, 165 miles away. In 1809, the cannonading 
of Heligoland was heard near Hanover, 175 miles away. On December 4, 
1832, during the siege of Antwerp, the French artillery was heard in the Saxon 
Erzgebirge, 400 miles away (see the contemporary 'Leipziger Zeitung'). C£ 
Thomson's 'Annals of Philosophy' Jan. 1816 p. 3. 
73,29 
See the note II. 282. 
74, 12 
J. W. Ritter (1776-1810) uses this phenomenon to illustrate the transition from 
sound to heat, see 'Fragmente' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1810) vol. II p. 252, ,'l)ie 
fd)ttJingenbe 6aite 3-.58. ttJitb in ben Bagen: ~ unb: --- ttJiitmet fet)n, a(5 
in bet Bage: _'. 
74, 20 
See CWadni's 'Entdeckungen aber die Theorie des Klanges' (Leipzig, 1787), 
'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802), and 'Neue Beytrage zur Akustik' (Leipzig, 1817). 
All these books contain illustrations of the famous 'figures'. 
CWadni discovered that thin metal plates may be used to illustrate regions of 
vibration and rest. As his experiment is usually performed, the plate is screwed 
to the top of a firm upright post, the plate being horizontal, and the screw in the 
middle of it. White sand is then scattered over its surface. The plate is then 
bowed at the edge, and thrown into vibration between nodal lines or curves. 
The sand is thrown from the moving parts or ventral segments into these lines, 
so forming the 'figures'. It soon becomes apparent that, as in the case of a musical 
string, the pitch of the note given is higher in accordance with the greater number 
of ventral segments into which the plate is divided. Historically, the main 
importance of Chladni's discovery was the impetus which it gave to research 
into the nature of elasticity: see R. J. Hauy's researches into the laws of vibrating 
286 

NOTES 
surfaces ('Journal de Physique' vol. 88 p. 125); M. Faraday's article in 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1831 p. 299; F. Savart in 'Annales de Chimie et Physique' 
vol. 36 p. 187 and vol. 40 pp. I and II3. 
74,28 
See the note II. 294. 
75,12 
Hegel is here referring to the monochord. 
75,22 
See Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) 'Tentamen novae theoriae musices' (St. 
Petersburg, 1739); Daniel Bernoulli (1700-1782) in 'Memoires de l' Academie' 
1762 p. 467; E. F. F. Chladni 'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802) pp. 26-37; P. 
Dulong (I785-1838) in 'Annales de Chimie et Physique' vol. 4I p. II3. These 
writers also deal with the vibrations of the air in pipes. Their work prepared the 
way for the 'Theorie analytique de la chaleur' (Paris, I822) of]. B.]. Fourier 
(1768-1830). 
75,29 
Pythagoras is said to have discovered the significance of the harmonic pro-
portion 12: 8 : 6, in which 12: 6 is the octave, 12: 8 the fifth and 8: 6 the fourth: 
see Plato's 'Timaeus' 36a (ed. Archer-Hind, London, 1888 pp. I07-1II). The 
stories that have come down to us about his having observed the harmonic 
intervals in a smithy, and then weighed the hammers that produced them etc. 
are absurd, and were recognized as such in Hegel's day: see Charles Burney 
(1726-1814) 'A General History of Music' (4 vols. London, 1776-1789), E. F. F. 
Chladni 'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802) p. 102, M. C. P. Schmidt 'Kulturhistor-
ische Beitrage zur Kenntniss des griechischen und romischen-Altertums' (Leipzig, 
1906-12) vol. I p. 78 f. As genuine popular tales however, they bear witness to 
the existence of a real tradition, in which Pythagoras was regarded as the author 
of this momentous discovery. It is clear that the early Pythagoreans studied 
proportion, and it is by no means unlikely that Pythagoras himself discovered 
these intervals: see E. Zeller 'Die Philosophie der Griechen' (7th ed. Leipzig, 
1923) vol. I pp. 507-510. 
Cf. C. E. Ruelle 'Collection des auteurs grecs relatifs a la musique' (Paris, 
1870). 
75,30 
The frequency with which Hegel refers to the soul-like nature of harmony in 
these paragraphs, and this reference to symmetry, seem to indicate that he had 
read the fascinating effusions published by Johann Friedrich Hugo Dalberg 
(1752-1812) in his 'Fantasien aus dem Reiche der Tone' (Erfurt, 1806). Verbal 
descriptions of the 'feelings and passions' aroused by 'harmony and melody' 
are very rarely successful, but Dalberg's book contains some fme passages. 
,Otbnung, @)t)mmetrie, Ueoeteinftimmung ift hie 
@)eele hes ®eiftes, 
287 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
ift 
ba~, tl)06ei er 
ba~ reinfte mergniigen emt1Tinbet' (p. 
37). ,'Ilie 
6eele ift ein %on, ber fidJ immer reiner ftimmen joU; ieber %on f)at 
ettoa~ \:lom @runbton in fidJ, ie mef)r er fidJ biefem nilf)ert, ie reiner unb 
geiftiger toirb er. 'Ilie 6eele mUfl errt if)re 2auf6af)n burdJtoanbern, toie ber 
%on be~ monodJorb~ bie ()ctatl, ef) fie 3-ur moUenbung gelangt. 'Ilarum f)at 
fie einen b01:J1:Jelten %rie6 3-ur %fJatigfeit unb ffiufJe, our %ragf)eit unb 
58etoegung, 6eibe if)r toejentlidJ notf)ig'. 
76, 14 
,barum ift bie Ouarte audJ ein frifdJerer %on'. See Gustav Schilling (1805-
1881) 'Encyclopadie der gesammten musikalischen Wissenschaften' (6 vols. 
Stuttgart, 1834-1838) vol. V pp. 586-590. 
76, 22 
See the article by J. G. Voigt of Halle in F. A. C. Gren's 'Neues Journal der 
Physik' (Leipzig, 1796) vol. II pp. 352-357, 'Einige Bemerkungen tiber die 
Schwingungsknoten bey klingenden Saiten'. 
,man tf)eHe )]l58 Me 6aite be~ IDlonodJorb~ in irgenb eine )]lnoaf)l gleidJet 
%f)eile, 0.58. in 4 burdJ Me $unfte~, 'Il, ~, unb fteUe ben 6etoeglidJen 6teg in ~. 
~ 'Il ~ 
)]l'-'-'-'-'58 
man lege in Me $unfte ~, 'Il, unb einige anbere ber 6aite, too man toill leidJte 
storndJen, 0.58. $Ut1ierftUddJen. 9Cun ftreidJe man mittelft einem mit ~olo~ 
1:Jf)onium beftridJenen miolinbogen, ben %f)eil ~ )]l an, fo toirb ber %on gef)ort, 
ber bem %f)eile ~ )]l forrei1:Jonbiert unb fidJ 3-um @runbtone ber 6aite )]l 58 
\:lerf)iilt, toie 4:1, unb aUe $a1:JierftUddJen, au~genommen Me in ben $unften 
~ unb 'Illagen, toerben burdJ Me ~ridJiitterung ber 6aite f)erunter getoorfen. 
'l)ie beiben $unfte ~ unb 'l) fJeiflen 6dJtoingung~fnoten'. Voigt describes 
four other simple experiments of this kind. 
76,3 1 
This is discussed at length in Hegel's 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' 
(tr. Haldane, 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. I pp. 194-239. 
The Pythagoreans swore by the 'T€'TpaK'ros or tetrad which consists of the 
first four integers (1+2+3+4=10) represented by pebbles or dots arranged 
in an equilateral triangle. For them, this figure symbolized the 'elements of 
number', which they thought to be the elements of all things. They regarded 
it as containing the concordant ratios of musical harmony, and by some of them 
(e.g. lamblichus), it was taken to be identical with cosmic harmony. In the 
Pythagorean oath it was described as, 'containing the root and fountain of 
everflowing Nature,' See Aristotle 'Metaphysica' (Oxford, 1924) vol. I pp. 145-
150: F. M. Cornford 'Mysticism and Science in the Pythagorean Tradition' 
('The Classical Quarterly' 1923 pp. 1-12, 1924 pp. 137-150). 
288 

NOTES 
In the second sentence Hegel seems to have in mind the following passages in 
Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' (986a 15), '(The Pythagoreans) say that the elements 
of number are the even and the odd, the latter limited, the former unlimited, 
and that unity is made up of both even and odd, that numbers come from unity 
and, to repeat, that the whole heaven is numbers,' Cf. the Pythagorean de-
finitions given by Aristoxenus in H. Diels 'Die Fragmente der V orsokratiker' 
(2 vols. Berlin, 1906) vol. I p. 270. Plutarch gives a fuller explanation of these 
doctrines in 'The E at Delphi' 388 ('Moralia' tr. Babbitt V pp. 217-222, Loeb, 
1936). C£ J. E. Raven 'Pythagoreans and Eleatics' (Cambridge, 1948) ch. X. 
W. A. Heidel is of the opinion that this subsumption of the even under the 
indeftnite, the odd under the ftnite, marks the meeting of the ethico-religious and 
the mathematico-scientiftc streams of interest in Pythagoreanism (' Archiv fur 
Geschichte der Philosophie' vol. XIV p. 390). 
76, 38 
See Alexander Malcolm 'A treatise of musick, speculative, practical and 
historical' (Edinburgh, 172 I, corrected ed. London, 1779); J. N. Forkel (1749-
1818) 'Allgemeine Geschichte der Musik' (Leipzig, 1801); Fr. von Drieberg 
'Die mathematische Intervallehre der Griechen' (Berlin, 1819); Thomas Busby 
(1755-1838) 'A General History of Music, from the earliest times to the present' 
(2 vols. London, 1819, Germ. tr. C. F. Michaelis, 2 vols. Leipzig, 1821-1822); 
C. E. Ruelle 'Collection des auteurs grecs relatifs a la musique' (Paris, 1870). 
77, 13 
This was a much debated point at that time. For later views on the subject 
see K. W. J. H. Riemann (1849-1919) 'Geschichte der Musiktheorie' (Leipzig, 
1898). 
Johann Ulrich Sponsel (1721-1782), in his 'Orgelhistorie' (Nuremberg, 1771 
ed. Smets, Cassel 1931), pointed out that organs did not assume their 'modern' 
form until the pedal was invented at the end of the ftfteenth century, and that 
instruments comparable with those used by J. S. Bach were not built before 
1600. Genesis IV 21 and Psalm CL 4 had given rise to claims of immense 
antiquity for the instrument, and it was generally assumed that these original 
organs had spread throughout Europe after the Greek Emperor Constantine V 
had presented one to Pippin III in 756: see Archibald Bower (1686-1766) 
'History of the Popes' (7 vols. London, 1748-1766) vol. V § 158 p. 248. Sponsel 
disputed these claims, but to little purpose. Cf. Journal zur Kunstgeschichte' 
vol. V p. 121 1777. 
Johann Friedrich Hugo Dalberg (1752-1812) in his 'Untersuchungen liber 
den Ursprung der Harmonie und ihre allmahlige Ausbildung' (Erfurt, 1800) 
shows some knowledge of old Scottish, Chinese, Greek, Assyrian, Arabic, 
K 
289 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Egyptian and Indian music, and comes to the conclusion that, 'Temperament 
has no foundation in nature, but is a product of art and of need, and of the 
limited capabilities of our instruments'. (p. ix). On pages 47-48 of this work he 
suggests that, 'Of all the instruments, it is the organ, and next to the organ the 
piano, which has contributed most to the perfection of harmony'. 
Cf. G. U. A. Vieth (1763-1836) 'Anfangsgriinde der Mathematik' (Leipzig, 
1824) pt. II sect. i p. 451. Musical theorists were aware of the possibility of 
enharmonic music at this time:]. N. Forkel (1749-1818) 'Allgemeine Geschichte 
der Musik' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1788-1801). Cf. the account ofIndian music, with 
its 25 note scale in 'Asiatick Researches' vol. IX no. 9. J. D. Berlin (17II-I787), 
in his 'Anleitung zur Tonometrie' (Copenhagen and Leipzig, 1767) suggested 
a 36 note scale, and even in the seventeenth century, A. Kircher (1601-1680), in 
his 'Musurgia universalis' (2 vols. Rome, 1650) drew attention to the importance 
of the enharmonic techniques employed by Galeazzo Sabbatini (1597-1662): 
see for example Sabbatini's motet 'Derelinquat impius viam suam'. 
78,6 
In the scale ofC, given by Hegel on p. 76, the frequency ratios and successive 
frequency ratios are as follows: 
Note 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
Freq. ratio 
1 
.!!. 
! 
4 
! 
Q. 
¥ 
2 
8 
3 
3 
Succ. freq. ratio 
.!!. 
19° 
16 
9 
JJ! 
~ 
u. 
s 
15 
"8 
9 
8 
16 
Starting from C, the subsequent frequency ratios required for the diatonic 
scale of G for example, may be easily discovered by writing down the eight 
notes from G to g in the key of C, together with their frequency ratios to C, 
and the frequency ratios required for the new scale: 
Note on scale of C 
G 
A 
B 
c 
d 
e 
f 
g 
Freq. ratio with C= I ! 
! 
\5 
2 
t 
Q. 
~ 
3 
z 
a 
Freq. ratio of diat. 
scale with G= I 
.!! 
Q. 
4 
! 
5 
1(-
8 
4 
3 
3 
2 
Freq. ratio with C = I, 
G=! 
3 
II 
185 
2 
.!!. 
! 
H 
3 
2" 
16 
4 
It will be apparent from this, that six of the eight notes on the scale of G 
coincide with those on the scale of C. Instead of A=! however, we now have 
A=n, and instead of f=l, we now have f=tt The interval between! 
d 27 • 
27 .5· 
.!!..l. Thi . th' 
, 
. 
db Hid· . 
an 
1:6 1S 1:6-:-3, 1.e. 80. 
s 1S 
e comma mentlOne 
y 
ege, an 1t 1S so 
small, that on an instrument, the same note will serve for both keys. 
In the case of f however, the interval between 1 and t~ is t~ -:-1, i.e. tH. 
This is quite perceptible, and on the piano therefore, a separate string has to be 
provided above f, i.e. f sharp. Taking the successive key-notes D, A, E, B, one 
finds that besides these 'commas', each scale introduces a new sharp. This is the 
290 

NOTES 
origin of the five sharps C, D, F, G, A, which, as Hegel observes, are very 
closely represented by the black notes of the pianoforte. 
78,40 
The first effective diatonic chromatic harp was devised by Fray Juan Bermudo 
(c. 1510-1560): see his 'Comienc;:a ellibro llamado declaraci6n de instrumentos 
musicales' (Ossuna, 1555). During the seventeenth century, double and triple 
harps were devised, and the welsh triple harp, for example, was still in use at 
the beginning of this century: see E. Roberts 'Instruction for Welsh harp' (1904); 
H. J. Zingel's article in 'Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart' vol. V pp. 
1507-1563 (Cassel and Basel, 1956). 
These double and triple forms were clumsy however, and the first effective 
attempt to build a completely harmonic harp was made in the Tyrol towards 
the end of the seventeenth century, when hooks were screwed into the neck of 
the instrument. These appendages could be turned down to fix the desired 
semitone at pleasure, so that it was no longer necessary for the player to shorten 
the strings with his fmgers: see Nauwerk 'Die Hakenharfe' ('Allgemeine 
musikalische Zeitlmg' Leipzig, 1815 p. 545). 
Georg Hochbrucker (c. 1670-1763) of Donauworth in Bavaria made the 
next important improvement, by inventing the pedal harp. There were five 
pedals to his instrument, which enabled the player to govern the stopping with 
his feet, and to play in no less than eight major scales. This instrument was so 
common in Germany at the beginning of the last century, that it was known as 
the 'German harp'. 
Pierre Joseph Cousineau (c. 1753-IS24) and Franc;:ois Joseph Dizi (1780-1835) 
effected further improvements in Hochbrucker's design, but the harp which 
Hegel has in mind here is almost certainly the famous 'double movement' 
instrument produced by Sebastien Erard (1752-1831) in ISIO. This instrument 
was first built at Erard's London workshop in Great Marlborough Street. It 
was so successful, that between ISIO and ISn he is said to have sold harps of 
this kind to the value of £25,000, and his design has never been substantially 
improved upon. See Pierre Erard (1796-IS55) 'The Harp in its present improved 
state compared with the original pedal Harp' (London, IS21): W. H. Grattan 
Flood 'The Story of the Harp' (London, 1905). 
79, S 
Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520-1591) was the first to use the modern method of 
adjusting the intervals of the scale in order to make the notes available in 
different keys. By taking the tone to be related to the semitone as IS to 17. 
he was able to put forward a flexible method of chromatic tuning which came 
very close to that employed today (99: 100). See his 'Dialogo della musica 
antica et della moderna' (Florence, I5SI); cf. o. Strunk 'Source Readings in 
Music History' (New York, 1950). 
291 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
In Hegel's day, the predominant temperament was that suggested by J. P. 
Kirnberger (1721-1783) in his 'Die Kunst des reinen Satzes in der Musik' 
(Berlin, 1771), c( G. L. T. 'Gedanken iiber die Temperatur Herrn Kirnbergers' 
(Berlin, 1775). 
79,23 
Joseph Sauveur (1653-1716) was for some years thought to have been the 
first to discover these overtones: see his article in 'Memoires de l'Academie 
de Paris' 1701. However, John Wallis (1616-1703), in 'phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1677 p. 839, and in his 'Treatise of algebra, both historical and practical' (3 pts. 
London 1684-1685) vol. II p. 466, mentions their having been discovered at 
Oxford, by William Noble (d. 1681) fellow of Merton, and Thomas Pigot 
(d. 1686) fellow ofWadham, who communicated their discovery to Narcissus 
Marsh (1638-1713) as early as 1676. See Anthony Wood (1632-1695) 'Athenae 
Oxonienses' (Oxford, 1721); C. G. Jocher 'Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon' 
(4 vols. Leipzig, 1750-1751); Sir John Hawkins (1719-1789) 'History of Music' 
(5 vols. London, 1776) vol. III p. 134; Matthew Young (1750-1800) 'Enquiry 
into the principal phaenomena of sounds and musical strings' (Dublin, 1784) 
pt. II sect. v. 
These tones are caused by vibrations not occurring in their simplest forms; 
when a string vibrates for example, distinct vibrations are also set up in the 
separate parts of it. 
80, 14 
Giuseppe Tartini (1692-1770), the Italian violinist, composer and musical 
theorist. After his clandestine marriage with the niece of the archbishop of 
Padua, he spent some time in a monastry at Assisi, and it was there that he 
learnt the rudiments of musical theory from the organist, Padre Boemo. 
In 1721 he was appointed solo violinist at the church of San Antonio in 
Padua. Two years later he was called to Prague for the coronation of the 
Emperor Charles VI, and stayed in the city for a further two years as conductor 
of Count Kinsky's private band. In 1728 he founded a school for violin in 
Padua, and subsequently taught, played and conducted at Rome and Bologna. 
His fame as a violinist was so great, that although Lord Middlesex offered him 
£3,000 p.a. in 1744, he was unable to entice him to London. 
Tartini's main work on the theory of music is his 'Trattato di musica secondo 
la vera scienza dell' armonia' (padua, 1754). The combination tones mentioned 
here by Hegel are discussed in the first part of this book, in which Tartini 
attempts to expound the physical basis of harmony. The second and third parts 
of the treatise include mathematical calculations and geometrical demonstra-
tions by means of which Tartini attempts to prove the harmonic nature of the 
circle, and to derive from it the major and minor tonal systems, diatonic and 
chromatic dissonances, and even an enharmonic scale. The last two parts of the 
292 

NOTES 
work are concerned with the derivation of the diatonic scale, and a discussion 
of the intervals found in the music of the time. 
The 'Trattato' is a long and complicated work, but Tartini also published 
what is in fact a summary of its main arguments: see 'De principj dell' armonia 
musicale contenuta nel diatonia genere' (Padua, 1767). Jean Adam Serre (1704-
1788) criticised these arguments in his 'Observations sur les principes de I'har-
monie' (Geneva, 1763, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1767). C£ E. R. Jacobi Jean-Adam 
Serre. Ein vergessener Schweizer Musiktheoretiker' ('Schweizerische Musik-
zeitung' vol. 98 p. 145 f£ 1958). Tartini replied in 'Risposta di Giuseppe Tartini 
alIa critica del di lui Trattato di musica di Monsieur Ie Serre di Genevra' 
(Venice, 1767). 
Most English translations of Tartini's works are hard to come by, but there 
are several in existence: see 'Principles and power of harmony' (tr. Stillingf1eet, 
London, 1771); 'A letter from the late Signor Tartini' (tr. Burney, London, 
1771); 'A Treatise on the ornaments of music' (tr. Babitz in Journal of Research 
in Music Education' IV 1956 pp. 75-102). 
See also: A. Rubeli 'Das mathematische System Giuseppe Tartinis' (Winther-
thur, 1958): A. E. Planchart 'A study of the theories of Giuseppe Tartini' 
(Journal of Music Theory' vol. IV no. I pp. 32-61, Yale, 1960): Dale Jorgensen 
'A Resume of Harmonic Dualism' ('Music and Letters' vol. 44 no. I pp. 31-42, 
Oxford, 1963). This last article is also interesting on account of its making 
mention of Hegel, and of Goethe's theory of music. 
80,27 
Jean Baptiste Biot's 'Traite de Physique experimentale et mathematique' (4 
vols. Paris, 1816) vol. II pp. 47-48 is the source of the explanation of combination 
tones given here by Hegel, 'Supposons, par example, que l' on fasse resonner 
ala fois, par deux cordes placees pres l'une de l'autre, les deux sons ut2 et sols 
d' une meme octave. Les nombres des vibrations de ces sons dans un meme temps 
sont 2 et 3; il y aura donc des epoques 00 elles arriveront ensemble a l' oreille, 
et d' autres ou elles y arriveront separees. Pour les distinguer, representons les 
instans qui repondent aux milieux des vibrations, par des points egalement 
espaces sur une meme ligne: 
Coincidences 
293 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Les epoques des coincidences sont evidentes; les intervalles qui les separent 
sont doubles de ceux qui separent les vibrations de ut2• L' oreille sera donc 
affectee par leur retour periodique, comme elle Ie serait par un son ut, plus 
grave d'une octave que ut2• C'est en effet ce qui arrive, et la decouverte de ce 
beau phenomene est attribuee au celebre musicien Tartini'. 
C£ D. C. Miller 'The Science of Musical Sounds' (New York, 1926). 
80,35 
Tartini, in his 'Trattato di musica' (Padua, 1754) says that he first observed 
these tones in 1714. The first to publish an account of them was Georg Andreas 
Sorge (1703-1778) however, see his 'Anweisung zur Stimmung der Orgel-
werke und des Claviers' (Hamburg, 1744) p. 40, and his 'Vorgemach der 
musikalischen Composition' (3 pts. Lobenstein, 1745-7) ch. V §§ 4-5. Sorge does 
not treatthem as a discovery however. As A. Kircher (1601-1680) in his exhaustive 
'Phonurgia Nova' (Kempten, 1673) makes no mention of them, it seems 
likely that they first became generally known early in the eighteenth century. 
Robert Smith (1689-1768), in his 'Harmonics, or the Philosophy of Musical 
Sounds' (Cambridge, 1749) p. 105 explained these tones from the hypothesis 
that different particles of air move through space in different directions, 'Different 
particles of the air at the ear will keep moving constantly opposite ways at the 
same time. And in so rare a fluid as air is, where the intervals of the particles 
are eight or nine times greater than their diameters, there seems to be room 
enough for such opposite motions without impediment: especially as we see 
the like motions are really performed in water.' Matthew Young (1750-1800) 
referred to them as 'grave harmonic tones', and attempted to explain them in 
pt. II sect. vi of his 'Enquiry into the principal phaenomena of sounds and 
musical strings' (Dublin, 1784). On the continent, J. L. Lagrange (1736-1813) 
dealt with them in 'Recherches sur la propagation du son', a paper published in 
'Miscellanea philosophico-mathematica Societas Privata Taurinensis' vol. I 
§ 64 (Turin, 1759). In a paper read to the Royal Society on January 16, 1800 
('Phil. Trans.' 1800 pt. I pp. 106-150), Thomas Young (1773-1829) criticised an 
essential part of Smith's explanation of the tones, 'It is surprising that so great a 
mathematician as Dr. Smith could for a moment have entertained an idea, that 
the vibrations constituting different sounds, should be able to cross each other 
in all directions, without affecting the same individual particles of air by their 
joint forces' (p. 130). He then postulated a theory essentially the same as that 
accepted by Hegel, according to which the combination tones are formed by 
what he called the coalescence of the beats of the primary tones. He recognized 
the difficulties presented by this explanation however, 'If the sounds are related 
as 7: 8, or as 5: 7, each compound vibration will occupy 1
25, or 1
22; and deducting 
5 or 4 vibrations from the whole period, we shall have a remainder of t. This 
explanation is satisfying enough with regard to the concord of a major third; 
but the same harmonic is sometimes produced by taking the major sixth below 
294 

NOTES 
the key note: in this case it might be supposed that the superior octave, which 
usually accompanies every sound as a secondary note, supplies the place of the 
major third, but I have found that the experiment succeeds even with stopped 
pipes, which produce no octaves as harmonics. We must therefore necessarily 
suppose that in this case, if not in the former, the sound in question is simply 
produced as a grave harmonic, by the combination of some of the acute har-
monies, which always accompany the primitive notes.' Young reprinted this 
paper in 'A Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy' (2 vols. London, 1807) 
vol. II pp. 531-554. It is apparent from this work that his belief in the existence 
of an analogy between the structure of light and sound led him to interpret 
combination tones in this way (cf. the note II. 234). 
When Hegel goes on to say that, 'in the consideration of harmony one should 
not confine oneself solely to hearing' etc., he is evidently referring to Young's 
controversy with John Gough (1757-1825) of Middleshaw near Kendal. Gough 
first questioned Young's theory in 'The Theory of Compound Sounds' a paper 
published in the 'Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Man-
chester' vol. V pt. ii pp. 653-665 (1802), and the subsequent controversy may be 
followed in 'Nicholson's Journal' of 1802/3 (see vol. II pp. 264-7, vol. III pp. 
39-41 etc.). Gough's main point is that the tones are the result not of an ob-
jective coalescence which may be calculated mathematically, but of mixtures of 
sounds apprehended subjectively. 'I profess to maintain compound sounds to be 
mixtures of elementary sounds, not aggregates by coalescence ... Now I 
know, by observation, that when an extensive surface is made to vibrate it 
sounds to a great distance; for when the shear-men of Kendal beat the tenters 
on a calm morning, the strokes may be heard for two miles, or more; though 
the ear of a by-stander is not much affected by them, the operation being per-
formed by striking the stretched cloth with a stick not thicker than a man's 
finger. Seeing then a number of sounds which are nearly in unison, forms an 
aggregate of more power than anyone of its constituents, it follows, that when 
a multiplicity of instruments contains a strong combination of unisons, that 
combination determines the range of the concert.' (Op. cit. vol. III p. 41 August 
19, 1802.) 
Hegel probably knew of this controversy from the excellent account of it 
published by G. U. A. Vieth (1763-1836) in 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' 
vol. XXI pp. 265-314 (1805). Until the middle of the 1820'S the explanation of 
the tones given by Biot and accepted by Hegel was generally regarded as the 
correct one. In 1826 however, J. Purkynje (1787-1869) published an article in 
'Kastner's Archiv' (sect. I p. 39) reviving the theory that they may be purely 
subjective phenomena. This view was generally rejected at the time, but it was 
later given careful consideration by Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-1894) in 
'Die Lehre von den Tonempfindungen' (Braunschweig, 1863, Eng. tr. Ellis, 
London, 1875) app. xii; cf. J. W. S. Rayleigh (1842-1919) 'Theory of Sound' 
(2nd ed. 2 vols. London, 1894-6) § 386. A. F. A. Blein (1767-1845) revived one 
295 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
of the problems mentioned by Young in 1800 by giving accounts of a series of 
combination tones which could not be readily explained from the generally 
accepted hypothesis; see 'Expose de quelques principes nouveaux sur l' acoustique' 
(Paris, 1827). 
80,40 
Georg Joseph Vogler (1749-1814) is generally known to English readers 
on account of Browning's poem, with its fine characterization of the master 
extemporizing upon 'this instrument of his invention'. 
Vogler, whose father was a violin maker, was born at Pleichach near Wiirz-
burg, and was educated by the Jesuits. Like J. C. Bach and W. A. Mozart, he 
studied the history and theory of music under Giovanni Battista Martini 
(1706-1784) at Bologna, but was dissatisfied with his teacher. In 1773 he was 
ordained priest in Rome, made a knight of the Golden Spur, and appointed 
protonotary and chamberlain to the Pope. It was on account of these appoint-
ments that he was later known as 'Abbot' (Abt) Vogler. 
In 1775 he was appointed court chaplain and deputy director of music to the 
Elector Palatine, and soon made himself known as an eccentric but extremely 
effective teacher. In his 'Tonwissenschaft und Tonsetzkunst' (Mannheim, 1776), 
he put forward a new system of musical theory. He also invented a new system 
of fmgering for the harpsichord, which gave rise to a considerable controversy, 
and which was condemned as 'miserable' by no less a person than Mozart. 
Soon after the elector's court moved to Munich in 1780, Vogler left for Paris, 
where his organ concerts in the church of St. Sulpice attracted considerable 
attention. He subsequently held appointments at Stockholm and Darmstadt. 
Gansbacher, Weber and Meyerbeer were among his pupils, and their affection 
for their old master was unbounded. Until he settled down in Darmstadt in 
1807, he travelled widely and continuously, and visited Spain, Greece, Armenia 
and even Greenland, in search of uncorrupted forms of national melody. From 
1786 until 1789 he was working in St. Petersburg and Stockholm on the con-
struction of his 'orchestrion', the instrument mentioned here by Hegel. Once it 
was finished, he toured Europe with it, and in 1790 performed upon it with 
great effect at the Pantheon in London. 
The orchestrion was built into a case having a capacity of only nine cubic 
feet. It had four manuals, each consisting of sixty three notes, and thirty nine 
pedal notes. By a system of shutters, Vogler acquired a forte and piano for each 
separate pipe, so that the instrument had the same volume range as a great organ. 
By making use of Tartini's discovery of combination tones, Vogler also gave 
his instrument the same range of notes as a great organ, while dispensing with 
the larger pipes. Tartini had discovered for example, that if the fundamental 
tone of a triad is played together with its fifth, the octave below this funda-
mental tone is heard. Vogler assumed therefore, that if a pipe of sixteen feet is 
combined with that of its fifth (i.e. ten feet eight inches), the note produced by 
296 

NOTES 
the great thirty two feet pipe would be heard; he discovered that this note is pro-
duced from the fundamental tone, the major third and the perfect fifth. 
This discovery was soon utilized, and led to a general simplification of organ 
building. 
Vogler supervised the building of simplified organs in the St. Peterskirche 
and the Michaelshofkirche at Munich and elsewhere, but although he was 
able to handle these instruments with astonishing virtuosity and effect, they 
were found by others (including Mendelssohn) to be unplayable, and were 
subsequently rebuilt. 
For the state of German organ-building at the time of Hegel's death, see 
Gottlob Topfer 'Die Orgelbau-Kunst' (Weimar, 1833). On Vogler's organ-
building see: E. Rupp 'Abbe Vogler als Mensch, Musiker und Orgelbauthe-
oretiker' (Augsburg, 1922); H. Spies 'Abt Vogler und die von ihm 1805 
simplifizierte Orgel von St. Peter in Salzburg' (Mainz, 1932); H. Schweiger 
'Abbe Vogler's Simplifikationssystem' (KirchenmusikalischesJahrbuch, vol. 29, 
1934, pp. 72-123); H. J. Moser 'Orgelromantik' (Ludwigsburg, 1961). 
81,26 
,fo ift bas ~1)alten feinet fdoft nut bie ~ne @)aite'. ,@)aite' (string), must 
be a misprint for ,@)eite' (side, aspect). 
82, 3 
,ltJie benn fcf)on bet Stlang ois 5um @),)Jtingen obet @)cf)mH5en fortge1)en/. 
The verb here should be singular (fortge1)t). The phrase has been corrected in the 
translation. 
82,8 
This transition from sound to heat may well have been influenced by 
the treatment of the subject in J. W. Ritter's 'Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse 
eines jungen Physikers' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1810) vol. II pp. 225-269. Ritter 
discusses the influence of sound upon the structure of bodies, and illustrates his 
argument in much the same way as Hegel; see pp. 255-256, ,~n aus 
Of ciUatiousglut1) leucf)tenbet Stowet mufJ eigentlicf) in bem 
~ttgenoHcfe 
fcf)mel5en, in ItJdcf)em iebesmal bie 
~om,)JteHion ftatt 1)at... 'I)Utcf) 
biefe 
momentanen 
@)cf)mel5ungen 
unb 
m!iebetfeftltJetbungen 
miiHen 
~enbetungen uon ~ebeutung im fcf)ltJingenben Stot,)Jet 1)etuotgeotacf)t ltJetben, 
oefonbets in bet ~onfteUation feinet %1)eHe. Do 1)iet1)et fcf)on bas fogenannte 
~usflJielen Uon 3nfttumenten ge1)oten mag? -
'I)~ &lafet5etfcf)teien ift aucf) 
1tJ01)l ~olge eines ~tecf)eus ltJegen @)cf)mel5ung.' 
82, 16 
In Michelet's version of this sentence, heat appears formally 'in that it sub-
lates' (inbem fie . . . auf1)ebt) this boundedness. In Nicolin and Poggeler's 
version it appears formally 'as sublating' (ag auf1)eoenb) this boundedness. As 
K* 
297 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
they give no reason for this emendation (cf. 'Encyklopadie' Hamburg, 1959, 
pp. 250 and 485), Michelet's version has been preferred. 
83,25 
,hie tro.\Jifd)en ~oge(, heren 6elbftifd)feit, nad) $flan3entueife, in i~re tlege. 
tatitle ~iiUe, ha$ @efieher, hurd) ha$ £id)t unh hie ~i~e i~re$ SfHma'$ f)eraw-
geriffen tuirh/. C£ the note III. 335. 
Although these remarks may at first sight seem somewhat fantastic, the 
views they express were quite common at the beginning of the last century. 
J. F. Meckel (1781-1833) for example, in his 'Ueber die Federbildung' ('Reil's 
Archiv fur die Physiologie' vol. xii pp. 37--96, Halle, 1815) makes much of the 
similarity between feathers and plants (p. 60), and notes that, 'The brightest 
colours always occur at the ends of the feathers and are brought forth through 
the influence of the sunlight.' (p. 70) etc. J. M. Bechstein (1757-1822), in his 
delightful 'Gemeinnutzige Naturgeschichte Deutschlands' (4 vols. Leipzig, 
1801-7) vol. ii p. 36, 'For although there are also beautifully coloured birds in 
a temperate country such as Germany, and undistinguished birds enough 
within the tropics, it is nevertheless quite clearly in the hot regions of the earth 
that the most beautiful birds such as Peacocks, Colibris, Parrots etc. are to be 
found, as well as the Leopard and Zebra and the most beautiful butterflies and 
flowers'. 
83, 3 I 
Johann Baptist Spix (1781-1826) was born at Hochstadt in Upper Franconia, 
and was the son of a chirurgeon. He began to study theology, but in 1804, 
under the influence of Schellingianism, took up medicine, and was awarded 
his doctorate in this subject at Wurzburg. He worked at Bamberg for a few 
years as a general practitioner, but in 18n, through the influence of Schelling, 
was taken into the employ of the Munich Academy. He was subsequently 
elected member of this Academy, and keeper of its zoological collection. In 
1815 he was chosen by the Bavarian government to lead the expedition to 
Brazil, probably on account of an earlier expedition to the Mediterranean, 
which he had undertaken on behalf of the Academy. 
His 'Cephalogenesis' (Munich, 1815) was a valuable contribution to literature 
on the comparative anatomy of the skull, and his 'Geschichte und Beurtheilung 
aller Systeme in der Zoologie' (Nuremberg, I8n) was highly praised, but his 
inability to concentrate exclusively upon the solution of specific problems 
prejudiced the quality of his purely scientific work. He was never able to clear 
his mind of Schellingianism. His health was seriously impaired by the Brazilian 
expedition, and he only lived to help Martius with the first volume of the work 
quoted here by Hegel. 
Karl Friedrich Philipp Martius (1794-1868) was born at Erlangen, and from 
his earliest years, trained by his father in the natural sciences. Even as a boy, he 
298 

NOTES 
had a fine command of Greek and Latin, and the study of the classical languages 
and literatures always remained his favourite hobby. 
In 1810 he went up to the university ofErlangen and began to study botany. 
In 1814 he was awarded his doctorate for his work in cataloguing the plants 
in the botanical garden of the university; see his 'p lantarum horti academici 
Erlangensis enumeratio' (Erlangen, 1814). Soon afterwards he was appointed 
one of the supervisors of this garden, and it was in this capacity that he became 
acquainted with the king of Bavaria, who was a keen botanist and often visited 
the garden, and who recommended him for the Brazilian expedition. 
He became professor of botany at Munich at the early age of thirty two, 
and later gained a European reputation on account of his botanical works. 
Mount Martius in New Zealand was named after him. 
Hegel is here quoting 'Reise in Brasilian auf BefeW Sr. Majestat Maximilien 
Joseph I Konigs von Baiernin denJahren 1817 bis 1820 gemacht' (3 pts. Munich, 
1823, 1828, 1831), most of which is the work of Martius. H. E. Lloyd (1771-
1847) published an English translation of the first part of this work; see 'Travels 
in Brazil in the years 1817-1820' (2 vols. London, 1824). The passage cited 
differs somewhat from the original in punctuation. The hyphen was evidently 
inserted to indicate the deletion of a curious speculation regarding the influence 
of melody made by man upon the musical productions of animals. Hegel has 
taken the passage from a chapter in which a journey from Rio de Janeiro to Sao 
Paulo in December 1817 is described (I pp. 179-217). The Santa Cruz he 
mentions is the royal palace, some 37 miles west of Rio, where Spix and Martius 
stayed for a few days. After climbing the jungle-clad granite hills beyond this 
palace to a height of some three thousand feet, they descended somewhat into 
clayey country, and it was here that they heard this bird. 
The whole expedition to Brazil lasted just over three years. They left Trieste 
on April 7, 1817, with the Austrian party accompanying the archduchess 
Leopoldina, who was to be married to Don Pedro the son ofJohn VI of Portugal 
and later emperor of Brazil (I p. 12), and arrived at Rio de Janeiro on July 
15th (I p. 85). After making several expeditions in southern and central Brazil, 
they travelled up to Bahia (Salvador), Sao Luis and Para (Belem) (bk. II). They 
then set out to explore the Amazon, and on September 18, 1819 reached 
Santarem (III p. 1030). In order to get as full an impression as possible of the 
upper Amazon and of the foothills of the Andes, they separated at Villa de Ega 
(Tefe) on December 7, 1819 (III p. lI81). Spix crossed the Brazilian frontier 
at Tabatinga on January 9, 1820 (III p. lI88). They met again at Para on 
April 16, 1820 {III p. 1327), and spent the next two months packing their 
collection, which consisted of 85 mammals, 350 birds, 130 amphibia, lI6 
fishes, 2700 insects, 80 arachnida, 80 crustacea and 6500 plants (III p. 1387). 
Only 57 animals reached Munich alive, most of them being monkeys and parrots. 
Martius subsequently published several works on the flora of Brazil, see 'Nova 
genera et species plantarum' (3 vols. Munich, 1824-1829), 'leones selectae 
299 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Plantarum Cryptoganicarum' (Munich, 1827), and 'Flora brasiliensis' (2 vols. 
Stuttgart, 1829, 1833). 
C£ J. R. Moore 'Goldsmith's degenerate song-birds, an eighteenth century 
fallacy in ornithology.' ('Isis' 1942-1943 pp. 324-327): O. Goldsmith (1728-
1774) 'An History of the Earth and Animated Nature' (London, 1774) V 
pp. 324-325. 
85, 10 
Benjamin Thompson (1753-1814) count Rumford, was born at Woburn, 
Massachusetts, and apprenticed to a warehouseman at the age of thirteen. He 
married well however, fought for Britain during the rebellion, and left America 
for London in March 1776. From then on his social rise was rapid. George 
Germain gave him a post at the colonial office, Sir Joseph Banks had him elected 
fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1784 George ITIknightedhim. A tour of the 
continent in 1783 brought him into contact with the Elector of Bavaria, and further 
honours followed in quick succession. In 1788 he became a major general in 
the Bavarian army, privy councillor, and head of the Bavarian war department. 
The king of Poland conferred the order of St. Stanislaus upon him, scientific 
societies at Berlin, Munich and Mannheim elected him to membership, and in 
1791 he was made count of the Holy Roman Empire. 
In Munich he did a great deal of good work. He improved conditions in 
the Bavarian army, cleared the city of beggars by establishing workhouses, 
organized the distribution of cheap food to the poor, and laid out the 'English 
garden', which still flourishes there. He returned to Britain in 1795, and occupied 
himself with improving conditions in the workhouses and hospitals of Dublin, 
and installing improved heating and cooking facilities in well over a hundred 
London houses, including those of Lord Palmerston, Sir Joseph Banks and the 
Marquis of Salisbury. He was back in Munich in 1796, preventing the French 
and Austrian armies from entering the city. In May 1802 he finally left England, 
married Lavoisier's widow in 1805, separated from her in 1809, and in 18u 
settled, with a daughter by his first marriage, at Auteuil near Paris, where he 
lived a retired existence, spending much time in his garden. 
He is mainly remembered for the experiments with heat mentioned here by 
Hegel, but he also did much for the general furthering of science. In 1796 for 
example, he gave £1,000 to the Royal Society, the interest on which was to 
provide a prize and a medal for, 'the most important discovery, or useful 
improvement, in any part of Europe during the preceding two years, on heat 
or light'. At the same time he granted $5,000 to the American Academy of 
Arts and Sciences to provide a similar award for work of this kind done, 'in 
any part of the Continent of America, or in any of the American Islands'. It 
was Rumford's inspiration which led to the founding of the Royal Institution in 
Albemarle Street, and in 1801 he helped to organize the Bavarian Academy of 
Arts and Sciences. He also endowed a professorship at Harvard, the holder of 
300 

NOTES 
which should deliver lectures on, 'the utility of the physical and mathematical 
sciences for the improvement of the useful arts, and for the extension of the 
industry, prosperity, happiness and wellbeing of society'. See J. A. Thompson 
'Count Rumford' (New York, 1935). 
85,28 
,unO hltlat in @eftalt bon 2tUgemeinljeit, @emeinjamfeit'. 
85, 35 
Marc Auguste Pictet (1752-1825) was appointed professor at Geneva in 1786, 
and was later president of the Genevan Academy. When the city was annexed 
to France in 1798, Pictet was member (1802), and then secretary (1803) of the 
governing council. In 1807 he was one of the fifteen inspectors appointed for 
reforming the public education of the city. 
He was a founder member of the Genevan 'Societe de physique et d'histoire 
naturelle', director of the Genevan observatory, and a fellow of the Royal 
Society. He visited Great Britain in 180l, and between 1796 and 1816 issued his 
'Bibliotheque britannique', which provided accounts of current British scienti-
fic research for the French-reading public. 
Hegel may have remembered this experimentation with cold from his 
reading of F. A. C. Gren's 'Grundriss der Naturlehre' (4th ed. Halle, 1801) 
§ 545 (see the note II. 267). Pictet gave an account of it in his 'Essais de 
physique' (Geneva, 1790) p. 82; see the German translation of this work 
'Versuche iiber das Feuer' (Tiibingen, 1790) ch. 6. James Hutton (1726-1797) 
called Pictet's conclusions on the matter in question in his 'On the philosophy 
of light, heat, and fire' ('Edin. Roy. Soc. Trans.' vol. IV (Hist.) pp. 7-16). 
Benjamin Thompson (1753-1814) drew Pictet's attention to this article in a 
letter sent from Munich on January 12,1797: see 'The Complete Works of 
Count Rumford' (4 vols. Boston, 1870-1875) vol. IV pp. 736-738. 
Thompson repeated Pictet's experiment at Edinburgh in 1800, in the presence 
of T. C. Hope (1766-1844), John Playfair (1748-1819) and Dugald Stewart 
(1753-1828), and gave the following account of it in his 'Historical Review of 
the various experiments of the author on the subject of heat' (1805), 'Two 
metallic mirrors, fifteen inches in diameter, with a focal distance of fifteen 
inches, were placed opposite each other, sixteen feet apart. When a cold body 
(for example, a glass bulb filled with water and pounded ice) as was the case 
on this occasion, was placed in the focus of one of the mirrors, and a very 
sensitive air thermometer was placed in the focus of the other mirror, the latter 
thermometer began immediately to fall. If, instead of being placed directly 
in the focus, the thermometer was removed a short distance from it to one 
side, the cooling power which in the former case the cold body had exerted 
upon it was no longer perceptible.' See, 'The Complete Works of Count 
Rumford' (4 vols. Boston, 1870-1875) vol. IIp. 222; C. A. Gerhard 'Benjamin 
Grafen von Rumford Abhandlungen iiber die Warme' (Berlin, 1805) p. 36. 
301 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
86,18 
,'Ilie m:nna~me einet ~iitmematerie, wie Me be~ 6d)aUftoff~, tU~t aUf bet 
~ategorie, baij, .. /. 
86,22 
Peter van Musschenbroek (1692-1761), in his 'Introductio ad philosophiam 
naturalem' (2 vol. Leyden, 1762) vol. II p. 632, noticed that metals increase 
in weight when 'calcinated' by fire, and concluded from this that heat has 
weight. 
As the attack on the phlogiston theory gathered momentum at the close of 
the eighteenth century, some curious hypotheses were put forward. F. A. C. 
Gren (1760-1798), in his 'Systematisches Handbuch der gesammten Chemie' 
(Halle, 1787) took phlogiston to consist of heat and light and to constitute a 
negative weight. From this hypothesis he explained why materials became heavier 
on being burnt, by assuming that they lose phlogiston. See his subsequent 
controversy with J. T. Mayer (1752-1830) in Gren's Journal der Physik' 
(Leipzig, 1790-93) vol. I pp. 205 and 359, vol. IIp. 198. 
86,31 
For early views on the materiality of heat see Athanasius Kircher (1601-1680) 
'Mundus subterraneus' (Amsterdam, 1665) tome I, lib. IV, sect. i, cap. 2; 
Christian Wolff (1679-1750) 'Niitzliche Versuche' (3 pts. Halle, 1721-3) vol. 
II ch. IX § 206. By the middle of the eighteenth century the materiality of heat 
was a generally accepted proposition, see George Martine (1702-1741) 'Medical 
and philosophical Essays' (London, 1740), Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) 
'Philosophical Works' (5th ed. Dublin, 1802) p. 351, William Hillary (d. 1763) 
'The nature and laws of fire' (London, 1760). 
The postulation of material inflammability or phlogiston was of course closely 
connected with these theories of material heat, see G. E. Stahl (1660-1734) 
'ZuHillige Gedanken . . . iiber den Streit von dem sogenannten Sulphure' 
(Halle, 1718). Adair Crawford (1748-1795) 'Experiments and observations on 
animal heat and the inflammation of combustible bodies' (London, 1779, 
Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1785). The 'Anfangsgriinde der antiphlogistischen Chemie' 
(Berlin, 1792), by C. Girtanner (1760-1800) was the first important German 
work to call these theories in question. 
On later phlogiston theory see J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' 
vol. 3 ch. xiii (London, 1962). 
86, 39 
Hegel is here referring to 'An Inquiry concerning the Source of the Heat 
which is excited by Friction', a paper which Rumford read to the Royal Society 
on January 25, 1798. See 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1798 pt. I pp. 80-102; 'The 
Complete Works of Count Rumford' (4 vols. Boston, 1870-1875) vol. I 
pp. 471-493· 
302 

NOTES 
In this article Rumford calls in question the existence of an 'igneous fluid', 
and describes experiments he performed while superintending the boring of 
brass cannon in the workshops of the military arsenal at Munich. 
(i) By using a blunt steel borer with a pressure of 10,000 lb. revolving 32 
times a minute for 41 minutes, he obtained 837 grains Troy of metallic dust, 
which constituted oisth of the cylinder. He then asks, 'Is it possible that the 
very considerable quantity of heat that was produced in this experiment ... 
could have been furnished by so inconsiderable a quantity of metallic dust? 
and this merely in consequence of a change of its capacity for heat?' 
(ii) He then performed the same experiment in a vacuum to show that it was 
not the air which had engendered the heat. 
(iii) He encased the cylinder being bored in a watertight deal box, which he 
then fIlled with 26~-lbs. of water having a temperature of 60°F. After 2t hours 
of boring the water boiled, and he discovered that 8f oz. Troy of metallic 
powder had been produced. 
(iv) He showed that the metallic powder required the same amount of heat 
to raise its temperature 1°, as an equal amount of the original metal. 
He concluded from these experiments that the source of the heat generated 
was apparently 'inexhaustible', and that it is, 'extremely difficult, if not quite 
impossible, to form any distinct idea of any thing, in the manner the heat was 
excited and communicated in these experiments, except it be motion'. 
Hegel's statement that these experiments 'told heavily' against theories of 
the materiality of heat is strictly accurate, for these theories were not refuted 
by them. It was still possible for supporters of the caloric theory to argue that 
although Rumford had proved that the powder and the solid metal required 
the same quantity of heat to raise the temperature of equal masses of either one 
degree, he had not proved that they contained equal quantities of heat, and this to 
the physicists of the day was the main point at issue. In 1799 Sir Humphrey 
Davy (1778-1829) provided a more direct refutation of the calorists' view when 
he melted ice by rubbing two blocks of it together. It was a well-known fact 
that ice requires to have a quantity of heat added to it to convert it into water, 
so that it had to be admitted that the water produced by the friction contained 
more heat than the ice. Davy concluded from this experiment that 'friction ... 
does not diminish the capacity of bodies for heat'. See the 'Essay on Heat, 
Light and the Combinations of Light' in 'Contributions to physical and medical 
knowledge' (ed. T. Beddoes, Bristol, 1799) vol. I p. i; c£ Davy's 'Collected 
Works' (London, 1836) vol. II. 
88,14 
,~ie ffieibung bon 3IUei ~o13ern (bei ben mHlben)I, Nicolin and Poggeler, 
in their edition of the 'Encyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959) p. 252, omit the words 
in parenthesis, but make no mention of this in their notes (c£ p. 485). 
303 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
89,17 
In Hegel's day the investigation of specific heat or thermal capacity was 
already strictly divided into the study of gases, fluids and solid substances; see 
the exhaustive survey of the subject in Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' 
vol. X pp. 666-836 (Leipzig, 1841). See also J. F. W. Herschel's article 'Heat' 
in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (London, 1829-1845). Forerunners of the 
table printed by Herschel (p. 338) are to be found inJ. H. Magellan (1723-1790) 
'Essai sur la nouvelle Theorie du feu elementaire' (London, 1780), F. X. Baader 
(1765-1841) 'Vom Wannestoff' (Vienna and Leipzig, 1786), Jacob Gadolin 
(1719-1802) 'De theoria caloris corporum specifici' {Abo. 1784}, and John 
Murray (d. 1820) 'Elements of Chemistry' (4th ed. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1816). 
In Pierre Louis Dulong (1785-1838) and Alexis Therese Petit (1791-1820) 
announced their famous discovery that the specific heats of thirteen solid 
elements which they had investigated were very nearly proportional to their 
atomic weights, i.e. that the atoms of simple substances have equal capacities 
for heat, the specific thermal capacity of a substance being equal to ·375 divided 
by its atomic weight; see 'Recherches sur quelques points importants de la 
theorie de la chaleur' ('Annales de Chimie' vol X pp. 395-413; c£ 'Tilloch's 
Philosophical Magazine' vol LIV pp. 267-275, 1819, 'Thomson's Annals of 
Philosophy' vol. XIV pp. 189-198, 1819). 
89,40 
See the note II. 272. See also William Irvine (1743-1787), who assisted 
Black in his experiments, 'Essays, chiefly on Chemical Subjects' (London, 1805), 
and William Irvine the younger {I 776-1 8 II} ; the article in 'Nicholson's 
Journal' vol. vi. pp. 25-31 (1803). Cf. 'Experimental determinations of the 
latent heat of Spermaceti, Bees' Wax, Tin, Bismuth, Lead, Zinc and Sulphur' 
('Nicholson's Journal' IX, 1804, pp. 45-52; 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' 
vol. 38 pp. 305-317, 18II). 
90, 27 
At about II p.m. on April 20, 1781, thick smoke was seen to be pouring 
from a cabin on the war frigate 'Maria', which was anchored off Cronstadt, 
the great Russian naval station on the island of Kotlin near the head of the Gulf 
of Finland. As a similar fire had broken out during the previous spring, sabotage 
or foul play was suspected. Sir Samuel Greig (1735-1788), who had entered 
Russian service in 1764, had appointed many Scottish officers in the course of 
reforming the navy, and in his capacity as governor of Cronstadt. After the 
matter had been thoroughly investigated by Count Ivan Czernischev however, 
the Empress Catherine (1729-1796) was satisfied that the fire had started by a 
process of spontaneous combustion, 'in a hammock, rolled up and tied with 
string, and containing smoke-black mixed with the oil used for applying it,' 
and that the previous fire could have started in the same manner in 'hemp, 
304 

NOTES 
rolled up in greasy mats'. See Czernischev's report of July 23, 1781 in 'Acta 
Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae' vol. III pt. i p. 311. 
Johann Gottlieb Georgi (1729-1802) gave an account of these fires and of 
many related experiments proving the existence of spontaneous combustion 
of this kind in 'Neue Nordische Beytrage zur physikalischen und geographischen 
Erd- und Valkerbeschreibung, Naturgeschichte und Oekonomie' vol. III pp. 
37-83, vol. IV pp. 309-324 (St. Petersburg and Leipzig, 1782-3). Cf. J. C. 
Wiegleb (1732-1800) 'Handbuch der allgemeinen und angewandten Chemie' 
(2 vols. Berlin, 1781); Charles Rivington Hopson (1744-1796) 'A General 
System of Chemistry' (London, 1789) p. 629 note; Thomas B. Woodman, 
'Account of a spontaneous Inflammation' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1794 pp. 
426-428). 
90,40 
Hegel is referring to the 'Gottingsche gelehrte Anzeigen unter der Aufsicht der 
kanigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften. Der dritte Band auf das Jahr 1817'. 
The article he is quoting is an anonymous review of the 'Memoirs of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences', and appeared as no. 161 on pp. 
1801-1808 (October 9, 1817). 
The American article which gave rise to this observation by the German 
reviewer was, 'On the origin and formation of ice islands' by A. Fothergill, 
M.D., F.R.S., A.P.S. etc. (op. cit. vol. III pt. i pp. 69-81, Cambridge, Mass., 
1809). Fothergill questions the accepted theory that icebergs are formed only 
in the polar regions, 'If it be true, according to some late observations, that 
the temperature of the sea decreases from its surface downwards so far as has 
yet been determined by the deepest soundings, where its coldness reaches the 
freezing point even of salt-water, is it not probable that, at greater depths out 
of soundings it may be many degrees below the freezing point, and that where 
congelation is constantly going on, these enormous masses of ice, may be 
gradually formed stratum super stratum, attaching themselves to the bottom 
till, loosed by currents or tides, they are detached, and being specifically lighter 
than water, like air balloons increasing in buoyancy in proportion to the in-
crease of their surface, they will gradually rise, and at length rear their heads 
far above the surface?'. 
91,9 
,S)or~ hagegen With I,)etoe~tt, weir e~ ein ilRatetial ift, ha~ hie S)i~e fod .. 
ie~en fann' On the generation of heat by burning wood see K. Wagenmann 
(1787-1867) 'o-ber die Heizung mit erwarmter Luft' (Berlin, 1827). C£ 'Gehler's 
Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. V pp. 141-221 (Leipzig, 1829). 
92,9 
In the 1827 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia', Hegel inserted the following 
passage here, 'it disappears only by being conditioned, and the different 
305 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
determinations have lost their immediacy, and therefore their capacity for 
being conditions'. 
92,29 
,i)af3 bet Stlang, a1~ ~eele, bet imateriatut nid)t entflie~e .. . '. Cf. the note 
II. 282. By using the unusual word 'materiature', Hegel is evidently referring 
to the scholastic doctrine according to which form is rendered inherent in a 
particular 'materiate' by means of 'materiation'. Aristotle's treatment of matter 
and form is evidently the ultimate origin of this concept: see W. D. Ross 
'Aristotle' (London, 1923) p. 167 et seq. 
J. H. Stirling (1820-1909), in the first Gifford lectures, published as 'Phil-
osophy and Theology' (Edinburgh, 1890) p. 349, uses the word to mean that 
which constitutes materiality, 'As you may wash away all colour from a clot 
of blood, and be left at last with a pure transparent ultimate, a pure transparent 
web which held the colour, so you may discharge materiature from any particle 
of dust, or sand, or mud, and be left at last with a pure diamond of fibres 
intellectual' . 
Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), in 'Pseudodoxia Epidemica' (London, 
1646, Germ. tr. Christian Rautner, Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1689) bk. vii ch. i, 
discusses the treatment of creation in Aristotle's 'De Caelo' and then continues, 
'But herein we remain sufficiently satisfied from Moses, and the Doctrin de-
livered of the Creation; that is, a production of all things out of nothing, a 
formation not only of matter, but of form, and a materiation even of matter it 
sel£' Cf. Richard Burthogge (1638?-1694?) 'An Essay upon Reason' (London, 
1694) pp. 157-158; Marcus Vitruvius Pollio 'De Architectura Libri Decem' 
(ed. Rose, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1899) Bk. 4 ch. 2 ii; 'Thesaurus Linguae Latinae' 
(8 vols. Leipzig, 1900-1966) vol. 8 col. 467. 
95,4 
Nicolin and poggeler, in their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 
1959), alter this paragraph somewhat without explaining why. They omit 
'the Notion of' (,in i~tem 58egriffe/) in (a), and by reconstituting Hegel's sen-
tence structure, disrupt the syntax of (b). Their generallay-out of the text has 
been adopted, but the translation has been made from Michelet's version. 
95,7 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827) Hegel added 'for the senses' 
(,fut bie ~inne/) after 'difference', but the words were removed in the third 
edition (1830). 
96, II 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817), Hegel added the following 
passage at this juncture (see Michelet's version), 'The form of shape and of 
individuality in general is not to be thought of as an external mechanism or 
306 

NOTES 
composition. There is no point in attempting to understand the determinateness 
of shape by dragging in external division and an external application of parts, 
for the essential element of it is always the characteristic differentiation which 
appears within these parts, and which constitutes the determinate and self-
identical unity of their relation'. 
96,28 
,well Me 3nbitJibualitat fid) ~ier nod) nid)t gegenftanblid) ift'o C£ § 337. 
97,20 
For the state of knowledge, at the beginning of the last century, with regard 
to the physical and chemical factors determining crystal structure, see § 315. 
When Hegel takes the decisive factor to be this 'invisible germ' or 'constructive 
force' in water, he is merely characterizing the general position of crystallo-
graphic research at that time. See J. B. L. de Rome de l'Isle (1736-1790), 
'Cristallographie ou description des formes propres a tous les corps du regne 
mineral' (3 vols. Paris, 1783) vol. I p. 13, 'Nulle cristallisation ne peut s'operer 
sans Ie concours d' un fluide, qui, par son interposition, mette les molecules 
integrantes des sels a portee de s'unir'. John Murray (d. 1820), in his 'System 
of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) admits (vol. I p. 42) that, 'The theory 
of crystallization is still obscure, so far as relates to the cause of the regular 
forms to which it gives rise'. C£ Jacob Green (1790-1841) 'On an instance of 
instantaneous Crystallization' ('The American Journal of Science' 1821 vol. 
III pp. 93-4). Froriep 'Notizen aus dem Gebiete der Naturwissenschaften' 
(Weimar, April 1825 no. 254). 
98,7 
Jacob Nicolai M01ler (1777-1862) was the son of the well-known Norwegian 
doctor Hans M01ler (1736-1796), and was born at Akre in Gjerpen (Norway). 
In 1791 he came down to study law at Copenhagen University, and after taking 
his degree in this subject in 1795, worked for a while in the Danish chancellery. 
He soon found office work irksome however, and in 1797 he left for Berlin, 
with the object of studying mineralogy. It was in Berlin that he met his country-
man Henrik Steffens (1773-1845), who travelled with him to Freiberg in 
Saxony to hear A. G. Werner (1750-1817) lecture on the earth sciences. In 
1800 they met Schelling in Jena, and the article referred to here by Hegel, 
M01ler's second published work, was written soon afterwards, and appeared 
in Schelling's 'Neue Zeitschrift ffir speculative Physik' (Tiibingen, 1802) vol. I 
pt. iii pp. 1-66. It has as its title 'tiber die Entstehung der Warme durch Reibung 
nebst Folgerungen ffir die Theorie beyder Phanomene'. 
Hegel evidently has in mind the following passage (p. 45), 'I concluded, 
further, once I had discovered this curved line, that I had as it were discovered 
the original type of the organization, and that all organizations would perhaps 
307 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
consist of numbers of such curved lines standing in various relationships to one 
another, just as all crystals consist of straight lines joining in all directions ... 
It was thus that I discovered that this line is in fact the model in accordance 
with which the artist had moulded every part, not only of the human form, but 
also of forms such as vases etc., and that for this reason I might well call it the 
line of beauty. When I looked at all the other forms of organic nature in the 
light of this discovery, I found the curved line reoccurring everywhere: in 
plants, nearly all the forms of which fall between the line and the surface; in 
the minute world of insects; in the dumb fishes of the sea, in the light-winged 
inhabitants of the air, and in the creatures dwelling upon the firm-set earth.' 
M011er adds that he is aware of the lenticular form in crystals c£ A. G. 
Werner 'A Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils' (tr. Weaver, Dublin, 
1805) pp. II2, 303: plate I figs. 23, 24, but assures us that he would be able to 
explain it in the light of his general principle. 
M011er fell ill in Hamburg in 1803 and was nursed back to health by Charlotte 
Elisabeth Alberti, the daughter of Lessing's clerical friend, who was also related 
to Steffens and Ludgwig Tieck (1773-1853). On January 27, 1804 he married 
this young lady in the chapel of the Austrian embassy at Hamburg, and on the 
same day abandoned his Lutheran faith and was received into the Roman 
church. When he returned to Copenhagen later that year he was unable to get 
employment in a silver works because of his new religion. He therefore left 
Scandinavia for good, and spent the next thirty years wandering about Germany, 
working as an estate manager, hotel keeper, private tutor and schoolmaster. In 
1812 he was appointed teacher at the grammar school in Nuremberg where 
Hegel was headmaster, but the pay was so bad that he did not stay long. 
In 1834 his son was appointed professor of philosophy at Louvain, and in 
1835 he was granted a similar honorary appointment~ He died in Louvain on 
November 30, 1862. 
The religious aspect of his intellect entirely overshadowed his scientific 
interests in his later years. His 'Speculative Darstellung des Christenthums' 
(Leipzig, 1819), 'Das absolute Princip der Ethik (Leipzig, 1819), Johannes 
Scotus Erigena und seine Irrthiimer' (Mainz, 1844) and 'Aus der Scholastik des 
St. Thomas von Aquin' were published under the name of Nicolaus M011er, 
by which he chose to be known after his conversion. By 1822-1826, when he 
was in Vienna, he had almost completely forgotten his mother tongue. 
See: H. Steffens 'Was ich erlebte' (10 vol. Breslau, 1840/4): D. A. Rosenthal 
'Konvertitenbilder aus dem 19. Jahrhundert' (3 vols. Schaffhausen, 1866-70) 
lip. 62 et seq., p. 409 et seq.: F. Boetzmann 'De la science ala foi' (Malines, 
1909): T. Menge 'Graf F. L. Stolberg und seine Zeitgenossen' (Gotha, 1862) 
II p. 245 et seq. C£ the articles by F. Nielsen in 'Dansk Biografisk Lexikon' 
vol. XII pp. 79-81 (Copenhagen, 1898), and by K. Kjelstrup in 'Norsk Bio-
grafisk Leksikon' vol. IX pp. 573-574 (Oslo, 1939), J. B. Halvorsen 'Norsk 
Forfatter-Lexikon 1814-1880' (7 vols. Kristiania, 1885-1908) vol. iv pp. 225-228. 
308 

NOTES 
M0ller published two further scientific articles: 'Om Anvendelsen af Steen-
kul' (C. G. Rafn's 'Bibliotek for Physik, Medicin og Oeconomi' xvii pp. 177-
236, Copenhagen, 1800), and 'Pors0g til en Characteristik af de fire Verdensdele' 
(C. Molbech's 'Athene II' pp. 322-344, Copenhagen, 1814, Swedish tr. Stock-
holm, 1815). 
While living in Belgium he published several works criticizing recent 
German philosophy: 'De l'etat de la philo sophie moderne en Allemagne' 
(Louvain, 1843), 'La sophistique de Hegel' (Louvain, 1846), first published in 
the 'Revue catholique de Louvain' III, 1845-1846, 'Poi et science' ('Revue de 
Bruxelles' nouv. serie I, 1842), and three articles in the 'Katholische Zeitschrift 
der Universitat Bonns' 1845: 'Die Theodicee Schellings', 'Parmenides und 
Hegel', and 'Ueber die Dialectik Hegels'. 
98,26 
J. C. Scaliger (1484-1558), in his 'Exotericarum Exercitationum' (Paris, 1557) 
exerc. 88, mentions a kind of metal found in Mexico which could not be 
liquefied by fire or by the arts of the Spaniards, 'inter Mexicum et Dariem 
fodinus esse orichalci: quod nullo igni, nullis Hispanicis artibus hactenus 
liquescere potuit.' This was undoubtedly platinum, but it was not until the 
riddle of the eighteenth century that the Swedish chemist H. T. Scheffer 
(1710-1759) made an accurate examination of the metal: see 'Kungliga Svenska 
Vetenskapsakademiens Handlingar' 1752 vol. xiii pp. 269, 276: 1757 vol. 
xviii p. 314. 
As the metal was practically immune to any form of corrosion, it was used 
for making chemical apparatus after W. H. Wollaston (1766-1828) had dis-
covered how to make it malleable: 'On a method of rendering platina malleable' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1829). Wollaston discovered how to do this as early as 
1804, but he kept the process a secret, and probably earned about £30,000 
from it. He dissolved native platinum in aqua regia, precipitated ammonium 
chloroplatinate with ammonium chloride, decomposed this by heat, washed 
the fmely divided residue of platinum, compressed a mud of the moist powder, 
raised this to a white heat, and hammered it into an ingot which could be beaten 
into foil or drawn into wire. 
When Hegel says that platinum is granular he probably has in mind the state 
in which it occurs naturally, and also, perhaps, its rigidity, i.e. the great difficulty 
formerly experienced in melting it or making it malleable. In his day Peru and 
Colombia produced most of the platinum marketed. The rich deposits of the 
metal at Verkhniy-Isetsk in the Urals were not discovered until 1819 and not 
extensively exploited until 1822. In 1831 platinum ore was recognized in the 
gold-bearing deposits of Borneo, where it was known to the natives as 'mas 
kodok' (frog gold), and had previously been regarded as worthless. A nugget 
of platinum weighing 310 ozs. was later discovered at Nizhe Tagisk. 
309 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
99,10 
,unb ift in biefet nod) alifttaften Gttenge -
bet IDlagneti5m~/ In normal 
usage 'bie Gttengel merely means strictness ,sharpness, keenness. Hegel's 
meaning becomes clearer here if we remember that metals which are hard to 
melt, such as platinum, were said to be 'fttengflilffig/, i.e. refractory. 
100,6 
See the note III. 228. 
100,8 
See 'Schellings Werke' (ed. Manfred Schroter, Munich, 1958) vol. II pp. 
257-261, first supplementary volume pp. 163-173, second supplementary 
volume pp. 255-276. 
In 1799 Schelling wrote ,m!enn nun allgemeine 
~nalogien illietf}au.):lt 
lietoeifenbe Sttaft f}alien, fo ift fein 8toeifel, bali bem IDlagneti5mus biefellie 
~unftion filt bie allgemeine ilCatut 5ugefd)tieoen toetben muli, bie toit bet 
unliefannten Urfad)e bet GenfiOiHtlit filt bie otganifd)e 5ufd)teilien/. He then 
goes on to assert that all oppositions in nature have their root in the phenomenon 
of magnetism. 
In 1804, in a fuller exposition of this doctrine, he writes, ,~ie (fleftricitlit 
ift ebenfo toie bet IDlagnetismu~ nid)t bie m!itfung eines oefonbeten ~tinci~, 
fonbetn eine allgemeine Stategotie bet IDlatetie/. 
101,21 
,bet f.):ltobe ~unft'. Literally translated this would be 'the brittle (hard, 
inflexible) point'. 
101, 33 
Rene-Just Hauy (1743-1822) discovered for example that the electricity of 
tourmaline decreases rapidly from the summits or poles towards the middle of 
the crystal, where it is imperceptible, and that if a tourmaline is broken into 
any number of fragments, each fragment, when excited, has two opposite poles. 
He found that Siberian and Brazilian topaz, borate of magnesia, mesotype, 
sphene and calamine also possess this property. See his 'Traite de mineralogie' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1801, Germ. tr. Karsten, 3 vols. Leipzig, 1803): c£ P. F. Mottelay 
'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 
286-288. 
102, I 
See Schelling, 'Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur' (1797, 'Werke' ed. 
Schroter, 1st suppl. vol. p. 172), 
,~ieli ift eine bet etften 2ef}ten 
bet ilCatur.):lf}UofO.):lf}ie, bie im ~nttoutf bes Gt}ftems biefer m!iffenfd)aft fo 
aUSgebriidt ift: ,,~et IDlagneti5mus ift fo allgemein in bet allgemeinen ilCatur, 
rus bie GenfiOiHtiit in bet otganifd)en, bie aUd) ber ~flan5e 5ufommt. 
310 

NOTES 
2!ufgef)oben ift er in ein3elnen 6ubftan3en nur fiir bie Q;rfdJeinung; in ben 
fogenannten unmagnetifdJen 6ubftan3en berliett fidJ bei ber )8eriif)rung un .. 
mittelbar in Q:leftricitiit, waiS bei ben magnetifdJen nodJ aliS IDlagneti£Smw 
unterfdJieben wirb, fowie bei ben ~flan3en unmittelbar in 3ufammen3ief)ungen 
fidJ berliett, wa£\ beim %f)ier nod) aliS 6enfation unterfdJieben wirb. Q;iS fef)lt 
alfo nur an ben IDlitteln, um ben IDlagneti£\mw ber fogenannten unmagnetifdJen 
6ubftan3en 3U ertennen tt.f.w.'4I. 
102, 34 
Sir George Leonard Staunton ( 1 73 7-1801) has left an account of the eighteenth 
century Chinese compass in his 'An Authentic account of the Earl of Macartney's 
Embassy from the King of Great Britain to the Emperor of China' (2 vols. 
London, 1797 Germ. tr. M. C. Sprengel, 2 pts. Halle 1798). 'The nature and 
cause of the qualities of the magnet have at all times been subjects of contem-
plation among the Chinese. The Chinese name for the compass is ting-nan-chin, 
or needle pointing to the south; and a distinguishing mark is fIxed on the 
magnet's southern pole, as in European compasses upon the northern one'. 
(Vol. I p. 445). 
Cf. J. A. M. de Moyria de Maillac (1679-1748) 'Histoire generale de la Chine' 
(13 vols. Paris, 1777-1785) vol. i p. 316: Julius Klaproth (1783-1835) 'Lettre a 
M. Ie Baron Humboldt sur l'invention de la boussole' (Paris, 1834). 
As early as 2637 B.C. Hoang-ti, in order to help his military campaigning, is 
said to have constructed a chariot upon which stood a prominent female fIgure 
which indicated the four cardinal points, and which always turned to the south 
whatever might be the direction taken by the chariot: see P. F. Mottelay 
'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 1-3. 
103,3 
Andre Marie Ampere (1775-1836), building on H. C. 0rsted's famous dis-
covery of the magnetic fIeld surrounding an electric current ('Gilbert's Ann. 
der Physik' 1820, VI p. 295), investigated in an experimental and theoretical 
manner the mutual action of electric currents, and the equivalence of a closed 
circuit to a polar magnet. It was this latter investigation which suggested his 
celebrated hypothesis that molecular currents are the cause of magnetism. See 
'Receuil d' observations electrodynamiques' (Paris, 1822); 'Theories des 
phenomenes electrodynamiques' (paris, 1826). 
These investigations laid the foundation of modern electro kinetics : see M. 
Faraday 'Experimental Researches in Electricity' (3 vols. London, 1839-1855): 
J. Clerk Maxwell 'Electricity and Magnetism' (2 vols. Oxford, 1892): E. F. 
Fournier d' Albe 'The Electron Theory' (London, 1906). 
103, 19 
This probably became generally known during the fIfteenth century: see the 
311 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 01= NATURE 
article by G. Hellmann in 'Meteorologische Zeitschrift' (ed. Hann and Hell-
mann) 1906 vol. 23 p. 145. The first accurate measurement of the declination of 
the needle was made by Robert Norman ofWapping, a manufacturer of com-
pass needles: see his 'The Newe Attractive' (London, 1581), in which he states 
that the dip, 'for this citie of London, I finde, by exact obseruations to be about 
71 degrees 50 mynutes' (ch. 4). 
Henry Gellibrand (1597-1637), Gresham professor of astronomy, discovered 
the secular change in the declination; see his 'Discourse Mathematical on the 
Variation of the Magneticall Needle together with its Admirable Diminution 
lately discovered' (London, 1635). George Graham (1675-1751), the London 
instrument maker, discovered a diurnal variation of 35' in the needle; see 'An 
Account of Observations Made of the Horizontal Needle at London, 1722-
1723' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1724-5 p. 332 and pp. 96-107). John Canton 
(1718-1772), by observing declination-changes on 603 days between 1756 and 
1759, was able to draw the distinction between regular and irregular diurnal 
variation in declination; see 'An attempt to account for the regular and diurnal 
variation of the horizontal magnetic needle'. ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1759). 
By measuring the oscillations of a vertical needle in the magnetic meridian, 
Jean Charles Borda (1733-1799) was able to determine correctly the differences 
in the intensity of terrestrial magnetism. J. J. D. Cassini (1747-1845), byobser-
vations made between 1782 and 1791, was able to show that the magnetic 
needle is also subject to an annual periodical fluctuation depending on the 
position of the sun with regard to the equinoctial and solstitial points. 
In Hegel's day there was some doubt as to the date at which declination had 
first been discovered: see Tiberius Cavallo (1749-1809) 'Treatise on Mag-
netism' (London, 1787) supplements; c£ P. F. Mottelay 'Bibliographical History 
of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 45-54 on the identity of 
Petrus Peregrinus (Cavallo's 'Peter Adsiger'), and the authenticity of the 
Leyden manuscript dated August 8, 1269. 
103,26 
See 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 51 (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931), 
,mie am magnetifd)en ~fen an ben ~olen bet ~fe1tfeilftaub ftiirfet angecrogen 
mitb als an bem WHttelfJunUe'. Michelet substituted ,attta~irt' (attracted) for 
,angecrogen' . 
103,28 
William Gilbert (1540-1603), in his 'De Magnete Magneticisque Corporibus' 
(London, 1600, Eng. tr. Mottelay, Chicago, 1952) bk. II ch. 27, appears to put 
forward a curious anticipation of the theory mentioned here by Hegel. 
Hegel could well be referring to 'Untersuchungen iiber den Magnetismus 
der Erde' (Christiania, 1819), by Christopher Hansteen (1784-1873), which was 
the standard work on this subject during his period at Berlin. As this passage 
312 

NOTES 
dates from the Jena period however, it is almost certainly a reference to the 
theory put forward by J. B. Biot (1774-1862) in 1804, according to which the 
laws governing the declination of the needle and magnetic intensity may be 
deduced from the hypothesis of a magnet situated at the centre of the earth 
having its poles infinitely close to each other and directed to opposite points 
on the surface of the globe; see 'Sur les variations du magnetisme terrestre a 
differentes latitudes'; Journal de Physique' LIX 1804 pp. 429-450; 'Tilloch's 
Philosophical Magazine' XXII 1805 pp. 248-257, 299-308; 'Gilberts Annalen 
der Physik' 1805 pp. 257-298, cf. Sir Edward Sabine (1788-1883) in the Report 
of the Seventh Meeting of the British Association; K. B. Mollweide (1774-1825) 
in 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. XXIX pp. 1-35,251-267. 
The theoretical background to this idea is to be found in two papers published 
in 'Histoire de l'Academie royale de Berlin' (1757 p. 175, 1766 p. 213) by 
Leonhard Euler (1707-1783). Euler adopted the theory of Descartes that the 
'magnetic fluid' moves from the equator to the poles, and then attempted to 
explain mathematically the course of the magnetic needle over the earth's 
surface by announcing that the horizontal needle is a tangent to the circle passing 
through the place of observation and through the two points on the earth's 
surface where the dipping needle becomes vertical or the horizontal needle 
loses its directive power. His theories were based upon the 'Variation Chart' 
published by Edmund Halley (1656-1742) in 1700, revised versions of which 
were published by William Mountaine and James Dodson (d. 1757) in 1744, 
1756 and 1757 ('Trans. Roy. Phil. Soc.' 1757). C£ P. C. Le Monnier (1715-1799) 
'Les lois du Magnetisme (2 vols. Paris, 1776-1779). 
Charles Augustin de Coulomb (1736-1806) had also contributed to Biot's 
theory through his investigation of the distribution of electricity upon the 
surface of spheres; see 'Memoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences' 1784, 
1785. It was the information collected by F. H. A. von Humboldt (1769-1859) 
during his voyage to the Americas in 1799-1804 which provided Biot with his 
data regarding the variation in the declination of the needle and the intensity 
of the earth's magnetic force; see Humboldt's 'Voyage aux regions equinoxiales 
du Nouveau Continent fait en 1799-1804' (30 vols. Paris, 1807 etc.). 
The method used at this time for comparing the force at different places 
consisted in taking the time of oscillation of the dipping needle. This probably 
accounts for Hegel's referring to declination as 'an oscillation of a more uni-
versal nature'. 
103,29 
See Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) p. 51, 
,6onbetn bet i1Ragnetgmus ift bies gan~ ~Hgemeine bet ~be, bas aUent .. 
galben al~ bies @an~e ift'. Michelet's version of this sentence changed the 
meaning, ,6onbetn bet i1Ragnetismus ift bien gan~ ~Ugemeine bet Q':tbe, bie 
aUentgalben bet gan~e i1Ragnetgmus ift'. 'Magnetism is however completely 
313 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
general to the Earth, and the Earth therefore constitutes the completeness of 
magnetism throughout the whole of its being'. 
103, 35 
Jeremias Benjamin Richter (1762-1807); for an account of his life and work 
see the note II. 428. Hegel is here referring to his article 'Ueber die bis jetzt 
sicherste Reinigungsmethode des Kobalts und Nickels vom Wismuth, Arsenik, 
Eisen und Kupfer; vozuglich aber die Methode der Scheidung des Kobalts 
vom Nickel oder des Nickels vom Kobalt in grossen Quantitaten', which 
appeared in A. F. Gehlen's 'Neues allgemeines Journal der Chemie' vol. xx 
pp. 61-72 (Berlin, 1804). Cf. 'Annales der Chemie vol. 53 p. 107. A summary 
of this article was published in 'Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' vol. XIX pp. 
51-54 (1804). Cf. the account of Richter's supposed discovery of 'nickeline' in 
Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' vol. XII pp. 261-165 (London, 
1805), and the article by Wilhelm Hisinger (1766-1852) 'Undersokning 
af Niccolan' in 'Afhandlingar i Fysik, Kemi och Mineralogi' vol. III pp. 
105-II2 (Stockholm, 1810), summarized in 'Thomson's Annals of Philos-
ophy' vol. I pp. II6-120 (1813), in which Hisinger showed that 'nickeline' was 
in fact an alloy of nickel with cobalt, plus a little iron and a trace of arsenic. 
Cobalt had been discovered by Georg Brandt (1694-1768), see his 'Cobalti 
nova species examinata et descripta' (Stockholm, 1748), and soon afterwards 
Axel Fredrik Cronstedt ( I 722-I 76 5) had established the fact that nickel is a distinct 
metal, see his 'Ron och forsok gjorde med en malmart fran Los kobalt grufvor' 
(Stockholm, 1751). Great difficulty was encountered in obtaining these metals 
in their pure state however, and Torbern Olaf Bergman (1735-1784), who 
investigated them with great care, came to the conclusion that it was impossible 
to obtain pure nickel, see his 'Opuscula Physica et Chemica' (6 vols. Uppsala, 
I779-1784). It was Bergman who first discovered the magnetic property of 
nickel (op. cit. II p. 240). F. A. K. Gren (1760-1798), in his 'Systematisches 
Handbuch der gesammten Chemie' (4 pts. Halle, 1787-1791) notes that cobalt 
has magnetic properties. 
For some years, as Hegel notes, many chemists attributed the magnetic 
properties of these metals to their impurities (i.e. their iron content). L. J. 
Thenard (1777-1857) showed however that the magnetic property of nickel 
increases when it is purified ('Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' vol. XX p. 63), 
and Richard Chenevix (1774-1830) showed that its loss of magnetic power 
was due to its arsenic content ('Nicholson's Journal' vol. V p. 287). W. A. 
Lampadius (1772-1842) subsequently calculated its magnetic energy as in the 
ratio of 35 to 55 to that of iron. 
See also W. A. Lampadius 'Annales de Chimie' vol. XXVI p. 89: J. B. 
Trommsdorff(1770-1837) 'Nicholson's Journal' vol. xii p. 258: C. F. Bucholz 
(I770-1818) 'Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' vol. xxiii p. 193: Richard 
Chenevix 'Observations on the supposed magnetic property of nickel' 
314 

NOTES 
('Nicholson's Journal' III p. 286, 1802): Richard Phillips (1778-1851) 'On the 
purification of nickel' ('Tilloch's Phil. Mag.' vol. xvi p. 312, 1803). 
104,20 
At the beginning of the last century, the term 'metalloid' was new, and was 
not yet clearly defined. It was not always synonymous with 'semi-metal' 
(~albmetarr), and this probably accounts for Hegel's keeping to the older term, 
the meaning of which was quite clear. As he indicates, shape or structure was 
taken to be the basic factor in the distinction between metals and semi-metals. 
Georg Brandt (1694-1768), in an article published in the 'Acta Sveciae 
Upsaliae publicata' (1735), classed mercury, antimony, bismuth, cobalt, arsenic 
and zinc as semi-metals, and rejected cinnabar, vitriols etc. from this class. He 
regarded true metals as those which solidify from fusion with a concave 
surface, and semi-metals to be metallic in appearance but brittle under the 
hammer. J. G. Wallerius (1709-1785), in his 'Elementa Metallurgiae spcciatim 
Chemicae conscripta' (Stockholm, 1768, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1770) vol. II pt. iii 
classes mercury, arsenic, cobalt, nickel, bismuth antimony and zinc as semi-
metals, and (pt. iv) iron, copper, lead, tin, silver, gold and platinum as complete 
metals.John Murray (d. 1820), in his 'System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 
1819) vol. iii p. 455 notes that, 'Nickel has been placed among what are named 
Semi-metals, from appearing to have little ductility or malleability'. 
Paul Erman (1764-1851), in an article published in 'Gilberts Annalen der 
Physik' vol. 42 p. 45 (1812) was evidently the ftrst to use the term 'metalloids', 
which he applied to the metals of alkalies and earths. At almost the same time, 
Berzelius also used the term for any ponderable elements which are not metals: 
see 'Kungliga Svenska Vetenskaps-Academiens Handlingar' (Stockholm, 1812) 
vol. 33 pp. 28-74, and his 'Lehrbuch der Chemie' (tr. Wohler, Dresden, 1825) 
vol. I pt. i p. 166. It was only later that this term was applied to semi-metals like 
arsemc. 
104,27 
,bet imagnet,,@;iienftein fef)eint abet bas IStJecififef)e lJU iet)n, tuotan fief) bet 
imagnetwmus offenoatt.' Hegel is referring to magnetite, which was known to 
the ancients as Magnesian stone on account of its having been found in large 
quantities in the district of Magnesia near the Aegean coast. See W. A. Tiemann 
'Systematische Eisenhiittenkunde' (Nuremberg, 1801) § 304. 
104,29 
Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859); see 'A letter from M. de Humboldt 
to M. Pictet, on the Magnetic Polarity of a Mountain of Serpentine' in 'Nichol-
son's Journal of Natural Philosophy' vol. 1 pp. 97-101 (June, 1797). 
'I traversed the chain of mountains of the High Palatinate and the margraviate 
of Bayreuth; and I found, in the bottom of the Fichtelgebirge, between Munich~ 
berg and Goldcronach, an isolated hill, which rises to elevation of ftfty toises' 
(320 ft), 'above the surrounding plain. Its height above the level of the sea may 
315 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
be estimated at two hundered and eighty, or three hundred, toises' (1790-
1920 ft). 'This hill extends in length from west to east, and forms a pyramid 
extremely obtuse. The rocks which crown the summit or ridge are composed 
of serpentine of considerable purity ... The action of this mountain of serpentine 
upon the magnet shews itself in a very curious manner. The uncovered rocks 
which are seen on the northern slope, and those on the declivity towards the 
south, have poles directly opposite. The former exhibits only south poles, the 
latter north poles. The whole mass of foliated serpentine does not therefore 
possess a single magnetical axis, but presents an infinity of different axes per-
fectly parallel to each other. This parallelism also agrees with the magnetic 
axis of the globe, though the poles of serpentine are inverted; so that the 
northern pole of the hill is opposed to the south pole of the earth. The east and 
western slopes present what in the theory of magnetism would be called the 
points of indifference ... Two points, of which the action is very strong, are 
joined by rocks which do not exert the least attraction. The chemical analysis of 
these compounds affords the same results; and it would be no less difficult to dis-
cover any difference of aggregation between them, than between iron which has 
received the touch, and other iron which had never acquired the magnetic power.' 
104,32 
In support of this statement, Hegel cites an observation made in 'Reise in 
Brasilien' (3 pts. Munich, 1823-1831) by J. B. Spix (1781-1826) and K. F. P. 
Martius (1794-1868); see the note II. 298. The expedition landed at Funchal 
on June 7, 1817. In vol. I pp. 64-65 there is a description of the hills of Madeira. 
Hegel quotes from the following passage, 'The phenomenon of the attraction 
and repulsion of the magnetic needle is very marked in the basalt of Madeira ... 
Evidence of polarity was more marked in this wacke than in the lower-lying 
basalt, which bears out the observation made by Giesecke that higher-lying 
basalt is more magnetic than that at lower levels. Incidentally, basalt which on 
account of its height is more insulated from the ground, becomes polarized 
earlier for the same reason that every stone capable of magnetism, even magne-
tite, only becomes magnetic when it is brought out of the depths into the air and 
light, just as a weather-vane only becomes magnetic when it is set on a steeple, 
or an iron rod when it is placed upright'. 
Spix and Martius are referring here to a paper 'On the mineralogy of Disko 
Island', written by Sir Charles Giesecke (1761-1833) in 1814, and published in 
the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' vol. I pp. II7-120 (1819). They knew of 
this paper (see their footnote) from a notice which appeared in the 'Edinburgh 
Philosophical Journal' vol. V p. 221 (1821), and Hegel also quotes this reference. 
'Sir Charles Giesecke observed similar effects in Greenland. All the basalt of 
Disco Island is magnetic. That which is found in the most elevated situations is 
most so, the fallen masses dispersed around the base of the mountains having 
more power over the needle than the others.' 
316 

NOTES 
Colonel George Gibbs (1776-1833), who had recently donated a magnificent 
collection of 12,000 minerals to the University of Yale, gave an account of a 
similar observation in, 'On the connexion between magnetism and light' ('The 
American Journal of Science' ed. B. Silliman vol. I pp. 89-90, New York, 1818). 
He visited a magnetic iron mine belonging to the governor of New Jersey, 'The 
ore in the upper part of the bed is magnetic and has polarity; but that raised from 
the bottom has no magnetism at first, but acquires it after it has been sometime 
exposed to the influence of the atmosphere ... I could only account for this 
circumstance by supposing that magnetism existed not in the interior of the 
earth, as was supposed, but only on the surface, and in such bodies as received 
this principle from atmospheric, or celestial influence'. 
During the two decades preceding Hegel's death, the nature of this connection 
between light and magnetism was a matter of controversy. Some attributed the 
'stimulation' as he calls it, to the light itself, others attributed it to the heat 
generated. In the summer of 1812 D. P. Morichini (1773-1823), professor at 
Rome, claimed to have demonstrated the direct magnetizing of steel needles by 
the violet rays of the solar spectrum: see his 'Sopra la forza magnetizzante del 
lembo extremo del raggio violetto' (Rome, 1812): c£ 'Bibliotheque britannique' 
vol. 52 pp. 21-35 (1813): 'Gilbert's Annalen der Physik' vol. 53 p. 212 (1813). 
Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) saw Morichini's experiments performed in 
Italy in 1813, and was convinced by them, as was John Playfair (1748-1819), 
when he saw Dr. Carpi perform similar experiments in Rome in 1817. S. H. 
Christie (1784-1865), in 'On magnetic influence in the solar rays' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1826 pp. 219-239, 1828 pp. 379-396) defended Morichini's hypothe-
sis and suggested that terrestrial magnetism is probably derived from solar 
influence, but A. von Baumgartner (1793-1865) contended that the influence 
of light upon the movement of the needles was due to the heating of the air 
about them; see 'Zeitschrift fUr Physik und Mathematik' I pp. 200-209, 263-281 
(1826), III pp. 96-103, 157-174 (1827): 'The Edinburgh Journal of Science' VI 
pp. 202-204 (1827). Cf. Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. VI pp. 873-
903 (Leipzig, 1836): Emil Wilde 'Geschichte der Optik' (2 vols. Berlin, 1838-
1843) II pp. 241-248: Mary Somerville (1780-1872) 'The Connection of the 
Physical Sciences' (London, 1834 tr. Kloden, Berlin, 1835): P. F. Mottelay 
'Bibliographical History of Electricity of Magnetism '(London, 1922) pp. 423-424. 
104,35 
This was the ordinary method by which bodies were demagnetized in 
Hegel's day. The metal was raised to a bright red heat, and then carefully 
guarded from magnetic influence while it cooled. This was a troublesome opera-
tion however, and was open to the objection that it was almost sure to produce 
a material but uncertain change in the physical constitution of the metal. It was 
subsequently discovered, (see Brit. Assoc. Report, 1890, 145), that ordinary 
magnetizable iron is in many respects an essentially different substance from the 
317 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
non-magnetizable metal into which it is transformed when its temperature is 
raised to this critical point. Abrupt alterations take place in its density, specific 
heat, thermo-electric quality, electrical conductivity, temperature-coefficient 
of electrical resistance, and in some at least of its mechanical properties. 
Consequently Hegel is completely justified in pointing out the connection 
between the magnetic properties of iron and the processing to which it is sub-
mitted. It was J. A. Ewing (1855-1935) who introduced the method of demag-
netizing a specimen by subjecting it to a succession of magnetic forces which 
alternate in direction and gradually diminish in strength from a high value to 
zero; see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 176 p. 539; c£ 'Magnetic Induction in 
Iron and other Metals' (3rd ed. London, 1900). 
105, I 
The iron and steel industry did not take on its modern form until the middle 
of the last century, when Henry Bessemer (1813-1898) invented his extra-
ordinary process of making the heat developed by the rapid oxidation of the 
impurities in pig iron raise the temperature above the exalted melting-point of 
the resultant purified steel. 
The most thoroughgoing and comprehensive eighteenth century work on 
the processing and properties of iron and steel is 'Forsok till jarnets historia' 
(Stockholm, 1782, Germ. tr. by Georgi, 2 vols. Berlin, 1785) by Sven Rinman 
(1720-1792). See also 'Memoire sur Ie fer consideree dans ses differents etats 
metalliques' ('Mem. de l'Acad. roy. des Sciences' 1786 p. 204; Germ. tr. Crell's 
Chem. Annal. 1794 vol. I) by Charles Auguste Vandermonde (1735-1796), 
Gaspard Monge (1746-1818) and C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822). When Hegel 
was delivering these lectures the best discussion in German of the various 
theories relating to the different structures, properties and chemical impurities 
of iron and steel was to be found in the works of Wilhelm Albrecht Tiemann: 
see his concise 'Bemerkungen und Versuche iiber das Eisen' (Braunschweig, 
1799), his 'Systematische Eisenhiittenkunde mit Anwendung der neuern 
chemischen Theorie' (Nuremberg, 1801), which contains a very useful biblio-
graphy, and his 'Abhandlung iiber die Formerie und Giesserei auf Eisenhiitten' 
(Nuremberg, 1803). 
In England, it was David Mushet (1772-1847), who by his experience at the 
Clyde Iron Works, the Alfreton Iron Works in Derbyshire, and the iron works 
at Coleford in the forest of Dean, made himself the greatest expert of his day 
in this field; see the forty articles on iron and steel published in 'Tilloch's 
Philosophical Magazine' 1798-1823, and collected in his 'Papers on Iron and 
Steel' (London, 1840). 
Cf. the curious theory put forward by Timothy Lane (1734-1807) in 'On 
magnetic attraction of oxides of iron' ('Phil. Trans. Roy.' Soc. 1805 pp. 281-284), 
and the chemical analysis of steel by L. N. Vauquelin (1763-1829) in 'Nichol-
son's Journal' vol. I pp. 248-256. 
318 

NOTES 
105, 12 
William Gilbert (1540-1603), in his 'De Magnete' (London, 1600, Eng. tl. 
Mottelay, Chicago, 1952) bk. III ch. 12 quotes 'Of the Compounding of 
Antidotes' by Philip Costa of Mantua as evidence of this, 'At Mantua, an apothe-
cary showed me a piece of iron completely turned to loadstone, so attracting 
other iron that it might be compared to a loadstone. But this piece of iron, 
after it had for a long time supported a terracotta ornament on the tower of 
the church of San Agostino at Rimini, was at last bent by the force of the winds 
and so remained for ten years. The friars, wishing to have it restored to its 
original shape, gave it to a blacksmith, and in the smithy Master Giulio Cesare, a 
prominent surgeon, discovered that it resembled loadstone and attracted iron. 
The effect was produced by long-continued lying in the direction of the poles'. 
About 1722, the rusty base of an iron cross which had been on a church spire 
in Delft for two hundred years was found by Antonius Leeuwenhoek (16p-
1723) to be highly magnetized; cf. the letter from Arnould Marcel ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1731-1732 pp. 294-298). 
105,17 
Anton Brugmans (1732-1789) was born at Hautum in the Netherlands, and 
was the son of a clergyman. At the early age of fourteen he left the Grammar 
School at Dokkum and continued his studies at the University of Franeker. Only 
two years later he took his M.A. with a thesis 'De Essentiarum idearumque 
absoluta necessitate' (Franeker, 1748), and in 1749 was awarded his doctorate for 
'Recherches sur quelques principes de connoissances humaines' (Leyden, 1756). 
In 1756 he began to teach 'philosophy' at Franeker, most of his courses being 
concerned with the natural sciences. In 1766 he was appointed professor of 
natural science at Groningen and his post at Franeker was taken by Jan Hendrik 
van Swinden (1746-1823), who was to continue Brugmans' work on the nature 
of magnetism (see the following note). 
Hegel is referring here to Brugmans' 'Tentarnina philosophica de materia 
magnetica ejusque actione in ferrum et magnetem' (Franeker, 1765). C. G. 
Eschenbach (1753-1832) published a German translation of this work 'Philo-
sophische Versuche iiber die magnetische Materie, und deren Wirkung in Eisen 
und Magnet' (Leipzig, 1784). Brugmans gives the following account of these 
points of indifference and supplies the following diagram (op. cit. Germ. tr. 
pp. 69-76, and table II fig. II):-
OEM N 
ACI====~!==~I========~!C==±!==~iC 
'In a rod such as AC, be it of iron or steel, there are two points M and N 
which are so constituted, that if one begins at one end, such as A, to stroke this 
319 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
rod with a powerful magnet, and ftnishes the stroking at these points, no 
magnetic power will be brought forth, ftrst at A and then at C. That is to say, 
that if one has stroked as far as M, no magnetism will be apparent at A, and 
that if one strokes on to N, it will be lacking at the other end (C). However, if 
one stops stroking either before or after these points (M and N), magnetism will 
be brought forth at both ends. 
So far as I know, these points M and N have hitherto remained unnoticed, and 
I shall therefore take the opportunity of calling them the points of indifference. 
This seems to me to be a not entirely unsuitable name, for the ends of the rod 
which has been stroked up to these points have an indifferent effect upon the poles 
of the magnetic needle.' 
Brugmans' 'Magnetismus seu de affmitatibus magneticis observationes 
acadeInicae' (Leyden, 1778, Germ. tr. Eschenbach, Leipzig, 1781) is his best 
known work. He supposed that a magnet contains Ininute invisible particles of 
iron, each of which possesses by itself the properties of a separate magnet. He 
also assumed that there are two distinct fluids-the 'austral' and the 'boreal'-
which reside in each particle of iron. These fluids he supposed to be inert and 
neutral when combined, as in ordinary iron, but he went on to assume that when 
they are decomposed, the particles of the 'austral' attract those of the 'boreal', 
and vice versa, while they each repel their like. 
Brugman's great contribution to practical affairs was his invention of a 
hydrometer by which the strength of spirits could be easily determined. His 
instrument was widely used on the continent. In England however, it was the 
instrument devised by Bartholomew Sikes which was prescribed for the 
customs; see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1794; 56 George III c. 40. 
105,20 
Jan Hendrik van Swinden (1746-1823) was born at's Gravenhage in the 
Netherlands, and was the son of a lawyer. In 1763 he began his studies at the 
university of Leyden where he took his doctorate in 1766. On February 18, 
1767 he took over the post previously occupied by Brugmans at Franeker, his 
opening lecture being concerned with the causes of Inistakes in matters of 
philosophy (zaken van wijsbegeerte). For the next eighteen years he lectured 
on physics, logic and mathematics at Franeker. 
His research during these years was concentrated mainly upon meteorology. 
Brugmans' 'Tentamina philosophica' (Franeker, 1765), by drawing his attention 
to the points of indifference (see the previous note), led him, as Hegel notes, to 
the discovery of culmination. He noticed that if an iron wire is stroked in one 
direction with the north pole of a magnet for example, the end from which the 
stroking begins becomes the south pole of the wire, and the other end becomes 
its north pole. He noticed also that the power of the north pole increases steadily 
when the stroking is done along a certain stretch of wire, but that a point is reached 
at which the power of the north pole reaches a maximum. Van Swinden 
320 

NOTES 
called this the point of culmination (puctum culminans), for if the stroking 
stops either before or after it, the power of the wire's north pole will not be so 
great. See his 'Tentamina Theoriae mathematicae de phaenomenis magneticis. 
Specimen Primum, sistens principia generalia ad novam punctorum indiffer-
entire et puncti culminantis Theoriam', which was published in vol. XIX p. 
458 (1772) of 'Commentatii de Rebus in Scientia Naturali et Medicina gestis' 
(44 vols. Leipzig, 1752-1798). 
In 1777 van Swinden was awarded a gold medal by the Paris Academy for 
his essay on changes in the magnetic needle: see 'Recherches sur les aiguilles 
aimantes et sur leurs variations regulierc:s' ('Memoires savants etrangers' VIII, 
1780). In 1780 his essay on the relationship between electricity and magnetism 
was awarded a prize by the Bavarian Academy: see 'De analogia electricitatis et 
magnetismi' ('Neue Abhandlungen der Baierschen Akademie der Wissenschaf-
ten' vol. II, Nuremberg, 1780). This essay is quite remarkable, for although he 
was not yet aware of the analogy of the magnet and the solenoid, he is mainly 
concerned with comparing the 'animal magnetism' of Mesmer etc. (see the 
note III. 381) with electricity. Two other important works in this field 
appeared while he was teaching at Franeker, 'De paradoxo magnetico' ('Neue 
Abhandlungen der Baierschen Academie' etc. vol. I 1778), and 'Receuil de 
memoires sur l' analogie de l' electricite et du magnetisme' (3 vols. La Haye, 
1784). 
In 1785 van Swinden was appointed professor of philosophy, physics, 
mathematics and astronomy at the Athenaeum in Amsterdam. In 1795 he 
turned down an invitation to teach at Leyden, but accepted ten years later when 
the offer was renewed at the wish of the king. His most famous work was 
'Beschrijving van een ... volledig bewegelijk Hemelsgestel' (Franeker, 1780, 
Germ. tr. by F. Meyer, Leipzig, 1807). He published a nautical almanack, 
helped to found a training school for navigators, and spent the period from 
July 1798 until October 1799 in Paris helping Tralles, Delambre and Legendre 
to formulate the metric system; see his 'Precis des operations qui ont servi a 
determiner les bases du nouveau systeme metrique' (Paris, 1799). 
Cf. 'The Edinburgh Journal of Science' (ed. Brewster, vol. I 1824); P. F. 
Mottelay 'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 
1922) pp. 271- 274. 
105,32 
See Sir William Edward Parry (1790-1855), Journal of a Voyage for the 
discovery of a north-west Passage ... performed in the years 1819-20' (London, 
1821). Appendix V of this work contains details of the magnetic observations 
made during the voyage. Appendix VIII contains, 'an account of experiments to 
determine the acceleration of the pendulum in different latitudes'. When Hegel 
treats these subjects as being closely related therefore, he may well have been 
influenced by these appendices. C£ 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1819 pp. 196-199. 
L 
321 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of! NATURE 
Hegel is evidently referring to events which took place on August 7, 1819 
(Op. cit. pp. 37-38), 'Since the time we first entered Sir James Lancaster's Sound, 
the sluggishness of the compasses, as well as the amount of their irregularity 
produced by the attraction of the ship's iron, had been found very rapidly, 
though uniformly, to increase, as we proceeded to the westward; so much, 
indeed, that, for the last two days, we had been under the necessity of giving up 
altogether the usual observations for determining the variation of the needle on 
board the ships. This irregularity became more and more obvious as we now 
advanced to the southward ... It was evident, therefore, that a very material 
change had taken place in the dip, or the variation, or in both these phenomena . 
. . . which rendered it not impossible that we were now making a very near 
approach to the magnetic pole. This supposition was further strengthened on the 
morning of the 7th; when, having decreased our latitude to about 73°, we 
found that no alteration whatever in the absolute course on which the Hecla 
was steering, produced a change of more than three or four points in the direc-
tion indicated by the compass, which continued uniformly from N.N.E. to 
N.N.W., according as the ship's head was placed on one side or the other of the 
magnetic meridian. We now, therefore, witnessed, for the first time, the curious 
phenomena of the directive power of the needle becoming so weak as to be 
completely overcome by the attraction of the ship; so that the needle might now 
be properly said to point to the north pole of the ship.' 
C£ William Bain (Royal Navy), 'An Essay on the Variation of the Compass, 
shewing how far it is influenced by a change in the direction of the ship's head.' 
(Edinburgh, 1817). 
105, 35 
,'!let imagnet a1~ imaffe unb a1~ ~ebel tJotgefteUt'. ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 52). Michelet changed this to ,'!let imagneti~mu~, alS imaffe unb al~ 
~ebel tJotgefteUt'. 
105,40 
When Hegel was lecturing at Berlin, the standard work on terrestrial mag-
netism was 'Untersuchungen iiber den Magnetismus der Erde' (Christiania, 
1819) by Christopher Hansteen (1784-1873). There is a review of this work in 
the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' vol. IV pp. 295-300 (1821), where 
Hansteen's world chart of the variations and dip of the needle is also repro-
duced. 
I06,3 
In the manuscript ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 52 note 3) Hegel added a 
remark here at a later date, ,toie am 
~ebeli abet biefe ljaben bai3 
322 

NOTES 
m:llgemeine nicf)t an ifjnen j dbft; ifjt @)cf)tuet,punft ift nicf)t bas abjoIut 
91egatibet • 
106,10 
,S'nbem in bem $enbeI bie @tiij3e bet m1aHe aHl betuegenbe Shaft eintritt, 
10 muj3 an ifjm ba~feIbe ~oIumen, ba~ dne gtiij3ete f,peMfifcf)e @)cf)tuete fjat, 
ftiidete 58etuegung~traft fjaben -
\0 ift e~ niifjet ben $oIen &U
l
• ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' p. 52). 
Michelet's version , ... jl) muj3 an ifjm biejeIbe m1affe ftiidete 58ell)egung~", 
traft fjaben, ie niifjet ben $oIen &U
l
• This is excusable, as Hegel actually wrote, 
, ... bie eine gtiij3ere f,pe&ifijcf)e @)cf)tuete fjat, ftiirfete 58etuegung~ftaft fjat -
jo niifjer ben $oIen 3U
I
• 
106, 18 
On the geodetical use of the pendulum at this time see Sir Edward Sabine 
(1788-1883) 'An Account of Experiments to determine the figure of the Earth' 
(London, 1825): F. W. Bessel (1784-1846) 'Untersuchungen fiber die Lange des 
einfachen Secundenpendels' (Berlin, 1828): J. B. Biot (1774-1862) and D. F. 
Arago (1786-1853) 'Receuil d' observations geodesiques' (Paris, 1821): Petrus 
van Galen 'Disputatio mathematica inauguralis de Pendulo, eiusque adplicatione 
ad telluris figuram determinandam' (Amsterdam, 1830). 
106,27 
In the terminology of the time 'chemism' (a::fjemgmu~) was taken to mean 
chemical relationship, i.e. 'everything in natural phenomena and mixed trans-
formations which is determined by chemical factors and may be explained in 
the light of chemical principles'. See J. F. Pierer 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' 
(8 vols. Altenburg, 1816-1829) vol. II p. 122. In the addition to this §, Hegel 
defines it as 'the totality into which bodies enter in accordance with their 
specific particularity'. The best account he gives of the general significance he 
attaches to it is to be found in 'The Logic' (tr. Wallace, O.U.P. 1963) §§ 200-203 
where he takes it to be the category presupposing 'mechanism', and anterior to 
'teleology'. For the development of his views on it during the Jena period see 
jenenser Logik' etc. (ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923) pp. 268-273: 'Jenenser Real-
philosophie I' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1932) pp. 28-73: jenenser Realphilo-
sophie' II (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) pp. 57-79,95-103. 
Typical of the experiments illustrating the connection between electricity 
and chemism was that performed in Amsterdam by A. P. van Troostwyk 
(1752-1837) and J. R. Deiman (1743-1808), in the course of which they man-
aged to decompose water by means of electricity: see Rozier's journal de 
Physique' Nov. 1789: Gren's journal der Physik' II vol. i p. 132: c£ 'phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1797 pp. 142-158. 
After Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) had suggested that the electric current 
which brings forth certain phenomena in living beings is also the prime cause 
of chemical and magnetic activity, changes in temperature etc. ('Gilbert's 
323 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Annalen der Physik' vol. XII p. 509), the relation between magnetism, elec-
tricity and chemism became the subject of much research. See Sir Humphry 
Davy (1778-1829) 'Chemical Agencies of Electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1803 pp. I-56). 
For a recent survey of developments in early electrochemistry, see J. R. 
Partington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. iv pp. 3-28 (London, 1964). 
107, 10 
,baa Me 3bentitat biefet 
~fd)einungen in bet 580tfteUung anetfannt 
ttJotben ift'. 
107, 31 
See for example Schelling's 'System der gesammten Philosophie und der 
Naturphilosophie insbesondere' (1804), published by Manfred Schrater in 
'Schelling's Werke' (Munich, 1962) second suppl. volume pp. 61-506. §§ 166-
169 of this work have the following headings:-
§ 166 ,~ie ~{eftticritat ift eoenfo ttJie Magnetwmu~ nid)t bie ~itfung eine~ 
oefonbeten $rinci~~, fonbetn eine allgemeine Sfategorie bet Matetie. 
§ 167 ~ebet butd) Magneti~mw nod) butd) ~{eftricritiit ift Me ~otaHtiit be~ 
bt)namild)en $toceHe~ gefe~t. 
§ 168 ~ie ~otaHtat be~ bt)namifd)en $toceHe~ ift nut im d)emifd)en $tocea 
batgefteUt. 
§ 169 ~et d)emifd)e $tocea ift fottJo~{ butd) Magneti~mu~ alfo butd) ~lef· 
tricritiit tJetmittelt'. 
108,35 
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) discovered that all conductors of electricity 
might be divided into two classes: those such as metals and carbon in its con-
ducting form, in which a difference of potential is created by mere contact, one 
of the conductors being positively electrified and the other negatively, and those 
such as water, aqueous solutions of various kinds, and those conductors now 
known as electrolytes. 
Volta discovered that if a series of bodies of the first class, such as disks of 
various metals, is brought into contact, the potential difference between the 
first and the last is precisely the same as it would be if these bodies were in 
immediate contact. He showed in fact, that in this case there is no accumulation 
of potential. He also showed however, that if metallic disks are alternated with 
disks of cloth wetted with a conductor of the second class, the effect of the feeble 
potential difference between one pair of metal disks is added to that of the 
potential difference between the next pair, so that any required difference of 
potential can be accumulated by a sufficiently long series of pairs. 
These discoveries led him to devise the 'voltaic pile' mentioned here by 
Hegel. It consisted of disks of copper and zinc or other metals, with wet cloth 
placed between the pairs. Volta's description of his pile was communicated in a 
letter written to Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820) on March 20, 1800; see 'On the 
324 

NOTES 
Electricity excited by the mere contact of conducting Substances of different 
Kinds' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 90 pt. i p. 402, 1800). 
The analogy between the polarity of the voltaic pile and that of the magnet 
was soon noticed, but it was not until 1819 that H. C. 0rsted (1777-1851) 
discovered that when a wire joining the end plates of a voltaic pile is held near a 
pivoted magnet or compass needle, the latter is deflected and places itself more 
or less transversely to the wire, the direction depending upon whether the wire 
is above or below the needle and on the manner in which the copper or zinc ends 
of the pile are connected to it. He recognized the existence of what is now called 
the magnetic field round the conductor. See 'Experimenta circa effectum con-
flictus electrici in acum magneticam' (Copenhagen, July 21, 1820): there is a 
translation of this work, 'Experiments on the Effect of a Current of Electricity 
on the Magnetic Needle' in 'Thomson's Annals of Philosophy' vol. XVI pp. 
273-6 (1820): cf. Gilbert's 'Annalen der Physik' LXVI, 1820 pp. 295-304. 
At about the same time Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) and D. F. Arago 
(1786-1853) discovered the power of the electric current to magnetize iron and 
steel. See 'Annales de Chimie et Physique' vol. XV pp. 93-103 (1820). 'Thom-
son's Annals of Philosophy' 1821, II pp. 81-88. 
These discoveries opened up research in the field of electromagnetism: see 
C. H. Pfaff (1773-1852) 'Der Elektro-Magnetismus, eine historisch-kritische 
Darstellung der bisherigen Entdeckungen' (Hamburg, 1824). 
109,3 
Hegel is evidently referring here to his Jena lectures, which were delivered 
soon after Volta's discovery and some fifteen years before 0rsted's. In the 
lectures of 1803 ('Jenenser Realphilosophie I' p. 80 c£ p. 255), he notes that, 
'We have recognized true cohesion in formal shape as magnetism, i.e. as a being 
of various specific weighted entities in a single unity, in shape as totality'. In 
the lectures of 1805-6 this idea is developed ('Jenenser Realphilosophie II' pp. 
50-54), and as in Hegel's later lectures, magnetism is regarded as forming the 
transition from shape to the crystal, 'Magnetism is therefore the formal determi-
nate being of differences within the unity of the subject; it is pure direction or 
line' etc. 
109,28 
See the note on Schelling II. 310. 
lIo,3 
Paul Erman (1764-1851) was appointed professor of physics at Berlin when 
the university was founded in 1810. For further details concerning him see the 
. note III. 3 II. 
The original account of the experiment with the 'rotation circuit' described 
here by Hegel is to be found in Erman's 'Umrisse zu den physischen 
325 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Verhiiltnissen des von Herrn Professor 0rsted entdeckten elektrochemischen 
Magnetismus' (Berlin, 1821). This work falls into three main parts: (i) obser-
vations on the free-moving electro-magnetic circuit, (ii) observations on the 
dipping needle of the box-compass, and (iii) observations on the azimuth 
compass. 
The experiment mentioned is to be found in the first part (pp. 7-36). Hegel's 
quotation is taken from p. 14. Erman supplies the following diagrams of his 
apparatus: 
(a) The strip of cardboard or whalebone and the container: 
The cardboard is cut at AC,DB etc. and the container is fitted into it. 
(b) The container is fuled with a weak acid and the circuit is brought into 
contact with it by means of a piece of zinc: 
-
E 
-
-----------" 
)z 
/ 
~ 
/ 
---------------_.-""" 
The whole apparatus is suspended by means of four threads. The magnet is 
brought to bear on it at Z. 
II2,26 
,S)a£l 2!n3ie~en ift eben mad)en, ban ba£l 2!nbere ebenfogut felbft ge~t, a!s 
ba£l mad)enbe
l
• 
326 

NOTES 
II2,30 
Hegel formulated the transition from magnetism to the crystal as early as 
1805-6 (jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 54). In the lectures of 1803-4 (jenenser 
Realphilosophie' I p. 70) he took the embryonic crystalline forms of hail, sleet 
and snow to be, like aerolites, a synthesis of the fluidity of air and the puncti-
formity of earth. It was probably the discovery of the chemical action involved in 
the functioning of the voltaic pile which clarified his views on this transition; 
see for example Sir Humphry Davy's numerous papers on this subject in 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807-1810. 
Hegel regarded water as being essential to crystallization (see the note 
II. 307). He seems to have supposed that once the 'invisible germ' or 'constructive 
force' giving rise to crystallization had been traced in water, it would prove to 
be similar to the figuration of a magnetic field. The discovery of magnetic 
'lines of force' by Michael Faraday (1791-1867), see his 'Experimental Re-
searches in Electricity' (3 vols. London, 1839, 1844, 1855) § 3237, and the 
recognition of the similarity between these lines and the 'watering' of metal 
mentioned by HegelII. 116, 14andC. N.Haldat duLys(I770-1852), see'Annales 
de Chimie et de Physique' vol. XLII pp. 33-45, 1829, seemed to conflIll1 this 
supposition. 
This theoretical background evidently accounts for Hegel's mentioning the 
ice-spicula at this juncture, the formation of ice being the most basic form of 
crystallization. The best investigation of this aspect of ice available to him was 
'Dissertation surla Glace' (Paris, 1715, improved ed. Paris, 1749), by J. J. Dortous 
de Mairan (1678-1771); c£ C. M. Marx (1794-1864) 'Geschichte der Crystall-
kunde' (Carlsruhe and Baden, 1825) pp. 82-84. De Mairan observes that, '11 
faut done reconnaltre, dans les particules de glace qui forment les etoiles de la 
neige, comme dans les globules du sang une autre cause, une cause active, un 
mecanisme plus cache, plus complique'. (p. 168). 
See the account of the huge hail-stones which fell at Bonn on May 7, 1822 
in 'The Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' vol. XI pp. 326-329 (1824), 'The 
masses had a concentric lamellar structure; in the centre was a white nearly 
opaque, nucleus, of a round or elliptical form, around which were arranged 
concentric layers, which increased in translucency from the innermost to the 
outermost'. A letter sent by a certain Robert Lindsay of Aberdeen, and con-
taining a description of hail stones he had observed in the Orkneys in 1818, 
was read to the Wernerian Society on Nov. 29, 1823: Lindsay observes that 
'The regularity in form may have been occasioned by laws of fracture in 
crystallized bodies . . . The probable cause of fracture may be found in the 
expansion of air in the opaque nucleus, in electricity, or in centrifugal force.' 
Cf. J. S. C. Schweigger's journal fiir Chemie und Physik' vol. XXXII pp. 
1-25 (Nuremberg, 1821): John Murray (d. 1820) 'SystemofChernistry' (4 vols. 
Edinburgh, 1819) vol. I p. 36. Jacob Green (1790-1841) 'On the crystallization 
of snow' ('The AmericanJournal of Science' vol. II no. 2 pp. 337-339, 1820). 
327 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Il3,7 
,im l)utd)gang bet 58liitter', b.~. in bet ~etngeftalt'. Hegel is here 
equating two theories of crystal structure prevalent at the beginning of the last 
century. 
A. G. Werner (1750-1817), in his 'Von den ausserlichen Kennzeichen der 
Fossilien' (Leipzig, 1774) §§ 156-159 took the 'folium' (581att) to be the funda-
mental feature of crystal structure, and foliated fractures to be distinguished in 
accordance with the '(MtOne, mic~tung unb 2age bet 581iittet'. In the lectures 
which he subsequently delivered at Freiberg however, his terminology changed 
somewhat. Thomas Weaver (1773-1855), when he published his 'Treatise on 
the External Characters of Fossils' (Dublin, 1805), supplemented Werner's 
original text with corrections and notes, and in this work (§§ 195-197 and pp. 
274-276) there is a full account of Werner's mature views on the 'passage of the 
folia' and foliated fractures. 
Hegel was clearly justified in regarding this theory of Werner's as approxi-
mating very closely to that put forward by R.J. Hauy (1743-1826) in his 'Essai 
d'une Theorie sur la Structure des Crystaux' (paris, 1784). Hauy, in his attempt 
to explain crystal structure, postulated what he called 'une molecule con-
stituante'. It is this that Hegel calls '~etngeftalt' , and which is generally known 
in English as the 'cleavage nucleus'. Hauy defines the basic problem of crystallo-
graphy in the introduction to this work (p. 25), 'Tout consiste a. resoudre, dans 
chaque cas particulier, ce probleme general; Etant donne un crystal, determiner 
la forme precise de ses molecules constituantes, leur arrangement respectif, et 
les loix que suivent les variations des lames dont il est compose.' 
Il3, 13 
,l)et %on be~ magnet~ ge~t 3uetft ... ' (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 54). 
Michelet changed this to ,l)et ma9neti~mw ge~t 3uetft .. .' 
I13, 19 
P. N. de Changeux (1740-1800) in Rozier's 'Observations sur la Physique' 
vol. VII p. 482 (Paris, 1776) noticed the influence of electricity upon crystalliza-
tion, 'Un chymiste tres-instruit m' a assure, qu' ayant soumis a. l' electricite les 
dissolutions des sels neutres la crystallization avoit ete favorisee; les sels etoient 
beaucoup plus reguliers et plus gros'. 
In Gilbert's 'Annalen der Physik' 1824 there is an article by L. N. Seeber 
(1793-1855) ofFreiburg on the influence of magnetism upon crystallization, but 
Henry James Brooke (1771-1857) in 'On Crystallization', an article published 
in the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' n. 23 Oan. 1825) calls the conclusions 
reached in question. 
The influence of magnetism upon crystallization is also discussed by K. A. 
Weinhold (1782-1829) in 'Physikalische Versuche iiber den Magnetismus. 
(Meissen, 1819) pp. 32, 38, 41: John Murray (1786-1851) in 'Philosophical 
328 

NOTES 
Magazine' (Nov. 1821 pp. 380-382): T. J. Seebeck (1770-1831) in 'Berzelim 
Jahrbuch tiber den Fortschritt der physikalischen Wissenschaften' (tr. F. Wohler, 
1825) vol. IV pp. 16,45 etc. C£ A. G. Ltidicke (1748-1822) 'Ueber den Einfluss 
des magnetischen Wirkungskreises auf die Krystallisation einiger Salze' ('Gil-
bert's Annalen der Physik' vol. 68 pp. 76-83, 1821). 
II3,25 
The translation of this sentence has been made from Michelet's version of it. 
As the original differs quite considerably however, it may be of interest to give it 
(Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 54), ,~~ ift bie~ bie @eomettie bet inatut, bie 
i~te ~eftimmt~eit oU ShiftaUen au~oifbet, eine fUUe f1Jtad)lofe ffiegfamfeit, 
bie oeitlo~ i~te 'llimenfionen gleid)giUtig -
0 ~ n e £i d) t -
batlegt. ~~ ift 
baoei feine iiufletlid)e ~eftimmung unb tyotmung, fonbem bM eigne ftiUe 
2eoen~1Jrinci1J bet inatut, ba~ tatlo~ fid) e!1Joniett, unb bon beHen @eoifbe 
man nut fagen fann, bafl e~ ba iW. 
II3,37 
See the note II. 327. 
II4,6 
,~~ ift ba~et bie 3ttJedmiifligfeit bet inatut feloft ~iet ouetft bot~anben'. 
In the original (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 54) explains this by adding that 
'The previous forms are not yet purposeful, but merely constitute a determinate 
being, which as such does not have its relation to another within itself'. 
II4,23 
,'llie gettennten 6tiide oleioen gleid)giiltig liegen'. Thomas Weaver (1773-
1855) in his 'A Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils' (Dublin, 1805) 
gives two equivalents for ,6tUde'. In connection with the 'external appearance' 
of 'fossils', he translates Werner's ,edigen 6tiiden' as 'angular pieces' (p. 254). 
In connection with the 'form of fragments', he translates Werner's ,aogefon., 
betten6tiide' as 'distinct concretions' (p. 278). Hegel evidently has in mind this 
second use of the word. 
II4,28 
This is evidently a reference to a remark made by R.-J. Hauy (1743-1826) in 
his 'Traite de crystallographie' (3 vols. Paris, 1822) vol. II p. 291 'Nous devons 
concrevoir que les molecules du cristal generateur sont douees d'une vertu 
analogue a celle qu l' on a designee par Ie nom de po farit!. Chacune d' elles a deux 
poles sollicites par des forces contraires'. 
See the article by J.J. Berhardi (1774-1850) on the 'magnetic axes' of crystals 
in 'Schweigger'sJournal' vol. XXV pp. 99-100, 247-253 (1819). C£ the article 
by G. F. PoW (1788-1849) in which the internal structure of crystals is treated 
L* 
329 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from an electro-magnetic point of view and taken to be the result of 'polari-
zation lines'. ('Kastner's Archiv' 1824 III i p. 47 et seq.). There is a survey of 
work in this field by P. L. Dulong (1785-1838) and L. J. Thenard (1777-1857) 
in 'Schweiggers Journal fur Chemie und Physik' vol. XXX pp. 229-246 (Halle, 
1824). John Murray (d. 1820) mentions the subject in his 'System of Chemistry' 
(4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. I p. 42, 'The theory of crystallization is still 
obscure, so far as it relates to the cause of the regular forms to which it gives 
rise. This has been accounted for, on the supposition that the particles of bodies 
have different figures, and that they have a polarity or tendency to arrange 
themselves, in obeying the law of cohesion, by certain sides in preference to 
others; whence the uniformity of crystallization in each individual, and the 
difference in the figure of its crystals from that in others.' 
II4, 35 
R.-J. Hauy (1743-1826), in his 'Essai d'une Theorie sur la Structure des 
Crystaux' (Paris, 1784) had explained the outer form of crystals by taking it to 
be built up from regular or irregular aggregations of its cleavage nucleus (op. 
cit. chs. I and II). 
In 1809 W. H. Wollaston (1766-1828) invented the first reflecting goniometer 
(the vertical-circle model). This enabled the angles of crystals to be measured 
with much greater precision than they had been by the old hand-goniometer. 
At almost the same time, Christian Samuel Weiss (1780-1856), a colleague of 
Hegel's at Berlin, began to attack the problem of crystalline form from a purely 
geometrical point of view, without reference to any theory of structure; see his 
'De indagando Formarum crystallinarum charactere Geometrico principali' 
(Leipzig, 1809), and 'Uebersichtliche Darstellung der verschiedenen naturlichen 
Abtheilungen der Crystallisationssysteme' ('Abhandlungen der Berliner 
Akademie der Wissenschaften' 1814-1815 pp. 290-336). Weiss considered the 
faces of crystals by their intercepts on co-ordinate axes, which were drawn join-
ing the opposite corners of certain forms. In this way he was able to group the 
various forms described by Hauy into four classes, cubic, tetragonal, hexagonal 
and orthorhombic. 
II4, 36 
,'Ilet (sic) ~ad)~t~um be~ Sftt)ftaUs ge~t id)id)tenttleiie bOt fid)'. 
This is probably a reference to the doctrine mentioned in R.-J. Hauy's 
'Traite de crystallographie' (3 vols. Paris, 1822) vol. I pI 54, 'Le cristal naissant 
est deja semblable a celui, que la nature nous presente entierement forme, et il ne 
fait ensuite que s' accroitre par une succession de couches, qui se recouvrent 
mutuellement'. It should be remembered that in the Wernerian terminology 
prevalent while Hegel was lecturing at Jena, ,ttlad)ien' had various technical 
meanings associated with the 'aggregation' of crystals, i.e. their natural occur-
renee; see T. Weaver op. cit. p. 268. 
330 

NOTES 
115, II 
See the account by Johannes Scheuchzer (d. 1733) of the huge rock-crystals 
found in a quartz vein in the Grimsel pass in 1720: 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1727 p. 260. Many of the rock-crystals found on that occasion weighed a 
hundredweight, and some as much as eight hundredweight. 'In other mountains 
in the Alps, cavities have been opened, containing rock-crystals weighing up-
wards of fourteen hundred weight, and measuring in diameter three and a half 
feet, in length two and a half, and each lateral plane one and a half feet broad ... 
Large and beautiful crystals ... are found in Madagascar.' Robert Jameson 
(1774-1854) 'A System of Mineralogy' (3 vols. Edinburgh, 1820) vol. I pp. 182-
196. 
The large Madagascan crystals mentioned by Hegel certainly originated in 
the Archaean crystalline and eruptive rocks forming the eastern massifs of the 
central plateau of the island. In the central and northern parts of this mountainous 
region, quartz is still mined commercially. See Alexis-Marie Rochon (1741-
1817) 'Voyage a Madagascar et aux Indes orientales' (Paris, 1791), tr. Joseph 
Trapp 'A Voyage to Madagascar and the East Indies' (London, 1793) p. 277, 
'Those who prefer mineralogy to botany, will fmd in the high mountains of 
Ambotismena, plenty of objects worthy their attention. They will find stupendous 
masses of rock-crystal; some are perfectly crystallized, others seem to have no 
regular form, many of them contain sheds and other strange bodies.' 
C£ H. Steffens 'Vollstandiges Handbuch der Oryktognosie' (4 pts. Halle 
1811-1824) pt. I pp. 105-110: G. K. C. Storr (1749-1821) 'Alpenreise' (2 pts. 
Leipzig, 1784-1786) II pp. 40-130: F. J. M. A. Billiard (1788-c. 1860) 'Voyage 
aux colonies orientales' (paris, 1822). 
115,20 
See the note II. 328. For further details concerning Werner see the note 
III. 218. 
II5,28 
See M. H. Klaproth (1743-1817) and F. B. Wolff (1766-1845) 'Chemisches 
Worterbuch' (9 vols. Berlin, 1807-1819) vol. I pp. 652-660, '6ein @efiige iit 
blatttig, unb bet ilutc~gang bet S81attet tic~tet fic~ ftets unb eincrig nac~ ben 
ac~t 6eiten be~ oftaebtif c~en @tunbftt)ftall~; ba~et fic~ auc~ bet iliamant 
bloU nac~ biefen mic~tungen f+,alten obet Hoben laUt'. 
There were some excellent works on this subject available to Hegel: see 
David Jeffries 'Treatise on Diamonds and Pearls' (London, 1751, ed. Holmes, 
1871, Germ. tr. Danzig, 1756): John Mawe (1764-1829) 'Treatise on Diamonds 
and Precious stones. To which is added some account of the best methods of 
cutting and polishing them' (London, 1813, ed. Grodzinski, London, 1950): 
R.-J. Hauy (1743-1826) 'Traite des caracteres physiques des pierres precieuses' 
(Paris, 1817): Moritz Pinder (1807-1871), who worked in the Royal Library at 
33 1 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Berlin from 1829, 'De adamante commentatio antiquaria' (Berlin, 1829): John 
Murray (1786?-1851) 'Memoir on the Nature of the Diamond' (London, 1831), 
see especially John Mawe op. cit. (2nd ed., London, 1823) p. 30. 
II5,30 
Rene-Just Hauy (1743-1822) was born at Saint-Just in the department of 
Oise. His parents were too poor to pay for his further education, but friends of 
the family recognized his brilliance, and helped him to finish his studies at the 
college of Navarre and the college of Cardinal Lemoine and fmally to take holy 
orders. It was at the latter institution that he became a teacher and met Charles 
Franyois Lhomond (1727-1794), who introduced him to the study of natural 
sciences, especially botany, and became his lifelong friend. 
It was a series oflectures on mineralogy by 1. J. M. Daubenton (1716-1800), 
author of the 'Tableau methodique des mineraux' Paris, 1784), which gave him 
his grounding in crystallography. On February 12,1783 he was elected member 
of the French Academy for his discovery of the law of rational indices or inter-
cepts. In his 'Essai d'une Theorie sur la Structure des Crystaux' (Paris, 1784) he 
expounded this theory at some length. He postulated a 'cleavage nucleus' (see 
the note II. 328) as being basic to all crystalline form, and then showed how the 
various secondary faces on a crystal are related to it by a law of whole numbers, 
and how the angles between them can be arrived at by mathematical calculation. 
He took this 'secondary form' of the crystal to be built up from regular or irregu-
lar layers of the 'nucleus', each of which is so small that it is not separately visible. 
See the excellent article by A. Q. Buee (1748-1826) 'Outlines of the Minera-
logical Systems of Rome de Lisle and Abbe Hauy; with observations' ('Nichol-
son'sJournal' IX pp. 26-39, 78-88, 1804). C£ W. H. Wollaston (1766-1828)'On 
the elementary Particles of certain crystals' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1813 pp. 
51- 63). 
For those who, in Hauy's lifetime, added to his work, see C. M. Marx (1794-
1864) 'Geschichte der Crystallkunde' (Carlsruhe and Baden, 1825) pp. 132-213. 
J. F. C. Hessel (1796-1872) showed that as a consequence of Hauy's law of 
rational indices, thirty two types of symmetry are possible in crystals; see his 
article 'Krystallometrie' in 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. V, 1830: 
published separately (Leipzig, 183 I). 
During the revolution Hauy was imprisoned for a while. In 1793 he was 
appointed member of the commission for weights and measures however, see 
his 'Instruction sur les measures deduites de la grandeur de la terre' (paris, 1794). 
In 1802 Napoleon appointed him professor of mineralogy at the museum of 
natural history, and in 1803 canon of Notre Dame. His 'Traite de mineralogie' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1801) was translated into German (Karsten, 3 vols. Leipzig, 1803), 
as was his 'Traite elementaire de physique' (Paris, 1803, tr. Blumhof, Weimar, 
1804). When Napoleon visited the National Museum during the hundred days 
332 

NOTES 
he told the canon, 'Monsieur Hauy, j' ai emporte votre physique a l'ile d'Elbe, et 
je l' ai relue avec Ie plus grand interet'. 
Hauy gave the completest account of his work on crystals in his 'Traite de 
crystallographie' (3 vols. Paris, 1822). He died at Paris on June 3, 1822. George 
Cuvier (1769-1832) said of him, in the funeral oration, 'Comme on a dit avec 
raison qu'il n'y aura plus un autre Newton, parce qu'il n'y a pas un second 
systeme du monde, on peut aussi dans une sphere plus restreinte, dire qu'il n'y 
aura point un autre Hauy, parce qu'l n'y aura pas une demaeme structure des 
cristaux'. This observation may well have incited Hegel into observing that 
Hauy concentrated mainly upon describing the forms of crystals. 
II5,40 
At that time, the word 'fossil' was used to refer to any rock, mineral, or 
mineral substance dug out of the earth. 
II6,3 
Hoffmeister's version of this sentence has been translated here (Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 55). Hegel actually wrote ,~ nimmt hen stern an, 
liiUt auf hie fen fid) hie IDColecule~ nad) einet ~tt bon meiljung, ttJotin hutd) •• .' 
Michelet emends this, and has clearly checked on Hegel's source. 
II6,6 
Hauy gives his fullest account of this doctrine in his 'Traite de crystallo-
graphie' (3 vols. Paris, 1822) see I p. 52 etc. Cf. Henry James Brooke (1771-
1857) 'A Familiar Introduction to Crystallography' (London, 1823) p. 43, 'The 
whole theory of molecules and decrements is to be regarded as little else than a 
series of symbolic characters, by whose assistance we are enabled to investigate 
and to demonstrate with greater facility the relations between the primary and 
secondary forms of crystals'. 
As this passage dates from Hegel's Jena period however, it is almost certainly 
based upon pp. 21-22 of Hauy's 'Essai d'une Theorie sur la Structure des 
Crystaux' (Paris, 1784). 
II6,8 
See J. J. Bernhardi (1774-1850) 'Ueber das Kristallisationssystem der chemi-
schen Elemente' ('Schweigger's Journal' 1817 vol. XXI i p. 7). See also the 
articles by Armand Levy (1794-1841) in Thomson's 'Annals of Philosophy' 
1823-1825 and the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' 1822-1826. 
It was in fact research in this field which led Eilhard Mitscherlich (1794-1863) 
to the discovery of isomorphism, and so to the disproving of Hauy's theory. As 
Mitscherlich made his discovery at Berlin in 1818, and was professor of chemistry 
333 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
there from 1822 onwards, it is rather curious that Hegel should not have made 
more of his work. Hegel may have felt that too full a treatment of the chemical 
factors in crystallization would have involved his abandoning the valuable 
standpoint that the essence of crystalline structure is its figuration, and that this 
is closely related to magnetic 'lines of force' (note II. 327). See Mitscherlich's 
'Ueber die Krystallisation der Salze' ('Abhandlungen der Koniglich Preus-
sischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, physikalische-mathematische Klasse' 
1818-1819 pp. 427-327): 'Ueber die Korper, welche in zwei verschiedenen 
Formen Krystallisiren' (op. cit. 1822-1823 pp. 43-48): 'Om Forhallandet imellan 
Chemiska Sammansattningen och Krystallformen' ('Kungliga Svenska Veten-
skaps-Akademiens Handlingar' 1822 pp. 4-79). 
Several facts which were in disagreement with Hauy's theory were known 
before Mitscherlich published these papers. In 1787 for example, N. Leblanc 
(1742-1806) discovered that alum crystals, which he obtained both as cubes and 
as octahedra, could contain considerable amounts of iron: see Journal de 
Physique' 1788, vol. 28, p. 34I.In 1816L.J. Gay-Lussac(I778-1850) grew crystals 
of ammonia alum over those of potash alum, and suggested that 'the molecules 
of the two alums have the same form and are acted upon by the same forces': 
see 'Annales de Chimie' 1816 vol. ii p. 176. 
n6, 12 
Giovanni Girolamo Zannichelli (1662-1729), in his 'De ferro ejusque nivis 
praeparatione in qua varia de ipso metallo explicantur' (Venice, 1713, 2nd ed. 
Venice, 1719) notices that blocks of iron, when they are broken, will sometimes 
display crystalline formations. J. B. L. Rome de !'Isle (1736-1790), in his 
'Cristallographie ou Description de Formes propres a tous les corps du regne 
mineral' (3 vols. Paris, 1783) vol. III p. 2 observed of metals that, 'tous sont 
susceptibles de prendre en cristallisant, soit par la voie humide, soit par la voie 
seche, la forme cubique ou son inverse qui est l' octaedre'. 
In 1808 Aloys Beck von Widmannstatten (1753-1849) noticed the crystalline 
figurations in metal caused by the corrosion brought about by nitric acid. 
Carl Franz Anton von Schreibers (1775-1852), in his 'Beytrage zur Geschichte 
und Kenntniss meteorischer Stein- und Metal- Massen' (Vienna, 1820), drew 
attention to the observations of von Widmannstatten (pp. 70-80) and laid the 
foundation of modern metallography through his examination of the crystalline 
structure of meteoric iron. See especially tables VIII and IX of this book, 'Der 
Zweck der bildlichen Darstellungen dieser Tafeln ist die Versinnlichung des 
merkwiirdigen krystallinischen Gefiiges der vorziiglichsten Gediegeneisen-
Massen'. Cf. H. C. Sorby (1826-1908) 'On the microscopical structure of iron 
and steel' (British Association, 1864). 
The crystalline structure of metals was fairly well confirmed in Hegel's day 
therefore. On the crystalline structure of bismuth see M. H. Klaproth (1743-
1817) and F. Wolff (1766-1845) 'Chemisches Worterbuch' (9 vols. Berlin, 
334 

NOTES 
1807-1819) 4th supplementary volume pp. 403-408: John Murray (d. 1820) 
'System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. III pp. 400-406. 
116, 14 
'Moire metallique'. It was evidently L. J. Proust (1754-1826) who first 
discovered that when tin-plate is dipped in a weak acid, the surface layer of 
tin is dissolved, and that various crystallizations, often exhibiting striking 
patterns, are formed in the lower layers: 'Sur l'etamage' ('Annales de Chimie' 
1804 pp. 44-74, 'Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' 1805 pp. 313-319). In 1815 
a certain M. Allard of Paris patented a technique for treating the surfaces of 
metal goods. L. W. Gilbert (1769-1824) gave an account of the process in 
'Moirirtes Metall und Malerei darin, oder das Moire metallique' ('Gilbert's 
Annalen der Physik' vol. 64 pp. 279-302): John Frederic Daniell (1790-1845) 
'On some phenomena attending the process of solution, and on their application 
to the laws of crystallization' ('Quarterly Journal of Science' I pp. 24-49, 1816): 
Samuel Parkes (1761-1825) on tin-plate in 'Quarterly Journal of the Manchester 
Physical Society' (Oct. 1819). 
The concisest contemporary English account of the phenomenon mentioned 
here by Hegel is to be found in 'The Journal of Science and the Arts. Edited at 
the Royal Institution of Great Britain' (London, 1818) vol. V p. 368: Mis-
cellaneous Intelligence I I. On the Moire Metallique, or Fer blanc moire. 'This 
is an article of Parisian manufacture, much employed to cover ornamental 
cabinet work, dressing boxes, telescopes, opera glasses, etc. etc. and is prepared 
in the following manner. 
Sulphuric acid is to be diluted with seven or nine parts water, then dip a 
sponge or rag into it, and wash with it the surface of a sheet of tin, which 
speedily will exhibit an appearance of crystallizations, which is the Moire. 
This effect however cannot be easily produced upon every sort of sheet tin, 
for if the sheet has been much hardened by hammering or rolling, then the 
moire cannot be effected until the sheet of tin has been heated so as to produce 
an incipient fusion on the surface, after which the acid will act upon it and 
produce the moire. Almost any acid will do as well as the sulphuric, and it is 
said that the citric acid dissolved in a sufficient quantity of water, answers better 
than any other. 
The moire has of late been much improved by employing the blow pipe, to 
form small and beautiful specks on the surface of the tin, previous to the appli-
cation of acid. 
When the moire has been formed, the plate is to be varnished and polished, 
the varnish being tinted with any glazing colour, and thus the red, blue, green, 
yellow, and pearl coloured moires are manufactured.' 
C£ John Badcock 'Domestic Amusements or Philosophical Recreations' 
(London, 1823) p. 140; 'The New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal' 
(London, 1823) vol. IX pp. 551-552; Andrew Ure (1778-1857) 'A Dictionary of 
335 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Arts, Manufactures, and Mines' (London, 1839), Germ. tr. 'Technisches Worter-
buch oder Handbuch der Gewerbskunde' (tr. K. Karmarsch and F. Heeren, 
3 vols. Prague, 1843-1844). 
II7,4 
Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim (paracelsus) (c. 1490-1541), the 
famous German physician. Hegel is referring here to his 'De tribus primis 
Essentiis', which is to be found in his 'Opera Omnia Medico-Chemico Chirur-
gica' (ed. De Tournes, 3 vols. Geneva, 1658) vol. I p. 354. C£ 'Theophrastus 
von Hohenheim gen. Paracelsus: Samtliche Werke' 1. Abteilung 'Medizi-
nische, naturwissenschaftliche und philosophische Schriften' (ed. Karl Sudhoff, 
Munich and Berlin, 1922-1933) vol. III pp. l-II;J. R. Partington 'A History of 
Chemistry' (London, 1961) vol. IIp. 142. Hegel may have known of the doctrine 
ofParacelsus and his followers from T. A. Rixner and T. Siber 'Leben und Lehr-
meinungen beruehmter Physiker am Ende des XVI und am Anfange des 
XVII. Jahrhunderts' (7 voIs. Sulzbach, 1819-1826: 2nd ed. Sulzbach, 1829) 
or from Kurt Sprengel (1766-1833) 'Versuch einer pragmatischen Geschichte 
der Arzneikunde' (5 vols. Halle, 1792-1828). 
The remark attributed here to Boehme was anticipated by Joseph Du Chesne 
(1544-1609), the physician-in-ordinary to Henry IV of France, who also 
taught that all bodies are composed of three substances as God is of three 
principles. He took these substances to be the solid contained in saltpetre, the 
volatile salt of sulphur and the volatile mercurial salt. 
II7,5 
Jacob Boehme (1575-1624): see 'The Works of Jacob Behmen' (ed. William 
Law, 4 vols. London, 1764-1781). Boehme mentions this doctrine on several 
occasions: see 'The Three Principles of the Divine Essence' (1619) chs. I and II 
(op. cit. vol. I), 'Behold, there are especially three Things in the Originality, out 
of which all Things are, both Spirit and Life, Motion and Comprehensibility, 
viz. Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal . .. Now to speak in a creaturely way, Sulphur, 
Mercurius, and Sal, are understood to be thus. SuI is the Soul or the Spirit that is 
risen up, or in a Similitude [it is] God: Phur is the Prima Materia, or first Matter 
out of which the Spirit is generated, but especially the Harshness: Mercurius has a 
fourfold from in it, viz. Harshness, Bitterness, Fire, Water: Sal is the Child that 
is generated from these four, and is harsh, eager, and a Cause of the Com-
prehensibility. 
Understand right now what I declare to you: Harshness, Bitterness, and Fire, 
are in the Originality, in the first Principle: The Water-source is generated 
therein: And God is not called God according to the first Principle; but accord-
ing to that, he is called Wrathfulness, Anger, the earnest [severe or tart] Source, 
from which Evil, and also the woeful tormenting Trembling, and Burning, have 
their Original'. C£ 'The Threefold Life of Man' (1619-1620) op. cit. vol. II 
336 

NOTES 
pp. 12-13: 'The Mysterium Magnum' (1623) op. cit. vol. m p. 17: 'Signatura 
Rerum' (1621) op. cit. vol. IV pp. 18-19. 
1I7, II 
,bet ®ebanfe, bet nod) nid)t ftei wat'. Nicolin and Poggeler, in their 
edition of the 'Enzyklopadia' (Hamburg, 1959) have removed the last five words 
without explaining why. 
II 7, 24 
,immet nod) 
etwa~ ~ejonbete~ atWgegangen 3U 
~aben'. In standard 
German the verb ,au~ge~en' has several meanings (to go out, emanate, come off, 
be extinguished, terminate etc.), but not that given to it here by Hegel, who is 
merely saying that these new facts or 'particularities' are brought under obser-
vation or into the sphere of experience. This is an example of his native Swabian, 
although even in this dialect, this use of the word is not common: see Hermann 
Fischer and Wilhelm Pfleiderer 'Schwabisches Worterbuch' (Tiibingen, 1904-
1936) vol. I col. 472. 
One of the earliest instances of its being used in this way in Swabian is to 
be found in the account by Hans Jakob Breuning (1552?-1616) of a journey he 
made to London in the summer of 1595, in order to enquire into the possibility 
of the Garter's being conferred upon duke Frederick I of Wiirttemberg: see 
'Relation iiber seine Sendung nach England' (ed. Schlossberger, Stuttgart, 1865) 
P.48, ,9)1onjieut mooed 6t)benat), gubemeut be ~liiffingen, abet ~att mit 
3ugejagt, wime ~.iY.®. ein $aat (~fut~unbe) uflg~een .•. 60fd)e joUen 
~.iY.®. bon i~mme bet) ned)ftet gelegen~et)tt ... 3U emtJfangen ~aben.' 
II9, 37 
,'l)iefl 6eefen~afte'. See the notes II. 282 and III. 318. 
120,5 
For Hegel's treatment of the senses see the note on III. 327. 
121, 19 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added, 'And within 
it, light and darkness are mere possibilities', but he removed these words from 
the 1830 edition. 
122,5 
,ift ba~ m:ufge~en bet md)tjeite in bet ®eftart felbft.' 
122,22 
,60 finb fie anbetetfeit~ aud) nut auflet bet 3nbibibuaHtiit bet S'rottJet 
f d)weoenb'. 
337 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
122,31 
Christoph Friedrich Luwig Schultz (1781-1834) signed himself C. L. F. 
Schultz and is entered in the baptismal register as L. C. F., but his Christian 
names are usually given in the above order. He was born at Marienwerder in 
West Prussia, where his father was a civil servant employed in administering the 
crown lands and organizing defence. 
Until 1795 he was educated privately by his grandfather. In that year he 
entered the Joachimsthal Grammar School in Berlin, and in 1799 the University 
of Halle, where he studied law and cameralistics (the management of state 
property). He entered the Prussian civil service in 1804, and in 1805 was 
appointed director of the Royal Porcelain Factory at Bruckberg near Ansbach. 
It was at this time, through the attempts to improve the colouring (especially 
white) of porcelain, that he began to interest himself in the theory of colours. 
In 1814 C. F. Zelter (1758-1832), knowing that Schultz's studies in the field 
of optics were likely to be of interest to Goethe, brought the two men into 
contact. An extensive correspondence ensued and a close friendship developed, 
which lasted until Goethe's death; see H. Diintzer 'Briefwechsel zwischen 
Goethe und Staatsrath Schultz' (Leipzig, 1853). On November 18, 1819 
K. F. S. Altenstein (1770-1840), the Prussian Minister of Culture, appointed 
Schultz 'curator' of Berlin University, in accordance with the Carlsbad decrees 
(see the note III. 319). By this time Schultz was known for his wide interests, 
which ranged from musical composition to philology, archaeology, and physics, 
and Altenstein evidently hoped that he would interpret his censorial duties in a 
liberal manner and interfere as little as possible with the life of the university. 
In fact Schultz took his new position very seriously, and soon alienated all but 
the most reactionary members of the academic body. He was eventually forced 
to relinquish the post in 1825, frustrated, embittered and friendless. His health 
declined, he had a disease of the lungs, he lost his eldest son, and it was only the 
friendship of Goethe which lightened his last years. 
During the winter of 1821-1822 Hegel, Leopold von Henning (1791-1866) 
and Karl Ernst Schubarth (1796-1861) met one evening a week at Schultz's 
house in Berlin to study Goethe's 'Theory of Colours'; see Schultz's letter to 
Goethe August 16, 1822 (Diintzer op. cit. p. 250). One outcome of these 
meetings was a paper by Hegel, dated November 21, 1821, criticizing § 32 of 
Schultz's article in Schweigger's Journal; see K. Rosenkranz 'Leben Hegel's' 
(Berlin, 1844) p. 340, cf. the note III. 326. 
Hegel is here referring to Schultz's paper, 'Ober physiologe Farbenerscheinun-
gen, insbesondere das phosphorische Augenlicht, als Quelle derselben, betreffend' 
which was finished on July 27, 1821, a few weeks after Schultz had visited 
Goethe at Weimar (Diintzer op. cit. letters 67, 72-74, 78, 86). Goethe reprinted 
the paper in his 'Zur Naturwissenschaft Oberhaupt' pt. II (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 
1962 pp. 296-304). 
Schultz was evidently influenced by Plato's theory of vision, according to 
338 

NOTES 
which our visual perceptions are caused by a light issuing from our eyes and 
mingling with that originating from the sun (see the note II. 396). In a paper 
printed by Diintzer (op. cit. pp. 391-398) he mentions Plato's theory (§ 23). 
In the paper referred to by Hegel however, his main point is that the light of 
the phosphorus in the eyes is essential to sight. He attempts to explain all the 
pathological and physiological phenomena of sight and colours by referring 
Goethe's theory of optics and colour back to this physiological 'fact'. There is 
a criticism of his theory by Carl Asmund Rudolphi (1771-1832) in 'Grundriss 
der Physiologie' (Berlin, 1823) § 316 obs. I. 
Rudolphi points out that the hypothesis of light 'issuing from our eyes' is 
extremely doubtful, as no amount of subjective activity will enable us to see 
in the dark. He takes the lights which appear when we close our eyes and rub 
them to be the same as the ringing we hear when our ears are struck, and not 
to indicate the actual presence oflight. He also notices a certain similarity between 
Schultz's theory and that put forward by Andrew Horn in his 'The seat of 
vision determined' (London, 1813). 
123, 37 
Michelet took this passage from a section of the jenenser Realphilosophie 
II' (p. 73) in which Hegel was attempting to formulate a transition from what 
at that time he called 'shaping and chemism' (gravity, elasticity, heat, process), 
to what he then took to constitute 'physics' (colours, chemical substances, 
chemical process). 
Crystals as such had already been dealt with at this juncture (see pp. 54-55), 
and if this passage is considered in its context, it becomes apparent that it refers 
not simply to the diamond as such, as Michelet evidently thought, but to the 
Earth (c£ the note III. 215). Mter the passage quoted, Hegel continues as 
follows, 'This pure crystal is to the same extent pure movement within itself 
however; it is dissolution which dissolves itself, and which resembles heat in 
that it holds all shape within an undivided and restless unity. It is the living sun, 
true reality, that which has power, all-animating light: it is the universal soul, 
the universal life itself ... One might say that in this absolute process the sun 
acts in opposition to the firmness of the crystal, sunders the absolutely rigid 
singularity of its dead carbon and draws it into movement'. In the margin at this 
point Hegel then added, 'Diamond, interior of the Earth'. 
124,20 
See 'Goethe, die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' pt. I vol. 4 'Zur Farben-
lehre ... Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) §§ 495-6 (p. 157). 
Hegel is here referring to that part of Goethe's work which deals with chemical 
colours in their most basic forms. After dealing with the 'opposition' of acid 
and alkali, Goethe goes on to treat of the 'derivation' of white and black, the 
'stimulation' of colour itself etc. At the end of this section he deals with the 
more complex colours of organisms. 
339 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
124, 33 
In support of this statement, Hegel quotes a passage from J. B. Biot's 'Traite 
de physique experimentale et mathematique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. III p. 199 
which he translates, 'On a un autre exemple de cette propriete, en jetant dans 
de I'huile d'olive des morceaux irreguliers de borax; car ces morceaux, a cause 
de leurs inegalites et du defaut de poli de leur surface, ne transmettent pas 
regulierement la lumiere lorqu'ils sont plonges dans l' air; mais ils deviennent 
parfaitement limpides quand ils sont plonges dans I'huile d' olive, parce qu' elle 
compense toutes leurs inegalites; et il se fait si peu de reflexion a la surface 
commune de ces deux substances, qu' on a peine a distinguer les limites de leur 
separation' . 
On hydrophane c£ Gren's Journal der Physik' VII p. 143 (Leipzig, 1793). 
Cf. Robert Smith (1689-1768) 'A Compleat System of Opticks' (2 vols. Cam-
bridge, 1738) vol. i p. 96. 
124,39 
For Newton's views on transparency, see his 'Opticks' bk. II pt. iii. His main 
proposition (no. 2) is that, 'The least parts of almost all natural bodies are in 
some measure transparent: And the opacity of those bodies ariseth from the 
multitude of reflexions caused in their internal parts'. Huyghen's deals with the 
matter in ch. 3 of his 'Traite de la Lumiere' (Leyden, 1690), 'The waves of light 
are carried on in the ethereal matter, which continuously occupies the inter-
stices or pores of transparent bodies. For since it passes through them continu-
ously and freely, it follows that they are always full of it. And one may even 
show that these interstices occupy much more space than the coherent particles 
which constitute the bodies.' Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), in his 'Nova theoria 
lucis' (Berlin, 1746) § 102 assumed that the particles of transparent bodies 
undergo compression, and transmit the vibrations communicated to them by 
the oscillations of the ether. 
Although Johann Heinrich Lambert (1723-1777), Pierre Bouguer (1698-
1758) and Count Rumford (1753-1814) subsequently investigated degrees of 
transparency, it was not until Maxwell discovered that the equations governing 
the behaviour of electric waves are equally applicable to light, that any real 
advance was made in this branch of physics. 
Hegel was clearly justified in regarding an explanation of transparency as 
being a necessary preliminary to any fully intelligible consideration of refraction 
and colours however. 
130, 33 
Although Hegel does not acknowledge the fact, this explanation clearly owes 
something to Newton's observation that the refraction of light is not caused 
solely by the rays falling on the actual surfaces of bodies, but that it is effected, 
without any contact, by the action of a power belonging to bodies and extending 
a certain distance beyond their surfaces. See Newton's 'Opticks' Bk. III pt. i 
340 

NOTES 
quo 20, 'Doth not this aethereal medium in passing out of water, glass, crystal, 
and other compact and dense bodies into empty spaces, grow denser and denser 
by degrees, and by that means refract the rays of light not in a point, but by 
bending them gradually in curved lines? And doth not the gradual condensation 
of this medium extend to some distance from the bodies, and thereby cause the 
inflexions of the rays of light, which pass by the edges of dense bodies, at some 
distance from the bodies?' 
Pr------------
I 
I 
N 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
a 
I 
------I---.,S 
I 
I 
I 
I 
H~------~--------~~--------------+_--~I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
RI-------,----
---------..L--JT 
I 
I 
b 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'The manner in which Refraction is performed by mere attraction, without 
contact, may be thus accounted for: Suppose HI the boundary of two mediums, 
Nand 0; the first the rarer, ex. gr. air; the second the denser, ex. gr. glass; the 
attraction of the mediums here will be as their densities. Suppose pS to be the 
distance to which the attracting force of the denser medium exerts itself within 
the rarer. Now let a ray oflight Aa fall obliquely on the surface which separates 
the mediums, or rather on the surface pS, where the action of the second and 
more resisting medium commences: as the ray arrives at a, it will begin to be 
turned out of its rectilinear course by a superior force, with which it is attracted 
by the medium 0, more than by the medium N; hence the ray is bent out of 
its right line in every point of its passage between pS and RT, within which 
distance the attraction acts; and therefore between these lines it describes a 
curve aBb; but beyond R T, being out of the sphere of attraction of the medium 
341 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
N, it will proceed uniformly in a right line, according to the direction of the 
curve in the point b.' Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Mathematical and Philo-
sophical Dictionary' (2 vols. London, 1795) IIp. 344. On the significance of 
density here see the note on II. 355. 
130, 35 
Michelet commented upon this as follows: 'Hegel's explanation of the 
phenomenon of elevation seems to me to be predominantly correct and appro-
priate, but since it is not physical but purely metaphysical, it is bound to en-
counter extensive opposition from the empirical physicists. According to the 
emission theory, the explanation of the phenomenon is to be found in the 
attraction which exists between the refracting matter and light, and the undula-
tion theory is then driven by the need for consistency to postulate another 
variation of this, in which the motion is likened to that of a cavalry regiment. 
Where do these various theories stand with regard to one another and with 
regard to the Hegelian interpretation? The point here is evidently the displace-
ment of the light image, which varies according to the different densities and 
rigidities of substances, for variations in the material intensity of the body must 
also give rise to variations in the expansion or concentration of the light-image 
(p. 126). Consequently, the denser a body is the more it will seem to obscure 
the virgin purity of light by breaking and dispersing it within its crass materi-
ality, so that the image appears to be larger and therefore closer. The principle 
is the same in embroidery, where a pattern which is executed in fine silk threads 
is much smaller and more sharply defmed than when it is executed in a coarse 
wool. The greater concentration or expansion of this elevation takes place in 
one and the same medium. When the air is clear for example, I see objects with 
clear outlines, so that they appear to occupy less space and to be smaller and 
further away than they do in dull weather, although perhaps not to be situated 
at a different angle. The sun and moon have to shine through a greater amount 
of vapour when they first rise than when they are standing high in the clearer 
regions of the heavens, and this gives rise to their apparently greater size. 
Similarly, the things seen under the water by a diver will certainly appear 
larger than when they are viewed in the atmosphere. In order that what is 
called refraction should occur with elevation however, the light-image has to 
traverse two media, in one of which there is a concentration and in the other 
of which there is an expansion of light, so that there are two distinct displace-
ments. The angle of refraction will then be caused by the line of vision being 
different in the two media. It is true that the light-image will be displaced by 
the specific determinateness of a single medium, but as this takes place uniformly 
throughout the whole distance between the object and the eye, the direction of 
the light does not diverge from a straight line, so that the displacement takes 
place without refraction. Even when there are two media between the eye and 
342 

NOTES 
the object, no refraction will take place if their powers of displacement are 
equal. Finally, it is also impossible for refraction to occur if there are two media 
of differing density and the eye is located on the perpendicular above the object, 
as in the following diagram, in which E is the eye and 0 is the object. 
E 
\ 
A 
\\ 
\\ 
\\ 
\ \ \ \e 
\ \ 
\ 
\\ 
\ 
\\ 
\ \\ 
b 
.a 
\ \ 
\ \ 
\ 
. 
\ \ 
\ 
\\ 
\ 
c 
\ \ 
\ 0 
d 
'\\ 
\ 
\\ 
\ 
B 
\\ 
\ 
'\ 
\ 
c 
o 
p 
o 
In this case the visual water-space abed, which is more concentrated in the 
air, merely lifts the object 0 towards the eye as far as 0, without fixing the 
relation between this place and the place in the more expanded visual water-
space ABC D at an angle, for the line of vision EO appears to coincide with 
Eo. If the eye is located at point F, and so stands at an angle to the object, it is 
impossible for the light-image to follow the same line in the air as it did through 
the water (Oe) in reaching the eye. It is diverted into the eF direction, so that 
to the eye located at point F, the object at 0 no longer appears to be lifted to 0, 
but as it must always be assumed to lie on the bottom, it will appear to be 
shifted further to point p. It is here therefore that refraction first occurs. When 
it is realized that the effects of both media have to combine, in order for example 
that the gold coin at the bottom of a vase may be simultaneously lifted and 
shifted and so appear longer and distorted, it becomes apparent how complicated 
this is. The coin's apparent increase in size is the result of the expansion of the 
light by the water, and this enlargement alone can cause the object to seem 
closer to the eye, for if one places one's eye so close to the water that there is 
no longer any air in between, the elevation still takes place. However, by reason 
of its lower density, the air also contributes to this phenomenon by its further 
343 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
concentration of the whole visual water-space of the gold coin. Consequently, 
it is only natural that in order to reach the eye, the light-image of the coin 
should assume a different direction when it emerges from the water into the 
air. That is to say that the air is merely determinative of the place of the light-
image, while the water also effects its shape. One might say therefore that 
whereas the object appears to be distorted and enlarged by the water, it is 
brought nearer and shifted by the air. The archetypal objective phenomenon 
of refraction seems to me to be the rod which appears to be broken where it 
emerges from the water. Here each medium displays an easily distinguishable 
kind of effect, while this was not so in the former subjective example. The part 
of the rod situated in the water is not only shifted towards the eye, so that the 
rod appears to be broken, but it is also the case that the further it extends into 
the water, the thicker it appears to be. This indicates that the distortion of the 
light-image increases in proportion to the increase in density resulting from the 
greater mass of the water. Consequently, this displacement will also be apparent 
under the water. On the other hand, if we view the phenomenon through air, 
the air's apparent modification of the position of the rod is added to the change 
in its shape brought about by the water. It is precisely this which causes the 
apparent obliquity of the rod. Completely objective elevation also takes place 
without refraction if the rod is held upright in the water instead of obliquely; 
it is not necessary in this case to view it from the perpendicular. How do the 
physicists explain the fact that no matter what the angle of incidence assumed 
by the eye in this case, the rod never appears to be broken? It is evident that the 
rays from each point on the submerged section of the rod which reach the eye, 
must form different angles of incidence with the surface of the water. Taking 
elevation and not refraction as our point of departure, our solution is quite 
simply that as long as the rod is in a perpendicular position, the elevation of 
that part of it which is submerged, and which merely appears to be thickened 
by the water, simply joins up with the perpendicular part that is above the 
water. As soon as the rod is placed obliquely in the water however, the per-
pendicular elevation of the oblique part under the water has to connect up at a 
certain angle with the oblique part above the water. Consequently, as the one 
part of the rod appears to assume a greater obliquity, both parts can no longer 
form one straight line. This concentration of a formerly more expanded light-
image is expressed by Hegel in a somewhat more subtle metaphysical form, 
when he says that the greater density of the water concentrates the visual air-
space into the density of water in an ideal manner.' 
131, IS 
This passage calls to mind the famous remark in the 'Philosophy of History' 
(tr. Sibree, Dover Publications 1956) p. 32, 'No man is a hero to his valet-de-
chambre', is a well-known proverb; I have added-and Goethe repeated it 
344 

NOTES 
ten years later-'but not because the former is no hero, but because the latter 
is a valet'. 
131, 25 
Willebrord Snell (1580-1626), commonly known as Snellius, was born at 
Leyden in 1580, not 1590 or 1591 as is so often stated. There is record of his 
attending school in the town in 1590. In 1613 he succeeded his father Rudolph 
Snell (1546-1613) as professor of mathematics at Leyden university. 
He was author of a great many learned mathematical works, but is mainly 
remembered for his 'Eratosthenes Batavus' (Lugd. Bat. 1617), in which he des-
cribes a new method of finding the dimensions of the earth by determining the 
distance of one point on its surface from the parallel of another, by means of 
triangulation. Hegel is referring here to his equally famous discovery of the law 
governing the refraction of light. He never published his work in this field, and 
there is good reason to believe that Descartes, when he formulated the law of 
refraction in a slightly different manner in his 'Discours de la methode' (Diop-
trics) (Leyden, 1637), was drawing upon his knowledge of Snell's manuscripts, 
although he failed to acknowledge this. See Christian Huyghens (1629-1695) 
'Dioptrica' pp. 2-3, published in his 'Opera posthuma' (Leyden, 1703): Isaac 
Vossius (1618-1688) 'Responsio ad objecta Johannis De Bruyn' (Hagae Com. 
1663) p. 32: Joseph Priestley 'The History and present state of discoveries relating 
to vision, light and colours' (2 vols. London, 1772, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1776) vol. 
I pp. 102-106: Emil Wilde 'Geschichte der Optik' (2 vols. Berlin, 1838) I pp. 
215-271: P. Kramer in 'Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik' IV 
(Leipzig, 1882): Korteweg 'Descartes et les manuscrits de Snellius' ('Revue de 
metaphysique et de morale' IV, 1896): Milhaud 'Descartes et la loi des sinus' 
('Revue generale des sciences' XVIII, March, 1907): Vollgraf 'Optica cum 
annotationibus Willebrordi Snelli' pars I, lib. i (Ghent, 1918). 
132, 3 
Michelet commented upon this as follows, 'Here one might well ask the 
physicists why an incident ray which falls perpendicularly should not be 
refracted. The refractive power of the medium cannot be weakened by 
perpendicularity, and the ray itself is not aware that it is perpendicular. The 
only satisfactory explanation of this is to be found in the perpendicularity of 
elevation.' 
132,9 
The 'perpendicularity of elevation' as Michelet calls it, was explained in most 
text-books of the time by the ordinary laws of refraction. See for example 
345 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 
vols. London, 1795) vol. II p. 347. 
G 
E 
H 
'If two rays CD and CP, proceeding from the same radient C, and falling on 
a plane surface of a different density, so that the points of Refraction D and P 
be equally distant from the perpendicular of incidence GK, the refracted rays 
DF and PQ have the same virtual focus, or the same point of dispersion G.-
Hence, when refracted rays, falling on the eye placed out of the perpendicular 
of incidence, are either equally distant from the perpendicular, or very near each 
other, they will flow upon the eye as if they came to it from the point G; 
consequently the point C will be seen by the refracted rays as in G. And hence 
also: if the eye be placed in a dense medium, objects in a rarer will appear more 
remote than they are; and the place of the image, in any case, may be deter-
mined from the ratio of Refraction: Thus, to fishes swimming under water, 
objects out of the water must appear farther distant than in reality they are. 
But, on the contrary, if the eye at E be placed in a rarer medium, then an object 
G placed in a denser, appears, at C, nearer than it is; and the place of the image 
may be determined in any given case by the ratio of Refraction: and thus the 
bottom of a vessel full of water is raised by Refraction a third part of its depth, 
with respect to an eye placed perpendicularly over the refracting surface; and 
thus also fishes and other bodies, under water, appear nearer than they really are.' 
If the matter was treated in a way which took both eyes into consideration, the 
explanations became more complicated, but the principles remained the same; 
see 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. I pp. lI48-II49 and fig. 260 
(Leipzig, 1825). 

NOTES 
132, 36 
This should evidently be regarded as a criticism of Newton's 'Opticks' bk. III 
pt. i quo 20 (see the note II. 340). 
Hegel is referring here to F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798) 'Grundriss der Naturlehre 
zum Gebrauch akademischer Vorlesungen' (4th ed. Halle, 1801); see 
the note II. 267. In §700 Gren gives P. van Musschenbroek (1692-1761), 
'Introductio ad philosophiam naturalem' (2 vols. Lugd. Bat. 1762) §§ 1720-
1724 as an authority, and writes, ,~et) ber ~red)ung be~ ~id)t~ in leinem 
Uebergange 
au~ einem burd)lid)tigen imitteI in ein anbere~ ~iingt all0 
ber ~red)ung~lt>infel t~eil~ bon ber ~atur be~ bred)enben imittel~, t~eil~ bon 
ber ~eigung be~ eingefaUenben 6tra~le~ abo @emein~in finb &It>ar hie bred)enben 
5rriifte ber burd)fid)tigen imittel im )8er~iiltniHe mit i~rer SNd)tigfeit; man 
fann inbeHen nid)t fagen, ba13 biele \Regel gan& genau unb ba13 fie aUgemein 
&utreffe i benn einige burd)fid)tige imitteI bred)en ftiitfer, anbere fd)lt>iid)er, 
al~ e~ nad) )8er~iiltnif3 i~res eigent~umlid)en @elt>id)g gefd)e~en foUte. 60 
fann ba~er mand)mal ba~ md)t bet)m Uebergange aus einem imittel in ein 
anbere~ metflid) gebrod)en It>erben, obgleid) hie f.lJecififd)en @elt>id)te hiefer 
imitteI nid)t merflid) berfd)ieben finb, &.b. 2Uaun unb gruner )8itriol; 10 fann 
es ferner aus einem imittel in ein anbere~ o~ne ~red)ung uberge~en, obgleid) 
bie c.Ilid)tigfeiten berfelben berfd)ieben finb, It>ie &.~. bet) ~aumo~l unb ~ora~; 
ia e~ fann enblid) fogar bet)m Uebergange au~ bem bid)tern ins bunnere 
WHttel bem ~er.lJenbitel &u gebrod)en It>erben, It>ie bet) )lliaHer unb %er.lJentino~l'. 
133, 8 
J. B. Biot 'Traite de physique experimentale et mathematique' (4 vols. Paris, 
1816). Biot bases these remarks, as he acknowledges, upon the observation, 
made by Newton; see the 'Opticks' bk. II pt. 3 prop. 10. Hegel seems to have 
been incapable of acknowledging that Newton had any virtues. 
133, 17 
When judging the exposition of refraction given here by Hegel it should be 
remembered that he is attempting not merely to state the facts of the case, but 
to explain them. It was generally realized at that time that the mechanical ex-
planations of refraction put forward by Descartes, Pierre Fermat (1601-1665), 
C. F. M. Dechales (1601-1678), Jean Bernoulli (1667-1748), Daniel Bernoulli 
(1700-1782), J. J. Mairan (1678-1771), P. L. M. Maupertius (1698-1759) etc. 
were inadequate. See Robert Smith (1689-1768) 'A compleat system ofOpticks' 
(2 vols. Cambridge, 1738, Germ. tr. Kastner, Altenburg, 1755) Remarks p. 70: 
Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' (2 
vols. London, 1795) II pp. 343-344: 'Gehler's Physikalisches W6rterbuch' vol. I 
pp. II27-II64· 
F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798), in § 698 of his 'Grundriss der Naturlehre' (4th ed. 
Halle, 1801), the work quoted by Hegel on p. 132 notes that, ,60 biele 
347 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Q;tfliitungen auc~ iibet bie tuitfenbe Utiac~e bes $~iinomen~ bet )l3tec~ung 
gegeben tuotben finb, io iit boc~ feine beftiebigenbet, als bie, tue!c~e un~ il1etu~ 
ton ie!bit babon gegeben ~at. Sie tebucitt jic~ auf bie Shaft bet (to~iiten3, 
obet, tuenn man Hebet tuill, bet m:n3ie~ung bet butc~iic~tigen 9Ratetie mit 
bem Stoffe bes Bic~ts, 10 tuie bie il1efle!ion im @egent~ei!e ben 9Rangel bie~er 
(toMten3 obet m:n3ie~ung an3eigt'. 
Although Hegel cannot bring himself to acknowledge the fact, he utilizes 
Newton's explanation of the phenomenon in his exposition of it (see the note 
II. 340). By insisting upon what he calls 'the advanced spirituality' of refrac-
tion, and by refusing to accept the purely mechanical 'explanations' of it 
proffered in the text-books of the time, he may not have added anything to 
scientific knowledge, but he did at least contribute towards keeping the way 
open for the demonstration, on the basis of the undulatory theory, that refrac-
tion may be explained from the fact that the velocity of light is inversely propor-
tional to the refractive index of the medium through which it passes. 
133,24 
Hegel adds the following footnote here, 'By formal equality I mean the 
general shape of the cube. The following passage from Biot's 'Traite de 
physique' (vol. III ch. 4 p. 325) will suffice to indicate the internal figuration of 
crystals giving rise to the so-called double refraction of light. "This phenome-
non occurs in all transparent crystals the primitive form of which is neither a 
cube nor a regular octahedron." , 
133, 37 
C£ the note II. 340. As the result of the mechanical interpretations of the 
refraction oflight prevalent in the eighteenth century, the category of power or 
force was often used in explanations of this phenomenon; see the note above. 
Hegel realized that this category had been overused in this context. In the case 
of double refraction however, which he took to involve the internal mirroring 
and reflecting structure of crystals, he regarded it as being relevant to explanation, 
probably on account of its being involved in the study of surface forces. 
This assessment would have been more intelligible to the German physicists 
of Hegel's day than to their French or English counterparts, since the study of 
surface forces was an accepted and clearly defmed part of their work; see the 
note II. 280. 
134, II 
The first volume of Goethe's 'Zur Farbenlehre' (Tiibingen, 1808, ed. Matt-
haei, Weimar, 1955) contains definitions offour kinds of colour. 
'§ 143. Those colours which arise when light and darkness have an effect 
upon the eye or upon confronting surfaces after passing through an achromatic 
348 

NOTES 
medium are said to be dioptric. In this case it is necessary that the medium should 
be transparent or at least have a certain degree of translucency. 
§ 366. When we speak of catoptric colours, we are indicating those colours 
known to us through their appearing by means of a reflection. We take as 
given that the light, as well as the surface from which it reflects, is in a completely 
achromatic condition. 
§ 391. The paroptic colours have been so named on account of its being 
necessary for light to fall upon an edge in order that they may be elicited. They 
do not appear whenever light falls upon an edge however; other quite particular 
secondary circumstances are also necessary. 
§ 430. Epoptic colours occur for various reasons on the surface of an achromatic 
body originally devoid of communication or colour'. 
In 1809 E. L. Malus (1775-1812), J. B. Biot (1774-1862) and D. F. J. Arago 
(1786-1853) began to investigate the polarization of light, particularly with 
regard to double refraction in Iceland spar (see the notes to §§ 276-278), and 
this gave rise to the discovery of what Thomas Johann Seebeck (1770-183 I) 
called entoptic colours; see his 'Von den entoptischen Farbenfiguren und den 
Bedingungen ihrer Bildung in Glasern' ('Schweiggers Journal' 1813, 1814) 
Goethe took the matter up, and in his 'Zur Naturwissenschaft Uberhaupt' vol. I 
(Stuttgart and Tlibingen, 1817-1822; ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962 pp. 94-138) gave 
an account of these colours in the light of his own theory. He took them to be 
closely related to epoptic colours and added that, 'they were called entoptic 
because they are to be seen within certain bodies'. 
For a contempory British account of them see David Brewster (1781-1868) 
'On the laws which regulate the absorption of polarized light by doubly 
refractory crystals' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1819 pp. 11-28). 
134, 16 
'Goethe, die Schriften zur Naturwissenschaft' pt. I vol. 8 'Naturwissenschaft-
liche Hefte' (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) pp. 108-109. In the section referred 
to Goethe says that it is, 'the variegated passage of the folia and the resultant 
interplay of mirrorings' which gives rise to double refraction in rhomboidal 
Iceland spar,and that the same effect might be produced artificially, by means 
of mirrors. He has in fact just dealt with the nature of mirroring (sects. XVII-
XXI). 
Then follows the passage quoted by Hegel, ,. . • nun gel)en tvit aU ben 
natiitHd)en, butd)fid)tigen, ftiftaUifietten SNit,))etn iioet, unb f,))ted)en alfo bon 
i~nen aus: ban bie lnatut, in bas 3nnetfte fold)et SNit,))et, einen gleid)en 
@),))iegela,)),))atat aufgeoaut l)aoe, tvie tvit es mit iiuf3etlid)en, ,))l)t)fifd) .. med)a .. 
niid)en 9J1itteln getan'. 
Hegel adds, in a footnote here, 'What I have said about this exposition was 
so favourably received by Goethe that it may be found in part 4 (p. 294) of 
"On the Science of Nature".' See Kuhn's ed. (op. cit. pp. 212-214). 
349 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Hegel's communication is dated from Berlin, February 20, 1821, and is 
therefore almost certainly the outcome of his weekly meetings with Schultz, 
von Henning and Schubarth (see the note II. 338). In it Hegel says that despite 
the many experiments performed since Malus published his first papers in 1808 
(see the note II. 241), the understanding of entoptic colours had not been 
furthered until Goethe's work on them appeared, 'at least so far as I am con-
cerned, understanding is of prime importance, and the bare phenomenon has 
interest for me only in so far as it awakens my desire to understand it'. He goes 
on to point out the importance of Goethe's archetypal phenomenon to a 
philosophic interpretation of colour. 
134, 17 
,eine innete 'l:lamafttoeoetei het matut'. Nicolin and Poggeler, in their 
edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959) p. 262 delete this phrase, 
without noting the fact or explaining why. This is unfortunate. Hegel is 
evidently referring to an advanced form of entoptic colour mentioned by 
Goethe in sect. XXXIV of the work just referred to (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 
1962 pp. 128-129). 
134,26 
Hegel changes this quotation somewhat, although not significantly. 
134,28 
op. cit. (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962 pp. 16-20) 'Doppelbilder des Rhombischen 
Kalkspats'. The essay is dated Weimar, January 12, 1813. 
135, 3 
See the preceding note. Hegel evidently has in mind the following 
passage, ,'l:lie 5atten etlotltifd)en tyatoen ftlieIen toie ein ~aud) hutd) hie gan5e 
9JCaffe unh 5eugen bon het feinften %tennung het 2ameUen. 'l:lutd) ein \l!ri5ma 
bon einem fo geatteten (;!6emtlfat touthe man hie oetounhetn5toutbigfte Fata 
Morgana botfteUen fonnen'. 
Rasmus Bartholin (1625-1698), professor at Copenhagen, was the first to 
discover the double refraction of light in Iceland spar; see his 'Experimenta 
Crystalli Islandici Disdiaclastici, quibus mira refractio detegitur' (Copenhagen, 
1669): 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' no. 67. Christian Huyghens (1629-1695) in-
vestigated the phenomenon very thoroughly and published the results of his 
work in his 'Traite de la Lurniere' (Leyden, 1690) ch. V, but he did not feel 
able to offer an explanation of it. 
Newton 'Opticks' Bk. III i quo 25 concluded from Huyghens' experiments 
that, 'There is an original difference in the rays of light, by means of which some 
rays are in this experiment constantly refracted after the usual manner, and 
others constantly after the unusual manner; for if the difference be not original, 
350 

NOTES 
but arises from new modifications impressed on the rays at their first refraction, 
it would be altered by new modifications in the three following refractions; 
whereas it suffers no alteration, but is constant, and has the same effect upon the 
rays in all the refractions. The unusual refraction is, therefore, performed by an 
original property of rays.' 
Here the matter rested until the beginning of the last century, when Thomas 
Young's revival of the wave-theory (see the note II. 229), and E. L. Malus's 
discovery of the polarization of light (see the note II. 241) showed that New-
ton's conclusion had been correct, and opened the way for the work of A. J. 
Fresnel (see the note II. 229). 
By attributing the phenomenon of double refraction exclusively to the 
lamellae or interior shape of the crystal, Goethe and Hegel were turning their 
backs upon some of the most valuable research being done in this field at that 
time. Their fault lay in regarding the work of Young, Malus, Brewster, Fresnel 
etc. as merely a continuation or degeneration of Newtonianism. It was in fact 
laying the foundations of Maxwell's dynamical theory of light. On the other 
hand, although it was outdating Newton, it was not disproving him, and it was 
certainly not opening the way for any 'refutation' of Newton on Goethean 
lines. 
135, 9 
The explanation of the fata morgana by J. B. Biot (1774-1862) in his 'Traite 
de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. III pp. 320--324 is substantially correct, 
and Hegel was right in regarding it as a phenomenon of refraction. When he 
says that it 'finds its place here' however, this is only partly correct, for the 
double refraction dealt with elsewhere in this paragraph also involves the 
polarisation of light. 
The refractive index of the atmosphere is continuously varying, and the 
meteorological optical phenomena which this gives rise to are caused either 
by the normal variation experienced as one ascends, or by the sporadic variations 
brought about by irregular heating. In accordance with the ordinary laws of 
refraction, the rays of light deviate from their rectilinear path as they pass from 
one homogeneous medium to another, assuming of course that the refractive 
indices of these media are different. Consequently, the path of the rays through 
continuously varying atmospheric media becomes curvilinear, i.e. compounded 
of a large number of these small rectilinear deviations. 
Biot informs us that it was Gaspard Monge (1746-1818) who drew his 
attention to phenomena of this kind. Monge had accompanied Napoleon on 
his expedition to Egypt and Syria, and had therefore had occasion to study 
mirages in the desert. See C. Dupin (1784-1873) 'Essai historique sur les services 
et les travaux scientifiques de Gaspard Monge' (paris, 1819). 
For contemporary accounts of the fata morgana, see: Antonio Minasi 
(1736--1806) 'Disertazione sopra un fenomeno volgarmente delto Fata Morgana 
351 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
cet' (Rome, 1773), c£ 'Gilberts Annalen der Physik' XII p. 520: Patrick Brydone 
(1736-1818) 'A Tour through Sicily and Malta' (London, 1773, Germ. tr. 
Leipzig, 1774): A. P. Buchan (1764-1824) 'Account of an appearance of 
Brighton Cliff seen in the air by reflection; ('Nicholson's Journal' 1806 XIV 
p. 340): H. H. Blackadder 'On Unusual Atmospherical Refraction' ('Edinburgh 
Philosophical Journal' XIII pp. 66-72, 1825). On the famous 'Brockengespenst' 
see J. E. Silberschlag (1721-1791) 'Geogonie' (3 pts. Berlin, 1780-83) pt. I 
p. 139. See also the 'Asiatic Journal and Monthly Register' (Sept. 1829): J. M. 
Pernter 'Meteorologische Optik' (Vienna and Leipzig, 1906): R. W. Wood 
Physical Optics' (New York, 1905). 
135, 30 
,60 gibt bann ein aud) fib: fid) e~iftietenbes ~inftetes unb filt fid) 
tJot'f)anbenes ~el(es'. 
136, 13 
The best known English work on this subject was done by Edward Hussey 
Delaval (1729-1814): see his 'On the agreement between the specific gravities 
of the several metals and their colours when united to glass' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' 1765 p. IO): 'An experimental Inquiry into the Cause of Changes in 
Opake and coloured Bodies' (London, 1777). There is a valuable and concise 
survey of the subject as it was understood at the tum of the century in the 
'Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 1807) vol. I pp. 
506-513, by Arthur Aikin (1773-1854) and Charles Rochemont Aikin (1775-
1847). 
The Aikins observe that, 'The metallic oxyds when mixed with any of the 
glasses, dissolve in them with ease at a melting heat, and always change the 
colour more or less, sometimes producing very beautiful compounds, which 
when well prepared, have a lustre and richness of colour strongly resembling 
that of the natural gems, though in an inferior degree'. They note for example 
that gold gives rise to purple, silver to yellow, iron to yellow, green, brown, 
black and red, copper to green, red and black, lead to yellow, antimony to yellow, 
manganese to purplish-red and black, cobalt to blue and green, nickel to violet-
blue, tungsten to blue, and chrome to red and green. They also give references 
to certain continental writers on the subject. 
C£ Edward Nathaniel Bancroft (1772-1842) 'Experimental Researches con-
cerning the Philosophy of Permanent Colours' (London, 1794: 2nd. ed. en-
larged, 2 vols. London, 1813). Bancroft introduced the important distinction 
between substantive dyes which, 'do not depend upon any basis or mordant, 
either for their permanency or their lustre', and 'adjective dyes', capable of being 
enlivened and fixed only by being adjected or applied upon a suitable basis'. 
352 

NOTES 
136, 19 
,Sn bet gemad)ten m:uf3eigung bes @anges bet ~etbunferung'. 'Course', 
'progress', 'manner' would perhaps be more accurate equivalents for ,bet @ang'. 
136,24 
Cf. II. 190, 16 and the note II. 407. 
137, 5 
Newton's basic proposition concerning colour is to be found in bk. I pt. 2 
(prop. 5 theorem 4) of his 'Opticks', 'Whiteness, and all grey colours between 
white and black, may be compounded of colours, and the whiteness of the 
Sun's light is compounded of all the primary colours mixed in a due pro-
portion'. He then describes six experiments involving prisms, combs, soap suds 
and powders, which he takes to indicate that this is so. Goethe discusses the 
merits of these experiments in 'Zur Farbenlehre. Polemischer Teil' (ed. Matt-
haei, Weimar, 1958) pp. 149-170. 
His criticism of Newton is based upon his conception of the 'archetypal 
phenomenon' of colour mentioned here by Hegel. According to Goethe colour 
arises not from light alone, but from light and darkness. Instead of taking the 
colours of the spectrum to be the constituents of white light, he takes light and 
darkness to be the constituents of colours. In § 739 of his 'Zur Farbenlehre. 
Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) pp. 216-217 he gives his 
main reason for this, 'Everything which appears and which we encounter as a 
phenomenon must either indicate an original division capable of union or an 
original unity capable of division, and must display itself as such'. It is not 
difficult to see why such an archetypal phenomenon should have appealed to 
Hegel. See C. H. Pfaff (1773-1852) 'Ueber Newton's Farbentheorie, ... 
Goethe's Farbenlehre und den chemische Gegensatz der Farben' (Leipzig, 1813) 
pp. 21-27: Emil Wilde 'Geschichte der Optik' (2 vols. Berlin, 1838-1843) 
vol. 2 pp. 197-217. 
The invention of the diffraction grating by Joseph Fraunhofer (1787-1826), 
by making it possible to separate wave lengths which are very close together, 
gave a great impetus to spectroscropy, and since Goethe's day gratings have 
largely replaced prisms for the study of complicated spectra. 
The advances made in this branch of physics as the result of Fraunhofer's 
invention now enable us to assess Newton's theory of white light more sensi-
tively than was possible when Hegel published this defence of Goethe's arche-
typal phenomenon in 1830. It is now realized that one would be justified in 
saying that the spectroscope creates coloured light, -although this statement may 
be harmonized with the classical Newtonian theory by adding that the pulse of 
light can be analysed mathematically into an integral composed of lights of all 
wave lengths. In this sense it is correct to say that white light contains all the 
M 
353 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
colours, even though it is unnatural to attribute any periodic quality to a single 
pulse. 
There is no basic difference between the resolution of light by a grating and the 
forming of the spectrum of white light by a prism. The prism merely converts a 
single pulse into successions of pulses differently spaced for the different direc-
tions. The analysis of light into wave lengths is mainly a matter of mathematical 
convenience therefore. It should be added however, that these wave lengths are 
important in practical spectroscopic analysis on account of the very nearly pure 
monochromatic lines which occur in the spectra emitted by gases. 
Consequently, it is to be presumed that any modern attempt to harmonize the 
differences between Newton's conception of white light as compound and 
Goethe's archetypal phenomenon would concern itself with the nature of the 
pulse and the part played by it in the appearance of colour. See the interesting 
and valuable attempt by Erwin Heintz to present Goethe's theory mathematically: 
'Licht und Finsternis, Ein Beitrag zu Goethes Farbenlehre', in G. Wachsmuth 
'Goethe in unserer Zeit' (Basel, 1949) pp. 185-208. Cf. E. H. Land 'Colour in 
the Natural Image' ('Proc. Roy. Inst. of Great Britain' 39 pt. I no. 176 1962 
pp. 1-15). George Magyar 'On the dual nature of light' ('British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science' vol. xvi pp. 44-49, 1966). 
137,32 
In the second edition of Goethe's 'Zur Farbenlehre' (Tiibingen, 1810) the 
passage referred to here occurs on p. 181. Hegel may be referring to the first 
edition (Tiibingen, 1808). See 'Zur Farbenlehre, Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, 
Weimar 1955) § 471 (p. 151), '6ed)fte >Bebingung. ~enn IDCetaHe erfJit5t 
ttJerben, fo entftefJen aUf ifJrer :OberfldcfJe flUd)Ug auf einanber folgenbe 
g:arben, ttJeld)e jebod) nad) >Belieben feft gefJalten ttJerben lonnen'. 
137, 35 
This is evidently a reference to the eighteenth century doctrine that, 'phlogis-
ton is nothing but the pure matter of light fixed immediately in bodies.': see 
P. J. Macquer (1718-1784) 'Dictionnaire de Chymie' (2nd ed. 4 vols. Paris, 
1778) vol. iii p. 144. Christophe Opoix (1745-1840), building on Macquer's 
work, showed from many facts that light is the material principle of colours, 
and that from its fixation as phlogiston in bodies it produces every species of 
colour according to its mode of combination: see his 'Observations physico-
chimiques sur les Couleurs' (Paris, 1784), and 'Theorie des Couleurs et des 
Corps Inflammables' (Paris, 1808). 
138,9 
Nicolin and Poggeler, in their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 
1959) omit, ,mber aud) du~etlid)e %riibung ift nid)t 6d)ttJdd)ung be~ 
md)t~ iiberfJauflt, 5.>B. burd) ~ntfernung: fonbern •• / 
354 

NOTES 
138, 23 
,bie ~igenld)oft be5 \l3ti5mo, ttiibenb ~u Itlitten/• The verb ,ttiiben
l and 
the noun ,bie %tiibel are central to Goethe's theory of colour. In this paragraph 
Hegel uses the words consistently, evidently with Goethe's theory in mind. 
They have usually been translated as 'to dim' and 'dimness'. 
In his 'Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt' voL I pt. 4 pp. 226-228 (ed. Kuhn, 
Weimar, 1962) Goethe discusses 'bet m:u£lbtud %tiib'. He notes that it always 
involves transparency, which is a necessary factor in both light and darkness, and 
adds, 'Just as the individual colours relate themselves to the light and darkness 
out of which they arise, so dimness, which is their corporeality or medium, 
relates itself to that which is transparent. The former give rise to the spirit of 
colour, the latter gives rise to its body'. 
He takes dimness to be, 'The primary mitigation of transparency, the first 
faintest filling of space, which is as it were the initiation of an opaque cor-
poreal being ... the first lamellae of corporeality.' This dimming body disturbs 
the clarity oflight and so gives rise to colour. 
Goethe then goes on to discuss the meaning of the Latin word 'turbidus' and 
its cognate forms in the Romance languages. 
138, 3 I 
,bet %og tJettteibt bie iYinfternW Cf. the note 11.365. 
139,9 
'Zur Farbenlehre, Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) p. 77 
et. seq. (§ 197 et. seq.). 
139,20 
Iba£l iYotben~~ieted/. This is evidently a reference to a series of experiments 
described by one of the first critics of Goethe's 'Farbenlehre', Christoph Hein-
rich Pfaff (1773-1852), professor of physics and chemistry at the university of 
Kiel. See 'Ueber die farbigen S1iume der Nebenbilder des Doppelspaths' 
('Schweiggers Journal fur Chemie und Physik' 1812 pp. 177-210); 'Ueber 
Newton's Farbentheorie, Herrn von Goethe's Farbenlehre und den chemischen 
Gegensatz der Farben' (Leipzig, 1813) pp. 125-148; cf. pfaff's 'Lebenserinner-
ungen' (Kiel, 1854) pp. 108 and 296-298. 
Goethe, in 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' § 558 et passim had put for-
ward his theory of the archetypal phenomenon of colour, and on the basis of 
it denied Newton's proposition that, 'Whiteness, and all grey colours between 
white and black, may be compounded of colours, and the whiteness of the Sun's 
light is compounded of all the primary colours mixed in a due proportion' 
('Opticks' bk. I pt. 2 prop. 5). In order to show that Goethe's criticism was not 
justified, Pfaff placed a white square against a black background and viewed it 
through Iceland spar. As the result of the double refraction, the secondary image 
355 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
appeared against the background of the white square and the black, so that 
three rectangles of white or grey were apparent, as well as three edging colours, 
blue, yellow and red. Pfaff showed that this superpositing of a 'dimmed' black 
or white did not give rise to the colours which should have appeared had 
Goethe's theory been correct, and that the colours that did appear could be 
explained by means of the known laws of refraction. 
In this 'account' of Pfaff's experiment Hegel evidently has in mind Goethe's 
theory of the relationships between colours (see p. 152), but the mere statement 
that the colours which have appeared are primary and therefore an expression of 
'the same difference' as that found in the opposition between light and darkness 
within the archetypal phenomenon itself, can hardly be regarded as an explana-
tion of what Pfaff had demonstrated. Although it might be conceded that Pfaff's 
black background and white square had 'distinct existences' and could not 
therefore be expected to change the intensity of the brightness or darkness of 
the 'dim medium', it is difficult to see why the secondary image should also 
be regarded as a distinct existence with regard to the first, especially as it is this 
image which gives rise to the colours. 
Pfaff's book is supplied with some admirable diagrams. 
139,26 
See the note II. 353. C£ Newton 'Opticks' bk. II pt. i obs. 14, 'And hence 
I seem to collect that the thicknesses of the air between the glasses there, where 
the ring is successively made by the limits of the five principal colours (red, 
yellow, green blue, violet) in order ... are to one another very nearly as the 
sixth lengths of a chord which sounds the notes in a sixth major, sol, la, mi, fa, 
sol, la. But it agrees somewhat better with the Observation to say that the 
thickness of the air between the glasses there, where the rings are successively 
made by the limits of the seven colours (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, 
violet in order) are to one another as the cube roots of the squares of the eight 
lengths of a chord, which sound the notes in an eighth .. .' 
139, 35 
In a footnote Hegel quotes Goethe's comment on Bk. I pt. 2 prop. IO prob. 5 
exper. 17 of Newton's 'Opticks', which is to be found in 'Zur Farbenlehre. 
Polemischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1958) § 645 (p. 183), 'But I can see 
well enough that lies are needed, and plenty of them'. 
It is only fair to note that Goethe is quoting Reynard the fox, and says as 
much. See 'Reinke de Vos' (Lubeck, 1498), Hartmann Schopper (1542-C. 1600) 
'Opus Poeticum de admirabili fallacia et astutia Vulpeculae Reinikes' (Frankfurt, 
1567), and Goethe's version of this book (Berlin, 1794). C£ Carlyle's 'On Ger-
man Literature of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries' ('Foreign Quarterly 
Review' 1831): T. J. Arnold 'Reynard the Fox: after the German version of 
Goethe' (London, 1860). 

NOTES 
139,40 
Hegel is here referring to Newton's proposition that 'Homogeneallight is 
refracted regularly without any dilatation splitting or shattering of the rays, 
and the confused vision of objects seen through refracting bodies by hetero-
geneallight arises from the different refrangibility of several sorts of rays'. 
The three experiments described by Newton surely prove his point. Hegel 
evidently has in mind Newton's concluding remark, 'And in these three 
experiments it is further very remarkable that the colour of homogeneallight 
was never changed by the refraction'. 
It is perhaps worth quoting Goethe's comment on this sentence ('Zur Far-
benlehre. Polemischer Teil' § 288), 'It is, to be sure, highly worthy of note, that 
only at this point does Newton become aware of the very ABC of prismatic 
observations, namely that a coloured surface is no more susceptible to change by 
means of refraction that is a black, white or grey surface, and it is merely the 
edges of the images which exhibit colouration'. 
140,5 
The English version of the passage referred to is as follow, 'Among all the 
Observations there is none accompanied with so odd circumstances as the 
twenty-fourth. Of those the principal are, that in thin plates which to the 
naked eye seem of an even and uniform transparent whiteness, without any 
terminations of shadows, the refraction of a prism should make rings of colours 
appear, whereas it usually makes objects appear coloured only there where they 
are terminated with shadows, or have parts unequally luminous; and that it 
should make these rings exceedingly distinct and white, although it usually 
renders objects confused and coloured.' 
This reference is interesting in that it indicates which edition of the 'Opticks' 
Hegel used. The work first appeared in English in 1704, and was translated by 
Samuel Clarke (1675-1729), the first edition of the Latin version appearing in 
1706. Goethe often indicates that he had compared the English and Latin versions 
of Newton's text (e.g. 'Zur Farbenlehre. Polemischer Teil' §§ 37, 133 etc.). 
140,7 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel inserted the 
following sentence here, 'According to his kind of reasoning, all the sculptor 
does with his hammer and chisel is to discover the statue within the block of 
marble, for like the kernel in the nut, its form is encased there from the start'. 
140, 12 
See Newton 'Opticks' Bk. I pt. 2 prop. 8 prob. 3, 'By the discovered proper-
ties of light, to explain the colours made by prisIns'. Hegel probably has in 
mind the following passage, 'And if one look through a prism upon a white 
object encompassed with blackness or darkness, the reason of the colours arising 
357 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
on the edges is much the same, as will appear to one that shall a little consider it. 
If a black object be encompassed with a white one, the colours which appear 
through the prism are to be derived from the light of the white one, spreading 
into the regions of the black, and therefore they appear in a contrary order to 
that, when a white object is surrounded with black. And the same is to be 
understood when an object is viewed, whose parts are some of them less 
luminous than others. For, in the borders of the more luminous parts, colours 
ought always by the same principles to arise from the excess of the light of the 
more luminous, and to be of the same kind as if the darker parts were black, 
but yet to be more faint and dilute.' 
Hegel's criticism of this passage is, in effect, that Newton did not attach the 
same significance to this phenomenon as Goethe. Even if one consults the 
corresponding paragraphs in 'Zur Farbenlehre. Polemischer Teil', (§§ 597-607) 
however, it is still difficult to see where, in this particular instance, the superi-
ority of Goethe's interpretation was supposed to lie. 
140, 19 
See Goethe's account of his first experiments with the prisms he borrowed 
from Christian Wilhelm Buttner (1716-1801) in 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer 
Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957) pp. 418-422. Cf. G. H. Lewes 'The Life and 
Works of Goethe' (Everyman cd. 1949) Bk. V ch. ix pp. 341-2. Lewes is right 
when he says that Goethe had misunderstood Newton on this point; see the 
Opticks' Bk. I pt. 2 prop. 8 prob. 3. 
Cf. 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. VII pp. 927--947 (Leipzig' 
1834); E. Wilde 'Geschichte der Optik (2 vols. Berlin, 1838-1843) vol. II pp. 
208-217. 
140, 22 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817), the following was added 
here, 'not forgetting the indiscriminate peddling of it which has been going on 
now for almost a century and a half, and the ignorance of those who have 
defended its crassitude'. 
140, 27 
David Gregory (1661-1708), in his 'Catoptricae et Dioptricae Sphaericae 
Elementa' (Oxford, 1695) was the first to suggest that an achromatic telescope 
might be built if attempts were made to reproduce the lens of the human eye, 
'Perhaps it would be of service to make the object lens of a different medium, as 
we see done in the fabric of the eye; where the crystalline humour (whose power 
of refracting the rays of light differs very little from that of glass) is by nature, 
who never does any thing in vain, joined with the aqueous and vitreous hu-
mours (not differing from water as to their power of refraction) in order that 
the image may be painted as distinct as possible upon the bottom of the eye'. 
358 

NOTES 
Newton concluded, from some rough experiments, that all refracting sub-
stances disperse the prismatic colours in a constant proportion to their mean 
refraction. From this he drew the natural conclusion that refraction could not 
be produced without colour, and therefore that no improvement could be 
expected from the refracting telescope ('Opticks' bk. I pt. i prop. 7 theorem 6: 
bk. I pt. ii prop. 3). C£ Goethe 'Zur Farbenlehre. Polemischer Teil' (ed, 
Matthaei, Weimar, 1958) §§ 303-315. 
C. M. Hall (1703-1771), after arguing like Gregory from the mistaken premise 
of the achromaticism of the lens of the human eye, attempted to correct the 
effect of the unequal refrangibility of light by combining lenses formed of 
different kinds of glass, and in 1733 fmally succeeded in constructing telescopes 
which exhibited objects free from colour. See 'Gentleman's Magazine' 1766 
p. 102, 1771 p. 143, 1790 pt. ii p. 890: 'Encyclopaedia Metropolitana' (London, 
1817-1845) vol. iii p. 408, vol. iv p. 41I. Hall, who was a gentleman of private 
means, did not publicize his invention however, and when Leonhard Euler 
(1707-1783) published his papers on the possibility of an achromatic telescope in 
'Memoires de I'Academie de Berlin' (1747, 1753, 1754), the existence of such 
instruments was unknown to him; see H. Servus 'Geschichte des Fernrohr' 
(Berlin, 1886) p. 77 et seq. It was also unknown to Hall's countryman John 
Dollond (1706-1761), who questioned the soundness of Euler's suggestions in a 
letter sent to the Royal Society ('Phil. Tran. Roy. Soc.' 1753 pp. 289-291), the 
main arguments of which were based upon Newton's work and authority. The 
Swedish physicist Samuel Klingenstjerna (1698-1765) then pointed out that 
Newton's law of the dispersion of refracted light did not harmonize with 
certain observed facts; see his main work on the subject 'Tentamen de definien-
dis et corrigendis ab errationibus radiorum luminis' (St. Petersburg, 1762): c£ 
B. Hildebrand in 'Kungliga Svenska Vetenskapsakademiens Handlingar' 1939. 
This led Dollond to reinvestigate the matter, and to confirm Klingenstjerna's 
theories by discovering, 'a difference far beyond my hopes, in the refractive 
qualities of different kinds of glass, with respect to their divergency of colours', 
and finally to construct his own achromatic telescope. See his 'Account of some 
Experiments concerning the different Refrangibility of Light' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1758 pp. 733-743). See John Kelly (1750-1809) 'The Life of John 
Dollond' (London, 1808): 'Astronomical Register' XIX p. 194 and 'Observatory' 
for May 1886. 
Dollond discovered that different refractions may be produced by different 
mediums, while at the same time, the dispersion caused by one refraction may 
be exactly countered by that caused by another, so that an object may be seen 
through mediums which, together, cause the rays to converge, without appear-
ing of different colours. He discovered that crown glass causes the least dispersion, 
and white flint the most, when they are wrought into forms that produce equal 
refractions. 
Goethe, in his 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957) 
359 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
pp. 361-365 took this discovery of achromatism to be the initiation of anti-
Newtonianism. Newton's view that all refracting substances disperse the 
prismatic colours in a constant proportion to their mean refraction had certainly 
been disproved, but this did not imply, as Goethe asserted, that the distinction 
between refraction and dispersion ('divergency' as it was then called, i.e. ,.8et-
ftteuung') should be abandoned, and was in any case irrelevant to an under-
standing of colour. 
Hegel clearly has Goethe's interpretation of Hall's discovery in mind here. 
C£ W. Whewell 'History of the inductive sciences' (3 vols. London, 1837) 
vol. II pp. 349-361: David Brewster (1781-1868) 'Remarks on Achromatic 
Eye-pieces' ('Nicholson's Journal' XIV, 1806, pp. 388-389): Robert Blair 
(d. 1828) 'The Principles and Application of a new Method of considering 
Achromatic Telescopes' ('Nicholson's Journal of Natural Philosophy' 1794, 
'Gilberts Annalen' 1800, vi p. 129); Goethe (Diary) studied this article between 
March 28th and April 6th 1810. 
141,2 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia', the following passage was inserted 
here, 'Absurdities such as this justify themselves by claiming the physicists' 
privilege of employing so-called hypotheses. Even jokes are not improved by 
inanities however, and as hypotheses are not formulated in the interests of 
hilarity, they should most certainly be denied these embellishments.' 
141,3 
See the note II. 241. 
141,4 
C£ the note II. 241. Hegel indicates in a footnote that he is referring here 
to the work of Johann Tobias Mayer (1752-1830) on the refraction and polarisa-
tion of light. He expresses his understanding and assessment of this work as 
follows, 'One takes two mirrors, one of which is weak and made merely of 
transparent glass, and places them together at any angle less than 90°. Then one 
moves the lower one round so that a light-image is obtained which disappears 
once they stand at a right-angle to one another. If one then continues to move 
the lower mirror round, the light will be visible on two sides, but not on the 
other two. With a power of intellect common at Gottingen, Prof. Mayer has 
deduced the four-sidedness of sunbeams from this experiment.' See the two 
papers by Mayer 'Commentatio de apparentiis objectorum terrestrium a re-
fractione Iucis in atmosphaera nostra pendentibus' and 'Commentatio de 
Polaritate Luminis' published in 'Commentationes Societatis Regiae Scientarum 
Gottingensis' vols. I and II (Gottingen 18I1, 1813). 
Mayer's father, also Johann Tobias (1723-1762), was eminent as a mathe-
360 

NOTES 
matician, physicist and astronomer. The younger Mayer had the same interests 
as his father and a very similar career. He studied at Gottingen and took his 
doctorate and qualified as a university teacher there. After teaching at Altdorf 
and Erlangen he returned to Gottingen as professor. Most of his writings were 
concerned with mathematics and physics, and appeared in Gren's Journals and 
various Gottingen periodicals. He published several excellent text-books how-
ever, which held their own in German university teaching for many years. His 
'Lehrbegriff der hoheren Analysis' (2 pts. Gottingen, 1818) is his main work, his 
'Griindlicher und ausfiihrlicher Unterricht zur praktischen Geometrie' had run 
to a fourth edition by 1818, and his 'Griindliche Anweisung zur Verzeichnung 
der Land-See-und-Himmelskarten' (Erlangen, 1794) remained the standard 
work on the subject until the appearance of H. F. Gretschel's 'Lehrbuch der 
Karten-Projektion' (Weimar, 1873). 
Light is thrown upon Hegel's opinion of the powers of intellect common at 
Gottingen (,@ottinget ~etftanb/) by Goethe's 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer 
Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957) pp. 351-352. Goethe implies that it was 
Gottingen's connection with England, through the House of Hanover, which 
made it such a hot-bed of Newtonianism. 
Cf. Newton's 'Opticks' bk. III pt. i query 26, 'Have not the rays of light 
several sides, endued with several original properties?' 
141,6 
See J. B. Biot (1774-1862) 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. IV 
pp. 499-542, 'Experiences sur les plaques de cristal de roche taillees perpendicu-
lairement a l' axe de cristallisation'. Michelet, in a note, calls particular attention 
to the following passage (op. cit. p. 521), 'D'aprt:s ce rapprochement, on doit 
sentir que Ie sens de la rotation des molecules, et la marche des teintes dans 
l' ordre des anneaux, sont deux choses liees entre elles, et telles, que la premiere 
est Ie principe de la seconde. On peut donc juger de l' une par l' autre; et en 
consequence, si l' on avait des plaques de cristal de roche pour lesquelles les 
couleurs montassent dans l' ordre des anneaux, lorsqu' on tourne Ie rhombolde 
de gauche a droite, on devrait en conclure que ces plaques font egalement 
tourner Ia lumiere de gauche a droite, c' est-a-dire en sens contraire des prece-
dentes: c' est en effet ce qui m' est arrive'. 
He then adds, 'Another remarkable phenomenon is supposed to occur as the 
result of this. When the oscillatory movement is from right to left, it is the 
violet and blue rays which move in front, while when the movement is from 
left to right, it is the red rays. It often happens that only the blue and violet rays 
are given out in this rotatory activity, but in general it is the blue rays which 
appear when the rotation is faster, and the red rays when it is slower (pp. 514-
517). It appears to be difficult to reconcile this last fact with the supposed 
alternation of the moving in front and staying behind of these opposing colours.' 
M* 
361 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
141,8 
See Newton 'Opticks' bk. II pt. 3 prop. 13, 'Definition. The returns of the 
disposition of any ray to be reflected I will call its fits of easy reflexion, and those 
of its disposition to be transmitted its fits of easy transmission, and the space it 
passes between every return and the next return, the interval of its fits'. C£ J. B. 
Biot (op. cit. IV pp. 88-122) 'Sur les Acces de facile transmission et de facile 
reflexion'. For the broader context of Biot's researches in this field see the 
notes II. 239:241. 
141, 13 
Differential calculus or the theory of finite differences, the branch of mathe-
matics which deals with the successive differences of the terms of a series, was 
first used by Henry Briggs (1556-1630), who laid down the rules of it in his 
'Arithmetica Logarithmica' (London, 1624) chs. XII and XIII, and his 'Trig-
nometrica Britannica' (Goudae, 1633). 
Newton, in his 'Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy' Bk. iii 
lemma 5, used the theory as a method of describing a curve of the parabolic 
kind, through any given number of points. This gave rise to its use in the field 
of mechanics, which is praised here by Hegel: see however the note I. 349. 
Its use in the field of chromatics (diffraction, dispersion etc.) was justified by 
Newtonianism but not by the GOthean hypothesis, hence Hegel's objection. 
142,7 
See the brilliantly lucid and concise exposition of the 'Wissenschaftslehre' 
given by Robert Adamson (1852-1902) in his 'Fichte' (Edinburgh and London, 
1881) pp. 144-188. C£ C. C. Everett 'Fichte's Science of Knowledge. A Critical 
Exposition' (Chicago, 1884). 
142,17 
The full text of the passage from which Michelet selected the following 
sentences is to be found in Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (ed. Hoffmeister, 
Leipzig, 193 I) pp. 80-8 I. Very little would be gained from a detailed indication 
of the many changes he has made, the omissions, the words emphasized by 
Hegel, the marginal notes to be found in the original etc. 
142, 36 
'Opticks' bk. I pt. i def. VII, 'The light whose rays are all alike refrangible I 
call Simple, Homogeneal and Similar; and that whose rays are some more 
refrangible than others I call compound, heterogeneal and dissimilar'. 
Def. VIII, 'The colours of hom ogenea I lights I call primary, homogeneal and 
simple; and those of heterogeneal lights, heterogeneal and compound'. 
143,7 
This remark almost certainly dates from the second series of lectures on the 
philosophy of nature given by Hegel at Berlin. These lectures were delivered 
362 

NOTES 
during the winter of 1821-2 and concluded on March 23, 1822. It was during 
this period that the weekly meetings devoted to Goethe's theory of colours were 
held at Schultz's house (see the note II. 338). 
Hegel is referring here to the public lectures on Goethe's theory of colours 
given at Berlin by Leopold Dorotheus von Henning (1791-1866) between 
1822 and 1835. 
Henning came of a military family. He was born at Gotha and studied 
jurisprudence, history and philosophy at Heidelberg. He joined the Saxon army 
during the War of Liberation and after the first peace of Paris visited London 
and Vienna, where he studied political economy. He practised as a referendary 
at Konigsberg and Erfurt for a while, and in 1818 arrived at Berlin. He soon 
became acquainted with Hegel, who inJuly 1820 got him a university appoint-
ment. 
Henning's first publication was a translation of Thornas Jefferson's 'A Manual 
of Parliamentary Practice' (Washington, 1801, 2nd ed. 1812), which appeared 
as 'Handbuch des Parlamentarrechts' (Berlin, 1819). His habilitation thesis 'De 
systematis feudalis natione' (Berlin, 1821) was also concerned with constitutional 
and legal matters, but at about the same time, probably under the influence of 
Hegel, he began to concern himself with the natural sciences see 'Das Ver-
haltniss der Philosophie zu den exacten Wissenschaften' ('Neue Berliner Monats-
schrift' 1821). 
On August 2, 1821 Hegel wrote to Goethe concerning Henning's proposal 
to lecture on 'Zur Farbenlehre' at Berlin. On October 18th Henning met 
Goethe at Jena to discuss the matter, and on the following day Goethe wrote 
to Zelter, ,es tuiire tuunberlid) genug, tuenn id) aud) nod) in biefer ~rotJin3 
trlumlJfjierte'. During the following winter, as we have noticed, Henning 
worked on the subject with Hegel, Schultz and Schubarth, a laboratory was 
put at his disposal by the university, and as the result of this activity he was able 
to publish an introduction to the forthcoming lectures, 'Einleitung zu offent-
lichen Vorlesungen fiber Goethes Farbenlehre, gehalten an der Koniglichen 
Universitat zu Berlin' (Berlin, 1822). 
Goethe was pleased. On September 6, 1822 he wrote to Boisserie, 
,<Rgentlid) barf id) fagen, bafJ id) tuofjl tJerbiene, nad) breifJigiiifjrigem 6d}tueigen 
3U ber niebertriid)Ugen \8efjanblung, bie id) tJon meinen .8eitgenoHen erbulbete, 
enb1id) burd) eine frlfd)e, fjod)geoi1bete 3ugenb 3U (Zfjren 3U gelangen'. He 
supplied Henning with apparatus and advice and kept up a regular correspon-
dence with him on the subject. On August 9, 1830 Henning reported to Goethe 
that he had just lectured for the tenth time on 'Zur Farbenlehre', to a considerable 
audience of students from all faculties. As usual, there were also young artists, 
officers and others interested in the natural sciences among them. A year later he 
estimated that about four hundred persons ,ber tJerfd)iebenften BeoenstJer'f)iilt.o 
niHe faft aus allen @egenben 'Ileutfd)lanM' had heard the lectures. It is clear 
therefore that the lectures were not attended only by physicists! 
363 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Henning was appointed assistant professor in 1825 and professor in 1835. 
From 1827 until 1847 he edited the 'Berlin Yearbooks', the official literary 
organ of orthodox Hegelianism. He also prepared the definitive edition of 
Hegel's 'Wissenschaft der Logik' (Berlin, 1834). Despite his excursion into the 
theory of colours, his main publications were concerned with sociological and 
constitutional matters; see 'Principien der Ethik in historischer Entwicklung' 
(Berlin, 1824), 'Zur Verstandigung iiber die preussische Verfassungsfrage 
(Berlin, 1845). 
F. T. Bratranek 'Goethes naturwissenschaftliche Correspondenz' (2 vols. 
Leipzig, 1874): Erna Arnhold 'Goethes Berliner Beziehungen' (Gotha, 1925). 
144,4 
This treatment of shadows is based to a great extent upon Goethe's 'Zur 
Farbenlehre'. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) §§ 62-88. 
Between the revival of the wave theory of light by Thomas Young (1773-
1829) at the turn of the century (note 11.229), and the brilliant exposition of the 
mathematical theory of light by A. J. Fresnel (1788-1827) in the 1820's, there 
was much uncertainty in theories concerning shadows. Coloured shadows 
attracted a great deal of attention. Benjamin Thompson, count Rumford (1753-
1814) regarded them as an illusion ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1794 pp. I, 107: 
'Gren's NeuesJournal der Physik' vol. II p. 58). C. Opoix (1745-1840) attributed 
them to diffraction ('Journal de Physique' vol. XXIII p. 402). The very variable 
quality of the observations and experiments described by J. H. Hassenfrate 
(1755-1827) in 'Journal de I'Ecole Polytechnique' XI p. 272 provides a good 
example of the uncertain state of knowledge in this field prevalent at the time. 
Pietro Petrini (1785-1822) emphasized the importance of physiological 
factors in the appearance of coloured shadows ('Memorie di matematica e 
fisica della Societa Italiana' vol. XIII p. II). It may well have been J. H. D. 
Zschokke (1771-1848), 'Die farbigen Schatten' (Aarau, 1826), who confirmed 
Hegel in the view that truly colourless shadows are a rare phenomenon. 
C£ the articles by Kaspar Pohlmann (c. 1800-1836) and G. T. Fechner (1801-
1887) in J. C. Poggendorff's 'Annalen der Physik' vol. XXXVII p. 319 and 
vol. XLIV p. 137. 
144,9 
See Newton 'Opticks' bk. I pt. 2 prop. 5 theorem 4 expo 10, 'When the 
motion was slow there appeared a perpetual succession of the colours upon the 
paper; but ifI so much accelerated the motion that the colours by reason of their 
quick succession could not be distinguished from one another, the appearance 
of the single colours ceased. There was no red, no yellow, no green, no blue, nor 
purple to be seen any longer, but from a confusion of them all there arose one 
uniform white colour.' 

NOTES 
144, 14 
Newton himself mentions this analogy in connection with the experiment 
described in the preceding note. 'If a burning coal be nimbly moved round in a 
circle with gyrations continually repeated, the whole circle will appear like 
fire; the reason of which is that the sensation of the coal in the several places of 
that circle remains impressed on the sensorium until the coal return again to the 
same place'. 
144,20 
The ultimate German origin of the song referred to here is 'Ein New Geseng-
buchlen' (Jungbunzlau, 1531) by Michael Weisse (d. 1534). This is the most 
famous of the early collections of songs by the Bohemian Brethren. On the 
mediaeval origins of Weisse's collection see Walter Blankenburg 'Zur Frage 
nach der Herkunft der Weisen des Gesangbuchleins der Bohmischen Bruder von 
153 I' 'Musik und Kirche' 21 Jahrgang, 1951 Hft.2): B. Stablein 'Die mittel-
alterlichen liturgischen Weisen im Gesangbuch der Bohmischen Bruder von 
1531' ('Musikforschung' V, 1952). C£ G. D. Schober 'Die wahre Gestalt der 
samtlichen Herrnhutischen Gesangbucher' (Leipzig, 1760). Michael Praetorius 
(1571-1621) reprinted the song in his 'Musae Sioniae' (pts, 2,3,4, Jena, Helm-
stedt, Wolfenbuttel, 1607), and from then on its popularity was widespread. 
By the end of the eighteenth century it was common as a nightwatchman's 
song: 
,3f)t lieoen ~f)riiten, ieib muntet unb ltJaef)U 
:!let %ag !:letiteiOt bie finftte ilCad)t, 
3a, ja, iinftte ilCad)t, 
:!laa if)t !:lom ®d)laff etltJad)t. 
m3ad)t auf in &ottes ilCamen, :!lUtd) 3eium ~f)riftum, 5lCmen! 
G.U.A. Vieth (1763-1836), ofDessau mentions it in connection with a certain 
acoustical peculiarity ('Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. XXI p. 269, 1805), 
'I have usually noticed this peculiarity early on winter mornings at about four 
o'clock, when although it has still been pitch-dark, the nightwatchman has 
loudly broadcast the untruth that the day is driving away the black night, and 
when it has been pretty certain that among the dear Christians of Kavalier-
strasse, only he and I have been up and astir'. 
The song was sung by the nightwatchman at Wurges near Limburg in the 
lower Taunus as recently as 1877. See Johann Lewalter 'Deutsche Volkslieder. 
In Niederhessen aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt' (3 pts. Hamburg, 
1890-1892): Ludwig Erk and F. M. Bohme 'Deutscher Liederhort' (3 vols. 
Leipzig, 1893-4): J. Wichner 'Stundenrufer und Lieder der deutschen Nacht-
wachter' (Regensburg, 1897). 
C£ St. Luke I v. 79, and the hymn 'Werde licht, du Stadt der Heiden' by 
Johann Rist (1607-1667) verse 5: 
'3efu, teines mef)t bet ®eele, bu !:lettteioft bie g:inftemiS.' 
365 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
144,27 
See Thomas Pownall (1722-1805) 'Inquiries into Coloured Light, by a Col-
lation of the Experiments and Observations made by Sir Isaac Newton on that 
Subject', an article published in 'The Philosophical Magazine' (ed. A. Tilloch 
vol. XII pp. 42-49 and I07-II2, London, 1802). Pownall had met Benjamin 
Franklin as early as 1754, and a life-long friendship between the two had de-
veloped. It was probably Franklin who inspired him with an interest in physics. 
He is of course mainly known for his activities as a colonial stateman and soldier. 
He was commissary-general of the British troops in Germany at the end of the 
Seven Years' War. See C. A. W. Pownall 'Thomas Pownall, M.P., F.R.S.' 
(London, 1908). 
In this article, which probably interested Hegel for a while on account of its 
providing a possible link between the theories of Newton and Goethe, Pownall 
suggests that, 'There is but one primary colour in our solar system, and ... all the 
rest in the prismatic image are, on one side of the scale, only gradations of 
that colour towards pure light; and, on the other side of the scale, merely de-
gradations from light towards the actual absence of it ... There are not seven, 
nor three, not two, but only one primary colour-a compound basis of all the 
tints of red, orange, and yellow: ... green, as an actual and uncompounded 
primary colour, has no existence: and ... the blues are only hues arising from 
a partial deprivation of light as it goes off into darkness'. 
C£ the curious physiological phenomenon described by Huddart in 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1777 p. 260. 
144,29 
Michelet has the following footnote at this point, 'The editor has thought it 
advisable not to suppress this polemic of Hegel's against Newtonian theory of 
colours, for the theory of waves and interference which is finding favour at 
present, and which is threatening to supplant Newton's theory, is merely 
another hypothesis, and although it has been regarded as replacing its predecessor, 
it has retained the whole of Newton's way of reasoning and method of drawing 
conclusions.' (see 'Halle Yearbooks' December 1838 nos. 305-307). See the note 
II. 229. 
The article referred to is Michelet's 'Zugestandnisse der neuesten Physik in 
Bezug auf Gathe's Farbenlehre' which was published in the 'Hallische Jahr-
bucher fur deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst' (ed. A. Ruge and T. Echtermeyer) 
nos. 305-307 Dec. 21st-24th 1838. In it, he presents many of the views ex-
pounded by Hegel in these 'additions', emphasizes the physiological aspect of 
colour, claims that Young's hypotheses Ofl802 were built into Goethe's theory, 
compares Aristotle's idea of the aether with that current in the late 1830'S, and 
makes the general point presented in this note. 
The article was a review of an attack on Goethe's theory made by H. W. 
366 

NOTES 
Dove (1803-1879) in 'Die neuere Farbenlehre mit andern chromatischen 
Theorieen verglichen' (Berlin, 1838). 
145,2 
Newton 'Opticks' bk. I pt. 2 prop. 2 theor. 2, 'The light of the Sun consists 
of rays differently refrangible'. et seq. 
145, 8 
See William Kirby (1759-1850) and William Spence (1783-1860) 'An Intro-
duction to Entomology' (5th ed. 4 vols. London, 1828) vol. iii pp. 644-652, 
'The Order, the clothing of whose organs of flight excites the admiration of the 
most incurious beholder, is that to which the excursive butterfly belongs, the 
Lepidoptera. The gorgeous wings of these universal favourites, as well as those 
of the hawkmoths and moths, owe all their beauty, not to the substance of which 
they are composed, but to an infInite number oflittle plumes or scales so thickly 
planted in their upper and under surface, as in the great majority entirely to 
conceal that substance.' 
There was some doubt at the time as to the precise nature of these 'scales', 
cf. the accounts of microscopic investigations of them in R.A.F. Reaumur 
(1683-1757) 'Memoires pour servir a l'histoire des insectes' (6 vols. Paris, 1734-
1742) vol. I p. 200. Charles de Geer (1720-1778) 'Memoires pour servir a 
l'histoire des insectes' (7 vols. Stockholm 1752-1778). Vol. I p. 63. J. U. Vallot 
'Concordance systematique ... a Memoires pour servir a l'histoire des insectes' 
(Paris, 1802). Bernard Deschamps 'Recherches microscopiques sur l' organisation 
des ailes des Lepidopteres' ('Annales des sciences naturelles' 2nd series vol. III 
p. iii, 1835): H. Fischer 'Mikroskopische Untersuchungen fiber die Kafer-
schupp en' ('Isis' 1846 p. 401): Goethe 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. 
Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) §§ 649-651. 
145,20 
This type of horn music was devised by Johann Anton Maresch (1719-1794), 
and was popular in Russia until about a century ago. 
Maresch was born at Chotesov in Bohemia, and had his fIrst musical training 
in the monastery there. He then studied at Dresden under AntonJoseph Hampel 
(d. 1768), a specialist in horn music, and at Berlin under Joseph Zyka, the famous 
violin cellist. In 1746 he began to teach music at Berlin. One of his pupils was 
the son of the Russian chancellor Count Bestuscheff, and it was through this 
connection that he went to St. Petersburg in 1748, where he was employed in 
the Bestuscheff chapel, and soon built up a horn band. This band gave its fIrst 
public performance in 1751. The Empress Elizabeth (1709-1762) was so im-
pressed by it while visiting Bestuscheff that she took Maresch into her service, 
and from 1756 until 1769 he had the full resources of the imperial chapel at his 
disposal for the development of the type of music mentioned here by Hegel. 
367 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
He took completely untrained huntsman's boys and equipped them with in-
struments closely resembling ordinary hunting horns. Each horn had its particular 
note however, and the full range of the band consisted of 54 whole- and semi-
tones, covering three complete octaves. By the turn of the century most of 
the higher Russian noble families were maintaining similar bands. See the 
account of a visit to St. Petersburg in 1802 by Ludwig Spohr (1784-1859), 
'It is hardly to be believed that they performed the most rapid passages (of 
a Gluck overture) with the greatest precision, and I could not have believed 
it possible, had I not heard it with my own ears'. 'Autobiography' (1860-1, 
Eng. tr. 2 pts. London, 1865) I p. 46. C£ the account of a visit of a similar 
Russian band to Scotland in 1833: J. G. Dalyell (1776-1851) 'Musical Memoirs 
of Scotland' (Edinburgh and London, 1849), pp. 170-172. 
See J. C. Hinrichs 'Entstehung, Fortgang und Beschaffenheit der russischen 
Jagdmusik' (St. Petersburg, 1796): G. J. Dlabacz 'Allgemeines historisches 
Kiinstler-Lexikon fur Bohmen' (Prague, 1815) vol. II col. 258: G. Seaman 
'The Russian Horn Band' ('Monthly Musical Record' 89, 1959 pp. 93-99). 
These Russian horns were usually manufactured in Germany: there is an interest-
ing collection of them in room IX of the Berlin 'Musikinstrumentensammlung' 
(Berlin 15, Wilmersdorf, Bundesallee 1-12). 
146,19 
See the note II. 353. 
146,29 
Werner Heisenberg (b. 1901), in a stimulating lecture given to the Society 
for Cultural Co-operation in Budapest on May 5, 1941, pointed out that New-
ton's and Goethe's theories of colour deal with, 'two completely different levels 
of reality', that whereas Newton's theory is concerned mainly with the objective 
nature of colour, Goethe's is concerned more with its subjective signijicance, and 
that, 'It is not enough to be aware of the laws in accordance with which all the 
events in the objective world are governed, it is also necessary that we should 
constantly hold before us all the consequences which these laws have for the 
world of our senses'. He quotes with approval Helmholtz's observation that 
Goethe's theory should be regarded as an attempt to do justice to the immediate 
truth of sensuous impression in the face of a simply physical interpretation of 
colour, and expresses the view that both Newton's and Goethe's approaches are 
relevant to any full understanding of the phenomenon. See 'Wandlungen in den 
Grundlagen der Naturwissenschaft' (4th ed. Leipzig, 1943) pp. 58-76 'Die 
Goethesche und die Newtonsche Farbenlehre im Lichte der modernen Physik'. 
If Heisenberg's line of argument does enable one to work out a truly balanced 
assessment of Goethe's attack upon Newton, it has to be admitted that Goethe 
368 

NOTES 
was wrong in thinking that his theory constituted a refutation ofNewtonianism, 
and that Hegel was wrong in treating colour from a Goethean standpoint at this 
juncture. The value of Goethe's theory, according to Heisenberg, only becomes 
apparent once the relationship between colour and consciousness is our main 
concern, the nature of colour as such being explained much more accurately by 
means of Newton's purely physical hypotheses. In his 'Philosophy of Nature' 
Hegel should therefore have attempted to assess Newton's theory, and Goethe's 
theory should have been presented in the very early stages of his 'Philosophy of 
Subjective Spirit' ('System der Philosophie' pt. iii ed. Boumann, Stuttgart, 
1958). 
Heisenberg's attitude towards this controversy throws light upon Hegel's 
observation that no artist is stooge enough to be a Newtonian. It is in fact among 
psychologists, artists and philosophers that Goethe's theory of colour has found 
its most enthusiastic supporters. Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920), in his 'Grund-
zuge der physiologischen Psychologie' (5th ed., 2 vols. Leipzig, 1912), praises 
Goethe as the 'founder of the impression method', i.e. as the first systematic 
investigator of the influence colours have upon feelings. Sir Charles Lock Eastlake 
(1793-1865) provides the best example of Goethe's influence upon British ar-
tists; see his translation of the didactic part of 'Zur Farbenlehre', 'Goethe's 
Theory of Colours' (London, 1840); c£ Brewster's review of the book in 'The 
Edinburgh Review' Jan. 1841. 
Many German artists have defended Goethe's theory; see Mathias Klotz 
(1748-1821) 'Griindliche Farbenlehre' (Munich, 1816): J. W. C. Roux (1777-
1831) 'Die Farben' (Heidelberg, 1829): P. O. Runge (1777-1810) 'Farbenkugel, 
oder Construction des Verhaltnisses aller Mischungen der Farben zueinander 
und ihrer vollstandigen Affinitat' (Hamburg, 1840): J. K. Bahr (1801-1869) 
'V ortrage uber Newton's und Gothe's Farbenlehre gehalten im Kiinstler-V erein 
zu Dresden' (Dresden, 1863): Ernst Bucken 'Die Grundlagen der Goetheschen 
Tonlehre' ('Technische Mitteilungen fur Malerei' 21ste Jahrgang Munich 
1915-16): Johannes Hoppe 'Goethes Farbenlehre' (op. cit. 1916-17) etc.-many 
articles on the subject appeared in this periodical between 1914 and 1917. Cf. the 
interesting assessment of 'Zur Farbenlehre' given by the mathematician, (not 
physicist) Andreas Speiser (b. 1885) in 'Goethe und die Wissenschaft' (Frankfurt-
on-Main, 1951) pp. 82-91, 'hier Kunst und Wissenschaft eine Einheit bilden, wie 
in wenigen Werken der Weltliteratur'. 
Of the philosophers who have been sympathetic towards Goethe's theory 
mention should perhaps be made of Schopenhauer's 'Ueber das Sehen und die 
Farben' (Leipzig, 1816) and F. T. Vischer (1807-1887) 'Aesthetik oder Wissen-
schaft des Schonen' (3 vols. Reutlingen and Leipzig, 1847) pt. II pp. 37-55. 
146, 34 
This word-play is also to be found in Schelling's 'Zeitschrift fur speculative 
Philosophie' ii, p. 60, 'Let us thank the gods that they have emancipated us from 
369 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the Newtonian spectrum (spectrum truly!) of composed light. We owe this to 
the genius to whom our debt is already so large'. Cf. G. H. Lewes 'The Life and 
Works of Goethe' (Everyman ed. 1949) p. 344. 
147,4 
See Newton's 'Opticks' bk. pt. 2 expo II. 
147,27 
Hegel quotes here from Samuel Clarke's Latin translation of Newton's 
'Opticks' (London, 1719) pp. 120-121 (bk. I pt. 2 exp 7), 'amicus, qui interfuit 
et cujus oculi coloribus discernendis acriores quam mei essent, notavit lineis 
rectis imagini in transversum ductis confmia colorum'. He then adds, 'Newton 
has become such a good friend to all physicists; no one has seen this himself, and 
ifhe has seen it he has spoken and thought like Newton'. 
147,29 
See the note 11.253. 
148, 10 
See Newton 'Opticks' bk. II pts 1 and 2, C£ the note 11.239. 
148, 17 
See Goethe 'Zur Farbenlehre, Historischer Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957). 
The book gives a very thorough and comprehensive survey of all the main 
theories of colour formulated since the time of Pythagoras. Goethe concludes it 
with an analysis of the lectures of Robert Blair (d. 1828), and a 'confession' con-
cerning the origins of his own interest in the subject. Historical knowledge is no 
substitute for successful scientific research however, and as Goethe revived many 
pre-Newtonian 'errors' in his own theory, these historical labours may not have 
had an entirely beneficial effect upon his experimental and 'didactic' work in 
this field. 
149, 16 
This curious remark may be connected in some way with the investigation of 
the inflection of light through cloth, made by David Rittenhouse (1732-1796) 
on the instigation of Francis Hopkinson (1737-1791); see 'An optical problem 
proposed by Mr. Hopkinson' in 'Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society' vol. II pp. 201-205, (Philadelphia, 1786): c£ 'Nicholson's Journal' 
vol. I p. 13 Hopkinson had viewed a street lamp through a silk handkerchie£ 
149,31 
Goethe's 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) 
§§ 155-169 provides all the examples of the 'archetypal phenomenon' given here 
by Hegel, including the instance of the smoke (§ 160). 
The infusion mentioned (§ 162) is that of nephritic wood, i.e. the nephritic 
370 

NOTES 
tincture formerly used as a remedy for diseases of the kidney: see Johann Wittich 
(1537-1598) 'Vinariensis ... de Ligno Nephritico' (Leipzig, 1589, 1592): 
Rudolph Jakob Camerarius (1665-1721) 'Disputatio Schematismi colorum 
infuso ligni nephritici propriorum' (2 vol. Tiibingen, 1689, 1690): Johann 
Friedrich Carthenser (1704-1796) 'Dissertatio de Ligno Nephritico' (Frankfurt-
on-Oder, 1749). Goethe refers to it as 'Guilandia Linnaei', but it is usually known 
as the Horse-radish or Ben-nut tree (Moringa pterygosperma), and is a native of 
Ceylon and of some places on the Malabar coast. Robert Boyle (1627-1691) 
mentions experiments made with its tincture in 'A continuation of new experi-
ments physico-mechanical' (London, 1682) II p. 140, and 'short memoirs for the 
natural experimental history of mineral waters' (London, 1685). Robert Smith 
(1689-1768), in his 'A Compleat System of Opticks' (2 vols. Cambridge, 1738) 
vol. 1. p. 86 cf. pp. 98--99, explains its coloured properties as follows, 'And much 
after the same manner that leaf gold is yellow by reflected and blue by trans-
mitted light, there are some sorts of liquours, as the tincture lignum nephriticum, 
and some sorts of glass, which transmit one sort of light most copiously and 
reflect another sort, and thereby look of several colours according to the 
position of the eye to the light'. 
The opal mentioned (§ 166) is called by Goethe 'Opalglass (vitrum astroides, 
girasole)'. He evidently treated it with a 'metallic calx' (i.e. metal oxide) in 
order to heighten its dimming property. William Nicholson (1753-1815), in his 
'A Dictionary of Chemistry' (2 vols. London, 1795) I pp. 349-350 notes, 'Gira-
sole, a name given by the Italians to the opal, which is of the flint kind, and 
remarkable for the mutability of its colours, according to the various directions 
of the light which falls on it, and the position of the eye of the observer'. The 
exact kind of opal used by Goethe is not easy to determine with any certainty 
however: see H. Steffens (1773-1845) 'Vollstandiges Handbuch der Oryktog-
nosie' (4 pts. Halle, 181I-1824) pt. i pp. 135-145; there was evidently some 
doubt as to the true classification of the 'girasole' 
Goethe subsequently (1820-1826) corresponded with the extraordinary ad-
venturer Eduard Romeo von Vargas-Bedemar (1768-1847) on the nature of 
opals: see F. T. Bratranek 'Goethes Naturwissenschaftliche Correspondenz' 
(2 vols. Leipzig, 1874) I pp. 30-31: Weimarer Ausgabe (1887-1919) IV 33 no 
1I8, 34 no. 46,40nos. 46 and 107. At that time Vargas-Bedemar had recently. 
made himself known in Germany as an expert on the geology of Scandinavia: 
see his 'Om Vulcaniske producter fra Island' (Copenhagen, 1817): 'Die Insel 
Bornholm' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1819), 'Reise nach dem hohen Norden' (2 vols. 
Frankfurt-on-Main, 1819), and he sent Goethe some of the common opals found 
on the Faeroe Islands and Iceland. C£ his 'Der Opal auf den Faroern' ('Leon-
hard, Taschenbuch' 1822 XVI pp. 1I-30): 'Analyser af Faer0iske Mineralier' 
('Tidsskrift for Naturvidenskaberne' ed. 0rsted, Copenhagen, 1823 vol. II pp. 
134-135). See also Otto Deneke 'Der Malteser-Ritter von Gottingen' (Gottin-
gen, 1937) pp. 11-12. 
371 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
149,36 
Hegel's house in Berlin was destroyed during the last war and has been replaced 
by a children's playground. He lived at Am Kupfergraben 4, directly opposite 
the present entrance to the Pergamon Museum. His window would have faced 
NE, and from it he would have seen a branch of the river Spree and the island 
on which the museums are now situated. The Berlin weather reports for January 
5, 1824 confirm that for the greater part of the day at least, the sky was over-
cast. Although they conflict with regard to the exact direction of the wind and 
give no indication of its strength, they agree with regard to its having blown 
from behind Hegel's house. 
See 'Allgemeine Preussische Staats-Zeitung' no. 5 p. 20, no. 6 p. 24 Berlin, 
5th and 6th January, 1824): 'Meteorological Observations: January 5th': 
Early 
Midday 
Evening 
Barometer Thermometer Hygrometer 
Wind 
Weather 
28°7' 
+ ItoR 
81° 
Southerly Snatches of 
Sunshine 
Southerly Dull 
Southerly Star-bright 
C£ the 'Wetterbeobachtungen vom Jahr 1824' made by Carl Ludwig 
Gronau (1742-1826) rector of the Parochialkirche in Berlin, and now in the 
possession of the 'Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin', 22-23 
Otto Nuschke Strasse. 
Early 
Midday 
Evening 
149, 39 
Barometer 
28°7' 
28°7' 
28°7' 
Thermometer 
34°F 
38°F 
32°F 
Wind 
Westerly 
Westerly 
Westerly 
Weather 
Dull, brilliant sunrise 
Dull 
Starry, frost 
Goethe sent Hegel a similar tumbler from Karlsbad. It carried the following 
inscription, ,S)em ~bfoluten enwfieqlt ficl) fcl)onften£! 3U fteunbIicl)et ~uf­
naqme ba£! UtlJqiinomen' i.e. 'The archetypal phenomenon, in anticipation of a 
cordial acceptance, humbly recommends itself to the Absolute'. Hegel thanked 
Goethe for the gift in a witty and humorous letter written on August 2, 1821: 
'Briefe von und an Hegel' (ed. Hoffmeister, 2 vols. Hamburg, 1953) vol. II pp. 
275-278. OnJuly 8,1821 K. F. Zelter (1758-1832) wrote to Goethe informing 
him that, 'The day before yesterday we drank the health of all archetypal souls 
from the magnificent archetypal tumbler you have sent Hegel'. See K. Rosen-
kranz (1805-1879) 'Hegel's Leben' pp. 339-40. (Berlin, 1844): Erna Arnhold 
'Goethes Berliner Beziehungen' (Gotha, 1925) pp. 177-178. 
The tumbler Hegel received was almost certainly manufactured at the 
Fikentscher glass-works in Marktredwitz. At that time this part of Bavaria 
belonged to Bohemia. Wolfgang Kaspar Fikentscher (1770-1837) established 
372 

NOTES 
the first German chemical firm in July 1788; his son Friedrich Christian (1799-
1864) founded the glass-works, and corresponded with Goethe regarding the 
production of dimming and entoptic glasses. See F. Strehlke 'Goethe's Briefe'. 
'Verzeichniss unter Angabe von Quelle Ort, Datum und Anfangsorten' pt. I p. 
183 (Berlin, 1882): W. Biedermann 'Goethe und die Fikentscher' ('Goethe 
Forschungen' Frankfurt-on-Main, 1879 pp. 295-312): Hans Zedinek 'Zwei 
Briefe an Goethe aus dem Fikentscherhaus in Marktredwitz' ('Der Siebenstern. 
Vereinszeitschrift des Fichtelgebirgsvereins' 4 Jahrgang July 1930 no. 7 pp. 
98-101): 'Goethe im chemischen Laboratorium zu Marktredwitz' (ed. R. Mat-
thaei, Marktredwitz, 1938). 
149,40 
See the note II. 353. 
150, 17 
See Newton 'Opticks' Bk. II pt. i obs 24. Hegel is quoting from Newton's 
remarks on this observation (op. cit. bk. II pt. 2), 'the refraction of a prism should 
make rings of colours appear, whereas it usually makes objects appear coloured 
only there where they are terminated with shadows, or have parts unequally 
luminous'. 
Michelet comments upon this as follows, 'The words of Newton which are 
quoted here indicate that the sole condition for colours is either a mere inequality 
of lighting, or a meeting of light and shade. Do they not contradict his whole 
theory?' 
Hegel and Michelet could not accept the explanation which Newton gives of 
this phenomenon because they denied the connection between colour and 
degrees of refrangibility. 
150, 18 
In the light of Goethe's hypothesis of course. See 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. 
Wallace, Oxford, 1963) § 92, 'If we take a closer look at what a limit implies, we 
see it involving a contradiction in itself, and thus evincing its dialectical nature. 
On the one side the limit makes the reality of a thing; on the other it is its nega-
tion.' 
Michelet comments as follows upon this, 'It is not only the empirical physi-
cists who have objected to Goethe's theory because of this, and Hegel deals with 
it in the course of his argument. It is only necessary to call attention to what has 
already been said (p. 144), i.e. that as the prism has a different thickness at each 
point of its breadth, each point of the light image and its base must also be drawn 
apart, and raised and displaced to a different extent. Consequently, as different 
and very closely contiguous displacements are received simultaneously by the 
eye, all their limits are necessarily drawn into one another. This happens to a 
373 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
greater extent of course when the distance is increased and the displacements are 
therefore greater.' 
150,26 
This is a translation of Hegel's original sentence (Jenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 83). Michelet altered it somewhat. 
151, 14 
The inflection or diffraction of light was first discovered by F. M. Grimaldi 
(1613-1663), see his 'Physico-mathesis de lumine, coloribus et iride' (Bologna, 
1665). C£ Robert Hooke (1635-1702) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1672. 
Grimaldi noticed that when light proceeding from a very small aperture falls 
upon an opaque object, a shadow is cast upon a screen situated behind the 
obstacle, and that this shadow is bordered by the alternations of brightness and 
darkness which are now known as diffraction bands. Newton took the matter up 
and describes the experiments he performed in his 'Opticks' bk. III pt. i. He did 
not feel however that his work enabled him to offer a satisfactory explanation of 
the phenomenon, and he merely concluded his consideration of the matter with 
a series of queries. 
Very little important work was done in this field during the eighteenth 
century, although Huyghen's wave theory could have provided the basis for 
constructive experimentation: see J. N. Delisle (1688-1768) 'Memoires de 
l'academie ... de Paris' 1715 p. 147: G. F. Maraldi (1665-1729) 'Memoires de 
l'academie ... de Paris' 1723 p. III: W. J. S'Gravesande (1688-1742) 'Physices 
elementa mathematica' (Leyden, 1721) p. 725: Henry Peter Brougham 
(1778-1868) 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1796 p. 227-277: 1797 pp. 352-385. 
The revival of the wave theory of light by Thomas Young (1773-1829), see 
the notes II. 229: 234 did not lead to immediate advances in the explana-
tion of diffraction, since Young assumed that the waves are longitudinal. Conse-
quently, when the Academy ofNimes offered a prize for the best thesis on this 
subject in 18II, it was awarded to Honore Flaugergues (1755-1835) for his, 
'Sur la diffraction de la lumiere' (Nimes, 1812) c£ 'Journal de Physique' vol. 75 
p. 16, vol. 76 pp. 142,278, in which no real advance was made upon Newton, 
and in which postulates such as attractive and repulsive forces were utilized. 
It was not until about 1815 that D. F. J. Arago (1786-1853) and A. J. Fresnel 
(1788-1827) began to follow up Young's suggestions. After they had 
adopted the hypothesis of transverse waves, Fresnel was able to formulate the 
first truly modern theory of diffraction (see the notes II. 229:233) C£ Josef 
Fraunhofer( 1787-1826) and the invention of the diffraction grating (note II. 353) ; 
G. Merz 'Das Leben und Wirken Fraunhofers' (Landshut, 1865). 
The plausible but completely amateurish explanation which Hegel gave of 
diffraction in 1805-6, would have been of interest until Young's, Arago's 
and Fresnel's publication became generally known. By 1830 however, most 
374 

NOTES 
textbooks of physics contained competent expositions of their work, so that 
there is no excuse for his having ignored it: see 'Gehlers Physikalisches 
Worterbuch' vol. V pt. ii (Leipzig, 1830) pp. 681-742. 
151,27 
Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 83, ,elll ift balll ~etawtteten belll an bie 
&eftalt a~ ba~ 'i)ing gebunben etfd)einenben ,3beeUen'. 
Michelet altered this somewhat, ,(fill ift balll ~etauMteten belll in bie &eftalt, 
als ba~ 'i)ing, gebunben etfd)einenben 3beeUen'. 'This is the emergence of 
that which is of an ideal nature and which, as thing, appears to be bound 
within shape.' 
151, 32 
,wobutd) @5d)atten .. .mnien neb en einanbet entfte~en'. The manuscript text 
is clearly incomplete: Hoffmeister's suggested reading is ,fo ban fid) @5d)atten-
linien nebeneinanbet bilben' (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 83). 
151, 37 
,'i)ie tyatbe ift nun eine beftimmte' (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 82). 
152,5 
,'i)ie tyatbe als ba~ wa~t~aft megati!:le, als ba~ ~idlid)e' (Jenenser Real-
philosophie' II p. 82). Michelet omitted the emphasized words. 
152, 14 
Christoph Friedrich Ludwig Schultz (1781-1834): see the note on II. 338 
Hegel is referring to Schultz's 'Ueber Physiologe Farberscheinungen', which 
Goethe published in his 'Zur Naturwissenschaft Uberhaupt' vol. II sect. i (ed. 
Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) pp. 296-304. 
In § 38 of this work Schultz summarizes Goethe's theory of colours in 
the following way, ,Um biefelll beutlid)et 3u mad)en, woUen wit un~ bie 
~aUlJtfatben, nad) &oet~e~ Be~te!:lon beten (fufte~ung, butd) ttiibe WHttel, 
in i~ten (flementen, al~ gewiffen &taben be~ %tiiben, in >Be3ug auf einen 
butd)widenben ~eUen obet bunfeln &tunb, obet, wie Wit e~ aud) nennen 
fonnen, in >Be3ug auf 'i)utd)leud)tung obet 'i)utd)fd)attung, !:lotfteUen. -
@5old)e~ 
wiitbe (inbem Wit 3Ut ~eteinfad)ung be~ >BeiflJiels bet mUwidenben >Beleud) .. 
tung unb >Beid)attung nid)t etWii~nen) wo~l am 3wedmiinigften in bet ~d 
geld)e~en fonnen, ban wit 3 &tabe bet %tiibung anne~men, weld)e, !:letmoge 
'i)utd)leud)tung obet 'i)utd)fd)attung, bie fed)~ ~aUlJtfatben be~ &oet~eid)en 
tyatbenfteifes folgenbetmanen etgeoen: 
375 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
$)urd){eud)tete~ %riibe~ -
&elb 
$)urd)fd)attete~ %rilbe~ -
~io{ett 
$)urd)leud)tete~ %rilbere~ -
Orange 
$)urd)fd)attetes %ri1beres -
~81au 
$)urd)leud)tetes %rilbftes -
mot 
$)urd)id)attete~ %rilbftes -
&riln.' 
Hegel evidently has his reservations with regard to accepting dus exposition. 
He probably realized that the three grades of dimness constituted an arbitrary 
enumeration. 
152, 18 
Leonardo da Vinci was evidently the first to suggest that the sky appeared to 
be blue on account of our viewing the dark space beyond the regions of the at-
mosphere through the air illuminated by the sun, i.e. that this blue was a mixture 
of black and white: see his 'Trattato della pittura' (paris, 1551 tr. Rigaud, Lon-
don, 1877) sect. 328. C£ the treatment of light and shadows in his diaries, 
'Tagebucher und Aufzeichnungen' (ed. Lucke, Leipzig, 1952) ch. XXXII. 
Goethe, in his 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957) 
pp. 162, 176, 307 notices that the same view was put forward by Antonius de 
Dominis (d. 1624) in his 'De radiis visus et lucis' (Venice, 16II), by Athanasius 
Kircher (1601-1680) in his 'Ars magna lucis et umbrae' (Rome, 1646), and by 
Philip de la Hire (1640-1718) in his 'Accidents de la vue' ('Anc. Mem. Par.' vol. 
IX, 1678). Hegel probably has in mind Goethe's exposition of this theory in 
'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) §§ 74, 155, 
156. 
By accepting this explanation of the blue of the sky, Hegel and Goethe were 
rejecting the predominant theory of the time, which was that put forward by 
Newton ('Opticks' bk. II pt. 3 prop. 7), according to which the vapours in a 
blue sky had attained consistence enough to reflect the most reflexible (azure) 
rays, but not enought to reflect any of the less reflexible ones. Newton's theory 
was propagated most notably by Thomas Melvill (1726-1753) in his 'Observa-
tions on Light and Colours' (1752) and 'Edinburgh Physical, and Literary 
Essays' II p. 75, Pierre Bouguer (1698-1758) in his 'Traite d'Optique' (Paris, 
1729) p. 368, and J. A. Nollet (1700-1770) in his 'Les:ons de physique experi-
mentale' (6 vols. Paris, 1743-1750, Germ. tr. Erfurt, 1749-1764) vol. VI p. 17. 
H. B. de Saussure (1740-1799) accepted it as basic to his work with the cya-
nometer: see 'Journal de Physique' 1791 p. 199: Gren's 'Journal der Physik' VI 
p·93· 
In the early part of the last century it was by no means unchallenged however. 
Many responsible physicists such as J. J. Berzelius (1779-1848) in his 'Lehrbuch 
der Chemie' (2nd ed. 3 vols. Reutlingen, 1821-1828) vol. I p. 257 and Benja-
min Scholz (1786-1833) in his 'Anfangsgriinde der Physik' (Vienna, 1816) p. 
376 

NOTES 
408, accepted the theory put forward by Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), and 
widely known on account of his 'Briefe iiber verschiedene Gegenstande aus der 
Naturlehre' (tr. Kries, Leipzig, 1792) I p. 177, according to which air itself is 
somewhat bluish. G. W. Muncke (1772-1847), in his 'Anfangsgriinde der 
Naturlehre' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1819-1820) vol. I p. 210 and in an article pub-
lished in 'Schweiggers Journal' vol. 30 p. 83, even argued that the blue of the 
atmosphere must be a purely subjective phenomenon: see Goethe's 'Zur 
Naturwissenschaft Dberhaupt' vol. I pt. iv (ed. Kuhn, 1962) pp. 192-195. 
152, 23 
See the note II. 358. 
153, 13 
This passage is clearly influenced by Goethe's 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer 
Teil' (ed. Matthaie, Weimar, 1955) sect. VI 'Sinnlich-sittliche Wirkung der 
Farbe' and §§ 915--920. Hegel treats the subject in a more extended manner in 
his 'Philosophy of Subjective Spirit' (ed. Boumann, Stuttgart, 1958) §401. Wil-
helm Wundt (1832-1920), in his 'Grundziige der physiologischen Psychologie' 
(5th ed. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1912) praises Goethe as the 'founder of the impression 
method', i.e. as the first systematic investigator of the influence colours have 
upon feelings. 
153, 30 
'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Tell' §§ 809-810 et seq. 'Zur Naturwissen-
schaft Dberhaupt' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) p. 190 (vol. I sect. iv.). 
153, 37 
'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' §§ 62--Q8. 
154, 19 
Christoph Friedrich Ludwig Schultz (1781-1834), see the note II. 338. The 
work referred to is 'Ueber Physiologe Farbenerscheinungen insbesondere das 
phosphorische Augenlicht, als Quelle derselben, betreffend' which Schultz 
completed on July 27, 1821 and which appeared in the first part of Goethe's 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft Dberhaupt' vol. II (1822) (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) 
pp. 296-304. 
In Michelet's text Hegel refers to 'interesting experiments with these psycho-
logical colours', but this is clearly a mistake. 
154, 26 
This could be a reference to 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer Tell' (ed. Kuhn, 
Weimar, 1957): see the note II. 362, but Hegel probably has in mind the 
collection of references to the theory of colours published by Goethe in his 'Zur 
377 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Naturwissenschaft Oberhaupt' vol. I sect. iv (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) pp. 202-
220. For an exhaustive bibliography of subsequent literature relating to this sub-
ject see Giinther Schmid's 'Goethe und die Naturwissenschaften' (Halle, 1940). 
154,40 
Michelet inserts the following footnote at this point, 'In the lectures based 
upon the first edition of the Encyclopaedia, this first part of the theory of col-
ours followed on immediately after the doctrine of the reflection of light (see 
above § 278 Add.), in which place this paragraph was also inserted. At this 
juncture however, the exposition of the entoptic colours came straight after 
the doctrine of double refraction.' 
See 'Enzyklopadie ... und andere Schriften aus der Heidelberger Zeit' (ed. 
Glockner, Stuttgart, 1956) pp. 175-176 and 192-194. 
155,8 
See 'Zur Naturwissenschaft Dberhaupt' I sect. iii (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1962) 
pp. 94-138. C£ the note II. 348: 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. 
IV p. 99 (Leipzig, 1827). 
156,9 
Michelet adds a footnote at this point. 'This accounts for the black undulat-
ing lines which occur when one causes these colours to pale by subjecting them 
to intense light.' 
Newton's 'Opticks' bk. II pts. i and ii, i.e. the 'Observations concerning the 
relexions, refractions, and colours of thin transparent bodies', initiated the 
research into what Goethe called 'epoptic' colours: see the notes II. 240: 
348. The colours of thin plates and Newton's rings are now regarded as an 
interference phenomenon. For the ordinary explanation of them given by the 
physicists of Hegel's day, see the article 'Anwandelungen' in 'Gehler's Physi-
kalisches Worterbuch' vol. I pp. 301-321 (Leipzig, 1825). It was based mainly 
on the work of Newton and Biot. 
15,614 
See J. F. Meckel (1781-1833) 'Uber die Federbildung' ('Reil's Archiv fur die 
Physiologie' vol. XII pp. 37--96, Halle, 1815), 'For the brightest colours always 
appear at the ends of the feathers, as the result of the influence of the sunlight' 
(p. 70). J. M. Bechstein (1757-1822) discusses the markings of pigeons in 
some detail in his 'Gemeinnutzige Naturgeschichte Deutschlands' (4 vols. 
Leipzig, 1801-1807) vol. III pp. 985--988, but gives no explanation of this iri-
descence. Cf. Goethe 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' §§ 389-428, 653-
661. 

NOTES 
158, 15 
See 'Die vier edlen Metalle' (1802), reprinted in 'Schellings Werke' 1st 
supplementary volume (ed. Schroter, Munich, 1962) pp. 565-574. Hegel 
evidently has § XVII of this work in mind, ,Sub unb Dft finb bie beiben 
etfteuHd)ften IDSeltgegenben, fo ift aud) bas @olb bas 
~eitetfte ffiCetaU, 
toeld)es ein gliidHd)et 3nftinft ftu~et fd)on als bas getonnene .2id)t mit bem 
3cid)en bet Sonne be5eid)net ~at'. 
IS8,29 
On contemporary ways of separating lead and silver see J. P. F. Duhamel 
(1730-1816), 'A memoir on the refining of Lead in the large way' ('Nicholson's 
Journal' 1805 vol. xi pp. 206-215). See also John Murray (d. 1820) 'System of 
Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. III pp. 200-207. Murray refers to 
'bet Si1betbHd' as the 'brightening', 'The appearance of a vivid incandescence 
or brightening, denotes when the silver has become pure'. Newton Ivory Lucas 
however, in his 'A Dictionary of the English and German and German and 
English Languages' (4 vols. London and Bremen, 1854-1868) vol. 4 p. 1799 gives 
the 'lightening of silver' as the correct technical term. 
Cf. the early discoveries relating to photochemistry surveyed in J. R. Parting-
ton's 'A History of Chemistry' vol. 4 pp. 713-718 (London, 1964). 
159,7 
Goethe 'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' (ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1955) 
§§ 472-477- This quotation is by no means word perfect. 
159,27 
See 'Zur Farbenlehre. Historischer Teil' (ed. Kuhn, Weimar, 1957). Goethe is 
here translating from the second part of'Traite de la nature des couleurs' (Paris, 
1688) by Edme Mariotte (d. 1684). 
159, 30 
'Zur Farbenlehre. Didaktischer Teil' § 533. 
160, 16 
,'i)ie inatU1:, toeld)e 5uetft fid) als i~ten Sinn bes @efu~ls enttoideUe' 
('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 81). Michelet omitted the emphasized words. 
160, 34 
See Schiller's 'Das Lied von der Glocke': 
379 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
,m!ogUiitig ift bes3 iJeuets3 9Rad)t, 
m!enn fie bet 9Renfd) 6e3iigmt, 6eroad)t ... 
m!ege, roenn fie los3gelaffen, 
m!ad)fenb ogne m!ibetftanb 
~Utd) bie l.loU6ele6ten ®affen 
m!iiI5t ben ungegeuren )Btanb! 
~enn bie ~(emente gaHen 
~as3 ®e6iIb bet 9Renfd)enganb/ 
The German text and an English prose translation of this poem are to be found 
in 'The Penguin Book of German Verse' (ed. L. Forster, 1957) pp. 260-278. 
160,37 
There is no detailed criticism of Hegel's treatment of Goethe's theory of 
colours, and even Goethe's criticism of Newton has yet to be subjected to a 
balanced full-scale analysis. English readers have to rest content with the exposi-
tion of the matter given by G. H. Lewes in his 'The Life and Works of Goethe' 
(Everyman ed. 1949) pp. 340-353, with the articles mentioned at the end of this 
note, and with Burton Chance's 'Goethe and his theory of colours' ('Annals of 
Medical History' New Series, New York, vol. V 1933 pp. 360-375), none of 
which is very constructive. 
The most worthwhile approach to this subject is undoubtedly that of the 
physicist unblinkered by the presuppositions of his particular field: see Hermann 
von Helmholtz 'Vortrage und Reden' (4th ed. 2 vols. Braunschweig, 1896) I 
pp. 23-47: Werner Heisenberg 'Wandlungen in den Grundlagen der Natur-
wissenschaft' (4th ed. Leipzig, 1943) pp. 58-76. For the extensive literature 
relating to the subject see Giinther Schmid 'Goethe und die Naturwissen-
schaften' (Halle, 1940): 'Goethes Werke. Hamburger Ausgabe' vol. XIII pp. 
638-642 (3rd ed. Wegner Verlag, Hamburg, 1960). 
From the physicist's point of view, Goethe's basic fault in 'Zur Farbenlehre' 
('Polemischer Teil' ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1958 §§ 610-677) is his rejection of 
Newton's proposition ('Opticks' bk I pt. 2 prop. 10) that the various colours of 
bodies arise from their reflecting most copiously this or that kind of light ray. 
This rejection forced him to deal with the various appearances of colour as 
involving physiological, physical, chemical and even organic factors, which 
were not only inessential to the treatment of colour as such, but which were not 
to be satisfactorily explained by the physiology, physics, chemistry and organics 
of his day, and which were certainly not to be explained simply in terms of the 
'archetypal phenomenon', i.e. the opposition between light and darkness. 
The great merit of his work in this field is that it consistently exhibits colour as 
an experience involving concrete appearances, although his attempt to refute New-
ton would seem to imply either that he regarded a purely physical interpreta-
tion of colour as being indefensible and unwarranted, or that he considered the 
380 

NOTES 
'archetypal phenomenon' to be justified on purely physical grounds. Schopen-
hauer was evidently aware of the potential and weakness of Goethe's approach 
when he advised him to examine more carefully the relationship between physical 
and psychic factors in the perception of colour: 'Goethes Werke-Hamburger 
Ausgabe' (3rd ed. 1960) vol. XIII pp. 612-613. 
As a purely physical explanation of colour, Newton's theory would appear to 
be immensely superior to Goethe's for it still constitutes the broad basis of all 
modern physical research in the fields of light and optics. It has of course 
been modified (notes II 229: 233: 358: 364), and some important modifi-
cations were made during Goethe's lifetime, but subsequent developments such 
as the postulation of 'phases' in wave theory and of 'photons' in quantum 
mechanics have only tended to confirm the accuracy of Newton's experimen-
tation and the soundness of the conclusions he drew from it. When Goethe 
published 'Zur Farbenlehre', Young's revival of the wave theory had yet to be 
justified, and Malus' 'polarization' constituted the very latest discovery in this 
field. During the next fifteen years the work done by Biot, Brewster, Arago, 
Fraunhofer and Fresnel etc. brought about the virtual completion of the geo-
metrical part of the wave theory, and prepared the field for Maxwell's dynamical 
interpretation of light. Goethe chose either to ignore these developments or to 
attempt a refutation of them in the light of his 'archetypal phenomenon'! 
How are we to assess Goethe's influence upon Hegel's treatment of light and 
colours? In some respects (notes: II. 242, III. 148: 214: 255) Hegel's views on 
light accord well with modern research, but in his rejection of Newton and 
the 'Newtonian' physics of his own day, he was clearly influenced by Goethe 
and very largely in the wrong. 
Goethe's theory appealed to him because it made it comparatively easy to 
work out a hierarchical exposition of colour (see his letter to Goethe Feb. 20, 
1821, printed in 'Zur Naturwissenschaft Oberhaupt' vol. I sect. iv pp. 212-214, 
1962 ed.), in which justice could be done to both its physical and spiritual sig-
nificance. For Hegel of course, this 'spiritual' significance involved not only the 
'psychic' factor mentioned by Schopenhauer, but also the 'intelligible' factor of 
a dialectical interpretation, employing the fundamental antithesis exhibited by 
the 'archetypal phenomenon'. Had he accepted Newton's theory that white 
light is a compound of the colours of the spectrum, his treatment of colour 
would have been much more closely juxtaposed to his treatment of light, and 
what is more, much more difficult to interpret dialectically. According to 
Goethe's theory however, it is the various circumstances in which light and dark-
ness are combined which give rise to colour. These circumstances involve a 
complexity of physical factors, and consequently, as Hegel took light to consti-
tute the simplestlevel of physics, he did not treat colour till he had worked out the 
dialectical exposition of those further physical stages which he considered to be 
involved in its production. For the development of his views on this from 1801 
onwards see Jenenser Logik' etc. (ed. Lasson, Leipzig 1923) pp. 307-309: 
381 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Jenenser Realphilosophie' I (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1932) pp. 54-56: 'Jenen-
ser Realphilosophie' II (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) pp. 33-34, 79-85: 
Heidelberg 'Encyklopadie' (ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1956) §§ 220-221. 
Although this approach is rather more sophisticated than Goethe's, it repro-
duces many of Goethe's errors. It fails for example to treat colour as such, and 
while honestly purporting to be an essentially physical doctrine, actually mis-
interprets physical phenomena by bringing psychic and metaphysical consi-
derations into an assessment of them. However, Hegel was undoubtedly 
convinced that Goethe had refuted Newton on purely physical grounds, and was 
therefore not aware that at this juncture the coincidence of the dialectical method 
and the archetypal phenomenon was bogus. It has to be admitted therefore, that 
in the light of his system and knowledge of the facts, he was justified in placing 
and treating colour as he did. Consequently, although these paragraphs are not 
intrinsically erroneous, they are unsatisfactory, not only because Hegel erred in 
his assessment of the physics of his day, but because he violated (though in-
advertently) an important principle of his own system, by introducing psychic 
factors at a level which should have been devoted solely to the treatment of 
physical phenomena. 
Goethe's theory of colour is certainly not without its merits (note II. 368), 
and Hegel of tens shows that he was aware of its true importance. If he had also 
been aware of Goethe's shortcomings as a physicist, he might very easily have 
anticipated Heisenberg (loc. cit) by converting the apparent contradiction be-
tween the Newtonian and Goethean theories into an exposition of their com-
plementarity. His system was well adapted to help him do this; in accordance with 
its principles, Newton's theory should have been assessed in the 'Philosophy of 
Nature' and Goethe's presented in the initial stages of the 'Philosophy of Spirit'. 
There are very few English works relating to this subject: see however Brew-
ster's review of Eastlake's translation of the didactic part of 'Zur Farbenlehre' in 
'The Edinburgh Review' vol. 72 pp. 99-131. (Edinburgh, 1841): John Tyndall 
'Goethe's Farbenlehre' in 'The Fortnightly Review' vol. 27 pp. 471-490 new 
series (London, 1880): A Schuster 'Goethe's Farbenlehre' in 'Publications of the 
English Goethe Society' no. 5 pp. 141-151 (London, 1890). 
161, 12 
See the note on II. 259. 
161,22 
A fUteenth century 'Vocabularius' (Augsburg, 1473) contains the following 
entry, ,6mecf1id) -odoriferus ... omne illud quod potest odorari', and in a pre-
Lutheran south German translation of the Bible, it is said of Lazarus' body that it 
,fmedt iebunt' (John XI 39) Hegel may also have known the Swabian rhyme 
,@;in ~irte of)ne 6teden 
3ft ttlie ein ~unb of)ne 6d)meden'. 
382 

NOTES 
See H. Fischer and W. Pfleiderer 'Schwabisches Worterbuch' (6 vols. 
Tiibingen, 1904-1936) vol. 5 cols. 986-989, vol. 6 pt. ii col. 3002. 
161,29 
,ag stalf'. See A, and C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Miner-
alogy' (2 vols. London, 1807) I p. 177, 'The term calcination is derived from the 
Latin calx, which signifies quick-lime, and is applied by the old chemists to the 
conversion of a comparatively dense substance into a light and porous one, by 
the action of fire ... Most metals when exposed to the joint action of heat and 
air are converted to a loose powdery substance which was denominated by the 
old chemists the calx of the metal, but which in the modern nomenclature is 
called an oxyd.' 
162, 30 
On this transition from colour to odorous matter see A. F. Fourcroy (1755-
1809) 'Elements of Naural History and Chemistry' (tr. W. Nicholson, 3 vols. 
London, 1790) vol. III p. 96, where the opinion is expressed that the colour of a 
dye is perhaps, 'a very subtle body, perhaps not less so than the principle of 
smells' etc. Working on the analogy of the propagation of light and sound, 
Johann Georg Steinbuch, in his 'Beitrag zur Physiologie der Sinne' (Nurem-
berg, 1811) p. 304, considered the possibility of there being 'odorous rays' 
(ffiied)ftraf)len) . 
P. J. Macquer (1718-1784), in 'Elements of the Theory and Practice of 
Chymistry' (tr. Reid, 2 vols. London, 1758) and 'Dictionnaire de Chymie' 
(2nd ed. 4 vols. Paris, 1778) vol. ii p. 45 I says that the smell of essential oils is due 
to a spiritus rector, a kind of gas which escapes from them. Fourcroy, in his 
'Elemens d'histoire naturelle et de chimie' (5th ed. 5 cols. Paris, 1793) vol. I ch. 
iv pp. 139-146, and in two articles ('Bull. Soc. Philomath'. 1797 no. 7, 52, and 
Ann. Chim. 1798, xxvii, 232) also defended the hypothesis of a spiritus rector, 
although in his 'Systtmes de Connaissances Chimiques' (II vols. Paris, 1801-2 tr. 
Nicholson, London, 1804) vol. VII p. 361, he says that the odour of each essen-
tial oil is its specijic property. Cf. F. A. Gren (1760-1798) 'Systematisches Hand-
buch der gesammten Chemie' (3 vols. Halle, 1806-7) vol. II § 1307. 
The colours of metallic salts, especially oxides, were probably considered by 
Hegel to be further evidence of the validity of this transition (note II. 352). John 
Murray (d. 1820), in his 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. 
IV pp. 319-336 considers colours, aroma and taste in the same sequence as 
Hegel. Unlike Hegel however, he does not distinguish between 'odour' and 
'fragrancy' . 
162, 36 
See the note II. 256. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OJ! NATURE 
163,6 
Hegel added a note here, 'Chemistry distinguishes between solution and 
resolution; resolution is a separation into component parts, solution simply 
takes place in water'. 
163, 14 
On water of crystallization, see the distinction drawn by G. F. Rouelle (1703-
1770), J'appelle cette eau qui entre ainsi dans la formation des crystaux, 1'eau 
de la crystallisation, afin de la distinguer de l' eau qui se dissipe par l' evaporation, 
a laquelle je donne Ie nom d' eau surabondante a la crystallisation, ou d' eau de la 
dissolution' . 
There was much uncertainty as to the nature of water of crystallisation. A. 1. 
Lavoisier (1743-1794) in 'Memoires de Chimie' (2 vols. Paris, 1803) vol. II p. 
765 took it to be in the form of ice ('dans 1'etat de glace'), but J. B. Richter 
(1762-1807) was convinced that this could not be the case: see his 'Ueber die 
neuern Gegenstande der Chymie' (II pts. Breslau etc., 1791-1802) pt. Xp. 250. 
Berzelius discovered that in compounds of different bases with water, the oxy-
gen in the water is in simple ratio to that in the anhydrous base, and that the 
oxygen in water of crystallisation in acids and salts is in a simple ratio to that in 
the basic water or basic oxide ('Gilberts Annalen' 1812, 50 p. 287). Cf. his 'Lar-
bok i Kemien' pt. III p. 84 (Stockholm, 1818). For later views on the subject see 
John Dalton (1766-1844) 'On the Quantities of Acids, Bases and Water in the 
different Varieties of Salts' (Manchester, 1842). 
Considering the basic uncertainty of this knowledge, Hegel's assessment of 
the matter is by no means unreasonable. 
163,34 
In the textbooks of the time, taste was taken to involve the two basic factors of 
sweetness and bitterness: see J. F. Pierer 'Medizinisches Realworterbuch' (8 vols. 
Leipzig, 1816-1829) vol. III p. 660. Most chemical descriptions involved giving 
the taste of the material being described, but the exact nature of this characteris-
tic was not closely investigated, and in the British textbooks of the time taste was 
only treated in detail as an attribute of vegetable substances. See Thomas Thom-
son (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. V pp. 
31-37: John Murray 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. 
IV pp. 333-335. Murray distinguishes between the acrid, narcotic and bitter 
principles, but admits that the whole subject has not been satisfactorily investi-
gated. 
165, 38 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 180-181. 
384 

NOTES 
167,28 
The distinction between vitreous and resinous electricity was first made by 
c. F. Dufay (1698-1739), who announced his discovery in the 'Memoires de 
I'Academie Royale des Sciences' 1733 cf. 1734 pp. 303, 341: 1737 pp. 86, 307: 
'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 38 p. 258. He writes, 'There are two kinds of 
electricity, very different from one another, one of which I call vitreous (posi-
tive) and the other resinous (negative) electricity. The first is that of glass, rock 
crystal, precious stones, hairs of animals, wool, and many other bodies. The 
second is that of amber, copal, gum-lac, silk, thread, paper and a vast number of 
other substances. The characteristics of these two electricities are that they repel 
themselves and attract each other.' 
168, 19 
Claude Louis Berthollet (1748-1822). The main importance of his book on 
chemical statics, 'Essai de Statique Chimique' (2 vols. Paris, 1803), which was 
based on investigations into chemical reaction made between 1799 and 1803, is 
the influence it had upon the development of the theory of chemical affinity. In 
this work he attacked the law of constant proportions which formed the basis of 
the quantitative analytical method employed among others by Richard Kirwan 
(1733-1812): see for example Kirwan's 'Experiments and Observations on the 
Specific Gravities and Attractive Powers of various Saline Substances' ('Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1781 p. 7, 1782 p. 179, 1783 p. 15 tr. Crell 'Versuche und 
Beobachtungen' etc. 2 pts. Berlin and Stettin, 1783-1785). 
According to Berthollet, chemical reactions are usually incomplete, and when 
substances of definite composition are formed, they are either the result of a 
mutual saturation of an acid by a base, in which the powers of each are simply 
neutralized in a certain proportion, or they are due to changes in physical 
factors such as cohesion or elasticity. 
The chapter of the book referred to by Hegel is headed 'De l' action de la 
lumiere et du fluide electrique'. In the passage referred to Berthollet admits the 
analogy existing between 'caloric' and 'electric fluid', and attempts to show why 
their effects are often similar. He believes that when metals are oxidized, the 
electric fluid merely causes a 'dilatation' of bodies, and suggests that both oxida-
tion and fusion are facilitated by the molecules of the metal being dispersed by 
the electricity. He notices for example that if heavy electrical charges are passed 
through platinum wire, the motion imparted will cause the latter to acquire a 
temperature about equal to that of boiling water, which is by no means high 
enough to fuse it. Consequently, he attributes the fusion and oxidation which 
occur to the vibrations set up by the electricity, and suggests that the electric 
shock (note II. 226), is the root cause of all these electro-chemical changes. 
169, 14 
See the note II. 306. 
N 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
169,25 
This passage is evidently meant to be a recapitulation of the progression from 
colour to smell and taste worked out in §§ 321-322. 
On the colour of electric light see J. Priestley (1733-1804) 'Experiments and 
Observations on Different Kinds of Air' (3 vols. Birmingham, 1790) vol. I pp. 
II5, 232 etc. Priestley notices that in 'fixed air' (C02), the electric spark is 
'exceedingly white', and that in 'inflammable air' (H2) it is red or purple, which 
he considers to be its characteristic colour. See also his 'The History and Present 
State of Electricity' (London, 1769) pt. VIII, sect. xvi expo 12, 'The electric 
spark, taken in the middle of a phial filled with inflammable air, is always of a 
red or purple colour, and cannot be made to look white; but the larger the 
explosion is, the nearer it approaches to white'. G. C. Morgan (1754-1798) 
regarded light as a body subject to gravity but heterogeneous, the same attrac-
tive power operating differently on its different parts. Like Priestley, he noticed 
that electric light assumes different colours according to the medium in which it 
is taken. He noticed for example that a spark conveyed through an imperfect 
vacuum displays its indigo rays, while in the vapour of ether it displays its 
green rays, and in ammoniacal gas, its red rays ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1785 
vol. 75 p. 190). 
On the smell of electricity, see 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. III 
p. 385 (Leipzig, 1827). It is clear from this account that the attribution of this 
property to the phenomenon was extremely hypotheitcal. See also L. V. Brug-
natelli (1761-1818) in 'Gilberts Annalen der Physik' 1803, vol. viii pp. 284-299. 
Brugnatelli regarded the 'galvanic fluid' as an electric acid, with the smell of 
phosphorus, from which he claimed to have prepared, a series of salts. Cf. 
'Nicholson's Journal' vol. IV p. 261: P. F. Mottelay 'Bibliographical History of 
Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 361-363. 
Johann Georg Sulzer (1720-1779) seems to have been the first to notice the 
taste of electricity: see his 'Theorie der angenehmen und unangenehmen Emp-
findungen' (Berlin, 1762), 'When two pieces of metal, one oflead and the other 
of silver, are so joined together that their edges make one surface, a certain 
sensation will be produced on applying it to the tongue, which comes near to 
the taste of vitriol of iron; whereas each piece by itself betrays not the slightest 
trace of that taste'. See F. C. Bakewell 'Manual of Electricity' (London, 1857) 
ch. III p. 28. C£ the note II. 412. 
169,28 
This is a reference to the 'figures' discovered by Georg Christoph Lichten-
berg (1744-1799) in 1777. His accounts of them have recently been edited as no. 
246 of Ostwald's 'Klassiker der Exacten Wissenschaften': see 'tiber eine neue 
Methode die Natur und die Bewegung der elektrischen Materie zu erforschen' 
(ed. Pupke und Zaunick, Leipzig, 1956). C£ Tiberius Cavallo (1749-1809) 'An 
account of some new experiments in electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 70 i 
386 

NOTES 
pp. 15-29, 1780): Thomas Young (1773-1829) 'A course oflectures on natural 
philosophy' (2 vols. London, 1807) vol. II pp. II9, 419, 426. 
These figures are produced by tracing any desired lines upon a cake of resin 
with a needle in contact with a Leyden jar, and by dusting upon the cake a 
well-triturated mixture of sulphur and of red lead. These substances having 
been brought by friction into opposite electrical conditions, the sulphur collects 
upon the positive and the lead upon the negative portions of the cake: positive 
electricity producing an appearance resembling feathers, and negative electricity 
an arrangement more like stars. 
Lichtenberg gives a list of the substances and powders he used (op. cit. pp. 
32-33), but does not mention colophony. Hegel may have in mind a paper 
published by Adolph Traugott von Gersdorff (1744-1807), in which many 
experiments similar to Lichtenberg's are described: see 'Uber einige elek-
trische Versuche' ('Neue Schriften der Berlinischen Gesellschaft naturfor-
schender Freunde' vol. II 1799). 
Historically, the main importance of Lichtenberg's work on electricity was 
that it provided support for the two fluid theory of electricity, championed among 
others, by Robert Symmer (d. 1763) in his 'New Experiments and Observa-
tions concerning electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 51 i pp. 371-389, 1760), 
as opposed to the one fluid theory championed by Franklin: see C. van Doren 
'Benjamin Franklin' (New York, 1938). Lichtenberg's work inspired Chladni to 
look for his figures' (note II. 286). 
Cf. K. Przibram 'Lichtenberg als Physiker' ('Naturwissenschaft' vol. 15 pp. 
423-425, 1927): G. Knoerzer and W. Kossel 'Zweipolige Lichtenberg-Figuren' 
('Naturwissenschaft' vol. 37 p. 357, 1950): J. A. Deluc (1727-1817) 'Idees sur la 
Meteorologie' (2 vols. London, 1786-1787). I p. 490. 
F. H. Mautner and F. Miller 'Remarks on G. C. Lichtenberg' ('Isis' 1952 pp. 
223-231). 
169, 34 
Various theories based upon the assumption of electrical matters were current 
at the end of the eighteenth century. W. J. G. Karsten (1732-1787), in his 
'Anleitung zur gemeinniitzigen Kenntniss der Natur' (Halle, 1783) § 497 
assumed positive electricity to be pure air saturated with elemental fire, and 
negative electricity to be phlogiston combined with a weak acid. To some extent 
he based his work on the theory of heat put forward by Adair Crawford (1749-
1795) in his 'Experiments and Observations on Animal Heat' (London, 1779). 
J. R. Forster (1729-1798) formulated a similar theory in 'Uber die Natur des 
Feuers und der Elektricitat' ('Crell's neueste Entdeckungen' vol. 12 p. 154,1784). 
Hegel probably has in mind J. A. Deluc's theory of an electric fluid: see his 
'Neue Ideen iiber die Meteorologie' (Berlin und Stettin, 1787) 'Traite elemen-
taire sur Ie fluide electro-galvanique' (2 vols. Paris, 1804). Cf. J. G. F. Schrader 
(1763-c. 1825) 'Versuch einer neuen Theorie der Elektricitat' (Altona, 1797): 
387 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
W. A. Lampadius (1772-1842) 'Versuche und Beobachtungen iiber die Elek-
tricitat' (Berlin and Stettin, 1793). 
170,7 
The best known German writer on occult agents is Agrippa von Nettesheim 
(1487-1537): see his 'De occulta philosophia' (Cologne, 1533). John French 
(1616-1657) published an English translation of this work (London, 1651), 
which has since been edited by W. F. Whitehead (Chicago, 1898). John Fergu-
son, professor of chemistry at Glasgow, has published bibliographical notes on it 
(Edinburgh, 1924). 
The work of Karl Kiesewetter, thorough though it is, is curiously weak on 
mediaeval theories of occultism: see 'Der Occultismus des Altertums' (Leipzig, 
1896) and 'Geschichte des neueren Occultismus' (ed. Blum, Leipzig, 1909). Cf. 
A. E. Waite 'The Occult Sciences' (London, 1891): G. B. Alfano 'Piccola 
encic10pedia di scienze occulte' (Naples, 1949). 
If Hegel is not referring to occultism as such, he probably has in mind such use 
of the concept as that mentioned by Edward Stillingfleet (1635-1699) in his 
analysis of Epicurus, 'But for one to say that atoms move, because it is their 
nature to move, and give no other account of it, is so precarious, that it will 
never give the least satisfaction to an inquisitive mind: and it will be the least of 
all pardonable in the exploders of substantial forms and occult qualities, when 
the origin of the whole world is resolved into an occult quality which gives 
motion to atoms.': see 'Origines Sacrae' (1662, III ii § 14, new ed. 2 vols. Ox-
ford, 1797) II p. 40. Newton, in his 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) bk. III 
pt. i query 31 comments as follows upon the concept, 'And the Aristotelians 
gave the Name of occult Qualities, not to manifest Qualities, but to such Quali-
ties only as they supposed to lie hid in Bodies, and to be the unknown causes of 
manifest Effects: Such as would be the causes of Gravity, and of magnetick and 
electrick Attractions, and of Fermentations, if we should suppose that these 
Forces or Actions arose from Qualities unknown to us, and uncapable of being 
discovered and made manifest. Such occult Qualities put a stop to the improve-
ment of natural Philosophy, and therefore of late Years have been rejected.' 
Despite this Leibniz accused Newton of reviving the occult qualities of the 
schools: see his letter to Abbe Conti (Nov.-Dec. 1715) published in J. Raphson 
'The History of Fluxions' (London, 1715) p. 97: c£ D. Brewster 'Memoirs ... of 
Sir Isaac Newton' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1855) vol. II p. 60. 
Voltaire, in his 'Philosophical Dictionary' (Eng. tr. London, 1765), defends 
the postulation of occult qualities. See also Alexandre Koyre 'Newtonian Studies' 
(London, 1965) appendix B. 
170, 10 
Jons Jacob Berzelius (1779-1848) had his sandbath and furnace in his kitchen; 
see Friedrich Wohler (1800-1882) 'Jugend Erinnerungen eines Chemikers' 
(Berlin, 1875) viii 841. Wohler spent a year with Berzelius in Stockholm 
388 

NOTES 
(1823-4), and in 1825 became a teacher at the newly-founded technical school in 
Berlin. Berzelius certainly regarded atmospheric and 'laboratory' electricity as 
being identical, see his 'Larbok i Kemien' pt. III (Stockholm, 1818) p. 62. 
C£ Jean Antoine Nollet (1700-1770) 'Lec;:ons de Physique' (6 vols. Paris, 
1743-1750) vol. IV p. 314, and the note II. 266. 
170, II 
Jacques Rohault (1620-1675), in his 'Traite de Physique' (2 vols. Paris, 1673), 
accounted for thunder by supposing that clouds collide. 1. U. de Tessan (1804-
1879) in 'Observation d'un coup de tonnerre accompagne de sifHement' 
('Comptes Rendus' 1841 vol. XII pp. 791-794) put forward the curious view 
that thunder was caused by the elasticity of the clouds being removed by the 
dissipation of electricity in the lightning flash. Cf. 'Proceedings of the London 
Electrical Society' ed. Walker 1843 pp. 180-184. C. H. Pfaff (1773-1852) in 
'Von den Gewitterwolken' ('Gehler's Phys. Wort.' vol. I p. 989, Leipzig, 1825) 
makes the point that the friction of air particles cannot playa very large part in the 
generation of atmospheric electricity because lightning often occurs when the 
air is comparatively still. 
170, 33 
See §§ 275 and 315. 
171, 13 
See the note II. 265. 
171, 19 
The gold-leaf electrometer devised by Abraham Bennet (1750-1799) and 
described by him in an article published in 'phil. Trans. Roy Soc.' 1787 pp. 
26-32, was the most sensitive instrument of its kind available to physicists at this 
time: c£ Bennet's 'New Experiments of Electricity' (Derby, 1789). 
Georg John Singer (1786-1817) improved upon Bennet's instrument by 
reducing the amount of moisture precipitated upon the surface of insulators 
(1810). Robert Hare (1781-1858) devised (1821) a single gold-leaf electrometer 
of such delicacy that it enabled him to detect the electricity produced by one 
contact between a zinc and copper disc, each six inches in diameter: see Silli-
man's 'American Journal of Science and Arts' vol. 35 p. 329. 
171, 23 
J. B. Biot (1774-1862) 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. II p. 217, 
'Nous voyons donc que lorsqu'un corps a ete prealablement electrise et isoIe, 
comme notre petit pendule, les autres corps electrises qui en approchent 
n' agissent pas tous sur lui de la meme maniere, puisque les uns Ie repoussent et les 
autres l' attirent: cela nous oblige desormais a distinguer deux sortes d' electri-
cites, l'une analogue a celle que developpe Ie verre frotte par une etoffe de 
389 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
laine; nous la nommerons l'electricite vitree; l'autre, semblable a celIe qu'exerce 
la resine, pareillement frottee avec une etoffe de laine; nous 1a nommerons 
l'electricite resineuse. Cette belle decouverte est due a Dufay'. See the note 
II. 385. 
171,28 
Rene-Just Hauy (1743-1822): see the note II. 332. His 'Traite de minera-
logie' (4 vols. Paris, 1801) was translated into German (Karsten, 3 vols. Leip-
zig, 1803), but Hegel is here making his own translation of the original (vol. I 
p. 237), 'L'electricite partage tout Ie regne mineral en trois grandes divisions, qui 
suivent a peu pres l'ordre methodique generalement adopte pour la classifica-
tion des etres de ce regne. Presque toutes les substances connues les unes sous Ie nom 
de pierres, les autres sous celui de sels, acquierent, a l' aide du frottement, l' elec-
tricite vitree, pourvu qu' elles jouissent d' un certain degre de purete. Les substances 
inflammables proprement dites, a l' exception du diamant, etant de meme frot-
tees, rerroivent au contraire l' electricite resineuse. Les substances metalliques 
possedent en general eminemment la propriete conductrice de l' electricite.' 
Hegel's apparent mistranslation ofHauy's statement concerning the diamond 
is almost certainly due to David Brewster's subsequent discovery of the pyro-
electrical condition of this stone: see P. F. Mottelay 'Bibliographical History of 
Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) p. 465: Brewster's articles in 'Annals 
of Philosophy' Dec. 1824 p. 469: 'Edinburgh Journal of Science' Oct. 1825 nr. 
2 p. 208:J. S. C. Schweigger's 'Jahrbuch der Chemie und Physik' vol. XIII pp. 
87-106 (Halle, 1825). 
For an interesting recent survey of the background to this subject see Robert 
Siegfried 'Sir Humphry Davy on the Nature of the Diamond' ('Isis' vol. 57, 
pt. 3 no. 189 pp. 325-335, Autumn, 1966). 
172 , IS 
Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), in one of his first experiments, insulated two 
men from the ground by standing them on cakes of wax. In this experiment one 
of them rubbed a glass tube. The other then passed his hand along it, and so 
received a charge of 'vitreous' electricity. Franklin discovered that both men 
were then about equally electrified, for the sparks obtained when either touched 
an uninsulated conductor were of equal intensity. If the men touched each other 
before touching the insulated conductor however, he found that they were 
completely discharged. He used this experiment to explain the nature of positive 
and negative electricity. 
172,20 
Johann Karl Wilcke (1732-1796), in his 'Disputatio inauguralis physica' 
390 

NOTES 
(Rostock, 1757) notices that the electricity of melted sulphur does not appear 
until it commences to cool and to contract, its maximum being reached at its 
point of greatest contraction. He regarded electricity produced by the lique-
faction of electrics as being 'spontaneous'. 
172,21 
As Hegel is here making his own selective translation ofBiot's text, it may be of 
interest to give the original: see 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. II 
pp. 356-359, 'Lorsque les surfaces de deux corps sont frottees ensemble, celle 
dont les particules integrantes s' ecartent Ie moins les unes des autres, et font des 
excursions moindres autour de leurs positions naturelles d' equilibre, parah, par 
cela meme, plus disposee a prendre l' electricite vitree; cette tendance augmente 
si la surface eprouve une compression passagere. 
Reciproquement celIe des deux surfaces dont les particules se trouvent plus 
ecartees par la rudesse de l' autre ou par toute autre cause quelconque, est, par 
cela meme, plus disposee a prendre l' electricite resineuse. Cette tendance aug-
mente si la surface eprouve une veritable dilatation .... 
Ainsi, lorsqu'une substance animale ou vegetale solide et seche est frottee 
contre une surface metallique qui a de la rudesse, elle donne des signes d' elec-
tricite resineuse; c' est Ie cas OU ses molecules sont ecartees. Lorsqu' elle est frottee 
contre un metal tres-poli qui altere peu sa surface, ou dont l' effet se borne a 
la comprimer par parties, sans ecarter individuellement les particules qui la 
composent, elle ne donne aucun signe d' electricite, ou elle donne des signes 
d' electricite vitree .... 
Lorsqu'on frotte les poils d'une peau de chat contre une surface metallique 
polie ou depolie, ils ne peuvent que ceder a son choc, et se refouler les uns sur les 
autres; mais ils se compriment ainsi, tout d'une piece, sans aucune vibration de 
leurs particules. Ils sont donc disposes d' une maniere eminemment favorable pour 
prendre l' electricite vitree. . . . 
... il est de fait qu'une etoffe de soie noire neuve de forte teinte, etant frottee 
contre un ruban de soie blanche, prend toujours cette espece d' electricite. Mais 
lorsque l' etoffe noire est usee et sa couleur affaiblie, si l' on dilate les pores du 
rub an blanc par la chaleur, il acquiert a son tour, pour l' electricite resineuse, une 
plus grande tendance que l' etoffe noire, et par consequent ilIa rend vitree .... 
Un rub an blanc sec frotte contre une etoffe de laine blanche, donne toujours des 
signes d'electricite resineuse; mais contre une etoffe de laine teinte en noir, il 
donne des signes d' electricite vitree'. 
Robert Symmer (d. 1763), in an article published in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1759 vol. 51 pt. i was the first to show that quite small differences determine the 
sign of the electrification generated by the friction of two bodies one against the 
other. When wearing black and white silk stockings one over the other, he had 
found that they were electrified oppositely when rubbed and drawn off. 
391 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
172, 32 
,fief) batauf beief)tdnft, fie 3U btild'en, unb ein3eln bie :teilef)en 3u entfernen'. 
Biot wrote, "ou dont l'effet se borne a la comprimer par parties, sans ecarter 
individuellement les particules qui Ie composent'. 
173, 14 
The article Hegel is quoting here appeared in the jahrbucher fur wissen-
schaftliche Kritik' (Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1829), the official publication of the 
Hegelian school, which was edited by Leopold von Henning (1791-1866): 
see the note II. 362. It was a review by Georg Friedrich PoW (1788-1849) of 
the third volume of 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' (Leipzig, 1827), not of 
the first three volumes as stated by Hegel, and appeared as a series of continuous 
articles published between July (op. cit. p. 18) and September 1829 (op. cit. p. 
451). The passages quoted by Hegel are taken from Pohl's analysis of the article 
on 'Electricity' by C. H. Pfaff (1773-1852), which occupies pp. 233-406 of this 
volume of the dictionary. 
The original 'Physikalisches Worterbuch' by Johann Samuel Traugott Gehler 
(1751-1795) appeared in four volumes with a supplement (Leipzig, 1787-
1795). The edition of it mentioned here by Hegel was edited, among others, by 
Georg Wilhelm Muncke (1772-1847), professor of physics at Heidelberg, and 
appeared in eleven volumes between 1825 and 1845. The dictionary is distin-
guished by its thoroughness, comprehensiveness and accuracy, by the excellence 
of its historical surveys and bibliographies, and by its being completely free from 
Schellingianism (see vol. VII pp. 547-548). 
Pohl, writing from an Hegelian standpoint, criticises the general arrange-
ment of the work in that it is merely alphabetical, and takes Pfaff's article as 
typifying the failures of a merely empirical approach to the subject matter of 
physics, in that its contents are selected arbitrarily and treated fussily and pedanti-
cally. He concludes however by wishing the authors well in their gigantic under-
taking. 
174, 10 
Hans Christian 0rsted (1777-1851), professor of natural philosophy in Copen-
hagen. R. C. Stauffer, in 'Speculation and Experiment in the Background of 
Oersted's Discovery of Electromagnetism' ('Isis, Official Quarterly Journal of the 
History of Science Society' vol. 48 pp. 33-50, Cambridge Mass, 1957) has 
traced the influence of Schellingianism upon 0rsted. 
In 1819 0rsted discovered that when a wire joining the end plates of a voltaic 
pile is held near a pivoted magnet or compass needle, the latter is deflected and 
places itself more or less transversely to the wire, the direction depending upon 
whether the wire is above or below the needle, and on the manner in which the 
copper or zinc ends of the pile are connected to it. See his 'Experimenta circa 
effectum conflictus electrici in acum magneticam' (Copenhagen, 1820), and the 
392 

NOTES 
English translation of this work in 'Thomson's Annals of Philosophy' vol. XVI 
pp. 273-6 (1820): Gilbert's 'Annalen der Physik' LXVI, 1820-304. 
A. A. De la Rive (1801-1873) repeated 0rsted's experiments before the 
French Academy of Sciences on September II, 1820, and seven days later A. M. 
Ampere (1775-1836), in a paper read before this society, made known the law 
governing electro-magnetism: cf. his 'Recueil d'Observations' (Paris, 1822). 
B. Dibner 'Oersted and the discovery of Electromagnetism' (Norwalk, 
1961). 
174,30 
'Electric rain' is described in 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. III 
p. 307 (Leipzig, 1827), 'It is this principle of attraction and repulsion ... which 
explains the experiments with ... small particles of cork or elderberry pith, 
which hop up and down on a table under an electrified bell. When there are 
enough of these particles and they are sufficiently small, or even better, when tiny 
strips of gold paper are used, they give rise, by their rustling and moving about, 
to what is called electric rain'. Tiberius Cavallo (1749-1809), in his 'A complete 
treatise on electricity' (London, 1777 Swedish tr. 3 vols. Lund, 1795-1796) 
vol. II ch. xi expo 17 describes a similar experiment. 
Joseph Priestley (1733-1804), in 'The History and Present State of Electricity' 
(London, 1769) pt. VII sect. i pp. 522-523, after presenting certain, 'practical 
maxims for the use of young electricians', describes a number of amusing elec-
trical playthings, including electric chimes, 'Suspend one plate of metal to the 
conductor, and place a metal stand, of the same size, at the distance of a few 
inches exactly under it, and upon the stand put the figures of men, animals, or 
whatever else shall be imagined, cut in paper or leaf gold, and pretty sharply 
pointed at both extremities; and then, upon electrifying the upper plate, they 
will perform a dance, with amazing rapidity of motion, and to the great diver-
sion of the spectators .... To the dancing figures above-mentioned it is very 
amusing to add a set of electrical bells. These consist of three small bells, the two 
outermost of which are suspended from the conductor by chains, and that in 
the middle by a silken string, while a chain connects it with the floor; and two 
small knobs of brass, to serve instead of clappers, hung by silken strings, one 
between each two bells. In consequence of this disposition, when the two outer-
most bells, communicating with the conductor, are electrified they will attract 
the clappers, and be struck by them. The clappers, being thus loaded with 
electricity, will be repelled, and fly to discharge themselves upon the middle 
bell. After this, they will be again attracted by the outermost bells; and thus, 
by striking the bells alternately, a continual ringing may be kept up as long as 
the operator pleases .... When these two experiments of the bells and the figures 
are exhibited at the same time, they have the appearance of men or animals 
dancing to the music of the bells; which, if well conducted, may be very di-
verting.' C£ Cavallo op. cit. vol. II ch. xi expo 14. 
N* 
393 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY O~ NATURE 
175,5 
See Schelling's 'Zeitschrift fur spekulative Physik' vol. I (lena and Leipzig, 
1800). In the long article 'Allgemeine Deduction des dynamischen Processes oder 
der Categorieen der Physik', Schelling discusses the relatedness of electricity and 
magnetism at great length, and sums up his argument as follows, , eo Ware 
aIfo", bie wa1)re etuffenfolge ber bt)namifcf)en ~atur\:)roceffe bieje: 
1. lmagneti~mui3 -
fein ecf)ema bie Binie. 
2, (tIe ctri ciUit -
i1)r ecf)ema ber m!infel. 
3. &al\)ani~mui3 -
fein ecf)ema ber :triangel. 
3ene brei finb alfo gleicf)fam bie ~rimoa1)len ber ~atur, bieje i1)re aUgemeinen 
~ieroglt)\:)1)en' . 
175,6 
Michelet comments upon this as follows, 'It could be said that it is because 
magnetism is the inftnite activity of form as undisclosed identity, that the mag-
netic insulators of existing magnetism exhibit the oppositions of form in their 
context, while the conductors of subia ted magnetism divide them between 
themselves; conversely, that as electricity exhibits the inftnite activity of form 
as disclosed differentiation, the insulators divide the existing oppositions be-
tween themselves while the conductors connect those which are subia ted. One 
is also able to see why the undifferentiated bodies are magnetic insulators, while 
the bodies of differentiation are electric insulators, for as insulation is displayed 
within existence, the undifferentiation of magnetism exhibits itself in metal, 
while the differentiation of electricity exhibits itself in the opposition between 
combustibility and neutrality. Chemistry on the contrary is the totality of the 
process which exhibits itself at every stage of corporeality.' 
175,21 
John Canton (1718-1772) was the ftrst to establish the fact of electrrucation 
by induction, or, as he terms it, 'relating to bodies immerged in electric atmo-
spheres'. The principle he enunciates is that, 'the electric fluid, when there is a 
redundancy of it in any body, repels the electric fluid in any other body when 
they are brought within the sphere of each other's influence and drives it into 
remote parts of the body; or quite out of it, if there be any outlet for that pur-
pose. In other words, bodies immerged in electric atmospheres always become 
possessed of the electricity contrary to that of the body in whose atmosphere 
they are immerged.' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' Dec. 1753). 
176, 16 
,fo ift bie 3ntenfitat an ber eteUe ber 58eru1)rung =0, ftader an ben 
entfernten ~unften ber Sfugeln/, 
394 

NOTES 
176, 21 
These experiments are taken from the well-known articles by Charles 
Augustin de Coulomb (1736-1806), which appeared in the 'Memoires de 
l'Academie Royale des Sciences' between 1784 (p. 266) and 1789 (p. 455). From 
them, Coulomb concluded that the attractive force of two small globes, one 
electrified positively and the other negatively, is in the inverse ratio of the 
squares of the distances of their centres, and that the repulsive force of the two 
globes, charged either with positive or negative electricity, is inversely as the 
squares of the distances of the centres of the globes. This hypothesis brought 
electrical phenomenon within the domain of mathematical analysis. See S. D. 
Poisson (1781-1840) 'Traite de Mecanique' (Paris, 18II), in which theorems are 
deduced for determining the distribution of the 'electric fluid' on the surfaces 
of two conducting spheres, when they are placed in contact or at any given 
distance. 
176,26 
Rene-Just Hauy (1743-1822) 'Traite de mineralogie' (4 vols. Paris, 1801): see 
the note II 332. 
In 'Curi5se Speculationen bei schlaflosen Nachten' (Chemnitz and Leipzig, 
1707), a certain J. G. S. gave the first account of the development of electricity 
in tourmaline by means of heat, and stated that it was the Dutch who had first 
brought this stone from Ceylon in 1703. C£J. Beckmann (1739-18II) 'Beitrage 
zur Geschichte der Erfmdungen' (Leipzig, 1782) pt. I sect. 2 no. 5 p. 241. 
This discovery initiated research into the subject of pyro-electricity, or the 
power possessed by some minerals of becoming electrified when merely heated, 
and of exhibiting positive and negative electricity. For eighteenth century de-
velopments in this field see: Louis Lemery (1667-1743) in 'Histoire de l'Aca-
demie' (1717 p. 7): Linnaeus 'Flora Ceilonica' (Copenhagen, 1747) p. 8, who 
gives the stone the name of 'Lapis electricus': F. M. U. T. Aepinus (1724-1802) 
in 'Memoires de I'Academie de Berlin' (1756 p. IIo) and 'Receuil de differens 
memoires sur la Tourmaline' (St. Petersburg, 1762): Benjamin Wilson (1721-
1788) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 51 pt. i p. 308 (1760): John Canton (1718-
1772) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 52 pt. ii p. 443. By 1820 electricity had 
also been discovered in topaz, oxinite, boracite, prehnite, sphene, diamond, 
garnet, amethyst, borate of magnesia and tartrate of potash etC.: see P. F. 
Mottelay 'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 
1922) p. 153· 
Hauy was however the first to throw clear light on this curious branch of 
physics by tracing the relationship between the secondary forms of crystals and 
their electrical polarity. For later views on the subject see David Brewster's 
articles in 'Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin.' (1845) and 'Philosophical Magazine' (Dec. 
1847). There is also a full discussion of the subject in the 'Treatise on Electricity' 
395 

HEGEL.S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
by A. de la Rive (tr. Walker, London, I856) vol. II pt. 5 ch. i. C£ 'Gehler's 
Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. IX pp. I088-II04 (Leipzig, I839). 
I77,4 
C£ the note on C. F. L. Schultz (I78I-I834) II. 338. Plato develops this 
theory in the 'Timaeus' (45b2-46a2), 'And first of the organs they (the gods) 
wrought light-giving eyes, which they fixed there on the plan I shall explain. 
Such sort of fire as had the property of yielding a gentle light but not of burning, 
they contrived to form into a substance akin to the light of every day. The fire 
within us, which is akin to the daylight, they made to flow pure smooth and 
dense through the eyes, having made close the whole fabric of the eyes and 
especially the pupils, so that they kept back all that was coarser and suffered 
this to filter through unmixed and pure. Whenever then there is daylight sur-
rounding the current of vision, then this issues forth as like into like, and co-
alescing with the light is formed into one uniform substance in the direct line 
of vision, wherever the stream issuing from within strikes upon some external 
object that falls in its way.' 'The Timaeus of Plato' (ed. R. D. Archer-Hind, 
London, I888). 
A. E. Taylor, in his 'Commentary on Plato's Timaeus' (Oxford, I928) pp. 
276-290 notices the similarity between Plato's thinking here and the famous 
parallel between vision and knowledge, the sun and the form of good, in the 
sixth book of the Republic. C£ Goethe's adaptation of Plotinus: 
,'liiire nid)t hein m:uge fonnen~uft, 
'liie fonnt' es ie hie 6onn' erbHcfen? 
'lie'fte nid)t in unS hie eigne @ottesfruft, 
'liie fonnt' uns @ottHd)es enthiicfen'l' 
'Naturwissenschaftliche Hefte' ed. Kuhn (Weimar, I 962) p. 296. See also 
F. M. Cornford 'Plato's Cosmology (London, I937) pp. I5I-I59. 
I77, II 
The destructive powers of lightning attracted much attention about the middle 
of the eighteenth century. In I764 St. Bride's Church, London, was struck by 
lightning, which 'bent and broke asunder an iron bar two and a half inches 
broad and half an inch thick'. ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' I762, I764). In I769 St. 
Paul's Cathedral was first provided with lightning conductors. 
Benjamin Franklin recommended the use of pointed conductors. After the 
outbreak of the American Revolution he was of course regarded as an enemy of 
England, and patriotism demanded that a new form of conductor should be 
introduced. Knobs were proposed, and enthusiastically prescribed by the King, 
who requested that Sir John Pringle (I707-I782), the President of the Royal 
Society, should advocate their introduction. Sir John hinted that the laws and 
operations of nature could not be reversed at royal pleasure, whereupon it was 
396 

NOTES 
intimated to him that a President of the Royal Society entertaining such an 
opinion ought to resign, and he accordingly did so. In a letter written to 
J. Ingenhousz (1730-1799) on Oct. 14, 1777 Franklin comments that, 'The 
King's changing his pointed conductors for blunt ones is therefore a matter of 
small importance to me. IfI had a wish about it, it would be that he had rejected 
them altogether as ineffectuaL' 
On the volatilization of gold see John Murray (d. 1820) 'A System ofChemis-
try' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. III p. 17I. Martin van Marum (1750-1837) 
and John Cuthbertson (d.c. 1845), working the great frictional machine in the 
Teyler Institute at Haarlem, caused gold to bum by powerful electric sparks, 
and found that when, 'electric discharges are transmitted over a gold wire 
enclosed in a glass tube with atmospheric air, they convert it into a powder of 
a brownish purple colour, while the air is diminished in volume, and rendered 
incapable of supporting combustion' ('Nicholson's J oumal' vol. V p. 146). 
J. B. Trommsdorff (1770-1836) found that electricity caused gold to bum with 
a bright white light: see P. F. Mottelay op. cit. p. 352. 
177, 14 
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), in letters written early in January 1777, de-
scribed an 'electric pistol' in which a cork was blown out of a closed tube by 
the explosion, by an electric spark, of a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen. 
See 'Collezione dell' opere del. ... Volta' (Florence, 1816) vol. III pp. 133, 176 
etc.: c£ 'Briefe iiber die entziindbare Luft ... von Herm Alex. Volta' (tr. 
C. H. Kostlin, Stuttgart, 1778). Similar experiments are described by J. C. 
Schafer (1718-1790) in his 'Abbildung und Beschreibung der elektrischen 
Pistole' (Regensburg, 1779): Joseph Weber (1753-1831) in his 'Abhandlung vom 
Luftelektrophor' (2nd ed. VIm, 1779), and Jan Ingenhousz (1730-1799) in his 
'Nouvelles Experiences et Observations sur divers Objets de Physique' (2 vols. 
Paris, 1785-1789) vol. I p. ISO. 
The main importance of Volta's invention was that it prepared the way for 
Cavendish's well known paper on the synthesis of water: see 'Experiments on 
Air' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1784 pp. II9-I53): cfJ. R. Partington. 'A History 
of Chemistry' vol. III pp. 325-338 (London, 1962). 
177,24 
See the notes II. 269-271. Hegel's fault evidently lies in his having failed to 
distinguish between the states of solidity, liquidity and gaseousness as dependent 
upon temperature and pressure, and the same states as the outcome chemical 
structure or composition. 
177, 35 
Michelet notes that the following was added here in the Heidelberg 'Ency-
clopaedia' (1818), 'or individualization. The individuality of the body is the 
negative unity of the Notion, and is clearly neither an immediacy nor an un-
moved universal, but is merely a determination which posits itself through the 
397 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
mediation of the process. Consequently, the body is a product, and its shape is a 
presupposition, of which it is rather the end into which it passes which is 
presupposed' . 
178,6 
,'1)ie ~ftern finb fo ba5 Unmittelbate, bon bem man anfiingt; fie felbft 
beftimmen fid) bann abet aud) als @efe~tes, bet ~fiften3 nad)'. Cf. Hegel's 
'Philosophische Propadeutik' ed. Glockner (Stuttgart 1949) p. 89 ,'1)iefe 
@efinning befteqt niiqet barin, ba~ jebes @lieb bet iYamiHe feine ~efen nid)t 
in feinet eigenen $etfon qat, fonbern ba~ nut baS @an3e bet iYamilie iqte 
$etfonlid)feit ausmad)t'. 
179,33 
See the definition of 'saturation' given by A. and C. R. Aikin in 'A Dictionary 
of Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 1807), 'A substance is said to be 
saturated with another, either (in the case of simple solution) when the solvent 
will take up no more of the substance dissolved, or (in the case of mutual 
chemical action) where the compound produced is perfectly neutralized'. 
Hegel probably has in mind Berthollet's definition of saturation as dependent 
upon individual circumstances, relationships and forces, rather than as a distinct 
and definite state: see M. H. Klaproth (1743-1817) and Friedrich Wolff (1766-
1845) 'Chemisches Worterbuch' (9 vols. Berlin, 1807-1819) vol. IV pp. 294-299. 
180,4 
,bet Me gan3e @eftalt entamitt'. ,~tamiten' is an unusual word. Heyse 
and Wittich 'Fremdworterbuch' (14th ed. Hanover, 1870) give the following 
account of it, 'initiate, open up, set going, a transaction for example'. It originates 
from the French word en tamer, which occurs in English as 'entame' (to open) or 
'attame' (to broach, attack, initiate). 
None of these definitions seems to cover the meaning attached to it here by 
Hegel. 
180,24 
See the note II. 321. 
180,26 
See the note II. 275. Hegel is evidently criticizing the hypothesis put for-
ward by J. W. Ritter (1776-1810) that the northern lights have a ten year 
periodicity and are in some way connected with the regular appearance of 
meteorites: see his 'Einiges fiber Nordlichter und deren Perioden, und fiber den 
Zusammenhang des Nordlichts mit dem Magnetismus' ('Gilberts Annalen' vol. 
XV pp. 206-226): 'Physische-Chemische Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806) 
vol. III pp. 164-186. Ritter's theory was not confirmed by the events of 1806-1816. 
398 

NOTES 
On Sept. 25, 1827, the northern lights were seen in Switzerland, Holland 
and Paris, ('Quarterly Journal of Science' N.S. IV 385). J. J. D. de Mairan 
(1678-1771) was of the opinion that these lights appear only in the winter and 
usually at night, but the brilliant display of the southern light at Cuzco on Aug. 
20, 1744, which took place during the day, attracted a great deal of attention 
and brought his view into discredit: see 'Memoires de l' Academie' 1745: 
A. J. Sertorius 'Dissertatio de aurora borealis' (Heidelberg, 1760) p. 7. 
180, 35 
See the note II. 392. 
182,7 
See Christopher Hansteen (1784-1873) 'Untersuchungen uber den Mag-
netismus der Erde' (Christiania, 1819): P. F. Mottelay 'Bibliographical History 
of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 444-446: 'Gehler's Physikal-
isches Worterbuch' vol. VI pp. 1023-1071 (Leipzig, 1836). 
182,9 
J. W. Ritter (1776-1810) 'Galvanische Beobachtungen wahrend der Sonnen-
fmsterniss vom II. Februar 1804' ('Voigt's Magazin fur den neuesten Zustand 
der Naturkunde' vol. VII pp. 175-179): Ritter's 'Physische-Chemische 
Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806) vol. III pp. 308-319. 
The eclipse began at 11.18 a.m., and about half an hour later Ritter noticed a 
decrease in the activity of his voltaic battery. It was at its maximum at 12.33 
p.m., and half an hour later the battery was only working at ! of its normal rate. 
It was over by 1.53 p.m., and by 5.3cHl.30 the battery was functioning at only 
la of its normal rate. 
Ritter suggested that the voltaic battery might be used for gauging the effects 
of unobserved eclipses. 
182,37 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added, 'It is this 
process which has been called synsomation'. 
183,6 
Addition in the second edition (1827), 'The only change is in the determinate-
ness of their specific weight, hardness, cohesion, fusibility and colour, etc.' 
183, 10 
Jacob Joseph Winterl (1732-1809), Hegel, in a footnote, gave the following 
account of him, 'He was professor at Pest, and at the beginning of this century 
had an urge towards a deeper insight into chemistry. He claimed to have dis-
J99 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
covered a particular substance andronia, but the discovery has not been conftrmed.' 
Winterl was born at Eisenerz in Steiermark and originally intended to study 
theology. He fmally decided to read botany at Vienna however, and it was there 
that he met H. J. N. von Cranz (1722-1799), who evidently awoke his interest 
in chemistry: seeJ. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. III, pp. 148-189, 
599-600 (London, 1962). He eventually took his degree in philosophy and 
medicine, and then worked for several years as a general practitioner in the hill 
villages of Hungary. 
In 1771 he was appointed professor of botany and chemistry at Tymau, and 
in the following year published his 'Systema artis pharmaceuticae' (Tyrnaviae, 
1772). He improved the botanical garden at Of en despite the limited ftnances 
he had at his disposal, and in 1785 published the ftrst catalogue of its contents; 
he also helped to improve the efficiency of Hungarian fruit growing. His at-
tempt to found a Hungarian learned society came to nothing however, on 
account of his Austrian origins and Hungarian nationalism. When Tyrnau uni-
versity removed to Buda in 1777, and transferred to Pest in 1783, Winterl 
moved with it. He was a member of many learned societies, including those at 
G6ttingen, Heidelberg and Jena. 
Until the turn of the century his publications were concerned mainly with 
specialized chemical and medical topics: see 'Methodus analyseos aquarum 
mineralium' (Budae et Viennae, 1781): 'Die Kunst, Blutlauge und mehrere zur 
Blutfarbe dienliche Materien im Grossen zu bereiten und soIche zur Blau-
farberei anzuwenden' (Vienna, 1790), interesting as a possible source of Hegel's 
'blood acid' (note II. 438) 'Ueber das Brown'sche System' (Of en, 1798), c£ 
notes III. 378: 379. 
At the beginning of the new century however, he published two books in 
which an attempt was made to generalize chemical phenomena into a new sys-
tem: see 'Prolusiones ad chemiam saeculi decimi noni '(Budae, 1800), 'Acces-
siones novae ad prolusionem suam primam et secundam' (Budae, 1803). This 
work was known to German chemists mainly through the publications of 
Johan Schuster (1777-1839), who was Winterl's assistant and successor at the 
university, and who made it the basis of his 'Darstellung der vier Bestandtheile 
der anorganischen Natur' (Jena, 1804), and 'System der dualistischen Chemie 
des Pro£ Jakob Joseph Winterl' (2 vols. Berlin, 1807), the second of which is 
quoted by Hegel on two occasions (note II. 426). Winterl's views enjoyed a 
considerable vogue when they ftrst became known: see H. C. 0rsted (1770-
1851) 'Die Reihe der Sauren und Basen' ('Gehlens Journal fur die Chemie und 
Physik' 1806 ii pp. 509-547): R. C. Stauffer 'Speculation and Experiment in the 
background of Oersted's Discovery of Electromagnetism' ('Isis' vol. 48 pp. 
33-50, Cambridge Mass., 1957). 
Winterl's basic propositions were that matter is in itself inactive, that it only 
becomes active by means of two alien and mutually opposite principles, and that 
these principles are combined with matter by means of a mediating substance 
400 

NOTES 
(Schuster's 'Darstellung' etc. p. xii). The acidic and basic principles (principium 
aciditatis et principium basicitatis) were supposed to adhere to the substratum 
of material atoms, and so impart acidic and basic properties to them. The various 
properties of these atoms were taken to be due to their more or less complete 
saturation. Water was regarded as an element forming hydrogen when 'animated' 
by the 'principium animans' of the basic principle or negative electricity, and 
oxygen when animated by the acid principle or positive electricity. 
Some of Winterl's observations were valuable and accurate; he recognized 
for example that acids need not contain oxygen, that silica has acidic properties, 
and that many metallic calces are acidic. He also put forward worthlessly fan-
tastic views on the chemical elements however; he attempted for example to 
show that copper is a compound of nickel, molybdenum, silica, and a volatile 
substance ('CreWs Annalen' 1787 ii. p. 519, 1788 i p. 493). 
The putative discovery of 'andronia' mentioned by Hegel ruined Winterl's 
reputation. Winterl regarded it as the main constituent of milk, albumin etc. 
when combined with hydrogen, and as forming ammonia and an acid analogous 
to putrefying organic matter when negatively electrolyzed. He obtained it by 
heating nitre and charcoal and careful neutralization with acid, and regarded it 
as forming a link between inorganic and organic chemistry. Richard Chenevix 
(1774-1830) and Christian Friedrich Bucholz (1770-1818) found that Winterl's 
method for the preparation of andronia gave only silica: see 'Neues allgemeines 
Journal der Chemie' ed. Gehlen 1804 iii, pp. 105-108: 1805 iv, pp. 583: 1806 vi, 
p. 605: Journal fur die Chemie und Physik' ed. Gehlen 1806 i p. 313; 1807 iii 
p. 336. L. B. Guyton de Morveau (1737-1816) reviewed Winterl's book very 
sceptically: see 'Annales de Chimie' 1802 (An. XI) vol. 47 p. 312. Winterl there-
fore sent specimens of andronia to the Paris Institute, together with a Latin 
letter. The substance was examined by A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809), L. N. 
Vauquelin (1763-1829) and C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822), who discovered that 
it consisted mainly of silica, contaminated with lime, alumina, potash and iron. 
In their report they said that, 'M. Vinterl n' a ni notions exactes sur les caracteres 
qui distinguent des corps, ni ces exercices si necessaires aux chimistes pour recon-
noitre les substances diverses qu'ils trouvent dans leurs analyses' ('Annales de 
Chimie' 1809, vol. 71 pp. 225-253). 
183, 14 
,eit)nfomatien' (Greek crop with + (J'wp.a body), as Hegel refers here to a 
process, the slight inaccuracy involved in anglicizing this term would appear to 
be justified. If we are to judge from the definition of synsomation given by 
Winterl's assistant Johan Schuster (1777-1839) in his 'System der dualistischen 
Chemie des Pro£ Jakob Joseph Winterl' (2 vols. Berlin, 1807) I pp. 447-450, 
Hegel alters the meaning of the term somewhat, 'Synsomates (Synsomazien) are 
combinations of homogeneously animated matters. Consequently, their re-
action is either acidic or basic. They are to be distinguished from neutral matter 
401 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
in that (I) they are not demulceated, and have lost neither their taste nor their 
power to alter pigments, and (2) in that the relationship of their constituents de-
pends upon external influences such as temperature, water and the atmosphere, 
and is therefore variable. Each is grounded in the bond which tends to augment 
the material part of the substratum.' 
184, 2 
Hegel is here referring to the famous account of Archimedes' calculations 
given by Marcus Vitruvius Pollio (fl. 1st cent. B.C.) in his 'De Architectura', a 
work which was translated into German by A. Rode (2 vols. Leipzig, 1796): see 
M. H. Morgan's edition (Cambridge Mass. 1914) IX introd. 9-12. Hegel seems 
to have misinterpreted the story somewhat however, for the king did not 
supply the contractor with silver, 'Hiero, after gaining the royal power in 
Syracuse, resolved, as a consequence of his successful exploits, to place in a certain 
temple a golden crown which he had vowed to the immortal gods. He con-
tracted for its making at a fixed price and weighed out a precise amount of gold 
to the contractor. At the appointed time the latter delivered to the king's satis-
faction an exquisitely finished piece of handiwork, and it appeared that in weight 
the crown corresponded precisely to what the gold had weighed. 
But afterwards a charge was made that gold had been abstracted and an 
equivalent weight of silver had been added in the manufacture of the crown. 
Hiero ... requested ... Archimedes to consider the matter. He made two 
masses of the same weight as the crown, one of gold and the other of silver. 
After making them, he filled a large vessel with water to the very brim and 
dropped the mass of silver into it. As much water ran out as was equal in bulk 
to that of the silver sunk in the vessel. Then, taking out the mass, he poured 
back the lost quantity of water, using a pint measure, until it was level with the 
brim as it had been before. Thus he found the weight of the silver corresponding 
to a definite quantity of water. 
After this experiment, he likewise dropped the mass of gold into the full 
vessel and, on taking it out and measuring as before, found that not so much 
water was lost, but a smaller quantity: namely, as much less as a mass of gold 
lacks in bulk compared to a mass of silver of the same weight. Finally, filling 
the vessel again and dropping the crown itself into the same quantity of water, 
he found that more water ran over for the crown than for the mass of gold of the 
same weight. Hence, reasoning from the fact that more water was lost in the 
case of the crown than in that of the gold and made the theft of the contractor 
perfectly clear.' 
It was impossible therefore that Archimedes should have been unjust to the 
goldsmith. The crown should not have contained any alloy. 
To anyone familiar with the principle of Archimedes, the mere fact that the 
crown displaced a volume of water greater than that displaced by an equal 
weight of gold, would indicate the impurity of its content. Consequently, Hegel 
402 

NOTES 
is probably right in assuming that Archimedes determined the proportion of gold 
and silver in the crown. Vitruvius' account may not give an accurate description 
of the way in which he did this however. In his 'On floating bodies' ('Works' 
ed. Heath pp. 252-300), Archimedes deals with the principles of hydrostatics, 
and in the first book of this work formulates the following proposition (no. 7), 
'A solid heavier than a fluid will, if placed in it, descend to the bottom of the 
fluid, and the solid will, when weighed in the fluid, be lighter than its true 
weight by the weight of the fluid displaced'. It seems likely therefore that he 
found the proportion of gold and silver in the crown, not by measuring the 
displacement of the water, but by weighing the three bodies in water and noting 
the apparent loss of weight in each case. 
'Archimedes von Syrakus vorhandene Werke' (ed. E. Nizze, Stralsund, 1824): 
'Archimedis opera omnia' (ed. J. L. Heiberg, 3 vols. Leipzig, 1881-1913): 'The 
Works of Archimedes' (ed. T. 1. Heath, 2 vols. Cambridge, 1897-1912: Dover 
Publications, New York): J. T. Hjelmslev 'Uber Archimedes Grossenlehre' 
('Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. Matematiske-fysiske meddelelser' 
vol. 25 no. IS, 1950). 
184,9 
In Hegel's day 'amalgam' was taken to refer more exclusively to the mercurial 
alloys than is now the case. See the method of extracting silver described by 
A. and C. R. Aikin in 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. 
London, 1897) II pp. 309-310, 'Reduction by Amalgamation. This most ingenious 
method of working silver ores, was first practised by the Spaniards in South 
America, and has since been adopted with numerous and essential improvements, 
in Saxony, Bohemia, Hungary, and some other parts of Europe .... A sufficient 
quantity of roasted ore and mercury, in nearly equal proportions, is added, to 
bring the whole to the consistence of thin mud. The machinery is now put in 
motion, and is continued incessantly for from thirty to forty-eight hours, ac-
cording to the richness of the ore, at which period the amalgamation is com-
pleted.' C£ Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. 
Edinburgh, 1810) vol. I pp. 182-185. 
184,20 
Jean d' Arcet (1725-1801) was the son of a lawyer, and was disinherited by his 
father for deciding to study the natural sciences instead oflaw. In 1762 the faculty 
of medicine at Paris awarded him a doctorate for his thesis 'Ergo omnes humores 
corporis tum excremento tum recremento ex fermentatione producuntur' 
(paris, 1762). Despite his having qualified as a doctor he never practised as such. 
His interest turned to chemistry, and he studied for a while under G. F. Rouelle 
(1703-1770), who numbered many famous French chemists among his pupils, 
including Lavoisier. 
D'Arcet fought in Germany during the Seven Years' War, and spent his 
403 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
leave exploring the Harz. He subsequently became lecturer in chemistry at the 
College de France. His 'Memoire sur Ie diamant et quelques autres pierres pre-
cieuses' (paris, 1771) is notable in that it established that the stone may be de-
stroyed by fire. His son Jean-Pierre-Joseph d' Arcet (1777-1844) also became 
prominent as a chemist. 
The solder mentioned here by Hegel is described by d' Arcet in 'Experiences 
sur quelques alliages metalliques qui ont la propriete de se ramollir, et meme 
de fondre et de couler dans l' eau bouillante', which was first published in the 
'Journal de Medecine, Chirurgie, Pharmacie etc.' vol. XLIII pp. 552-56I (june, 
1775), and republished unaltered in 'Observations sur la Physique' Jan. 1777 
pp. 217-221. D' Arcet informs us that it was the researches of Newton which led 
him to investigate the properties of various combinations of bismuth, tin and 
lead. He describes fourteen different combinations of these metals, and notes 
the temperatures at which they melt. The combination mentioned by Hegel is 
number ten, 'Huit parties de bismuth, cinq parties de plomb, et trois parties, 
d'etain, forment un alliage qui fond avant que l'eau soit bouillant; etant place 
sur un support, il font I'instant d'apres que I'eau a commence a bouillir.J'ai fait 
deux livres a-la-fois de cet alliage; et, lorsqu'il est en grande masse, il coule aussi 
facilement qu' en petite'. 
M. J. J. Dize 'Precis historique sur la vie et les travaux de Jean d' Arcet' (Paris, 
1802). 
I84,30 
Hegel refers to this acid by its older name of ,sronig~jiiure/, although it was 
usually known either as ,sronig~ltJuHer' or ,ful+"letrld)te 6u15fiiuret. In the English 
terminology of the time it was known either as 'aqua regia' or as 'nitro-muriatic' 
acid. It was first mentioned by Isaac Hollandus (Dutch, late 16th), and was called 
Regia on account of its being the solvent for gold, the king of metals. 
See C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822) 'Observations sur l' eau regale et sur quelques 
affinites de l' acide marin' ('Histoire de l' Academie Royale des Sciences' 1785 
(1788) pp. 296--307): John Murray (d. 1820) 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. 
Edinburgh, 1819) vol. II pp. 477-478. 
186, 27 
Johann Bartholomaus Trommsdorff (I770-1837) came of a famous Erfurt 
family of chemists and apothecaries. He had an extensive practical training as an 
apothecary, which probably accounts for the comprehensively empirical nature 
of the numerous text-books he wrote. 
His main contribution to the scientific life of Germany was his introduction 
of the scientific method into the practice of pharmacy and his diffusion of 
chemical and pharmaceutical knowledge. In 1796 he founded a Chemico-
Physical-Pharmaceutical Institute at Erfurt, which functioned for thirty years 
and trained over 300 students, many of whom became prominent as 
404 

NOTES 
apothecaries, doctors, professors and manufacturers. He was professor of physics 
and chemistry at the university ofErfurt from 1795 until its dissolution in 1816, 
and after 1823 director of the Erfurt Academy of Sciences. He was offered Klap-
roth's chair at Berlin, but refused it as he could not bring himself to leave his 
home town. He also founded one of the earliest chemical factories, later de-
veloped by his son C. W. H. Trommsdorff (18u-1884), which concentrated 
upon the production of rare alkaloids such as morphine. 
In 1794 he started his famous 'Journal der Pharmacie fur Aertzte, Pharma-
ceuten und Chemiker' which he continued to edit until 1834, and which was 
then continued by J. Liebig (1803-1873). Hegel is here quoting his 'Systema-
tisches Handbuch der gesammten Chemie zur Erleichterung des Selbststudiums 
dieser Wissenschaft' (2nd ed. Erfurt, 1805-1820) vol. IV p. 235 § 2812 (Erfurt, 
1812). The first volumes of the first edition of this book appeared only a few 
years earlier (Gotha and Efurt, 1800-1807). 
C£ J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. III pp. 587-589 (London, 
1962). 
186, 35 
Louis Bernard Guyton de Morveau (1737-1816), the French chemist. He 
studied law at university, and first made his mark with a satirical poem on the 
Jesuits entitled 'Le Rat iconoclaste, ou Ie Jesuite croque' (1763). He began to 
interest himself in chemistry about 1764. An essay on chemical nomenclature 
which he published in the 'Journal de physique' (vol. 19 p. 370 May, 1782), was 
ultimately developed, with the aid of Lavoisier, Berthollet and Fourcroy, into 
the 'Methode d'une nomenclature chimique' published in 1787. The principles 
of this work were speedily adopted by chemists throughout Europe. 
He adopted revolutionary principles after 1789, and in 1791 was a member of 
the National Assembly in Paris. In 1794 he became professor of chemistry at 
the institution which was later to become the Paris Polytechnic. See J. R. Par-
tington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. III pp. 516-534 (London, 1962). 
Hegel is referring here to the article which Guyton wrote in conjunction 
with C. B. Desormes (1777-1862): see 'Essai sur l' analyse et la recomposition des 
deux alcalis fixes, et de quelques unes des terres reputees simples'. ('Memoires 
de I'Institut National' 1802 vol. III pp. 321-336). They claimed that natron 
(soda) consists of magnesia and hydrogen however, not talc and hydrogen. 
Valentin Rose (1762-1807) and C. J. B. Karsten (1782-1853) were unable to 
examine the validity of their statements concerning the composition of lime and 
soda on account of their not possessing a platinum crucible: see H. E. Roscoe 
and C. Schorlemmer 'Treatise on Chemistry' (6th ed. London, 1923) vol. ii 
p. 1453. Darracq, in 'Experiences concernant I'analyse et la synthese des alcalis 
et des terres' ('Annales de Chimie' XL pp. 171-195, 1801), c£ Tilloch's 'Philo-
sophical Magazine' vol. XI, 180! pp. 344-355, showed however that their con-
clusions regarding the composition of these substances were erroneous on 
405 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
account of their not having taken impurities into account, and on account of 
their having drawn wrong inferences from mistaken resemblances: see Thomas 
Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) 
vol. II pp. 32-33,41, 58. 
In his second Bakerian Lecture of November 19, 1807, Sir Humphry Davy 
(1778-1829) suggested that the alkaline earths might be metallic oxides, and 
that potash and soda were 'evidently' compounds: see 'On some new pheno-
mena of chemical changes produced by electricity, particularly the decompo-
sition of the fixed alkalies, and the exhibition of the new substances which 
constitute their bases' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1808 vol. 98 pp. 1-44). 
186,37 
Steffens 'Grundziige der philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' (Berlin, 1806) 
pp. 113-114, 
,~ie $f(an3en 3eigen im ftarren @egenia~e ~erbortretenben 
Sfo~lenftoff unb 3uriidgebriingten 6ticfftoff, im oetoeglidjen @egenia~e ~erbor~ 
tretenbe ~t)brogeniiation unb 3uriidgebriingte :tl!t)bation . . . ~ie ;t~iere 
3eigen im ftarren @egenia~e ~erbortretenben 6ticfftoff unb 3uriidgebriingten 
Sfo~lenftoff, im oetoeglidjen @egenia~e ~erbortretenbe :tl!t)bation unb 3uriid .. 
gebriingte ~t)brogeniiationl. See also his 'Beytrage zur innern Naturgeschichte 
der Erde' (pt. i Freiberg, 1801) p. 60 etc. 
187, 17 
G. E. Stahl (1660-1734), the founder of the 'phlogiston' theory, thought that 
phlogiston is expelled from a metal during 'calcination', and that the remaining 
'calx' is the base with which this phlogiston was formerly combined. An ob-
vious objection to this theory was that it failed to account for the necessity of 
the presence of air to metallic calcination. The fact that the metal increased in 
weight as the result of calcination also told against Stahl's hypothesis. 
Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743-1749), in his 'Sur la Calcination des Metaux 
dans les vaisseaux fermes, et sur la cause de l' augmentation de poids qu'ils 
acquirent pendant cette operation' ('Observations sur la Physique' 1774 vol. IV 
pp. 448-452) showed that Stahl's theory was untenable and prepared the way 
for the discovery of oxygen and of oxidation. See John Murray (d. 1820) 'A 
System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. 1lI p. 133 ff. 
187, 40 
This claim, that nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen and carbon are to be regarded 
as constituting the three moments of basic to all the chemical elements, obviously 
has to be interpreted in the same way as the claim made by Hegel in § 281. 
Hegel would have been better advised, if at this juncture he had attempted a 
critical reconstruction of the chemical atomic theory put forward by John Dalton 
(1766-1844). This theory evidently grew out of Dalton's consideration of the 
406 

NOTES 
speci}icgravities of gases: see 'Manchester Memoirs' 1805 i p. 244: 'A New System 
of Chemical Philosophy' (3 vols. Manchester, 1808, 1810, 1827). 
190,26 
Hegel shows here that he was aware of the need for a new system of chemical 
classification. It is curious that he should not have given more consideration to 
Dalton's atomic theory: see F . Wolff's translation of Dalton's work 'Ein neues 
System des chemischen Theiles der Naturwissenschaften' (2 vols. Berlin, 1812-
1813). In 1826 J. J. Berzelius (1779-1848) revised his theory of chemical propor-
tions and published it separately: see 'o-ber die Bestimmung der relativen Anzahl 
von einfacher Atomen in chemischen Verbindungen' ('Gilberts Annalen der 
Physik' 1826 vii pp. 397-416: 1826 viii pp. 177-190). 
J. L. G. Meinecke (1781-1823), 'Erlauterung zur chemischen Messkunst' 
pt. ii (Halle, 1817) pointed out that the numbers representing the chemical 
proportions of the elements are whole multiples of that of hydrogen. Hegel 
probably anticipated difficulties in showing the relationship between this theory 
and chemical process. 
192, 17 
Michelet notes, that 'In the first edition, galvanism forms the conclusion of 
electricity, 'Galvanism is the developed permanence of the electrical process. It 
has this permanence through the contact of two differentiated and unrigid 
bodies, which on account of their fluid nature, or the so-called conducting power 
of metals, immediately give determinate being to the whole of their differentia-
tion, and because of their solidity and the superficiality of this relation, preserve 
a state of tension between themselves. It is merely through this particular pecu-
liarity of bodies that the galvanic process assumes more concrete and corporeal 
nature, and so makes the transition to the chemical process'. In the Jean lectures 
on the contrary, it forms the transition from the chemical process to the organ-
ism, for Hegel placed it at the end of the chemical process, and called it 'the image 
of the organic process'. 
See 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' II (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 193 I) pp. 100-103: 
'Enzyklopadie ... und andere Schriften aus der Heidelberger Zeit' (ed. Glockner, 
Stuttgart, 1956) § 249 pp. 193-194. 
192,25 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817) Hegel added the following 
observation here, 'It is only an oxide which, on account of the inner undifferen-
tiation of its compact nature, approximates to the stage of metallicism as calx. 
The impotence of nature in holding fast to the determinate Notion also allows 
certain metals to pass so far into the opposition however, that their oxides even 
take the place of acids. As is well known, chemistry is now able to demonstrate 
the existence of a metallic base, not only in an alkali and natron and even 
407 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
ammonium, but also in strontian, barytes, and even in earths, at least in their 
amalgams, and so to recognize these bodies as oxides. What is more, the chemical 
elements are abstract bodies which are so constituted, that if they exhibit their dis-
tinctness in a gaseous form, they interpenetrate like light, for despite their ponder-
ability, their material impenetrability shows itself as elevated into immateriality. 
Oxygen and hydrogen have such a minimal determination dependent upon 
corporeal individuality however, that oxygen unites itself with bases in order 
to form oxides and alkalies as well as the opposing acids; in hydrothionic acid 
on the contrary, the acid determination shows itself as hydrogenation.' 
'Enzyklopadie ... und andere Schriften aus der Heidelberger Zeit' (ed. 
Glockner, Stuttgart, 1956) § 253 pp. 195-196. 
193,29 
Georg Friedrich PoW (1788-1849) was born at Stettin, and studied theology, 
philosophy, mathematics and the natural sciences at Halle and Frankfurt-on-
Oder. He regarded the ftrst two subjects as essential to any sound view of 
existence as a whole, and the last two as being basic to all forms of precise 
knowledge. It is not surprising therefore that Heinrich Steffens (1773-1845) 
should have interested him in Schellingianism, and that he should have found 
Hegelianism congenial. 
He taught in a Stettin Grammar School from 1810 until 1813, and after the 
War of Liberation took up a similar post in Berlin. In 1820 he was appointed 
professor of mathematics and physics at the Frederick William Grammar 
School in Berlin and began to attend Hegel's lectures at the University. 
His ftrst published work was concerned with improving the teaching of 
geometry and trigonometry: see 'Die Kugelflache als mathematisches Construc-
tionsfeld' (Berlin, 1819). Hegel's lectures probably inspired his 'Andeutungen 
fiber die Einheit der Natur und Geschichte' (Berlin, 1822) but, as Hegel notes, 
it was in the ftelds of magnetism, electricity and galvanism that he ftrst made his 
mark as a thoughtful research worker. He was in many ways a model Hegelian, 
for although his experimentation was carried out in a thoroughly 'empirical' 
manner, its results were referred back to an overall assessment of the fteld being 
investigated. 
Between 1821 and 1848 PoW published thirty three articles, most of them 
being concerned with magnetism, electricity and galvanism. The book men-
tioned here by Hegel is 'Der Process der galvanischen Kette' (Leipzig, 1826). 
In Hegel's lifetime PoW also published 'Der Elektromagnetismus theoretisch 
und practisch dargestellt' (Berlin, 1830), and two articles relating to this subject: 
see 'tiber den Zusammenhang des Magnetismus mit der Elektricitat und dem 
Chemismus' ('Gilberts Annalen' vol. 74, 1823): and 'tiber das polare Verhalten 
der Fliissigkeit in der galvanischen Kette' ('Poggendorfs Annalen' XVI, 1829). 
In 1826 the University of Erlangen awarded him a doctorate for this work, 
and in 1829 he became a professor at Berlin. In 1832 he was appointed professor 
408 

NOTES 
of physics at Breslau, and remained there for the rest of his life. In his later years 
his interest turned to astronomy: see 'Grundlegung der drei Keppler'schen 
Gesetze' (Breslau, 1845); 'Der Elektromagnetismus und die Bewegung der 
Himmelskorper' (Breslau, 1846): 'Ueber das Wesen der Elektricitat und 
Schwere' (Breslau, 1848). 
194, 15 
,roo aud) gan3 duf3edid)etroeife jene~ fiit fid) gtunbIoje, qeimHd)e ~utd) .. 
matfd)ieren bet @aje obet WColecule~ nad) iqtet gleid)namigen 6eite unmoglid) 
ift ;' 
194,22 
,in biefem fenjioeln WCebium'. This could mean 'in this visible medium', i.e. 
Hegel might be referring to the change of colour in the litmus. 
194,32 
J. B. Biot (1774-1862) 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). Hegel is 
quoting here from bk. III ch. xvi of this work, which is concerned with 'Effets 
chimiques de l' Appareil electromoteur' (vol. II pp. 505-514). 
Biot, who informs us that he is basing his remarks upon the researches of 
J. 1. Gay-Lussac (1778-1850) and 1. J. Thenard (1777-1857), attributes the dis-
covery of the decomposition of water by electricity to Carlisle and Nicholson. 
He then describes an experiment in which water is decomposed into two parts 
hydrogen to one part oxygen, and then converted into water again by an electric 
spark. He notices however that the quantities of gas given offin a given time vary 
in accordance with the chemical content of the water, and that concentrated 
saline solutions and mixtures of acid and water give off the gases most copiously 
and rapidly, whereas boiled and perfectly pure water hardly give off any gas 
at all. From this fact he draws the conclusion quoted here by Hegel. 
Hegel's objection to Biot's reasoning is that it is based on the assumption that 
Galvanic activity of this kind is not a distinct chemical process, but merely involves 
the transmission of electricity. 
See William Nicholson (1753-1815) 'Account of the new electrical or gal-
vanic apparatus of Sig. Alex Volta' ('Nicholson's Journal' 1808 iv pp. 179-187) 
and the other articles on this subject published in this volume: J. J. Berzelius 
(1779-1848) and W. Hisinger (1766-1852) 'Versuche fiber die Wirkung der 
elektrischen Saule auf Salze und auf einige von ihren Basen' ('Gehlen's Neues 
allgemeines Journal der Chemie' 1803 vol. I p. 1I5): Theod. von Grotthuss 
(1785-1822) 'Memoire sur la decomposition de l' eau et des corps, qu' elle tient 
en dissolution, a l' aide de l' electricite galvanique' (Rome, 1805) c£ 'Philosophical 
Magazine' 1806 XXV pp. 330-339: Ostwald's Klassiker, 1906 no. 152. Grot-
thuss put forward the theory, dominant throughout the nineteenth century, that 
the volataic pile is an electric magnet, each pair of plates having a positive pole. 
409 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) reproduced Grotthuss's theory without 
mentioning him (,Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807 vol. 97 pp. I-56) and Biot 
treated the matter in a fuller manner in his 'Precis Elementaire de Physique 
Experimentale' (3rd ed. Paris, 1824) vol. I p. 641. 
195,22 
Jons Jacob Berzelius (1779-1848), see the note ll. 432. Hegel is quoting 
his 'Essai sur la theorie des proportions chimiques et sur l'influence chimique de 
l' electricite, par J. J. Berzelius, ... traduit du suedois sous les yeaux de l' auteur, 
et publie par lui-meme' (paris, 1819). This essay first appeared in Berzelius's 
'Urbok i Kemien' pt. III (Stockholm, 1818) pp. 1-132 as 'Forsok till en theore-
tisk asigt af laran om de kemiska proportionema, samt af elektricitetens in-
flytelse sasom kemiskt agens': see esp. p. 62 f. K. A. Blode (1773-1820) published 
a German translation of it, based on the Swedish and French texts: 'Versuch 
iiber die Theorie der chemischen Proportionen' (Dresden, 1820): see pp. 79-81. 
The following is the full text of the passage referred to by Hegel (op. cit. 
pp. 72-74), 'Dans l' etat actuel de nos connaissances, l' explication la plus probable 
de la combustion et de l'ignition qui en est l' effet, est done: que dans toute com-
binaison chimique, il y a neutralisation des electricites opposees, et que cette neutralisation 
produit Ie feu de la m2me maniere qu' elle Ie produit dans les decharges de la bouteille 
electrique, de la pile electrique et du tonnerre, sans hre accompagnle dans ces demiers 
phenomenes, d'une combinaison chimique. 
11 s' eleve cependant ici une question qui ne peut etre resolue par aucun phe-
nomene analogue de la decharge electrique ordinaire. Apres que les corps se sont 
combines par l' effet d' une decharge electrochimique, et en produisant Ie phe-
nomene du feu, ils restent dans cette combinaison avec une force qui, comme 
nous l' avons dit, est superieure a. toutes celles qui peuvent produire une separation 
mecanique. Les phenomenes electriques ordinaires expliquent bien l' action des 
corps a. plus ou moins de distance, leur attraction avant runion, et Ie feu que 
cette union produit; mais ils ne nous eclairent pas sur la cause de l' union per-
manente des corps avec une si grande force, apres que l' etat d' opposition elec-
trique est detruit. Est-ce l' effet d' une force particuliere inherente aux atomes 
comme la polarisation electrique, ou est-ce une propriete de l' electricite qui 
n' est pas sensible dans les phenomenes ordinaires? Si l' on tente de decider cette 
question l' on trouve que, dans Ie premier cas, la permanence de la combinaison 
ne devrait pas etre soumise a. l'influence de l'electricite, et que, dans Ie second, Ie 
retablissement de la polarite electrique devrait detruire meme la plus forte com-
binaison chimique. Aussi savons-nous que la decharge de la batterie electrique 
surmonte l' affmite chimique et separe les corps combines, c' est-a.-dire qu' elle 
vainc ou annulle la force par laquelle les atomes, apres la decharge electro-
chimique, continuent a. etre unis. On peut, par exemple, au moyen d'une petite 
batterie electrique de 8 ou ro paires de disques d' argent et de zinc, grands comme 
une piece de 5 francs, decomposer la potasse, avec l'intermede du mercure; ce 
410 

NOTES 
qui fait voir que ce que no us appelons affmite de combinaison, affmite chimique, 
a une relation necessaire et inalterable avec les phenomenes electro-chimiques, 
quoique nous ne puissons pas l' expliquer par les phenomenes connus jusqu'a 
present des decharges de l' electricite produite par Ie frottement.' 
195, 38 
C£ Schelling's 'Benehmen des Obscurantismus gegen die Naturphilosophie' 
('Neue Zeitschrift fur speculative Physik' vol. I pt. i Tiibingen, 1802 pp. 161-
185). 
196, I 
See Schelling's 'Zeitschrift fur speculative Physik' vol. I Gena and Leipzig, 
1800). Hegel may have in mind §§ 6cHi2 of Schelling's 'Allgemeine Deduction 
des dynamischen Processes' (op. cit. II pp. 80-83). 
198, 18 
,bet (i;belfeit'. See A. and C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and 
Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 1807) vol. II p. 94, 'Much about the same time 
arose the chemical distinction of metals unalterable by exposure to the air at a 
fusing heat, and those which in the same circumstances were liable to be calcined. 
The former of these were called perfect or noble metals, and the latter imperfect 
or base metals.' 
199,4 
J. B. Trommsdorff (1770-1837) discusses the subject mentioned here by Hegel 
in §§ 2668, 2669 of his 'Systematisches Handbuch der gesammten Chemie' 
(1st ed. vol. IV pp. 117-119, Erfurt, 1803: 2nd ed. vol. IV pp. 119-121, Erfurt, 
1812). He could be referring to Goethe's acquaintance Christian Wilhelm 
Biittner (1716-1801): see the note II. 358. 
199, 9 
Schelling 'Neue Zeitschrift fiir speculative Physik' Ersten Bandes drittes 
Stiick (Tiibingen, 1802). Hegel is referring to Schelling's Article 'Die vier edlen 
Metalle' § VIII, ,'l)a ba9 ~efen obet bie Subftan~ an fid) unb abfolut ebel ift, 
fo fann ein ~efonbete9, ~58. 9RetaU nut in bem 9Raafle ebel ~eiflen, als e9 tlOlt 
bem ~efen in fein ~efonbete9 (a19 bie tyotm) aufnimmt'• 
199, 17 
See the note II. 309. In 1803 Smithson Tennant (1761-1815) began to work 
on the residue remaining when crude platinum is dissolved in aqua regia. This 
led to his discovery of osmium and iridium: see 'On two metals found in the 
black powder remaining after the solution of platina' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1804 vol. 94 pp. 411-418). Iridium was discovered independently by A. F. 
411 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Fourcroy (1755-1809), 1. N. Vauquelin (1763-1829) and H. V. Collet-Descotils 
(1773-1815) at almost the same time: see 'Annales de Chimie' 1803 vol. 48 
pp. 153, 177; 1804 vol. 49 pp. 188,219; 1804 vol. 50 p. 5. The French chemists 
at first confounded the two elements however and took them to be a single 
metal, which they called ptene. 
W. H. Wollaston's discovery of palladium was announced early in 1803: see 
R. W. T. Gunther 'Early Science in Cambridge' (Oxford, 1937) p. 234. In an 
article published in the 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' (1804 vol. 94 p. 419), Wollaston 
described the preparation of this metal from native platinum and also announced 
the discovery of rhodium. In 'Memoire sur l'iridium et sur l' osmium' ('Annales 
de Chemie' 1814 vol. 89 pp. 150, 225), Vauquelin described a method of sepa-
rating platinum, osmium, iridium, palladium and rhodium. For an excellent 
survey of contemporary knowledge of these metals see John Murray (d. 1820) 
'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. III pp. 218-265. Murray 
does not regard these discoveries as evidence that platinum has 'metallic mo-
ments', 'All these metals form but a small proportion of crude platina; and their 
discovery exhibits, in a striking point of view, the delicacy and accuracy of 
chemical analysis'. 
199,21 
See the note II. 280. Steffens first attempted to range metals into an order 
in his 'Ueber Mineralogie und das mineralogische Studium' (Altona, 1797) pp. 
135-143. Hegel evidently has in mind his extended treatment of the matter in 
his 'Beitrage zur innern Naturgeschichte der Erde' (pt. i, Freiberg, 1801) pp. 
101-176 (sect. iv). The doctrine of their density standing in inverse ratio to their 
cohesion is formulated more succinctly in Steffens' 'Grundztige der philoso-
phischen Naturwissenschaft' (Berlin, 1806) pp. 88-95. 
199,28 
Hegel probably has in mind the thesis 'Memoria sull Ellettricita animale' 
(Brugnatelli's 'Giornale di Fisica, Chimica, e Storia Naturale' vol. I Pavia, 1792) 
by Allessandro Volta (1745-1827): cf. 'Volta's Schriften tiber die thierische 
Elektricitat' (ed. Mayer, Prague, 1793): Volta's letters (Autumn 1792) to Ti-
berius Cavallo (1749-1809) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1793 vol. 83 pp. 10-44. In 
these publications Volta questioned Galvani's hypothesis of there being a dis-
tinct animal electricity. He showed that the effects observed by Galvani are due 
to 'the actions of a very weak artificial electricity which was excited in a way 
which would not be suspected, viz. simply by bringing together two coatings of 
different metals'. Cf. the experiments made with his electrical doubler by Abraham 
Benner (1750-1799), described in his 'New Experiments on Electricity' (Derby, 
1789) p. 75 ff. 
412 

NOTES 
199, 39 
L. Galvani (1737-1798), in 'De Viribus Electricitatis in Motu Musculari Com-
mentarius' ('Comment. Bonon.' VII 1791), see R. M. Green's translation 'Com-
mentary on the Effects of Electricity on Muscular Motion' (Cambridge, Mass., 
1953), supposes that the convulsion of the frog's legs when the muscles and 
nerves are simultaneously touched with an arc composed of two metals, is due 
to a peculiar kind of electricity possessed by the bodies of animals. He thinks 
that the motion is communicated through both nerve and muscle, positive 
electricity going to the nerve, while negative electricity goes to the muscle, 
and that the muscles represent the exterior and the nerves the interior of the 
Leyden jar, the discharge being similarly produced by the metal which com-
municates with both. 
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) in 'Sopra l'elletricita animale' (1792, 'Opere' 
1918 vol. i pp. 13,40, and addition p. 75), and]. C. I. A. Creve (1769-1863) in 
his 'Beitdige zu Galvanis Versuchen' (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1793) and an 
article in Gren's Journal der Physik' (1793 vol. vii pp. 323-331) disproved the 
Leyden jar theory by using two metals in producing the effects, proving that 
the action is only on the nerves, and showing that the same result follows if 
the bands are of two different metals brought into contact by a third metal. 
Volta freed the study of galvanism from biological factors. In his latter pub-
lications he reiterates his theory that the effects of the pile are due to contact of 
the metals ('Nicholson's Journal' 1802 i pp. 135-142), and it is probably correct 
that the seat of the electromotive force in the pile is ultimately at the contact 
of the two metals. Volta was wrong however in supposing that this contact is 
also the source of the current (Gren's 'Neues Journal der Physik' 1796 iii p. 479 f). 
Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) showed that the current is provided by the 
chemical action in the pile: see 'On the Relations of Electrical and Chemical 
Changes' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1826), 'there is no instance of continued 
electro-motion, except in cases where chemical changes can take place.' If Hegel's 
statement here is not actually based on Davy's researches, it is at least compatible 
with them. 
200,3 
]. W. Ritter (1776--1810) 'Das Elektrische System der Korper' (Leipzig, 1805), 
,Bu aHem bielem tJerltanb fief) tJon fdolt, baj3 ba5 metan, bie ~of)fe u.f.ItJ., 
ein lofcf)er 
~or.\)er ltJar, ber tJon ber ~fiij3igfeit angegtiffen ltJerben 
lonnte', (p. 48 cf. the list on p. 109). 
Hegel probably heard Ritter lecture on galvanism at Jena in the winter 
1803-1804, but he does not seem to have remembered his remarks with complete 
accuracy. See 'Dictate aus Vorlesungen tiber den Galvanismus', published in 
Ritter's 'Physisch-Chemische Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806), vol. III 
p. 269, ,Bugfeid) ld)Hej3en fid) an lie nod) mef)rere anbere ~or.\)er an, Me man 
413 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
nid)t gerabe3u WletaUe nennt, bie aber bod) eben Yo gute Beiter, toie fie, finb; 
al~ ~of)le, ffieiablet}, dne Wlenge )Berbinbungen ober )Berer3ungen ber WletaUe.1 
200,9 
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) wrote to F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798) describing 
this and similar experiments: see Gren's 'Neues Journal der Physik' 1796 vol. iii 
p. 479, 1797 vol. iv pp. 107, 473: c£ 'Philosophical Magazine' 1799 vol. iv 
pp. 59, 163, 309. See also Giovanni Aldini (1762-1834) 'Dissertation on Animal 
Electricity' (tr. R. B. Green, Cambridge, Mass. 1953) XXI, XXII. 
200, 10 
Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859): see his 'Versuche uber die gereizte 
Muskel-und Nervenfaser' (2 vols. Posen and Berlin, 1797) vol. I pp. 471-478. 
Humboldt corresponded with Dr. John Ash (1723-1798) of Trinity College 
Oxford on the subject. 
200, II 
Johann Salomo Christoph Schweigger (1779-1857) was the son of a professor 
of theology at Erlangen. He took his doctorate at Erlangen in 1800 with a thesis 
on a philosophical subject 'De Diomede Homeri'. His interests shifted to 
mathematics and the natural sciences however, and when he began to teach at 
his university, he lectured on these subjects. 
In 1803 he left Erlangen to teach mathematics and physics at a grammar 
school in Bayreuth. From 18n until 1816 he taught these subjects in a school 
at Nuremburg, so he must have known Hegel personally. In 1810 he began to 
edit his Journal fur Chemie und Physik' which was a continuation of A. F. 
Gehlen's Journal fur die Chemie Physik und Mineralogie'. This work broadened 
and deepened his knowledge of the natural sciences, and made him realize that 
reforms were needed in the way in which they were being taught. 
In 1816 he was appointed member of the Munich Academy. He then spent 
two years as professor of physics and chemistry at Erlangen before taking up a 
similar appointment at Halle in 1819, where he worked for the rest of his life. 
Most of Schweigger's writings are concerned with galvanism and electro-
magnetism. Hegel is referring here to his 'Galvanische Combinationen' which 
appeared in vol. vn pp. 537-578, vol. IX pp. 316-331 and pp. 701-706 of the 
Journal fur die Chemie, Physik und Mineralogie' edited by Adolph Ferdinand 
Gehlen (1775-1815). These researches are mentioned by P. F. Mottelay in his 
'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' (London, 1922) pp. 
412-414. Schweigger's object in performing the particular experiment men-
tioned by Hegel was to show that a mere difference in temperature can initiate 
electrical differentiation (op. cit. pp. 704-706). 
414 

NOTES 
200,28 
William Hyde Wollaston (1766-1828) was educated at Charterhouse and 
Caius College, Cambridge. He took the degrees of M.B. (1787) and M.D. 
(1793), and practised medicine at Bury St. Edmunds and later at London. When 
he failed to obtain a vacant physicianship at St. George's hospital however, he 
abandoned medicine and took to original research. 
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1793, and interim president 
on the death of Sir Joseph Banks in 1820. In 1812 he also became a member of 
the Geological Society of London. 
Most of his original work deals more or less directly with chemical subjects, 
but he also concerned himself with astronomy, acoustics, optics, mineralogy, 
botany, physiology and even art and fairy-rings. See George Wilson 'Religio 
Chemici' (London and Cambridge, 1862) p. 253: 'Nature' 1928 vol. 122 p. 970. 
Hegel is referring here to his 'Experiments on the chemical production and 
agency of electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1801 pp. 427-434) in which 
Wollaston shows that the oxidation of the metal is the primary cause of the 
electrical phenomena obtained in the voltaic pile. Cf. 'Gilberts Annalen der 
Physik' 1802 pp. I04-II3. 
200,30 
See the note II. 391. 
200, 39 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) §§183-189. 
201, II 
]. B. Trommsdorff(l77o-1837), in his 'Systematisches Handbuch der gesamm-
ten Chemie zur Erleichterung des Selbststudiums dieser Wissenschaft' (8 vols. 
Erfurt, 1805-1820), gives a 'Geschichte des Galvanismus ... besonders in 
chemischer Hinsicht' in volume five (Erfurt, 1808), and it is to this part of his 
book that Hegel is referring (vol. V p. 68). 
Trommsdorff is evidently summarizing the six papers published by Sir 
Humphry Davy (1778-1829) in 'Nicholson's Journal' in 1801-1802. In these 
papers, which constitute the earliest of Davy's published work on galvanism, 
the action of the pile is shown to be dependent upon the presence of oxygen. It 
is also stated that with solutions, the power of action, 'appears to be, in a great 
measure, proportional to the power 0f the conducting fluid substance between 
the double plates to oxydate the zinc'. The exact nature of this process was not 
clear to Davy however, 'the oxydation of the zinc in the pile, and the chemical 
changes connected with it are somehow the cause of the electrical effects it pro-
duces'. See 'The Collected Works of Sir Humphry Davy' (ed. J. Davy, 9 vols. 
London, 1839-40) vol. II pp. 139-181. 
Davy subsequently noticed however that electrification actually arises by 
415 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
contact and is sometimes more pronounced the greater the precautions taken to 
prevent chemical changes, and that very vigorous chemical changes can occur 
without the slightest development of electrification, and this led him to abandon 
the chemical theory of galvanism in favour of Volta's contact theory (note 
11.413): see 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807 vol. 97 p. 1: 'Collected Works' 
vol. V pp. 32,44,49 £ 
J. B. Biot (1774-1862) describes the experiment mentioned by Hegel in his 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols, Paris, 1816) vol. II pp. 528-529, and concludes from 
it that, 'Cette experience montre que l' appareil electromoteur a une action propre 
independante de la presence de l'oxigene; resultat conforme a ce qu'etablissaient 
les experiences fondamentales de Volta sur Ie contact des metaux isoles'. 
201,25 
Jan Swammerdam (1637-1685) noticed the muscular contraction of frog's legs 
by contact with copper and silver wires as early as 1678: see his 'Biblia naturae 
sive historia insectorum' (2 vols. ed. Boerhaave, Leyden 1737-1738, Germ. tr. 
Leipzig, 1752, Eng. tr. London, 1758). In the second volume of this work 
Swammerdam alludes to one of the many experiments he made before the 
Grand Duke of Tuscany in 1678, 'Let there be a cylindrical glass tube in the 
interior of which is placed a muscle, whence proceeds a nerve that has been en-
veloped in its course with a small silver wire, so as to give us the power of 
raising it without pressing it too much or wounding it. This wire is made to 
pass through a ring bored in the extremity of a small copper support and 
soldered to a sort of piston or partition; but the little silver wire is so arranged 
that on passing between the glass and the piston the nerve may be drawn by the 
hand and so touch the copper. The muscle is immediately seen to contract.' 
Luigi Galvani (1737-1798), professor of anatomy in Bologna, noticed that a 
frog's legs are convulsed when its thigh nerve is touched with an iron rod while 
at the same time a spark is drawn from an adjacent electrical machine, and that 
the same movement occurs when lightning strikes or thunder-clouds pass near 
a wire connected with the frog's legs, or when the muscles and nerves are simul-
taneously touched with an arc composed of two metals. See his 'De Viribus 
Electricitatis in Motu Musculari Commentarius' (Comment. Bonon. VII, 1791) 
R. M. Green has recently published an English translation of this work 'Com-
mentary on the Effects of Electricity on Muscular Motion' (Cambridge, Mass. 
1951). Galvani supposed the phenomenon to be due to 'animal electricity' iden-
tical with the 'vital spirits' coming the brain, but Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) 
proved that all the effects are due to common electricity (note II. 413). 
201,29 
Giovanni Aldini (1762-1834) was born at Bologna, and was a founder mem-
ber and one of the guiding spirits of the National Institute of Italy, a scientific 
416 

NOTES 
society whose declared object it was to combat the doctrines of Volta and defend 
those of Galvani. As Felice Fontana (1730-1805), Bassano Carminati (1750-
1830) and Gioachino Carradori (1758-1818) had already founded a society at 
Pavia with the object of furthering the doctrines of Volta and disproving those 
of Galvani, a lively but somewhat futile debate ensued. During the early 1790'S 
similar societies espousing the cause of Volta were formed throughout Europe, 
Tiberius Cavallo (1749-1809) leading the English one. See Cavallo's 'Compleat 
Treatise on Electricity. Supplementary volume' (London, 1795): Richard 
Fowler (1765-1863) 'Experiments and observations relative to the Influence 
lately discovered by Mr. Galvani' (London, 1793, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1796). 
Aldini was not only Galvani's nephew, but also his assistant for a period of 
fourteen years. He had considered taking holy orders, but fmally decided upon 
an academic career as a scientist. He took his doctorate in 1782, and in 1788 was 
appointed honorary professor at the university of Bologna. In 1803 he was 
appointed professor of experimental physics there in succession to Sebastiano 
Canterzani (1734-1819) under whom he had worked. He held this position until 
1807, and subsequently found employment as a town councillor in Milan. 
Aldini was an indefatigable investigator, and in that he was also a good 
linguist and had the knack of devising striking and memorable experiments, was 
highly successful as a popularizer of scientific matters. He visited Paris in 1802 
and London and Oxford in 1803, and performed various macabre experiments 
demonstrating the effects of 'animal electricity'. 
Hegel is referring here to his' Essai Theoriq ue et Experimental sur Ie Galvanisme' 
(2 vols. Paris, 1804). See vol. I pp. 53-55 of this work, 'Proposition XIII. Le gal-
vanisme parcout une chaine, soit metallique, soit animale, avec une rapidite 
analogue a celle du fluide electrique. XXXVIII Exp. Je disposai dans mon 
cabinet un ftl de fer de 250 pieds de long, de maniere qu'il ne se touchat nulle 
part. Les deux extremites de ce ftl venaient aboutir a la table preparee pour 
l'experience. J'en fts communiquer une a la base d'une pile de 50 plaques de 
cuivre et de zinc; et, prenant l'autre dans ma main gauche, je touchai de la 
droite Ie sommet de la pile.J'eprouvai Ie meme effet que sij'eusse touche la base 
de la pile avec la main qui tenait Ie ftl de fer. Aucun de ceux qui repeterent 
publiquement l'experience n'y sut distinguer de difference. Les 250 pieds de ce 
fd etaient done parcourus par Ie galvanisme dans un espace de temps inappre-
ciable.' 
The experiment with the mercury is described in vol. IT p. 143, 'Deux vases 
de verre sont places l'un au-dessus de l'autre; Ie superieur, qui est remply de 
mercure, res;oit la moelle epiniere d'une grenouille preparee a cet effect; Ie fond 
en est perce d'un trou, que l' on ouvre a volonte, et qui laisse couler Ie mercur, de 
maniere a toucher dans quelque point les muscles places au dessous. Quand on 
etablit cette communication, les muscles se contractent: cependent l' arc est de 
mercure, l'armature en est aussi; l'electricite est la meme dans tous les deux; 
donc on ne devrait attendre aucune de l' electricite exterieure. Ainsi vous 
o 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
observez une contraction dont on ne peut en chercher la cause dans l' electricite 
des metaux.' 
Many of Aldini's works appeared in English: see for example 'An account of 
the galvanic experiments performed by Pro£ J. Aldini on the body of a male-
factor lately executed at Newgate' (London 1803), 'General views on the appli-
cation of galvanism to medical purposes' (London, 1819). For a full account of 
them see W. Fulton and H. Cushing 'A bibliography of the Galvanic and Aldi-
ini writings on animal electricity' ('Annals of Science' 1936 I pp. 357-372). 
201, 32 
See the letter written by Luigi Galvani (1737-1798) to Bassano Carminati 
(1750-1830) on May 8, 1792, 'In fact his (Volta's) experiments will clearly 
demonstrate that the electric fluid can have muscular motions directly not only 
from the muscle to the nerve but starting from the nerve to the muscle, or be it 
from the brain to the muscle, and can occur not only through the means of the 
discharge, but again by means of a forced and impetuous overcharge of the 
supposed muscular phial: this being admitted, who does not see how happily 
successful is the explanation of voluntary muscular motions? 
To excite these, the mind needs only, from the brain where it resides, with its 
marvellous and incomprehensible power and command to determine a greater 
quantity of animal electric fluid, collected in the brain, through the nerve-con-
ductor to the muscle, or else perhaps to give a greater impulse to that which 
naturally exists in that muscle; the contractions then will occur no otherwise 
than they did with the most illustrious Signor Volta, when he added to the 
animal electricity of the nerve a little bit of artificial electricity and in conse-
quence increased the impulse and the action of that which was static on the 
internal surface of the muscular fibre, in a sort of inertia and of idle equilibrium.' 
See R. M. Green 'A Translation of Luigi Galvani's Commentary' etc. (Cam-
bridge, Mass, 1953) p. 92. 
201, 33 
Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859): see his 'Versuche iiber die Gereizte 
Muskel-und Nervenfaser' (2 vols. Posen and Berlin, 1797) vol. I pp. 78-79 'Of 
all the physical experiments I have hitherto had the pleasure of performing in the 
presence of other natural scientists, I have found none which, on account of its 
extreme delicacy, can cause so much astonishment as this coating by means of 
breathing. The circuit of dry metals, gold, zinc and gold, gives rise to no stimu-
lation. One breathes upon either the lower or upper surface of Z, and allows the 
gaseous water we exhale with carbonized nitrogen to cover this surface. The 
muscle will then be convulsively disturbed to the same extent as it would if the 
stimulator of the muscle were in contact with the damp or dry side of Z.' 
418 

NOTES 
202,6 
See the note II. 324. Cf. the first of the three letters which Volta wrote to 
F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798) during 1796: 'Lettera I, II, e III al Pro£ Gren d'Hala 
suI galvanismo' (Gren's 'NeuesJournal der Physik' 1796 iii p. 479), 'We see now 
wherein the whole secret, the whole magic of galvanism lies. It is nothing but 
artificial electricity set in motion by the contact of heterogeneous conductors'. 
(§ 54). 
202, 19 
C. H. Pfaff (1773-1852) and Martin van Marum (1750-1837) 'Account of 
some comparative experiments made with the Teylerian electrical apparatus' 
('Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' XII 1802 pp. 161-164): John George Child-
ren (1777-1852) 'An account of some experiments performed with a view to 
ascertain the most advantageous method of constructing Voltaic apparatus' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1809 pp. 32-38): Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) 
'Elements of Chemical Philosophy' (London, 1812) p. 152. 
202, 35 
J. B. Biot (1774-1862) 'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816) vol. II pp. 
436-437. Hegel has adapted this quotation somewhat, and made one unwarran-
ted alteration. Biot wrote 'par des fils tres-fins' not 'par des fils tressees' (twisted). 
Biot quotes Wollaston in translation but does not mention his source here. He is 
evidently referring to Wollaston's 'Experiments on the chemical production and 
agency of electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1810 pp. 427-434: 'Gilberts Anna-
len der Physik' 1802 vol. XI pp. 104-113). 
202, 36 
Johann Wilhelm Ritter (1776-1810): see the note II. 270. In February 1802 
Ritter constructed the first 'dry pile' in which instead of wet cardboard, sheep's 
leather, waxed cloth and thin glass plates were placed between the pairs of zinc 
and copper plates. When he removed all humidity from this apparatus however, 
it ceased to function. Ritter published his first account of these experiments in 
'Der Reichsanzeiger' 1802, no. 66 p. 813: cf. the review of them in the 'Intelli-
genzblatt der Allgemeinen Lit. Zeitung' Nov. 1803: Ritter's 'Physische-Chem-
ische Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806) vol. II p. 270. 
The usual form of the so-called 'dry pile' was evolved by J. A. Deluc 
(1727-1817), see 'Nicholson's Journal' 1810 vol. 26 p. 69 and Guiseppe Zam-
boni (1776-1846), see his 'Della pila elletrica a secco' (Verona, 1812), 'Annales de 
Physique' 1815 vol. 49 p. 35. George John Singer (1786-1817) constructed a dry 
pile of 20,000 zinc and silver pairs separated by paper; it charged Leyden jars but 
could not decompose salt solutions: see 'Nicholson's Journal' 1813 vol. 35 p. 
84: P. F. Mottelay 'Bibliographical History of Electricity and Magnetism' 
419 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(London. 1922) pp. 430-432: 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. VIII pp. 
II5-161 (Leipzig, 1836). 
203,20 
Cf. the notes II. 386 and 413. 
203, 25 
Richard Fowler (1765-1863) describes an experiment of this kind in his 
'Experiments and observations relative to the Influence lately discovered by Mr. 
Galvani and commonly called animal Electricity' (Edinburgh and London, 
1793, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1796). See also the experiments made by John Robinson 
(1739-1805) described at the end of Fowler's book, and Alexander Monro 
(1733-1817), 'Experiments on the nervous System' (Edinburgh, 1793 Germ. tr. 
Leipzig, 1796). 
204,24 
J. W. Ritter (1776-1810), 'Versuche zum Erweise, dass auch bey der gewohn-
lichen Electricitat, in chemischer Hinsicht, die positive die oxygenee, die 
negative die hydrogenee sey'. This paper was first printed in 'Gilberts Annalen 
der Physik' vol. IX pp. 1-17, and subsequently republished in Ritter's 'Physische-
Chemische Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806) vol. II pp. 126-141. 
Hegel evidently has the following passage in mind, ,llliM aUf bet 
negatitJen 6eite tJotgeljen toitb, toitb immet 3uIe~t fid) tebuciten auf 
~e~o!t)genation bet ~t)btogen, obet ffrqet ~t)btogenation; -
unb 
fo ift 
e~, oljne einen ftemben ~egriff bamit hU tJetoinben, tooljl etlauOi, 
in d)emifd)et ~infid)t bie 1JofititJe ~Iectticitat bie o!t)genee, bie nega~ 
ti tJ e ~Iectticitiit f)ingegen bie ljt)btogenee, 3U nennen in bet ~offnung, baa 
niemanb batan benfen toetbe jene ~rectticitat fut ()!t)gen fefoft, biefe ljingegen 
fut ~t)btogen feloft au£lgegeoen toiffen 3U toollen, toa~ in bet ~ebeutung, bie 
biefe 6toffe oi£lljet geljaot f)aoen unb nod) ljaoen, tooljl nie gefd)eljen batf 
unb fanni. 
204, 35 
Cf. the note II. 403. Thomson discusses mercuric amalgams of gold, plati-
num and silver (op. cit. I pp. 182-185). There is a much fuller discussion of the 
matter in A. and C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy' 
(2 vols. London, 1807) vol. II pp. 90-92. Cf. M. H. Klaproth and F. Wolff 
'Chemisches Worterbuch' vol. IV. pp. 191-196 (Berlin, 1809). 
204, 38 
This mineral was known as 'w olform' by the miners of the Erzgebirge as 
early as the sixteenth century. The name was Latinized as 'spuma lupi'. It was 
known as such because it hindered the smelting of the tin ores with which it 
420 

NOTES 
commonly occurs in Cornwall, Saxony and Bohemia, 'drawing the tin forth 
and devouring it, as the wolf does the sheep'. See A. Gotze 'Zeitschrift fur 
deutsche Philologie' 1929 vol. 54 p. 24 ff.: 'New English Dictionary on His-
torical Principles' (ed. Murray, Bradley, Craigie, Onions, Oxford 1888-1933). 
Wolfram was first shown to be a tungstate of iron and manganese by the 
Spanish chemists Fausto (1755-1832) and Juan Josef De Elhuyar, in 1783: see 
'Extractos de las Juntas generales de la Sociedad Vascongada' 1783 pp. 46-88; 
'A Chemical Analysis of Wolfram; and Examination of aNew Metal, which 
enters into its Composition. By Don Juan Joseph and Don Fausto de Luyart. 
Translated from the Spanish by Charles Cullen, Esq. To which is prefixed A 
Translation of Mr. Scheele's Analysis of the Tungsten, or Heavy Stone; With 
Mr. Bergmann's Supplemental Remarks' (London, 1785). C£ 'Journal of 
Chemical Education' 1934 vol. xi p. 413: 'Isis' 1935 vol. 23 p. 526: 'Lychnos' 
1959 p. 16I. 
204,40 
Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742-1786) in his 'Chemische Abhandlung von der 
Luft und dem Feuer' (Upsala and Leipzig, 1777, Eng. tr. Kirwan, London, 
1780) vol. I p. 196, IIp. 75 § 82 first showed that ammonia consists of nitrogen 
and hydrogen. C L. Berthollet (1748-1822) and his son confIrmed Scheele's 
analysis, and found that ammonia contained 18·87 hydrogen and 81·13 nitrogen 
'Analyse de l'acali volatil' ('Memoires de I'Academie Royale des Sciences' II 
June 1785 p. 316), 'Memoires de Physique et de Chimie de la Societe d'Arcueil' 
1809 vol. ii p. 268. William Austin (1754-1793) calculated that the ratio of the 
weights of nitrogen and hydrogen in ammonia is 121:32 ('Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' 1788 vol. 78 p. 379). 
As the true nature and composition of ammonia were well known by the 
close of the eighteenth century, Hegel's characterization of it might appear to be 
inexcusable. It is almost certainly based upon the paper 'On the Decomposi-
tion and Composition of the Fixed Alkalies', by Sir Humphry Davy (1778-
1829), which appeared in the 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' in 1808. At that time 
ammonia, potash and soda were taken to be the three alkalies. Davy's discovery 
that the last two were 'metallic oxides' led him to postulate a metallic base to 
ammonia, and to suspect that the gas might also contain oxygen. See the sym-
pathetic exposition of Davy's views by Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) in his 
'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II pp. 4-21: cf. W. 
Henry (1774-1836) 'Experiments on Ammonia' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1809 
p. 130): M. H. Klaproth and F. Wolff'Supplemente zu dem chemischen 
Worterbuche' vol. r pp. 73-112 (Berlin, 1816). 
205,20 
Michelet notes that in the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817), this 
paragraph read as follows, 'The compact undifferentiation of particularized 
42I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
corporeality stands opposed to physical brittleness, which is particularity held 
together in the unity of a selfhood. Ore exhibits this totality as the combina-
tion of sulphur and metal. This brittleness is the real nature of the possibility of 
being kindled; fire, as the actuality of self-consuming being-for-self is still 
external to it. It is by means of the air, the physical element of abstract negativity, 
that it mediates the inner differentiation of the combustible body with posited 
being or reality, and activates this body into acid. The air is however dirempted 
by this into oxygen, its negative principle, and into the defunct positive residue 
of nitrogen.' 
206,28 
In the manuscript (Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 93), Hegel mentions 
,ed)roefeIbatt)t', i.e. heavy spar (barium sulphate) as an example of this. See 
L. B. Guyton de Morveau (1737-1816) 'Observations mineralogiques et 
chymiques sur Ie spat pesant et sur la maniere d' en retirer Ie barote ou terre 
barotique' ('Nouveaux Memoires de l' Academie des Sciences, Arts et Belles 
Lettres de Dijon' 1782 vol. i pp. 159-175): J. A. C. Chaptal (1756-1832) 'Ele-
ments of Chemistry' (3 vols. tr. Nicholson, London, 1791) vol. II pp. 45, 203. 
206,29 
,1las etfte ~etbtennlid)e'. Hegel wrote ,'l)as eigent!id) mtennlid)e', i.e. 
'That which actually burns'. Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 93. 
206,38 
Jacob Joseph Winter! (1732-1809): see the note II. 399. Hegel is 
referring here to the 'System der dualistischen Chemie des Prof. Jacob 
Joseph Winterl' (2 vols. Berlin, 1807) by Johan Schuster (1777-1839). 
,ed)roefel. ~t ift eine eiiute, ba et Me fa15igen unb etbigen mafen, unb bie 
WCetaUe, feIbft ol)ne bie filt bie ilbtigen eiiuten bebingte m!affetfiiute 5U 
gebtaud)en, neuttalifiett; ba et betfd)iebenet @tabe bet eiiuetung fiil)ig ift. 
'l)et einfad)e ed)roefel ift eine in ~infid)t bet fa15igen mafen fd)road)e, in 
~infid)t bet WCetaUe ftade mafe, ba et fie ben meiften eiiuten entteiflt'. 
207,5 
The validity of Hegel's remarks at this juncture is difficult to assess. Lime, 
barytes and potash are certainly not 'nothing but oxides', for apart from their 
metallic bases, barytes and potash also contain sulphur and hydrogen. The terms 
'alkali' and 'earth' were always somewhat vague, and although they still were in 
general professional use at the beginning of the last century, chemists were not 
able to use them with any precision. For a very useful survey of the background 
to these remarks see Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 
vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II pp. I-III. 
422 

NOTES 
207,6 
A. 1. Lavoisier (1743-1794), in his 'Traite Elementaire de Chimie' (2 vols. 
Paris, 1789) pp. 176, 179 thought that, 'Oxygen is the bond of union between 
metals and acids, and this ... may lead us to suppose that all substances which 
have a great affmity for acids contain oxygen. It is thus quite probable that the 
four alkaline earths . . . contain oxygen, and that this is the bond which unites 
them with acids ... These substances may be nothing by oxidised metals, with 
which oxygen has more affmity than for carbon, and by this circumstance are 
irreducible. This is only a conjecture which later experiments alone can confirm 
or destroy.' 
Robert Kerr (1755-1813), in his translation of Lavoisier's work, 'Elements of 
Chemistry' (Edinburgh, 1796) p. 213, suggested that potash might be, 'a 
metallic substance in some hitherto unknown state of combination'. William 
Nicholson (1753-1815), in his 'Dictionary of Chemistry' (2 vols. London, 
1795) vol. I p. 105 suggested that, 'the alkalis may consist of certain substances 
combined with vital (oxygen) or perhaps with phlogisticated (nitrogen) air'. 
These books led Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) to his discovery of the 
alkali metals potassium and sodium in the October of 1807: see 'The Collected 
Works of Sir Humphry Davy' (ed. J. Davy, 9 vols. London, 1839-1840) vol. 
V p. 60, 'Although potash, perfectly dried by ignition, is a non-conductor, yet it 
is rendered a conductor, by a very slight addition of moisture, which does not 
perceptibly destroy its aggregation; and in this state it is readily fused and de-
composed by strong electrical powers. 
A small piece of pure potash, which had been exposed for a few seconds to 
the atmosphere, so as to give conducting power to the surface, was placed upon 
an insulated disc of platina, connected with the negative side of a battery of the 
power of 250 of 6 and 4, in a state of intense activity; and a platina wire, com-
municating with the positive side, was brought in contact with the upper sur-
face of the alkali. The whole apparatus was in the open atmosphere. Under 
these curcumstances a vivid action was soon observed to take place. The potash 
began to fuse at both its points of negative electrization. There was a violent 
effervescence at the upper surface; at the lower or negative surface, there was no 
liberation of elastic fluid; but small globules having a high metallic lustre, and 
being precisely similar in visible characters to quicksilver, appeared, some of 
which burnt with explosion and bright flame, as soon as they were formed, and 
others remained, and were merely tarnished, and finally covered with a white 
film which formed on their surfaces. These globules, numerous experiments 
soon showed to be the substance I was in search of, and a peculiar inflammable 
principle the basis of potash.' 
207,7 
See for example John Murray (d. 1820) 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. 
Edinburgh, 1819) vol. II p. 602, 'Besides existing in vegetables, (potash) is a 
423 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
principle in several of the animal fluids. It has also been discovered in the min-
eral kingdom as a constituent part of several fossils. Klaproth discovered it first 
in the leucite. Vauquelin found it in the lava in which that fossil is imbedded; 
Dr Kennedy detected it in pumice, and it has since been discovered in stones 
which cannot be suspected of volcanic origin, as in zeolite, feldspar. lepidolite. and 
others. Some of these contain 16 or 18 of potash in 100 parts.' 
207,21 
N. Lemery (1645-1715) describes the making of sulphuric acid in 'A Course 
of Chymistry' (tr. Harris, London, 1680) p. 214. The sulphur was burnt under 
a glass bell, and he notes that it was essential that the air should be allowed to 
enter. Joshua Ward (1685-1761) used the much same process as Lemery, but kept 
it a secret, and it was not until John Page published an account of it that it be-
came generally known: see 'Receipts ... made use of by the late Mr. Ward ... 
by John Page, Esq., to whom Mr Ward left his Book of Secrets' (London, 
1763). Ward made sulphuric acid using large glass globes of 40-50 gallons 
capacity containing a little water. A stoneware pot was put inside the globe, and 
on it rested a red-hot iron saucer, into which was put a mixture of sulphur and 
saltpetre, the neck of the globe being closed by a wooden stopper. The charge 
was repeated. 
During the early decades of the nineteenth century Tennant and Co., St. 
Rollox, Glasgow, were the largest manufacturers of sulphuric acid, making 
200,000 lb. of it a week. The chamber acid was concentrated by boiling in 
large cylindrical platinum stills. 
See A. and C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. 
London, 1807) vol. II pp. 368-371: J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' 
vol. III pp. 560-562 (London, 1962): L. F. Haber 'The Chemical Industry during 
the Nineteenth Century' (Oxford, 1958). 
207, 35 
A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809) found that the white oxide of arsenic has certain 
peculiar properties. He noticed that it has an acrid taste and is corrosive; that it is 
soluble in water, and that when it is dissolved in boiling water and this solution is 
then cooled, tetrahedral or octahedral crystals are deposited; and that it reddens 
litmus and combines with the alkalies. From this evidence he proposed that it 
should be considered as an acid rather than an oxide, and named it 'Arsenious 
Acid'. See John Murray (d. 1820) 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 
1820) vol. III p. 425: M. H. Klaproth and F. Wolff 'Chemisches Worterbuch' 
vol. I p. 158 (Berlin, 1807): J. B. Trommsdorff 'Systematisches Handbuch der 
gesammten Chemie' vol. IV p. 477 (Erfurt, 1812), ,'Ila~ bas wei~e :O~t)b bes 
2{tjenifs eine witUid)e Siiure ift, unb ale cine untJoUfommene Siiute 
bettad)tet Wetben mu~, f)aben wit ... gefef)en'. 
424 

NOTES 
208, 19 
'Carbonic acid is not acted upon by oxygen, nor is it altered by any of the 
simple combustibles, incombustibles, or metals. Charcoal indeed absorbs it, but 
it gives it out again unchanged'-Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of 
Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II p. 211. 
208,31 
Hegel is using outdated terminology here, 'The term caustic prefixed to the 
alkalies and earths to distinguish the pure or decarbonated state, is omitted on the 
modem nomenclature, being rendered unnecessary by the use of the term car-
bonate; thus to the terms caustic potash and mild potash are substituted those of 
potash and carbonate of potash respectively' -A. and C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of 
Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 1807) vol. I p. 273. 
Hegel probably has in mind the paper by W. H. Wollaston (1766-1828) 'On 
superacid and subacid Salts' (,Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1808). Wollaston discover-
ed that when crystallized carbonate of potash, or of soda, is exposed for a short 
time to a red heat, it passes into a subcarbonate, which yields, when decomposed 
by an acid, exactly half the quantity of carbon dioxide which the crystallized 
carbonate does. Wollaston applied the terms carbonate and bi-carbonate to these 
compounds. For the controversies surrounding this subject see C. L. Berthollet 
(1748-1822) 'Troisieme suite des recherches sur les lois de l'affmite' (Journal de 
Physique' 1807 vol. 64 pp. 168-187, 193-219). 
209, 12 
,6cf)ttJefelleber', i.e. Hepar sulphuris or Liver of Sulphur, was formed by 
heating two parts of potash and one of sulphur in a crucible until they melted 
and combined to form a brown substance, not unlike the liver of animals. 
'When sulphuret of potash is exposed to the air, or when it is moistened with 
water, its properties very soon change. It acquires a green colour, and exhales 
the odour of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. This change is due to the formation of a 
quantity of sulphured hydrogen, in consequence of the decomposition of the 
water. This new-formed substance combines with the sulphuret, and converts it 
into hydrogureted sulphuret of potash, which is soluble in water, and has a brownish 
-green colour ... Hydrogureted sulphuret is capable of oxidizing and dissolving 
almost all the metals.'-Thomas Thomson op. cit II p. 30. C£ A. F. Fourcroy 
(1755-1809) 'Systeme des Connaissances Chimiques' (II vols. Paris, 1801-
1802) vol. II p. 203: C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822) 'Observations sur l'hydrogene 
sulfure' ('Annales de Chimie' 1798 vol. 25 pp. 233-271): L. J. Proust (1754-
'r826) 'Sur les sulfures metalliques' ('Tilloch's Phil. Mag.' vol. 21, 1805 pp. 
208-213 Journal de Physique' vol. 59 pp. 260-265). 
209, 21 
Steffens 'Grundziige der philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' (Berlin, 1806) 
0* 
425 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
p. II 7, ,ilie gaUertartige 8ii~igfeit hei9t ben Ue'6etgang aus bem in fief) 
~etfd)loffenen bet telatitlen 
~o~iitenh bes o!t)birteften 
~o~lenftoffs hUt 
~Ugemein~eit bet ()t)btogenifation. ila~et Me ~ntfte~ung einet Q$aUert butd) 
~et'6inbung bes ~efels unb ~~onil! mit ~ali -
ba~et bas ~etid)toinben bes 
gaUertartigen 8uiammen~angs, je iit~erifd)et bie ,oele toetben/• 
209,22 
Johann Constantin Schuster (1777-1839) was born at Fiinfkirchen in Hungary 
and educated at the Grammar School there. In 1796 he went to the University 
of Pesth to study medicine, and took his degree in 1800 and his doctorate in 
1802. He then worked at the University as Winterl's assistant for two years. In 
1804 he visited a number of German universities and stayed for some time at 
Berlin. 
He returned to Pesth in 1806 and taught pharmacy, chemistry, mineralogy 
and metallurgy at the university until Winterl's death in 1809. He then taught 
botany and chemistry, being appointed professor in these subjects in 1811. After 
a separate chair for botany had been endowed in 1817, he concentrated upon his 
original disciplines of pharmacology and pathology. He also held various 
administrative posts at the university during these years. 
In 1829 he supervised the first thesis on pharmacy published in Hungarian, 
and for this service he was elected member of the Hungarian Academy in 1831. 
He first became widely known on account of his exposition ofWinterl's works 
on chemistry (note II. 399). He holds an important position in the history of 
Hungarian botany: see his 'Terminologia botanica' (Budae, 1808), A. Kanitz 
'Versuch einer Geschichte der ungarischen Botanik' (Halle, 1865) p. 135: but it 
is mainly as a doctor and writer on pharmacy that he will be remembered: see his 
translation ofP. Orfilas' 'Rettungsverfahren bei Vergiftung unddemScheintode' 
(Pesthe, 1819): 'Taxa medicamentorum pro Regno Hungariae' (Of en, 1824): 
'De opio', 'De iodo', 'De ferro' (Pesth, 1819, 1827, 1829): 'Kleiner chemischer 
Apparat' (Pesth 1830). 
He also showed an interest in local history and topography: see his 'Ge-
schichte der Stadt Pesth' (Pesth, 1829), his edition of the 'Hydrographia Hun-
gariae' (Pesth, 1829) by Paul Kitaibel (1757-1818), and his work on organizing 
and drawing up a catalogue for the Hungarian National Museum. 
Hegel is referring here to his 'System der dualistischen Chemie des Pro£ 
Jakob Joseph Winterl' (2 vols. Berlin, 1807): see vol. I pp. 129-130 ,ilie 
~launetbe fommt mit ben a'6ge~anbelten ~ottletn batin il'6etein, baa 
fie bie @liiuten a'6ftumtlft unb biejel'6en neuttalifirt, benn aud) fie qe'6t 
bie (figenfd)aften, bie 9Teafhion bet @liiuten aUf; il'6et fie a'6gehogene @lalhfiiute 
ge'f)t in einem minbet teagitenben (entfiiuerten) 8uftanbe ~ettlot; fie '6Ubet 
mit ben @liiuten ~euttalen, meift butd) ftiitfete 58afen gefiiUt. @lie tlet'6inbet 
fid) mit bet (iauet teagitenben) ~efeletbe (Waunetbe unb 
~iefe(auflofung 
426 

NOTES 
farren fid) beteint Darracq Ann. d. Ch. T.40) bie fie oft fo feft ~aft, baa fie i~t 
faum entnHen toetben fann. eie ift alfo eine >Bafe. 
mUein fie ift aud) in WUalien aufHiflid), unb toitb bataw butd) eauten 
gefaUet, (i. Waunetbe 3U (fube bet eaUten); fie teagitt a1fo aud) toie eine 
eaute/ 
C£ op. cit. pp. 415-417, where Schuster refers to C. L. Berthollet's 'Statique 
Chimique' (2 vols. Paris, 1803) vol. II p. 309 and T. Thomson's 'System der 
Chemie' (tr. Wolff, 5 vols. Berlin, 1805-1811) vol. I p. 668 in support of his 
views on this subject. 
The origin of the 'dualism' on which Winterl and Schuster based their theor-
izing is to be found in A. 1. Lavoisier (1743-1794) 'TraiteElementaire de Chimie' 
(2 vols. Paris, 1789: Eng. tr. R. Kerr 5th ed. Edinburgh, 180!: Germ. tr. S. F. 
Hermbstadt, 2 vols. Berlin and Stettin, 1803). In this work an acid was taken to 
be a combination of a radical and oxygen, a base to be a combination of a metal 
and oxygen, and a salt to be a combination of a base and an acid. The theory had 
a great influence upon Berzelius: see J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' 
vol. IV pp. 166-168 (London, 1964) 
209,25 
'Alumina has the property of combining, in the humid way, with the fixed 
alkalis. When any of its salts is decomposed by potash or soda, if an excess of 
alkali be added, the precipitate first formed is re-dissolved; a solution of the pure 
earth is also effected, when it is boiled in an alkaline solution ... This combina-
tion of alumina with an alkali is subverted, by the addition of an acid which 
saturates the alkali, and precipitates the earth'. John Murray (d. 1820) 'A System 
of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1820) vol. III p. 79. 
209,32 
See Schuster's 'System der dualistischen Chemie des Pro£ Jakob Joseph 
Winterl' (2 vol. Berlin, 1807) vol. I pp. 412-413, ,seieieletbe. eie ift eine 
eaute, 0'6g1eid) eine id)toad)e: 1. benn fie neuttalifitt bie >Bafen: fie betbinbet 
fid) mit seali obet inatton 5um ~J1aie obet 3Ut seiefe!feud)tigfeit; seieieletbe 
unb seaff fd)me!5en in gleid)et 9J1enge butd) ~eftige~ tyeuet 5um @;maiUe'. 
Cf. Richard Kirwan (1733-1812) 'Elements of Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 
1794-1796) vol. I pp. 56-73. Schuster had read this source. See also Thomas 
Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. 
II p. 100, 'There is a strong affmity between silica and fIxed alkalies ... When 
the potash exceeds the silica considerably, the compound is soluble in water, and 
constitutes what was formerly called liquor silicum and now sometimes silieated 
potash or soda. When the silica exceeds, the compound is transparent and colour-
less like rock crystal, and is neither acted on by water, air, nor (excepting one) 
by acids. This is the substance so well known under the name of glass.' 
427 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
209,33 
C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822) 'Essai de Statique Chimique' 2 vols. Paris, 
1803): see the note II. 385. 
210,7 
Until Berthollet suggested ('Statique Chimique' vol. I p. 69) that acids should 
be regarded as bodies capable of combining with alkalies and of neutralizing 
them, while at the same time they lose their acidity, there was no very satis-
factory defmition of an acid. Oxygen was often regarded as the acidifying prin-
ciple, but merely because it was known to exist as a component part in the 
greater number of acids. 
Henry Cavendish (173 1-18 IO), in his 'Three Papers containing experiments on 
factitious airs' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1766) took a metal to consist of its calx 
and 'phlogiston' and thought that when an acid is added to it, the calx and the 
acid form the salt while the 'phlogiston' is given off as inflammable air (hydro-
gen). 
A. L. Lavoisier (1743-1794), in his 'Memoire dans lequel on a pour objet de 
prouver que 1'Eau n' est point une substance simple' ('Memoires de l' Academie' 
1784 p. 468), taking the case of zinc dissolved in dilute sulphuric acid, was able 
to say that the metal takes oxygen from the water to form oxide of zinc, which 
dissolves in the acid to form a salt, the hydrogen of the water being set free. 
Hegel was evidently not satisfied with the criticism of this theory put forward 
by F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798) in his Journal der Physik' 1798 vol. viii p.14. 
210,23 
Jeremias Benjamin Richter (1762-1807) was born at Hirschberg in Silesia and 
served in the army as an engineer from 1778 until 1785. He then studied mathe-
matics at Konigsberg, and took his doctorate therein 1789 with a dissertation 'De 
usu matheseos in chymia', in which he already shows his interest in the idea that 
chemistry is a branch of applied mathematics. Kant had probably set him thinking 
along these lines. 
He failed to gain an academic position, and became a mining official at Bres-
lau in 1794. In 1798 he was appointed chemist to the royal porcelain factory at 
Berlin, and died in Berlin on April 4, 1807. 
Richter was one of the first chemists to determine the weight of the quantities 
in which acids saturate bases and bases acids, and to entertain the idea that those 
amounts of different bases which can saturate the same quantity of a particular 
acid are equivalent to each other. On the basis of these researches and ideas he 
attempted to trace a law according to which the quantities of different bases 
required to saturate a given acid form an arithmetical progression, and the 
quantities of acids saturating a given base form a geometrical progression. See 
'Anfangsgrilnde der Stochyometrie' (op. cit.) pt. I sect. ii p. vii. 
428 

NOTES 
The law mentioned here by Hegel is usually known as 'the law of neutrality', 
and is formulated as follows by Richter, 'When two neutral solutions are mixed, 
and decomposition follows, the new resulting products are almost without ex-
ception also neutral; the elements must, therefore have among themselves a 
certain ftxed ratio of mass'. See 'Anfangsgriinde der Stachiometrie oder Mess-
kunst chymischer Elemente' (3 vols. Breslau and Hirschberg, 1792-1794) pt. 
i pp, xx, xxii. In his 'Ueber die neuern Gegenstande der Chymie' (I I pts. Breslau 
and Hirschberg, 1791-1802) pt. 8 p. 82 f; pt. 9 pp. 10, 145; pt. I I p. 84. Richter 
also points out that when two metallic salts exchange acids and bases by double 
decomposition, the metal of one ftnds in the other exactly the quantity of oxygen 
necessary to keep it dissolved in the acid; i.e. that the quantitites of different 
metals necessary for the formation of neutral salts combine with identical weights 
of oxygen. 
Richter's work was generally known through Berzelius's 'Essai sur la Theorie 
des Proportions Chimiques' (Paris, 1819) and 'Lehrbuch der Chemie' (Dresden, 
1827) III, i, 17 f. Berzelius made the mistake of attributing it to C. F. Wenzel 
(1740-1793), and it was not until 1841 that G. H. Hess (1802-1850), professor of 
chemistry at St. Petersburg, corrected the error and so brought Richter to the 
notice of the non-specialist. C£ J. R. Partington 'A History of Chemistry' vol. 
III pp. 674-688 (London, 1962). 
210,27 
1. B. Guyton de Morveau (1737-1816): see the note II. 405. Hegel is here 
referring to the article on 'Affmite' which Guyton wrote for the 'Encyclo-
pedie Methodique' vol. I pt. i pp. 535-613 (1786). S. F. Hermbstadt (1760-
1833) translated it into German and added notes: 'Allgemeine theoretische und 
praktische Grundsatze der chemischen Affmitat oder Wahlanziehung' (Berlin, 
1794). C£ 'Nicholson's Journal' 1799 ii p. 340. Sir Humphry Davy (1778-
1829) in a paper read to the Royal Society in November 1810 ('Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' 181I vol. 101 pt. i p. 17) speaks of Richter and Guyton as the discoverers of 
the 'mutual decomposition of the neutral salts'. Cf. 'Gilberts Annalen der 
Physik' 181I vol. 39 p. 394: 'Chemiker Zeitung, Cathen' 1930 vol. 54 p. 1005. 
Guyton's initial consideration of the subject took the form of a criticism of the 
ftgures for the combining properties of acids and bases given by Richard Kir-
wan (1733-1812) in his 'Elements of Mineralogy' (London, 1784) pp. 181-207, 
406. He fmally arrived at the following generalizations (op. cit. pp. 598 f., 600), 
'I. A weak base takes more of the same acid than a strong base. 2. The quantities 
of bases necessary for the saturation of an acid in the direct ratio of their affini-
ties with this acid, or (what is the same) an acid takes more of a base for satura-
tion the greater the affinity it has for it. 3. The quantities of acids taken by the 
same base are in the ratio of the powers of the acids in the order of affmities or 
a base takes more of an acid according as it is stronger.' 
429 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
2II,20 
C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822) 'Essai de Statique Chimique' (2 vols. Paris, 
1803): see the German tr. by G. W. Bartoldy (ed. E. G. Fischer, 2 vols. Berlin, 
18n). In the introduction to this work (I p. 9), Berthollet observes that, 'Des que 
l' on a reconnu les proprietes generales auxquelles doivent aboutir tous les 
effets de l' action chimique, on s' est hate d' etablir, comme lois constantes et 
determinees, les conditions de l' affinite qui ont paru satisfaire a toutes les expli-
cations, et c' est dans la superficie que la science acquiest par la, que l' on fait 
principalement consister ses progres'. C£ the German edition p. n. 
212,23 
W. H. Wollaston (1766-1826), in his paper on equivalents, read to the Royal 
Society on November 4, 1813 ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 104 p. I) refers to 
Richter. In this paper he makes use of Dalton's (not, as he states Higgins's) 
theory of the atomic nature of chemical combination, but his exposition of the 
theoretical foundations for his 'equivalents' is not at all clear. Hegel may have 
known the account of Wollaston's work given by M. H. Klaproth and F. Wolff 
in 'Supplemente zu dem chemischen Worterbuche' vol. IV pp. 192-200 
(Berlin, 1819). Wollaston was not quite the first to introduce Richter's theories 
into England however, for Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) made mention of 
them in his 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1807) vol. III pp. 624-
624. 
212,24 
C. L. Berthollet (1748-1822), in his 'Essai de Statique Chimique' (2 vols. 
Paris, 1803) vol. I p. u6 f. gives an abstract of Richter's views taken from 'C. L. 
Berthollet tiber die Gesetze der Verwandtschaft' (Berlin, 1802), by E. G. Fischer 
(1754-1831), who taught physics and mathematics at a Berlin grammar school. 
He says that Richter's experiments on mixing solutions of neutral salts which 
form precipitates seemed, 'to lead necessarily to the consequence which I did 
not indicate in my researches, viz. that the different acids follow corresponding 
proportions with different alkaline bases to arrive at a neutral state of combina-
. , 
non. 
The obscurity of Richter' s style probably accounts in no small measure for the 
tardiness of his fellow chemists and countrymen in appreciating his views: see 
L. W. Gilbert's complaints in his 'Annalen der Physik' 18u vol. 39 pp. 361, 
394· 
212, 30 
Phrenology, the empirical system of psychology formulated by Franz Joseph 
Gall (1758-1828), was based upon five main principles: (i) the brainis the organ 
of the mind; (ii) the mental powers of man can be analysed into a definite num-
ber of independent faculties; (iii) these faculties are innate, and each has its seat in 
a definite region of the surface of the brain: (iv) the size of each such region is the 
measure of the degree to which the faculty seated in it forms a constituent 
430 

NOTES 
element in the character of the individual; (v) the correspondence between the 
outer surface of the skull and the contour of the brain-surface beneath is suffi-
ciently close to enable the observer to recognize the relative sizes of these several 
organs by the examination of the outer surface of the head. See Gall's' Anatomie 
et physiologie du systeme nerveux en general et du cerveaux en particulier' (4 
vols. Paris, 1810-1818). 
Gall's theories were based upon research he did in Vienna, where he took his 
doctorate in 1785, and where he lectured privately for some years. On Decem-
ber 24, 1801 he was forbidden to continue his lectures on the ground that they 
were detrimental to religion, and in March 1805 he left Vienna with his disciple 
J. C. Spurzheim (1776-1832) and toured Germany, lecturing on his doctrines: 
see 'Meine Reise durch Deutschland' (Erfurt, 1806). In January 1808 he settled in 
Paris as a Doctor. In 1821, when E. Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire (1772-18«) proposed 
him as a member of the Academy, he was unable to find a seconder. 
Gall's teachings enjoyed a tremendous vogue in Great Britain, and in 1832 
there were no less than twenty-nine British phrenological societies. The clergy 
were affected by the doctrines, and even Richard Whately (1787-1863), arch-
bishop of Dublin, took them seriously. See George Combe (1788-1858) 
'Essays on Phrenology' (Edinburgh, 1819), 'Elements of Phrenology' (Edin-
burgh, 1824), 'Systems of Phrenology' (Edinburgh, 1825), 'Phrenological 
Journal' (20 vols. Edinburgh, 1823-1847). 
August von Kotzebue (1761-1819) satirized phrenology in his comedy 'Die 
Organe des Gehirns' (Vienna, 1807): Eng. tr. by Capadose 'The Organs of the 
Brain' (London, 1838), and the teaching was also very cleverly parodied in 'The 
Craniad', a poem by Francis Jeffrey (1773-1850) and J. Gordon (Edinburgh, 
1817). Rather more serious refutations of it are to be found in J. F. Ackermann 
(1765-1815) 'Die Gall'sche Gehirnlehre widerlegt' (Heidelberg, 1806) and 
J. F. W. Himly 'Erorterung der Gall'schen Lehre' (Rudolstadt, 1807). For an 
attempt at a balanced assessment, see the lecture delivered to the Royal College 
of Surgeons in June 1821 by John Abernethy (1764-1831) 'Reflections on Gall 
and Spurzheim's 'System of Physiognomy and Phrenology' (London, 1821). 
212,32 
Jeremias Benjamin Richter (1762-1807): see the note II. 428. Hegel 
evidently has in mind his 'Anfangsgrunde der Stochyometrie oder Messkunst 
chymischer Elemente' (3 vols. Breslau and Hirschberg, 1792-1794). In the pre-
face to this work he says that he had often pondered on the extent to which 
chemistry was a branch of applied mathematics, especially on account of the 
common experience that two neutral salts when they mutually decompose each 
other, g~ve rise to further neutral compounds. From his subsequent investiga-
tions he concluded that, 'there must be definite ratios of magnitude between the 
constituents of the neutral salts'. 
This led him to define stoichiometry, 'Since the mathematical part of chemistry 
43 1 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is mosdy concerned with bodies which are undecomposable bodies or elements, 
and teaches how to determine the mass ratios between them, I have been able to 
fmd no shorter and more suitable name for this scientific discipline than Stochyo-
metry from O'TOtXE~OV, which in the Greek language means something which can-
not be divided further, and ftETPE~V which means to fmd out relative magnitudes'. 
213,4 
Hegel is here referring to the Prussian currency of his day. In 1750 this cur-
rency had been reformed under the direction of Johann Philipp Graumann 
(c. 1690-1762), and it remained substantially the same until the Austro-Prussian 
currency agreement of 1857. 
The Friedrichsdor, which was minted until about 1850, was the Prussian equi-
valent of the Spanish pistole. In 1740, when it first appeared, it had a gold con-
tent of 6.055 gr., which in 1770 was reduced to 6.032 gr. After 1786 it was 
known officially as a 'Friedrich-Wilhelmsdor', but it kept its original name in 
everyday speech. 
The taler was the approximate equivalent of the English crown piece. It first 
appeared at the end of the fifteenth century, and got its name from the Joachim-
stal silver mines, in Bohemia. The Prussian taler of 1750 has a silver content of 
16·704 gr. and was officially valued at five to a Friedrichsdor. This proved to be 
an overvaluation however, and in order to check the subsequent disappearance 
of the gold currency, it was revalued at 51 to a Friedrichsdor after the Seven 
Years' War. It was during the Napoleonic wars that the further adjustment of 
51 talers to the Friedrichsdor was made. There were twenty four groschen in a 
taler. 
See J. P. Graumann 'Gesammelte Briefe von dem Gelde' (Berlin, 1762), F. 
Schrotter 'Worterbuch der Miinzkunde' (Berlin and Leipzig, 1930). 
213, 10 
Jons Jacob Berzelius (1779-1848) the famous Swedish chemist. He was born 
in East Gothland and brought up by his stepfather. In 1793 he entered the gram-
mar school at Linkoping where the excellent teaching of C. F. Hornstedt 
awoke his interest in botany and entomology. He had originally planned to 
follow the family tradition and train for the church, but in 1796 he went up to 
Uppsala to read medicine. His means were so limited however that he was soon 
forced to leave the university. He found work as an apothecary at Vadstena, and 
it was there that he first became interested in chemistry through meeting an 
Italian who taught him how to blow glass and use various instruments. In 1798 
he won a small scholarship and in 1802 graduated M.D. with a thesis on the 
medical applications of galvanism. 
In Stockholm he worked with Wilhelm Hisinger (1766-1852) on the effect 
of an electric current on salt solutions and published his lectures on animal 
chemistry: 'Forelasningar i Djurkemien' (2 vols. Stockholm, 1806, 1808: Eng. 
432 

NOTES 
tr. Brunnmark, London, 1813, Germ. tr. Sigwart, Nuremberg, 1815). He was 
successively reader in chemistry at the Carlberg Military Academy (1806), 
professor of medicine and pharmacy at the Stockholm School of Surgery (1807), 
and professor at the Caroline Medico-Chirurgical Institute (1810-1832). In 
1808 he was elected member of the Swedish Academy of Sciences, of which he 
became permanent secretary in 1818. 
He made several journeys abroad and corresponded with many of the scien-
tists he met: see 'lac. Berzelius Bref' (ed. H. G. Soderbaum, 7 vols. Stockholm 
and Uppsala, 1912-1935). He visited Copenhagen in 1807 and met H. C. 
0rsted (1777-1851). In 1812 he visited London and was greatly impressed by the 
experimental lectures given at Guy's Hospital by A. J. G. Marcet (1770-1820). 
On this occasion he also became personally acquainted with Davy, Smithson 
Tennant (1761-1815), Wollaston and Thomas Young. He renewed many of 
these acquaintances when he visited London again in 18 I 8, but on this occasion 
his main objective was Paris, where he was well received by Berthollet, Gay-
Lussac, Thenard, Chaptal, Vauquelin, Chevreul and other French chemists. See 
'Kungliga Svenska Vetenskapsakademiens Arsbok for ar 1953' pp. 325-362. 
He met Goethe at Karlsbad in 1822, took part in scientific meetings at Berlin in 
1827 and 1828, and in 1830 met J. von Liebig (1803-1873) in Hamburg. See J. 
Carriere 'Berzelius und Liebig, ihre Briefe von 1831-1845' (Munich and Leip-
zig, 1892). Once the pan-Scandinavian scientific meetings had been organized, 
Berzelius supported them, and attended those held at Copenhagen in 1840 and 
1847, Stockholm in 1842 and Kristiania in 1844. 
After 1819 he did not enjoy good health, he tended to do less experimental 
work, and spent more time in backing up the ideas he had already put forward. 
Within Sweden his most prominent critic was Israel Hwasser (1790-1860), a 
Schellingian who had practised medicine in Germany during the 1813-1814 
campaign, and subsequently (1830) became professor of medicine at Uppsala: 
see 'Valda skrifter' (4 vols. ed. P. Hedenius, Stockholm, 1868-1870): U. 
Quesnel's article in 'Uppsala lakareforbundets forhandlingar' 1932. 
Berzelius's main works are his 'Larbok i Kemien' (3 vols. Stockholm, 1808-
1818) and 'Larbok i Organiska Kemien' (3 vols. Stockholm, 1827-1830), 
Numerous German translations and editions of them were published and they 
also appeared in French, Dutch, Italian and Spanish, but they were never trans-
lated into English. Some of his minor works were however: see 'An attempt to 
establish a pure scientific system of mineralogy' (tr. Black, London, 1814): 'The 
use of the blowpipe in chemical analysis' (tr. Children, London, 1822). Much of 
his work appeared in periodicals. 
Berzelius is important in the history of chemistry mainly for the following 
reasons: I. He was one of the first chemists to make use of chemical symbols. 2. 
He developed Dalton's atomic theory into the corpuscular theory, which is based 
on the assumption that bodies are aggregates of spherical atoms which in chemi-
cal combination neutralize those of their kind with opposite electric charges. 
433 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Berzelius notes that the weights found from volumes are the same as Dalton's 
atomic weights, but have the advantage of being based on facts and not on an 
hypothesis. 3. He formulated the electrochemical theory criticized by Hegel in 
§ 330 (note II. 410). He noticed that heat is given offin every chemical combina-
tion, and that bodies may be classed and graded as electropositive and electro-
negative, according to the charges they take up in contact with each other. He 
regarded electrolysis as being the exact reverse of chemical combination, and 
suggested that the electric charges lost on combination are restored to the two 
parts of the compound, which appear in the free state. For his final account of 
this theory see: 'Traite de Chimie' (tr. Esslinger and Hoefer, 6 vols. Paris, 
1845-1850) vol. i p. 105 £ 
Hegel is referring here to Berzelius's work on combining proportions, an English 
translation of which appeared as, 'An Attempt to determine the definite and 
simple proportions, in which the constituent Parts of Unorganic Substances are 
united with each other' ('Philosophical Magazine' vols. 41-43 1813-1814): cf. 
'Versuch die bestimmten und einfachen Verhaltnisse aufzufinden nach welchen 
die Bestandtheile der Unorganischen Natur mit einander verbunden sind' 
(Ostwald's Klassiker, 1892, no. 35). On the three oxides of tin see M. H. 
Klaproth and F. Wolff'Supplemente zu dem chemischen Worterbuche' vol. IV 
pp. 427-433 (Berlin, 1819). It was evidently Richter's 'Uber die neuern Gegen-
stande der Chemie' pt. VIII p. 82 £ (Breslau and Hirschberg, 1797) and to a lesser 
extent Dalton's 'A New System of Chemical Philosophy' (2 pts. Manchester, 
1808-1810) which encouraged Berzelius to make the attempt at working his 
researches out into a 'universal law' . 
See Arne Holmberg 'Bibliografi over J. J. Berzelius' (Stockholm and Uppsa-
la, 1933). 
213, 17 
John Dalton (1766-1844): see his 'A New System of Chemical Philosophy' 
(3 pts. Manchester, 1808, 1810, 1827). On the whole, the book was well received 
in Germany; F. Wolff (1765-1845) published a translation of the first two parts 
'Ein neues System des chemischen Theils der Naturwissenschaften' (2 vols. Ber-
lin, 1812-1813). 
Hegel evidently has in mind the following passages in this work (pt. i pp. 
141-4, 2II-20), 'All bodies of sensible magnitude, whether liquid or solid, are 
constituted of a vast number of extremely small particles, or atoms of matter 
bound together by a force of attraction, which is more or less powerful accord-
ing to the circumstances, and which as it endeavours to prevent their separation, 
is very properly called in that view, attraction of cohesion; but as it collects them 
from a dispersed state (as from steam into water) it is called, attraction of aggre-
gation, or more simply, affInity ... we may conclude that the ultimate particles of 
all homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike in weight, figure, etc.. .. every 
434 

NOTES 
particle of water is like every other particle of water; every particle of hydrogen 
is like every other particle of hydrogen etc .... 
'Repulsion . .. is now generally, and I think properly, ascribed to the agency of 
heat. An atmosphere of this subtile fluid constantly surrounds the atoms of all 
bodies, and prevents them from being drawn into actual contact .... 
It is the one great object of this work, to show the importance and advantage 
of ascertaining the relative weights of the ultimate particles, both of simple and 
compound bodies, the number of simple elementary particles which constitute one com-
pound particle, and the number of less compounds particles which enter into the for-
mation of one more compound particle'. 
213, 18 
See the note II. 410. 
213,19 
Johann Salomo Christoph Schweigger (1779-1857): see the note II. 414. 
Schweigger assumed the permanent polarization of atoms before Berzelius, but 
his views received little attention: see his 'Journal fur Chemie und Physik' 1812, 
v. 49; 1814, xiv, 497; 1823, ix, 231. 
213,24 
Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829): see his Bakerian Lecture of November 
20, 1806 'On some chemical agencies of electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1807 pp. I-56). Despite the war, Napoleon awarded Davy a prize of 3000 francs 
for this lecture. 
213, 34 
In the first edition of the 'Encylopaedia' (1817), Hegel added 'of oxides and 
acids, this also returns.' 
214, I 
In the second edition of the 'Encylopaedia' (1827), Hegel added, 'The pro-
duction of these processes presupposes a conditioning by the abstract agency of 
an acid, not a neutrality, working upon a neutral substance. This presupposition 
is rooted in the finite nature of the chemical process, the bodies of which are 
differentiated, and have at the same time an independent subsistence.' 
215, 25 
See notes, II, 256: 258: 264: 406. If Hegel had been content merely with 
distinguishing between the two meanings of the word 'element' he could have 
avoided making a controversy out of this issue. In that it is gaseous oxygen is of 
course to be distinguished from gold, silver and sulphur in that they are solids. 
However, in that both oxygen and gold etc. are simple bodies which had hitherto 
435 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
resisted analysis, the chemists of his day were perfectly justified in regarding 
them as 'elements'. 
215,40 
C£ Lavoisier's definition of an element as, 'the last point which analysis is 
capable of reaching' ('Traite Elementaire de Chimie' 2 vols. Paris, 1789 pre£ 
xvii, 192), 'Nous attachons au nom d'elemens ou de principes des corps l'idee 
du dernier terme auquel parvient l' analyse, toutes les substances que nous 
n'avons encore pu decomposer par aucun moyen, sont pour nous des elemens; 
... puisque nous n'avons aucun moyen de les separer, ils agissent a notre egard a 
la maniere des corps simples,· et nous ne devons les supposer composes qu' au 
moment OU l' experience et l' observation nous en auront fouIni la preuve.' 
M. H. Klaproth and Friedrich Wolff in their 'Chemisches Worterbuch' vol. 
I pp. 321-325 (Berlin, 1807) avoid the use of the word '~lemente' (see op. cit. 
II p. 58), and refer only to '\'8eftanbt~eile' (constituent parts). Cf. the excellent 
summary of the subject by Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) in his 'A System of 
Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. I pp. 626-631, 'As the term simple 
substance in chemistry means nothing more than a body whose component parts 
areunknown, it cannot be doubted that, as the science advances towards perfec-
tion, many of those bodies which we consider at present as simple will be de-
composed; and most probably a new set of simple bodies will come into view, 
of which we are at present ignorant. These may be decomposed in their turn, 
and new simple bodies discovered; till at last, when the science reaches the 
highest point of perfection, those really simple and elementary bodies will come 
into view, of which all substances are ultimately composed.' 
216,3 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added, 'such as the 
positing of phosphorous in oxygen.' 
216, II 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added, 'Conse-
quently, although these particular processes belong to the total process, they are 
traditionally called the wet and dry way, to which one has had to add the gal-
vanic way. Their relationship has to be grasped more determinately however. 
The superficial distinction between wet and dry contains nothing which might 
determine the nature of bodies, and as these processes are related to one another as 
a determinative progression and a return into the indeterminate, a multitude of 
these products is furnished in an external way by their relationship.' 
217, 13 
Lavoisier first demonstrated the composition of carbon dioxide: see 'Memoir-
es de l' Academie des Sciences de Paris' 1781 p. 448: c£ Smithson Tennant 
436 

NOTES 
(1761-1815) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 81, 1791 p. 182: G. Pearson (1751-
1828) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1792 p. 289. 
217,24 
This identification of fire with time is evidently inspired by Heraclitus: see 
Hegel's 'History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. I p. 287, 
'To Heraclitus the truth is to have grasped the essential being of nature, i.e. to 
have represented it as implicitly infinite, as process in itself; and consequently it 
is evident to us that Heraclitus could not say that the primary principle is air, 
water, or any such thing. They are not themselves process, but fire is process; 
and thus he maintains fire to be the elementary principle and this is the real form 
of the Heraclitean principle, the soul and substance of the nature-process. Fire is 
physical time, absolute unrest, absolute disintegration of existence, the passing 
away of the 'other', but also of itsel£' Cf. W. Pagel 'John Baptist van Helmont: 
De Tempore and the history of the biological concept of time' ('Isis' 1941-1942 
pp. 621-623). 
217,25 
Hegel is referring here not to ,5Sergna~'f)ta', i.e. the mineral oil obtained at 
that time from Monte Ciaro, near Piacenza, in Italy, and from Baku on the 
north-west shore of the Caspian, but to what British chemists knew as 'sulphuric 
ether', i.e. a mixture of alcohol and sulphuric acid. For a discussion of it as the 
base of organic 'oils' see Fourcroy and Vauquelin 'De l'action de l'acide sul-
furique sur les substances vegetales et animales' ('Annales de Chimie' 1797 
vol. xxiii pp. 186-215, 'Nicholson's Journal' 1797 voU pp. 385-394): T. Thom-
son (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II pp. 
440-455· 
For contemporary German views on the matter see Johann Friedrich August 
Gottling (1755-1809) 'Almanach oder Taschenbuch fur Scheidekiinstler und 
Apotheker' (Weimar, 1797) 66: cf. H. Kopp 'Geschichte der Chemie' (4 vols. 
Brunswick, 1843-7) vol. IV p. 284. Also S. F. Hermbstadt (1760-1833) 'Physi-
kalisch-chemische Versuche und Beobachtungen' (2 vols. Berlin, 1786-9) 
vol. I p. 162. 
217,28 
,~ a 11 er f to Hi aure, - Me@)a(5i au r e/. The true nature of hydrochloric acid 
(HCI) had not at that time been completely settled. The issue was complicated 
by Lavoisier's theory that oxygen is essential to an acid: see 'Memoires de 
l'Academie Royale' 1784 p. 468,1786 p. 530. Christoph Girtanner (1760-1800) 
in his popular text-book 'Anfangsgriinde der antiphlogistischen Chemie' (2nd 
ed. Berlin, 1795) p. 154 takes 'muriatic' acid to be a compound of hydrogen and 
oxygen.]. B. Van Mons (1765-1842) in 'Examen des faits ... sur la nature du 
437 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
radical de l' acide muriatique' ('Memoires de 1'Institut National' 1798 vol. i 
pp. 36-44) refuted this view, and attributed the production of hydrogen from 
muriatic acid to the decomposition of water. 
Sir Humphry Davy's discovery of chlorine in 1810 clarified the field: see 
'Researches on the Oxymuriatic Acid, its nature and combinations' ('Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1810 pp. 231-57) c£ 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1818 pp. 169-
17I. A. Avogadro (1776-1856) gives the correct formula for hydrochloric acid 
in his 'Essai d' une maniere de determiner les masses relatives des molecules 
elementaires des corps' (Journal de Physique' 18n vol. 73 pp. 58-76: Ostwald's 
Klassiker no. 8), but as late as 1828 John Murray (1798-1873) considered the 
matter to be controversial: see his edition of his father's' A System of Chemis-
try' (6th ed. Edinburgh, 1828) vol. II pp. 665-70 (appendix). 
217,35 
,mlutjiiute', i.e. Acidum sanguinis. This acid, which was evidently a thio-
cyanate, is only mentioned in a few of the text-books of the time. Hegel pro-
bably knew of it from the writings ofJ. J. Winterl (1732-1809) who refers to it 
in his 'Die Kunst, Blutlauge und mehrere zur Blutfarbe dienliche Materien im 
Grossen zu bereiten und soIche zur Blaufarberei anzuwenden' (Vienna, 1790): 
see also J. C. Schuster (1777-1839) 'System der dualistischen Chemie des Pro£ 
Jakob Joseph Winter1' (2 vols. Berlin, 1807) vol. I pp. 398-399, who says that it 
is to be obtained by slowly heating blood and potash in a sealed container with-
out bringing them to a red heat. According to Winterl alcohol forms a salt with 
the residue out of which muriatic acid precipitates blood acid in the form of a 
curdled cheese. 
Rink repeated Winterl's experiments and confirmed his conclusions 'Beitrag 
zu den Verhandlungen iiber Blausaure' ('Neues allgemeines Journal der Chemie' 
1804 II pp. 460-466), as also did C. F. Bucholz (1770-1818): see his edition of 
Gren's 'Grundriss der Chemie' (2 pts. Halle, 1796-7) vol. I p. 504; cf. the English 
translation of this work by Gruber, a pastor of the Austrian colony in London 
'Principles of Modern Chemistry' (2 vols. London, 1800). 
M. H. Klaproth and Friedrich Wolff in their 'Supplemente zu dem chemis-
chen Worterbuche' vol. I pp. 275-277 suggested that Winterl's acid mght be the 
same as the 'sulphuretted chyazic acid' discovered by Robert Porrett (1783-
1868): see Nicholson'sJournal 1810 vol. 25 p. 344, 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1814 
vol. 104 pp. 527-556. Berzelius took the matter up in 'Om sammansattningar af 
svafelhaltigen blasyra salter' ('Kungliga Svenska Vetenskaps Academiens Hand-
lingar' 1820 pp. 82-99: 'Schweigger'sJourna1' 1820 vol. 30 pp. 1-67), and refer-
red to Winter1's book (1790) and to Bucholz's 'Beitdige zur Erweiterung und 
Berichtigung der Chemie' (Erfurt, 1799) in the course of his argument. He 
rightly diagnosed the quantitative composition (HCNS) ofPorrett's discovery. 
Raymund de Vieussens (1641-1716) in his 'Deux dissertations ... La premiere 
touchant l' extraction du sel acide du sang' (Montpellier, 1698) cf. 'Epistola de 
438 

NOTES 
Sanguinis Humani, cum sale fum, spiritum acidum suggerente' (Leipzig, 1698) 
claimed to have discovered an acid in the four ounces of residue left from the 
evaporation of fifty pounds of blood, but in Hegel's day this was regarded as a 
putative discovery: see J. F. John (1782-1847) 'Handworterbuch der allge-
meinen Chemie' (4 vols. Leipzig and Altenburg, 1817-1819) vol. I pp. II5-
II6; J. F. Pierer (1767-1832) 'Anatomisch-physiologisches Realworterbuch' 
vol. I p. 887 (Leipzig and Altenburg, 1816). 
218, 19 
In a marginal note on this sentence Hegel writes CJenenser Realphilosophie' 
II p. 94): 'Clay (a) aspect of the process with sulphur, combustibility, (b) of the 
crystal, hardness uncrystallized, corundum, sapphire, very hard. Water does not 
become water of crystallization. Acid is not (produced), but (remains) for itself, 
intro-reflected.-Sapphire as clay-. The earths, processless, because abstract 
subjects, need an other, consequently they exhibit this determinate being of the 
process, but the result of each only has the form of something sublated, like 
metallicism; burning which does not become acetose.-(It is) rather inner dry 
discrete hardness, as the hardness of the crystal, like natural glass, absolute 
singular being-for-sel£ Process less damp heat with water does not give rise to 
chemical differentiation, but to greater external hardness.' 
Hegel seems to have in mind the fact that alum crystals are formed through the 
action of sulphuric acid upon alumina and potash. Sulphuric acid and pure 
alumina will not form alum: see T. Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chem-
istry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II pp. 670-676. 
Six kinds of jasper were distinguished at that time:-Egyptian, striped, por-
celain, common, agatine and marbled. Blue porcelain jasper from Toplitz was 
analysed by W. A. Lampadius (1772-1842), who found that it contained 33"5% 
silica, 58% alumina, 4% talc and 3% iron oxide see his 'Sammlung praktisch-
chemischer Abhandlungen und vermischter Bemerkungen' (3 vols. Dresden, 
1795-1800) vol. II p. 223, vol. III p. 246. 
It is probable that Hegel is merely saying that both alum and jasper contain a 
large percentage of alumina. He is certainly mistaken if he is attributing the for-
mation of procelain jasper to the action of sulphuric acid upon alumina. He may 
have had in mind the glazing of procelain, done by dipping the biscuit ware in a 
mixture of 60 parts litharge, 10 of clay, and 20 of ground flint, diffused in water 
to a creamy consistence, and then fusing it in a kiln at a moderate heat: see A. and 
C. R. Aikin 'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy' (2 vols. London, 
1807) vol. II pp. 243-247. 
218, 19 
,~iitte (strlftalHfation) tletbanft fie bem ~euet/. ('Jenenser Realphilosophie, 
II p. 94). Michelet altered the sentence somewhat. 
439 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
218,23 
Michelet's version of this sentence has been revised in the light of the original 
which is as follows: ,(3) :taU-obet 58 it t e t e t b e al!3 ®ubjeft be!3 ®al3e!3; 58ittetfeit 
be!3 WIeete!3,,®aI3 al!3 ®ubjeft, WIittel, @efc~macf, bet 3um iYeUet,))rin3i,)) 
getootben, e,eifenattig, eben bet ffiucfgang be!3 ineuttalen iw iYeUet,))rin3i,))/ 
Hegel has two marginal notes relating to the sentence: see 'Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II p. 94. 
219,4 
This assessment of the 'concrete elements' as a 'system of determinately dif-
ferentiated corporeality' should be compared with Hegel's exposition of the 
'elements' in §§ 281-285. 
219,8 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (18 I 7) Hegel added, 'It merely makes 
its appearance however, it does not become objective'. 
219, II 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817) Hegel added, 'immediate 
and contingent' before 'conditions'. 
219,23 
,eine!3 anfiinglid)en ®elbftbeftimmen!3.' The 1827 edition of the 'Encyclo-
paedia' had ,einet anfiinglid)en ®elbftbeftimmung', and the 1830 edition, 
probably on account of an oversight due to the alteration of the text, ,einem 
anfiinglid)en ®elbftbeftimmen.' 
220,5 
,ba!3 @an3e be!3 d)emi\d)en $toceffe!3 ent~iilt einetfeit!3 bie fefte 58eftimmt~eit, 
in bet }!Beife bet 3nhiffeten3 3U iet)n, unb auf bet anbetn ®eite ben :trieb, 
al!3 (futgegenfe~ung feinet in fid) 3U fet)n, toorin bann hie 58eftimmt~eit toegfiiUt.' 
220,22 
In the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1817) Hegel wrote, 'concrete 
universality' . 
220, 34 
,in biefem }!Bed)fel bet ~cciben3ien'. See, 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, 
Oxford, 1963) 150 (pp. 273-274): c£ Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' IV 1025 a 14. 
221,9 
In a marginal note ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II p. 93) Hegel comments upon 
this as follows, 'Instability in the relationships of the constituent parts, and 
further fixed points, as in the thermometric scale, character.' 
440 

NOTES 
221, 16 
On the oxides of copper see Richard Chenevix (1774-1830) 'An analysis of the 
red octahedral Copper Ore of Cornwall' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1801 pp. 
193-240), L. ]. Proust (1754-1826) 'Recherches sur Ie cuivre' ('Annales de 
Chimie' 1799 vol. 32 pp. 26-54) and].]. Berzelius (1779-1848) 'An attempt to 
determine Proportions ('Philosophical Magazine' 1813 vol. 41. p. 200). Cf 
Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) 'A System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 
1810) vol. I pp. 206-7, 'There are two oxides of copper at present known; and it 
does not appear that the metal is capable of being exhibited in combination with 
more than two doses of oxygen. The protoxide is found native of a red colour, 
but when formed artificially it is a fme orange; but the peroxide is black, though in 
combination it assumes various shades of blue, green, and brown.' 
222,24 
See the note II. 306. 
222, 28 
'Av1) ,pvX~ UOrPWTfLT1) Kat apiuT1)' (The dry soul is wisest and best). See I. 
Bywater 'Heracliti Ephesii Reliquiae' (Oxford, 1877) no. 74. For the various 
corruptions of this text see ]. Burnet 'Early Greek Philosophy' (London, 
1908) p. 152. For a recent discussion of Heraclitus's view of the soul see P. 
Wheelwright 'Heraclitus' (Princetown, 1959) ch. IV. Cf. the notes II. 226: 437. 
441 

INDEX TO TEXT VOL 2. 
absorption, 208, 218 
accident, 220 
accretion, 86 
achromaticism, 140, 142, 153 
acid, 124, 163, 177, 179, 190, 191, 208; 
activity, 104, HO; and alkali, 189, 190, 
194, 205, 2II, colour. 221, litmus. 159, 
neutrality, 218. oxidation, 210, 219, 221; 
atmosphere, 151; causticity, 39; classifi-
cation of, 217; concentrated. 186; fluidity. 
200; neutralized. 216; sulphur, 206; 
water, II8, 186; weak, 198 
acidity, 19. 182; affinity of, 212; property of. 
192 
activation, 185, 188.207,209,219; activated 
bodies, 182, 191 
activity, 85; acidic, 104, HO; and materiali-
ties, 190; aqueous, 193; artistic. 97; 
chemical, 188, 202, 203, 216, 219; electri-
cal, 202; galvanic, 169, 199, 200, 203; 
igneous, 205, 221; linear, III; magnetic, 
107, III; mechanical, 174; mechanizing, 
168; 
Notional, 
III; physical, 
168; 
spiritual, 28, 222 
acumination (crystalline), 114 
aUhesion, 63 
aerolite, 50, 52. 53 
affinity, 210 
agent, 214, 221 
aggregation, 17. II6, 213 
Aigle,53 
air: and acid, 208, metal, 186, 204, metal-
loid, 193, odour, 162, quicksilver, 198, 
sound, 70, 72. 73; as conductor, 172, gas, 
217, mediator, 207; atmospheric, 187, 
201,202; destructiveness of, 161; dry, 46, 
172, 186; element of, 35, 44, H7, 123, 
185, 207, 215; humid, 186, 208; nega-
tivity of, 39; neutrality of, 204; pressure, 
49; pump, 201 
alcohol, 183 
Aldini, G., 201 
Alix,}. A. F., 16, 47 
alkali, 218; and absorption, 208, acid, 182, 
189, 194, 195, 207, 208, 209, 210, 2II, 
causticity, 205, 207, 208, colour, 159, 
earths, 209, metal, 190, 208, oxidation, 
207, 209; as whole body, 179; classifica-
tion, 217; grading, 210-11 
alloy, 183 
alum, 132; earth, 209 
alumina, 124,209,218 
amalgam, 53, 183, 184, 197,204, 209 
amber, 171 
America, 51, 83 
ammonia, 204 
analogy, IS, 16,42, 75, 145,209 
Ancients (the), 26,35,45,76 
angle, 65, 97, 98; of refraction, 132 
anhydrous, 209 
animal, 29, 51, 177, 186; acids, 217; colours, 
83; constituents, 34; electricity, 201; 
forms, 37; fluids, 35; life, 187; oils, 217; 
reproduction, 195; substances, 172, 214 
animation, 29, 33, 51, 52, 108, 179, 219 
antimony, 219 
antinomy, 67 
antithesis, 26, 50, 61,87,109,157,198,205, 
218 
aqua fortis, 217 
aqua regia, 184 
archetypal: crystal, 123; phenomenon, 148, 
149,154, ISS, 193 
Archimedes, 183, 184 
architecture, 75 
Aristotle, 32,45 
arithmetic, 77, 209; arithmetical progression, 
78 
armature, 201 
arsenic, 219; acid, 207; oxide, 207 
art, 97; artist, 146 
Asia, 51 
astral powers, 3 I 
astronomy, 18,26, 30 
atmosphere: air of, 187, 201, 202; and 
barometer, 60, blue of sky, 152, comet, 28, 
28, heat, 91, magnetism, 104, refraction, 
20; caloric, 213; Earth's, 49, 91; electric, 
442 

INDEX TO TEXT 
151; formation of, 151, 162; gas of, 187; 
inter-stellar, 20; lunar, 26; planetary, 27; 
pressure of, 98; stimulation of, 104 
atom, 66, 67, 213; metaphysical, 213 
attraction, 61, 108, III, II3, 168; force of, 
49 
aurora borealis, 52 
axis, 48, 103,105, 180; rotation of, 16, 30 
azurite, 22 I 
Baffm's Bay, 53 
balance, 58 
balances, 19 
balloon ascent, 16 
barometer, 49, 51, 59, 60 
barytes, 204, 207, 209 
base, 124, 161, 186, 197,204, 209, 210, 212, 
216,217 
battery; electric, 197; galvanic, 210, 203 
Bayreuth, 104 
beauty (line of), 98 
bell,7I,88 
Berlin: Academy, 45, University, 143, 
Yearbooks, 173 
Berthollet, C. L., 168,209, 2II, 212 
Berzelius,].]., 195, 196, 197, 213 
Biot, ]. B., 37, 73, 80, 132, 135, 141, 147, 
171,194,201,202 
bird, 51; shape, 98: song, 83, 84 
bismuth, II6, 184 
bitterness, 218 
bitumen, 206 
black, 173; composition, 144; of sky, 149 
bleach, II8 
blood acid, 217 
blue: copper sulphate, 221; of sky, 143, 152, 
153 
Bode,]. E., 29 
Boehme,]., 32, II7 
bones, 73 
borax, 124 
Boston, 59 
brass, 184 
Brazil, 53, 83 
brightness, 139 
brittleness, 27, 63, 65, 221; and combusti-
bility, 206, shape, 99, 100, 123, 141; of 
bitumen, 206, glass, 65. 105, 135, ISS, 
iron and steel, 65, 104, metals, 198, 
na,phtha. 206. resin. 198, silica, 218, 
443 
sulphur, 198, 206; mechanical, 161; 
resonance of, 82 
bronze, 73 
Brugmans, A. (not Brugmann); 105 
bubble, 41, 177 
burning, 202; glass, 85 
butterfly, 145 
Caesar, 20 
calcareous substance, 218 
calculus (differential), 141 
caloric, 86, 89, 213, 216 
calx, 161, 193, 198; calcined iron, 104, 
quicksilver, 199 
candlelight, 143, 144 
cannon, 85; cannonade, 73 
capillary tube, 63 
carbon, 185, 187, 190, 2I5 
carbonic acid, 124, 207, 208, 216, 217; gas, 
217 
carboniferous seam, 52 
cardboard, 201 
Carlsruhe, 60 
Cassel, 16 
category, 17, 23, 43, 58, 84, 85, 88, 133, 
136, 154, 215 
Catherine the Great, 90 
catskin, 172,200 
caustic, 39, 193, 210; alkali, 205. 207 208; 
condition, 207; potash, 189 
centre, 16, 25, 28, 40, 55, 60, 68, 103; 
centrality, 42, 59, 100, 142, 
centrifugal force, 106 
centripetal force, 106 
chaos, 142 
charcoal, 198, 199 
chemical: action, 202; actlvIty, 188, 202. 
203, 216, 219; analysis, 35; change, 198; 
combustion, 161; compounds, 197; ele-
ments, 185, 186, 187, 196,207, 215, 217-
219; form, 213; kitchens, 170; moments, 
185; opposition, 205, 210, 213; process, 
16,31, 88, 95, 121, 162, 163, 164, 173, 174, 
177, 178, 188, 189, 205, 216, 219, 222; 
relationship, 169; substances, II6. 215 
chemism, 106, 109, 175,180, 181,194 
chemistry, 34, 136 
Chinese, 102 
Chladni, E. F., 73. 74 
chromatic difference, 159 
circle, 144 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
circuit (galvanic) 109, 193, 199; Erman's 
rotation, llO 
cirrus (clouds), 52 
citric acid, 217 
classification, 188, 190, 214 
climate, 47, 83, 84 
cloud, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 170 
coagulation, 156, 158 
cobalt, 103, 184 
cobweb,169 
coffee, 90 
coherence, 64, 82, 85 
cohesion, 57, 61, 62, 69, 74, 81, 84, 85, 87, 
88, 89, 92. II4, 118, 130, 137, 156, 166, 
169,183,184,199,211,220 
coincidence. 23 
cold,48, 85,88,89, 152 
collision, 68, 170 
Cologne pipes, 73 
colour, 22, 23, 51, 118, 119, 135-160, 163, 
220; and chemical process, 179, elec-
tricity, 168, 173, heat, 83, light, 122, 
magnetism, 174, metal, 184, 218, 221; 
matter of, 136; of animals and birds, 83; 
rings, 155; shadows, 143; square, 139; 
subjectivity of, 122 
column (of air), 73 
combination, 183, 184, 190, 191, 196, 200, 
212, 214,216,218, 219 
combustion, 15,90,117,118,162,189,202; 
combustibility, 27, 130, 161, 163, 171, 
187,205,207,217 
comet. 26. 27. 28. 3 1,48. 123; Halley·s. 28 
comma (musical). 78 
commonsense. 32. 43 
compactness. 157, 158. 187. 192. 198,218 
compass, 102. 104 
complementary colours. 153 
composition. 139. 142, 187. 215 
compound. 190 
compressibility, 41. 68 
concentration: of light, 25; of acid. 186 
conduction: and galvanism. 210; of elec-
tricity. 170. 171, 175. 194; of heat. 84, 
86; wet and dry. 192,202 
consistence. 63 
constructive force, 97 
contact. 171. 176, 186, 199, 200, 204 
contiguity, 185, 198 
continuity, 67, 71, 85, 104, 218 
contraction, 68, 125 
convergence, 108 
copper, 31,64,65,73,184,199; bowls, 200; 
salts, 221 
corolla, 173 
corpuscle, 20, 141 
corrosion, 36, 98, 207 
cosmic: causes 60; forces, 33 
courtier, 29 
crystal, 112-116; and light, 123, 171; 
densities, 133; dissolution, 90; form, 97, 
117,170; indifference of, 164; mechanical 
composition of, 96; of the Earth, 27,103, 
II 3; of the Moon, 28; reticulation, 96; 
transparency, 121, 123, 133, 135, 156. 
170; water, 43, 46. 47.163 
crystalline: connectedness, 218; lens. 152 
crystallization, 27. 28, 34. 103. 135. 211; of 
alumina, 218; form, 97; heat. 88 
crystallography, 115, ll6 
crucible. 2 I 3 
cube, 103. 134 
culmination points, 105, 169 
cumulus cloud, 52 
currency (Prussian), 212-213 
current: electric 173; magnetic. 103 
curve. 97, 108 
customs officer, 44 
cylinder, 175 
Dalton. J., 213 
D' Arcet. J., 184 
darkening, 135. 155 
darkness, 14, 21. 22. 25, 117, 137, 139, 142. 
148.156 
Davy. H .• 210. 213 
daylight. 143 
deal, 73 
death. 159, 214 
declination (of magnetic needle), 103 
decoction. 149, 159 
decomposition, 36. 160. 163, 193. 198. 200. 
202.216 
dehydration. 46 
Deluc, J. A. 45, 50 
demagnetization. 105 
density. 57, 59, 61. 68. 69, 125. 126, 132. 
133. 135. 159,184 
Descartes, R., 131 
deuteroxide (of tin), 213 
deviation, 109, 151, 172 
dew, 49 
dialectic. 66, 67, 222 
444 

INDEX TO TEXT 
diamond. II5. 123. 133 
dicotyledon, 32 
diffusion: of heat; 84; of things. 170 
dimension. 63. 65 
dimming. 138. 143. 148. ISO 
discharge (electric). I6S. 196. 202. 2II 
disharmony, 74 
disoxidation. 173 
displacement. 172 
disposition (magnetic). ISO 
dissolution, 40, 43. 50, S2. 90. 91. 92, 120. 
165,166,197.200 
divergence. !OS. 144 
diverse refrangibility. 145 
double image. 126. 150. 151 
double refraction. 133. 141 
dry conductor. 192, 202 
ductility. 63, 65. 198 
dynamic physics. 5S 
ear. 73. 76. 77, 78, 79. 80 
earth (element). 41. 123.218; cf. 'earthy' 
Earth (planet), 27. 29, 30. 33,42.48. 51, 53. 
54. 59, 60. 122. 179. ISO. 181; crystal of, 
27. 103. II3; magnetic axis. 103; magne-
tism, 99; rotation. 106 
earthenware, 73 
earthquake. 50 
earths, 104. 124. IS4. 193. 204. 205, 208. 
209.214.127.218 
earthy: acids. 217; bases. 206. 217; element. 
218; fire. 2IS; fracture. 104; metal. 104; 
principle.2IS 
eating utensil. 162 
eclipse (solar). IS2 
ecliptic (inclination to). 105 
ego. 13. 31. lI9 
elasticity, 46. 66. 67. 6S. 83; elastic fluids. S9 
elective affinity, 210-213 
electric: atmosphere. 151; battery. 197; 
chimes. 174; currents. 173; discharge. 
168. 196. 202. 2lI; field. 175; fluid. 173; 
force. 166. 176. 196; light, 165. 166. 167. 
169. 170. 171; matter. 169; opposition. 
173; rain. 174; shock. 167. 16S; tension, 
165.166.167.168.170.175 
electrical: activity. 202; 
differentiation. 
171; figuration. 169; opposition. 173; 
machine. 171; process. 109. 168. 186. IS9 
electricity. 44. 95. 106. !O7. 120. 164-177. 
I7S. 192, 193, 195, 197,200.203,206.212 
electro-galvanic 
actIvIty. 
!O9; 
electro-
chemism, 107. 174; electro-chemistry. 
200-213; electrometer, 171. 174; electro-
moteur. 194, 197 
element (chemical), 185-187. 196. 207, 
215.217-219 
element (universal. physical), 32. 33. 43. SO. 
54. 95. lI6, II7, 123, 160. 163, 180. 181. 
182.185,186, (217-219) 
elephant, 131 
elevation (perpendicularity of), 131 
elision, 19 
ellipse, 2S. 97, 154 
Empedocles, 34 
empiricism. 16, 17. 18, 20. 37. 43. 87. 88, 
107. lI7, 131, 136, 141, 142, 158, 167, 
174. 181. 190, 191, 193.214.215 
England. 180; the English, 144,212 
entoptic colour. 23.135.137. ISS 
epoptic colour. ISS, 158 
equator, (52). !O6 
equilibrium, 39, 58, 61. 87, !O4. !OS, lI4 
equinox. 48 
Erman, P .• lIO 
eruption. So 
essence. 9. I I 
ether. 20 
Euler. L., 20 
euphony, 75 
Europe. 51, 52 
evaporation, 46, 89 
expansion. 18. 83. 89. 172 
experiment, 137, 143 
explosion. 16 
eye. IS. 22. 124. 129. 131. 149. 151, 153 
face (lines of), 98 
fading (of colour), 160 
fall, 106 
fata morgana, 135 
feather, 98 
feeling. 71, 75. II9 
fermentation, 88. 90 
fertility. 53 
fibrousness, 65 
Fichtean idealism, 142 
figuration: electrical, 169; spatial, 92 
fire (element), IS. 16. 32,38-41.51,85,162, 
171. 183. 186, 198. 207, 208, 216, 217. 
219. 222; connection with air, 38; 
earthy, 218; free, 198. 222; imperishable. 
445 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
222; process of (15), 27,50,52,187,190, 
191,205-208,221 
fireball, 26, 53 
fire-rose, 202 
fish (shape of), 98 
fits (Newtonian), 141 
fixation, 87 
flame, 91, 123, 153, 162, 166, 169, 205, 206 
flax, 90 
flint, 91 ;-glass, 150 
flower, 83, 162 
fluid, 89,94,98, 199; fluidity, 53,68,71,82, 
92,93,98,117,192,198,200 
flute, 145 
focus, 19, 154 
folia, (passage of), II3, lIS, 134 
force, 42; and acid, alkali, 196, cohesion, 83, 
dissolution, 82, elements, 187, form, 96, 
friction, 185, refraction, 133, 134, trans-
parency, 135, 136; attractive, 49; category, 
133; 
chemical, 34; constructive, 97; 
cosmic, 33; electric, 166, 176, 
196; 
mechanical, 38; motive, 106; sonic, 92; 
surface, 64 
forest, 73, 83 
forging (of iron), 65,104 
formic acid, 217 
fossil (shape of), II5 
fracture: crystal, II4, lIS; earthy, 104, 124 
granular, 65, 104 
fragrancy, 162 
France, 53; the French, 32, 13S, 212 
free: colour, 143; element, 198,222 
French horn, 146 
friability, 218 
friction, 16, 72, 85, 86, 88, 90, 91, 166, 169, 
171, 185, 196 
frigate, 90 
frog, 201 
fulcrum, 58 
furnance,198 
fusion, 16, 177, 186, 202, 218 
Gall, F.}., 212 
Galvani, L., 201; galvanism, 191-205 
galvanic: action, 210, 203, 209; activity, 109, 
199, 200, 203; battery, lIO, 207; circuit, 
109, 193, 199; form, 180; pile, 46,210; 
process, 177, 181, 182, 190, 192,200,204, 
206,213; product, 204; theory, 174 
gas, 38,46, 136, 172, 189, 194,203,205,214, 
216,217 
Gehler,}. S. T., 173 
generation: of electricity, 197; of heat, 90 
Geneva, 85 
geognosy,26 
geology, 27, 51 
geometry, 63,98, 114, 115, 131 
Germany, 50; the Germans, 212 
glass, 44, 64, 65, 70• 71. 73, 82, 84, 134, ISS, 
171, 172. 17S. 176. 177. 218; britdeness, 
13S, 141; coloured, 147; composition, 
ISO; dark, 149; milky, 141; plate, 63, 
171,176; porcelain. 149; powdered, 124; 
prism, 144; transparent, 143; tubes, 172 
globularity, 98, 100 
Goethe,]. W., von: on meteorology, 51. 52, 
59. 60; on colour. 23. 124, 134, 139, 140, 
142,146• 148,149,153,154,159,212 
gold, 31, 59, 61, 64, 65, 104, 156, 183, 184, 
190, 198, 199.202,204, 21S; coins, 198; 
colour, 156; Schelling on, 158; volatili-
zation of, 177 
good (the), 17 
'Gottingen Literary Advertiser,' 90 
granular fracture, 65, 104 
graph, 59 
gravity, 19, 53, 54, 55, 62, 122, lSI, 206; 
and crystal, 96, form, II4, heat, 160, 
individuality, 92, light, 218, magnetism, 
108, pendulum, 106, specific gravity, 89, 
touch, 160; determination of, 86; direc-
tion of, 64, 65; liberation from, 56; 
possibility of, 156; sphere of, 59; terres-
trialityof, 120, cf. specific gravity. 
Greeks, 19 
Gren, F.A.C., 45, 63, 132 
grey, 138, Ir4,I48, 149; shadow, 139 
guitar, 80 
guttate fluidity, 198 
Guyton de Morveau, L. B., 186, 210 
hail, 49 
hair, 172 
half-shadow, 151 
Halley's comet, 28 
hammering, 65, 104 
hardness, 68, 218 
harmonic: limit, 77; ratio, 78; triad, 76, 77; 
harmony, 30,74,75,76,79, 81 
harp, 78 

INDEX TO TEXT 
Hauy, R.-J., II5, 171, 176 
head, 73, 98 
health,29 
hearing, 72, II9 
heat, 44, 47, 48, 57, 81, 82-93, II9, 152, 
160,166,168,192,196,208 
heavenly body, II, IS, 16, 25-31, lOS, 170, 
181 
hedgehog, 18 
height (of mountain), 60 
Heim,]. L., 26, 27 
hemisphere, 18, 105 
hemp, 90,201 
Heraclitus, 45, 222 
hero, 131 
Herschel, F. W., 20, 21 
Hiero, 183 
hindering (of illumination) , 137 
history (of philosophy), 34 
hoar-frost, 49 
horizon, 127 
hom (instrument), 145, 146 
horse, 53 
hue (variety of), 142 
Humboldt A. von, 47, 104,200,201 
humidity, 44, 46, 49, 170 
hydracid, 217 
hydrate, 192 
hydrochloric acid, 210 
hydrogen; and acid, 206, Volta's pistol, 177, 
water, 35, 46, 192, 193, 206; Alix's 
theory, 16,47; as principle of combustion, 
185, 187, 217; classification of, 190,214; 
hydrogenation, 192, 204, 209, of metals, 
204, of sulphur, 209 
hydrophane, 124 
hygrometer, 46 
hyperoxide (ofrin), 213 
hypothesis, 21, 173 
ice, 40, 41,124,156,172; spicula, II2 
Iceland-spar, lIS, 134, 135, 150 
idealism, 142 
igneous: 
principle, 
117; 
process, 
IS; 
ignition, 168; cf. fire 
image, 134 
immutability (of substances), 215 
impact, 11,62,64,70 
inactive materialities, 190 
incidence (angle of), 22, 23, 132 
inclination, 105 
incoherence, 84 
India, 52; the Indians, 13, 19 
indifference (points of), 104, 105 
induction (electrical), 168, 175 
inertia, 167, 177 
infection, II I 
infinitude, 3 I, 64 
inflection (oflight), 151 
infusion (plant), 159 
inorganic: being, 222; confusion, 217; 
shape, 97 
insect (shape of), 98 
instinct, 32 
instrument (musical), 70, 72, 75, 78, 79 
insulation, 172, 175, 176, 194, 201, 202 
integrality, 12; integration, 208; integrant 
molecules, II6, 134 
intelligence, 114, 193 
intensity, 58 
interfusion, 183 
interval (musical), 77 
intuition, 17, 82, 193 
iridescence, 156 
iridium, 199 
iris (or eye), 154 
iron, 31, 53, 64, 65, 102, 103, 104, II6, 
184,186,199; cast, 65; forged, 65; ore, 
104; stone (magnetic), 104; sulphate, 203 
irrelativity, 24 
Jena,59 
Jupiter, 3 I; satellites, 20 
jurist, 154 
Jussieu, A. L. de, 32 
Kent 1.,58 
Kepler,]., 30, 32 
key (musical), 78, 145 
key-note, 75, 76,79 
lamella, lIS, 134, 135 
language, 71 
Laplace, P. S. 28, 30 
lark,83 
latency, 43,47, 86, 87, 89, 105, 163 
Lavoisier, A. L. 187 
law, 20, 42, III, lIS, 132, 141,210,212 
lead,3l,64, 159, 184, 186, 198,202 
leaf shape, 98 
447 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
lens, 19, 137, 148, 152, 154, ISS 
level (metaphysical), 109, II9, 143, 190,214, 
215; cfo stage 
lever, 71, 105 
levity, 17,206 
Lichtenberg, Go Co, 45, 50 
life, 9, 29, 94,96, 182,205, 219,220,221,222 
ligation, 43 
light, 12-25, II 7, 174; activity, 33; and 
colour, 135-160, 162, crystal, 123, 171, 
dimming, 141, flame, 91, gravity, 218, 
heat, 91, illumination, 135, prism, ISO; 
as element, 160; corpuscles, 19, 141; differ-
entiated, 165; electric, 165, 166, 167, 169, 
170,171; galvanic, 203; Goethe's theory, 
148; Newton's theory, 20,139, oscillation, 
19; particles, 17; passive, 36; pervasion by, 
156; primary, 9; propagation, 18, 20, 
130; rays, 17, 23, 144; reflection, 22-25, 
135, 155, 167; refraction, 13,20, 125-135, 
155; selfhood, 54, 55, 121; self-substantia-
ting, 93; stimulation, 104; subjective, 203 ; 
waves, 19; weight of, 19 
lightening (of silver), 158 
lighter (pneumatic tinder-box), 38 
lightning, 44, 52, 170, 18o 
lime, 124, 186,204,207,209,216,218 
line, 74, 92, 97-98, 100, II5; of crystal, 
II4; lineality, 89; linear activity, I II; 
linearity, 63, 100, 107,110, 112,113 
Linnaeus, C. von, 32 
lips, 203 
liquid,171 
litmus, 159 
living: being, 189, 219; creature, 160; 
existence, 108; process, 181 
Livy, To, 53 
loadstone, 103 
logic, II, 27, II6, 165, 200; logical pro-
gression, 178 
London, 59 
luminescence, 52 
luminosity, 20 
lunar matter, 52 
lunatic, 29 
lustre, 159, 197, 220 
lye (alkaline), 203 
Madagascar, II5 
magensia, 124,209,218 
magnet, 101, 109, 166,211,212 
magnetic: disposition, 180; matter, 102; 
needle, 99, 105, 174, 180; pole, 102, 109 
magnetism, 58, 62, 99-111, II3, 165, 170, 
174,175,179,182,195 
magneto-electro-chemism, 107 
malleability,63,104 
materiality, 190; materiature, 92, 93, 222 
matter: and animation, 108, fire, 91, form, 
55, 71, 94, 108, gravity, 54, 55, heat, 82, 
85; calorific, 86; category, 85; combus-
tible, 163; dark, 22, 156; electrical, 169, 
170; immediacy of, 91; individuality of, 
9, 108; modal condition of, 85; negative 
67; notion of, 54; of light, 17; penetra-
bility, 92; primary, 12; qualified, 21; 
subjective, 43, 94, 100; weighted, 55, 87, 
92, II7, 199 
mechanical: actlVIty, 174; being, 174; 
cohesion, 165; compounding, 96; con-
tact, 166, 169; determination, 40, 45, 
65, 81; disturbance, 88; effect, 167; 
force, 38; friction, 90, 91; impression, 
156; independence, 166; individuality, 
II9; inertia, 167; interruption, 74; light, 
71; manner, 68; mass, II4; materiality, 
II9; neutrality, 122; penetration, 123; 
physics, 37; point of view, 43; pressure, 
40, 177; property, 126; relation, 166; 
relationship, 164; response, 62; self-
preservation, 165; sphere, 70, 72, 75, 95; 
tension, 168; totality, lI9, 157, 165, 171; 
treatment, lI8; unity, 123 
mechanics, 42, 55,95, 141, 168 
mechanism, 96, 106, 116 
mechanizing: activity, 168; geometry, 63 
mediation, 16, 83, 152,200,203, 2II 
mediatory colour, 152 
medium (physical), 125, 183 
medius terminus, 200 
melody, 75, 83 
melting, 88,184; point, 88 
memory, 18 
mercury, 32, II7; calxes, 199; oxide, 199; 
cfo quicksilver 
Mercury (planet), 27, 31 
meridian, 103, 105 
metabasis, 44 
metal, 158, 208; and acid, 186, 210, atmos-
phere, 52, chemical attack, 200, chemical 
process, 162, colour, 120, 122, 136, 1370 

INDEX TO TEXT 
221, combination, 200, electricity, 179, 
galvanism, 192, 193, 197, 199, 205, heat, 
86, 137, specific gravity, 32, 90, 124, 
187, 192, 197, 199, transmission of 
sound, 70, water, 163, 214; classification, 
zl8-Z19; cohesion, 199; conductor of 
heat, 84; conductor of electricity, 171, 
175, 193; crystallization, u6; density, 
199; ductility, 65; implicit, 221; internal 
shape, 97; magnetization, 103; neutrality, 
200, 221; opacity, 123; ore, 163; oxida-
tion, 187, 189,200,210,221; precious, 162, 
198,199; pure, 216; ring of, 71, 73; salt, 
221; smell, 161, 162, 221; specific 
gravity, 136 
metal oxide, 189,204,205,209 
metallic: amalgam, 183; atmosphere, lSI; 
base, 204; calx, 207; element, 204; 
principle, 136; salt, 124; series, 31, 64; 
surface, 172 
metallicism, (32), IS7, 159, 191, 199, 204, 
205,218 
metalloid, 193, 198,204,214 
metallurgy, 158, 184 
metaphysics, 67, 86, 87, 103, 141, 154, 213, 
214 
meteor, 26, 27, 53 
meteorology, II, 4z-54, 59, 169, 180, 181, 
187 
mica, 124 
midday, 180 
mineral kingdom, 171 
mirage, 135 
mirror,22,24,85,I34 
mist,4S 
mixture, 183; mixing (of colours), 146 
mode, 42, 62, 64, 71, 107, 191; condition, 
85; of activity, 207, alteration, 183, 
existence, 221, iron, 221, production, 136, 
sensation, II 9 
moisture, 44, 49,163 
molecule, 66, n6, 134, 194 
Moller ,J. N., 98 
monochord,75 
monochromatic (part of spectrum), 139 
monocotyledon, 32 
monotone, 76 
Moon, z6-z7,28,29,3I,48, I23;-light,143 
motion, 12, 66, 67, 71, 107, 108, 109, II4, 
164, 173, 174 
mountain, 52, 73, 91; air, 47; blue, 221; 
chain, 51 
mouth,203 
Munck.e, G. W., 173 
Munich, 46; Academy, 202 
muriatic: acid, 184,217; copper oxide, 221 
muscle, 72, 200, 201 
music, 75, 78; theory of, 81 
muslin,I49 
naphtha,89,206, 217 
natron,204 
natural science, 43 
nature, 10, 12, 14, 19, 32, 33, 40, 97, 104, 
169, 173, 181, 185, 195, 220; activity of, 
II3; purposiveness of, U4; system of, 109 
navigation, 109 
nebulae, 21 
negative,l6g,171,209 
neptunism, 5 I 
nerve,20,201 
neutral, 206; body, 216, 219; colour, 152; 
point, 102 
neutrality, 34, 39, nS, 163, 210; neutrali-
zation, 185,221 
Newton, I., 18, 30, 139, 142, 143, 144, 146, 
147,153,154 
nickel, 53, 103 
night, 48,142,149; -watchman's song, 144 
nightingale, 83 
nisus, 92, 93 
nitric acid, 184,217 
nitrogen, 35, 185, 187, 190,204,217 
node (of vibration), 74 
noise, 68, 166 
non-magnetism, 105 
north pole, 99-105, no, 170, 174, 180, 2II, 
212 
northern lights, 52, 180 
nose, 169 
note (musical), 75, 145 
nuclear shape, II3, lIS 
number,7S 
numerical: ratio, 79; relationship, 74 
occludence, 90 
occult qualities, 170 
odour, 37, 40, II8, II9, lSI, 161-163, 163, 
169,174,179 
Oersted, H. C., 174, 180 
oil,4I,117,I24,I30,133,161 
opacity, 21, 24, 36,.121, 122, 123, 1240 159, 
220 
p 
449 

oPal,I49 
optics, 18 
ore,I63 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
phrenology, 212 
organ (musical), 77, 80, 145 
organic: being, 31, 37, 97, 118, 122, 162, 
164, 170; factors, 210; nature, 220; pro-
cess, 188; shape, 97; sphere, 159 
org~m,83,220,222 
oriental intuition, 17 
oscillation, 13,68,73,74,164 
osmiur.n, 199 
oval line, 98 
oven (iron), 105 
oxidation, 118, 173, 200; and acid, 39, 161, 
colour, 221, galvanism, 192, 204, 205; 
degrees of, 213; of iron, 104, metals, 198, 
218,221, nitrogen, 187 
oxidized metal, 159, 198,204,218,221 
oxygen: and air, 35,46,47,187, galvanism, 
192, metal, 161, 202, 204, Volta's pistol, 
177, vvater, 35, 187, 193-194; atmospheric, 
210; classification, 190,214,217; element, 
185,187 
oxygenation, 209 
palladiur.n, 199 
parabola, 28 
Paracelsus, 32, 117 
parents, 9 
paroptic colour, 156, 158 
Parry, W. E., 48,52, 105, 180 
particle, 68, 83, 172 
passion, 75 
passivity, 85, 86 
past (the), 18, 181 
pendulur.n, 106 
penetration, 123, 152; penetrability, 38, 92 
penur.nbra, 151 
perfection (metallic), 198 
permeation, 218 
perpendicularity (of elevation), 131 
personality, 184 
pervasion (of medium by base), 152 
petrification, 52 
phenomenology, 173; appearance, 44 
philosophy, 17,30,32,34,47, 100, 103, 107, 
108, 109, 141, 142, 154, 181, 195, 196; of 
nature,62,71,88,99,lol-102,113 
phonic substance, 73 
phosphorescence, 16,206 
phosphorus, 122, 190,206,214 
physics, 9, ll, 55, 94; physical inertia, 167 
physiology, 137, 153 
pianoforte, 77,145 
Pictet. M. A., 85 
pigeon, 156 
pigment, 120, 146, 156,158 
piston, 38, 75 
pitch (musical), 19,73,79 
plane,74,97,I00, 112,114,115 
pianet,I5,I6,28,29,30,31,33,I81 
plant, IS, 35, 83, 152, 158, 173 
platinur.n, 64, 198, 199 
Plato, 148, 177 
plur.nage, 83 
PoW, G. F., 173, 193 
point, 9, II, 18, 30, 53, 55, 65, 67, 88, 92, 
97, 98, 100, 101, 102, lIS, 121, 125, 
169,176,186 
poison, 162 
POIarity,23,99,IoI,I09,I7S 
polarization, 23, 141, 167 
poles: acid and alkali, 194; hydrogen and 
oxygen, 182-194, 200; magnetic, 58, 
99-110, II I, 114, 166, 174 
poor metal, 207 
porcelain jasper, 218 
pore,43,S7,58,61,67,73 
positive, 209; electricity, 169, 171 
potash, 197,204,207,218 
povvder, 124,218-219 
povver,I2 
precious metal, 162, 198, 199 
precipitate, 221 
pressure, 13,40,62,88,137, 156, 172, 199 
presupposition, 56, 188, 215, 220, 222 
primary colour, 152 
prism, lIS, 138, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
147, ISO, 151, 152 
probability (theory of), 27 
process: chemical, 16, 31, 88,95, 121, 162, 
163, 164, 173, 174, 177, 178, 188, 189, 
205, 216, 219, 222; electrical, 109, 168, 
186, 189; galvanic, 177, 181, 182, 190, 
192,200,204,206,213; totality of, 210 
professionals, 154 
progression: arithmetical, 78; logical, 178 
propagation: light, 20; sound, 70 
property, 117,222 
protoxide (of tin) , 213 
pull,64 
pulverization, 82, ISS 
450 

INDEX TO TEXT 
puncticity, 27, 218; punctifonnity, 89, 113, 
lIS, 135, 137, ISS, 157; punctuality, 63 
pupil (of eye) , 154 
purpose, 97, II4; purposiveness (of nature), 
II4 
pyramid,134 
pyrites (magnetic), 104 
Pythagoras, 32, 75, 76 
quadrature, 28 
quicksilver, 31, 46, 49, 60,89,184, 197, 198, 
199,201,204 
quiescence, 96, II4 
radical, 191, 197,217 
rain,45,49, So, 52,170 
rainbow, 158 
ray (oflight), 17,23, 144 
reagent, 205 
reason, 37, I17, 148 
receptivity, 169 
recursion, 74 
refming (of metal), 184 
reflection (of light) , 22-25, 135, ISS, 167 
refraction (of light), 13, 20, 125-133, ISS; 
angle of131; double, 133-135 
refrangibility, 145 
regulus (metallic), 104, 162, 187, 190, 198, 
204,216,218,221 
relativity, 209 
religion, 19; religiosity, IS 
repulsion, 61, 82, 108, III, II3, 168, 175 
reservoir, 52 
residuum, 200 
resin, 44, 171, 172, 198, 201; resinous 
electricity, 167, 171 
resistance, 62, 65 
resonance, 71 
retort, 44 
revolving disc (Newton's), 144 
Richter,]. B., 103,210,212 
rigidity, 26, 27, 28,32,48,53,63,71,81,82,83 
ring (colour), 155 
ring (sound), 69, 71, 220 
Ritter,]. W., 46,182, 199,204 
rock-crystal, lIS, 124 
rotation, 16, 44, 106, IIO; Erman's circuit, 
lIO 
rough sea (colour), 154 
rubber, 44 
Rumford, Count, 85, 86 
Russian horn music, 145 
rust, 186 
sage (plant), 153 
sailor, 44 
St. Gotthard pass, lIS 
sal ammoniac, 201 
salinity, 163,206 
salt: acid and base, 2II-212, 216; and 
chemical process, 186, 191, electricity, 171, 
magnetism, 104, water, 1I8, 163; as 
product, 21I, 212; classification, 217-218; 
colour, 221; combination, 196; crystal-
linity, 1I6; dissolution, 40, 204; element, 
32; formation, 
208-210; heat, 
216; 
neutrality, 186,191,207,216 
Santa Cruz, 83 
satellite, 20, 26 
saturation, 179, 184,195,210,211 
Saturn, 31 
Saussure, H. B. de, 45 
scale (musical), 76, 77 
scales, 145 
scar, 29 
Schelling, F. W.]. von, 31, 62, 64,158,175, 
199 
Schiller F. von (quoted), 160 
scholastics, 170 
Schulz, C. F. L., 122, 152, 154 
Schuster,]. C., 209 
Schweigger,]. S. c., 200, 213 
scientific form, 214 
scoria, 219 
sealing wax, 44, 154, 171, 171. 
sea-level, 60 
season, 48, 182 
sea water, 218 
seed,173 
semi-metal, 104 
semi-tone, 77 
sensation, II9, 203 
sense, 1I8, 1I9, 161, 165,200 
sentience, 96, 1I9, 160 
separation, 213-218 
serpentine rock, 104 
shade, 20, 140, 152 
shadow, 139, 143, 152,153; line, lSI 
shape, 96-98 
sheen, 83, 158 
shock (electric), 167, 168 
shooting (offish), 127 
shooting star, 26, 52 
451 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
Siberia, 53 
sidereal power, 29 
sight, II9, 149, 160 
nuca, 32. 124.204.209.218 
silk. 172. 173 
silver. 31. 65. 73. 158. 183. 184. 190. 197. 
198• 199,202.203.204.215 
sine. 132 
sky. 44, 170; black of, 149; blue of, 143, 
152,153; brightness of. ISS 
sleep. 29 
smell, II7. II9. 160. 162. 168. 169. 22.1 
smelting, 71 
smoke. 149 
Snellius. W .• 131 
snow. 52. 91 
soapy water, 200 
softness, 68 
soft solder, 68 
solar: eclipse. 182; system, 9, 17.28, 33 
solubility, II8, 163 
sonority, 74, 81 
soul: and body, II4, crystal, 96, II5, 123. 
fire, 222, form. 83, fusion, 83, hearing, 
II9, life, 96, light. 123, 177, materiature, 
169, pervasion, 55, sound, 92; inner, 71; 
mouse, 131 
sound, 19,57,69-82.87.164,165, 166 
south pole, 99, 102, 104, IIO. 174, 2II, 212 
space, 12, 13, 58, 67. 100, 107. 130; content 
of, 57; generation of, 14 
spatial: attraction, 168; forms. 63; repulsion, 
168 
spatialitY,92,loo,l07 
specific: coherence, 199; cohesion, 70; 
density, 183; dimension, 63; gravity, 
57-61, 92, 220; and coherence, 64, 
cohesion, 92, crystal shape, II6, elasticity. 
66, heat, 84, 87, 88, 89, illumination, 137, 
matter, 92, opacity. 124, oxidation, 187, 
197, shape, 157, sight, 129, 131, synso-
mation, 183, 184, transparency, 124; 
alteration of. 87, 88; as form, 89; change 
of, 74; continuity in, 84. 104; in organics, 
90; negation of, 69,85; of air, 51, chemical 
body. 221, mass, 106, metal. 32, 90, 124, 
187, 192, 197, 199, physical medium, 125, 
water, 131; heat, 88; motion. 108; 
quantity, 210; weight. 45. 59.61,93, 132. 
183 
spectre, 21, 146 
spectrum, 122,146,152 
sphere (metaphysical). II, 12. 18. 20, 43. 
44, 51. 70• 71, 72. 75, 81, 92. 95. III. 
II6, II8, II9, 136, 142, 159. 160, 168. 
175,178,179.217,221.222 
sphere (shape), 97. 103, II3. 132. 176; 
sphericity, II3 
spinal nerve, 201 
spirit. 31. 39, 44, II4, 158; spiritualization. 
128 
Spix.J. B., 83 
sponge, 169, 170 
spring (water), 51, 52 
stage (metaphysical), 43, 165, 181, 189, 190, 
192,214.216; c£ level; 32.7 
star, 15, 16,21,28 
steam, 38,40,89 
steel, 65, 68, 104, 158 
Steffens, H., 31, 64,186,199,209 
stimulation, 33, 104, 178,201,204 
stoichiometry, 212 
stone, 53, 84, 97,171,217; slab. 72 
storm, 49, 52. 170, 180 
stratus cloud, 52 
stream, 47 
stretching, 65 
strontian, 207. 209 
subjective colour, 122; image. 153; unity, 
181 
substratum, 107,174 
suffocation, 187 
sulphur: and acid, 190, 207, 216, air, 207, 
base, 216, fire, 190, scoria. 219, water, 
207; brittleness, 198; classification. 136. 
214, 215; combustibility. 205, 206, 217; 
electricity, 171. 172.213;element.32.218; 
matter, 162; molten, 172, 213 
sulphuret of potash, 209; sulphuric acid, 
200,207,208,209,217,218, 
sultriness, 5 I 
summer,46,47,48,52,91,155 
Sun, 9, 15, 27. 28, 29, 31. 48. 60, 91, 102. 
122, 167, 169, 170. 181; sunbeam, 23, 
141; sunlight, 15. 24. 143, 149. 167. 169, 
206 
surface, 21, 22, 24,85,92,98, II3, 115. 172; 
force, 64; pressure. 166; superficity, (63), 
89 
Swabia, 161 
Swinden,J. H. van. 105 
Swiss: Alps, 152; mountains, 46 
syllogism, 29, 62, 99,101,175,186.192,200, 
207,216 
452 

INDEX TO TEXT 
symbolism (of colours). 153 
symmetry. 75. 176 
synsomation. 183. 184. 191.221 
syzygy. 28 
talc. 124.218 
tar. 90 
Tartini. G .• 74. 80 
taste. 39. 40. II8. II9. 160. J63-J64. 168, 
169.174.179.200,203,221 
teleology, 219 
telescope, 28, 140 
telluric cause, 60 
temperature. 48, 49, 87. 88, 89, 91, 152, 
184. 195. 2II, 216 
tenacity. 63 
tension, 48, 49. So, 75, 174. 176, 178, 180, 
213; electrical. 165, 166. 167, 168, 170, 
175 
tensioned: bodies. 
177; conflict, 
192; 
extremities, 175; light. 165. 169, 
textbook,125. 132,140, 190 
texture: crystal. lIS; metal. 219 
thermal: capacity, 87. 89. 90; increase and 
decrease. 48 
thermometer. 59 
thirst. 28, 182, 189 
thought. 14. 19. 67. 93. 108. II7. II9, 
131 
thunder, 50; storm. 49.50,51 
tide. 28 
timbre, 70 
time. 20.30.38.39.67,71.217,222 
tin. 31. 73. II6. 184.200.202; -foil. 203; 
oxides. 213 
tinder. 38 
tongue, 203 
tone (musical). 69, 70. 72. 73. 77 
Topel, Toplitz. 59 
touch. 72. 119,120, 160 
tourmaline. 176 
trade-wind. 52 
transition, II. 22. 40, 43. 72. 86, 92, 134. 
161,164, 189. 191.218,220.221,222 
translucency. 28. 124 
transmission of: electricity. 168. 169. 175, 
192,202; heat, 83, 84. 85, 86.87.88.89. 
190; an image. 134; light. 20, 22; sound, 
70.71,73 
transparency. 13,24, 36, 12J-J24, 136. 137, 
143. 149, ISO, ISS, IS7, 1&7. 170, 220, 
221 
tree, 149 
tremor, 72 
tremulation.74 
triad, II7, 216 
Trommsdorff,]. B., 186, 198 
tropical bird, 83 
tropics, 83 
truth, 17,222 
turpentine (oil of). 132 
twilight, 144, 153 
undulation, 98. 156 
unison. 75 
vapour, 45, 198 
vascular system, 196 
vegetable, 186; acid, 217; consistituent, 34; 
material, 199-200; oil 217; substance, 172, 
214 
velocity, 12, 71 
Venus. 27,31 
verticality, 65 
vibration of: body. 68; cohesion. 105; heat. 
90; matter, 74; sound. 20. 69. 70, 72. 73, 
166; strings, 74. 75, 76, 79. 80 
Vienna, 59, 60 
vinegar, 90 
violin. 72 
virgin earth, 32 
virtue, 47 
visibility. 22, 24, 126, 133; vision, 177 
vitreous electricity. 167, 171; vitrified 
metal. 129; vitriol. 124. 132, 
Vogler, G.]., 80 
voice. 72 
volatilization. 161, 164. 177 
volcano.27,50,51 
Volta, A .• 201. 202; voltaic pile. 108. 193. 
194.197.202; Volta's pistol, 177 
volume,57,58,59,68.125 
vulcanism. 5 I 
water: adhesion, 63; and acid, 186,207, 208, 
air, 208; alcohol, 183, chemical process, 
39. 189. 202, crystal of Earth, 52, earth, 
217, electricity, 177, 202. galvanism, 201, 
metal. 186. 214, oxidation. 201, salt, 217, 
453 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
stone, 217, transmission of sOWld, 72, 
Volta's pistol, 177; as bond, 207, insulator, 
202, 203, medium, 192, 210; base, 206; 
cohesion, 70, 218; conductor, 203; 
decomposition, 177; density, 132; dir-
emption, 187; element, 39-41, 44, 1I8, 
123, 215; formation, 177; germ, 97; 
neutrality, 52, 185, 189; 
opacity, 124; 
process, 208-210; production, 216; reali-
zation, 217; refractive power, 132; salt 
content, 192; synsomation, 183; tone, 70, 
72; transparency, u8; volume, 59; 
weight, 59, 61 
watering (of metal), 1I6 
water-system, 73 
wave-theory (oflight), 20 
wax, 172 
weather, 29,104; -vane, 105 
weight, 57, 58,60,63,68, 85, 86, 1I4, 183; 
-ratio, 213; weighted matter, 55, 87, 92, 
I17, 199; weightedness, 70 
Weimar, 59 
welding, 202 
Werner, A. G., lIS 
whalebone, 73, 1I0 
white, 124, 144, 173,221 
wind, 49, 52 
wine, 30,90 
wing,98 
winter, 46, 48 
Winterl,J.J., 183,206 
wire (iron), 65 
wolfram, 204 
Wollaston, W. H., 200, 202, 2U 
wood, 16,64, 86,88,90,91, 149, 159, 177 
wool,84,172, 173 
world (creation of), 46 
Zeno,67 
zero,89 
zinc, 197,198, 199,204 
454 

INDEX TO NOTES VOL. 2 
i\bernerlly,j., 431 
accident, 440 
achromaticism, 358, 359 
i\chterberg, E., 225 
acid: and base, 429; oxygen, 428 
acidum sanguinis, 438 
i\ckermann, j. F., 262, 43 I 
i\dams, G., 231 
i\damson, R, 362 
i\dsiger, P., 312 
i\epinus, F. M. U. T., 395 
aerolite, 278 
affUllty(chemic~), 385 
aggregation (cryst~e), 330 
agriculture, 228 
i\ikin, i\. and C. R, 352, 383,398,403,441, 
420, 424, 425, 439 
air: composition, 272; definition, 258 
i\lberti, C. E., 308 
Mdini, G., 414, 416, 417. 418 
Mdis, W. S., 229 
i\lfano, G. B., 388 
i\lfieri, V., 228 
i\lgol,227 
i\llard, M., 335 
i\llemann, G.1\., 257 
i\llix, j. 1\. F., 227 
i\ltenstein, K. F. S., 338 
alum crysw, 334, 439 
~umina, 427 
am~gam, 403 
amber, 266 
i\merican song-birds, 300 
ammonia, 421 
i\mpere, i\. M., 3Il, 393 
i\naxagoras, 257, 258 
andronia, 400, 401 
anim~: electricity, 412, 416, 417, 418, 420; 
magnetism, 321; prophecy, 274 
i\nquetil Duperron, 1\. H., 224 
aqua regia, 404, 4Il 
i\quinas, St Thomas, 308 
i\rago, D. F.j., 234, 238, 240, 242, 243, 260, 
323, 325, 349, 374, 381 
i\rcher-Hind, RD., 287, 396 
archetyp~ phenomenon, 370, 372 
i\rchimedes, 402, 403 
i\ristotle, 256, 257, 258, 260, 265, 266,288, 
289,306,366,440 
i\rnhold, E., 364, 372 
i\mold, T. j., 356 
arsenic oxide, 424 
artist (and Goerlle's theory of colour), 369 
i\sh, j., 414 
astronomy, 409 
arlleism, 254 
atmosphere: lunar, 244; planetary, 247 
atomic theory, 406, 434 
attraction and repulsion, 279, 280 
aurora borems, 275 
i\ustin, W., 421 
i\vogadro, 1\., 231, 438 
axial rotation, 243 
Baader F. X., 304 
Babbitt F. C., 289 
Babitz, 293 
Bach,]. C., 296 
Bach,]. S., 289 
Bachtold-Staubli H., 226 
Bacon, F., 269 
Badcock, ]., 335 
Baeurnker, C., 260 
Bahr, j. K., 369 
Bain. W., 322 
Bakewell, F. C., 386 
B~four, F., 250, 275 
ballooning, 226 
Bancroft, E. N., 352 
Banks, j., 300, 324, 415 
barometer, 275 
Barrllolin, R, 235, 239, 350 
Bartoldy, G. W., 430 
Bartsch, K., 225 
basalt (magnetism of), 316 
battery (electric), 271 
Baumgartner, i\. von, 317 
455 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Bayreuth, 315 
Bechstein, J. M., 298, 378 
Beckmann, J., 395 
Beddoes, T., 303 
Bengol,275 
Benner, A., 412 
Bennet, A., 389 
Berard, J. E., 261 
Bergmann, T. 0., 255, 314 
Berkeley, G., 230 
Berlin: Academy, 284; University, 363; 
weather, 372 
Berlin, J. D., 290 
Bermudo, F. J., 291 
Bernhardi, J. J., 329, 333 
Bernoulli, D., 287, 347 
Bernoulli, J., 347 
Berthollet, C. L., 284, 318, 385, 398, 401, 
404,405,421,425,427,428,430,433 
Bcrzelius,J.J., 315, 329, 376, 384, 388, 389, 
407, 409, 410, 427, 429, 432, 433, 434, 
435,438,441 
Bessel, F. W., 323 
Bessemer, H., 318 
Bestuscheff, Count, 367 
Beyer, H., 255 
Biedermann, W., 373 
Billiard, F. J. M. A., 331 
Biot, J. B., 226, 231, 239, 240, 243, 260, 
276, 277, 285, 293, 295, 313, 323, 340, 
347, 348, 349, 351, 361, 362, 378, 381, 
389,391,392,409,410,416,419 
Birch T., 265 
Black,John,433 
Black, J., 272 
Blackadder, H. H., 352 
Blankenburg, W., 365 
Blair, R., 360, 370 
Blein, A. F. A., 295 
Blade, K. A., 410 
blood acid, 438 
Blum, R., 388 
Blumhof, (]. G. L.), 332 
Bobertag, F., 233 
Bode, J. E., 227, 224, 250, 251; law, 250 
Boehme, F. M., 365 
Boehme, J., 257, 336 
Boerhaave, H., 416 
Boetzmann, F., 308 
Bollak, J., 258 
Bonnet, C., 268 
Boorde, A., 233 
Borda, J.C., 312 
Borneo, 309 
Boscowich, R. J., 23 I 
Bose, E. G., 235 
Bouguer, 340, 376 
Boumann, L., 3<>9, 377 
Bower, A., 289 
Boyd, J., 277 
Boyer, C. B., 235 
Boyle, R., 231, 260, 261, 370 
Bradley, J., 237, 238 
Brahe T., 225, 235 
Brandt, G., 314, 315 
Bratranek, F. T., 364, 371 
Brazil, 299, 316 
Breuning, H. J., 337 
Brewster, D., 240, 279, 321, 349, 351, 360, 
369, 381, 382, 388, 390, 395 
Briggs, H., 362 
Brooke, H. J., 328, 333 
Browne, T., 282, 306 
Brucken, E., 3<>9 
Brugmans, A., 319, 320 
Brugnatelli, L. V., 386 
Brunnmark, G., 433 
Brydone, P., 352 
Buchan, A. P., 352 
Bucholz, C. F., 314,401,438 
Buec, A. Q., 332 
Burnet, J., 258, 441 
Burney, C., 287, 293 
Burthogge, R., 306 
Busby, T., 289 
Buttmann, P., 266 
Buttner, C. W., 358, 411 
Bywater, I., 267, 441 
calcination (of metal), 302 
calculus (differential), 362 
Callisen, A. C. P., 285 
calx, 383 
camera obscura, 231 
Camerarius, R. J., 371 
Campe, J. H., 233 
Camper, P., 235 
Canton, J., 312, 394, 395 
Capadose, H., 431 
carbonic acid, 425 
Carlisle, A., 271, 409 
Carlyle, T., 356 
Carminati, 471, 418 
456 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Catnot, N. L. S., 261, 263 
Carpi, Dr., 317 
Carradori, G., 417 
Carriere, J., 433 
Carthenser,J. F., 371 
Casper, M., 251, 252, 256 
Cassini, J., 230 
Cassini, J. D., 235, 243 
Cassini,J.J. D., 312 
Catherine (the Great), 304 
catoptric colour, 394 
Cavallo, T., 312, 386, 393,412,417 
Cavendish, H., 270, 397, 428 
Cesare, G., 319 
Chance, B., 380 
Changeux, P. N. de, 328 
Chaptal, J. A. C., 422, 433 
charcoal (as conductor), 413 
Charles VI, 292 
chemical: affinity, 385, change; 416; colour, 
339; combination, 430 
chemism, 323 
Chenevix, R., 314,401,441 
Chevreul, M. E., 433 
Children, J. G., 419, 433 
Chinese compass, 3 I I 
Chladni, E. F., 278, 281, 282, 283, 284,285, 
286, 287, 387 
Chladni's figures, 286 
Christie, S. H., 317 
circuit (Erman's rotation), 325 
Clairault, A. C., 248 
Clarke, S., 357, 370 
clavicylinder, 283 
cleavage nucleus (crystalline), 328, 330 
Cless,H.D. von, 272 
Cliff, B., 352 
climate (influence of), 250 
cloud, (types), 276 
Clouston, W. A., 233 
cobalt (purification), 314 
Cohen, I. B., 229, 235, 253 
cohesion (transition to sound), 281 
cohesive property, 280 
cold (pictet's experiment), 301 
Coleridge, S. T., 255 
Collet-Descotils, H. V., 412 
collision (of clouds), 389 
Cologne pipes, 285 
Colombia, 309 
colophony, 387 
colour: and metal, 352; Goethe's and 
Newton's 
theories, 
348, 
353, 
380; 
primary, 366; -square, 355; subjective, 
356; wave theory, 366 
coloured light, 366 
Combe G., 431 
combination (chemical), 430 
combination tone, 292 
combustion, 262; spontaneous, 304-305 
comet, 246; Halley's, 248; nucleus, 248; 
orbit, 248, 251 
cometary collision, 246, 249 
comma (musical), 290 
Compagnoni, G., 228 
compass: Chinese, 3 II; variation, 322 
conductor (electric), 324 
constant proportions (law of), 385 
Constantine, V., 289 
Conti, Abbe., 388 
Conybeare, F. C., 255 
Cooper, M., 268 
copper (oxides of), 441 
Comford, F. M., 288, 396 
corpuscle (light), 232 
Costa, P., 319 
Coulomb, C. A. de, 313, 395 
Cousineau, P. J., 291 
Cranz, H. J. N., 400 
Crawford, A., 302, 387 
Crell, L. F. F. von, 318, 385 
Creve, J. C. I. A., 413 
Croll, 0., 256 
Cronstedt, A. F., 314 
crystal: aggregation, 330; cleavage nucleus, 
330; molecule decrement, 333; outer 
form, 330; rational indices, 332; structure, 
307, 328, 330, 334 
crystallinity (of Earth), 339 
crystallization, 327; electricity, 328; mag-
netism, 328; water, 384 
cube, 348 
Cullen, C., 421 
culmination (point), 320 
current (electric), 3 II, 323 
Cushing, H., 418 
Cuthbertson, J., 397 
Cuvier, G., 333 
Czernischev, I., 304, 305 
Dahl, B. T., 254 
Dalberg, J. F. H., 277, 287, 289 
Daniell, J. F., 335 
457 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Dalton, J., 259, 261, 264. 270. 276• 384. 
406.407.430.433,434 
Dalyell. J. G., 368 
D·Arcet.J.. 403.404 
Darracq. 405. 427 
Daubenton, L. J. M., 332 
Davy, H., 271.303.317, 324, 327,406,410, 
413,415,419,421,423,429,433,435,438 
Davy, J., 415, 423 
Dechales. C. EM., 347 
declination (of magnetic needle), 312 
decomposition (of water), 409 
Deiman, J. R., 270, 323 
Delambre, J. B. J., 321 
Delaroche, F., 261 
Delaval, E. H., 352 
Delisle, J. N., 374 
Deluc, J. A., 266,268, 269,270,278,387,419 
demagnetization, 317 
Deneker, 0., 371 
'De Orbitis Planetarum', 251 
dephlogisticated air, 263 
Descartes, R., 313, 345, 347 
Deschamps, B., 367 
Desormes, C. B., 405 
dialectic, 225, 309 
diamond cutting, 331 
Dibner, B., 393 
Diels, H., 258, 267, 289 
diffraction: grating, 353; of light, 374 
dimming, 355, 376 
dioptric colour, 349 
Dirksen, H. W., 250 
Diruf, C. J., 278 
dispersion (of light), 360 
divergency (of light), 360 
Dize, M. J. J., 404 
Dizi, F. J., 291 
Dlabacz, G. J., 368 
Dobereiner, J. W., 240 
Dodson, J., 3 I 3 
Dollond, J., 359 
Dominis, A. de, 376 
Don Pedro, 299 
Doren, C. van, 387 
double refraction, 229, 239, 348, 349, 350 
Dove, H. W., 367 
Drieberg, Evon, 289 
dry electric pile, 419 
Du Chesne, J., 256, 336 
Dufay, C. E, 385 
Duhamel, J. P. E, 379 
Dulong, P. L., 261, 287. 304, 330 
Dumotiez, M., 262 
Dunn, S., 244 
Diintzer, H., 338, 339 
Dupin, C., 351 
DUring, I., 256 
dye, 352 
Earth: crystallinity, 339; magnetism, 313, 
322 
earth sciences, 307 
Eastlake, C. L., 369 
Echtermeyer, T., 366 
eclipse, (solar), 399 
Egyptian music, 290 
Einstein, A., 229 
electricity: and crystallization, 328, magne-
tism, 325; animal, 406-418, 420; atmos-
pheric, 266; colour, smell, taste of, 386; 
conduction, 324; laboratory, 388-389; 
of molten sulphur, 390-391, tourmaline. 
310; physiological, 271; trans-mission, 
409; vitreous and resinous, 385 
electrochemistry, 324,434 
electrodynamics, 3 II 
electro-magnetism. 392 
electrometer, 389 
element, 257, 258, 263, 265; Aristotelian, 
256; defir.Ution, 435. 436; fire. 266 
elevation (perpendicularity of). 342-346. 367 
Elhuyar, F., and].J., de, 421 
Ellis, A. J., 295 
Empedocles, 257, 258 
Empress Elizabeth. 367 
enharmonic music, 290 
entomology, 367 
entoptic colour, 349, 350, 378 
epoptic colour, 349 
equivalent (chemical), 430 
Erard, S., 291 
Erigena, John Scotus, 308 
Erk, L., 365 
Erman, P., 262, 315, 325, 326 
Ersch, J. S., 246 
Erxleben,]. C. P., 263, 269, 275 
Eschenbach, C. G., 319, 320 
Esslinger, Me., 434 
ether, 230, 242 
eudiometer, 272 
Euler, L., 234, 242, 244, 287, 313.340,359. 
377, 
458 

INDEX TO NOTES 
euphon, 283 
Everett, C. c., 362 
Ewing, J. A., 318 
Fabricius, D., 227 
Fabricius, J. C., 254 
Falconer, W., 250 
family, 398 
Faraday, M., 264, 271, 287, 3II, 327 
Farquhar, J., 275 
fata morgana, 351 
feather (colour), 378 
Fechner, G. T., 364 
feeling (and colour), 377 
Ferguson, J., 388 
Fermat, P., 347 
Fichte, J. G., 254 
figures, (Lichtenberg), 386 
Fikentscher, F. c., and W. K., 372, 373 
Fischer, E. G., 267, 430 
Fischer, H., 337, 367, 383 
fire: and time, 437;-ball, 278; element, 263 
fits (Newtonian), 229, 361 
fixed polarization, 239 
Flaugergues, H., 374 
folia (passage of), 349 
Fontana, F., 417 
Forkel, J. N., 289, 290 
Forster, E. S., 266 
Forster, J. R, 387 
Forster, L., 380 
fossil, 333 
Fothergill, A., 305 
Fourcroy, A. F., 383, 401, 405, 412, 424, 
425,437 
Fourier, J. B. J., 287 
Fournier, d'Albe, E. F., 3II 
Fowler, R, 417, 420 
Franklin, B., 234, 266, 276, 302, 365, 387, 
390,396,397 
Fraunhofer, J., 234, 353, 374, 381 
Frederick, I. (Wiirttemberg), 337 
freezing water (pressure), 264 
French, J., 388 
frequency ratio (musical), 290 
Fresnel, A. J., 229, 234, 235, 240, 242, 243, 
351, 364, 374, 381 
Freygang, W.von,278 
friction, 277 
friendship (Newtonian), 370 
Fries, J. F., 280 
Froriep, R, 307 
Fulton, W., 418 
Gadolin, J., 304 
Gage, W. L., 255 
Galen, P. van, 323 
Galilei, V., 252, 291 
Galileo, 235, 238 
Gall, F. J., 285, 430, 431 
Galvani, L., 412, 413, 416, 417, 418, 420 
galvanism, 271, 285, 407 
Gansbacher, J. B., 296 
gas, 231, 260 
Gay-Lussac, L. J., 226, 26o, 261, 271, 334, 
409,433 
Geer, C. de, 367 
Gehlen, A. F., 314, 400, 401, 409, 414 
Gehler, J. S. T., 226, 244, 245, 259, 264, 
265, 269, 273, 28o, 284, 304, 305, 317, 
332, 346, 347, 358, 375, 378, 386, 389, 
392,396,399 
Gellibrand, H., 312 
Gelpke, A. H. C., 238, 251 
geodesy, 323 
geognosy, 246 
geometry, 329 
George, III., 300 
Georgi, J. G., 305 
Gerhard, C. A., 301 
Germain, G., 300 
German philosophy, 309 
Gersdorff, A. T. von, 387 
Gibbs, G., 317 
Giesecke, C., 316 
Gilbert, L. W., 226, 234, 241, 242, 250, 261, 
262, 265, 271, 272, 276, 277, 278, 295, 
304, 3II, 313, 315, 317, 323, 325, 328' 
329, 335, 352, 360, 365, 384, 386, 393, 
398,407,408,415,419,420,429,430 
Gilbert, W., 312, 319 
Girtanner, C., 302, 437 
Glockner, H., 230, 244, 246, 263, 378, 382, 
398,407,4°8 
G. L. T., 252, 292 
Gluck, C. W., 368 
God,336 
Goethe, J. W. von, 240, 241, 243, 249, 254. 
273. 274. 275. 276. 277. 279, 280, 293. 
338, 339. 344. 348. 349. 350, 351. 353. 
354, 355. 356, 357, 358. 359, 36o, 361. 
362, 363, 364, 366, 367. 368• 369, 370. 
459 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
371, 372, 373, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 
380, 381 
Goldsmith, 0., 300 
goniometer, 330 
Goodricke, J., 227 
Gordon,J.,431 
Gottingen, 361 
Gottling, J. F. A., 437 
GOtze, A., 421 
Gouffes,J. A. M., 250 
Gough, J., 295 
Graham, G., 312 
Grattan, W. H., 291 
Graumann, J. P., 432 
Gray, J., 265 
Green, J., 307, 327 
Green, R M., 413, 416, 418 
Greenland, 316 
Gregory, D., 358 
Greig, S., 304 
Gren, F. A. K., 267,268,269,270,280,288, 
301, 302, 314, 323, 340, 347, 360, 364, 
376,383,413,414,419,428,438 
Gretschel, H. F., 361 
Grimaldi, F. M., 374 
Grimsel pass, 331 
Grodzinski, P., 331 
Gronau, C. L., 372 
Grotthuss, T. von, 264, 409, 410 
Gruber, J. G., 246 
Gruber, Pastor, 438 
Grundtvig, N. F. S., 253, 254 
Guericke, O. von., 265 
gunnery, 228 
gunpowder, 264 
Gunther, R W. T., 412 
Guyton de Morveau, L. B., 401, 405, 422, 
429 
Haber, L. F., 424 
Hagen, K. G., 259 
Haldane, E. S., 257, 258, 260, 263, 288, 437 
Hall, C. M., 359, 360 
Haller, A. von, 260 
Halley, E., 229, 246, 248, 249, 275, 313 
Halvorsen, J. B., 308 
Hampel, A. J., 367 
Hann, J. von, 312 
Hansteen, C., 276, 312, 322, 399 
Hare, R, 389 
harmonic interval, 287 
harmony, 287 
harp (history), 291 
Harris, W., 424 
Hassenfratz, J. H., 364 
Hauy, R-J., 286, 310, 328, 329, 330, 331, 
332, 333, 334, 390, 395 
Hawkins,J.,292 
heat: latent, 223, 272, 304; materiality of, 
302; Rumford's experiments, 302-303; 
specific, 304 
Heath, T. L., 403 
Hedenius, P., 433 
Heeren, F., 336 
Hegel: diary, 272 
Hegelianism, 408 
Heiberg, J. L., 403 
Heidel, W. A., 289 
Heim, J. L., 245, 246 
Heintz, E., 354 
Heisenberg, W., 368, 369, 380, 382 
Hellmann, G., 312 
Helmholtz, H. von, 295,368,380 
Henning, L. von, 338, 350, 363, 364, 392 
Henry IV (France), 336 
Henry, W., 421 
Heraclitus, 266, 267, 437, 441 
Herder, J. G. von, 270 
Hermbstadt, S. F., 427, 429, 437 
hero, 344 
Herschel, J. F. W., 240, 304 
Herschel, W., 225, 226, 227, 238, 239, 243, 
244, 247, 248 
Hessel, J. F. c., 332 
Hevelius, J., 227 
Heyse, G., 398 
Higgins, W., 430 
Hildebrand, B., 359 
Hildebrandt, G. F., 259 
Hillary, W., 302 
Himly, J. F. W., 431 
Hinrichs, J. C., 368 
Hire, P. de la, 376 
Hisinger, W., 314,409,432, 
historicism, (Goethe's), 370 
Hjelmslev, J. T., 403 
Hoang-ti, 3 II 
Hochbrucker, G., 291 
Hoefer, J. C. F., 434 
Hoffmann-Krayer, E., 226 
Hoffmeister,J., 224, 228, 230, 247, 256, 272, 
312,313,323,333,362,372,375,382,407 
Hogarth, W., 268 
460 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Holland, V., 255 
Hollandus, J., 404 
Holmberg, A., 434 
Holtzendorff-Vietmannsdorf, F. von, 284 
Holmes, T. W., 331 
Homberg W., 232 
Hooke. R., 233, 237, 241. 374 
Hooykaas, R., 256 
Hope, T. C., 301 
Hoppe, J.. 369 
Hopson, C. R., 305 
Hopkinson, F., 370 
Hom, A., 339 
hom music (Russian), 367 
Hornstedt, C. F., 432 
Hotham, D .• 257 
Howard, E. F., 277 
Howard, L., 273,274, 276. 277, 280 
Huddart, J.. 366 
Huesmann, E., 255 
Humboldt, A. von, 271. 3II, 313, 315, 
414.418 
Hutton, C., 266, 238. 244, 259. 263. 279. 
342.346.347 
Hutton.J., 268, 269. 270, 301 
Huyghens, C., 229, 233. 234, 239. 242. 340. 
345, 350, 374 
Hwasser, 1.. 433 
Hyde. T., 224 
hydrochloric acid. 437 
hydrogenation, 420 
hydrometer, 320 
hydrophane, 340 
hygrometer, 268 
hypothesis. 360 
iatrochemistry. 256 
ice, 384; formation, 263; island, 305; 
-spicula, 327 
Iceland spar (double refraction), 350 
impression method, 377 
Indian music, 290 
indifference (point of), 319 
induction (of electricity), 394 
infinity, 230, 253 
U1flection, 370, 374 
influence machine, 227 
Ingenhousz, J., 397 
insulation, 390 
integrality (of light), 223 
interference, 378 
iridium, 41 I 
iron and steel industry, 318 
Irvine, W., 304 
Isle,J. B. 1., de Rome de 1',307,334 
isomorphism, 333 
bam, J., 261 
Jacobi, E. R., 293 
Jameson, R., 331 
Jan, C., von, 256 
jasper, 439 
Jefferson, T., 363 
Jeffrey, F., 431 
Jeffries, D., 331 
Jeffries, J., 226 
Jocher, C. G., 292 
John VI (portugal), 299 
John, J. F., 439 
Johnston, W. H., 223, 259, 260 
Jorgensen, D., 293 
Jupiter: atmosphere, 247; satellites, 235, 243 
K1imtz, 1. F., 279 
Kanitz. A., 426 
Kant, I., 279, 428 
Karmarsch, K., 336 
Karsten, C. J. B., 405 
Karsten, D. 1. G., 310, 332, 390 
Karsten, W. J. G., 267, 387 
Kastner, A. G., 347 
Kastner, K. W. G., 267. 280, 295, 330 
Kelly, J., 359 
Kennedy, R., 424 
Kepler, J. , 231, 235, 251, 253, 256; laws. 251; 
son, 235 
Kerr, R., 423, 427 
Kiesewetter, K., 388 
Kinsky, Count, 292 
Kirby, W., 367 
Kircher, A., 290, 294, 302, 376 
Kirk, G. S., 267 
Kirnberger, J. P., 252, 253, 292 
Kirwan, R., 276, 385, 421, 427, 429 
Kitaibel, P., 426 
Kjelstrup, K., 308 
Klaproth, J., 311 
Klaproth, M. H., 285, 331, 334. 398, 40 5, 
420,421,424,430,434,436,438 
Klingenstjerna, S., 3S9 
Klotz, M., 369 
461 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Knight, G., 279 
Knoerzer, G., 387 
Knox, T. M., 259 
Koch, R., 255 
Kohlschiitter, V., 284 
Kopp, H., 437 
Komer, F., 240 
Korteweg, D. J., 345 
Kossel, W., 387 
Kostlin, C. H., 397 
Kotzebue A. von, 43 I 
Koyre, A., 388 
Kramer, P., 345 
Kranz, W., 267 
Kremer, H., 233 
Kries, F. C., 248, 268, 377 
Kuhn, D., 240, 273, 274, 276, 279,338,348, 
350, 355, 358, 359, 361, 370, 375, 376, 
377, 378, 379, 396 
laboratory electricity, 388, 389 
Lagrange, J. L., 294 
Lalande, J. J., 246 
Lambert, J. H., 250, 340 
Lampadius, W. A., 270, 314, 388,439 
Lancaster, J., 322 
Land, E. H., 354 
Lane, T., 318 
Laplace, P. S., 247, 251, 261, 265, 284 
Lasson, G., 224, 228, 230, 238, 251, 232, 381 
latency (of heat) , 272, 304 
Lavoisier, A.J., 263, 270,384,403,405,406, 
423,427,428,436,437 
Law, W., 336 
Leade, J., 257 
Leblanc, N., 334 
Lebouvier-Desmontier, V. R. T., 262 
Lee, F., 257 
Leeuwenhoek, A., 319 
Legendre, A. M., 321 
Lemery, L., 395 
Lemery, N., 424 
Lenz, J. J., 240 
lepidoptera, 367 
Lessing, G. E., 308 
Levy, A., 333 
Lewalter, J., 365 
Lewes, G. H., 358, 370, 380 
Lhomond, C. F., 332 
Lichtenberg, G. C., 244, 246, 263, 264, 268, 
269, 270, 275, 386, 387 
Lichtenberg, L. C., 268 
Liebe, F., 260 
Liebig, J. von, 405, 433 
life, 228 
light: and magnetism, 317; corpuscle, 232; 
electric, 226; Hegel's views on, 242; 
inflection (diffraction), 374; integrality of, 
223; polarization, 234, 239, 241, 349; 
obliquated, 241; oscillation of, 361; 
ray, 229, 230, 231; refrangibility of, 362; 
solar, 227, 228; stellar, 227; velocity of, 
235-238; weight of, 232; wave theory, 
229, 233, 242 
lightning conductor, 396 
Lindsay, R., 327 
line (crystalline and organic), 308 
Link, H. F., 265 
Linnaeus, C. von, 395 
liquidity, 264 
Livy, T., 277 
Lloyd, H. E., 299 
Locke, J., 246 
logic, 223, 259, 260, 232, 384, 440 
longitudinal vibration, 284 
Liidicke, A. G., 329 
Luther, M., 258 
Luthmer, D. J. J., 227 
Luyart, F. de, 421 
Luyart, J. J. de, 421 
Lys, C. N. H. du, 327 
Macartney, Earl of, 311 
McPike, E. F., 249 
Macquer, P. J., 232, 354, 383 
McTaggart, J. M. E., 223 
Madagascar, 331 
Madeira, 3 16 
Magellan, J., 304 
magnetic: field, 311; line, 334; needle, 312, 
321; property, 319 
magnetism: and crystallization, 328, elec-
tricity, 325, light, 317; 
animal, 321; 
molecular current, 3 II; of basalt, 316, 
Earth, 312-313, 322, nickel and cobalt, 
314, serpentine, 315 
magnetite, 3 I 5 
Magyar, G., 354 
Malliac, J. A. M. de Moyria de, 3 II 
Mairan, J. J. D. de, 232, 276, 327, 347, 399 
Malcolm, A., 289 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Malus, E. L., 241, 242, 243, 349, 350, 351, 
381 
Mangor, C. E., 233 
Maraldi, G. F., 243, 374 
Marcel, A., 319 
Marcet, A. J. G., 433 
Maresch, J. A., 367 
Mariotte, E., 379 
Marius, S., 235 
Marktredwitz: glass-works, 372 
Mars, (atmosphere), 247 
Marsh, N., 292 
Martine, G., 302 
Martini, G. B., 296 
Martius, K. F. P., 298-299, 316 
Marum,M. van, 270, 397, 419 
Marx, C. M., 327, 332 
Masson, A., 227 
materiature, 306 
mathematics, 230; and colour, 369, elec-
tricity, 395 
matter, 260 
Matthaei, R., 240, 339, 348, 353, 354, 355, 
356, 359, 364, 367, 370, 373, 376, 379, 
380 
Maupertius, P. L. M., 347 
Mautner, F. H., 387 
Mave, J., 331, 332 
Maximilien Joseph, I (Bavaria), 299 
Maxwell,J. C., 243, 265, 3II, 340, 352, 381 
Mayer, J., 412 
Mayer, J. T., 241, 244, 278, 302, 360 
Mayow, J., 262 
mechanical interpretation (refraction), 348 
Meckel, J. F., 298, 378 
Meincke, J. L. G., 407 
Meissner, M., 255 
Melvill, T., 376 
memory, 230 
Mendelssohn, F., 297 
Menge, T., 308 
Mercury (atmosphere), 247 
Merz, G., 374 
Mesmer, F. A., 250, 321 
metal: and colour, 352; crystalline structure, 
334; precious, 379; series of, 255, 412 
metalloid, 3 15 
meteorology, 279 
metric system, 321 
Meuse!. J. G., 246, 268 
Meyer, F., 321 
Meyer, K., 235 
Meyerbeer, J., 296 
Michaelis, C. F., 289 
Michelet, C. L., 224, 228, 247, 256, 263, 273, 
281, 297, 298, 306, 312, 313, 322, 323, 
328, 329, 333, 339, 342, 345, 361, 362, 
366, 373, 374, 375, 377, 378, 379, 394, 
397, 407, 421, 439 
Michell, J., 232 
Middlesex, Lord, 292 
Milhaud, G., 345 
Miller, D. C., 294 
Miller, F., 387 
Milton, J., 232, 249 
Minasi, A., 351 
mineralogy (and electricity), 390 
mirror, 241, 349 
Mitscherlich, E., 333, 334 
moire metallique, 335 
Molbech, c., 309 
molecular current (magnetic), 311 
M0ller, I., 255 
M0ller, J. N., 307-309 
Mollett, J., 262 
Mollweide, K. B., 313 
Monge, G., 241, 318, 351 
Monnier, P. C. Ie, 313 
Monro, A., 420 
Mons, J. B. van, 437 
monsoon, 275 
mood,249 
Moon: atmosphere, 244; craters, 245 ; 
inhabitants, 255; surface, 245 
Moore, J. R., 300 
More, L. T., 257 
Morichini, D. P., 317 
Moringa pterygosperma, 371 
Morgan, G. C., 386 
Morgan, M. H., 402 
Moser, H. J., 297 
Mottelay, P. F., 310, 311, 312, 317, 319, 321, 
386,390,395,397,399,414,419 
Mountaine, W., 313 
Mozart, W. A., 296 
Muncke, G. W., 264, 377, 392 
Murray, J. A. H., 421 
Murray, J., 304, 307. 315. 327. 328, 330, 
332, 335. 379, 383, 384, 397, 404. 406, 
412,423,424, 427, 438 
muscular motion, 413, 418 
Mushet. D .• 318 
music (history), 289 
musk,260 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Musschenbroek, P. van, 321,232,264, 382 
302,347 
Mynster, J. P., 254 
mysticism, 257 
Nairm, E., 265 
Napoleon, 284, 332, 351,435 
natron, 405 
Naturphilosophie, 324 
Nauwerk.291 
navigation. 321 
nephritic wood, 371 
Nettesheim. A. von. 388 
neurology. 235 
neutrality (law of). 429 
Newton. I., 229. 230. 231. 232, 233, 234. 
239. 240. 241. 242. 243, 246, 253, 257, 
259, 279, 333, 340, 347, 348, 350, 351• 
353. 354. 355. 362. 364. 365. 366. 367, 
368. 369. 370. 373, 374. 375. 378, 379. 
380. 381. 382. 388. 404 
Nicholson. W .• 226. 227. 241. 265. 270, 
271. 295. 304, 314, 315. 318, 332, 352, 
36o, 370, 371, 379, 383, 386, 397, 409, 
413, 415. 419, 422, 423, 429, 437, 438 
nickel,314 
NicoIin, F., 263, 297,3°3,306,337.35°,354 
nightwatchman's song, 365 
nitro-muriatic acid, 404 
Nizze, E .• 403 
Noble, W., 292 
Nollett, J. A., 266, 376, 389 
Norman, R., 312 
north-west passage, 321 
northern lights, 398 
Novalis, 254. 270 
obliquated light, 241 
Occam, W., of, 257 
occultism, 388 
odorous matter, 259 
OehlenschHiger, A. G., 254 
Oersted. H. C., 254, 3II, 325, 326, 371, 392, 
400, 433 
Oettingen. A.]. von, 267 
oil,437 
Oken, L., 278 
Olbers, H. W. M., 246, 248, 278 
opal, 371 
Opoix. c., 354 
optics, 230, 231 
orbit (cometary), 248, 251 
orchestrion (Volger's), 296 
Orfilas, P., 426 
organ (musical), 289, 296, 297 
organic oil, 437 
Orphal, W. C., 274 
oscillation (of light), 361 
osmium,4II 
Ostwald, W., 386, 409, 434, 438 
overtone, 292 
oxide,407 
oxygen, 263, 423; and acid, 428 
oxygenation, 420 
Page,].,424 
Pagel, W., 437 
palladium, 412 
Palmerston, Lord, 300 
paradox, 230 
Paracelsus, 256, 336 
paroptic colour, 346 
Parkes, S., 335 
Parrot, G. F., 263, 264, 280 
Parry, W. E., 272, 273, 275, 321 
Partington, J. R., 256, 271, 302, 3240 336, 
379,397,400,405,424,427,429 
past (the), 238 
patriotism (English), 396 
Peacock, G., 229, 234 
Peacock, R., 225 
Pearson, G., 437 
pendulum, (geodetical use), 323 
Peregrinus, P., 312 
perfection (metallic), 4II 
Pernter, J. M., 352 
Peru, 309 
Petit, A. T., 305 
Petrini, P., 364 
Pfaff, C. H., 325, 353, 355, 356, 389, 392, 
419 
Pfaff, J. W. A., 252 
Pfleiderer, W .• 337, 383 
Phillips, R., 315 
phlogiston, 302354, 387,406 
photon, 229 
Phrantza, G., 248 
phrenology, 285, 430 
physiological: colour, 377; electricity, 271 
Piazzi, G .• 251 
Pichard, J., 235 
464 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Pichegru, c., 274 
Pictet, M. A., 262, 301, 315 
Pierer, J. F., 257, 323, 384, 439 
Piggott, N., 227 
Pigot, T., 292 
Pinder, M., 331 
Pippin, III, 289 
Planchart, A. E., 293 
Planck, M., 229 
planetary: harmony, 252; sequence, 255 
platina, 412 
platinum, 309 
Plato, 282, 287, 338, 339, 396 
Playfair, j., 301, 317 
Plutarch, 289 
Poggeler, 0., 263, 297, 303, 306, 337, 350, 
354 
Poggendorff,j. C., 227,364,408 
Pohl, G. F., 329, 392, 408 
Pohlmann, K., 364 
point: culmination, 321; indifference, 319 
Poisson, S. D., 395 
polarization: of light, 234, 239, 24I, 349, 
35I, 360; line, 330 
Pond, j., 247 
Pontanus, j., 248 
Pope, A., 253 
Poppelbaum, H., 255 
Pordage, J., 257 
pore, 279 
Porrett, R., 438 
Porta, G. B. della, 23 I 
Porterfield, W., 23I 
Posselt, J. F., 279 
potassium, 423 
Pownall, T., 366 
Praetorius, M., 365 
precious: metals, 379; stones, 33 I 
pressure, 264 
Priestley, J., 232, 259, 263, 345, 386, 393 
primary colour, 366 
Pringle, J., 259, 396 
prism, 358, 373 
Proust, L. J., 335, 425, 44I 
Prussian currency, 432 
Przibram, K., 387 
pteme,4I2 
Pupke, H., 386 
Purkynje, J., 295 
pyro-electricity, 395 
Pythagor~, 256, 287, 288, 289, 370 
Q 
quadrature, 247 
Quatremere d'Isjonval, D. B., 274 
quartz, 33I 
Quesnel, U., 433 
Rafn, C. G., 309 
rain (cause of), 268-269 
Ramsden J., 277, 265 
rational indices (law of), 332 
Raphson, J., 388 
Rautner, C., 306 
Raven, J. E., 289 
ray (light), 229, 230, 23 I 
Rayleigh, J. W. S., 295 
Reaumur, R. A. F., 367 
refraction, 230, 260, 345, 347-348, 357, 360; 
double,229,239,349,350 
refrangibility, 362 
Regner, L., 242 
Reil, J. C., 298, 378 
relatedness (magnetism, electricity, galvan-
ism),394 
religion, 232 
Remer, F. W., 275 
Reynard the fox, 356 
Richter,J. B., 3I4, 384, 428, 429, 430, 431, 
434 
Riemann, K. W. J. H., 289 
Rigaud, J. F., 376 
Rink,438 
Rinman, S., 318 
Rist, J., 365 
Rittenhouse, D., 370 
Ritter, G. H., 285 
Ritter, J. W., 270, 27I, 285, 286, 297, 398, 
399,413,419,420 
Rive, A. A. de la, 393, 396 
Rixner, T. A., 256, 336 
Roberts, E., 291 
Roberts, F., 230 
Robinson, J., 272, 420 
Robison, J., 279 
Rochon, A. M., 331 
rock-crystal, 33 I 
Rode, A., 402 
Rohault, J., 389 
R0mer, 0., 235 
Roscoe, H. E., 405 
Rose, V., 306 
Rose, V., 405 
Rosenkrantz, K., 272, 338 
Rosenthal, D. A., 308 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Ross, W. D., 257, 306 
rotation: circuit, 325; solar, 227; stellar, 227 
Roth-Scholtz, F., 257 
Rouelle, G. F., 384, 403 
Roux, J W. c., 240, 369 
Roxburgh, W. 275 
Rozier, F., 270, 232, 328 
Rubeli, A., 283 
Rudloff, W., 255 
Rudolphi, C. A., 339 
Ruelle, C. E., 287, 289 
Ruge, A., 366 
Rumford, COIDlt, 300, 301, 302, 303, 340, 
364 
Runge, P.O., 369 
Ruperti, G. A., 277 
Rupp. E., 297 
Russell, B., 260 
Sabbatini, G., 290 
Sabine, E., 313, 323 
Saint-Hilaire, E. G., 431 
Sanderson, J B., 224, 232 
satellite, 243 
Saturn, 243, 247 
Saussure, H. B., de, 267, 268, 376 
Saussure, N. de, 267 
Sauveur, J, 292 
Savart, F., 287 
Scaliger, J C., 309 
Scandinavian: geology, 371; science, 433 
Schafer, J. C., 397 
Scharfenberg, K. L., 274 
Scharling, C. 1., 254 
Scheele, C. W., 421 
Scheffer, H. T., 309 
Schelling, F. W. J, 253, 254, 255, 260, 280, 
281, 298, 307, 309, 310, 324, 325, 369, 
379, 394 
Schellingianism, 298, 392 
Schere, J A., 262 
Scherer, A. J P. von, 278 
Scheuchzer, J, 331 
Schlldbiirger, 233 
Schiller, F. von, 249, 379 
Schilling, G., 282, 283, 288 
Schlegel, A. G., 254 
Schleiermacher, F. E. D., 266 
Schlossberger, A. von, 337 
Schmid, G., 378, 380 
Schmidt, J. K. E., 240 
Schmidt, M. C. P., 287 
Schober, G. D., 365 
Scholz, B., 376 
Schopenhauer, A., 369, 381 
Schopper, H., 356 
Schorlemmer, C., 405 
Schrader, J G. F., 387 
Schreiber, C. F. A. von, 334 
Schroeter, J H., 243, 244, 245, 247 
Schron, H. L. F., 279, 280 
Schroter, M., 255, 260, 280,310,324,379 
Schrotter, F., 432 
Schubarth, K. E., 338, 350, 363 
Schiibler, G., 279 
Schultz, C. F. L., 240, 338, 339, 350, 363, 
375, 377, 396 
Schulz, J. A. P., 252 
Schumacher, H. C., 246, 248 
Schuster, A., 382 
Schuster, J c., 400, 401, 422, 426, 427 
Schweigger, J S. C., 240, 253, 275, 276, 
327, 329, 330, 333, 338, 349, 355, 377, 
390, 414,435, 438 
Seaman, G., 368 
seasonal temperature, 272-273 
Seebeck, T. J, 240, 329, 349 
Seeber, L. N., 328 
Sejour, P. A. D. de, 246 
semi-metal, 315 
serpentine, 3 1 S 
Serre, J. A., 293 
Sertorius, A. J, 399 
Severinus, P., 256 
Servus, H., 359 
S'Gravesande, W. J, 374 
shadow, 364 
Siber, T., 256, 336 
Sibree, J, 224, 344 
Siegfried, R., 390 
Sigwart, G. K. L., 433 
Sikes, B., 320 
Silberschlag, J E., 352 
silica. 401, 427 
Silliman, B., 389 
Simson, F. H., 257, 258, 260, 263 
Singer, G. J. 389, 419 
sky (colour of), 376 
Sloane, H .• 246 
Smets, 289 
Smith, R., 294, 340, 347, 371 
Smithson, J. L. M., 433 
Snellius, W., 345 

INDEX TO NOTES 
sodium, 423 
Soderbaum, H. G., 433 
solar: furnace, 242; light, 227, 228 
solder, soft, 404 
solution, 384 
Soldani, A., 278 
Somerville, M., 317 
Sommer, G. M., 238 
song-bird, 300 
Sorby, H. c., 334 
Sorge, G. A., 294 
soul, 282, 287, 441 
space (infmitum of), 230 
specific heat, 304 
spectroscopy, 353 
spectrum, 356, 370 
Speirs, E. B., 224, 232 
Speiser, A., 369 
Spence, W., 367 
spider, 274 
Spies, H., 297 
Spix, J. B., 298, 299, 316 
Spohr, L., 368 
Sponsel, J. u., 289 
spontaneous combustion, 304 
Sprengel, K., 336 
Sprengel, M. C., 311 
Spurzheim,J. c., 431 
Stablein, B., 365 
Stahl, G. E., 262, 263, 302,406 
star, 227, 228, 230, 238 
Stauffer, R. C., 392, 400 
Staunton, G. L., 311 
steam, 263, 264 
sulphur, 390, 391, 425 
sulphuric: acid, 424; ether, 437 
Sulzer, J. G., 386 
Sun (rotation of), 227 
sunbeam, 360 
sunlight, 367 
surface force, 280, 348 
Swabia, 337, 382 
Swammerdam, J., 416 
Swinden, J. H. van, 319, 320 
Sydney, R, 337 
Symmer, R, 387, 391 
symmetry (crystalline), 332 
synsomation, 401 
syzygy, 247 
tachopyrion (pneumatic tinder-box), 261 
Tartini, G., 292, 293, 294, 296 
taste, 384 
Tata, D., 278 
Taylor, A. E., 396 
temperament (musical), 252, 291 
temperature: and electricity, 414; seasonal, 
273 
Tennant, S., 411, 433, 436 
Tessan, L. U. de, 389 
tetrad (pythagorean), 288 
Teyler, P., 269, 270 
Thales, 263 
Thenard, L.J., 314, 330, 409, 433 
theory of colour, 240 
thermodynamics, 261 
Steffens, H., 253, 254, 255, 281, 307, 308, 
Thompson, B., 300, 301, 302, 303, 340, 364 
Thompson, J. A., 301 
331,371,406,408,412,425 
Steinbuch, J. G., 260, 383 
stellar light, 227 
Stewart, D., 301 
Stillingfleet, B., 293 
Stillingfieet, E., 388 
Stirling, J. H., 306 
stoichiometry, 428, 43 I 
stone (from sky), 277 
storm, 275 
Storr, G. K. c., 331 
Strehlke, F., 373 
Struck, W., 257 
Strunk, 0., 252 
Struthers, L. G., 223, 259, 260 
Sturz, F. G., 257 
Sudhoff, K., 336 
Thompson, S. P., 233 
Thomson, J., 264 
Thomson, T., 242, 286, 304, 314, 325, 
333, 384, 398, 403, 406, 420, 421, 422, 
425,427,430,436,437,439,441 
thunder, 389 
Thurston, R H., 261 
Tieck, L., 308 
Tiemann, W. A., 315, 318 
Tilloch, A., 271, 275, 304, 313, 314, 315, 
318,335,366,405,419,425 
time, and ftre, 437 
tinder, 261, 262 
Titius, J. D., 250 
tonal sequence, 253 
tone, 292, 293-296 
Topfer, G., 297 
467 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
tourmaline, 310, 395 
tradewind,275 
Tralles,]. G., 321 
transition: chernism-physics, 339; cohesion-
sound, 281; colour-odour, 383; magnet-
ism-crystal, 327; sound-heat, 297 
transparency, 340 
Trapp, J., 331 
tremulation (of sound), 282 
Treschow, N., 253, 254 
triangulation, 345 
Trommsdorff, C. W. H, 405 
Trommsdorff,]. B., 314,397,404,411,415, 
424 
Trommsdorff, W. B., 267 
Troostwyk, A. P. van, 270, 323 
tropical birds, 298 
Tuscany, Duke of, 416 
Tyndall, J., 382 
universe (theory of), 228 
university (idea of), 255 
Urals, 309 
Uranus, 244 
Ure, A., 335 
valley (formation), 245 
Vallot, J. u., 367 
Vandermonde, C. A., 318 
Vargas-Bedemar, E. R von. 371 
Vauquelin, L. N., 318, 401, 412, 424, 433, 
437 
vegetable (potash content), 423 
velocity (oflight), 235-238 
vibration: node, 288; of air, 287 
Vieth, G. U. A., 290, 295, 365 
Vieussens, R de, 438 
Vinci, L. da, 376 
Virchow, R L. C., 284 
Vischer, F. T., 369 
vision, 231, 338, 396, 
vitreous (and resinous) electricity, 385 
Vitruvius, M., Pollio, 305, 403 
Vogler, G.]., 296,297 
Voigt,]. G., 288 
Voigt,]. H, 240, 271 
volatilization (of gold), 397 
Vollgraf,]. A., 345 
Volta, A., 271, 323, 324, 325, 397, 409, 412, 
413,414,416,417,418,419 
voltaic: apparatus, 419; battery, 399; pi! 
324; pistol, 397 
Wachsmuth, G., 354 
Waerden, L. van der, 256 
Wagemann, K., 305 
Wasielewski, W., 275 
Waite, A. E., 388 
Walker, C. V., 277, 389 
Wall, Dr., 266 
Wallace, W., 223, 230, 260, 323, 373, 38~ 
415,440 
Wallerius,]. G., 315 
Wallis, J., 292 
Ward, ]., 424 
Waschnitus, V., 255 
water, 264; decomposition, 270, 409; for· 
mation, 270; of crystallization, 327, 38, 
Watts, I., 253 
wave-theory (of light), 299, 233, 242, 351 
366 
weather prophecy, 274 
Weaver, T., 308, 329, 330 
Weber, C. M. von, 296 
Weber, ].,274, 397 
weight (of light), 232 
Weinhold, K. A., 328 
Weiss, C. S., 330 
Weisse, M., 365 
Wenzel, C. F., 429 
Werner, A. G., 254, 307, 308, 328, 329,
330; Society, 327 
Whateley, R, 431 
Wheelwright, P., 267, 441 
Whewell, W., 360 
Whiston, W., 246 
white (composition of), 364 
Whitehead, W. F., 388 
Whitehurst,]., 245 
Whittaker, E., 230 
Wickner, J., 365 
Wicksteed, P., 257, 266 
Widmannstatten, A. B. VOll, 33 .... 
Wiegleb, J. c., 255, 305 
Wilcke, J. K., 390 
Wilde, E., 317, 345, 353, 358 
Wilkins, W., 247 
Wilson, A., 250 
Wilson, B., 395 
Wilson, G., 415 
Winkler, J. H, 266 
468 

INDEX TO NOTES 
Winterl, J. J., 399, 400, 401, 422, 426, 427, 
438 
Witelo,231 
Wittich, J., 371 
Wittich, W., 398 
Woeste, J. F. L., 225 
Wohler, F., 315, 329, 389 
Wolf, F. A., 266 
Wolff, C., 250, 302 
Wolff, F. B., 285, 331, 334, 398, 407, 420, 
421,424,427,430,434,436,438 
wolfram, 420 
Wollaston, W. H., 309, 330, 332, 412, 415, 
419,424,430,433 
Wood, A., 292 
Woodman, T. B., 305 
Wright, G., 275 
WWldt, W., 369, 377 
Wurm, J. F., 227 
YOWlg, M., 292, 294 
YOWlg, T., 229, 234, 242, 279, 283, 294, 
295, 296, 351, 364, 366, 374, 381, 387, 
433 
Zach, F. X. von, 235, 242, 245, 246, 248, 
250,251,278 
Zamboni, G., 419 
Zannichelli, G. G., 334 
Zaunick, R., 386 
Zedinek, H., 373 
Zeller, E., 287 
Zelter, C. F., 338, 363, 372 
Zend-A vesta, 224 
Zingel, H. J., 291 
Zschokke, J. H. D., 364 
Zyka, J., 367 
Zylius, J. D.O., 268, 269 

