
G. W. F. Hegel 
The Difference Between 
Fichte' s and Schelling's 
System of Philosophy 
Translated by H. S. Harris 
and Walter Cerf 
State University of New York Press 
Albany 
1977 

Published by State University of New York Press 
99 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12246 
Translation© 1977 State University of New York 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's Syste(!l 
of Philosophy in connection with the first fascicle of 
Reinhold's Contributions to a more convenient sur-
vey of the state of philosophy at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, first fascicle. 
Translation of Differenz des Fichte'schen und 
Schelling'schen Systems der Philosophie in Bezie-
hung auf Reinhold's Beytrage zur leichtern Obersicht 
des Zustands der Philosophie zu Anfang des neun-
zehnten ]ahrhunderts, erstes Heft. 
Includes bibliographical and analytical indexes. 
1. Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 1762-1814. 2. Schelling, 
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von, 1775-1854. 3. Faith 
and Reason. I. Title: Difference between Fichte's and 
Schelling's System of Philosophy ... 
B2848.H3313 193 
76-9821 
ISBN 0-87395-336-3 
ISBN 0-87395-337-1 microfiche 
ISBN 0-88706-827-8 (pbk) 

Contents 
Translators' Preface 
vii 
Speculative Philosophy and Intellectual 
Intuition: An Introduction to Hegel's Essays 
xi 
Walter Cerf 
A Note on the Text and on Conventions xxxvii 
Introduction to the Difference Essay 
1 
H. S. Harris 
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FICHTE1S AND 
SCHELLING's SYSTEM OF PHILOSOPHY 
G.W.F. Hegel 
Preface 
79 
Various Forms Occuring in Contemporary Philosophy 
85 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
119 
Comparison of Schelling's Principle of Philosophy with Fichte's 
155 
On Reinhold's View and Philosophy 
174 
Bibliographic Index 
197 
Analytic Index 
205 


Translators' Preface 
The occasion for the initial attempt to translate Hegel's essay on the 
Difference between Fichte' s and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy 
(1801) 1 into English, was the giving of graduate courses on "The 
Young Hegel" and on "Post-Kantian Philosophy" by Walter Cerf at 
the University of the City of New York and the University of Wis-
consin during the 1960s. Our first thanks must go to the students in 
those courses, who never tired of suggesting improvements, and to 
the City University of New York, which contributed $100 to help 
cover the expense of typing and mimeographing that first draft. 
The mimeographed translation was duly registered with the Trans-
lation Center of the University of Southern Illinois. We owe a great 
debt of gratitude to Professor Fritz Marti whose brainchild this Center 
is. He never wavered in his interest in, and encouragement of, our 
translation and he put at Walter Cerf's disposal certain pages of his 
own translation. Had it not been for Marti's Translation Center, it is 
very doubtful that H. S. Harris (at Glendon College of York Univer-
sity in Toronto) would ever have learned of the existence of the Cerf 
translation, and Cerf is certain that without the cooperation of Harris 
the translation would not have reached the stage of publication. 
Harris became involved during a sabbatical leave from York Uni-
versity in 1971-72. Thanks are due both to York University and to 
the Canada Council for providing the leisure that made his participa-
tion possible. The research grant that went with his Canada Council 
Leave Fellowship also paid for the typing of the final draft of the 
translation. 
We also wish gratefully to acknowledge the help of Sir T. Malcolm 
Knox, who went over the whole body of our second draft and made 
many useful suggestions. 
Our cooperative effort was from beginning to end under a lucky 
star of complementarity. Translating the Difference Essay fitted in 
nicely with Harris' research for the second volume of his Hegel's De-
velopment.2 Cerf's interest in Hegel, on the other hand, has been mo-
l. As likewise Faith and Knowledge (1802}, Albany: State University of New 
York Press, 1977. 
2. The first volume--Toward the Sunlight, 1770-1801-was published by the 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, in 1972. 

Vlll 
Translators' Preface 
tivated more by his studies of Kant. The reader will find therefore, 
that Harris' introduction to the Difference ess~y seeks both to connect 
it with the earlier and later thought of Hegel, and to offer explanatory 
comments on the detail of the rather difficult text. Cerf's introduction, 
on the other hand, is directed to readers who may not be too familiar 
either with Kant's Critical Idealism or with Schelling's Philosophy of 
Identity. 1 He deals in the main with the difference between reflective 
and speculative philosophy and with the concept of intellectual intui-
tion. We have each studied and criticized the other's contribution, and 
both of us have profited greatly (though of course we have not always 
agreed perfectly). 
Harris is a native speaker of English, but his knowledge of German 
is by no means perfect. Cerf is a native German whose forty years of 
sojourn in the United States have not prevented German from remain-
ing in the full sense his mother tongue. Cerf must therefore bear the 
main responsibility for mistakes in the rendering of Hegel's text. But 
Harris assumes a full share of the responsibility for any errors of inter-
pretation, since he will not allow the fault to rest with Hegel (though 
Cerf maintains, and Hegel's own first audience agreed, that Hegel's 
German offers difficulties frequently insurmountable even to a native 
German). 
We were agreed on making a translation that would be as faithful 
to Hegel's German as could be reconciled with its readability in Eng-
lish. Harris was more inclined to sacrifice readability to faithfulness, 
Cerf faithfulness to readability. Moreover, while Harris believed he 
could detect in the language of the Essays a consistency and precision 
commensurate to their content, Cerf tended to detect in it specula-
tive insouciance and even simple carelessness, the latter no doubt due 
to the extraordinary speed with which Hegel wrote the Essays. The 
translators hope that they have hit an acceptable balance in trying to 
reconcile their divergent tendencies. Our paragraphing generally fol-
lows that of Lasson rather than Hegel. The frequently monstrous sen-
tences of the original, some of which cover more than a full page of 
small print, were ruthlessly cut into manageable pieces. But Hegel's 
1. Cerf wrote two introductions: one inquiring into ways of making the Hegel 
of the Essays interesting to contemporary analytic philosophy, the other putting 
the accent on existentialism's relation to Hegel. The first one, of which there was 
only one copy, was lost in transit between Toronto and Brandon. But as the sec-
ond introduction was also meant to be useful to readers having little acquaint-
ance with either critical or speculative philosophy it was decided t::> print it with 
each of the two Essays. 

ix 
Translators' Preface 
actual language has been rendered with a sort of flexible rigidity. That 
is to say that although there are many cases where the same German 
expression is rendered by two different English expressions, there are 
almost no cases where the same English word is used for two differ-
ent words in German. Our desire to maintain this much consistency 
has led us to adopt the artificial expedient of marking three breaches 
in it with daggers. The English words "formal," "ideal," "real" are, 
in most contexts, the only possible representatives of the three pairs 
of terms formal/ formellt, idealt I ideel and realt I reell. For the most 
part Hegel appears to use these pairs as synonyms; but there are oc-
casions where we suspect that he intends some distinction of meaning 
between them. We have therefore marked the occurrence of the less 
frequent member of each pair with a dagger (i.e., the daggers in our 
translation indicate the German words here marked). We must draw 
the reader's attention to our using "Reason" for the peculiarly He-
gelian conception of what Kant called Vernunft, and "intellect" for 
his conception of what Kant called Verstand. 
For both of us, the labor of translation was far greater than we had 
expected at the outset. The work had to be relegated to hours that we 
could spare from other assignments; and our lucky star was often hid-
den behind the clouds of a postal service that ranged from dead slow 
at the best to dead stop during the Canadian postal strikes. We are all 
the more grateful therefore to Caroline Gray, who helped with the 
Bibliography, and to Lawrence Lyons, who did much of the dullest 
work for the analytical Index. Nor should the labor of several willing 
and able typists be forgotten, though their names are not here re-
corded. Above all, we wish to thank our respective spouses whose love 
and patience sustained us over the years. 
Finally, acknowledgment is due to Professor Marvin Farber, editor 
of the series Modern Concepts of Philosophy, and Warren H. Green, 
the publisher of the series. After years of patiently waiting for our 
translation they very graciously permitted us to transfer the publica-
tion to the State University of New York Press whose director, Nor-
man Mangouni, and editor, W. Bruce Johnson, have been most coop-
erative and helpful. 
Brandon and Toronto, Lady Day, 1976 
H. S. Harris 
Walter Cerf 


Speculative Philosophy and 
Intellectual Intuition: 
An Introduction to Hegel's Essays. 
I. S P E C U L A T I V E P H I L 0 S 0 P H Y : A F I R S T S K E T C H 
"Speculation" is a bad word nowadays. On the stock market specu-
lators are people who, wanting to get rich fast and without work, 
invest their money in untested stocks or on the basis of information 
that gives the prediction of success only a hazardously low degree of 
probability. And so, when we believe that a scientific hypothesis or a 
presumed psychological insight or indeed even a statement claiming 
to be "factual" has no evidence or hardly any evidence that could 
serve as foundation of its truth claims, we say: "This is mere specu-
lation." 
Yet when the congressional committee investigating the wild gi-
rations of the stock market asked Bernard Baruch what he did for a 
living he is supposed to have answered proudly, "I am a speculator." 
Rather. surprisingly, old Bernard Baruch and the young Hegel of these 
Essays have one thing in common: they were proud of being engaged 
in speculation. Of course they meant two different things by "specu-
lation" -even though the latter-day use of the word is connected in 
some bizarre way with the earlier meaning. 
The term "speculation" comes from "speculare," which is taken to 
be synonymous with "intuire" (from which comes "intuition"). In a 
very preliminary way we can describe what the author of the Essays 
meant by speculation as the intuition or vision of the true nature of 
the relations among God, nature, and self-consciousness or reason. 
"Self-consciousness" and "reason" are interchangeable on the basis 
of the Kantian "I think"-"1 think the categories"-rather than on 
the basis of the Cartesian "cogito," which comprises acts other than 
those of thinking, let alone "pure" thinking. It was Schelling who 
tried to articulate this vision of the true nature of the relation of God, 
nature and self-consciousness in his Philosophy of Identity-so called 
because the relation was to be one of identity, a basically simple 
design trying to hold together a complex composition. The vision was 
of course not a sensuous intuition, but an intellectual intui-

xii 
Walter Cerf 
tion. 1 When Hegel speaks of speculative philosophy he has the 
Philosophy of Identity in mind and its intellectual intuition of the all-
comprising and ultimate whole of God, nature, and self-consciousness. 
The Philosophy of Identity had to have the form of a system 
whose organic wholeness, reflecting the wholeness of the vision, was 
to be the test of the truth of the vision. The system consisted of two 
parts: the Philosophy of Nature and the Transcendental Philosophy, a 
division obviously at odds with the Kantian as well as the pre-
Kantian divisions of philosophy. At the time when Hegel wrote the 
Essays Schelling had published several drafts of the Philosophy of 
Nature2 and one of the Transcendental Philosophy.3 Although Schel-
ling was forever revising his system, the holistic vision behind it is 
clear. It was a singularly beautiful vision. If ever the time should 
come when philosophy is judged in terms of <Esthetic criteria, the 
general scheme of the Philosophy of Identity (rather than the detailed 
execution) would surely be among the crowned victors. Its vision of 
the whole is the vision of an unconscious God (Spinoza's natura 
naturans) revealing Himself in the ever ascending levels of nature 
(natura naturata) until self-consciousness emerges in rational man. 
This is the story the Philosophy of Nature tells. The Transcendental 
Philosophy, on the other hand, claims to trace God's coming to know 
Himself in a sequence of stages that culminate in art, according to 
Schelling; in religion or rather, a re-union of art and religion, ac-
cording to the young Hegel; and in philosophy, according to the ma-
ture Hegel. For although Hegel's mature thought and system became 
more complex and subtle, they never completely lost their connection 
with the basic vision and division of the Philosophy of Identity. His 
Philosophy of Nature, like Schelling's though critical of it, was still 
meant, if not to replace the natural sciences altogether, at least to pro-
vide them with the basic framework without which they lose them-
selves in the infinite chaos of experience and remain atomistic and 
mechanistic instead of becoming holistic and dynamic. And Hegel's 
Logic, his Philosophy of History, and perhaps even his Phenomenol-
ogy, may be said to explicate themes that Schelling's Transcendental 
Philosophy was unable to shelter and develop in its relatively sim-
plistic frame. Further, Hegel could integrate these themes into the 
total vision. 
In any case, the Hegel of the Essays, following Schelling though 
not without reservations, is convinced that philosophy has finally 
come into its own as speculative philosophy envisioning the inner 
unity of God, nature, and self-consciousness, and it has gained its 
systematic presentation in the Philosophy of Identity with its two 

xiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
organic parts, the Philosophy of Nature tracing the emergence of self-
consciousness, and the Transcendental Philosophy tracing the emer-
gence of God's knowledge of Himself. 
None of this is likely to sound convincing to a reader with an 
analytically trained intellect. I shall try in Section III of this Introduc-
tion to make the conception of speculative philosophy appear less 
strange by pointing out how speculative philosophy takes care of 
objections which non-speculative philosophy raises against it. Nor 
will speculative philosophy make sense to any historian of philoso-
phy who knows that "speculation" is just another term for "intellec-
tual intuition" and is aware of what Kant did to that concept. In 
Section IV I hope to show where in Kant's work the speculative phi-
losophers believed to find justification for reintroducing intellectual 
intuition into the cognitive enterprise of philosophy. In Section II, 
however, I shall try my hand at an entirely different approach to the 
Philosophy of Identity, an approach by way of the human or, to use 
a fashionable term, existential motivations that drove Hegel into the 
arms of Schelling's Philosophy of Identity. 
But first we must return for a moment to the term "speculation." 
It was of course precisely its Philosophy of Nature that brought 
speculative philosophy into disrepute. The triumphant march of the 
natural sciences throughout the nineteenth century turned specula-
tion qua intellectual intuition into speculation qua unwarranted by 
any acceptable evidences. In their Philosophy of Nature Schelling and 
Hegel were like two brave medieval knights fighting a division of 
tanks. The battle was lost before it began. Yet the thought is perhaps 
not without some twilight charm that someday the sciences them-
selves will feel a hankering after a unity that could not be satisfied 
by the logical reconstruction of the language of science and to which 
the holistic passion that shaped these now forgotten Philosophies of 
Nature may be congenial. To be sure, the fuzzy-heads that make up 
the small but noisy army of today's anti-science and anti-technology 
prophets may joyfully return to the speculative Philosophy of Nature 
and claim it as an ally. But its sound re-appropriation, if there is to 
be another one after the debacle of Bergson's elan vital, will have to 
arise from a need within the sciences themselves. 
II, HE G E L 
A N D THE P H I L 0 S 0 P H Y 0 F I D E N T I T Y 
In his introduction to the Difference essay Hegel writes that philoso-

xiv 
Walter Cerf 
phy becomes a need in times when the simple and beautiful harmony 
of existence is sundered by the awareness of basic dichotomies and 
antinomies, when the believers become alienated from the gods, man 
from nature, the individual from his community. In historical situa-
tions of this sort philosophy is born and re-born in order to prepare 
through its systematic thought the revolution through which civiliza-
tion's many-dimensional alienation will be overcome in a higher 
cultural synthesis. 
We can see by inference from his early theological writings4 and by 
what we know of the circumstances of his first thirty years that these 
views reflect Hegel's own existential situation. On the level of values 
he was torn apart by clashing loyalties, loyalties to Greek Apollo, 
Christian Jesus, and Judeo-Prussian Kant. Liberated in mind by the 
French Revolution like every young German worth his salt, he yet 
remained in political bondage to the absolutist Duke of Wiirttem-
berg. He was tied down to the study of dogmatic theology, although 
there was probably little that interested him less at the time. He who 
later drew the wide panorama of human history and civilizations into 
his philosophy lived as a young man in exceedingly narrow condi-
tions of financiat sociat and sexual deprivation as stipendiate in 
Tiibingen and as tutor in private homes of the moderately wealthy 
in Bern and Frankfurt. Only an iron self-discipline can have kept him 
from exploding and going mad as his friend Holderlin did. His was a 
thoroughly alienated existence in which the clash between the life he 
led and his aspirations, between what was the case and what should 
and could be the case drove him, as it drove so many of his genera-
tion, to dream the idealizing dream of the Hellenic age and of the 
Christian Middle Ages and to trust in philosophy to prepare the revo-
lution of the German situation. It is important to be aware of the 
personal urgency in Hegel's commitment to philosophy. What moti-
vated and energized his philosophical beginnings were not at all 
intellectual puzzles, but the deeply felt disturbances of the situation 
in which he found himself and his generation, with the clash between 
Apollo, Jesus, and Kant the most articulate of these personal aspects 
of the general malaise. At least that much the young Hegel and our 
own existentialists have in common: matters of personal urgency 
rather than an interest in intellectual puzzles motivated their philoso-
phizing. And when Kierkegaard compared the later Hegel's Logic 
with a dance of skeletons he was not aware-and in fact could not 
have been aware-of how similar the personal problems behind his 
Either-Or were with the clash of value constellations that split the 

XV 
Speculative Philosophy 
young Hegel. Although their motivational situation was similar they 
took off in very different directions indeed, doing so on the basis of 
the sort of decision which is not exactly made by men, but which 
rather makes men: Kierkegaard to explore, and lead his public into 
what, in this time and place of his, it should mean to be a Christian 
in Christianity, and Hegel to explore and finally present what, in this 
time and place of his, the system of philosophia perennis is. 
How did the existential situation of the young Hegel lead him in 
the Essays to embrace Schelling's Philosophy of Identity? 
To be sure, Hegel might never have become a Schellingian if the 
accidents of life had not brought him together with Schelling in 
Ttibingen and made them good enough friends to remain in contact 
even after they went their different ways from Ttibingen, Schelling 
to fame and professorship in Jena, Hegel to the obscurity of a private 
tutorship in Bern and Frankfurt. Nor must it be forgotten that Schell-
ing, in making Hegel his neighbor and his colleague at the University 
of Jena, freed Hegel from the social and financial-if not sexual-
frustrations of the preceeding decades. It is not cynical to ascribe 
importance to biographical data of this sort. On the other hand, there 
must have been something in Schelling's Philosophy of Identity that 
made it look attractive .to Hegel as philosophy from the perspective 
of his own existential travail. 
Kant's Critical Idealism lay before the public in its whole extension 
and depth. There was Fichte's philosophy as Wissenschaftslehre. He-
gel was familiar with both. In the rich firmament of Goethe's Ger-
many there was a multitude of other philosophers, now known only 
to specialist scholars but then quite visible stars, a few of them 
generally believed at the time to be stars of the first magnitude. What 
Hegel could see in Schelling's philosophy and in none of the others 
was the construction-or at least the sketch for it-of a harmonious 
whole in which Hegel's own basic conflicts, though expressed in the 
most abstract terms, found their solution. He was able to project the 
longing after harmony that was energized by his personal turmoil 
into Schelling's philosophy, a philosophy which aimed at overcoming 
and bringing into systematic unity the basic conceptual dichotomies 
and antinomies that had evolved in modern metaphysics from Des-
cartes to Kant around the relation between the infinite and the finite 
(God and His creation) and between the subject and object (man and 
nature, the knower and the known). It was not at all impossible to 
project one's own alienations into these and connected dichotomies 
and to consider the Philosophy of Identity, with the interdependence 

xvi 
Walter Cerf 
of its two parts and their intrinsic relation to the Absolute, as the 
vehicle of one's own reconciliation with God, nature, and society. 
Thus Hegel, quite unlike Kierkegaard, took the first and decisive 
step away from his existential motivations and moved toward the 
grand tradition of modern philosophy-whose Plotinus he was des-
tined to become. His Essays are the documents marking the begin-
ning of his career. Without this first step Hegel rather than Kierke-
gaard might have become the father of existentialism. His gifts-
among which ordinary logical thinking was conspicuously absent 
-might have well prepared him for this; and the influence which 
parts of the Phenomenology had, for example on Sartre, corroborate 
it. 
III. S P E C U L AT I V E V E R 5 U S R E F L E C T I V E PH I L 0 S 0 P H Y 
Our excursion in the preceding section was intended to aid in an 
understanding of how the general scheme of Schelling's system-
with its view of the Absolute revealing itself in nature and rational 
self-consciousness and revealing itself to itself in the two parts of the 
Philosophy of Identity-found a ready response in Hegel. The 
schisms characteristic of his situation and that of his generation, 
when expressed in philosophical dichotomies such as those of the in-
finite and finite and of subject and object, could find their harmonious 
solution in the Philosophy of Identity, which seemed to offer on the 
academic level a view of the whole uniting in harmony all sorts of 
opposites. As such, it could serve as a philosophical basis for the 
revolution that would turn modern civilization, sick from and of its 
schisms, into a truly integrated culture to be described in metaphors 
taken from the romantic conception of nature: a living whole of 
which the individuals were organs rather than atoms. As each part 
was sustained and enriched by the whole, so each part functioned to 
sustain the whole. 
But here a problem arises. If speculative philosophy, having its 
sight on that final whole of God, nature, and self-consciousness, is 
philosophy as it has finally come into its own truth, then what about 
all those philosophical efforts that cannot be said even by the most 
tolerant historian to anticipate speculative philosophy at least germi-
nally? That is, what about all non-speculative philosophy? And what 
about the interrelations, if any, between speculative and non-

xvii 
Speculative Philosophy 
speculative philosophy? These questions are among the questions 
which Hegel himself takes up in his Introduction to the Essays. 
The Essays have a name for non-speculative philosophy: reflective 
philosophy. The term has here only an indirect connection with the 
various uses Kant assigned to 'reflection' and 'reflective' in The 
Critique of Pure Reason and The Critique of Judgment. Basically, 
Hegel uses ;t as Schelling had done in his System of Transcendental'· 
Idealism (1800), where reflection was what the second of the three 
"epochs" in the "history of self-consciousness" led to, reflection go-
ing hand in hand with analysis, both being opposed to the "productive 
intuition" and "synthesis" that characterize the first epoch. And 
Kant's philosophy was taken to be the typical culmination of the 
epoch of reflection. (The third epoch was that of "the absolute act of 
will.") But as no concept remained quite the same when Hegel took 
it up in his own thought, we can understand what Hegel meant by 
'reflective philosophy' without discussing Schelling's view. 
The distinction between reflective and speculative philosophy is 
not meant to be a distinction between different schools of philosophy. 
To Hegel, English empiricism from Locke on as well as continental 
rationalism (with the exception of Spinoza) were reflective philoso-
phies. The whole philosophy of the Enlightenment was reflective. 
And so was most of Kant's transcendental idealism. Reflective phi-
losophy is philosophy that has not come to the true conception of phi-
losophy, philosophy that is not really philosophy-inauthentic phi-· 
losophy over against authentic philosophy which is, and cannot but 
be speculative. In terms of the Kantian faculties, reflective philoso-
phy is philosophy of the intellect (der Verstand), speculative philoso-
phy is philosophy of Reason (die Vernunft), but of a Reason which 
has been allowed to trespass on territory Kant believed to be inacces-
sible to finite man. It is typical of reflective philosophy, though it does 
not exhaust its nature, that it relies on argumet~ts, proofs, and the 
whole apparatus of logic, that it insists on clear-cut dichotomies in 
terms of abstract universals, dichotomies such as those of the infinite 
and the finite, subject and object, universal and particular, freedom 
and necessity, causality and teleology, etc., etc.; that it tries to solve 
intellectual puzzles rather than give the true conceptual vision of the 
whole; that it sticks to the natural sciences as the source of the only 
reliable knowledge of nature, thus committing itself, in the first place, 
to a concept of experience reduced to sense perception and to a con-
cep.t-ef sense perception reduced to some causal chain, and in the 
second place, to a pervasive atomism that reduces the whole to the 

xviii 
Walter Cerf 
sum of its parts, and to a mechanism that excludes teleology from a . 
positive role in cognition. No reflective philosophy need have all of 
these characteristics although any one of them would be the indica-
tion of a philosophy that has not reached the one authentic concep-
tion of philosophy. 
Hence, any assault that reflective philosophy directs against specu-
lative philosophy can be taken care of simply by pointing out that it 
is a reflective assault. Answering it by counterarguments would turn 
the speculative philosopher into a reflective one. What is wrong with 
the attack is that it is reflective; it is made in a style of doing philoso-
phy that is not truly philosophical. Whatever the argument may be 
which a reflective philosopher uses against speculative philosophy, 
his very arguing shows that he is not really a philosopher. Contempt 
is the only answer to all reflective assaults. No dialogue is possible. 
We shall soon observe that this is only one side of Hegel's attitude 
toward reflective philosophy. But before we come to the other side 
we may want to illustrate this conception of the relation between 
reflective and speculative philosophy by way of a contemporary paral-
lel. I mean the relation between existentialism and analytic philoso-
phy. 
There can be no doubt at all that our own contemporary analytic 
philosophy, in its narrowest as well as in its widest meaning (which 
excludes only the existentialists, the Whiteheadians, and the Tho-
mists), would be judged by Hegel to be a very typical reflective phi-
losophy. There must be considerable doubt, however, whether or not 
Hegel would acknowledge existentialism to be speculative philosophy. 
From the viewpoint of the Philosophy of Identity, existentialism 
spoiled its chance of being authentic philosophy by concentrating 
not just on man but on man as condemned to finitude. And from the 
viewpoint of existentialism Hegel spoiled his chance of being the first 
modern existentialist when he permitted the urge that drove him into 
philosophy to find satisfaction in the more or less traditional appa-
ratus of the Philosophy of Identity. Yet there are several aspects of 
existentialism in which the Hegel of the Essays could recognize him-
self. Besides the already mentioned motivational factor (one does not 
do philosophy to solve intellectual puzzles, though a positive version 
would have to have recourse to some colorless formula such as 
searching for meaning in a world become meaningless, which fits nei-
ther Hegel nor existentialism), Hegel would recognize his contempt 
for the philosophy of the intellect in existentialism's contempt for a 
civilization in which the empirical sciences and technology have be-

xix 
Speculative Philosophy 
come predominant and where philosophy has very largely become the 
handmaiden of science. He would recognize, as we already did, his 
distinction between reflective and speculative philosophy in the dis-
tinction_ so dear to _ex~stentialis~s, the distin~tion_)Jetreen wh~t _}S,~, 1 _ 1 
authenhc and what 1s mauthenhc, between ezg~iltfi and ufUi~eht-
lich. And speculation itself, intellectual intuition as vision of the 
whole, has its analogue or rather, its subjective caricature in the cog-
nitive function existentialists ascribe to moods, the mood of boredom, 
for example, being said to reveal the Whole of Being or Being as a 
Whole. In any case, whether or not existentialism is what speculative 
philosophy would have come to be in our own day, it is quite certain 
that the reaction existentialism has shown towards even the most 
devastating attacks launched against it by analytic philosophers is 
very much the same as the reaction of speculative philosophy towards 
reflective attacks. These attacks are attacks that need not be answered 
except by classifying them as analytic, that is, as basically unphilo-
sophic, as philosophically inauthentic. From the side of existentialism 
no dialogue is possible between it and analytic philosophy, just as 
from the side of speculative philosophy no dialogue is possible be-
tween it and reflective philosophy. (From the side of analytic philoso-
phy as from the side of reflective philosophy in general, the situation 
is of course quite different as they are committed to the idea of ra-
tional discourse. It seems to them incomprehensible that there are 
philosophies which in principle refuse to argue or, if they condescend 
to argue, know that they are lowering themselves to a pseudo-
philosophical level.) 
We had mentioned that the contempt for reflective philosophy will 
turn out to be only one side of Hegel's attitude toward reflective phi-
losophy. To the reader of the Essays it may appear to be the most 
prominent part, as they abound with ferocious sarcasms directed at 
reflective philosophy in general and at this or that reflective philoso-
pher in particular. Yet th~re is something authentically inauthentic, 
so to speak, about the very dichotomy of reflective and speculative 
philosophy. For like all the other dichotomies mentioned before, the 
dichotomy of reflective and speculative philosophy is itself typical of 
the style of reflective philosophy, and not at all typical of speculative 
philosophy, in which the reflective dichotomies are overcome in a 
vision of the organic whole that builds up its richness of harmony 
out of the tensions between its constituents. To be sure, unlike the 
reflective dichotomies separating the infinite from the finite, subject 
from object, freedom from necessity, etc., the dichotomy separating 

XX 
Walter Cerf 
reflective from speculative philosophy is not a dichotomy in phi-
losophy, but a dichotomy about philosophy, a second-level dichoto-
my. But this should make no difference at all; for meta-philosophy is 
itself an essential part of philosophy and the meta-philosophical di-
chotomy is philosophical-although Hegel should have called it a 
reflective philosophical dichotomy, a dichotomy which sets specula-
tive philosophy the task of overcoming it as it is to overcome the 
first-level dichotomies that reflective philosophy prides itself of. 
Here we reach the positive side of Hegel's attitude toward reflec-
tive philosophy. It is historical or at least, it is historical in a way. 
Only after reflective philosophy has gone through all its paces and 
realized its major possibilities can philosophy come into its own as 
speculative philosophy. The analytic gifts of the intellect must have 
bloomed and so made all the dichotomies of the time explicit before 
the bud (ever present?) of speculation can open up in its full glory. 
In particular, reflective philosophy must have reached the stage where 
it sees itself split into unsolvable antinomies and is forced into scep-
ticism concerning the very problems that form its traditional core. It 
is at this historical point when philosophy despairs of metaphysics 
-as it does in Kant's Dialectic of Pure Reason-and forbids pure 
Reason to have any but a methodological ("regulative") role in cogni-
tion, that philosophy can and must come into its own as speculation. 
In Hegel's style of speculative philosophy this necessity is at once 
historical and conceptual-without much awareness of this reflective 
distinction. Rather it is taken for granted that the logical dependence 
of the concept of speculative philosophy-the overcoming of the di-
chotomies-on the concept of reflective philosophy is eo ipso a tem-
poral sequence or, to express it in a somewhat different way, as if 
the teleological unfolding of philosophy is identical with the causal 
chain of historical events. (It needs no stressing that this sort of 
identification as it occurs in the Essays, is at the very heart of the 
later Hegel's elaborate and subtle historical dialectic.) 
(In the Essays Hegel's view of the history of philosophy is rather 
ambivalent. At times he does seem to view the history of philosophy 
z.s leading "necessarily" in its last stages from reflective philosophy 
t::l speculative philosophy. At other times he seems to think that any 
philosophy which deserves the name is germinally speculative, but 
kept from knowing itself as such by the cultural situation in which 
it makes its appearance. Yet there is Spinoza, the great inspirator of 
the Philosophy of Identity. It seems difficult for either of these views 

xxi 
Speculative Philosophy 
to account for Spinoza's system appearing at the time when it did 
appear.) 
There are two images that the Essays occasionally use for the re-
lation between reflective and speculative philosophy, and they show 
how ambiguous Hegel's concept of this relation is. In one image, 
what philosophy is about is compared with a grove. To speculative 
philosophy the grove is where the god dwells. To reflective philoso-
phy, the grove is a number of trees. In the other image, philosophy 
is compared with a temple. Speculative philosophy dwells in it, but 
reflective philosophy remains in the forecourt. 
The first image appears to make the difference between reflective 
and speculative philosophy so radical as to exclude all relation, let 
alone dialogue, between them. Yet in his earlier theological writings 
Hegel also uses the image of the hallowed grove for the youthful or-
ganic and holistic culture of Hellas, in which nature and the divine 
were not yet split one from the other nor the individual from his 
community. If we remember this, then we may also interpret the hal-
lowed grove image with respect to speculative philosophy in a dialec-
tical way: reflective philosophy had to separate the sacred grove into 
its component trees so that in speculative philosophy the divine, the 
natural, and the rational could achieve consciousness of their unity. 
Exactly the opposite holds for the other image, that of the temple 
and its forecourt. Obviously, if there is a forecourt one cannot enter 
the temple of speculative philosophy without passing through the 
forecourt of reflective philosophy. On the surface, then, the second 
image seems to be that of a necessary connection between reflective 
and speculative philosophy. But why does there have to be a fore-
court at all? And in fact, Hegel stresses that there is no approach to 
speculative philosophy but a salta mortale, a corps perdu, by a jump 
that must be lethal to reflective philosophy if it is to be resurrected 
as speculation. 
Besides the rather hedged-in admission that reflective philosophy 
had to run its full course before the true conception of authentic phi-
losophy could arise, the Essays contain a second positive appraisal of 
reflective philosophy. For it would seem that Hegel concedes that the 
very language of speculative philosophy must for purposes of com-
munication be to a large extent the language of reflective philosophy 
and even the language of ordinary discourse. There are certain indi-
cations that the writer of the Essays had already given considerable 
thought to the problem of how to communicate speculative philoso-

xxii 
Walter Cerf 
phy. He is convinced that it should not be done more geometrico, 
not even in the very attenuated form in which it occurs in Fichte's 
Science of Knowledge and Schelling's publications up to 1801. This 
logical apparatus is hopelessly reflective. Nor would Hegel's own in-
clinations and logical gifts be appropriate to it. But then, how can 
speculation, extra-ordinary and extra-reflective as it is, be communi-
cated at all? How can ordinary language and reflective philosophical 
discourse be made to do an extra-ordinary and non-reflective job? 
There is quite a similarity here between the speculative philosopher 
and Kierkegaard. Kierkegaard focused in on this sort of problem very 
early and his whole literary style is a deliberate answer to it, an an-
swer full of astonishing deviousness. Even the most prejudiced He-
gelian will have to admit, I think, that in this respect Kierkegaard 
was much the greater craftsman of the two. Hegel found the full 
measure of his style only in the Phenomenology {1807) when he was 
37 years old, and it consisted mainly in various singular ways of 
adapting the grammar and terms of ordinary and reflective discourses 
to the presentation of an ever ongoing movement of concepts fed by 
dialectical tensions. Kierkegaard was an artful spider weaving intri-
cate nets to catch his readers, Hegel a busy bird bravely bending 
and stretching the available material to build a fine nest for his dia-
lectical eggs, and the reader be damned. Some of this bending and 
stretching can already be observed in the Essays. Hegel's style in the 
Essays was unlike that of anybody else then writing in German phi-
losophy. This is not necessarily a praise, least of all in Hegel's own 
judgment, which condemns the idiosyncratic in philosophy. I am 
somewhat inclined to agree with those critics who say that the main 
stylistic rule of the Essays is this: the more complex the grammatical 
construction of a sentence and the less clear its meaning, the more 
speculative it will be. In any case, the uniqueness of his style in the 
Essays seems due less to any clear insight into how speculative phi-
losophy should and could be communicated than to a rather tentative 
groping in many divergent directions of adapting the linguistic me-
dium to speculative purposes. The reflective dichotomy, for example, 
of subject and object is overcome linguistically with Schelling's aid 
by way of the awkward formulas at the heart of the Philosophy of 
Identity: "the subjective Subject-Object" and "the objective Subject-
Object." The latter is dealt with in the Philosophy of Nature, the 
former in the Transcendental Philosophy. The same procedure might 
have been used for the reflective dichotomy of the Infinite and the 
Finite, but neither Schelling nor Hegel does so, though they use "the 

xxiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
finitely Infinite" and "the infinitely Finite," neither of which would 
indicate what it should: the overcoming of the dichotomy in the 
"identity" of the Infinite and the Finite. To speak of God in episte-
mological terms as Subject-Object must have seemed less iconoclastic 
and objectionable than to speak of Him as the Finite-Infinite. One 
shudders to think of Schelling and Hegel extending the symbolization 
of the identity of subject and object to other dichotomies such as 
those of freedom and necessity or causality and teleology. 
Parenthetically we may note here that Hegel is rather flexible in 
relating these two basic dichotomies of subject and object and of the 
infinite and the finite to one another. Sometimes it is the subject that 
is infinite and the object finite, sometimes the other way around, a 
flexibility that only a philosophy contemptuous of reflective philoso-
phy could allow itself. 
In any event one has to keep in mind the whole glorious scheme of 
the Philosophy of Identity to give to the 'objective and subjective 
Subject-Object' the flesh and blood it seems to lack in the Essays. 
One must keep in mind, moreover, that these abstract identity for-
mulas were alive with the existential agony felt by Hegel and his 
contemporaries and that the holistic passion at the living core of the 
Philosophy of Identity was fed by the alienation of the individual 
from nature, community (das Volk), and God. 
Speculative philosophy, in sum, defends itself against the attacks 
of reflective philosophy by labelling the attacks reflective, and not by 
arguing with them-because it would then abandon itself as specu-
lation and surrender to reflection. On the other hand, reflective phi-
losophers, cupidi rerum novarum, see in the speculators an interest-
ing new sort of monkey they would like to get better acquainted 
with. In fact, if the monkey could convince them that his system is 
not just another cage but what he claims it to be, the ultimate whole 
as known in the only sort of knowledge that deserves the name, the 
reflectors might in the end want to share the cage with him. But in-
stead of trying to convince them in the style they expect from a 
philosopher, the monkey develops his salta mortale rhetoric which 
is as convincing as telling a healthy man that he must go through 
cancer of the brain in order to enjoy true health. So what can specu-
lative philosophy actually do to convince reflective philosophy {as 
well as common sense and the general public) that it is what it claims 
to be? 
Perhaps this is one of the problems, taken in its most catholic ?Yit.rOL{ 
scope, that the Phenomenology, as the prolegomena to Hegel's sys-

xxiv 
Walter Cerf 
tern, was later intended to answer. In the Essays the answer is an 
inaudible sigh of regret joined with an affirmation of hope. The sigh 
of regret: if only THE speculative system existed, not in fragments 
and sketches as in Schelling, but as an organic whole detailed in its 
totality! The affirmation of hope: once this system exists, the spirit 
of the time will reach out toward it, its time will have come, es wird 
sein Glueck machen.5 For civilization is longing to be cured of the di-
chotomies that rend it and that reflective philosophy had the task of 
bringing into the open. 
And the spirit did reach out toward it. However, it was not in the 
Philosophy of Identity that the spirit recognized itself, not in Schell-
ing and not in the Hegel of the Essays. It recognized itself in the 
Hegel of the Phenomenology, the Logic and the Philosophy of His-
tory. In them, speculative philosophy, though greatly changed, ful-
filled its promises, and died (except in England, where religion found 
a strong ally in it, and in Italy, where liberalism was the ally and 
where national pride could claim Vico to be St. John the Baptist to 
Hegel, the savior). 
After all is said and done it must yet be admitted that the Essays, 
notwithstanding Hegel's unwillingness to let speculative philosophy 
descend to the level of reflective philosophy, give not only a specu-
lative judgment on reflective philosophy, but also a reflective ap-
proach of sorts to speculative philosophy. Contemptuous of the fore-
court of the temple, the Essays manage just the same to spend much 
time and effort in it-just as Michelangelo did in la bella rusticana, 
the little Quattrocento church on the hills of Florence whose simple 
static harmonies he was in need of as a foil for the complex dynamic 
tensions of his own revolutionary style. 
IV· INTELLECTUAL INTUIT I 0 N 
We might begin in a cavalier-fashion by saying that intellectual intu-
ition furnishes the evidences on which the Philosophy of Identity is 
built. In saying this we are, however, already victims of reflective 
philosophy. For the concept of "being based upon ... " involves some 
logical relation pertaining to induction or deduction, as if intellectual 
intuition either furnished the evidences that could verify or falsify 
the truth claims of statements, or were some set of self-evident axi-
oms at the basis of a body of theorems. In the former case the Phi-

XXV 
Speculative Philosophy 
losphy of Identity would be an empirical science with an exceedingly 
strange sort of evidence as its experiential ground. In the latter case 
it would be like geometry as traditionally conceived, and hence sub-
ject to the threat of the Kantian question whether the apriority of 
the axioms is analytic or synthetic; and if synthetic a priori, the pos-
sibility of their objective reference would have to be made intelligible. 
But this whole apparatus remains of course in the forecourt of the 
temple of philosophy and is, or should be, foreign to speculative 
philosophy-which dwells in the temple itself. 
We have already suggested that intellectual intuition became, in 
Schelling and Hegel, the vision of the whole, a vision in which God, 
nature, and self-consciousness (or reason) come into their truth. Spi-
noza's scientia sub specie ceternitatis becomes scientia sub specie to-
talitatis atque harmonice. (In the following generations this vision of 
the whole will be degraded to Weltanschauung, leading to the rela-
tivization not only of moral and ;:esthetic standards but also of the 
basic theoretical categories, emerging as sociology of sorts in France, 
and in Germany as Dilthey's typology of Weltanschaungen.) Kant, 
however, had surely meant by intellectual intuition something quite 
different from this vision of the whole. And he had clearly and deci-
sively disallowed intellectual intuition to have any positive role in 
human cognition. How was it then that intellectual intuition turned 
into this holistic vision and organized itself into something that 
claimed to be THE system of knowledge under the name of the Phi-
losophy of Identity? 
I shall let Schelling and Hegel speak for themselves, letting them 
talk univoce without drawing a line between what Schelling said and 
what Hegel said. Nor shall I draw a line between what they did say 
and what they might have said. It must of course not be assumed 
that the way they understand Kant is my own way. 
What the speculators said and might have said to Kant is this: 
"You admit that the concept of an intuitive intellect or intellectual 
intuition harbors no logical contradictions and that therefore there 
could be such a thing as intellectual intuition; but you also assert 
that as a matter of fact human beings do not possess it. For the basic 
way in which anything can be knowable to us as an object of expe-
rience is by its being given to us, and the only way in which it can 
be given to us is by its becoming a datum to our senses: it must 
cause a sensation in us. Having sensations, however, is very different 
from having knowledge. So you bridge the gap between having sen-
sations and having knowledge by an impressive analysis of the ap-

xxvi 
Walter Cerf 
paratus which our sensibility and the reason (der Verstand) con-
tribute on their own account to the objectivity of possible objects of 
experience. We say 'our sensibility' and 'the reason' because you do 
play with the idea of non-human subjects whose sensibility might 
have forms different from those human sensibility has. And you do 
not play with the idea of rational beings whose forms of judgment 
and therewith categories might be different from those of man. This 
is part of your Stoic background, about which more later. Sensibility 
contributes (the forms of) space and time; reason contributes twelve 
basic concepts in accordance with the twelve forms of judgment and, 
dependent on the categories and their schematization, your twelve 
'principles of the pure understanding.' In consequence, what you 
allow us to have knowledge of in our experience are not the things 
as they are in themselves but only as they affect us, that is, as they 
appear to us. You revel in the dichotomy of things in themselves-
which are unknowable to us-and their appearances-which are all 
we are ever permitted to know. Even what you call our synthetic 
a priori knowledge such as mathematics does not reach beyond the 
possible objects of experience. 
"If we examine the nature of your prejudice against intellectual 
intuition more closely we find it to be rooted in dubious psychology, 
theological dogma, and the procedures of the natural sciences. To 
begin with the last, you state that the knowledge claims of the na-
tural sciences are well founded to the extent that their judgments, 
from statements of observation to the most general theories, can be 
tested empirically, that is, by perception; and perception, according 
to the causal theory of perception which you unquestionably accept, 
has as its basic stratum visual, acoustic, and similar sensations. So 
the triumphant course of the natural sciences since Galileo and New-
ton over against the debacle of the metaphysical knowledge claims 
of the rationalists leads you to assert that we must claim no knowl-
ege of any object, ourselves included, that cannot be related in certain 
prescribed ways to something that is given to us either in externally 
or in internally perceptual experience. (The prescribed ways in which 
any object we claim to know must be related to what is sensuously 
given to us are spatial, temporal and those formulated in your prin-
ciples of the pure understanding.) 
"The lesson which the natural sciences taught you goes beautifully 
hand in hand with your theological bias. This is your conviction of 
the inescapable finitude of rational man. You find the index of this 
finitude in the fact that objects can be known to us if and only if 

xxvii 
Speculative Philosophy 
they (a) affect our sensibility and (b) conform to the spontaneously 
imposed conditions of our intellect. Our sensibility is merely passive 
and our spontaneity is limited to the mere forms of objectivity. Over 
against this doubly finite relation of the human subject to the objects 
of his cognitive experiences you conceive of a kind of knowledge 
which is spontaneity all through. There would be no receptivity in it 
at all and spontaneity would not be limited to the mere forms. This 
is what you call intellectual intuition. It is divine creativity seen in 
the perspective of your epistemological and psychological presuppo-
sitions. 
"Your psychological presuppositions have already come to the 
fore. Man has the capacity to receive sensations, and you call this 
receptivity sensibility. This is one psychological stem from which 
knowledge grows. The other is the faculty of freely forming concepts, 
combining them in judgments, and combining judgments in syllo-
gisms. This is reason. What sort of psychology is this? If it were 
rational psychology a Ia Wolff and Baumgarten, you yourself would 
have destroyed it in the Paralogism section of your Dialectic of Pure 
Reason. If it were empirical psychology you would seem to have 
founded, at least in part, your explanation of the possibility of em-
pirical knowledge on empirical knowledge and this is hardly a con-
vincing foundation. 
"Besides, there is the basic contradiction that you got yourself into. 
Jacobi summed it up when he said that without the thing-in-itself 
one cannot get into The Critique of Pure Reason and with the thing-
in-itself one cannot stay in it. What is it that causes the sensations 
in us? This cause of our sensations cannot be found in the objects 
of our experiences, whether we mean by the objects of our experi-
ences(ordinary objects 'like trees and houses or scientific objects like 
gravity and atoms.6 The objects of our experiences cannot be the 
causes of our sensations, for according to your own theory the possi-
bility of any object is rooted in the forms of our sensibility and the 
forms of the intellect having shaped the sensuous material. So the X 
that causes the sensation must be the thing-in-itself unknowably 
hidden behind the veil of appearances. But in making the thing-in-
itself the cause of our sensations you have done what is verboten by 
your own Critique. You have applied one of the categories, the cate-
gory of causality, to the thing-in-itself. It is inconceivable in terms 
of your theory that the thing-in-itself causes sensations. One could 
more easily receive a letter from outer space, even one written in 
English. 

xxviii 
Walter Cerf 
"Now what would you say if we show you that you yourself un-
knowingly make intellectual intuition the ultimate basis of all knowl-
edge claims that you consider soundly grounded? We are of course 
referring to your transcendental apperception, the 'I think,' of which 
you say that it is the highest point to which must be fastened the 
applicability of the categories to time (and space), therewith the 
possibility of experiencing objects and therewith the possibility of 
objects of experience. For according to your first Critique the unity 
of nature as the totality of all possible objects of experience depends 
in the last analysis on the unity of the I in its synthetizing categorial 
acts of thinking. But precisely in making the thinking I the highest 
point you give it the characteristic that is definitory of intellectual 
intuition. To think oneself as thinking-pure self-consciousness-is 
to give oneself existence as pure I. Your transcendental appercep-
tion lives up to your own concept of intellectual intuition. You have 
overcome your dichotomy of receptivity-in which objects are given 
-and spontaneity-in which they are thought. The pure Ego gives 
itself to itself in the pure act of thinking itself as thinking. This is 
how it exists. Naturally, 'existence' does not have the meaning it 
ordinarily has. It does not have anything to do with being localizable 
in ti:ne and space, which is the reason why the I must not be said 
to create itself. Fichte prefers to speak of the Ego 'positing' itself. 
We use 'constructing,' others 'constituting.' 
"Your transcendental apperception, however, does not only over-
come your dichotomy of receptivity and spontaneity. It also is the 
beginning of a synthesis of your two most radical and basic oppo-
sites, that of the subject and object and that of the infinite and the 
finite. 
"As to the dichotomy of subject and object, it is seen at once that 
the 'I think' of the pure apperception-the I that thinks itself as 
thinking-is at the same time both subject and object, or as we pre-
fer to say, the identity of subject and object. Nous noei heauton. This, 
though, is Aristotle. The Greek roots of your philosophy are Stoic 
rather than Platonic or Aristotelian. So were those of Rousseau, 
whom you so admired. The light that gave the Enlightenment its name 
was the lumen naturale, the Stoic spark of reason, the representative 
part of divine reason in all rational beings making them all free, 
equal, and brothers, as the French Revolution concluded. 
"The metaphysical rationalism of Stoicism also forms the hidden 
background of your transcendental apperception. For the T of your 
'I think' is not at all that of any !-saying individual, who is no less 

xxix 
Speculative Philosophy 
appearance than the objects he experiences. One might rather say 
that the I of the pure apperception is that of the Leibnizian monad 
which, as the l-in-itself, is hidden behind the subject as it appears to 
itself. This monadological background of the pure apperception 
would seem to be undeniable. Yet it must not ever be forgotten that 
the monadic subject-in-itself is given, in the spirit of the age, the 
features of the Stoic spark of reason, the same divine reason in each 
rational individual. So there is occasion for a secret tug-of-war be-
tween the Leibnizian and the Stoic background. In any event, at the 
bottom of your Critique there is the Stoic philosophy of identity. It 
is a very limited one in comparison with ours. It excludes all of na-
ture. For though divine reason is said by Stoic metaphysic to rule 
over nature, the laws of nature being decrees issued by it, Stoicism 
does not allow divine reason to be present inside nature as the un-
conscious urge driving it toward the emergence of self-consciousness. 
Thus your Stoic identity is limited to the divine reason ruling the 
universe and its representative sparks residing in human individuals, 
and through that very residence standing in constant danger of being 
infringed and becoming polluted. To this extent, then, and only to 
this extent, your transcendental apperception is also the overcoming 
of the finite-infinite dichotomy. Without this Stoic identity between 
infinite and finite reason, each monadic subject would have its own 
world and you would have to appeal to the hypothesis of a pre-
established harmony to explain the illusion of a world shared by all. 
You would not be able to explain that our experience, instead of be-
ing a flux of private sensations, gives us knowledge of a common 
world. On the other hand, your monadological background might 
have permitted you a more subtle way of accounting for the pre-
personal individuation of the sparks of reason-of the indexing func-
tion of the I of the transcendental apperception-than Stoicism itself 
would have been able to do. In either case, though, for either monad 
or spark of reason the use of language, in any of the customary 
senses of 'language,' is a disquieting problem, though not within the 
Philosophy of Identity as it knows God's becoming man. 
"Here we must return for a moment to what we have said about 
your overcoming of the subject-object dichotomy. For the 'I think' 
of your transcendental apperception is not just the Ego's thinking 
itself as thinking-and thus in this very narrow sense the identity of 
subject and object. Your 'I think' is an incomplete expression. You 
yourself stress that what the I thinks are the categories and through 
them the twelve principles of the pure understanding to which the 

XXX 
Walter Cerf 
objectivity of the objects of our experience is due. 'I think the cate-
gories' is, in terms of our Philosophy of Identity, a formula for the 
identity of that part of the subject which you call Verstand and the 
form of objectivity. In claiming that the twelve principles are the con-
ditions furnished by reason which allow our experience to be of 
objects you may also claim, as we would express it, the identity of 
the rational self with the form of objectivity. 
"In sum, then, your transcendental apperception is indeed intellec-
tual intuition unilaterally defined from the perspective of the dichoto-
my of receptivity and spontaneity as the overcoming of this dichoto-
my. At the same time, however, and again without your recognizing 
the fact, the transcendental apperception is the very limited over-
coming of the dichotomies of the subject and object and of the 
infinite and the finite that your philosophy allows. And intellectual 
intuition does all this right at the most crucial point of your phi-
losophy, where you deny the possibility of intellectual intuition to the 
finite beings men are. From all this we conclude that your concept 
of intellectual intuition is much too narrow. Intellectual intuition 
must be conceived as the construction of the identity underlying all 
the dichotomies you reflectors have been proud of establishing, and 
particularly the subject-object and infinite-finite dichotomies. It is 
this enlarged concept of intellectual intuition which we call specula-
tion and which thus becomes the holistic vision of the complex iden-
tity of subject and object and of the infinite and the finite or-in 
terms that join these basic dichotomies-of God, nature and self-
consciousness. 
"Transcendental apperception as intellectual intuition, however, is 
not the only motive in your Critical Idealism that leads directly into 
the speculation of our Philosophy of Identity. We have always been 
fascinated by an aside of yours that you let slip in an unguarded 
moment. This is your remark that perhaps the two stems of our cog-
nitive faculties, sensibility and reason, have the same root.7 You must 
have had in mind something like an unconscious intellectual intuition, 
an identity of receptivity and spontaneity prior to their reflective 
separation. We think we are justified in seeing this as an anticipation 
of the unconscious God revealing Himself in nature. For one inspired 
moment you came close to our philosophy of nature. 
"We also like to connect this aside of yours with your equally 
inspired conception of the role of productive imagination in your 
Transcendental Deduction of the Categories. The role productive 
imagination is given in your Deduction is that of synthetizing the 

xxxi 
Speculative Philosophy 
pure manifold of time in accordance with the rules as which the cate-
gories function in the objectification of experience. Pure imagination, 
as the great synthetizer, is the mediator between time and the cate-
gories. It does not seem to us far-fetched to see in the role you 
ascribe to imagination an anticipation of the speculative construction 
of the identity of these opposites. Productive imagination, instead of 
merely putting two different pieces in an external unity, is their inner 
unity, their 'common root' raised from its unconscious pre-reflective 
status to post-reflective awareness. 
"The role you ascribe to productive imagination in your Deduction 
anticipates our speculative philosophy, or is at least a step in the 
right direction, also with respect to the finite-infinite dichotomy. For 
in overcoming through productive imagination your own rigorous 
confrontation of receptivity and spontaneity, you are also undoing, 
however cautiously and limitedly, your stubborn insistence on the 
finitude of man. And at the same time you are advancing beyond the 
Stoic philosophy of identity with its restriction to the sparks of rea-
son as the only divine element in man. To be sure, you still exclude 
the sense data from the Ego's productivity. It was Fichte to whom 
we owe this giant step. But in making productive imagination the 
great synthetizer you have given to the pure Ego, at least within the 
cognitive sphere, a spontaneity that goes far beyond the mere think-
ing of the categories. The Ego is now coming close to being a 'finitely 
infinite.' By the same token you have transcended the limitations of 
your Stoic background. To the Stoic reason which is pure thought 
you have added productive imagination to do the work which reason 
cannot do, the work of synthetizing the pure manifold of time. 
Thcugh there is no labor involved in this sort of work, it is at least 
doing something while the pure manifold of time, on the left of pro-
ductive imagination, and the pure thinking of the categories, on its 
right, are in one sense and another not doing anything at all. You 
have gone beyond the contemplative god of Stoicism; yet you have 
not come closer to the active God of Christianity. 
"In your theoretical philosophy God functions as a merely meth-
odological rule in the ongoing business of exploring the world: do 
not ever stop exploring. In your practical philosophy God is a postu-
late, though a necessary one, to guarantee justice in distributing bless-
ings according to deserts. Your Stoicism turns Judaic in the moral 
sphere. You totally separate, reason and the universal moral law 
grounded in it from the beautiful sphere of human passions. More-
over you are unable to explain how the universal moral law can 

xxxii 
Walter Cerf 
actually function as such in human life and you admit that even if 
it does no one can ever be sure that it is doing so. This is what the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit have come to in your philosophy. 
Your hidden metaphysical Stoicism is Hellas' revenge on Christianity. 
"We regret to have to say this. Our Philosophy of Identity has as 
much of the Christian God as any metaphysic can possibly have 
that claims to be knowledge. You must not suspect us of being friv-
olous when we see the total relationship of God, nature and self-
consciousness in analogy with the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit. 8 
"But quite apart from this somewhat esoteric analogy taken from 
the tradition of Christian theology-not for nothing did we spend 
years in the Stift in Tiibingen-speculation achieves its overcoming 
of all the basic reflective dichotomies in the organistically conceived 
vista of THE WHOLE as presented in the Philosophy of Identity. Its 
Philosophy of Nature deals with the objective Subject-Object, whose 
unconscious self-revelatory dynamics replaces your dichotomy of the 
thing-in-itself and its appearances. The Transcendental Philosophy 
deals with the subjective Subject-Object and solves the problems, 
unsolvable within your Critical Idealism, of the relation of the pure 
apperception to God on the one hand, and to the (logico-historical) 
development of rationality in man on the other. The God who reveals 
Himself in nature is not, as such, the God who cpmes to know Him-
self as having revealed himself in nature. That G~d He becomes only 
in the evolution of human rationality. Man's re-construction of God's 
creativity in nature is thus itself a chapter-the last one?-of God's 
creation of Himself. 
"It surely cannot be said against our system with its superb bal-
ance of idealism and realism that there is still a vestige of an ideal-
istic imbalance in it because the Philosophy of Nature was not written 
by nature itself but had to wait for the birth and development of 
rationality in man. One could just as well talk about an imbalance 
in favor of realism in that the whole ascending chain of God's un-
conscious revelations in nature was needed to bring forth that ration-
ality in man which becomes the instrument of God's knowledge of 
Himself. 
"To use an analogy which is not at all congenial to us but may 
become fashionable someday, your Critique sets new rules for the 
game of METAPHYSICS. Yours is a game somewhat like tennis. The ball 
must always pass above the net of empirical statements. The game 
begins with a rally in which the ball must hit the ground in the nar-

xxxiii 
Speculative Philosophy 
row part of the area that you call the synthetic a priori, namely, that 
part of the synthetic a priori that gives 'the conditions of the possi-
bility of objects of experience.' This is the rally of meta-metaphysics. 
Once this rally is over and the properly metaphysical part of the 
game begins, the ball must hit the ground in the area of analytic 
judgments and logical inferences and, strangely enough, also in an 
area adjacent to the synthetic a priori but having certain empirical 
ingredients-as in your Metaphysische Anfangsgrunde der Natur-
wissenschaft (1786) and Die Metaphysik der Sitten (1797). We say, 
strangely enough,' for after you had drawn a line of absolute oppo-
sition between the empirical and the a priori you yet proceed as if 
there were a gradual transition from one to the other. This may very 
well serve as another example of your overcoming your own dichoto-
mies; but it is not of the same interest to us as the examples of the 
transcendental apperception and productive imagination. 
"Our game is quite different: it is rather like doing a jigsaw puz-
zle. Directed perhaps by what we retain from the picture when we 
first saw it before it was taken apart, we reconstruct it by finding the 
proper place for each part within the whole, the only rule being that 
we have to follow faithfully the outline of each part so that they fit 
together as their maker meant them to. There is only one solution to 
the jigsaw puzzle, and it is ours. 
"From the viewpoint of our system as a whole your Critique of 
Judgment with its discussion of the role of teleology in cognition is 
almost as important to us as your first Critique. For the process as 
which we see the whole cannot but be teleological, and so we had to 
undo your typically reflective position with respect to teleology in 
your Critique of Judgment. However, as we aim in this speech of 
ours to show the germs of true speculation in your philosophy, we 
have no reason t0 go into your treatment of teleology where you 
stubbornly insist on the finitude of human cognition. (Just the same, 
we wish to advise anyone who wants to understand our Philosophy 
of Identity from the inside out to study carefully the Critique of the 
Teleological Judgment-Part II of the Critique of Judgment-and par-
ticularly§§ 74-78.) 
"However, there is one famous remark of yours that we wish to 
comment on. You are convinced that there never will be a Newton 
able to explain as little as the origin of a blade of grass according to 
laws of nature that were not arranged by design (Absicht) 9• In other 
Words, you believe the biological realm to be ultimately impervious 
to that atomistic-mechanistic approach that is celebrating triumph 

xxxiv 
Walter Cerf 
after triumph in physics and chemistry. And yet at the same time 
you seem to resign yourself to the fact that biology as science has no 
choice but to use the methods of physics and chemistry as far as 
they can go, and beyond that point there is no knowledge that is sci-
entific. This is absurd. To us biology in its largest sense is truly the-
agony and instead of reducing it as much as possible to physics and 
chemistry we extend to the subjects of physics and chemistry the 
holistic and dynamic vision of theogonic biology. 
"May we now talk to you about Fichte, your erstwhile disciple and 
our erstwhile mentor and friend. Knowing how he annoyed you with 
his interpretation of your first Critique, we shall talk about him only 
for a moment, though we have much to say about him in the Essays. 
"We have already mentioned the importance of his translating 
your 'I think' into 'The Ego posits himself.' This translation made it 
clear to us that your transcendental apperception is intellectual intui-
tion. Prompted by us, Fichte accepted this. The ultimate basis of your 
Critique and his Science of Knowledge is intellectual intuition. His 
second important merit was his radical elimination of the thing-in-
itself, although others had seen its paradoxical role in your idealism 
before him. He eliminated it, in the first place, through the Ego's 
second Tathandlung: the Ego posits the non-Ego. However, this 
would not take him any further than your own grounding of the 
form of objectivity in the subject. The step that leads him radically 
beyond your 'formal' idealism is his showing that the sensations 
themselves, far from being caused by the thing-in-itself, as well as 
their spatial and temporal relations, are doings, though unconscious 
ones, of the Ego. The historical merit of this doctrine is that it is so 
paradoxical. Thinking our way through the paradox greatly assisted 
us in bringing to birth the true system of philosophy. The paradox 
as presented from the side of the object of knowledge, that is, from 
the side of nature, consists in the fact that Fichte's doctrine totally 
de-naturalizes nature so that nature becomes even less than it is in 
your philosophy. In the Critique nature is mere appearance, but it is 
the appearance of something that rs, the thing-in-itself, even though 
it is unknowable to us and not even definable as to the sense in 
which it can be said to be. The paradox from the side of the subject 
is that the Ego has lost your index of its finitude, for it is all spon-
taneity. Yet it is not allowed to be God nor is The Science of Knowl-
edge allowed to be a text about God's acquiring knowledge of Himself. 
Fichte's third Tathandlung posits the definite finalization of the Ego: 
the Ego's aspirations to become one with God will be fulfilled only 

XXXV 
Speculative Philosophy 
in the infinitely distant future, that is to say, they will never be ful-
filled. 
"Over and against the Fichtean idealism, completely one-sided and 
perhaps rightly denounced as atheistic, we plead with you to see the 
profound balance and harmony, based on the speculative viewing of 
the relations among God, nature and self-consciousness, of our Phi-
losophy of Identity, in which nature is as truly existent in God as 
God is subsistent in self-consciousness." 
Kant had received his guests in his bedroom, seated in a chair by 
a closed window. When Schelling and Hegel finished with their plea 
Kant appeared to be asleep. The year is 1803 and he is sick and a lit-
tle senile. He will die the following year, two years after the publica-
tion of the second of Hegel's Essays. (Post hoc, but not propter 
hoc-although if Kant had read the Essays, they might have shortened 
his life.) The silence continues. Hegel turns rather brusquely toward 
the door. He finds the stale air in the room oppressive. (Kant did not 
allow windows to be opened as he believed that bed bugs, which had 
been torturing him for years, fly in through the window. 10) Schelling 
bows elegantly in the direction of Kant. It is then that Kant gets up 
from his chair with great effort, holding himself by the table next to 
his chair and, slowly returning the bow, mutters, "I honor humanity 
in you."11 Schelling, quite touched, answers with a charming smile, 
"Sir, we honor divinity in you." He rushes to help the faltering Kant 
into his chair. But the old man does not want help. And Schelling, 
bowing once more, follows Hegel into the hall, leaving the great re-
flector to his bugs. 
1. Cf. below, pp. XXIV ff. 
2. Ideen zu einer Philosophie der 
Natur als Einleitung in das Studium 
dieser Wissenschaft (1797). Von der 
Weltseele (1798). Erster Entwurf eines 
Systems der Naturphilosophie (1799). 
Einleitung zu dem Entwurf eines Sys-
tems der Naturphilosophie (1799). 
3. System des Transcendentalen 
ldealismus (1800). 
Walter Cerf 
4. First published by H. Noh! in 
1907 and in large part translated by 
T. M. Knox and R. Kroner in 1948 (see 
Bibliographical Index). 
5. See below, p. 82. Also F & K, p. 55. 
6. These two sorts of objects, the 
ordinary and the scientific, were at 
that time not yet so different from one 
another as to cause much of a prob-
lem concerning their relation. 

xxxvi 
Walter Cerf 
7. Critique of Pure Reason, AlS, 
B29. 
8. See H. S. Harris' Introduction, 
p. 22. 
9. Critique of Judgment, § 75. 
10. Hermann Schwarz, Immanuel 
Kant, Ein Lebensbild (Halle a.S., 1907), 
p. 269. 
11. Ibid., p. 378. In the spirit of this 
imaginary scene I have taken some 
liberties with the passages in Prof. 
Schwarz' book. 

THE TEXT: 
Note on the Text 
and on Conventions 
Two editions of the text were used in making this translation: that of 
Georg Lasson (Philosophische Bibliothek, Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1928; 
reprinted, Hamburg, 1962), and that of Hartmut Buchner and Otto 
Poggeler (Gesammelte Werke, Band 4, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968). The 
latter was taken as basic, and the pagination of this authoritative 
critical edition is indicated in square brackets in the translation. 
THE TREATMENT OF HEGEL'S QUOTATIONS 
When Hegel quotes from other authors, he rarely uses quotation 
marks. We have added quotation marks wherever we were able to 
trace the quotation (a task which has generally been made easy by 
the editors of the two German texts that we have used). In the rela-
tively rare cases where Hegel himself used quotation marks we indi-
cate this in the footnotes. 
But whether they are marked by him or by us, Hegel's quotations 
from other authors are apt, like those of most other (German?) au-
thors of the period, to fall short of perfect scholarly precision. He 
rarely marks his omissions. We have marked his unacknowledged 
elisions by inserting "[ ... ]". Also, Hegel's emphases are almost al-
ways different from those of the original text quoted. Here, we have 
not tried to be precise ourselves. Instead of noting every change in 
emphasis we rest content with a general warning to the reader that the 
emphases in quotations are usually Hegel's, and not those of the au-
thor quoted. Other major deviations are indicated in our footnotes. 
0-::casionally we have also furnished a translation of the original text 
from which Hegel's quotations and summaries are taken. 

xxxviii 
Note on the Text and on Conventions 
Abbreviations and References: 
The following abbreviations are employed regularly: 
F. & K.=Faith and Knowledge, translated by Walter Cerf and H. S. 
Harris, Albany: State UniversityofNewYorkPress, 1977. 
N.K.A.=Hegel, Gesammelte Werke, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968 ff. 
Akad.=Kants Gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben von der Ko-
niglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin. 
Other references in the notes are usually confined to the author (edi-
tor, translator) and short title where needed. The Bibliographic Index 
supplies the full details of the work cited. 
Concerning the use of the dagger (f), see the Translators' Preface. 

Introduction to the Difference Essay 
1. FICHTE, SCHELLING, AND HEGEL 
The essay on the Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's System 
of Philosophy was Hegel's first acknowledged publication. 1 He wrote 
it between the middle of May (probably) and the middle of July (cer-
tainly) in the year 1801. It appeared at the end of September, just a 
month after his thirty-first birthday.2 For Hegel it represented the first 
step toward a professional academic career which he had long desired. 
At the dawn of the new century, 1 January 1801, Hegel was thirty. 
He had not achieved anything very remarkable in the world, and no 
one could have foreseen his later eminence.3 He came from a family 
which had spawned teachers, preachers and minor civil servants in the 
Duchy of Wiirttemberg for several generations. His father was a rela-
tively unimportant financial official in the Stuttgart administration. 
The youthful Wilhelm showed a scholarly bent from the first. At the 
Stuttgart Gymnasium he was always at the top of his class, and out of 
school he read widely and voraciously, always with pen in hand, mak-
ing copious excerpts and notes. The family expected that he would 
make his career in the churches or schools of his homeland, and this 
became a legal obligation when he entered the Theological Seminary 
at Tiibingen as a stipendiary of Duke Karl Eugen of Wurttemberg in 
1788. 
News of the Revolution in Paris stirred the even tenor of his schol-
arly way before he achieved his MA in the Faculty of Philosophy in 
1790. He rebelled against the prospect of three years of formal study 
in theology, and tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade his father to let him 
transfer to law. A theologian he had to be; but a career in the Church 
he was still determined to avoid. When he graduated in 1793 he ap-
plied to the Consistory at Stuttgart for permission to take a teaching 
post abroad. With their consent he became house-tutor to the children 
of the von Steiger family in Berne. There he remained for more than 
three years, meditating on classical antiquity and on the origin and 
history of Christianity. These meditations continued after he moved 
to a similar position with a merchant family in Frankfurt at the begin-
ning of 1797. But at Frankfurt he was once more in company with the 

2 
Difference 
poet Holderlin-who had been in his class at Tiibingen-and with a 
group of young men for whom the study of the new idealist philoso-
phy of Fichte was part of an active preparation for a German Revolu-
tion. Hegel himself had predicted in his letters from Switzerland that 
the proper "completion" of the Kantian philosophy would lead to a 
revolution in German life, and all of his intellectual labours in these 
years are best understood as contributions to this "completion" of 
Kant in preparation for the revolution. 
From Switzerland he watched the boy-wonder, Schelling-five years 
younger, yet only two years behind him in the Seminary-take the 
first steps of what was clearly destined to be a brilliant academic ca-
reer. Schelling's first published philosophy essay appeared in 1794 
when he was in his last year at Tiibingen, and still under twenty. In 
that essay-"On the Possibility of a Form of Philosophy in General"4 
-and in several subsequent ones, Schelling stood forth as a talented 
and enthusiastic disciple of Fichte. But gradually he moved into an 
independent position, largely because of his excited interest in the 
speculative philosophy of nature. Fichte remained decidedly cool 
toward this aspect of his young champion's work, but it soon attracted 
the favorable notice of Goethe. In August 1798 Schelling was ap-
pointed as an extraordinary professor of Philosophy at Jena, which 
could at that period properly be called the intellectual capital of 
Germany. 5 
This was only a few months after the death of Hegel's father-an 
event which gave Hegel both a small legacy, and the freedom to make 
plans for its spending which his father might well have frowned at. 
Not that Hegel did anything very precipitate. For more than eighteen 
months he continued quietly working at his religious and political es-
says. When he finally wrote to Schelling in November 1800 that he 
was now ready to embark on an academic career, and asking advice 
about where he should spend the next few months before applying for 
a license to teach at Jena, Hegel was probably hoping for the response 
that he must certainly have received-an invitation to come straight 
to J ena, and prepare himself on the spot. 
Even after he arrived in Jena, and settled in comfortably, next door 
to Schelling in the Klipstein Garden, Hegel continued to work for 
some time on his political studies rather than on anything directly rel-
evant to his career as a philosophy lecturer.6 It may very likely have 
been Schelling who urged him to set his revolutionary labors aside 
and concentrate on something more strictly philosophical. Perhaps he 
even suggested the topic of the Difference essay. We can be sure, at 

3 
Introduction 
least, that Hegel discussed the project at length with Schelling, when 
he embarked upon it. For Hegel appeared on the scene at Jena, and 
was accepted there, as a disciple and coadjutor of Schelling. In the 
Difference essay itself, it is plain that he accepted this role. But he had 
been following his own way ever since he was eighteen, and although 
he continually took over new concepts and vocabulary from friends 
whom he thought of as more advanced in the study of philosophy 
than himself, he consistently sought to apply the new concepts to his 
own problems and uses. 7 
Toward Fichte, Hegel had always been rather cool. In his Frankfurt 
years he was much influenced by Holderlin, whose purely philosophi-
cal fragments show that he was moving toward a type of "Identity-
philosophy" as early as 1795. Like Schelling, Holderlin derived the 
basic conceptual apparatus for his new position from Fichte. Holder-
lin's friend Sinclair-from whose notes we get most of our knowledge 
of Holderlin's position at this period-was later characterized by He-
gel himself as a "stubborn Fichtean."8 But the loyalty of Holderlin and 
his friends to Fichte was of the same kind as Fichte's loyalty to Kant. 
It was the sense of an intellectual debt that was to be paid precisely 
by transforming the ideas one had received. 
This sort of loyal affiliation tends to be embarrassing, and hence 
irritating, to the intellectual father figure who is the object of it. Just 
as Kant had been driven to denounce publicly Fichte's claim to be his 
true and genuine intellectual heir,9 so Fichte would finally have been 
obliged to denounce Schelling in the same way. But in this case Schel-
ling's new "disciple" Hegel proclaimed the apostasy first. The imme-
diate effect of Hegel's Difference essay was to make a public breach 
between Fichte and Schelling, a breach which both parties had so far 
managed to avoid, and which Schelling still strove to avoid for a time 
even after Hegel's essay appeared. 10 
2. H E G E L AN D T HE P H I L 0 S 0 P H Y 0 F I D E N TIT Y 
We cannot be very sure or precise about Hegel's own philosophical 
position immediately before he arrived in Jena and made himself the 
champion of what he calls "the Schellingian System." He did have a 
position; and we can be fairly certain that it was spelled out at some 
length in an essay that he finished in September 1800. But only two 

4 
Difference 
sheets (about one twentieth of the whole) remain to us from that es-
say; and these two sheets-generally referred to as the Systemfrag-
ment-are not easy to interpret. 11 But three conclusions do seem to be 
fairly clearly warranted: First, that Hegel held that it was the task of 
philosophical reflection to overcome or resolve antinomies; secondly, 
that philosophy cannot bring this task to completion, but must in the 
end pass over into a higher form of consciousness called religion; and 
thirdly, that a religious consciousness that does not rise to this higher 
level, but remains within the bounds of reflection, will be "positive," 
that is, will involve alienation and authority. In the final paragraphs 
of his manuscript Hegel used Fichte's theory of the Ego as an example 
to demonstrate this point.12 
It is probably fair to say that Hegel became a disciple of Schelling 
at Jena because Schelling's philosophy of Identity provided him with 
a bridge across the gulf that he had discovered between theoretical re-
flection with its Kantian antinomies, and the "beautifully humane" 
religion in which the infinite and the finite are perfectly reconciled. 
Because the philosophy of Identity is founded in "intellectual intui-
tion," the gulf between finite reflection and the infinite that is the goal 
experience in religion does not arise. The principal difficulty that the 
new philosophy faced lay in the explication of the intuitive founda-
tion to which it laid claim. How can it be the case that we enjoy a 
kind of awareness which seemed to Kant to be quite evidently out of 
our range altogether? 
Schelling took the first step toward the new philosophy while he 
was still an orthodox disciple of Fichte. It was probably he who con-
vinced Fichte that the self-positing of the Ego (in the Science of Knowl-
edge of 1794) was an intellectual intuition as defined by Kant in § 77 
of the Critique of Judgment. But this self-intuition of the Ego was 
only a kind of leap across the gulf between finite and infinite that 
troubled Hegel. It leaves finite experience behind altogether. The real 
breakthrough came when Schelling went on to claim in the "Exposi-
tion of My System" {1801) that the Ego of Fichte was intuitively 
identical with the "God or Nature" of Spinoza. 
As we can see from his references to Spinoza in the Science of 
Knowledge, Fichte regarded Spinoza as the paradigm of "dogmatic 
philosophy."13 A consistent dogmatism must arrive at the morally un-
bearable position of fatalism because it must posit universal causal 
determinism. In Fichte's eyes Spinoza was the one dogmatic philoso-
pher who could not be theoretically overthrown because he recognized 
and accepted this conclusion. The achievement of the Critical Philoso-

5 
Introduction 
phy, as systematized and completed by Fichte himself, was to exhibit 
the viability of an alternative philosophy of moral freedom. But the 
decision between the alternatives was essentially a moral choice, not 
a logical conclusion. To Fichte's young disciples who moved on to a 
"philosophy of Identity," this absolute option between dogmatic ra-
tionalism and moral idealism appeared as the final form of precritical 
dogmatism in Fichte himself. The antinomy between Spinoza's doc-
trine of necessity and Fichte's doctrine of freedom must somehow be 
resolved in a higher synthesis. Holderlin seems to have been the first 
to move in this direction; and much of Hegel's speculation at Frank-
furt was carried on in the context of this problem. ·Before he arrived 
in Jena Hegel seems to have held that there was no theoretical solu-
tion, but that the problem is resolved practically in religious experi-
ence. Schelling's "System of Absolute Identity" provided a theoretical 
solution by claiming to exhibit a perfect parallel between the philoso-
phy of nature as the non-conscious production of objective reality by 
Reason, and transcendental philosophy as the conscious self-construc-
tion of Reason as the absolute subject. What is "intellectually in-
tuited" (that is, revealed to itself in the very process of its genesis) is 
neither Spinoza's Substance nor Fichte's Ego (Subject) but an infinite 
life which is at once Substance and Subject; and the intuition does not 
involve a leap out of all finite categories, because in the philosophical 
system the categories of finite experience are themselves exhibited as 
a chain of successive "powers" of the Absolute Identity. 
If we look at this programme from the point of view of Hegel when 
he finished the manuscript from which the above mentioned "System-
fragment" is all that now remains, we can readily see that what would 
have attracted him about it was the project of grasping objective 
nature and subjective experience as an articulated whole. The articula-
tion must not be endless, and there must be some means of demon-
strating that it is complete. Otherwise he would be no better off than 
he was already. This explains his deep concern about the method of 
the new philosophy. Spinoza's geometric method did not please him 
any more than Fichte's method of postulation. He accepted Schelling's 
contention that a philosophy of the Absolute Identity was possible. 
But some of the general reflections with which the Difference essay 
begins tell just as heavily against Schelling as they do against Fichte 
or Spinoza. 
We should notice, for example, that in Hegel's view nothing could 
lll.ake a more misleading impression than to begin with a definition as 
Spinoza does (105).14 This remark is interesting because Schelling had 

6 
Difference 
declared that Spinoza was the model for the exposition of his "break-
through."15 Hegel goes on to give, in some detail, the reasons why a 
philosophical system ought not to be deduced from a fundamental 
principle, and to attack the whole apparatus of the Critical Philosophy 
as we find it in Fichte. His attitude toward both of these great prede-
cessors, Spinoza and Fichte, who are reconciled in the new dispensa-
tion, is here basically appreciative, but the eventual scathing attack 
upon Schelling's Identity Theory as an empty formalism (in the Pre-
face to the Phenomenology) is already implicit in his comments on 
philosophical method in the Difference essay. 
Indeed, the criticism of Schelling is so nearly explicit that one won-
ders how any of Hegel's readers, let alone Schelling himself, could 
have regarded this unknown "Doctor of Secular Wisdom"16 as a mere 
disciple. The explanation seems to be that his contemporary audience 
simply did not understand what Hegel was saying; and they did not 
at that point have any reason for thinking that what they did not un-
derstand was important.17 Only Schelling himself was really in a posi-
tion to know better, for only he could talk to Hegel about what he had 
already thought and written. Close study of Schelling's writings in 
this period does show that he learned some things from HegeU8 But 
he was too volatile, too much the type of the romantic genius, to ap..: 
predate Hegel's patient struggle with the problems of philosophical 
method. Schelling was continually subject to new inspirations, and 
whenever he was seized by one he was apt to begin all over again, so 
that all of his attempts at a systematic exposition of his Philosophy of 
Identity remained incomplete. He wrote rapidly and published work 
still in progress. As the more phlegmatic and methodical Hegel re-
marked some years later, "Schelling conducted his own education in 
public."19 
The quicksilver character of Schelling's speculative thought is one 
of the major stumbling blocks in the path to an understanding of the 
Difference essay. In his preface Hegel speaks of the systems of Fichte 
and Schelling as already "lying before the public/' but in fact Schel-
ling's system was not properly displayed for public view at this time. 
The fundamental statement of his position to which contemporary 
readers would most naturally turn-the "Exposition of My System of 
Philosophy" of 1801-dealt only with general principles and with the 
philosophical construction of inorganic nature. In order to get a syn-
optic view of Schelling's position, we have to supplement this initial 
statement from various later essays and lectures published or delivered 
during the next five or six years; and when we put the various state-

7 
Introduction 
ments together we find that even at a quite basic level there is a great 
deal of wavering in the systematic outline.20 
Among Schelling's contemporary critics Hegel himself was one of 
the most perceptive. When he came to deal with Schelling in his first 
course on the history of philosophy he summed up the problem as 
follows: 
It is not feasible here to go into details respecting what is 
called the philosophy of Schelling .... For it is not yet a scientific 
whole organized in all its branches, since it rather consists in 
certain general elements which do not fluctuate with the rest of 
his opinions. Schelling's philosophy must still be regarded as in 
process of evolution, and it has not yet ripened into fruit.21 
This was how Hegel saw the matter in 1805. But it was not how he 
affected to see it in 1801. The title of the Difference essay clearly im-
plies that Schelling does have a system; and the essay itself provides 
some indications of what it will look like when it does finally "lie be-
fore the public" as a whole. But the fact that the comparison of Schel-
ling and Fichte is not preceded by an exposition of Schelling's system 
is a tacit admission that Schelling has still to do what Fichte has al-
ready done :-provide the raw material for a critical analysis compar-
able with that which Hegel performs upon Fichte's major works. 
3. T HE A D V AN C E F R 0 M C R I T I C A L T 0 
S P E C U L AT I V E 
PHILOSOPHY 
Of course, Hegel's slightly curious procedure of using the imperfect 
as a yardstick for the perfect-analyzing Fichte's System in order to 
reveal its shortcomings and inadequacies, and then comparing it with 
his own projection of Schelling's system-is largely jusified by the 
fact that Schelling's system grew out of Fichte's in the first place. In 
Hegel's own terms, the two systems whose difference is to be exhib-
ited arise from the common root of a single philosophy which they 
both express. We can best begin our own analysis of Hegel's essay, 
therefore, with a brief characterization of the philosophy that Fichte 
and Schelling are supposed to have in common, even though their sys-
tems are different. This common ground is the "authentic idealism" 
which is the spirit as distinct from the letter of the Kantian philoso-
phy.22 Kant himself remained bound to his own "letter" and scarcely 

8 
Difference 
rose into the higher realm of truly speculative philosophy at all-so 
that "even the Kantian philosophy had proved unable to awaken Rea-
son to the lost concept of genuine speculation" (118). But Fichte's 
work, like Schelling's is "the most thorough and profound specula-
tion" (118; cf. 173). 
What, then, does Fichte's achievement as a speculative philosopher 
consist in? Hegel's answer, which is given quite explicitly in the Dif-
ference essay and confirmed in the Lectures on the History of Philoso-
phy, is that Fichte turned Kant's deduction of the categories into a 
genuine science of knowledge. "In the principle of the deduction of 
the categories Kant's philosophy is authentic idealism .... Fichte ex-
tracted this principle in a purer, stricter form" (79). 
What Hegel refers to as "the principle of the deduction of the cate-
gories" is what Kant calls "the transcendental unity of apperception." 
Kant himself says that "the principle of apperception is the highest 
principle in the whole sphere of human knowledge."23 Fichte "extract-
ed this principle in a purer, stricter form" as the "Ego." The self-posit-
ing Ego in Fichte's words is "the primordial, absolutely unconditioned 
first principle of all human knowledge" and his initial description of 
it is "that Act [Tathandlung] which does not and cannot appear among 
the empirical states of our consciousness, but rather lies at the basis 
of all consciousness and alone makes it possible."24 Fichte sought to 
show how the categories could be derived from this basic principle 
without the problematic Kantian thing-in-itself playing any role in the 
deduction. Only in this way could a proper deduction of the categories 
be given; and only then would the theory of knowledge be established 
on a truly "scientific" basis. 
Thus, as Hegel said in his lectures, Fichte removed the "unthinking 
inconsistency" of Kant.25 But it is precisely when we follow this line 
of interpretation (which I believe to be essentially just to Fichte's own 
aims, and which became canonical in any case, through ceaseless repe-
tition by Hegel and his followers in his later years) that the funda-
mental claim advanced in the Difference essay on behalf of Schelling's 
system becomes most problematic. For if Fichte laid the foundations 
of a genuinely speculative philosophy by providing an organic account 
of the derivation of the categories from the self-positing of the Ego, 
how can Schelling's breakthrough to the philosophy of Identity, or his 
doctrine of a parallel between transcendental philosophy and the phil-
osophy of nature be an advance from this position? All of this looks 
like a gratuitous return to pre-Critical dogmatism. Why is it necessary 
at all? 

9 
Introduction 
In order to understand why Hegel believed that Schelling's system 
was an advance over Fichte's we must now ask what it was that Fichte 
got wrong. If we examine carefully what Fichte says about Spinoza, 
we shall soon find the clue. "We shall," says Fichte," "encounter his 
[i.e., Spinoza's] highest unity again in the Science of Knowledge; 
though not as something that exists, but as something that we ought 
to, and yet cannot achieve."27 This acceptance of a mere Sollen is the 
burden of Hegel's life-long complaint against Fichte. But why should 
an endless endeavour not be the ultimate truth of our condition? Why 
must Fichte's science of knowledge be counted a failure because this 
is what we know? This is the crux. 
When we compare Fichte's Science of Knowledge with Schelling's 
System of Transcendental Idealism, we can see at once, upon the most 
superficial survey, that although they have a common aim with respect 
to the deduction of the categories, there is a fundamental difference 
between them with respect to Kant's doctrine of our cognitive facul-
ties. Schelling's problem is not just to trace the logical evolution of the 
categories from the transcendental unity of apperception but to trace 
the evolution of the faculties of conception, of judgment, of moral 
choice, and finally of artistic creation, from the original spontaneity of 
the productive imagination. Fichte finds that the Critique of Pure Rea-
son needs to be done over again; but Schelling sets out to do the 
whole ·Critical Philosophy over again. The relation of the three Cri-
tiques, which remained quite unproblematic for Fichte, has become 
problematic for Schelling. 
In order to understand why this has happened we must consider 
some of the fundamental doctrines of the "Critique of Teleological 
Judgment." Kant lays it down (in section 76 of the Critique of Judg-
ment) that "Reason is a faculty of principles, and the unconditioned 
is the ultimate goal at which it aims."28 But it cannot achieve this ulti-
mate goal because in all of its existential assertions it is dependent on 
the cooperation of intuition and concept in the understanding. With-
out its intuitive content, the mere concept is just something possible 
{as long as it is self-consistent). The intuitive content that gives it ex-
istential import, comes to us through the senses; the understanding 
cannot supply this content for itself. If it could, then the object of its 
concept would be actualized in the very process of conceiving it. An 
intuitive intellect of this sort is conceptually possible-it contains no 
contradiction in itself. But our own understanding cannot operate like 
this, for it is totally dependent on sensibility to furnish it with content. 
However, this rational concept of an intuitive intellect, which must 

10 
Difference 
forever remain for us a mere possibility without any application in 
experience is not, in Kant's view, just one among the infinity of think-
able possibilities that we can never experience. It is a necessary idea, it 
plays an essential role in our theory of knowledge. In fact, it is the 
ultimate ground of the very possibility of systematizing our experi-
ence in such a way that we can properly speak of knowledge at all. 
For without this ground we cannot form the conception of nature as 
an organic whole; and we cannot reconcile our own moral experience 
with the constitutive principles of our understanding without regard-
ing nature in a teleological perspective. 
Kant sums up the situation thus: 
Now the principle of the mechanism of nature and that of its 
causality according to ends, when applied to one and the same 
product of nature, must cohere in a single higher principle and 
flow from it as their common source, for if this were not so they 
could not both enter consistently into the same survey of na-
ture .... Now the principle common to the mechanical derivation, 
on the one hand, and the teleological, on the other, is the super-
sensible, which we must introduce as the basis of nature as 
phenomenon. But of this we are unable from a theoretical point 
of view to form the slightest positive determinate conception. 
How, therefore, in the light of the supersensible as principle, na-
ture in its particular laws constitutes a system for us, and one 
capable of being cognized as possible both on the principle of 
production from physical causes and on that of final causes, is a 
matter which does not admit of any explanation.29 
What becomes of the science of knowledge if this conclusion is al-
lowed to stand as Kant states it? Fichte's boasted science becomes the 
absolute knowledge of our own inescapable ignorance, the knowledge 
that we cannot absolutely know anything. Kant remarked in an aph-
orism which was quoted by hosts of competing interpreters that he 
had "found it necessary to deny knowledge in order to make room for 
faith." 30 Fichte was among the most enthusiastic-and the most self-
assured-of all the thinkers who accepted this dictum. But in follow-
ing Kant here he abandoned his project of a science of knowledge and 
so ceased to be a speculative philosopher altogether.31 For if the ulti-
mate conclusion of the supposed science is the recognition that all of 
our knowledge is grounded in faith, then we cannot claim to have a 
science of knowledge, we cannot properly claim to know what it is to 
know anything. When we find ourselves faced with this result we are 

11 
Introduction 
therefore bound to reexamine the "absolutely unconditioned first prin-
ciple" from which we began. 
This "absolutely unconditioned first principle" was self-knowledge, 
the Cogito of Descartes, the "I think" of Kant. But in Fichte's science 
of knowledge this principle is not a dogmatic conclusion from think-
ing being to substantial being as in Descartes; nor yet is it a necessary 
"form," critically cleansed of all antic commitment, such as we see in 
Kant's Ich denke. Fichte's "Ego" is a primordial Act, a:Tathandlung~ 
a self-establishing, the self-positing of Reason. Now if in fact we can 
know ourselves as the self-positing of Reason, and if this is the only 
way that we can know ourselves to be rational at all, then Kant was 
mistaken in thinking that our understanding does not operate intui-
tive:ly, for on the contrary, Reason is always intuitive, it "gives" its 
own object. That is, Reason is always "positing" its¢lf, it is always 
self-actualizing ; and this self-actualization, this intellectual intuition 
is what is at the foundation of all possible experience. Fichte was thus 
the founder of speculative philosophy-the intellectual vision of all 
things in the Universal Logos-on a critical base. But the programme 
of his science of knowledge will not be properly concluded until we do 
know ourselves to be identiCCll with the putative but necessary "com-
mon source'' of natural mecha.J;lislll 
and organic teleology .So when 
Fichte says that "we shall encounter the highest unity ... as some-
thing that we ought to, and yet cannot achieve" he is admitting .tiuu 
he has not succeeded in what he set out to do. In fact, his initial state-
ment of the problem 'already indicates the inadequacy of his enter-
prise; for he declares that the Tathandlung we are seeking is one that 
we must necessarily think (he italicizes denken himself) "as the basis 
of all consciousness." 
About 1797, Fichte himself began to speak of "intellectual intui-
tion" (intellektuelle Anschauung) as "the only firm standpoint for all 
philosophy."32 His need to do this was a direct consequence of con-
tinued meditation on what was implicitly involved in the characteriza-
tion of the Ego as the Tathandlung of self-positing. Probably he was 
influenced by his younger friend Schelling-still, in his eyes, a faith-
ful disciple. It must be emphasized, however, that Fichte did not ac-
cept the consequence that Spinoza's "unity of the mind with the 
whole of nature" either had to be, or even could be, demonstrated. 
Since this "highest unity" remained for Fichte an unachievable 
ideal, it is obvious that Fichte did not hold that we must achieve it in 
order to prove to ourselves that we are indeed rational beings, or in 
order to know scientifically what our knowledge is. In fact, he held 

12 
Difference 
that our rational nature is known to us intuitively in the moral law. 
To those who jeered at his appeal to "intellectual intuition" he re-
torted, "I should like to know how they view the consciousness of the 
moral law; or how they would undertake to construct the concepts of 
right, virtue, and so forth, which they yet undoubtedly possess."33 
But the grounding of our knowledge of what ought to be in an in-
tellectual intuition, while all of our knowledge of what is continues to 
be grounded in empirical intuition, merely legitimates the breach in 
human nature which Hegel had been struggling for years to overcome. 
Long before he joined Schelling at Jena, Hegel had become convinced 
that the whole Kantian conception of morality as a sort of internal 
legislation imposed by Reason on our "lower" nature was not rational 
freedom at all, but the most insidious form of slavery. In formulating 
the Hellenic ideal of his earliest essays he already envisaged the ra-
tional life as a communal and public expression of a spontaneous har-
mony of all aspects of human nature, not a private and personal stren-
uous assertion of the law of reason against the pulling and pushing of 
natural desires and instinctive drives.34 In any case, we do not know 
the Kantian law of Reason. Pure practical Reason does not, and cannot, 
tell us what to do in any actual situation. Hegel remarked in his Frank-
furt manuscripts on the difficulties created for Kant by "conflicts of 
duty." In Faith and Knowledge, he gives free rein to his irony against 
Fichte on this topic. Fichte's Science of Rights and System of Ethics 
were in his eyes the reductio ad absurdum of all the ethical theories 
that begin from the established opposition of human reason and hu-
man life. 
\.i'\'..t.A.;Sv' 
"The sole interest of Reason," says Hegel, "is to suspend sue]) rigid 
antitheses." (90) The Gegensatz of "reason" and "the passions" -to 
speak of it in the way that is probably most familiar in English, 
though Hegel does not refer to it thus-is the obvious one which we 
must overcome before we can claim to have an intuitive knowledge of 
ourselves as rational organisms. The self-intuition of Reason is the 
intellectual intuition on which genuine speculation is founded; it must 
not find itself faced by an incomprehensible opposite, an independent 
reality or thing-in-itself. What Hegel calls Vernunft is not a distinct 
faculty which we discover, and which we then show by analysis and 
comparison to be the defining characteristic of the class of animate 
organisms called man. Vemunft is not something discovered and clas-
sified in that way at all. To speak of the antithesis between reason and 
the passions would be awkward for Hegel, because it would involve 
the abandonment of the speculative standpoint at the very beginning, 

13 
Introduction 
and the complete assimilation of intellectual intuition-the self-consti-
tutive activity-into the empirical or sense intuition through which we 
discover something other than ourselves. It was Kant's great achieve-
ment that he showed us how much of the process of discovering ob-
jects of experience must be credited to our own activity as rational 
subjects. But what he failed to recognize, according to Hegel, was that 
the critical activity by which we distinguish between activity and pas-
sivity, form and matter, concept and sensation, both requires and ex-
emplifies a non-sensuous intuition. Only our sense-knowledge is ac-
counted for by Kant's account of intuition. The knowledge of our own 
rational activity that the Critique of Pure Reason puts before us re-
mains yet unaccounted for as knowledge in the Critique. 
The recognition that the Critical Philosophy is itself knowledge was 
the crucial step that Fichte took in proclaiming his science of knowl-
edge. It was natural enough that he should express this discovery in 
terms of a new kind of intuition. To speak of it thus was the simplest, 
most minimal, adjustment of the Kantian perspective. The establish-
ment of the science of knowledge was just a matter of adding to 
Kant's account of experience, the one thing required to legitimate the 
scientific status claimed for the critical account of experience itself. 
,We have merely to notice that when we are engaged in the critique of 
our own rational capacities we do have an indubitable awareness of 
our own rational activity; that this awareness is an essential element 
in the activity because it is just what makes it self-critical; and that 
this activity of pure reason is a self-constitutive activity (as our cri-
nque itself shows). Thus we are led to recognize in our critical phil-
osophy that we have an intellectual intuition of ourselves, because 
the activity that is the content of this intuition is the one !::hat consti-
tutes the formal structure of our ordinary empirical consciousness. 
The activity that is the form or concept in the synthesis (which is our 
philosophic consciousness) is our own comprehending of this truth 
about ourselves. But if we preserve the original Kantian analysis of 
experience in this Fichtean way, and are content simply to supplement 
it as Fichte did, then our conception of our own nature will have two 
sides which must remain essentially sundered and opposed. For we 
now claim to have one kind of intuitive knowledge of ourselves as 
rational, and another kind of intuitive knowledge of ourselves as ani-
mal. If we could simply say that we have intellectual intuition of 
ourselves, and empirical intuition of the outside world, we might 
perhaps be satisfied with our science of knowledge, for the opposition 
between "self" and "other," the "inside" and the "outside," is one of 

14 
Difference 
the most obvious facts of our experience, and a radical difference in 
our modes of intuition would be a persuasive account of it. But as our 
own "inner world" is cognitively a composite of both types of intui-
tion, the relationship between sensible and intellectual intuition be-
comes a problem. This is where Schelling enters. Our self-awareness 
is in the fullest sense organic. It is something that grows. The philoso-
pher's view of it as founded in an intuition of a special kind is only 
the culminating phase of its perfect maturity. Ordinary consciousness 
seems, on the contrary, to have its empirical origin in sensation, the 
manifold which is somehow synthesized in sensible intuition. How is 
it then, that the intellectual intuition of the philosopher, the critic of 
pure reason, derives, or at any rate, emerges from sense-intuition? 
This was Schelling's problem in the System of Transcendental Ideal-
ism. 
This problem of the transition in our self-knowledge leads on to a 
more general problem in the critical theory of our knowledge of nature 
as a whole. For if we are aware of ourselves as organisms of a very 
special kind, as conscious or rational organisms, how can we rest con-
tent with Kant's general theory of organism, and his account of or-
ganic teleology as a purely regulative ideal for our empirical knowl-
edge? Once we have grasped the constitutive role of Reason in our 
own experience, and have successfully traced its evolution from the 
primitive spontaneity of sensory imagination to the conscious auton-
omy of moral freedom, we are in a position to assert that organic 
finality has more than a regulative function, that it is intuitively real-
ized, or exemplified in our experience. But further, when we seek to 
define our own Endzweck, the constitutive purpose of the rational or-
ganism, we are driven by the organic conception of human experience 
that we have finally arrived at to face Spinoza's problem of man's 
place in nature, in Spinoza's terms. We must seek "the union of the 
mind with the whole of nature," because our empirically determinate 
goals, the finite purposes of our "animal" nature, can only become 
fully rational in that absolute perspective. Only by overcoming the 
opposition between intellectual and empirical intuition generally, can 
we mediate the contrast between our intellectual and empirical aware-
ness of our own nature. Hence Kant's Critique of Judgment, especial-
ly the "Critique of Teleological Judgment," became the point of de-
parture for a new era of genuinely speculative philosophy. 
In this perspective, it is easy to see why Hegel's attitude to Fichte 
was so ambivalent. On the one hand, Fichte had laid the foundations 
for a new speculative philosophy upon critical foundations. But on the 

15 
Introduction 
other, he had tried to complete his task by systematizing the very as-
pect of Kant's theory that was most objectionable, the sundering of 
human nature into reason and the senses, of human experience into 
the phenomenal and the noumenal, and of Reason itself into "pure 
reason" and "practical reason," or "reason" and "faith." Schelling's 
system, with its two philosophic sciences of transcendental idealism 
and natural philosophy might be, as yet, more a program than a real-
ity, but it was at least an effort in the right direction and along the 
right lines. Hegel himself was never satisfied with Schelling's (or his 
own) execution of the program of the Identity Philosophy. He was, 
from the beginning, unhappy about Schelling's formulation of the the-
ory of intuition. Eventually-at the cost of his break with Schelling-
he arrived at a solution of that problem with which he was fairly con-
tent. He went on wrestling with the formulation of his philosophy of 
nature for most of his life. But at no time did he lose faith in the sys-
tematic ideal articulated in the original program. 
On a cursory view, at least, Schelling's view of philosophical meth-
od in this period appears wavering and erratic. He was obsessed about, 
perhaps indeed possessed by, the moment of vision at the end of the 
road. Nevertheless it was not the consciousness of the goal, but a cru-
cial starting point for the true method of philosophy that Hegel owed 
to Schelling. The abiding significance of the Difference essay emerges 
when we recognize that it is the first chapter of a "discourse on meth-
od" which Hegel carried on for the rest of his life. His views certainly 
evolved a great deal, and his way of articulating and expressing those 
views developed even more. But from this essay onwards he moved 
steadily forward, whereas previously he had known what his goal 
was, but had never been sure how to reach it. In this sense there is 
some justification-however slight-for the embittered conviction of 
the aged Schelling that Hegel's later fame and reputation all derived 
from what he, Schelling, had taught him. 
4. AN AN A LYSIS 0 F THE ARGUMENT : 
(I) THE "GENERAL REFLECTIONS." 
Let us try, now, to follow the argument of this first chapter of Hegel's 
lifelong "discourse on method." The occasion for it, as Hegel tells us 
in his preface, is Reinhold's misunderstanding of the new speculative 
philosophy, and specifically his failure to grasp what is new and orig-

16 
Difference 
inal in the work of Schelling. Schelling, Fichte, Kant, Reinhold,35 and 
Bardili36 form in Hegel's mind a descending sequence of the possible 
degrees of consciousness with respect to speculation. Schelling knows 
what speculative philosophy is, and sees how it has to be done in the 
light of Kant's critical attack; Fichte knows what it must do, but not 
how to do it; Kant knows what it must do, and thinks he has proved 
that the task is impossible; Reinhold and Bardili do not even know 
what the real task of speculation is, anrl only aim to produce an imita-
tion of it ("popular" or "formula" philosophy) which is more to the 
taste of the general public. The course of Hegel's argument rises from 
this popular level to the true pitch of speculative thought and then 
falls again to the bathos of "everything is what it is, and not another 
thing." 
Hegel's project is to show what is original in Schelling's view, and 
how his view is superior to Fichte's.37 Kant-who hardly gets into the 
essay by name at a.ll, but whose continual implicit presence gives con-
siderable significance to every explicit mention of him-made a new 
beginning of speculative philosophy possible, though he did not real-
ize what he had done. Fichte saw how the new beginning could be 
used. The "deduction of the categories" must be replaced by a more 
organic derivation of the categories from the unity of apperception, 
and one which does not depend upon the problematic "thing-in-it-
self"; and the unity of apperception along with everything derived or 
deduced from it must be viewed not as formal structures but as activ-
ities. 
Kant's failure to understand what he had done is all summed up, 
for Hegel, in his treatment of the categories of "modality." The other 
nine categories are genuine moments in the self-constitutive activity 
of human experience, but when we employ the categories of modality 
we presuppose "the non-identity of subject and object." We can see 
why Hegel says this if we look at § 76 and § 77 of the Critique of 
Judgment. Here Kant claims that: 
Human understanding cannot avoid the necessity of drawing 
a distinction between the possibility and the actuality of things. 
The reason for this lies in our own selves and the nature of our 
cognitive faculties. For were it not that two entirely hetero-
geneous factors, understanding for conceptions and sensuous 
intuition for the corresponding Objects, are required for the exer-
cise of these faculties, there would be no such distinction be-
tween the possible and the actual. This means that if our under-

17 
Introduction 
standing were intuitive it would have no objects but such as are 
actual. Conceptions, which are merely directed to the possibility 
of an object; and sensuous intuitions, which give us something 
and yet do not thereby let us cognize it as an object, would both 
cease to exist ... the distinction of possible from actual things 
is one that is merely valid subjectively for human understanding . 
. . . For reason never withdraws its challenge to us to adopt 
something or other existing with unconditioned necessity-a root 
origin-in which there is no longer to be any difference between 
possibility and actuality, and our understanding has absolutely 
no conception to answer to this Idea .... 
38 
Now since speculation is founded in intellectual intuition the truly 
speculative intellect operates on what Kant calls the "standard of the 
intuitive or archetypal understanding."39 But Kant did not realize that 
this was possible; and specifically he did not realize that he was him-
self operating on this standard, the standard of Reason itself, in carry-
ing out the critique of Reason. Speculation is Reason's own answer to 
the challenge that it "never withdraws." Hence speculation must be-
gin from "unconditioned necessity," not from the distinction of "the 
actual" and "the possible." This "unconditioned necessity" is what 
Fichte discovered in his principle of "pure thinking." But Hegel be-
lieves that Fichte was not faithful to the principle he has discovered 
becaus~ he left the whole realm of natural phenomena, given in em-
pirical intuition, quite unconnected with "pure thinking" and its nec-
essary structures. In point of fact, as I have already suggested, Fichte 
had no thought of doing what Schelling set out to do, because he was 
quite satisfied with the architectonic structure of the Critical Philoso-
phy. He did not have the standard of the intuitive intellect before his 
eyes in quite the same way that Schelling did; and he certainly did 
not have the driving urge to reform the whole relation between pure 
and practical reason which Hegel had gained from his long struggle 
With Kantian ethics. The "infinite progress" in morality which Fichte 
accepted as the destiny of humanity, was for Hegel an endless tread-
mill of internalized slavery; it placed man in the situation of Sisyphus 
or Tantalus, it deprived him even of the rational possibility of a real 
self-fulfilment that could be known and enjoyed. 
When we read Hegel's preface against this background, we can see 
why the critique of Fichte has to be preceded by a series of general 
reflections about the nature and task of speculative philosophy. If the 
learned world is to understand the relation between Fichte and Schel-

18 
Difference 
ling properly they must first be made to see how different the real 
task of philosophy is from the image of it that is presented in the pop-
ular philosophy of a man like Reinhold. It is prototypical of Hegel's 
whole career as a professional philosopher that he should begin his 
first published essay with a discussion of the history of philosophy. 
The apparent confusion of tongues in the history of speculative phil-
osophy was Kant's great argument in favor of his dialectical concep-
tion of pure reason. By reasserting the presence of a philosophia 
perennis, Hegel aimed to show that the dialectic of philosophical ideas 
is subordinate to, and instrumental for, the focal concern of rational 
speculation, which never varies. But at the same time he wanted to 
distinguish his notion of the philosophia perennis from the common-
sense view of the philosophical tradition as a series of prior attempts 
to solve perennial problems which can be used by beginners as exer-
cises or practice studies. 
The lowest possible view of the history of philosophy is the merely 
historical approach, the approach which ignores the perennial char-
acter of philosophy altogether. Men's opinions about the world and 
about their place in it are one possible subject for a historian, and 
certainly not the least interesting one. But it is precisely the task of 
the philosopher in his relation to the public to make clear why this 
history is interesting. A historian of philosophy ought to have some 
general conception of his subject, in terms of which he can answer 
this question. Reinhold satisfies this condition; so he is not quite at 
the bottom of the ladder. But his image of previous philosophy as 
material for exercises is the perfect expression of an alienated con-
sciousness, for it completely misrepresents the truth that in doing 
philosophy one is forming oneself, "founding and grounding" one's 
own being. Reinhold emphasizes the eigentiimlich aspect of philo-
sophical positions. This is an implicit acknowledgment of the self-
founding character of philosophy; but since the only self that Rein-
hold can recognize is the private consciousness of the individual, he 
misunderstands what Fichte and Schelling grasped: that philosophy 
is the consciousness of the absolute self. He thinks of this insight as 
being their peculiar idiosyncrasy (178). But the recognition of the 
absolute self is just what philosophy is needed for; and it is also what 
is needed if there is to be philosophy. 
Reinhold's view of philosophy as a progressive development in 
which personal idiosyncrasies manifest themselves is itself idiosyn-
cratic. Equally idiosyncratic is the opposite view of Fichte, that phil-
osophy really has no history, and cannot exhibit any personal idiosyn-

19 
Introduction 
crasies. Fichte is certain that his science of knowledge is the one true 
philosophy; and Hegel agrees that it is an expression of truly specula-
tive thought. But Fichte's inability to understand either the perennial 
or the personal character of philosophy leads him to suggest that Spi-
noza could not have believed his own philosophy, and that the Greeks 
did not even know what philosephy was (87). In Reinhold's conception 
there is no absolute knowledge at all; in Fichte's there is nothing else 
but absolute knowledge. The true conception of philosophy in its his-
tory is a synthesis of these opposites. On the one hand, one cannot 
enter upon the study of philosophy as a personal concern: one must 
set aside personal concerns entirely. But, on the other hand, in this 
absolute sacrifice of self, one becomes the mouthpiece of one's own 
time. The speculative philosopher speaks with the voice of universal 
Reason. But when he speaks from the past, his philosophical auditors 
in the new time will be those who can recognize "the organic shape 
that Reason has built for itself out of the material of a particular 
age" (88). 
Philosophy arises only when it is needed. The need for it is_ felt 
precisely when what philosophy itself needs is not present. Philosophy 
is the overcoming of Entzweiung, of dichotomy in consciousness. In 
the history of philosophy the fundamental dichotomy is between God 
(the absolute self) and the world (the totality of objective reality). As 
long as·the presence of God(everywhere in the cultural world)is direct-
ly apprehended and felt, philosophy does not arise at all. But when we 
begin to understand the world, and to manipulate it for our own ends, 
nature ceases to be "divine" and we have the sense of alienation from 
the power that creates and sustains it, and us within it. In our own 
culture the intellect has as its goal the grasping of the order of nature 
in its eternal, unchanging aspect, the formulation of its laws. Yet the 
more this intellectual endeavour appears to succeed, the more the 
~ense of alienation increases. The reason for this is that our intellec-
tual comprehension of nature as law excludes the spontaneity and 
freedom which belonged to the pre-philosophical awareness of the 
natural world as the expression of the divine life. But the intellect is, 
of course, always aware that all of the finite phenomena which are 
correlated in its system of laws require an infinite or absolute ground. 
So "when life as Reason steps away into the distance, the totality of 
limitations is at the same time nullified, and connected with the Abso-
lute in this nullification, and hence conceived and posited as mere ap-
pearance" (90). This is exactly the result that Kant arrived at. The 
whole of our experience, which must be formulated by us in the cate-

20 
Difference 
gories of the understanding, is phenomenal, and hence it presupposes 
a noumenal foundation, the Ding-an-sich, of which it is the appear-
ance. The phenomena are nothing in themselves. To call them phe-
nomena is thus to nullify them, to deny that they have independent 
being. But it is also to concede that they arise from something else, they 
are appearances of something that does have being in its own account. 
And if we took away all possibility of finite appearance, the problem-
atic thing-in-itself would be nothing-in-itself likewise. Hence "The 
split between the Absolute [the noumenal reality] and the totality of 
limitations [the phenomenal world] vanishes." 
A world which has lost its soul in this way, however, will not for 
some time recognize what has happened to it. It will make do with a 
dualistic philosophy-an intellectual copy of the absolute positing of 
true speculation. The Absolute is intellectually fixed as a noumenal 
reality-to use the Kantian terminology-and absolute opposition is 
accepted in lieu of absolute identity. This is not surprising, because, 
as we shall see, absolute identity involves absolute opposition, and or-
dinary consciousness is full of oppositions-though it only remains 
healthy because of a secure feeling for "the might of union." 
The need of philosophy arises, contingently, when the aesthetic 
and religious life of the time can no longer sustain the sense of living 
unity. "Far away and long ago" in classical Greece there was an im-
mediate sense of the harmony of life. This was an aesthetic sense of 
the divine life-a paradise in which the apple of intellectual discord 
was still to be eaten. After the fall, the discords were eventually har-
monized again in a long "age of faith" in which the "might of union" 
was sustained by the dominance of religion. The Reformation marked 
the beginning of the culture in which the need of philosophy became 
for the first time fully explicit. Descartes' dualism of thinking and ex-
tended substance was the philosophical expression of this need, and 
Hegel took the French Revolution to be the practical expression of it 
in social life. 40 
What Hegel says about art as the expression of the Absolute here 
is in full accord with Schelling's conception of aesthetic consciousness 
as the highest mode of experience. But the emphasis on religion is 
more distinctly his own. As we can see from Faith and Knowledge the 
underlying concern in his analysis of the disrupted cultural conscious-
ness of his time was not just to make plain the need of philosophy but 
to prepare his audience for the proclamation of a new gospel. The 
proclamation will be made by the Identity Philosophy itself, but it 

21 
Introduction 
will be embodied in a new religion, a new political and social culture, 
in short a new way of lifeY 
A dualism of the Cartesian type makes a peaceful division of cul-
tural life between faith and intellect relatively easy. But in the realm 
of the intellect the dualism was fearlessly attacked by Spinoza. On the 
speculative level no one understood what he was doing; but within 
the context of the dichotomy the intellectual purport of his work was 
easy to appreciate and the reaction was violent. As Lessing remarked 
in his conversations with Jacobi, Spinoza was a "dead dog" in Euro-
pean philosophy for a hundred years. The dominant influence through-
out this period was his exact contemporary John Locke, through whose 
conception of the philosopher as an underlaborer clearing away specu-
lative rubbish one can fairly say that "the realm of the intellect rose 
to such power that it could regard itself as secure from Reason" (92). 
Thus modern culture entered the time of enlightenment.42 
When the need for a speculative overcoming of the basic dkhoto= 
mies of existence is felt in a culture in which all the dichotomies have 
been sharply formulated by the intellect, it naturally takes the intel-
lectual form of a quest for the ultimate foundation of experience, the 
principle from which everything can be deduced or derived. The phil-
6sophical justification for the focal position that is allotted to Rein-
hold in the Difference essay-in spite of the low opinion of his philo-
sophical achievement and his ultimate historical significance which 
Hegel so trenchantly expresses-is that no less an authority than 
fichte had ascribed to him "the immortal merit of having made philo-
sophical Reason aware ... that the whole of philosophy must be led 
back to one unique basic principle" ;43 and in his continuing quest for 
this Grundsatz Reinhold had at length fastened upon the formallogi-
~al principle of Identity. This is the emptiest possible formal expres-
sion for the lost "might of union"; and it is only one side of the intel-
lectual presupposition of speculative philosophy. The other is the 
intellect itself-the consciousness that has "stepped out of the total-
ity" and become an observing intellect which fixes the real in the 
context of an abstract range of possibilities. This polar conception of 
the real and the ideal is the basic error of the intellect. The real "might 
of union" now lies hid in the "night" of pre-reflective consciousness-
and of the "dark ages." 
Hegel does not choose, here, to consider the struggle between faith 
and reason, however. That study, which he pursues at length in the 
Phenomenology, begins in Faith and Knowledge. Here he looks rather 

22 
Difference 
at the religious expression of the triumph of the intellect, the dogma 
of Creation. The first article of the Creed in that earlier age of faith 
was that "in the beginning" God created the world "out of nothing." 
The first created thing was light which shone in the primeval dark-
ness. It is in this religious form that the speculative significance of 
reflection can best be appreciated. For the restoration of true specula-
tion in a world that has now been completely enlightened by the intel-
lect, will only be possible through a properly reflective understanding 
of the earlier religious tradition of which speculative philosophy is the 
true heir. 
Hegel's doctrine of the Creation owes as much to the first chapter 
of John as to the first chapter of Genesis or to the Nicene Creed. The 
light that shines in the primeval darkness is the light of Reason-the 
Logos that was "begotten not made"; and it seems that the nothing 
out of which God the Father made the world is to be identified with 
the creative might of the Father himself. We should note that there 
are two sides to the speculative interpretation of all this religious lan-
guage. On the side of the philosophy of nature, "light" refers both to 
the physical principle of light (and heat) and to the principle of life; 
and "night" means not only darkness but that which, being impervi-
ous to light, is shown up by it, the heavy matter which is always in-
wardly dark till the higher light of life itself shines within it. On the 
side of transcendental philosophy "light" stands for the reflective 
co~~ciousness which discovers all the creative activity (of the Father?) 
that has already gone on in the "night" of unconscious nature; and "the 
nothing" means the mighty force of thought, the abyss out of which 
everything comes and into which it is hurled. God himself, when not 
identified with this abyss, which is both his creative power and his 
negative side, is identical with the life and order of the creative activ-· 
ity. Thus the night or the abyss is God the Father, while Reason in 
nature is God the Son, the Logos; and speculative Reason returning 
from the creation and reconciling it with its ground in the divine pow-
er will be God the Holy Spirit, "proceeding from the Father and the 
Son" or "positing being in non-being, as becoming [the Father], di-
chotomy in the Absolute as its appearance [the Logos], the finite in 
the infinite as life [the Spirit]" (93-4). The trinitarian dogma of the 
Christian faith is a proper religious expression of speculative truth; 
while on the other hand, the Judaic creation story (in Genesis) ex-
presses the truth from the "standpoint of dichotomy." 
If we approach the problem of philosophy in a reflective way-that 
is, as observers of a dichotomy in our own consciousness and our cul-
ture which needs to be overcome or healed-then we are bound to 

23 
Introduction 
give both an analysis of the need and a prescription for the cure. But 
before we can think of doing this we are reflectively bound to examine 
first, in the same spirit of calm observation, the question of what ca-
pacity we have to deal with these philosophical problems at all. Thus, 
after Descartes expressed the divided condition of modern culture in 
clear intellectual terms, as a dualism of thinking and extended sub-
stance, we find that Spinoza's answer to the challenge thus posed by 
Reason to Reason was not properly heeded. The voice that was heard 
rather, was that of Locke, who asked whether we are in a position to 
say anything at all about the ultimate substance of things; and Locke's 
Essay was the beginning of a whole tradition which Hegel calls (in 
Faith and Knowledge) "the reflective philosophy of subjectivity." 
It appears that, as far as the speculative purpose of philosophy is 
concerned, this reflective philosophy must remain eternally defeated, 
since it is self-defeating. The self-defeating character of reflection in 
philosophy is what Reinhold's endless multiplication of methodologi-
cal prolegomena and preambles illustrates. But it is only for Reinhold 
and his like that defeat is inevitable, not for the principle of reflection 
itself. Reflection can really become "the instrument of philosophy." It 
can become Reason. This is the speculative significance of Kant's 
"Copernican Revolution." 
In the Critique of Pure Reason reflection became the means for the 
reestablishment of speculative philosophy through a genuine conquest 
of the Cartesian dualism. In order to see how and why this is so, we 
must examine the structure of philosophical reflection. Whatever ap-
pears in reflective consciousness does so as an object of consciousness, 
as something other than, and opposed to, the thinking subject to 
whom it appears. But, at the same time-as we already find Locke say-
ing-nothing can appear to the mind except its own products, its 
"ideas." Thus when we reflect critically-as Kant did-upon the pro-
cess by which the mind produces all of its Lockean "furniture" we 
recognize that what initially appears to us as the passive reflection of 
a world of finite objects that present themselves, is actually an activity 
in which the mind presents to itself the results of its own synthesizing 
activity. Thus, what we do consciously in philosophical reflection, that 
is, make our own mental activity into an object for observation, is just 
what we are doing unconsciously in ordinary consciousness. 
Thus philosophical reflection discovers that all consciousness is re-
flection. Our own activity is everywhere reflected back to us. It is only 
the structure of reflection itself-the process of dividing subject from 
object and opposing them-that disguises this from us. In the critical 
perspective, we can see that reflection is essentially antinomies. For 

24 
Difference 
consciousness must have an object, and the object must appear as 
other than the receptive activity of the intellect, which merely ob-
serves it. But when reflection is turned upon itself, when we become 
consciously reflective, we observe that what reflection is, is not what 
it appears to be (the having or observing of an object) but rather just 
the opposite (the positing or constitution of an object). At the same 
time, we must reflectively affirm that reflection is what it appears to 
be. It is the having of an object, and for this reason, we are only able 
to produce the critique of reflective reason by observing the process of 
conscious experience as the appearance of a thing-in-itself. 
Until reflection "makes itself its own object" and so "becomes Rea-
son" by "nullifying itself" in this discovery of its own antinomic 
character, the task that faces it is a hopeless one. It is forever involved 
in an infinite regress (theoretically) or an infinite progress (practically). 
The goal of philosophy is to comprehend the unity of all that is. In 
the world of the intellect the obvious hopelessness of ever achieving 
"a whole of the intellect's own kind" is the "force of the negative 
Absolute,"44 just as Spinoza's Ethics is the presentation of "the force 
that posits the opposed objective and subjective totality" (95). But the 
reflective intellect remains stubbornly realistic, insisting on the inde-
pendent being of the world that presents itself in consciousness, and 
ignoring the fact that nothing in finite consciousness ever really is. 
Every conscious datum refers beyond itself in one way or another; 
and the ultimate ground-Locke's Substance or Kant's thing-in-itself 
-must be "given up for lost" because it is "nothing" (i.e., nothing 
determinate). 
Kant's Copernican revolution involved a recognition of the anti-
nomic character of reflection. But Kant did not overcome the antinomy 
properly. Instead, he turned the opposite aspects of the antinomy into 
the phenomenal world of intellectual necessity and the noumenal 
world of rational freedom. The phenomenal world of Kant is the 
sphere where intellect remains supreme, and "does not become Rea-
son" (96). But through its self-critical labours the intellect now knows 
that it is dealing only with phenomena which are nothing-in-them-
selves, because they are only the appearance of what truly is. The way 
forward from here lies in the recognition of the process of appearing 
as a necessary moment of what truly is. We have to comprehend ex-
perience as the presentation of the Absolute to itself, the self-knowl-
edge of the Absolute. Hence when Reinhold complains that the basic 
fault of all past philosophy is "the habit ... of regarding thinking as 
something merely subjective" (97), he would at least be right about 

25 
Introduction 
all reflective philosophy, if he understood properly what non-subjec-
tive thinking was. But in fact he remains merely a philosopher of 
subjective reflection himself. 
Just what Reinhold meant by his appeal to the learned world to 
conceive of thinking as an objective activity I have not discovered. 
But Schelling and Hegel had already taken up the challenge in the 
form in which Kant posed it. The noumenal world of freedom must be 
united with the phenomenal realm of necessity by something more 
powerful than an act of what Kant, in the introduction to the Critique 
of Judgment (cf. also §§ 69, 75) called "reflecting" judgment. Kant 
had declared that all teleological concepts were merely regulative {i.e., 
subjectively valid for the guidance of our reflections) not constitutive 
(i.e., objectively valid for the constitution of objects). This is the situ-
ation of Reason "operating as intellect" {97). Schelling and Hegel in-
.sisted that, on the contrary, all speculative thinking was both teleolo-
gical and objective. Thus nothing could count as objective thinking for 
them if the thought had to be "applied" to the matter. The thinking 
must constitute the object, and it must use the standard of its own 
self-constitution in doing so.45 When the whole range of our finite ex-
perience is consistently organized in this way we shall have the Abso-
lute before us as "an objective totality, a whole of knowledge" {98). 
Instead of an endless chain we shall have a complete cycle of exist-
ence. Every proper part of this totality will be an organic system with 
the same cyclic structure as the totality. This community of structure 
is the "conne~tion with the Absolute" that gives the part its standing. 
Nothing counts as real knowledge, or as an acceptable explanation, 
unless it places the explanandum in the context of an organic totality 
of this kind. 
Having thus dealt, bot);t. negatively and positively, with the intellect 
as an instrument of philosophy, Hegel now turns to the question of 
-the right relation between "healthy" intellect and speculative Reason. 
He has just laid down that speculative philosophy is the only real 
knowledge, and he has shown why isolated reflective cognitions are 
not knowledge. When reflection becomes philosophical and examines 
itself critically "its positing appears to Reason to be non-positing, its 
products to be negations" {95-6). But before Locke disturbed the naive 
realism of ordinary consciousness, and Kant imprisoned us in a world 
of appearances of which we are the unconscious stage-managers, we 
Were all sure that we have quite a lot of real knowledge; and as soon 
as we leave the philosophy class-room we start living in a real world, 
praying to a real God and so on. The self-nullifying certainty of criti-

26 
Difference 
cal reason which tells us that we have no way of knowing this real 
world is forgotten. What is the relation of philosophic knowledge to 
this ordinary knowledge? What is the proper relation between philos-
ophy and common sense? Can we reflectively develop a philosophy of 
common sense? 
Hegel's answer to this last question is negative. Common sense is 
essentially unphilosophical, and as soon as it develops philosophical 
pretensions it becomes unhealthy. The man of sound sense has many 
principles to guide him in his life. In choosing and applying the one 
that is appropriate to his situation he is guided by his feeling for life 
as a whole. When a critical philosopher comes along-Socrates is the 
most notable example-he finds it easy enough to throw common 
sense into confusion by making it reflect upon itself. The proper de-
fense against the Socratic elenchus was to refuse to argue. So far as it 
remains healthy, common sense is bound to regard philosophy with 
suspicion. In order to pass from the intuitive knowledge of feeling to 
the speculative knowledge of Reason, it is necessary to pass through 
the fire of philosophical reflection. But when he is asked to cast his 
naive reflection into the abyss of speculative reflection, the man of 
sense can only assume that he is in the presence of the evil one. 
Hence it comes about that intensely religious spirits-Socrates, Spin-
oza, Fichte-are held to be impious men or atheists. 
The reflective form of common-sense-the way in which we naively 
deal with such dichotomies as actual/possible, rea!lideal, and appear-
ance/truth-is the form of faith. Healthy common sense has its feet 
on the ground, yet it walks in the sight of God. "The earth is the 
Lord's, and all that therein is" indicates a relation of reflection to the 
Absolute, for it preserves the "form of sundering"; yet "reflection is 
certainly Reason" because finite experience is here taken up into the 
infinite. But in this common sense faith it is the aspect of opposition-
" all flesh is as grass" etc.-that is typically present to consciousness. 
So when speculation insists on the redemption of the finite world here 
and now-not at the Last Trump-it appears as the Antichrist. 
Pre-critical speculation-any monistic form of what Kant called 
dogmatic metaphysics-is bound to be offensive to common sense be-
cause of its apparent one-sidedness. Thus Berkeley's idealism appears 
to Dr. Johnson very easy to refute. But when in the materialism of La 
Mettrie and D'Holbach the opposite is raised to the Absolute, the 
sense of absurdity turns to one of moral horror. The speculative read-
er, one who can recognize "flesh of his flesh," will not be deceived by 
any merely apparent one-sidedness. He will ask rather whether the 

27 
Introduction 
philosopher has really fallen victim to his time. Thus Hegel is pre-
pared to defend D'Holbach (171); and his primary critical concern is 
to show just where Fichte's speculation "succumbs to the fate of its 
time" (101). 
Thus common sense is normally enraged at speculation on two 
counts. First, it does not understand the very project of suspending 
the dichotomy-and so far as it comprehends the results it must find 
them impious, because the salvation of the finite here and now is of-
fensive to faith. Secondly, what it does perceive is the one-sidedness 
of speculation-the apparent suppression of one of the poles of the 
dichotomy. This may or may not appear impious-depending on what 
is outwardly suppressed-but it is bound to appear absurd. A specula-
tive theory that is completely successful-in Hegel's view-yet man-
ages to offend common sense in every possible way is Spinoza's fatal-
ism (to give it the name that shows what is outwardly suppressed). 
D'Holbach's materialism plays rather the cultural role that Hegel 
ascribes to a system that "strikes down with one stroke the whole 
mass of finitudes that adheres to the opposite principle" (102). 
Common sense, being rooted in "feeling," is an aspect of our social 
nature. The society which because of its natural climatic environment 
has produced Descartes, Newton and the Enlightenment, may take 
some time to accept and come to a proper appreciation of the philoso-
phical revolution which the advent of the Identity Philosophy repre-
sents. Hegel seems to think that common sense itself must be brought 
to complete confusion and despair before the new philosophy can 
triumph. Yet speculation has the principle of the reality of knowledge 
in common with common sense. After all the intellectual oppositions 
have been nullified in philosophical reflection, the mountains will once 
more be known as mountains and the rivers as rivers-not as phe-
nomenal appearances of a hidden power. The "night" of the enlight-
ened intellect will be transformed into the "noonday" of Reason; and 
the noonday of Beas'Hl.i& .-al.:zo the noonday of real life. 
What distinguishes the knowledge of speculation from that of com-
lllOn sense is its systematic character. So far, we have advanced with 
Critical reflection to the Kantian conception of a philosophical system: 
"the unity of the manifold modes of knowledge under one idea."46 
And we have alluded to Reinhold's discovery of the principle of iden-
tity as the Grundsatz under which all modes of knowledge are to be 
subsumed. But from our study of why common sense cannot under-
stand speculation we have discovered that the speculative overcoming 
of a dichotomy must at the same time preserve the dichotomy. It is no 

28 
Difference 
surprise to find, therefore, that Hegel's next step is to show how the 
principle of Identity must comprehend its own "application" when it 
enters into the "thinking that is the absolute activity of Reason" {96) 
By so doing it becomes not a proposition, but an antinomy-a pair of 
contradictory propositions which describe the opposite aspects of con-
scious reflection. 
In this connection Hegel needs to show us that the definition ot 
substance from which Spinoza began was already a speculative antin-
omy of the same sort. He must do this because Schelling had chosen 
to expound the new philosophy of Identity on the model of Spinoza's 
geometric method. It is clear, too, that he means to demonstrate the 
superiority of Spinoza's procedure-however dogmatic and uncritical 
it may look-as compared with the essentially subjective procedure of 
analysing the foundations of consciousness that both Reinhold and 
Fichte practiced.47 
But in spite of this polemical concern, the concession that "no phil-
osophical beginning could look worse than Spinoza's" (105)-backed 
up as it is by the whole critique of the Grundsatz approach to system-
atic philosophy-contains a devastating implicit critique of Schelling's 
method. Nor should we forget the historical lesson of Spinoza's hun-
dred years as a "dead dog." Hegel speaks in the Preface of the great 
millenium of Reason when "from begining to end it is philosophy it-
self whose voice will be heard" (83}. When that day dawns no doubt 
all readers of philosophy will understand the foundations of specula-
tive systems properly. What we are now bound to ask, however, is 
what need will philosophy satisfy when the great day arrives? Spec-
ulation is the essential self-mirroring of the Absolute, the recognition 
of finite experience as the self-othering which is unavoidably neces-
sary if the Absolute is to exist as self-knowledge. But how can this 
absolute knowledge come to birth except through the experience of 
reflective dichotomies? The philosophical millenium of the Preface 
will be the day when the Absolute can be "shot out of a pistoJ."·1' 
Hegel has already shown us why that day will never dawn. Schelling'~ 
procedure is that of one who expects it with tomorrow's sunrise. 
It was Fichte, not Schelling, who set the pattern for Hegel's inter-
pretation of the formal principle of identity in such a way as to make 
a Gegensntz out of it. In the first Science of Knowledge (1794), Fichte 
treated "A = A" as an abstraction from the self-positing of the Ego.!'' 
But his procedure was subjective only. Hegel proceeds objectively, 
that is, he treats the formal principle itself as the absolute activity of 
Rea9on. The object here is, as Hegel says, knowledge, for we know 

29 
Introduction 
that the absolute activity of Reason must be a self-knowing. Seen in 
this perspective "A= A" becomes the formula of the semantic theory 
of truth. The first A stands for the truth in the mind of the subject, 
and the second A for the corresponding state of things in the world-
Reinhold's "matter," to which the pure concept of reflective thought 
is to be "applied." As soon as we look at the proposition m this way 
we see that it is indeed a Gegensatz. For what "A = A" asserts is the 
Parmenidean identity of thought and being. But since the thought is 
evidently differe11t from what is thought about, we cannot assert 
"A = A" without at the same time asserting "Ad- A." "A" in the 
mind does not equal "A" in the world. So in order to make any effec-
tive use of the subjective principle of identity (which has perfect for-
mal validity as a hypothesis of pure thought in isolation-"If any-
thing is A, then it is A") we must say "A = B," the obJect of my 
thought is this real being. When we thmk truly we cannot just think 
hypothetically. Yet there is no more absolute and necessary difference 
than the difference between thought and being:'0 
In the world of finite experience, to which the formal logic of iden-
tity is supposed by its proponents to apply, the antinomy appears as 
the endlessness of the search for an ultimate ground. We want to 
think truly of "what is" and we are faced with the fact that nothing 
in our experience is self-subsistent: everything is the effect of some 
cause ari.d becomes the cause of some further effect. Nothing is cause 
eE itself, nothing abides, nothing remains equal to itself. Speaking 
more generally, nothing contains its own explanation within itself, 
nothing is its own logos. In order to be what it is ("everything is what 
it is and not another thing") everything requires that some other thing 
should equally be: and in order for the second thing to be, the first 
thing must cease to be (or be not yet). The causal relation is just the 
simplest illustration of this. For it shows us how the being of every-
thing finite requires its own nonbeing, and the being of something else 
in its place, for the sake of its own finitude (which is just what gives it 
its identity as distinct from other things). 
One can of course cling fast to the principle of identity, and move 
straight from the transitoriness of all finite existence to a sort of Par-
menidean mysticism. Thus one accepts the nullification of all finite 
experience in the antinomy, and the intellect does not "grow into Rea-
son," but is left unperturbed in ordinary life, because it is simply an-
nihilated in the religious consciousness of the Absolute. As soon as 
one thinks of God, heaven and earth pass away; but from Sunday to 
Sunday one can live beneath the one and upon the other quite com-

30 
Difference 
fortably nevertheless. This is the position of Jacobi. Reinhold is more 
naive. He clings to the principle of identity without recognizing its 
antinomic character. He postulates the "'matter" to which thinking, 
with its principle of identity, is "applied." Hegel calls this "a very in-
adequate synthesis." But inadequate as it is, it still involves the antin-
omy, for when the principle "A= A" is applied to some matter (i.e., 
to something other than thought itself) it is also asserted in the form 
"A = B." The "absolute stuff" which is the matter to which thought 
is applied has to "fit in" to the conceptual patterns in which thought 
strives to construct the self-identity of what truly is. In Hegel's view 
this doctrine of "fitting in" is the only original contribution of Bardili 
to the great programme for the "reduction of philosophy to logic." 
Reinhold had greeted Bardili's Outline of Primary Logic (1800) with 
great enthusiasm, declaring himself a follower of this new way. But 
Fichte was the first to say, and Hegel agreed, that Bardili's theory was 
only Reinhold's philosophy "warmed over" (188). 
What is needed, if we are to transcend the standpoint of reflection 
and achieve a truly speculative grasp of the principle of identity is 
'"lrans-cendental intuition."51 We have already seen that this claim re-
fers-to- Kant's statement of what is required in order for us to compre-
hend the unity of mechanical and teleological explanation in the ulti-
mate ground which Reason requires us to postulate. But now Hegel is 
ready to show us why Kant must be wrong in holding that what is 
required cannot be supplied by any means at our disposal. If Kant 
were right, then all cognition would come to grief, even the limited 
cognition that Kant believes we do have. All the relative identities (of 
concept and empirical intuition) must be connected with the Absolute 
if they are to have real cognitive status. But when they are connected 
they become antinomies. Thus, without transcendental intuition, phil-
osophic knowledge can only lead us to the negative conclusion of Par-
menides: "Being is, Not-Being is not." We can show, through the sub-
ordinate principle of causality or of sufficient reason, that the being of 
everything is related to (depends on) the being of something else; 
hence that its being as finite requires its own nonbeing; and since the 
chain of related grounds is an infinite regress theoretically, or an in-
finite progress practically, the whole that truly is becomes a contradic-
tion and is really nothing. "Pure knowing," without intuition can have 
only an unknowable Ding-an-sich as its object. Intuition must there-
fore have a transcendental status if there is to be positive knowledge 
at all. \Ne must be able to unite the absoluteness of pure being (or the 
activity of pure thinking) with the transitoriness of intuited existence 

31 
Introduction 
(in the synthesis of finite thought). We can do this in the case of our 
own self-knowledge: the unity is the intuited act of "self-positing." 
But that self-positing is at the same time, and necessarily, the positing 
of a natural order in which we exist as mortal, finite, elements.52 So 
what is intuited even in self-intuition is "an activity of both intelli-
gence and nature" (110). The conceptual moment, the aspect of thought, 
is the moment of freedom; the intuitive moment, the aspect of nature, 
is the moment of necessity. We should notice that the self as concept, 
as a free activity of thinking, knows itself directly in philosophical 
reflection; but as a natural being it has to be "deduced as a link in the 
chain of necessity." That the self is an activity of both intelligence 
and nature is only intuited properly when the task of speculation is 
complete. But, at the same time, if we try to philosophize without the 
intuition of the whole, we shall be obliged to wander, as the Goddess 
tells Parmenides that all other mortals do, "ignorantly, with divided 
minds and scattered thoughts."53 
Thus from the point of view of reflection, this intuition of the 
whole is the one thing that can and must be postulated as a condition 
ofthe possibility of philosophical knowledge. There can be no justifi-
cation for postulating Ideas, no excuse for the celebrated postulates of 
God, and immortality; and no need to postulate freedom, if thinking 
itself is freedom. But how does the intuition of the whole differ as a 
postulate from God? When we raise this question we come back again 
to the influence of Spinoza on the philosophy of Identity. Kant postu-
lates God as a moral Providence, a rational guarantee of the summum 
bonum. 54 He agrees that the archetypal intelligence is the only ground 
in which mechanism and finality can be satisfactorily united: but our 
theoretical need to appeal to final causes does not justify the postulate 
of God because "theism would first have to succeed in proving to the 
satisfaction of the determinant judgment that the unity of end in mat-
ter is an impossible result of the mere mechanism of nature. Other-
wise it is not entitled definitely to locate its ground beyond and above 
nat,H{e-t5 "Postq\ating God" means, for Kant, positing something 
"iitre'F' die Natur hlnaus." This is the postulate that Hegel declares ille-
gitimate.5" From the (Kantian) standpoint of philosophical reflection 
We can best express what Hegel is prepared to permit as the postulate 
that "the unity of end in matter" is not "an impossible result of the 
mere mechanism of nature." He claims that for the sake of reflective 
cognition we are required to postulate that the finality of nature coin-
cides with its mechanism, i.e., we must abandon the simple Kantian 
identification of nature with causal necessity. The Absolute is Fichte's 

32 
Difference 
God as Absolute Subject, and Spinoza's God as Absolute Substance-
or it is God as infinite necessarily comprehending Nature as finite. 
Having thus far painfully constructed a ladder from reflection to 
speculation, by way of Kant's concept of Reason as dialectical-and 
particularly by a bold generalization of Kant's notion of antinomy-
Hegel now begins to talk out of the other side of his mouth, and 
preach the gospel according to Schelling. Once we have climbed He-
gel's ladder we must throw it away. For from the speculative point of 
view it is a mistake to regard transcendental intuition as a postulate 
at all: "this whole manner of postulating has its sole ground in the 
fact that the one-sidedness of reflection is accepted as a starting point" 
(112). When we rise to the standpoint of self-conscious Reason, we 
begin-as Spinoza did-from God as the essence that necessarily 
exists. This is really the end of our journey however. We can only 
speak of philosophy beginning here because the construction of thf' 
Absolute is not completed until we return to the poir.t where we be-
gan "postulating" the Absolute.57 
The last of Hegel's preliminary questions is: must philosophy be 
systematic? We have already noted that a mystical scepticism, which 
knows only the transitoriness of finite things is perfectly possible; and 
that in the absence of transcendental intuition this is the only form in 
which a genuinely speculative impulse can express itself (compare fur-
ther 155-6). What Hegel now goes on to argue is that transcendental 
intuition can be imperfect in various ways and degrees so that the 
speculative impulse of the philosopher does not get completely artic-
ulated into his system. Fichte with his continual emphasis on "striv-
ing'' is very much in Hegel's mind here (though the model of philoso-
phy as a "constant flight from limitations" [113] is probably Jacobi). 
Fichte managed to produce a properly systematic theory of the self, 
but his theory of the world was all "postulation." The proper method, 
as sketched by Hegel, is to begin with the most immediate realities 
(objectively: "matter"; subjectively: "feeling") and show how they 
are necessarily related to other realities that are less immediate. Thm 
the totality is constructed in an organic order that corresponds to its 
natural genesis in experience. The System of Ethical Life which Hegel 
produced at the end of 180258 is an example of this progressive devel-
opment. Being an essay in practical philosophy, it is subjective and 
begins with feeling. 59 
The history of speculative philosophy is "the history of the one 
eternal Reason" (114). But philosophies will have different contingent 
starting points according to the need of the culture in which they arise. 

33 
Introduction 
Thus the topic of systematization rounds out Hegel's general reflec-
tions by bringing us back to the problem of the use and abuse of the 
history of philosophy from which we began. Systems which appear to 
be most radically opposed to each other may equally be products of 
genuine speculation, that is, they may both be constructions that are 
validly founded in the transcendental intuition of the absolute whole 
that knows itself in the "history of the one, eternal Reason" (114). 
Thus both Fichte's idealism and D'Holbach's materialism are expres-
sions of genuine speculation; and both of them also fall into dogma-
tism in so far as they are systematically imperfect. Hegel concedes that 
philosophical materialism typically involves a cruder kind of dogmatic 
failure (ll5). This is presumably because the primitive object of trans-
cendental intuition is the thinking self. 60 
The mark of dogmatism is the substitution of the category of cause 
and effect for that of substantial relation in philosophical reflection 
about the relation of the Absolute to its appearance in the knowing 
consciousness of Reason. Kant regarded Descartes, Spinoza, and Leib-
niz as the paradigms of dogmatic metaphysics. In general, Hegel does 
not allow that Spinoza was guilty of dogmatism at all. Indeed, he can-
not allow this without implicitly conceding that Schelling's philosoph-
ical procedure is misguided. All the same, the route to speculation that 
he has himself mapped out passes through the fire of Kant's Dialectic 
and for this reason his own conception of dogmatism comprehends 
Kant's view in a suspended form. Thus, what he refers to as "pure 
dogmatism" or as a "dogmatism of philosophy" seems to be charac-
teristic of Descartes. For in Descartes we are presented with two sub-
stances which interact. "Consistent realism and idealism" are repre-
sented in the Kantian perspective by Spinoza and Berkeley. But since 
Hegel says that in the consistent forms of realism and idealism "the 
causal relation is essentially suspended" we probably ought to think 
rather of Spinoza and Fichte as the speculative proponents of these 
extremes. Certainly Fichte is the main example in Hegel's mind when 
he goes on to discuss the way in which transcendental philosophy 
(i.e., speculative idealism) passes over into dogmatism. So we can be 
sure that he has Fichte's distinction between "realism," "idealism," 
"d ogmatism," and "critical philosophy" in his mind. Fichte usually 
identifies "realism" with "dogmatism" and "idealism" with "criti-
cism," though he admits that dogmatic idealism is possible. 61 
Genuinely speculative philosophy always takes the substance/acci-
dent relation as basic. But just as causality is thought of as reciprocal 
in pure dogmatism, so the substance/ accident relation is shown to be 

34 
Difference 
reciprocal in pure speculation. Thus in the philosophy of nature self-
positing is the abstract schema of the real world, and in transcendental 
philosophy nature is only the abstract schema of self-conscious Rea-
son (110). Fichte starts out among the speculative lambs, but since he 
does not attempt to construct nature on the model of the self, but 
rather regards it as an endless practical problem to reconstruct it in 
accordance with the moral law (causality through freedom), he ends 
up among the dogmatic goats. For his moral idealism requires "a rela-
tion of the Absolute to appearance other than that of nullification." 
But in Fichte only the nullification ever appears; the identity of the 
Ego and its world remains a subjective intuition. 
The exposition of Fichte, to which Hegel now proceeds, is designed 
to establish this thesis in detail, but we should never forget that Hegel 
is only spelling out the cost of a conclusion which Fichte himself pro-
claims as necessary from the outset. There is no question of Hegel's 
accusing Fichte of failing to do something that Fichte had originally 
proposed to do. 
5. ANALYSIS (rr): FICHTE 
About the fairly lengthy exposition of Fichte which makes up the cen-
tral section of the essay we can here afford to be much briefer. The 
argument is more straightforward, and Hegel himself has provided an-
other version of most of it in his discussion of Fichte in the History of 
Philosophy. 62 We shall here confine ourselves to the briefest outline 
possible, along with the identification and discussion of a few cruces. 
The general line of Hegel's criticism of Fichte has already been in-
dicated. Fichte' s science of knowledge is a genuinely speculative the-
ory of the self which shows us how the self produces the world, but 
not how the world is the real world of the self. It is natural therefore 
that Hegel should concentrate on Fichte's deduction of nature in its 
various aspects. We should notice at once, however, that he ignores 
what was at that moment Fichte's most recent (and accessible) state-
ment of his views in the Vocation of Man (1800). The reason for this, 
which is not explicitly stated in the essay, was made plain the follow-
ing year, in Faith and Knowledge, and we have already referred to it. 
Fichte' s decline from speculative philosophy to dogmatism becomes 
complete in that work. It is therefore excluded from the Difference 

35 
Introduction 
essay as unworthy of treatment. Hegel is here concerned only with 
Fichte's system as an expression of genuine speculation.63 
In his lecture course on the History of Philosophy, Hegel lays it 
down that among Fichte's works only the Science of Knowledge is 
genuinely speculative. Fichte's Science of Rights and his System of 
Ethics "contain nothing speculative, but demand the presence of the 
speculative element."64 This contention follows quite naturally from 
the argument of the Difference essay taken together with Faith and 
Knowledge. The completion of his critical survey of Fichte in Faith 
and Knowledge caused Hegel to be rather more trenchant from the 
outset in the lecture course, than he is in the Difference essay. In the 
lectures he complains straight away that "the form in which Fichte's 
philosophy is presented has ... the real drawback of bringing the em-
pirical ego ever before one's eyes, which is absurd."65 But it seems to 
me that the Vocation of Man and the "non-speculative" parts of 
Fichte's system have improperly influenced this verdict, and that He-
gel's initial stance in the Difference essay was sounder. 
Here he begins by contrasting pure thinking with ordinary con-
sciousness and saying that the task of Fichte's speculative philosophy 
is to·explain this antithesis, that is, to show the positive relation of or-
dinary finite consciousness to the pure act of self-positing. The nega-
tive aspect of the relation is already given by a simple consideration of 
what it means to be finite. This is what we have in the religious con-
sciousness that "all flesh is as grass." The desired positive relation 
would be an explanation of this transitory existence. The opposition 
between the infinite and the finite self must be suspended or over-
come, in other words there must be no recourse to the Kantian thing-
in-itself as the ultimate origin of sensuous data. The opposition must 
be suspended because the world of empirical consciousness is what we 
are primarily aware of. Philosophical consciousness comes later, and 
reflects on, looks back upon, ordinary consciousness. If this pure con-
sciousness is indeed the real origin of empirical consciousness we must 
be able to deduce empirical consciousness from pure consciousness. 
Otherwise we shall not have shown that pure consciousness is pure, 
that is, a priori. It is only by this deduction, by showing how every 
aspect of empirical consciousness is adequately grounded in pure con-
sciousness, that we can transform the empty concept of pure con-
sciousness into an intuition. Empirical consciousness, i.e., the world as 
we experience it, must be shown to be a self-actualization of the pure 
self-positing Ego. 

36 
Difference 
Fichte fails to solve this problem. P~mu:_Qru!:i_o~sness does not "be-
come objective to itself," does not become an intuition. First he dis-
guises the antinomy of consciousness by separating it into two seem-
ingly independent propositions: "the Ego posits itself" and "the Ego 
posits a non-Ego opposed to itself." Then his reconciliation "the Ego 
posits within itself a divisible Ego and a divisible non-Ego" is never 
shown to be identical with the original absolute positing. The original 
self-positing ought not to have been divided into a sequence of distinct 
acts like this. This is how the reflective intellect is bound to proceed; 
but once Fichte has taken the activity of the Ego to pieces like this he 
is never able to put it together again. 
The Ego and the non-Ego fall apart just as, in Kant, transcendental 
apperception and the thing-in-itself fall apart. The self-positing and 
the oppositing remain quite independent and opposed, so that the self 
within which the two activities are supposedly united remains un-
known and transcendent like the traditional God of theism. The third 
principle ought to be the only one. We have to comprehend the way 
in which the activity which Kant called "productive imagination" es-
tablishes both self and world in one fell swoop .. What Fichte estab-
lishes instead is a finite self enveloped in a mystery which it struggles 
endlessly and hopelessly to dissolve. The easy interpretation of Fichte's 
theory, the one that a formalist like Reinhold naturally seizes on, is 
the dogmatic idealist one. But Fichte is too honest and too clearheaded 
to solve his problem by the fiat of dogmatic idealism; so his idealism 
remains simply problematic.66 Empirical consciousness is explained 
equally well either in terms of the self-positing or in terms of the op-
positing: "it offers no more and no less warrant for pure conscious-
ness than for the thing-in-itself" (127). 
In the theoretical activity of the Ego the mystery appears in the 
form of the incomprehensible "impact" which the Ego meets. This is 
just Kant's Ding-an-sich; and transferring it, by hypothesis, into the 
Ego itself does not make it any more comprehensible than it was be-
fore. Here we are face to face with the absolute oppositing that is not 
resolved in the synthesis. Nature is deduced from this primordial de-
fectiveness of the Ego-from the fact that it meets an impact. "As 
Fichte put it, the advance to empirical consciousness is made because 
pure consciousness is not a complete consciousness" (129-30). I have 
not been able to find any passage in which Fichte does put it quite like 
this. But he does say that intellectual intuition "never occurs in isola-
tion, as a complete act of consciousness."67 And in the Science of 
Knowledge itself, he asserts several times that pure self-positing can-

37 
Introduction 
not constitute what we mean by consciousness nt all. Here is what he 
says, for example, in the section on which the rest of Hegel's outline 
appears at this point to be based: "A self that posits itself as self-
positing, or a subject, is impossible without an object brought forth in 
the manner described."68 The expression that I cannot trace probably 
occurs in some exposition of 1797 or later-or perhaps Hegel's mem-
ory is slightly at fault here. 
Because of his admission of the impact Fichte's system falls short of 
being a system of perfect freedom. The impact is obviously a bound-
ary for productive imagination in theoretical cognition; but Fichte 
seeks to maintain his idealism by proving that it must arise from the 
practical activity of the Ego. On that side, however, it turns out to be 
a necessary presupposition for the existence of freedom as an endless 
striving. The conquest of the non-Ego, the establishment of equiva-
lence between the first principle "Ego= Ego" and the third "Ego = 
(Ego+ non-Ego)" is a moral requirement. But the existence of the self 
as an agent presupposes that this requirement cannot finally be met. 
So in the end "Ego = Ego" turns into "Ego ought to be equal to Ego." 
Pure consciousness has flown up into the noumenal realm of the moral 
law; empirical consciousness remains sundered between what ought to 
be and what is. And, in Fichte's view, it is only what ought to be that 
is int~llectually intuited. What is real, on the contrary, is always the 
lived antithesis between this intellectually intuited ideal, and the em-
pirically intuited situation. Human rational existence is simply moral 
striving. The Absolute is thus a "bad" infinity of moral progress in 
perpetuity. 
All the concrete applications of Fichte's philosophy to human life 
are reflective rather than speculative because they rest on this founda-
tion. Hegel now comes to his main topic, which is the conception of 
nature in Fichte's system. The most immediate form of nature in ra-
tional consciousness is a "drive" (T rieb); while the finite manifesta-
tion of rational freedom is a "concept of purpose." Synthesized as a 
mode of consciousness these two elements make up a feeling. We 
should note that Hegel accepts this synthesis himself, just as he ac-
cepts the theoretical synthesis of self-positing and oppositing. For 
"feeling" is one of the primitive notions that he mentions as appro-
priate starting points for speculative development (113). But he does 
not agree with the analytical, compositive method by which Fichte 
arrives at it. The whole context into which Fichte's synthesis is in-
serted is wrong, for "feeling is finite only from the point of view of 
reflection" (136). In the System of Ethical Life Hegel himself begins 

38 
Difference 
with the intuition of a "feeling"-but he allows the context of rela-
tions that are involved in it to develop from it. 69 
According to the principle of self-positing, freedom and drive should 
coincide. They are just different ways of looking at the same basic 
drive (Urtrieb). But since drive or impulse is thought of as completely 
determinate it can only be identified with freedom by coming under 
the control of the practical concept which decides whether or not it is 
to be gratified or suppressed. This is the moral tyranny that Hegel had 
already condemned in Kant. The unity is merely formal, and the form 
conceals an inner disruption. What makes things still worse is that so 
far as the disruption is overcome, the union involves the corruption of 
pure freedom. It is always some impulse of nature that is gratified in 
an action; the final purpose of absolute rational freedom is endlessly 
postponed. The best that we can do is make progress towards it. 
The weakness of this view is that Nature is regarded as mechanical-
ly determined and lifeless. Schelling and Hegel must have spent hours 
poring over the "Critique of Teleological Judgment"; but it seems safe 
to say that Fichte did not. The simple antithesis of mechanical neces-
sity and freedom was sufficient for him, and for that reason he de-
clines into a reflective philosopher as soon as he reaches the problems 
of practical philosophy. For it is just this antithesis of freedom and 
necessity that is the final shipwreck of reflection; this is the abyss 
from which speculation begins. Reflective thought is aware of itself as 
a free, spontaneous activity, since it operates in the infinite realm of 
possibilities; yet the ideal that it strives after is to comprehend the ac-
tual world as a system of perfect determinism. This is the impasse 
that Fichte avoids by the device of absolute postponement. 
But if the establishment of nature, of the non-Ego, really is an as-
pect of the free self-positing of the Ego, this simple antithesis of free-
dom and mechanism is an illusion of the intellect. Nature as a whole 
must be conceived as a self-determining system, an organic living 
whole, Spinoza's natura naturans. Fichte acknowledges this in his Sys-
tem of Ethics but he maintains the rigid opposition between nature 
and freedom nonetheless. 70 The organic view of nature does not confer 
any standing on it in the face of the law of Reason. We can see this 
with particular clarity in the Science of Rights. The whole deduction 
proceeds as if nature were simply dead matter, varying only in its de-
gree of plasticity to the imposed rational purpose. Kant preserved a 
certain independence for the organic aspect of nature by insisting that 
we are obliged to conceive of the purpose of a "natural end" (i.e., an 
organism) as if it were determined by and for another intelligence 

.l9 
Introduction 
(though we are not thereby entitled to postulate the existence of that 
other intelligence). Fichte "does not-need this detour" (143). But it is 
highly questionable whether he is really better off than Kant in He-. 
gel's eyes.71 
In Fichte's theory "nature is determined immediately by and for in-
telligence" (143). So we do not have to concern ourselves with the pur-
pose for which it was designed by an intelligence other than ours. But 
we still have to take a "detour through the dominion of the concept" 
(144). The "rational being," or finite intelligence, is a composite of soul 
and body, the combination of pure rational freedom with a limited set 
of physical possibilities. There is the freedom that man is, and the 
freedom that a man has. Nature is the sphere of the freedom that we 
have, and because we all have it, we necessarily impinge on one an-
other. So for the sake of rational freedom, the spontaneous capacity of 
the individual to act for its own ends must be surrendered. Only the 
freedom of obedience to the law 'of Reason matters. The individual 
must be absolutely at the disposal of that law. His freedom is to be 
measured as the degree of his plasticity, his indeterminateness, the 
range of possibilities that stands at the disposal of Reason in his per-
son. Thus if my spontaneous impulses are interfered with and curbed 
for the sake of the community, this is not really an infringement of 
my freedom but the realization of it. Fichte could not speak, as Rous-
seau did, of "being forced to be free," but this is exactly how the 
moral compulsion exercised by Fichte's rational will appears to Hegel. 
The moral freedom of Fichte is quite different from voluntary commit-
ment to a social purpose that one understands and identifies with. 
Self-commitment and identification of this sort is the "free limitation 
of one's freedom" that is characteristic of natural organic community. 
Natural needs only become compulsive in the way that Fichte's moral 
requirements are, when they rise to the pitch of what Hegel calls Not 
in his Frankfurt manuscripts. Thus Fichte's image of human society 
can be called a Notstaat. 72 Everything in society must be regulated by 
Reason (embodied in an external authority). The ordinary societies 
which are less ambitious on behalf of Reason are actually more con-
cordant with Reason. 
Thus Fichte's theory of law involves a universal external tyranny of 
Reason. His theory of ethics involves an even more effective internal-
ized tyranny. The external tyranny seems more objectionable, but it 
can be evaded; whereas the rational man will not even wish to evade 
his own conscience. Furthermore, because of the empirical component 
in any drive, ethical volitions are bound to conflict; so there are "con-

40 
Difference 
flicts of duty" -for any ethical volition will be defensible at the bar 
of Reason, that is, it can be presented as a duty. Kant recognized the 
necessity for casuistry in order to resolve moral difficulties of this sort. 
But because Fichte aims to be systematic, his doctrine of moral duty 
needs to be as completely determinate as his theory of legal right. 
The "indifference point" which Fichte cannot reach is an aesthetic 
ideal. Now Fichte, too, has read Kant's Critique of Judgment and 
Schiller's Aesthetic Letters. So he can write eloquent pages about the 
aesthetic harmony of human nature, and he appreciates the instru-
mental role which Schiller assigns to aesthetic education. Even the role 
of beauty as a regulative ideal (which is also in Schiller) is one that 
Fichte can verbally appropriate. Hegel approves of what Fichte wrote 
on this topic, but finds it to be inconsistent with his basic position. He 
claims that Fichte's Ethics is condemned out of his own mouth when 
the criteria of beauty, harmony and spontaneity are applied to it. This 
judgment is unfair. For Fichte's position clearly is that we must "relate 
to the moral law like a slave" only if we can do no better. The only 
valid complaint is that Fichte never explains how we can do better. 
"Striving" is all that he explains; and although striving can be noble, 
it can certainly also be ugly. 
Thus in spite of its genuinely speculative impulse, Fichte's system 
is ultimately an exercise of mere intellect. This was evident at the be-
ginning from the way in which Fichte analytically separated the "acts" 
of the Ego. And in the end the aspects of identity and difference (of 
pure and empirical consciousness) go apart into a causal relationship. 
Causality is the model case of a relative identity; and Fichte's practical 
philosophy, where all the problems of the theoretical philosophy are 
supposed to be resolved, turns out to be just a matter of the causal 
efficacy of Reason, or of the dominance of the concept over impulse. 
6. AN A L Y SIS (I I I ) : 5 C HE L L IN G 
Schelling's system, by contrast, is completely speculative; it is an or-
ganic expression of his basic philosophical insight. Pure consciousness 
(insight) and empirical consciousness (system) coincide. He shows us 
both how the self becomes a world-the "subjective Subject-Object," 
and how the world becomes a self-the "objective Subject-Object." 
The "point of indifference" from which this double task starts is the 
transcendental intuition of the self positing itself as other in order to 

41 
Introduction 
achieve self-consciousness. Earlier Hegel spoke of tpis moment posi-
tively as the "infinite focus which irradiates the rad'ii (i.e., finite cog-
nitions) at the same time that it is formed by tJ;lem" (111). This lan-
guage comes from the tradition of Augustinian theology. It was used 
by the theologians to describe God's relation to the created world. In 
the context of the Identity theory it only becomes meaningful when 
speculation has arrived at its goal. Hegel generally prefers to describe 
the indifference point as a vanishing-point. It is the moment where 
finite consciousness annihilntes itself by recognizing its own antinomic 
character. Thus transcendental intuition is the intuition of nothing-
ness. Only a religious enthusiast could be satisfied with "this intuition 
of colorless light" (156) which is merely the birth-pang of speculative 
philosophy, the point of "absolute contraction." 
Philosophy must justify finite experience, it must "give the separa-
tion into subject and object its due" (156). Finite experience is appear-
ance (both of the being of a "thing-in-itself" on the objective side, and 
of the activity of human imagination and intellect on the subjective 
side). But neither the being nor the activity can exist without mani~ 
festing themselves. Both for the subject and for the object it is essen-
-ti~l that they should appear. Thus an intuition of the ultimate identity 
o.f subject and object is not enough: "the Absolute itself is the iden-
tity of [noumenal] identity [of subject and object] and [phenomenal] 
non-identity" (156). Absolute knowledge is the identity of being and 
appearance, or the comprehending of the finite as a mirror (speculum) 
of the infinite. Unless we admit "the claims of separation" we cannot 
'reach the absolute identity at all. Both subject and object are equally 
finite and equally contingent in ordinary experience. The contingency 
is overcome when the finite phenomena are comprehended under laws. 
But to put the legislation of freedom on the noumenal side and that of 
nature on the phenomenal side is not good enough, if all that there is 
on the noumenal side for reflection and knowledge is "nothing." Mor-
al freedom will only become comprehensible when the programme of 
the Identity philosophy is carried out, or when Nature, the realm of 
the finite phenomena of ordinary cognition is exhibited as self-deter-
mining. The antinomy of necessary and free causality, which was so 
fundamental in Kant's view that one must be ascribed to phenomenal 
natu-re exclusively and the other to the noumenal self exclusively, 
must be shown up as an ideal opposition,·, a matter of intellectual per-
spective: while the difference between conscious and unconscious ac-
tivity, which is reduced to an ideal difference, a matter of perspective, 
in Fichte's idealism, must be given its proper status as a real opposi-

42 
Difference 
tion. For it ls the consnous/unconsoous opposition (not the neces-
sary/free opposition) that genuinely characterizes the realms of nature 
and culture into which experience is really divided. 
The indifference point from which speculative philosophy starts is 
the self that intuits its own spontaneity. This is the philosophical 
common ground shared by the two systems. For reasons of neutrality 
(as between natural and transcendental philosophy) Hegel refers to it 
as the "point of contraction." It will be helpful here, therefore to con-
sider generally the relation of the poles of contraction and expansion 
to the two forms of the indifference point that are spoken of in the 
Identity Philosophy. The indifference point as unity is the rationally 
self-conscious individual. When philosophic reflection turns in upon 
itself and seeks the pure activity which is the point of origin of all 
consciousness it discovers the pole of contraction-Fichte' s self-posit-
ing Ego or the spark of divine life which is the basis of our existence 
as rational individuals. This moment of pure consciousness, so called, 
whether it be pure thinking or pur~-intuition, is not consciousness in 
any ordinary sense at all. It is the f~unt of feeling and thought-or of 
"life" and of "light" in the language of the first chapter of John-and 
the starting point of transcendental philosophy. It is also the goal of 
natural philosophy which moves from the infinite extent of nature at 
the opposite extreme of expansion to the absolute source of life in the 
self-conscious living organism. The "indifference point as totality" is 
only really reached when both sciences are completed. In the same 
way, the indifference point of the magnet (upon which the whole an-
alogy is founded) is only really known for what it is, when the field 
of force between the two pples of which it is the center are plotted 
and shown in relation to it. The natural philosopher's journey from 
the boundaries of physical existence to its center must be comple-
mented and fulfilled by the transcendental philosopher's journey from 
the origin of consciousness to the conscious union of the mind with 
the whole of nature. This is the expansion of the self from unity to 
totality. But we cannot unpack all the riches of the spirit practically, 
unless we know theoretically what is packed up in its nature. Thus he 
journey from the immensity of space to the external center-the hu-
man organism-is just as necessary to philosophical comprehension as 
the journey from the internal center-the human mind, and specifical-
ly the productive imagination which is its point of origin-to God. 
Fichte rightly believed that he could find the secret of existence in the 
depths of the self. But it was still a secret when he found it. All of his 
constructive account of human life rests on an intellectual (i.e., me-

43 
Introduction 
chanica!) concept of nature. If we really want to formulate the pur-
pose of human life in the world, we must comprehend adequately our 
own place in the order of living nature. 
We can go this far with the identity theory without any great 
strain. For, ambitious though it may be, it surely makes sense to set 
up the organic comprehension of the world as the goal of philosophi-
cal endeavor; and it makes sense to insist that the task must be con-
ceived in an organic or teleological frame, since the enterprise of com-
prehension itself, as a goal set by a conscious, goal-seeking organism, 
is to be comprehended within that frame. But why do the proponents 
"of this programme insist n priori, that every part of the organic total-
ity must itself be organic? We surely cannot assert a priori that "every 
speck of dust is an organization?" (157). 
This is probably the gravest crux in the identity theory. What ap-
pears to be a quite dogmatic assumption that everything is organic, 
contrasts very sharply with the careful and critical concern of Kant to 
do justice to the organic world along with the inorganic. And it is un-
deniable that the identity theorists were over-confident. Nothing can 
save them from the reproach of over-simplification and wild generali-
zation. They were even conscious of it themselves. Both Schelling and 
Hegel continually reformulated their philosophy of Nature, struggling 
to find the right application of the concept of organism to it and in it. 
Hegel later accused Schelling of using a few general analogies every-
where and calling the result "science." But even to a sympathetic He-
gelian critic like Croce, it was not clear what gave Hegel the right to 
condemn Schelling. For-to Croce at least-Hegel's own mature phil-
osophy of Nature appeared to be liable to the same criticism.73 We 
shall have to re-examine later the question whether Hegel's critique of 
Schelling really was a matter of· pot calling kettle black. 
For the present, the fact that neither Hegel nor Schelling was philo-
sophically troubled by difficulties which were almost as obvious to 
them as they are to us, suggests that we may not have understood 
properly what the philosophical enterprise was. The Identity Theory 
in its primitive form is quite evidently a latter-day version of the tra-
ditional conception of the "great chain of being." But it is indeed a 
latter-day version-or in other words it is meant to have a critical in-
terpretation. Interpreted critically the proposition that "every speck of 
dust is an organization" is a thesis about what can count as a satisfac-
tory explanation of any phenomenon. The claim is that the model of 
theoretical explanation is an organic system. The "speck of dust" is 
plainly a metaphor for the "smallest part." The microscope had, of 

44 
Difference 
course, revealed that there were living specks; and Leibniz had gener-
alized and extrapolated from that discovery with a boldness that still 
inspires awe. But that is not the crucial point: indeed it will only mis-
lead us, if it causes us to think that the Identity theory is a direct 
return to Leibniz. The claim of the Identity theorists is rather that 
explanation in terms of causal chains does not satisfactorily explain 
anything. A proper explanation must place the explanandum in a pat-
tern that is self-subsistent and self-sufficient; and a philosophical sys-
tem must be an all-inclusive pattern of this same type. Just how phe-
nomena can be arranged in organic patterns is a matter for empirical 
investigation. In this respect the original formulation was certainly at 
fault, being both too dogmatic in the old style, and too little attentive 
to the actual state of empirical science. 
The thesis about what can count as a satisfactory explanation, is 
what is locked up in the claim that the object itself is a Subject-Object. 
All knowledge, it is claimed, must be modelled on, must have the 
structure of, our self-knowledge. Fichte's right to be considered an im-
portant speculative philosopher rests on the fact that he was the one 
who had analysed that structure. But he fell short of the goal because 
he analysed only self-knowledge. He could not provide any ground 
for the knowledge of objects which would give the objective (or nat-
ural) sciences an independent, self-subsistent status. The natural 
world was for him simply the stage for moral activity, the place where 
the Ego ought to be equal to itself, but cannot be, because it needs the 
tension of the ought in order to go on existing at all. 
That nature has no independent status, no subsistence on its own 
account, is what the claim that there is only an ideal opposition of 
subject and object in Fichte means. Hegel showed earlier that Fichte 
is in trouble about the opposition of the first two acts of the Ego, its 
self-positing and the positing of the opposite. If they are just ideal 
factors, and only the third synthetic proposition is real knowledge, 
then Fichte's system becomes a form of dogmatic theism since only 
God can know things as they are: the absolute self-positing is quite 
outside of our finite experience. But if the absolute positing and op-
positing are real, then they are not properly united in the synthesis of 
our finite experience; and then Fichte's system which rests on the self-
positing and suppresses the positing of the object by fiat, is a dog-
matic idealism. 
Whether we adopt the theistic or the idealistic interpretation, Na-
ture has in Fichte the status of an absolute object; it never achieves 
the status of something which posits itself like a subject. Even if God 

45 
Introduction 
knows it as it is in itself, it exists for us only as a moment in the 
synthesis of conscious reflection. But then the synthesis becomes 
merely formal, that is, the thing-in-itself remains independent of it, 
and so does the real subject. These reflective forms-the thing-in-it-
self and the I think-are just what have to be nullified in the antin-
omy of self-conscious reflection. Then speculative thought can proceed 
to construct the Subject-Object in metaphysical intuition. This "con-
struction" of Nature as a Subject-Object is a matter of interpreting our 
experience of nature in the categoreal pattern provided by the trans-
cendental theory of the self. We can only claim to have philosophically 
comprehended our own position in Nature, when all of our empirical 
knowledge has been organized conceptually with the emergence of the 
self as its telos. This is "the work of Reason which posits the oppo-
sites identity and non-identity, as identical, not just in the form of 
cognition, but in the form of being as well." 
It is only if Nature is a mirror of the Self in this way that there can 
be true self-knowledge. Fichte speaks in one place of the difference 
between God's point of view and ours, that is, he speaks as if the 
theistic interpretation of his system were correct. But he immediately 
makes clear that we cannot even think what God's consciousness 
would be like, because pure self-positing of the Ego cannot constitute 
consciousness for us.74 Thus the only consistent way to avoid the 
demands of the Philosophy of Identity is Kant's critical conception of 
all knowledge as phenomenal. This is the "legislation of reflection" 
(159}; and no matter how much Fichte may insist on the life and ac-
tivity of the Ego he cannot escape Kant's net. 
From the Kantian viewpoint only limited things can be known. So 
Hegel describes the a priori synthesis of cognition itself in terms of 
the categories of quantity and quality: 
The identity, insofar as it synthesizes the opposites [i.e., hltui-
tion and concept], is itself just a quantum [a particular cognition] 
and the difference [between subject and object generally] is 
qualitative [i.e., it is a real difference between separate beings, 
the Ding-an-sich and the noumenal Self behind the "I think"] in 
the manner of the categories where the first, for example reality 
[compare the Ding-an-sich] is posited in the third [limitation-
compare the formal synthesis of intuition and concept] and so is 
the second [negation-compare the noumenal self] but only 
quantitatively [compare the use of quantum earlier]. (159-60) 
Speculation, on the other hand, requires a real synthesis of these 

46 
Difference 
real opposites (whose reality remains entirely problematic in the doc-
trine of formal synthesis). There must be an actual not a formal 
identity of being and nothing, reality and negation, and it must be 
known to appear in our limited experience. This knowledge is the 
"identity of identity and non-identity." 
There are, therefore, two absolute sciences or types of science: 
transcendental philosophy and natural philosophy, or the science of 
intelligence and the science of life. The structure of consciousness be-
comes both the activity and the content of absolute knowledge when 
both the pure subject and the pure object are taken as opposed aspects 
of the original self-manifesting Subject-Object. The reality of the op-
position appears here as a reversal of categoreal values. From the point 
of view of transcendental philosophy the objective aspects of experi-
ence are empirical or accidental facts; but from the point of view of 
natural philosophy the subjective aspects are epiphenomenal or acci-
dental forms. 
The independence of the two standpoints is something that we are 
quite naturally, and commonsensically, aware of. But common sense 
i~" never comfortable with the strict opposition. Descartes postulated 
two substances and then struggled to find the point of union between 
them. Others, who are less clearheaded, just take criteria and problems 
that belong to one perspective and import them into the other. Thus 
we can ask, "What are the physical causes of truth?" and we then 
arrive at a "transcendental hypothesis" like the "membrane theory" of 
J. C. Lossius. 75 Or we can ask "What is the rational purpose of the 
cork tree?" and make Wolff's eternally amusing discovery that it was 
intended by nature for the plugging of wine bottles.76 
The typical philosophical mistake is to fall into an aggressive dog-
matism that denies the validity either of the transcendental or of the 
natural point of view. Dualism gets along comfortably enough by ig-
noring the fundamental requirement that the dualism must be ex-
plained. Aggressive dogmatism takes the task more seriously. Hegel 
now presents the idealism of Kant and Fichte as the final sophistica-
tion of dogmatism. He has to include Kant along with Fichte here, 
because Kant was a notable philosopher of Nature, whereas Fichte 
contributed nothing in this area. We should be glad of this accident 
because it is only at this point that his own debt to Kant's Critique of 
Judgment (of which I have already made so much) comes right to the 
surface in the essay. 
First he sums up the doctrine of a "natural end" in the "Critique of 
Teleological Judgment." Here we have only to notice the translation 

47 
Introduction 
rules. Kant's insistence that the category of natural end has a regula-
tive not a constitutive function for our understanding becomes "This 
human perspective is not supposed to affirm anything concerning the 
reality of nature" (163). Kant would have been surprised to learn that 
he had left the reality of nature in doubt. But he was philosophically 
obliged to leave the reality of the Ding-an-sich in doubt; and so, ac-
cording to Hegel, "nature remains something merely thought." To be 
real, nature must exist "for itself," it must have its own essence and 
purpose, and not just be the result or product of our constructive ef-
forts with our categories. Kant rises to the idea of a "natural end," 
and even to the idea of a "sensuous intellect" (again he would be sur-
prised, and when he recognized his intel.lectus archetypus or "intui-
tiYe understanding" under this strange name he would not be very 
pleased). But Kant does not comprehend the necessary reality of either 
of them. So he is, like Newton, ultimately a sceptic about human sci-
ence. His Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science is an exposi-
tion of Newtonian metaphysics-and Kant himself said that we must 
not hope for the Newton of a blade of grass.77 
But, alas for Kant, not even Newtonian mechanics can be consist-
ently derived in accordance with the dictates of Newtonian epistemol-
ogy. The attractive and repulsive forces that have to be united in the 
concept of matter already constitute an organic whole. Kant may pro-
test, like Newton, that we have "no insight into the possibility of 
basic forces" but he knows what he means by a force, and he knows 
that matter, according to his concept of it, is composed out of opposite 
forces. Kant's matter thus prefigures the Fichtean Ego, and not even 
the most elementary phenomena of dynamics fall within the constitu-
tive purview of the understanding. Whether this contention of Hegel's 
is justified or not, would require a lengthy inquiry, and one that is be-
yond my competence. But at least, we can see clearly at this print why 
Schelling and Hegel thought they must assert that "every speck of 
dust is an organization." 
On the basis of this universal mechanism of Newton and Kant, 
Fichte erected a moral teleology that is indistinguishable in principle 
from that of Wolff. Since his starting point is supplied by his own 
existence as a finite rational being, Fichte, like Wolff before him, is 
doomed to fall prey to the immense variety of nature and the still 
greater variety of its practical possibilities for use. "The only way in 
which this dispersion could be avoided at all, would be for the deduc-
tion to draw its various points into a circle" (165). But before one 
can draw a circle one must fix the center. 

48 
Difference 
Here at last Hegel arrives at the stage of positive statement. The 
true method of philosophy should be modelled on the pattern of..,.or-
ganic growth. Both transcendental and natural philosophy should 
trace the evolution (of self-consciousness and of nature) from germ to 
ripeness, or from unity to totality. There will thus be a parallel like 
that which Spinoza asserted between the "order of ideas" and the 
"order of things." The ideas and things that are ordered will them-
selves be organic patterns; so no matter how finite they are, they will 
be "internally unlimited." The most ephemeral of organizations can 
be viewed sub specie aeternitatis. The important claim of the identity 
theory, as against Spinoza or any mechanistic theory, is that it is not 
just the whole but every naturally produced organic cycle or pattern 
that can be comprehended in its eternal aspect. If every moment of 
experience, philosophically interpreted, were not in this way a mirror 
of the Absolute-like one of the monads of Leibniz-if only the in-
finite whole were eternal, then Kant would be right, and Reason would 
be dialectical in a self-destructive sense. But if Kant were right, Jacobi 
would be right in his turn: all the finite science that Kant wanted to 
defend would be no more than the organization of our ignorance. In 
fact, however, finite cognition becomes knowledge by being "organ-
ized"-and the Identity Philosophy shows us how this miracle can 
come about in spite of our human limitations. 
Each of the two philosophical sciences reaches its limit where the 
other begins. The pole of expansion belongs peculiarly to natural phil-
osophy, and the pole of contraction to transcendental philosophy. Nat-
ural philosophy falls short of the contraction of all extended organiza-
tion into the temporal point of self-consciousness. Self-consciousness 
is engulfed in the immensity of physical space. Natural philosophy 
moves from the immensity of space to the unity of the most complex 
and highly developed physical organism-man, the "outer center." 
Transcendental philosophy moves from the most primitive sensational 
consciousness (the "inner center") to the religious experience of the 
most civilized community. It would seem that the two sciences cannot 
directly touch one another because the medium of the one is physical 
reality while that of the other is conscious ideality. But natural phil-
osophy is theoretical, i.e., it is concerned with the conceptualization of 
physical reality; and transcendental philosophy is practical, i.e., it is 
concerned with the realization of consciousness. So an ultimate sus-
pension of the opposition between them is not inconceivable, and as 
we shall soon see, Hegel has some important things to say about it. 
Another note is needed here, however, about the "indifference 

49 
Introduction 
points" in natural philosophy. We indicated earlier that natural phil-
osophy goes from the pole of expansion to that of contraction and we 
characterized the indifference points only as they appear in transcen-
dental philosophy. But the Spinozistic doctrine of a parallel between 
the two orders requires Hegel to say, and he does say, that both sci-
ences move from unity to totality. What then is the unity from which 
natural philosophy begins? What is the indifference point that some-
how unifies the bad infinite of space? It appears that the answer is "a 
spatial point regarded as a center of force." For we know that "the 
identity that is least dichotomous" is "at the objective pole, matter" 
(113); and we can infer something of the theory of matter from He-
gel's critical comments about Kant's mechanics (163-5). Every point of 
space is a center from which force radiates out over the whole uni-
verse and also a center on which the force of the universe is focussed. 
Viewed in this way the physical point is an intuition of the primitive 
$tructure of the Ego according to Fichte. This center of cohesion is the 
minimal form of physical organization. The maximum or totality of 
physical organization is represented by the living body which is, in 
Spinoza's terminology, "the object of the idea that constitutes the hu-
man mind."78 
Each of the sciences is a system of freedom and of necessity. Thus 
freedom and necessity are not real opposites-as Kant thought when 
fte assigned each to its own world-but ideal moments or aspects of 
the one absolute reality. Freedom is the inner aspect of the organic 
whole, whether we view it in nature or in spirit; and necessity is its 
I,Xtemal aspect even if it is a link in an intelligible, not a physical, 
thain. This assimilation of physical to logical necessity which Hegel 
inherited from Spinoza, has been one of the great curses of his philos-
ophy, perhaps the greatest impediment to understanding that derives 
&om its origins in the Identity theory of Schelling. 79 The naturaliza-
tion of freedom, on the other hand, must be accounted one of the 
great advances of post-Kantian speculation.80 
But even if natural development is spontaneous, and the evolution 
of self-consciousness is conditioned, still the development of freedom 
is impossible in nature, and the natural conditioning of consciousness 
is not a matter of "physical causes of truth." Nature is the realm 
where necessity is predominant; and nothing spiritual is physically 
necessitated in a mechanical way. Hence the philosophy of Nature is 
the theoretical part of philosophy (where we contemplate necessity) 
and transcendental philosophy is the practical part (where we enjoy 
the consciousness of our own productive activity). But since this oppo-

50 
Difference 
sition is only an ideal one, and each of the two sciences is a conscious 
expression of the whole, each of them must strive away from its own 
ideal pole (necessity or freedom) towards the opposite one. Thus with-
in the theoretical philosophy of nature there is a tension between the 
theoretical "construction" of inorganic nature and the practical "re-
construction" of the organism. Biology is in a difficult position as an 
empirical science, not because, as Kant thought, our minds are not 
properly equipped for it, but because its subject matter is the anticipa-
tion in nature of what only consciousness is properly fitted to achieve. 
Similarly within the practical philosophy of consciousness there is a 
theoretical part which deals with the "construction" of consciousness 
itself as the capacity for theoretical cognition, as well as a fully prac-
tical part which deals with the transformation of the natural world 
through the realization of consciousness. All of nature-philosophy is 
really constructive, that is to say it involves the projection (in meta-
physical intuition) of the structure of consciousness at the unconscious 
level. Construction is thus the instantiation of the(absolute concept in 
intuitioy, the externalization of the divine Logos. But within the con-
struction of the eternal order of nature, we can distinguish two phases, 
a spatial one and a temporal one, and the temporal phase is a recon-
struction of the spatial order at a higher level. What I have called the 
spatial phase already involves time, for the organic motion of inor-
ganic nature in space-the solar system-is the foundation of the 
temporal order, it gives us our standing measures for time. But this 
original construction is an image of life without change in the ele-
ments-the stars continue for ever in their courses. The reconstructive 
phase of natural philosophy is the internalization of the organic cycle 
within the cycling elements; the elements must now grow and decay, 
and hence they must produce their own successors. The years succeed 
one another, even though "heaven and earth do not pass away"; and 
with the passing of the years, the generations succeed one another, 
though life itself does not pass away. Thus, even within the unchang-
ing natural order, "the Logos is begotten, not made." 
But all of this happens, and it happens all the time. Consciousness 
does not make it so, and consciousness is not necessary to it. Con-
sciousness itself, on the other hand, is the true reconstruction of the 
Absolute, the resumption into unity of the totality spread out in space 
and time, the synthesis of absolute intuition and absolute concept. The 
first phase of this reconstruction is self-discovery. From this point of 
view it resembles the constructive phase in the observation of nature; 
but at this level the activity of consciousness is essential. We only 

51 
Introduction 
come to be what we really are, when we know what we really are. 
The conscious observer of nature is the "center" of an external world 
which he organizes in his empirical knowledge. But as he does trans-
cendental philosophy he discovers himself to be the internal center, to 
be the focus of the life that animates the world. This is the true "be-
getting of the Logos," the discovery of our identity with the eternal 
Reason. It is a discovery which is throughout a self-making; and when 
the self-making is recognized as fundamental we pass from the theory 
of the self, to prtf-ctical philosophy in the higher or stricter sense. This 
is the theory of the conscious community; that is, practical philosophy 
is economic and social thought, political and legal theory rather than 
ethics and moral philosophy as they have been traditionally under-
stood in what Hegel calls subjective reflection. 
When the goal of transcendental philosophy is reached, when man 
knows himself as the Logos, the culminating phase of the Identity phil-
osophy opens. This is the suspension of the real opposition between 
the two philosophical sciences in the consciousness of the absolute in-
difference of knowing and being, discovering and making, construction 
and reconstruction. Philosophy as pure speculation is concerned with 
this suspension of the opposition between the two philosophic sciences 
(of nature and the self). The account that Hegel gives of the absolute 
point of indifference is an indication of the general content of this 
phase, at least. It should certainly be recognized as a third distinct 
phase of systematic philosophy. For otherwise we should have to re-
gard the philosophy of art as part of natural philosophy (which does 
not seem to be possible). Art, which Schelling had declared to be the 
"organon of philosophy ,"81 is said by Hegel to be the grasping of the 
point of absolute indifference from the side of nature; speculation 
grasps the indifference point from the other side, the side of transcen-
dental activity. But art is creative activity, and speculation is the con-
templation of what is; so there is a perfect balance of subjective 
activity and objective being in both of them. As moments in the con-
sciousness of absolute being (the culminating phase of science or abso-
lute knowledge) they are both aspects of religion, which is the com-
munal experience of the Absolute. 
Hegel does not explicitly say that the theory of the absolute indif-
ference point is a distinct phase of systematic philosophy, and not part 
of transcendental philosophy in the strict sense. But I think that this 
is the view that he actually holds, and that his failure to be explicit 
only reflects the difficulty of discussing a system which for the most 
part remains still to be expounded, and one whose exposition more 

52 
Difference 
properly belongs to someone else. He has to project an image of what 
Schelling's system will look like when Schelling has completed it. But 
he could not expound the system fully in the Difference essay, because 
in this period Schelling's activity was concentrated exclusively on the 
side of natural philosophy. Transcendental philosophy was to be He-
gel's sphere. All the lecture courses that he was to give before Schel-
ling left Jena, were conceived either as transcendental philosophy or as 
a critical propaedeutic to philosophy (like the general reflections with 
which the Difference essay opens). Since both Schelling and Hegel 
were by temperament and by express declaration systematic philoso-
phers it was very comfortable to have a systematic conception which 
enabled them to divide the field while still continuing, each of them, 
to expound the Absolute Identity completely. 
It is not surprising therefore, that in his account of Schelling's sys-
tem in the Difference essay Hegel concentrates on the theory of or-
ganic nature. This is, in any case, what the comparison with Fichte 
requires, when that comparison is seen as an integration of Fichte's 
inadequacies, in line with the general project of showing that Schel-
ling's system is not only different but also superior. And this was just 
where Schelling's own "Exposition of My System" broke off, so that 
as Hegel said in his preface even Schelling himself had never made the 
difference clear {79). 
Hegel's condensed exposition does not clarify the problem very 
much, however. For help in understanding it we had best tum to the 
summaries of his system that Schelling himself produced during the 
next year or two. Schematically the main "levels" (Potenzen) of his 
Philosophy of Nature in this period were as follows :82 
First Potenz: {of Nature or finitude, as opposed to God or infinity) 
Reflection, or reception of the infinite in the finite: 
1. World-structure {in the whole) 
2. Body, material forms (in singulars) 
3. Spatialization 
Second Potenz: Subsumption,83 or the reception of the finite into the 
infinite: 
1. Light (the universal principle) 
2. Dynamic series of bodies (in three Potenzen): 
a) Magnetism-one dimensional or linear 
b) Electricity-two dimensional or square 
c) Chemical process-three dimensional or cubic 

3. Divine Light and Gravity 
Universal Mechanism and Necessity 
53 
Introduction 
Third Potenz: Reason, or the absolute equality of finite and infinite 
Organism (identity of form and matter): 
1. Bildungstrieb (reproductive power, analogous to magnetism and 
cohesion) 
2. Irritability (analogous to electricty or relative cohesion) 
3. _Sensi!,ilify (analogous to chemical process) 
Indifference Point: The organism is "Objective Reason" or "Truth" as 
the real side of "Absolute Indifference." It corresponds to "imagina-
tion" or "Beauty" as the ideal side. 84 
I shall not try to expound this scheme but a few words about the 
basic concept of Potenz are needed. This is a term which Schelling al-
ways continued to use from about 1797 onwards-when his friend 
Eschenmayer was the first to use it in print.85 It was borrowed from 
the theory of powers in mathematics (x, x2, x3, etc.), and together with 
plus and minus signs (for "positive" and "negative" or" A" and "non-
A") it provided Schelling with all the formal equipment he needed for 
a conceptual algebra of the Identity theory. Hegel does not use this 
algebra in the Difference essay, though he began to employ it in Faith 
and Knowledge. But he does employ the term Potenz. It is the general 
name for an organic pattern of the kind which the Identity theory re-
quires as the unit of existence or of explanation. According to Schel-
ling's "Exposition": "The Absolute Identity only exists under the 
form of all Potenzen."86 His fullest and least technical account of the 
concept-which I can scarcely hope to improve on-is in the introduc-
tion to his lectures on the Philosophy of Art (first delivered October 
1802}: 
There is only One philosophy and One science of philosophy; 
what are called distinct philosophical sciences, are either quite 
perverse or these sciences are just expositions of the One and un-
divided whole of philosophy in distinct Potenzen or under dis-
tinct ideal determinations . 
. . . this expression ... is connected with the general doctrine 
of philosophy about the essential and inward identitity of all 
things and of everything which we distinguish at all. There is 
truly and in itself only One essential being, One absolute real, 
and this being an absolute is indivisible, so that it cannot pass 

54 
Difference 
over into distinct beings through division or separation; since the 
one being is indivisible, diversity of things is only possible at 
all, in so far as it is posited as the undivided whole under distinct 
determinations. These determinations I call Potenzen. They 
change nothing whatsoever in the essential being, which remains 
always and necessarily the same, which is why they are called 
ideal determinations. For example, what we cognize in history or 
in art, is essentially the same as what also exists in nature; in 
each of them the whole absoluteness is innate, but this absolute-
ness stands at distinct levels [Potenzen] in nature, history, and 
art. If one could take the Potenz away, so as to see the pure 
essence naked so to speak, One being would truly be in all of 
them. 
But Philosophy in its complete appearance, emerges only in the 
totality of all Potenzen. For it ought to be a true image [Bild] of 
the Universe-and this equals the Absolute set forth in the total-
ity of all ideal determinations. God and the Universe are one, or 
they are only different aspects of One and the same being; God is 
the universe regarded from the side of identity; he is All since 
he is the only real being, and hence there is nothing outside of 
him, while the Universe is God grasped from the side of totality. 
But in the absolute idea which is the principle of philosophy, 
both identity and totality are once again one. Now the complete 
appearance of philosophy, as I say, emerges only in the totality 
of all Potenzen. In the Absolute as such, and therefore also in 
the principle of philosophy there is no Potenz precisely because 
it comprehends all Potenzen, and conversely just in virtue of the 
fact that there is no Potenz in it, all Potenzen are contained in it. 
I call this principle the absolute point of identity of philosophy 
precisely for this reason, that it is not equal to any particular 
Potenz, and yet it comprehends all of them. 
Now this indifference point, just because it is the point of in-
difference, and it is strictly unique, indiscernible and indivisible, 
necessarily exists again in every particular unity (another name 
for a Potenz); and this is not possible unless in each of these 
particular unities all unities, hence all Potenzen, return once 
again. Thus there is in philosophy overall nothing but the Abso-
lute, or we meet with nothing in philosophy but the Absolute-
always just strictly the One, and just this unique One in 
particular forms. 87 

55 
Introduction 
The illustration that Hegel offers us is mainly a development of the 
analogy between the third Potenz of Nature and the second. The basic 
concept is the theological one of the "divine light" (of John 1) which 
shone (outwardly) in the primeval darkness at the moment of Crea-
tion, but which was also (inwardly) "the life of men" (and of lower 
organisms). On the other side of the antinomy, the darkness is not 
only the uncreated {or infinite) nothing out of which the finite world 
was made but Jllso the inward darkness of the created (i.e., finite) 
solid bodies-which are impervious to the light of their central sun. 
Just how the power of light is supposed to split and integrate the gen-
eral force of gravity into the differentiated "specific gravity" of the 
"cohesive series" we need not enquire. There was never anything to 
be said in support of this hypothesis except that the Sun is, after alt 
the general centre of gravity for our cosmos (the solar system). This 
stage corresponds to the production of objective intuitions by the 
imaginative intelligence. We can agree, at least, that the work of the 
productive imagination is equally mysterious. The self-positing of 
Reason is unconscious, and the self-positing of nature (as light and 
gravity) is a simple compresence of the different forces. The infinite 
source is the Sun, but all the sundered aspects of the finite dynamic 
series are united in the reflective, (and finite) form of the crystal. This 
is the theoretical parallel of our thinking activity. 
The practical parallel is between man's conscious remaking both of 
his physical environment and of himself in his culture, and the inter-
nalization of the divine light as the life of an organism. The organ-
ism has as its focus a kind of "organic crystal" (in higher animals, 
the brain) which is a higher Potenz of contraction because it has an 
inner side; the animal feels, it is aware of itself (though not yet as a 
selt for that is the extreme of contraction which Nature points to but 
cannot reach). But this higher contraction is accompanied by sexual 
differentiation.88 Sexual attraction, which is specific to animals is elec-
tric (rather than cohesive or magnetic) in character because it involves 
the linking of two sundered poles. 
Thus it is transmitted by voice which is the first seed of that utter-
ing of the inner consciousness which distinguishes (and constitutes) 
spiritual being. The inwardness of natural organisms is not self-ut-
tered, however, except at this limit, and in this absolutely limited way. 
In general, it has to be reconstructed, by the introjection of the organic 
patterns that lie open to view in the inorganic world. Thus, in the two 
axes of a planetary ellipse, nature already presents us with the poles 

56 
Difference 
of a magnet without a joining bar.89 This "line of cohesion" is some-
how internalized in the organization of the animate body (Hegel does 
not say how). The internalized electricity of sex is easy enough to rec-
ognize90 and needs no further comment. Voice is analogous to the 
electric current that passes between the poles of a Voltaic pile in the 
"chemical process. " 91 
Here we must reconsider the problem of the place of analogy in the 
philosophy of nature. Hegel never quite gave up using inorganic anal-
ogies based on magnetism and electricity in his philosophy of the or-
ganism. But he did later see the error of this wholesale introjection of 
inorganic patterns into the interpretation of organic phenomena. This 
is the "capricious exercise of the imagination and the most common-
place way of reasoning by superficial analogy," the "crude empiricism" 
that he later condemned.92 His own approach even in these earliest 
days was more dependent on the projection outwards and downwards 
of patterns discovered in self-conscious life. We have an example of 
this in the remark that even an animal cry "posits itself as cognizing 
and to be recognized" (168). The "struggle for recognition" is a He-
gelian motif (not found at all in Schelling) which makes its first ap-
pearance here. It plays a prominent role in the Systerri of Ethical Life. 
The two philosophic sciences are really opposed because each is an 
integrated unity of being and cognition. But in natural philosophy, the 
moment of objectivity, of external being is predominant (the algebraic 
+ 
formula for it is A = B); whereas in transcendental philosophy the 
moment of subjectivity, of cognition is dominant. It has being because 
+ 
its self-knowing is also a self-making (and the formula for it is A= B). 
Cognition and being, the dialectical elements for which A and B stand, 
are only ideal opposites, not real ones. And because of their real oppo-
sition, their independence, the two sciences cannot simply exist side 
by side in parallel (that is their "ideal" relation). They must be or-
dered in relation to one another as existences; and their order is 
already apparent. Transcendental philosophy is higher than natural 
philosophy which leads up to it. Each is complete and closed in itself, 
but only in a relative way, that is, a way that points to its completion 
in the other. They each culminate in the same point of indifference 
but they express it from opposed aspects (objective and subjective). 
They form a line (which Schelling called the "constructed line") 
through the point of indifference. Schelling drew it thus: 

57 
Introduction 
+ 
+ 
Ideal Pole A= B 
(0) 
A= B Real Pole 
~------------~A~~A---------------
Zero is the negative expression for the point of indifference or the 
Absolute Identity. "A= A" is the positive expression. Schelling pre-
fers the positive expression, but Hegel adopts the negative one (as a 
formula for nullification). We have already seen (pp. 21-4 above) 
how Hegel's preference arises from his conception of the birth of 
speculation from the antinomic character of reflection. Schelling's 
choice arises from his Spinozist conviction that speculative philosophy 
can be expounded directly from the absolute standpoint of God. He-
gel's eventual condemnation of Schelling's Absolute as "the dark 
night in which all cows are black" is already implicit in his use of 
zero; and Schelling's sense of outrage at this verdict is easy to under-
stand since he did not take an antinomic view of "A= A." 
The constructed line is the formula which expresses the opposition 
of the two sciences in parallel or as mutually balancing one another. 
But the "midpoint is doubled" in each of them because each is a line 
in itself. They must join one another not just at the center but at the 
extremes. This is the "self construction of identity into totality" which 
is best represented as the circle produced by the spinning of the whole 
line upon its center point through 180° so that the ends change places 
and the line itself is inverted: 
A=A 
(Real Pole) 
g = Y (ayod {t?api) 
+ 
A=A 
I hope it will be clear why I have preferred to use Hegel's zero for 
the indifference point as "identity." The center of the circle is the neg-
ative Absolute, the nothing out of which the world is created, and the 
abyss in which all finitude is engulfed. The starting point of the "in-
finite mov~ment" is indicated above the line and the finishing point 
below. With a clockwise motion this enables us to place transcenden-

58 
Difference 
tal philosophy "above," which is where it belongs. The circle that is 
produced by the motion is the "indifference point as totality," which 
is what is properly expressed by the formula A= A. The "relative to-
talities" are the closed half-circles. 93 
The point of transition which is now represented by the constructed 
line (as the diameter that divides the realm of nature from that of in-
telligence) is man himself as the crowning achievement of natural 
creation, and the maker of the cognitive circle. For human conscious-
ness is the incarnation of the Logos, the "lightning stroke of the ideal 
upon the real" (170). This is the dividing line between unconscious 
production and conscious self-production. 
Hegel's final remarks about the polarity of intellectual intuition it-
self cannot be interpreted on the circumference of the circle at all; for 
they concern the relation of Art, Speculation, and Religion, to the ab-
solute indifference point in the center. As we have suggested, this 
final phase of philosophy should be thought of as distinct from the 
two philosophical sciences. Art is the resumption of human life in the 
Absolute, and Speculation is the resumption of human thought in the 
Absolute. To express this on our diagram we should probably return 
to the radial line and think of a movement toward the center from 
each end. But Hegel's doctrine that Art is natural and Speculation 
transcendental is not at all the same as Schelling's; and the identifica-
tion of both of them as forms of "divine Service," so that they are 
aspects of Religion which is the "resumption of the whole into one," 
is also Hegel's own (though of course Schelling identified the totality 
with God). Art and Speculation are uniquely individualized creative 
activities (in which feeling and conception are respectively dominant). 
But Religion is a communal activity. Because he begins from the con-
trast of aesthetic and religious intuition, Hegel speaks at first as if re-
ligion was simply emotional, not conceptual. But since he regards 
Speculation as a form of divine service it is evident that Religion is 
really the ultimate point of union, and hence that it is not vitiated by 
any one-sidedness of this kind. 94 
Speculation becomes divine service when it transcends its own one-
sided intellectual character. This certainly implies that one cannot be 
a philosopher without having a kind of aesthetic awareness. But this 
sober criticism of reflective thought is far removed from Schelling's 
enthusiastic pronouncement that "Art is the organon of Philosophy." 
It is clear that for Hegel, Speculation is higher than Art, and also that, 
Cl.t this stage in the development of his thought, Religion is higher 
than either of them. 

59 
Introduction 
I have thus far sought to interpret what Hegel says about Schel-
ling's System in the light of Schelling's own contemporary statements 
about it. But already I have ventured to propose a circular diagram 
which goes beyond anything in Schelling. I will try finally to sketch 
the outline of the System that seems to be implicit in the text of the 
Difference essay as I have interpreted it. This outline is by no means 
independent of the tabular presentation of Schelling's view that I have 
already given, but it departs from it in a few places, and in many re-
spects it falls short because I have only included points for which 
there is evidence in Hegel's own texts in this period. Hence, this out-
line should be thought of as no more than a fragment of the whole, 
and as no more than a probable conjecture at best: 
I. The theoretical Science of Nature (the unconscious self-production 
of the Absolute observed or contemplated by Reason) 
A. Theoretical Part: Inorganic Nature 
(1) Magnetism: the level of connected poles-theory of 
universal and specific gravity, and of cohesion 
(2) Electricity: level of separated poles 
( 3) Chemical process: self-resolution of the poles into neu-
trality 
Point of Union for the inorganic: Crystallization (a self-deter-
mined form) 
B. Practical Part: Organic Nature (the active reconstruction of the 
inorganic process from an inner center) 
(1) Living magnetism (organic cohesion) 
(2) Living electricity (sexual attraction and reproduction) 
(3) Living chemical process (voice-communication) 
Point of Union for the organic: the brain (this is the highest 
product of organic cohesion) 
II. The practical Science of Intelligence (the conscious self-reproduc-
tion of the Absolute by and as Reason) 
A. Theoretical Part: Knowledge (here Reason produces itself as the 
outer center, the observer) 
(1) Sense intuition and imagination 
(2) Reflection and intellect 
(3) Reason 

60 
Difference 
Point of Union: Transcendental intuition (the "outer" center 
becomes "inner") 
B. Practical Part: Ethical Life (here Reason as the "inner center" 
produces its own world) 
(1) Individual and family (spiritual cohesion) 
(2) Conflict and War (opposition) 
(3) Ethical life (substantial existence) 
Point of Union: Religion (this leads to III below) 
III. Theory of the Indifference of Nature and Intelligence 
(1) Theory of art 
(2) Speculative theology 
( 3) Religion 
Sections lA and IB in this scheme are based on the example that 
Hegel gives in the Difference essay (168-9). As the reader will see by 
examining the tabular summary of Schelling's theory given above, 
this example corresponds fairly closely to the second moment of 
Schelling's Second Potenz, and it can be viewed as an expansion of 
the second moment of Schelling's Third Potenz (which is what the 
parallelism obviously requires). This gives us some measure of how 
much is omitted in the present schema. The structure of the Science 
of Intelligence can scarcely be inferred from the text of the Difference 
essay at all, but the correspondence between the structure of Schel-
ling's System of Transcendental Idealism and Hegel's constructive 
analysis of Kant in Faith and Knowledge makes me fairly confident in 
claiming that the critical remarks about reflective philosophy in the 
Difference essay presuppose a speculative structure of the type sug-
gested. I have filled in the practical part by inserting the skeleton of 
the subsequent System of Ethical Life. This is much more conjectural. 
But it is supported on one side by the parallel with Schelling's Third 
Potenz and on the other side by the natural transition that it provides 
to the theory of the absolute indifference point which is outlined in 
he Difference essay. 
Hegel's own discussion of Schelling's system ends by returning to 
the comparison with Fichte. If speculative Reason does not transcend 
its own limits, but simply comprehends the Absolute formally as an 
absolute activity, instead of comprehending the antinomic identity of 
this Absolute with its appearance-the "identity of identity and non-
idenity" -then an opposition between the noumenal and the phe-

61 
Introduction 
nomenal world is set up, and the only integration that is possible is 
through the dominance of the noumenal reality as moral law. The 
boundary between the two worlds (of Reason and sense) is an incom-
prehensible one; this is what follows directly from the fact that spec-
ulative Reason remains pure and does not "suspend itself." Because 
transcendental philosophy is an independent science of the Absolute, 
this "great refusal" is possible. One cannot hope to stir Fichte out of 
his "entire Science of Knowledge" therefore, because it 1s tormally 
complete; it is unsatisfactory because it is only formal, but that limit-
ation is formally necessary. The only way that Fichte could be moved 
would be through a re-examination of his conception of intellectual 
intuition. The primary activity of thought as reflection is the abstrac-
tion of the pure form from the manifold of empirical consciousness. 
So if we take this reflective activity as the intuited object of our phil-
osophical reflection-which is what Fichte does-we are beginning 
with something that is conditioned. We need to take the further step 
of abstraction, to remove the subjectivity and grasp the identity of 
being (the condition of reflection) and thinking (the activity that re-
flects). We may well feel that in this "negation of negation" we do 
indeed have "the dark night in which all cows are black." But al-
though he said this later himself about Schelling's theory of the ab-
solute indifference point, Hegel continued to tell his students that the 
beginning of philosophy was the comprehension of "the nothing." He 
only objected when this beginning was set us as the final goal. The 
intuition when it is thus absolutely comprehended, has two sides: it 
is both subject and object, both thinking and being, both Ego and na-
ture. The adequate development of the side of self-consciousness re-
quires the development pari passu of the philosophical comprehension 
of nature. Fichte tried to ignore this requirement. 
We know and understand ouselves, exactly as well, and to the de-
gree, and in the respects, that we know our world. This is the funda-
mental thesis of the Identity Philosophy, and it stands unshaken in 
Hegel's mind throughout his later development. Whatever follies we 
may find in the Philosophy of Nature that Schelling or Hegel formu-
lated, the only question that we can properly raise is whether it ex-
presses a "thinking comprehension" of the world of that time, and of 
its experience of Nature as systematized in its science. Hegel subse-
quently asked this question about Schelling's philosophy of nature 
and answered in the negative. Everyone agrees with him. But no one, 
as far as I know, has properly studied whether the same verdict really 
holds about Hegel's Philosophy of Nature; the general assumption 

62 
Difference 
has been that it does. Perhaps it does indeed; there are reasons for 
thinking that it may. Hegel's intense aversion for Newtonian meta-
physics may have distorted his understanding of Newtonian physics, 
for example; and he certainly espoused several lost causes in chemis-
try, in optics, and in physiology. But even at the worst, even if his 
effort was not notably more successful than Schelling's, it would be 
rank dogmatism to conclude without further study that his project 
was mistaken because the execution failed. A systematic philosophy 
of human knowledge and human experience must involve some ac-
count of man's place in nature; and the more "formal" it is in this 
respect, even if the formalism can be intellectually justified and de-
fended (which seems more questionable in our non-Euclidean, post-
Newtonian, evolutionary culture than it did in the scientifically secure 
century that followed Kant's death), the less valuable it will be for 
our human purposes. Certainly no modern attempt to construct the 
Identity Principle into a system could be the unaided work of one 
mind. But then Hegel did not really claim that that was possible even 
in the heyday of romanticism. The Philosophy that speaks through 
his mouth is no respecter of persons-his own included. 
7. THE CODA: REINHOLD. 
At this point our analysis ceases, for Hegel's argument is now com-
plete. The essay ends with a discussion of Reinhold (and Bardili). But 
for the most part this is easy enough to follow. We have already ap-
pealed to it for aid several times in our study of the "general reflec-
tions" at the beginning. Hardly anything in it requires further explan-
ation until the very end when it returns to the topic of "the need of 
philosophy." 
Hegel did not dignify this section with a heading; and the chief 
question to be asked about it is why he wrote it at all. "It still re-
mains," he says blandly, "for us to say something about Reinhold's 
view of Fichte's and Schelling's philosophy and about his own philos-
ophy" (174). But why does it remain? The topic which Hegel itali-
cized is germane to the project of the essay because Reinhold's mis-
understanding of Schelling's system is the external occasion, the 
historical stimulus for the writing of it. This fact is recorded on the 
title page of the essay itself; a discussion of Reinhold's criticism of 
Schelling in the first fascicle of his Contributions had been promised 

63 
Introduction 
to the reader and must be supplied. But Hegel dispatches this topic in 
a few pages, and then devotes three times as much space to a discus-
sion of "Reinhold's own philosophy." This is not merely gratuitous; 
it is almost directly contrary to his explicit declaration at the outset 
that his essay will not be concerned with Reinhold's "revolution of 
bringing philosophy back to logic" (79). 
Why then does Hegel discuss it after all? Walter Kaufmann, ignor-
ing the Preface and everything on the title page except the reference 
to Reinhold's Contributions, says that the essay is "an extended re-
view of a work by Reinhold."95 If ever there was a case of the tail 
being made to wag the dog this is one. Kaufmann's comment is not 
even an accurate characterization of the tailpiece, for the works "re-
viewed" here are not the ones mentioned on the title page at all, but 
rather Reinhold's old Versuch and Bardili's new Grundriss der Ersten 
Logik. Nevertheless, Kaufmann's view contains, in a distorted way, 
the clue that we need. For while Hegel was writing this essay, Schel-
ling was excitedly pursuing the project of a Critical Journal of Phil-
osophy which would survey the whole range of the contemporary 
philosophical literature and sift out what was worthy of note from 
the point of view of the new speculative idealism. When his other 
hoped-for collaborators failed him, he turned to Hegel for help.96 The 
critical appraisal of the "logical reduction of philosophy" with which 
Hegel's· essay ends is a foretaste of what he could and would do to 
the popular philosophy of the time in his contributions to the new 
Journal. 
The discussion is witty; it shows us a lighter, though not a gentler, 
side of Hegel. But the outcome is entirely negative, and the polemical 
tone and stance is ultimately rather repellent. As with the many pages 
of the Critical Journal that was devoted to the strenuous campaign 
against "non-philosophy," it is wisest to read these final pages of the 
Difference essay for their amusement value and then to forget them. 
What we have here is, for the most part, the spectacle of the Young 
Turks of Academe railing against the old fogies who have all the best 
jobs. 
A very different view has, of course, been defended, and it is easy 
to see why. Whatever we may think about Bardili, Reinhold is not a 
contemptible figure in the history of philosophy. He is not unworthy 
of attention; and in the Critical Journal, Hegel generally gives serious 
attention to those who deserve it, however hostile and negative he 
may be. But the results of serious critical attention on Hegel's part 
are never simply negative, as any careful student of Faith and Knowl-

64 
Difference 
edge or of Hegel's review of G. E. Schulze's Critique of Theoretical 
Philosophy97 can testify. Now Reinhold certainly was not a philoso-
pher of the stature of Kant or Fichte; perhaps he should not even be 
ranked with Jacobi. But surely he was the equal of Schulze? And if 
we look again with this in mind, do we not see that just as the critical 
evaluation of scepticism was important for the Phenomenology, so 
the "reduction of philosophy to Logic" is the watchword of Hegel's 
mature system? 
Several scholars-the French translator Mery among them98-have 
tried to argue this way on behalf of Reinhold, and more especially on 
behalf of Bardili. But I think they are mistaken, or at least they are 
mistaken in so far as they seem to hold that the stimulus and example 
of Reinhold and Bardili were important. What is true is that the focal 
importance which was ascribed to the principle of Identity in their 
programme makes Hegel's critical exercise into a useful foil for the 
exposition of the speculative philosophy of Identity. This connection 
and contrast was his excuse for concluding his comparison of Fichte 
and Schelling, who had constructed different systems on a common 
philosophical base, with a critique of two thinkers who did not have 
that philosophical base at all.99 
The reduction of philosophy to logic, in the sense in which Hegel 
took it up, was the project of Kant in the three Critiques. Hegel did 
not intend to address the general topic of the relation of logic to phil-
osophy in the Difference essay. That is why he says in the "Preface" 
that he does not propose to deal with this latest revolution in Rein-
hold's thought. Careful examination of the "Kant" section of Faith 
and Knowledge will show that Hegel's Logic grew out of the "critical 
philosophy," which Bardili regarded as a mental sickness that needed 
his logical "medicine." In the Difference essay there is still no sign of 
a speculative conception of Logic as such. I hope that my analysis of 
the argument has shown that "speculative logic" is almost ready to be 
born. But there is external evidence to show that the birth has not yet 
happened. Hegel began teaching "logic and metaphysics" shortly after 
he penned these closing pages on Reinhold and Bardili. He taught this 
subject regularly for several terms, and he began at once to write a 
textbook for it. We have some bits of evidence to show that in all of 
his early lecture courses his conception of logic remained critical, 
rather than speculative. He did not have the project of a speculative 
logic that would stand in the same relation to the logic of Reinhold 
and Bardili as his speculative principle of Identity stands to their for-
mal principle in the Difference essay. Rather he held that the study of 

65 
Introduction 
logic must prepare the way for philosophy by confronting all forms 
of finite thought with the Absolute, and casting them "into the abyss 
of their own perfection," to borrow a phrase from the Difference es-
say (140). This critical conception of logic is expressed in the intro-
ductory lecture for a winter course-a lecture that was probably 
given in September/October 1802.100 Hegel had then completed, and 
was about to publish, a complete survey of the "forms of finite 
thought" in Faith and Knowledge. All the manuscripts from the 
earliest courses on logic are lost, but I think Faith and Knowledge is 
the conscious precipitate of everything valuable produced by this crit-
ical conception of logic, made at the moment when Hegel was almost 
ready to advance to the speculative conception of the subject-a con-
ception which was publicly announced in the Summer of 1803, and 
first formulated around the previous Christmas. If this hypothesis is 
right, then Jacobi was a far more immediate stimulus than Reinhold 
or Bardili for the thought-revolution that was involved. For it was 
Jacobi who emphasized the self-destructive character of philosophical 
reflection. 
But, finally, was it not Reinhold who proclaimed the need for an 
objective conception of thinking? Indeed it was, and Hegel waxes 
very ironic about what Reinhold produced in answer to his own chal-
lenge. It is clear from the Difference essay that Hegel and Schelling 
did not need Reinhold to deliver any such challenge. Again, they had 
already found their challenge in Kant's declaration that teleological 
concepts could only be employed regulatively in our thinking. Rein-
hold's demand did not even have the irritant power of the one made 
by the egregious W. T. Krug who asked whether the Identity Philoso-
phers could "deduce his pen."101 It was obviously quite useless to re-
spond to that challenge as far as Krug himself was concerned, for the 
way in which he framed it showed that he was quite incapable of un-
derstanding any response that was possible within the Identity Sys-
tem. Among the things that he demanded a deduction for, there were 
some (e.g., the Moon) for which the deduction had already been giv-
en. But Krug struck a nerve; for the sake of the "identity of identity 
and non-identity" Hegel went on struggling to decide what ought to 
be said about "Krug' s pen," and in consequence, a complete nonentity 
has crept for ever into a place among the necessary footnotes of the 
history of philosophy. 
Reinhold did not have that luck; but he did not, and does not, need 
it. Hegel had never been much interested in him. 102 In the Difference 
essay he brings him tumbling in upon the stage, along with his latest 

66 
Difference 
mentor Bardili, like the clowns bowing and taking the curtain calls 
for that daring young man on the flying trapeze, Schelling. This is 
certainly not fair treatment. But the unfairness itself is part of the life 
of Reason. For there are philosophical enterprises other than the one 
in which the Identity philosophers were engaged; and philosophers 
engaged in different enterprises are bound to appear ridiculous to one 
another when they seem to be talking about the same questions. If it 
really is the case (whatever that means) that the history of Philoso-
phy is "the story of the one eternal Reason" (114), it is certainly also 
the case that that story will never be told with perfect balance and 
adequacy in one book, or from a single point of view. We can admit 
this without doubting that Hegel's conception of the history of phil-
osophy is an immense advance over Reinhold's. And we can assert 
that in turn, without denying that Hegel is unjust to Reinhold. The 
fact is that he is consistently unjust to the whole tradition of philoso-
phy that stems from Locke. But not more unjust, certainly, than the 
heirs of that tradition have been to him. An understanding of how 
philosophical prejudice arises from the "need" of the time is one of 
the things that Hegel sought to bring about. His own is not the least 
important case where his insight needs to be applied. 
N 0 T E 5 
1. He had previously published (at 
Frankfurt in 1798) an anonymous 
translation with introduction and notes 
of the Confidential Letters of J. J. 
Cart, a political pamphlet against the 
administration of the Vaud by the 
Canton of Berne. A facsimile reprint 
was recently issued by Vandenhoek 
and Rupprecht (Gottingen, 1970). 
2. Schelling told Fichte that it had 
appeared "in the last few days" on 3 
October 1801 (Nicolin, report 42). 
Hegel's birthday was on 26 August. 
3. The whole career outlined in the 
following paragraphs is fully discussed 
and documented in Harris, Toward the 
Sunlight. 
H. S. HARRIS 
4. This was first published in 1794. 
There is an English translation by Fritz 
Marti in Metaphilosophy VI, 1, 1975. 
5. It was Schiller, not Goethe, who 
pressed for Schelling's appointment in 
the first instance. Goethe was unim-
pressed by Schelling's first essay on 
the philosophy of nature: he feared 
that Schelling was only Fichte in dis-
guise, and would prove to be even 
more of a political radical than Fichte. 
But he changed his mind after his first 
long conversation with Schelling; and 
his reception of Schelling's next essay 
of the philosophy of nature (On the 
World-Soul, 1798) was enthusiastic. 
(See Fuhrmans, I, 131-5). 
6. The first continuous draft of the 
essay which later editors have called 

"The Constitution of Germany" was 
written in this period. (An English 
translation-the first half of which is 
based on the unfinished second draft-
is in Knox and Pelczynski, pp. 143-
242). 
7. As we shall see later, there is 
some evidence that even in the Differ-
ence essay Hegel has modified what he 
calls "Schelling's System" to accord 
with his own beliefs. See pp. 51-2 
above. 
8. Letter 167 (to Sinclair [October 
1810]), Hoffmeister, I, 332. (For Hol-
derlin's position at this stage see Han-
nelore Hegel, Isaak von Sinclair). 
9. See Kant's "Open Letter" of 7 
August 1799, Aka d. XII, 370-1; the 
crucial passage is translated in Zweig, 
pp. 253-4. 
10. An anonymous reviewer (actual-
ly Karl August Bottinger) who sur-
veyed the Michaelmas publication lists 
in the Allgemeine Zeitung of Stuttgart 
(Hegel's home city) at the beginning 
of November, informed his readers 
that "S.chelling has now fetched a stout 
warrior to Jena from his fatherland 
Wi.irttemberg, through whom he gives 
notice to the astonished public, that 
even Fichte stands far below his own 
viewpoint." Someone passed on a 
garbled version of this report to 
Fichte, and Fichte was naturally upset. 
The only signed statement in the 
whole of the Critical Journal (edited 
by Schelling and Hegel together) was 
a footnote near the end of the first 
issue in which Hegel flatly called the 
author of this report "a liar" (N.K.A. 
IV, 190 n.). 
After receiving Schelling's explana-
tions Fichte affected to be perfectly at 
ease about the whole matter (see Let-
ter 483, Schulz II, 345). But if he read 
the essay he can hardly have been 
happy about it. Probably he did no 
more than glance at it. At any rate it 
was no lie to say that Hegel clearly 
67 
Introduction 
declares that Schelling's viewpoint 
stands far above Fichte's. Schelling 
would probably have preferred not to 
see the declaration made quite so 
plainly. But since it was not true that 
Hegel was merely Schelling's mouth-
piece, the most that Schelling could do 
was to deny responsibility for what 
Hegel had written. He did this very 
explicitly when he wrote to Fichte 
shortly after the essay appeared ( 3 
October 1801; see Nicolin, report 42, 
or Schulz, II, 340). 
11. Noh!, pp. 356-61; translated by 
R. Kroner under the title "Fragment of 
a System" in Knox and Kroner, pp. 
309-19. 
12. See Knox and Kroner, p. 318. 
The quotation which Kroner detects 
but cannot identify in this passage is 
from Fichte's "Appeal to the Public" 
of 1799 (Werke V, 237); the same echo 
occurs twice in Faith and Knowledge, 
pp. 174, 177. 
13. Science of Knowledge (translated 
by P. Heath and J. Lachs), pp. 117-
119, 146, 226, 101, 81. It will be helpful 
to examine the passages in this order. 
We should notice the shift in the 
meaning of "dogmatism," for which 
Fichte was primarily respomible. Kant 
called any metaphysics dogmatic if it 
failed to inquire into the foundation of 
its truth claims. In Fichte dogmatism 
is the only alternative to idealism-
and hence virtually a synonym for 
realism. The Identity Philosophy was 
in part an attempt to overcome this 
dogmatic opposition. Hegel regards 
Fichte's supposedly critical idealism as 
dogmatic in its moral opposition to all 
realism. All of these later pejorative 
uses of 'dogmatic' spring from Kant's. 
But what is qualified as dogmatic de-
pends on what is accepted as being 
fully critical by the author concerned. 
(For further discussion, illustrations 
and references see notes 60 and 61 be-
low.) 

68 
Difference 
14. The parenthetic numbers in the 
text refer to the relevant page of the 
translation below. 
15. Schelling himself says "As far as 
the exposition is concerned I have 
taken Spinoza as my model." (Werke 
IV, 113.) 
16. Doktor der Weltweisheit was a 
quite common form for "Doctor of 
Philosophy" employed by scholars who 
were averse to Latin terms and Latin-
ate borrowing. But Hegel probably 
adopted it because he was not, in point 
of fact, a "Doctor" at all. He was a 
Magister of Tiibingen. At Tiibingen 
this dignity was considered equal to 
the doctorate of other institutions, but 
it was not widely recognized as such. 
If Hegel had called himself Philoso-
phiae doctor the question "from what 
institution?" would have arisen. The 
German periphrasis enabled Hegel to 
avoid this problem, and in order to 
make this advantage visible we have 
translated the vernacular phrase liter-
ally. 
17. There is even some evidence 
which suggests that there were people 
who genuinely believed at the time 
that Hegel was faking. Heinrich Laube 
in his Moderne Charakteristiken (pub-
lished in 1838) gives the following re-
port about Hegel at Jena thirty-five 
years before: "He paid for his Habili-
tation comically enough with bad 
Louis d'or that Fichte had given him, 
his philosophy was always counterfeit 
coin, but he was bold as brass to defy 
the Faculty with a leg-pull. Hegel was 
a real good fellow, full of good fun" 
(Nicolin, report 116). 
One of Schelling's best students, 
I. P. Troxler, remarked in a letter of 
1854 that Laube had "sketched the 
Jena period very well" (Nicolin, report 
50). So although Laube's story can 
hardly have gone the rounds in quite 
this form when the Difference essay 
first appeared, the view that Laube 
suggests may well be a genuine echo 
of that time. Of course, Hegel did not 
really "pay" for his Habilitation with 
the Difference essay: he had to pro-
duce a Latin dissertation On the Orbits 
of the Planets for that (as well as 
some honest money!). But at the mo-
ment when he applied for his license 
to lecture both he and everyone else 
certainly regarded the Difference essay 
as the principal basis for his claim to 
an academic career. 
18. See especially Klaus Dusing, 
"Spekulation und Reflexion," Hegel-
Studien 5 (1969): 95-128. 
19. Haldane and Simson, III, 513. 
This comment probably goes back to 
1805. 
20. A useful survey of the different 
"system outlines" that Schelling gave 
in his various works between 1801 and 
1806 will be found in Xavier Tilliette, 
I, 417-21. The best conspectus I can 
arrive at for 1801-2 is given and dis-
cussed on pp. 52-3 above. 
21. Haldane and Simson, Ill, 515. I 
do not know whether Tilliette was 
consciously influenced by this com-
ment. But, if not, his own title (Schel-
ling: une philosophie en devenir) is an 
independent confirmation of its accu-
racy. 
22. Because of the distinction be-
tween "spirit" and "letter" even this 
philosophy common to Fichte and 
Schelling did not "lie before the pub-
lic" of 1801 so very plainly. Hegel cas-
tigates Reinhold for seeming not to 
know that "there has been a philoso-
phy other than pure transcendental 
idealism before the public for years" 
(174). By "a philosophy other than 
pure transcendental idealism" he prob-
ably means "the speculative philoso-
phy of both Fichte and Schelling." 
Fichte's Science of Knowledge was 
published in 1794 and Schelling's Sys-
tem of Transcendental Idealism in 
1800. 

23. Critique of Pure Reason, 8135. 
24. Werke I, 91 (Heath and Lachs, p. 
93). 
25. Haldane and Simson, III, 481. 
26. Werke I, lOD-2; Heath and Lachs, 
pp. lOD-2. 
27. Ibid., p. 102 (Heath and Lachs, p. 
102). 
28. Akad. V, 401 (Meredith, Teleolo-
gical Judgment, p. 55). 
29. Akad. V, 412 (Meredith, Teleolo-
gical Judgment, p. 7D-1). The empha-
sis in the first sentence of the quota-
tion is mine. 
30. Critique of Pure Reason, B, xxx. 
31. Hegel deals with Fichte as a the-
orist of "faith" in Faith and Knowl-
edge. In the Difference essay he is 
treated strictly as a theorist of knowl-
edge. This is the key to an under-
standing of the enormous contrast in 
the way Fichte is treated in the two 
essays. 
32. "Second Introduction to the Sci-
ence of Knowledge," Werke I, 466 
(Heath a.nd Lachs, p. 41). Kant uses 
the expression "intellektuelle An-
schauung" only in the second edition 
of the Critique of Pure Reason; and 
the very first time he does so he flatly 
contradicts the interpretation Fichte 
later adopted (B35n). In the Critique 
of Judgment he speaks rather of an 
"intuitive Verstand"; and just once, in 
the same connection, of "eine andere 
als sinnliche Anschauung" (Akad. V, 
418; all the relevant passages can be 
found under "intuition" in the indices 
of Kemp Smith and Meredith). The 
possibility of "intuitions different from 
ours" is mentioned three or four times 
in the first edition of the Critique of 
Pure Reason, as is the impossibility of 
"representing to ourselves the possi-
bility of an understanding which 
should know itself, not discursively 
through categories, but intuitively in a 
non-sensible intuition" (A256/B311-2). 
69 
Introduction 
The "intuitive understanding" is also 
discussed in the second version of the 
Transcendental Deduction. It was un-
fortunate that Kant's successors gen-
erally adopted the expression which 
Kant used only in the Critique of Pure 
Reason, since it was the doctrine of 
the Critique of Judgment that im-
pressed them. The expression "trans-
cendental intuition" which Hegel some-
times uses is in some ways preferable 
(see n. 51 and pp. 109-11). But Hegel's 
one reference to the "intuitive under-
standing" in the Difference essay is 
very paradoxically phrased, for he 
speaks of a "sensuous understanding" 
(163), an expression which neither 
Kant nor anyonE:, else ever used. 
33. Werke I, 467 (Heath and Lachs, 
pp. 41-2). "Construct" is one of Schel-
ling's trademarks. I was delighted to 
find my hypothesis that it was Schel-
ling who led Fichte to begin thinking 
in this way, supported-and to my 
mind conclusively confirmed-by W. C. 
Zimmerli, pp. 177 ff. 
34. The most forceful statement of 
Hegel's earlier critique of Kant (based 
on a detailed study of the Metaphysics 
of Ethics-for which his notes no 
longer survive) is in "The Spirit of 
Christianity and its Fate" (Knox and 
Kroner, pp. 209-15, 244). 
35. Reinhold was a "fashionable" 
author among the bright students at 
Tiibingen when Hegel was there, but 
Hegel never found him very interest-
ing: his work was "of more relevance 
just for theoretical reason [rather] 
than of greater applicability to con-
cepts that are generally useful." (Letter 
8, to Schelling, January 1795, Briefe I, 
16.) He did admit at that time that 
Reinhold was an important philoso-
pher. In his first letter to Schelling he 
remarked that it would take the ap-
pointment of "someone like Reinhold 
or Fichte" to make a real difference in 
the academic situation at TUbingen 

70 
Difference 
(Letter 6, Christmas Eve 1794, Briefe I, 
12). 
36. The reader should note that C. G. 
Bardili {1761-1808) was one of Hegel's 
first teachers at the Tiibingen semi-
nary. He was a Repentent (a "graduate 
assistant") during Hegel's first two 
years at Tiibingen {1788-90); and 
Hegel took Bardili' s course on "the use 
of profane authors in theology" in 
1789. At that time Bardili was more in-
terested in poetry and literature than 
in logic (see Toward the Sunlight, pp. 
81, 84-5). 
37. In the curriculum vitae that he 
wrote in 1804 Hegel gave the title as 
"Difference of the Systems of Fichte 
and Schelling and the inadequacy of 
the former" (Hoffmeister, Briefe IV, 
92). 
38. Akad. V, 401-2 (Meredith, Tele-
ological Judgment, pp. 56-7). 
39. Akad. V, 407 (Meredith, p. 64). 
40. This is an interpretation of the 
enigmatic paragraph on p. 92 below. 
which depends heavily on what Hegel 
says about the Cartesian philosophy in 
the "Introduction" to the Critical Jour-
nal (N.K.A. IV, 126-7) and partly on 
the first section of Faith and Knowl-
edge {pp. 57-9). 
41. For the evidence in support of 
this claim see Toward the Sunlight 
chapter V, and the summary of Hegel's 
Jena lectures on "ethical life" given 
by Rosenkranz (Hegels Leben, pp. 133-
41). Within the Difference essay itself, 
a partial confirmation of the position 
here adopted is provided by the ac-
count which Hegel gives of the "abso-
lute indifference point" (169-72). 
42. I do not think there can be any 
doubt that this period of "intellectual 
security against Reason" must be iden-
tified with the Enlightenment. Hence 
I take my reference to Locke to be jus-
tified. My reference to Spinoza is, of 
course, only a conjecture; and the con-
jecture depends on the assumption 
that when Hegel writes die Versuche 
... konnen eher verstanden werden he 
means ... eher verstanden werden 
[als begriffen], "more easily understood 
intellectually [than comprehended phil-
osophically]." 
43. This remark occurs in his review 
{1794) of the attack on Reinhold's 
"Elementary Philosophy" by Aeneside-
mus (G. E. Schulze). See Fichte, Werke 
I, 20. Of course Fichte was not satis-
fied with Reinhold's "ultimate fact of 
consciousness" (ibid., p. 8) or with the 
"principle of identity." But his own 
procedure in the first Science of Knowl-
edge (likewise 1794) shows the influ-
ence of Reinhold. 
44. In Faith and Knowledge (83) 
Hegel says that Kant's "mathematical 
antinomies deal with the application of 
Reason as mere negativity to some-
thing reflection has fixed." These are 
the antinomies of temporal beginning/ 
perpetuity and spatial atom/infinite 
divisibility. Compare also Critique of 
Pure Reason, B536-7. 
45. It is not clear, and it does not 
become clear later (at least to me), 
just what-if anything-the "self-con-
stitution" of the different "potencies" 
of nature in speculative thought means 
over and above the adoption of this 
standard. Perhaps that is all it does 
mean. In that case this must be what 
Hegel means when he says that "only 
the connection with the Absolute per-
sists, and it is the sole reality of the 
cognition" {97). 
46. Critique of Pure Reason, A832/ 
B860. I believe it is helpful to place 
the discussion in this Kantian context 
because Hegel intends to show that 
the principle of Identity is dialectical, 
as a Kantiai\ "Idea of Pure Reason" 
should be. 
47. Spinoza's definition of substance 
was a truly speculative antinomy be-
cause that which is "cause of itself" 
must at the same time be effect of it-

self. But his procedure was mislead-
ing, because an antinomy of this sort 
is not a basic proposition from which 
consequences can be drawn by simple 
linear inference. Hegel himself used 
Spinoza's principium in a properly 
speculative way when he enounced his 
celebrated dictum that "the Absolute 
is not merely substance, it is also sub-
ject" in the Preface to the Phenomen-
ology (Hoffmeister, p. 19; Baillie, p. 
80). But in the end he did not choose 
to begin philosophy either with Spin-
oza's "substance" or with "the prin-
ciple of identity"'; instead he turned 
"the positing of being in nonbeing as 
becoming" around into "the positing 
of non-being in being." "Identity" be-
comes (virtually) the beginning of the 
"logic of essence" and Spinoza's con-
cept of Substance is (again virtually) 
its culmination. 
48. In the Phenomenology Hegel ac-
cuses Fichte of trying to do this: see 
Hoffmeister, p. 26 (Baillie, p. 89). 
49. Science of Knowledge, Werke I, 
91-102 (J;ieath and Lachs, pp. 93-102). 
This passage is well analysed from 
the Hegelian point of view by 5. Rosen 
in his G. W. F. Hegel (pp. 95-104). 
Schelling is so far from Hegel's anti-
nomic interpretation of the formal 
principle of Identity in his own "Ex-
position" that he writes: "16. Between 
the A that is posited as subject in the 
proposition 'A= A,' and that which is 
posited as predicate, no Gegensatz is 
in principle possible" (Werke IV, 17). 
As his explanation there shows, Schel-
ling does not want to use the formula 
to express the identity of essence and 
existence. He does not want us to con-
ceive the Absolute from the side of 
this reflective dichotomy at all. As 
Hegel would put it, Schelling wants us 
to "reflect on connectedness" only: 
every Potenz expresses the Absolute 
Identity-and so on. 
50. When Hegel uses "difference" as 
71 
Introduction 
a technical term in his speculative vo-
cabulary in this period he generally 
means to refer to the "difference" be-
tween essence and existence on which 
Kant relied in his Critique of the On-
tological Argument. But this is also 
the Platonic difference between the 
One (concept) and the Many (particu-
lars). 
51. There can be no doubt that this 
is what Hegel also calls intellectual 
intuition elsewhere. By calling it trans-
cendental Hegel opposes it to sensuous 
or empirical intuition. Thus he does 
claim, against Kant, that we have "an 
intuition different from our sensuous 
intuition" (Critique of Judgment § 80, 
Akad. V, 418, Meredith, Teleological 
Judgment, p. 77) but he is not com-
mitted to the position that this trans-
cendental intuition satisfies exactly the 
requirements laid down by Kant for 
intellectual intuition (compare note 32 
above and pp. 109-14 below. 
52. To show this is the task of the 
Identity Philosophy as a whole. Thus 
"transcendental intuition" is a "poshi-
late" by means of which the totality 
of experience is to be "constructed." 
Just as the mathematician constructs 
mathematics-especially geometry-in 
the a priori "form of outer intuition," 
so the metaphysician constructs nature 
and the self in the a priori form of 
inner intuition-which is Fichte's orig-
inal self-positing. The construction, 
when completed, validates the initial 
"postulate." This is because the con-
struction is not complete until it re-
turns to its starting point. 
53. Diels-Kranz, Fragmente der Vor-
sokratiker, 18 B6. 
54. Critique of Practical Reason, 
Part I, Book II, Section 2, Subsection 
V. (Akad. V, 124-32). 
55. Critique of Judgment, Section 73 
(Akad. V, 395; Meredith, Teleological 
Judgment, p. 47). 
56. Compare his comment that 

72 
Difference 
"Fichte does not need this detour" 
(143). 
57. Although I accuse Hegel of shift-
ing from his own dialectical position 
to Schelling's visionary one here, it 
should be noted that in one important 
respect he is being faithful to his own 
critical ideal. That ideal does require 
the elimination of all postulation: 
"this whole manner of postulating" 
does indeed "have its whole ground in 
the acceptance of a one-sided starting 
point." But the leap that Hegel makes 
here in order to escape from the "one-
sidedness of reflection" is exactly what 
he will eventually write the Phenom-
enology to avoid. The reflective con-
sciousness must be shown how to es-
cape from its own one-sidedness, not 
prophesied to from the other side of 
the abyss. 
58. First published by Lasson in 
1913; now reprinted separately (Ham-
burg: Meiner, 1967). 
59. In the System of Ethical Life the 
role of the negative is constructive: it 
stimulates growth. In the Phenomenol-
ogy we find ourselves on a "highway 
of despair" (Hoffmeister, p. 67; Baillie, 
p. 135), since every constructive step 
involves destruction, every significant 
advance involves the recognition of 
failure. The method of the Encyclo-
paedia is again positive. Thus the pro-
gressive dialectic described in the Dif-
ference essay (113-4) for the first time, 
remains for Hegel the dialectic of 
speculative philosophy as such. The 
dialectic of failure (in the Phenomenol-
ogy) is the dialectic of phenomenal 
experience. 
60. Reinhold applied the word 
Geistesverirrung both to D'Holbach's 
Systeme de Ia Nature and to Schel-
ling's System of Transcendental Ideal-
ism (177). It might seem that if he was 
wrong about one of them he had to 
be right about the other. But Hegel 
turns aside for a moment in his de-
fense of Schelling, to show that Rein-
hold was just as badly mistaken about 
D'Holbach. The Systeme de Ia Nature 
begins from "matter"; but both spec-
ulative idealism and speculative ma-
terialism begin from "the absolute 
identity" of mind and nature. Matter 
and feeling are literally poles apart as 
appearances of the Absolute; and a 
system (D'Holbach's for instance) will 
be defective if it suspends the oppo-
sition transcendentally or an sich. This 
is the typical defect of a dogmatic 
philosophy. Fichte's system suspends 
the opposition of mind and nature in a 
similar way, so that, in spite of his 
protestations, Fichte's idealism is al-
most as dogmatic as D'Holbach's 
materialism. 
61. See for instance the "First Intro-
duction to the Science of Knowledge," 
Sections 3-6 (Werke I, 425-40; Heath-
Lachs, pp. 8-20). Fichte there opposes 
dogmatism to idealism. But in the 
Science of Knowledge itself he had 
distinguished dogmatic from critical 
idealism. See for instance, Werke I, 
156, 172-3 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 147-
8, 160) and compare Difference pp. 
126-9 below. When Fichte draws this 
distinction he also formulates the on-
tological contrast in terms of idealism 
and realism. 
62. Haldane and Simson, III, 479-
505. 
63. Hegel's decision to chop Fichte 
in two, which is not clearly explained 
in either essay, gave rise to some crit-
ical misunderstandings of Faith and 
Knowledge; but we need not concern 
ourselves with that here (see the intro-
duction to that work, pp. 5-6). Even 
the History of Philosophy lectures 
which did make the distinction be-
tween the two Fichtes clear (Haldane 
and Simson, III, 48Q-1, 505-6) did not 
point out the relation of Hegel's two 
critical essays; for in his lectures 
Hegel discussed the Way to the Blessed 

Life as a specimen of the "popular" 
Fichte. He again ignored the Vocation 
of Man altogether at that stage. 
64. Haldane and Simson, Ill, 504. 
65. Ibid., III, 481-2. 
66. See the references given in note 
61 above. 
67. "Second Introduction," Werke L 
463; Heath and Lachs, p. 38. 
68. W erke I, 218 (Heath and Lachs, 
p. 195). The "wavering of imagination" 
is discussed ibid., pp. 216-7 (Heath and 
Lachs, p. 194); and Hegel's assertion 
that "pure and empirical consciousness 
condition one another mutually" seems 
to be based on Fichte's account of the 
reciprocal determination of "the activ-
ity" (of the Ego) and "the interplay" 
(with the non-Ego)-ibid., p. 212 
(Heath and Lachs, p. 190). 
69. See Lasson (1967), pp. 9-24. 
70. System der Sittenlehre, Werke 
IV, 114-5 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 119). 
71. In the Vocation of Man Fichte 
develops a "postulational" version of 
the older external teleology; Nature 
is prophetically presumed to keep pace 
with the moral advance of man 
(compare Faith and Knowledge, pp. 
177-79). This certainly represents a 
degeneration rather than an improve-
ment upon Kant's position. 
72. In the German Constitution 
essay Hegel calls Fichte's rational com-
munity "the machine-state." (Knox 
and Pelczynski, pp. 159, 163-4); as 
early as 1796 (in the "System-Pro-
gramme of German Idealism") he had 
insisted that this conception of the 
state, which he first found in Moses 
Mendelssohn, must be transcended: see 
Toward the Sunlight, pp. 510, 250-2; 
also Hegel's essay on Natural Law 
(Knox and Acton, pp. 85-7, 124-6). 
73. Hegel, Philosophy of Nature, 
Introduction (Miller, p. 1); Croce, p. 
164. 
74. "For the deity, that is, for a 
consciousness in which everything 
73 
Introduction 
would be posited by the mere fact 
of the Ego having been posited 
(though for us the concept of such a 
consciousness is unthinkable) our 
Science of Knowledge would have no 
content ... but even for God the 
Science would have formal correct-
ness" (Werke I, 253; Heath and Lachs, 
p. 224). 
75. The title of Lossius' book, 
Physische Ursache der Wahrheit, 
seems to me a powerful argument in 
favor of the view that Hegel has him 
in mind here (161-2). 
76. Credit for this discovery should 
actually go to F. L. von Stolberg; and 
it was Goethe who let the world in on 
the joke (see Petry, I, 293-4). But Beck 
gives some examples from Wolff's dis-
cussion of the purpose of the sun and 
the earth that would have amused 
Hegel even more (Early German 
Philosophy, pp. 273-4). 
77. Critique of Judgment, Section 75 
(Akad. V. 400; Meredith, Teleological 
Judgment, p. 54). 
78. Ethics, part II, prop. 13. 
79. One of the most important 
achievements of Hegel's Logic is his 
account of the different types of 
necessity. But that came later (and it 
is doubtful whether it has ever been 
understood properly). The mono-
chrome character of the Identity 
theory (which Hegel himself attacked 
within a few years) was much easier 
to grasp-and to draw mistaken 
conclusions from. 
80. Arbitrariness, and its natural 
counterpart chance, are quite different 
from the natural spontaneity, or con-
scious acting in and for the whole, 
which are what Hegel means by 
"freedom." All the same, the deroga-
tory way in which he speaks of them 
is unfortunate, because although their 
place in the scheme of things is subor-
dinate, they do have a necessary place, 
and Hegel was fully aware of this, as 

74 
Difference 
the System of Ethical Life demon-
strates. But there is nothing arbitrary 
or casual about the organic structure 
in which arbitrariness and chance 
play their necessary role. One could 
not, for instance, produce an explana-
tion of the world order that would 
satisfy Hegel upon the principles of 
the ancient atomists. For to assert that 
everything is basically a matter of 
chance is to assert precisely that there 
is no satisfactory explanation of 
things. This is the hypothesis that 
philosophical speculation is essentially 
impossible-a hypothesis which makes 
no sense for man as the natural 
consciousness of Reason; Hegel is 
confident therefore that it will never 
be accepted as final. Whether the 
hypothesis really does make no sense, 
or whether Hegel's confidence was 
misplaced, is a much more open 
question for us, because our view of 
nature and of our place in it has been 
transformed since his time. But we 
must, in any case, acknowledge the 
importance of his philosophical justifi-
cation of chance. Because of it his 
system can retain its validity (as 
Spinoza's, for example, cannot) even 
for someone whose philosophy of 
nature is fundamentally evolutionary. 
81. System of Transcendental Ideal-
ism, Werke III, 627. 
82. My scheme is based mainly on 
the Fernere Darstellungen of 1802 
(Werke IV, 213-23); a few details 
come from the second edition of the 
Ideen (1803). 
83. Schelling's distinction of the 
levels of "reflection" and "subsump-
tion" should be seen as a metamorpho-
sis of Kant's distinction between 
"determining" and "reflecting" judg-
ment-first made in the Introduction 
to the Critique of Judgment, section IV, 
Akad. V, 179-80 (Meredith, Aesthetic 
Judgment, p. 18-9). 
84. I have added this note about the 
final terms of the "real series" and 
the "ideal series" in order to underline 
the fact that Hegel's placing of "Art" 
and "Speculation" (or "beauty" and 
"truth") in relation to the "point of 
difference" is the opposite of Schel-
ling's own. There is no scheme of 
Schelling's in this period, in which Art 
is placed at the apex of the real series. 
(See Tilliette, Schelling I, 417-21 for a 
convenient conspectus of all of Schel-
ling's efforts to arrange the "real se-
ries" and the parallel "ideal series." 
Note how often the latter series is 
completely ignored.) 
85. In a work called Propositions 
from Nature-Metaphysics. See Schel-
ling's dialogue "On the Absolute Iden-
tity System" in the Critical Journal 
(Hegel, N.K.A. IV, 162 n.). 
86. Schelling, Werke IV, 31. 
87. Schelling, Werke V, 365-7. 
88. Hegel regarded sex-differentia-
tion as specific to the animal kingdom 
and as merely accidental and symbolic 
in its vegetable forms. This can be 
gathered already from his Frankfurt 
essays (see Knox and Kroner, p. 261) 
and is confirmed in the System of 
Ethical Life (Lasson [1967], p. 15). But 
in the present context (168) Hegel 
speaks of the sexual differentiation of 
plants, without qualification. So pre-
sumably Schelling was inclined to em-
phasize the continuity of organic 
forms, and Hegel has here accepted 
this emphasis. But sexual attraction, at 
least, is a form of animal irritability, 
which Schelling gives as the second 
Potenz in the Ideen of 1803. See the 
table in the text. 
89. This was one of the main topics 
of Hegel's Latin dissertation On the 
Orbits of the Planets (1801), which 
was already drafted (in German) when 
he wrote the Difference essay. 
90. It becomes even easier when we 
realize that where electricity is referred 
to, it is static electricity that is meant. 

The charge is released when the two 
differently charged bodies come suffi-
ciently close to each other. What we 
generally call electricity belongs to 
what Hegel calls the chemical process 
because it is generated in that process. 
91. Subsequently Hegel's theory of 
the chemical process carne to embrace 
more of what we recognize as chem-
istry. But it always included and began 
from galvanism. To the very end of 
his life Hegel stoutly resisted the as-
similation of the different types of 
electrical phenomena under one cate-
gory. 
92. Philosophy of Nature, trans. 
A. V. Miller, p. 1. 
93. The "constructed line" is Schel-
ling's (see Werke IV, 137). But this 
circle is my own. 
94. The remarks about religious in-
tuition here show the influence of 
Schleierrnacher's On Religion, to which 
Hegel makes a laudatory reference in 
his preface (83). By the time he wrote 
Faith and Knowledge his enthusiasm 
had cooled somewhat. He still rated 
Schleil.;rrnacher's achievement highly, 
but insisted that it was one-sided; it 
was the height of subjectivity only. 
95. Hegel (Anchor), p. 47. 
96. A few further details will be 
found in the introduction to Faith and 
Knowledge. (See pp. 1-3.) 
97. "Verhaltniss des Scepticisrnus 
zur Philosophie," N.K.A. IV, 197-238. 
(There is a French translation by B. 
Fauquet.) It deserves to be noted that 
just as Hegel's critique of Reinhold 
and Bardili is only a foil for his appre-
75 
Introduction 
dation of the speculative philosophy 
of Identity, so the critique of Schulze's 
formal scepticism is only a foil for his 
appreciation of the truly speculative 
scepticism of the Ancients-and espe-
cially for his appreciation of Plato's 
Parmenides. 
98. Mery, p. 189, note U. He cites 
Glockner as the great champion of this 
view. His careless syntax also creates 
the impression that Rosenkranz be-
longs to his party-but Rosenkranz 
was actually one of its most trenchant 
critics. See Hegel's Leben, pp. 150-1. 
99. It is much more correct to say as 
Zirnrnerli does (pp. 8-9) that the dis-
cussion of Reinhold was regarded by 
Hegel as part of the "Comparison of 
Schelling's Principle with Fichte's," 
than to regard the whole essay as a re-
view of Reinhold (as Kaufmann sug-
gests). But Zirnrnerli ignores the con-
flict between Hegel's programme as 
announced in the "Preface" and the 
discussion of Reinhold's philosophy in 
the closing pages. There is thus more 
excuse for Lasson's fourfold division 
of the essay than Zirnrnerli allows. 
100. See Rosenkranz, pp. 190-2. The 
only possible times for this course 
were Winter 1801 (Hegel's first term) 
or Winter 1802 (his third). All the in-
ternal and external indications support 
the later date, but none of them is 
very decisive. 
101. See Hegel's review in N.K.A. 
IV, 178-9. Also the note in the Philo-
sophy of Nature (Encyclopedia, section 
250; Miller, p. 23). 
102. See note 35 above. 


The Difference Between 
Fichte' s and Schelling's 
System of Philosophy 
in connection with 
the first fascicle of 
Reinhold's Contributions 
to a more convenient 
survey of the state of 
philosophy at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century 
published in Jena, 1801. 


Preface 
In those few public utterances in which a feeling for the difference 
between Fichte's and Schelling's systems of philosophy can be recog-
nized, the aim seems to be more to hide their distinctness or to get 
round it than to gain a clear awareness of it. Neither the systems as 
they lie before the public for direct inspection, nor among other things, 
Schelling's answer to Eschenmayer's idealistic objections against the 
philosophy of nature have brought the distinctness of the two systems 
out into open discussion. 1 On the contrary, Reinhold, for example, is 
so far from an inkling of it that he takes the complete identity of both 
systems for granted.2 So his view of Schelling's system is distorted in 
this way too [as well as in other ways]. The occasion for the follow-
ing treatise is this confusion of Reinhold's, rather than his revolution 
of bringing philosophy back to logic-a revolution that he has not 
merely threatened us with, but has proclaimed as already accom-
plished.3 
The Kantian philosophy needed to have its spirit distinguished 
from its letter, and to have its purely speculative principle lifted out 
of the remainder that belonged to, or could be used for, the argu-
ments of reflection. In the principle of the deduction of the categories 
Kant's philosophy is authentic idealism; and it is this principle that 
Fichte extracted in a purer, stricter form and called the spirit of Kant-
ian philosophy.4 The things in themselves-which are nothing but an 
1. K. A. Eschenmayer, "Spontaneitat = Weltseele oder das hi:ichste Prinzip der 
Naturphilosophie," and F. W. ]. Schelling, "Anhang zu dem Aufsatz des Herrn 
Eschenmayer," in Zeitschrift fur "spekulative Physik II, 1-68 and 109-46; see 
Schelling, Werke {1856-63) IV, 79-103. 
2. See K. L. Reinhold, Beytriige I {Hamburg, 1801), especially pp. 85-89 and 
135-54. 
3. Reinhold believed the revolution was accomplished in the work of C. G. 
Bardili, Grundriss der Erste11 Logik (Stuttgart, 1800). The full title of this work 
was. "Outline of Primary Logic purified from the errors of previous Logics gen-
erally, and of the Kantian logic in particular; not a Critique but a medicina men-
tis, to be employed mainly for Germany s Critical Philosophy." 
4. Compare Fichte: "That our proposition [-The Ego originally and absolutely 
posits its own being-] is the absolutely basic principle of all knowledge was 

80 
Difference 
objective expression of the empty form of opposition-had been hy-
postasized anew by Kant, and posited as absolute objectivity like the 
things of the dogmatic philosophers. On the one hand, he made the 
categories into static, dead pigeonholes of the intellect; and on the 
other hand he made them into the supreme principles capable of nul-
lifying the language that expresses the Absolute itself-e.g., "sub-
stance" in Spinoza. Thus he allowed argumentation to go on replacing 
philosophy, as before, only more pretentiously than ever under the 
name of critical philosophy. But all this springs at best from the form 
of the Kantian deduction of the categories, not from its principle or 
spirit. Indeed, if we had no part of Kant's philosophy but the deduc-
tion, the transformation of his philosophy [from speculation into re-
flection] would [6] be almost incomprehensible. The principle of spec-
ulation is the identity of subject and object, and this principle is most 
definitely articulated in the deduction of the forms of the intellect 
(Verstand). It was Reason (Vernunft) itself that baptized this theory 
of the intellect. 
However, Kant turns this identity itself, which is Reason, into an 
object of philosophical reflection, and thus this identity vanishes from 
its home ground. Whereas intellect had previously been handled by 
Reason, it is now, by contrast, Reason that is handled by the intellect. 
This makes clear what a subordinate stage the identity of subject and 
object was grasped at. The identity of subject and object is limited to 
twelve acts of pure thought-or rather to nine only, for modality 
really determines nothing objectively; the nonidentity of subject and 
object essentially pertains to it:5 Outside what is objectively deter-
mined by the categories there remained an enormous empirical realm 
pointed out by Kant in his deduction of the categories; but he never laid it down 
specifically as the basic principle." (Foundation of the Science of Knowledge 
[1794], Werke [1845] I, 99; Heath and Lachs, p. 100.) For the claim that this 
principle is the "spirit of Kantian philosophy" see Fichte, Werke I, 186 n., 479 
(Heath and Lachs, pp. 171 n., 52). This last passage, in the "Second Introduction 
to the Science of Knowledge" (1797), occurs in the context of a discussion 
(Werke I, 468-91; Heath and Lachs, pp. 42-62) that is very important for the 
understanding of what "intellectual intuition" means to Schelling and Hegel. 
5. For Kant's table of categories see Critique of Pure Reason B 106. The triad 
of modality is: 1. Possibility/Impossibility; 2. Existence/Non-existence; 3. Neces-
sity/Contingency. As to the peculiarity of modality compare A 74 (B 100) and A 
219 (B 266). 

81 
Preface 
of sensibility and perception, an absolute a posteriori realm. For this 
realm the only a priori principle discovered is a merely subjective 
maxim of the faculty of reflectin& jud~ment, 6 That is to say, npniden~ 
tity is raised to an absolute principle. Nothing else was to be ex-
pected, once the identity, i.e, the rational, had been removed from the 
Idea, which is the~\Wt ef ReaseR, and the Idea had been posited 
in absolute opposition to being. Reason as a practical faculty had been 
presented as it must be conceived by finite thought, i.e., by the intel-
lect: not as absolute identity, but in infinite opposition, as a faculty 
of the pure unity [typical] of the intellect. Hence there arises this con-
trast: there are no ~absolute objective determinations for the intellect 
[i.e., in critical philosophy], but they are present for Reason [i.e., in 
speculative philosophy]. 
The principle of Fichte's system is the pure thinking that thinks it-
self, the identity of subject and object, in the form Ego = Ego.7 If one 
holds solely and directly to this principle and to the transcendental 
principle at the basis of Kant's deduction of the categories, one has 
the authentic principle of speculation boldly expressed. However, as 
soon as [Fichte's] speculation steps outside of the concept that it es-
tablishes of itself and evolves into a system, it abandons(itself and its 
principle ~nd does not come back to it again. It surrenders Reason to 
the intellect and passes over into the chain of finite [acts and objects] 
of consciousness from which it never reconstructs itself again as iden-
. ·tity and true infinity. Transcendental intuition, the very principle [of 
speculation], thereby assumes the awkward posture of something that 
is in opposition to the manifold deduced from it. The Absolute of the 
system shows itself as apprehended only in the form in which it ap-
pears to philosophical reflection. This determinacy which is giv~n to 
the Absolute by reflection is not removed-so finitude and opposition 
are not removed. The principle, the Subject-Object, turns out to be a 
subjective [7] ,Subject-Object. What is deduced from it thereby gets 
the form of a conditioning of pure consciousness, of the Ego = Ego; 
and pure consciousness itself takes on the form of something condi-
tioned by an objective infinity, namely the temporal progression ad 
infinitum. Transcendental intuition loses itself in this infinite progres-
sion and the Ego fails to constitute itself as absolute self-intuition. 
6. For the maxim of reflecting judgment see Critique of Judgment, Introduction 
section IV, and sections 75-76 (Akad. V, 179-80, 397-404). 
7. See especially the first section of the Science of Knowledge (Fichte, Werke 
I, 95-100; Heath and Lachs, pp. 97-101). 

82 
Difference 
Hence, Ego = Ego is transformed into the principle 'Ego ought to be 
equal to Ego.' Reason is placed in absolute opposition, i.e., it is de-
graded to the level of intellect, and it is this degraded Reason that be-
comes the principle of the shapes that the Absolute must give itself, 
and of the Sciences of these shapes.8 
These are the two sides of Fichte's system. On the one hand it has 
established the pure concept of Reason and of speculation and so 
made philosophy possible. On the other hand, it has equated Reason 
with pure consciousness and raised Reason as apprehended in a finite 
shape to the status of principle. That these two sides should be dis-
tinguished must be shown to be an inner necessity of the problem 
itself (die Sache selbst), even though the external occasion for making 
the distinctions is a need of the time and is now provided by a bit of 
contemporary flotsam in time's stream, namely Reinhold's Contribu-
tions to a Survey of the State of Philosophy at the Beginning of the 
New Century. In these Contributions the aspect of authentic specula-
tion and hence of philosophy in Fichte's system is overlooked;9 and 
so is the aspect of Schelling's system that distinguishes it from Fichte's 
-the distinction being that in the philosophy of nature Schelling sets 
the 9_b~ti_ve Su~ect-Object beside the subjective Subject-Object and 
presents both as united in something higher than the subject. 
As to the need of the times, Fichte's philosophy has caused so much 
of a stir and has made an epoch to the extent that even those who de-
clare themselves against it and strain themselves to get speculative 
systems of their own on the road, still cling to its principle, though in 
a more turbid and impure way, and are incapable of resisting it. The 
mosf obvious symptoms of an epoch-making system are the· misun-
derstandings and the awkward conduct of its adversaries. However, 
when one can say of a system that fortune has smiled on it, it is be-
cause some widespread philosophical need, itself unable to give birth 
to philosophy-for otherwise it would have achieved fulfilment 
through the creation of a system-turns to it with an instinct-like 
propensity. The acceptance of the system seems to be passive but this 
is only because what it articulates is already present in the time's in-
ner core and everyone will soon be proclaiming it in his sphere of 
science or life. 
8. Ihrer Wissenschaften: ihrer may refer either to the "shapes" or to "this de-
graded Reason." 
9. Hegel plays on Reinhold's use of Ubersicht. In his "Contributions to an 
Overview" Reinhold manages to overlook the most important points. 

83 
Preface 
In this sense one cannot say of Fichte's system that fortune has 
smiled on it.10 While this is partly due to the unphilosophical [8] ten-
dencies of the age, there is something else that should also be taken 
into account. The greater the influence that intellect and utility suc-
ceed in acquiring, and the wider the currency of limited aims, the 
more powerful will the urge of the better spirit be, particularly in 
the more openminded world of youth. A phenomenon such as the 
Speeches on Religion 11 may not immediately concern the speculative 
need. Yet they and their reception-and even more so the dignity 
that is beginning to be accorded, more or less clearly or obscurely, to 
poetry and art in general in all their true scope-indicate the need for 
a philosophy that will recompense nature for the mishandling that it 
suffered in Kant and Fichte's systems, and set Reason itself in har-
mony with nature, not by having Reason renounce itself or become 
an insipid imitator of nature, but by Reason recasting itself into na-
ture out of its own inner strength. 
This essay begins with general reflections about the need, presup-
position, basic principles, etc. of philosophy. It is a fault in them that 
they are general reflections, but they are occasioned by the fact that pre-
supposition, [9] principles, and such like forms still adorn the entrance 
to philosophy with their cobwebs. So, up to a point it is still necessary 
to deal with them until the day comes when from beginning to end it 
is philo~10phy itself whose voice will be heard. Some of the more in-
teresting of these topics will be more extensively treated elsewhere.12 
Jena, July 1801. 
10. Compare Fichte, "Ueber den Begriff der Wissenschaftslehre" (1794), Werke 
I, 34-36. 
11. [Friedrich Schleiermacher], On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers 
(Berlin, 1799). 
12. This promise suggests that Hegel was already looking forward to his work 
as a contributor to the Critical Journal. The most obvious and important publica-
tion in which it was fulfilled is Faith and Knowledge (trans. Cerf and Harris [Al-
bany: State University of New York Press, 1976]). 


Various Forms Occurring 
in Contemporary Philosophy 
HISTORICAL VIEW OF PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEMS 
An age which has so many philosopical systems lying behind it in its 
past must apparently arrive at the same indifference which life ac-
quires after it has tried all forms. The urge toward totality continues 
to express itselt but only as an urge toward completeness of informa-
tion. Individuality becomes fossilized and no longer ventures out into 
life. Through the variety of what he has, the individual tries to pro-
cure the illusion of being what he is not. He refuses the living partici-
pation demanded by science/ transforming it into mere information, 
keeping it at a distance and in purely objective shape. Deaf to all de-
mands that he should raise himself to universality, he maintains him-
self imperturbably in his self-willed particularity. If indifference of 
this sort escalates into curiosity, it may believe nothing to be more 
vital than giving a name to a newly developed philosophy, expressing 
dominion over it by finding a name for it, just as Adam showed his 
dominance over the animals by giving names to them.2 In this way 
philosophy is transposed to the plane of information. Information is 
concerned with alien objects. In the philosophical knowledge that is 
only erudition, the inward totality does not bestir itself, and neutral-
ity retains its perfect freedom [from commitment]. 
No philosophical system can escape the possibility of this sort of 
reception; every philosophical system can be treated historically. As 
every living form belongs at the same time to the realm of appear-
ance, so too does philosophy. As appearance, philosophy surrenders 
1. Wissenschaft. It is characteristic of Schelling and Hegel (largely as a result 
of Fichte's Wissenschaftslehre) that they do not merely regard speculative philos-
ophy as a "Science," but as the only "Science" worthy of the name. Hence "Sci-
ence" and "philosophy" become synonymous. 
2. In his first "Philosophy of Spirit" (Winter 1803) Hegel makes the following 
remark about this: "The first act by which Adam constituted his dominion over 
the animals is that he gave them names, i.e., he nullified them as beings and 
made them into essentially ideal things (fur sich Ideellen)" (N.K.A., VI, 288). 
Similarly then, the historian turns the living spirit of a philosophy into a definite 
"idea" in his own mind. 

86 
Difference 
to the power capable of transforming it into dead opinion and into 
something that belonged to the past from the very beginning. Thf liv-
ing spirit that dwells in a philosophy demands to be born of a kindred 
spirit if it is to unveil itself. It brushes past the historical concern 
which is moved by some interest, to [collect] information about opin-
ions. For this concern it is an alien phenomenon and does not reveal 
its own inwardness. It matters little to the spirit that it is forced to 
augment the extant collection of mummies and the general heap of 
contingent oddities; for the spirit itself slipped away between the fin-
gers of the curious collector of information. The collector stands firm 
in his [10] neutral attitude towards truth; he preserves his indepen-
dence whether he accepts opinions, rejects them, or abstains from de-
cision. He can give philosophical systems only one relation to himself: 
they are opinions-and such incidental things as opinions can do him 
no harm. He has not learned that there is truth to be had.3 
The history of philosophy [seems to] acquire a more useful aspect, 
however, when the impulse to enlarge science takes hold of it, for 
according to Reinhold, the history of philosophy should serve as a 
means "to penetrate more profoundly than ever into the spirit of phil-
osophy, and to develop the idiosyncratic views of one's predecessors 
about the grounding of the reality of human cognition further in new 
views of one's own."4 Only if this sort of information concerning pre-
vious attempts to solve the problem of philosophy were available 
could the attempt actually succeed in the end-if mankind is fated to 
succeed in it at all. 
As can be seen, the project of such an investigation presupposes an 
image of philosophy as a kind of handicraft, something that can be 
improved by newly invented turns of skill. Each new invention pre-
supposes acquaintance with the turns already in use and with the 
purposes they serve; but after all the improvements made so far, the 
principal task remains. Reinhold evidently seems to think of this task 
as the finding of a universally valid and ultimate turn of skill such that 
the work completes itself automatically for anyone who can get ac-
quainted with it. If the aim were such an invention, and if science 
were a lifeless product of alien ingenuity, science would indeed have 
3. In his Lectures on the History of Philosophy (first given in 1805) Hegel crit-
icized Dietrich Tiedmann as a collector of this kind See Haldane and Simson, !, 
112-3; or Gray, pp. 314-5 
4 Beytrage I, 5-6. 

87 
Contemporary Philosophy 
the perfectibility of which mechanical arts are capable. The preceding 
philosophical systems would at all times be nothing but practice 
studies for the big brains. But if the Absolute, like Reason which is its 
appearance, is eternally one and the same-as indeed it is-then every 
Reason that is directed toward itself and comes to recognize itself, 
produces a true philosophy and solves for itself the problem which, 
like its solution, is at all times the same. In philosophy, Reason comes 
to know itself and deals only with itself so that its whole work and 
activity are grounded in itself, and with respect to the inner essence 
of philosophy there are neither predecessors nor successors. 
Nor is it any more correct to speak of personal views entertained 
in philosophy than of its steady improvement. How could the rational 
be a personal idiosyncrasy? Whatever is thus peculiar in a philosophy 
must ipso facto belong to the form of the system and not to the es-
sence of the philosophy. If something idiosyncratic actually consti-
tuted the essence of a philosophy, it would not be a philosophy, 
though even where the system itself [11] declared its essence to be 
something idiosyncratic it could nevertheless have sprung from au-
thentic speculation which suffered shipwreck when it tried to express 
itself in the form of science. One who is caught up in his own idio-
syncrasy can see in others only their idiosyncrasies. If one allows per-
sonal views to have a place in essential philosophy, and if Reinhold 
regards what he has recently turned to as a philosophy peculiar to 
himself, then it is indeed possible generally to regard all preceding 
ways of presenting and solving the problem of philosophy as merely 
personal idiosyncrasies and mental exercises. But the exercises are 
still supposed to prepare the way for the attempt that finally succeeds 
-for though we see that the shores of those philosophical Islands of 
the Blest that we yearn for are only littered with the hulks of wrecked 
ships, and there is no vessel safe at anchor in their bays, yet we must 
not let go of the teleological perspective. 
Fichte dared to assert that Spinoza could not possibly have believed 
in his philosophy, that he could not possibly have had a full inner liv-
ing conviction; and he said of the ancients that it is even doubtful 
that they had a clear conception of the task of philosophy.5 This, too, 
must be explained in terms of the idiosyncratic form in which his 
philosophy expressed itself. 
5. See the "Second Introduction to the Science of Knowledge" (Fichte, Werke 
I, 513; Heath and Lachs, pp. 81-2). 

88 
Difference 
In Fichte, the peculiar form of his own system, the vigor that char-
acterizes6 it as a whole produces utterances of this sort. The peculiar-
ity of Reinhold's philosophy, on the other hand, consists in its found-
ing and grounding concern with different philosophical views, making 
a great to-do about the historical investigation of their idiosyncrasies. 
His love o( and faith in, truth have risen to an elevation so pure and 
so sickening that in order to found and ground the step into the tem-
ple properly, Reinhold has built a spacious vestibule in which philoso-
phy keeps itself so busy with analysis, with methodology and with 
storytelling, that it saves itself from taking the step altogether; and in 
the end, as a consolation for his incapacity to do philosophy, Reinhold 
persuades himself that the bold steps others have taken had been 
nothing but preparatory exercises or mental confusions. 
The essence of philosophy, on the contrary, is a bottomless abyss 
for personal idiosyncrasy. In order to reach philosophy it is necessary 
to throw oneself into it a corps perdu-meaning by 'body' here, the 
sum of one's idiosyncrasies. For Reason, finding consciousness caught 
in particularities, only becomes philosophical speculation by raising 
itself to itself, putting its trust only in itself and the Absolute which 
at that moment becomes its object. In this process Reason stakes noth-
ing but finitudes of consciousness. In order to overcome these fini-
tudes and construct the Absolute in consciousness, Reason lifts itself 
into speculation, and in [12] the groundlessness of the limitations and 
personal pecularities it grasps its own grounding within itself. Specu-
lation is the activity of the one universal Reason directed upon itself. 
Reason, therefore, does not view the philosophical systems of differ-
ent epochs and different heads merely as different modes [of doing 
philosophy] and purely idiosyncratic views. Once it has liberated its 
own view from contingencies and limitations, Reasort necessarily finds 
itself throughout all the particular forms-or else a mere manifold of 
the concepts and opinions of the intellect; and such a manifold is no 
philosophy. The true peculiarity of apnilosophy lies in the interesting 
individuality which is the organic shape that Reason has built for it-
self out of the material of a particular age. The particular speculative 
Reason [of a later time] finds in it spirit of its spirit, flesh of its flesh, 
it intuits itself in it as one and the same and yet as another living 
6. Sthenische Beschaffenl1e1t. the term is borrowed from the physiological the-
ory of Dr. John Brown (1735-88), which influenced Schelling and Hegel greatly 
in this ear!y period. Reinhold is, by contrast, an "asthenic" philosopher, but 
Hegel leaves it to us to supply this Brownian complement. 

89 
Contemporary Philosophy 
being. Every philosophy is complete in itself, and like an authentic 
work of art, carries the totality within itself. Just as the works of 
Apelles or Sophocles would not have appeared to Raphael and Shakes-
peare-had they known them-as mere preparatory studies, but a_s a 
kindred force of the spirit, so Reason cannot regard its former shapes 
as merely useful preludes to itself. VirgiL to be sure, regarded Homer 
to be such a prelude to himself and his refined era, and for this reason 
Virgil's work remains a mere postlude. 
THE NEED OF PHILOSOPHY 7 
If we look more closely at the particular~rm worn by a philosophy 
we see that it arises, on the one hand, from the living originality 
of the spirit whose work and spontaneity have reestablished and 
shaped the harmony that has been rent; and on the other hand, from 
the particular form of the dichotomy from which the system emerges. 
Dichotomy is the source of the need of philosophy; and as the culture 
of the era, it is the unfree and given aspect of the whole configura-
tion. In [any] culture, the appearance of the Absolute has become iso-
lated from the Absolute and fixated into independence. But at the 
same time the appearance cannot disown its origin, and must aim to 
constitute the manifold of its limitations into one whole. The J,ntellect, 
as the capacity to set limits, erects a building and places it beween 
man and the Absolute, linking everything that [13] man thinks worthy 
and holy to this building, fortifying it through all the powers of na-
ture and talent and expanding it ad infinitum. The entire totality of 
limitations is to be found in it, but not the Absolute itself. [The Ab-
solute is] lost in the parts, where it drives the intellect in its ceaseless 
development of manifoldness. But in its striving to enlarge itself into 
the Absolute, the intellect only reproduces itself ad infinitum and so 
mocks itself. 8 Reason reaches the Absolute only in stepping out of 
7. As is often the case in Hegel, the genitive here fulfils more than one func-
tion. "The need of philosophy" means both the need (at this time) for philoso-
phy, and what philosophy needs (at this time). 
8. There is perhaps an echo here of Goethe's Faust: Ein Fragment (1790), lines 
415-20. These lines of Mephistopheles were reproduced without change in Faust 
Part I (1808). Walter Kaufmann's translation is as follows: "Who would study 
and describe the living starts I By driving the spirit out of its parts: I In the 
palm of his hands he holds all the sections, I Lacks nothing except the spirit's 

90 
Difference 
this manifold of parts. The more stable and splendid the edifice of the 
intellect is, the more restless becomes the striving of the life that is 
caught up in it as a part to get out of it, and raise itself to freedom. 
When life as Reason steps away into the distance, the totality of limi-
tations is at the same time nullified, and connected with the Absolute 
in this nullification, and hence conceived and posited as mere appear-
ance. ·The split between the Absolute and the totality of limitations 
vanishes. 
The intellect copies Reason's absolute positing and through the 
form [of absolute positing] it gives itself the semblance of Reason 
even though the posits are in themselves opposites, and hence finite. 
The semblance grows that much stronger when intellect transforms 
and fixes Reason's negating activity [as distinct from its positing ac-
tivity J into a product. The infinite, insofar as it gets opposed to the 
finite, is a thing of this kind, i.e., it is something rational as posited 
by the intellect. Taken by itself, as something rational, it merely ex-
presses the negating of the finite. By fixing it, the intellect sets it up 
in absolute opposition to the finite; and reflection which had risen to 
the plane of Reason when it suspended the finite, now lowers itself 
again to being intellect because it has fixed Reason's activity into [an 
activity of] opposition. Moreover, reflection still pretends to be ra-
tional even in its relapse. 
The cultures of various times have established opposites of this 
kind, which were supposed to be products of Reason and absolutes, 
in various ways, and the intellect has labored over them as such. An-
titheses such as spirit and matter, soul and body, faith and intellect, 
freedom and necessity, etc. used to be important; and in more limited 
spheres they appeared in a variety of other guises. The whole weight 
of human interests hung upon them. With the progress of culture 
they have passed over into such forms as the antithesis of Reason and 
sensibility, intelligence and nature and, with respect to the universal 
concept, of absolute subjectivity and absolute objectivity. 
The sole interest of Reason is to suspend such rigid antitheses. But 
this does not mean that Reason is altogether opposed to opposition 
connections, I Enclzezreszs naturne the chemists baptize it I Mock themselves and 
don't realize it'' (Goethe's "Faust" [Garden City, NY. Doubleday, Anchor Boob, 
l9bl], p 199, lines 193b-4l) (We know that this passage impressed Hegel, and 
stuck in his mind For he quoted it, from memory, in his Berlin lectures on Logzc 
and again m his course on the Pl11losopl1y of Nature See Encyclopaedia, Section., 
38 Addn. and 246 Addn.) 

91 
Contemporary Philosophy 
and limitation. For the necessary dichotomy is One factor in life.9 Life 
eternally forms itself by setting up oppositions, ~nd totality at the 
highest pitch of living energy (in der hochsten Lebendigkeit) is only 
possible through its own re-establishment out of the deepest fission. 
[14] What Reason opposes, rather, is just the absolute fixity which 
the intellect gives to the dichotomy; and it does so all the more if the 
absolute opposites themselves originated in Reason. 
When the might of union vanishes from the life of men and the 
antitheses lose their living connection and reciprocity and gain inde-
pendence, the need of philosophy arises. From this point of view the 
need is contingent. But with respect to the given dichotomy the need 
is the necessary attempt_io suspend the rigidified opposition between 
subjectivity and objectivity; to comprehend the achieved existence 
(das Gewordensein) of the intellectual and real world as a becoming. 
Its being as a product must be comprehended as a producing. In the 
infinite activity of becoming and producing, Reason has united what 
was sundered and it has reduced the absolute dichotomy to a relative 
one, c.ne that is conditioned by the original identity. When, where 
and in what forms such self-reproductions of Reason occur as phil-
osophies is contingent. This contingency must be comprehended on 
the basis of the Absolute positing itself as an objective totality. The 
contingency is temporal insofar as the objectivity of the Absolute is 
intuited as a going forth in time. But insofar as it makes its appear-
ance as spatial compresence, the dichotomy is a matter of regional 
climate. In the form of fixed reflection, as a world of thinking and 
thought essence in antithesis to a world of actuality, this dichotomy 
falls into the Northwest. 10 
9. Hegel capitalized Ein. The "Other" factor is "union" or "identity" (with the 
Absolute) 
10. Als eine Welt von denkendem und gedachtem Wesen, in Gegensatz gegen 
eine Welt von Wirklichkeit fiillt diese Entzweiung in den westlichen Norden. The 
reference here is to Descartes. This is not quite as plain as the French translator, 
Mery, thinks (p. 175, note F), but it is rendered certain by what Hegel says about 
the Cartesian philosophy in the "Introduction" to the Critical Journal (which he 
drafted only a few months later)· "Against the Cartesian philosophy, which has 
expressed in philosophical form the all-encompassing dualism in the culture of 
the modern period in our northwestern world ... philosophy, like every aspect 
of living nature must seek means of salvation ... " (N.K.A. IV, 126). From the 
context of this latter passage it emerges clearly that Hegel regarded the Reforma-
tion as the religious expression, and the French Revolution as the political ex-
pression, of the dualism to which Descartes gave philosophical form. The "old 
life" of which these revolutions, together with the Cartesian philosophy were the 

92 
Difference 
As culture grows and spreads, and the development of those ~ut­
ward expressions of life into which dichotomy can entwine itselfbe-
comes more manifold, the power of dichotomy becomes greater, its 
regional sanctity is more firmly established and the strivings of life 
to give birth once more to its harmony become more meaningless, 
more alien to the cultural whole. Such few attempts as there have 
been on behalf of the cultural whole against more recent culture, like 
the more significant beautiful embodiments of far away or long ago, 
have only been able to arouse that modicum of attention whicp re-
mains possible when the more profound, serious connection of living 
art [to culture as a living whole] can no longer be understood. The 
entire system of relations constituting life has become detached from 
art, and thus the concept of art's all-embracing coherence has been 
lost, and transformed into the concept either of superstition or of en-
tertainment. The highest aesthetic perfection, as it evolves in a deter-
minate religion in which man lifts himself above all dichotomy and 
sees both the freedom of the subject and the necessity of the object 
vanish in the kingdom of grace, could only be energized up to a cer-
tain stage of culture, and within general or mob barbarism. As it [15] 
progressed, civilization has split away from it {i.e., this aesthetic re-
ligiou!i perfection], and juxtaposed it t6 itself or vice-versa. Because 
the intellect has grown sure of itself, both [intellect and the aesthetic 
religious perfection] have come to enjoy a measure of mutual peace 
by separating into realms that are completely set apart from one an-
other. What happens in one has no significance in the other. 
However, the intellect can also be directly attacked by Reason in 
its own realm. These attempts to nullify the dichotomy, and hence the 
absoluteness of intellect, through reflection itself are easier to under-
stand. Dichotomy felt itself attacked, and so turned with hate and 
fury against Reason, until the realm of the intellect rose to such pow-
er that it could regard itself as secure from Reason. -But just as we 
often say of virtue that the greatest witness for its reality is the sem-
blance that hypocrisy borrows from it, so intellect cannot keep Rea-
son off. It seeks to protect itself against the feeling of its inner empti-
downfall, was that of Roman Catholic feudalism. But Christian culture was in-
fected with this dualism from the beginning. The new life of which the "saved" 
philosophy (of Identity) will be the scientific expression must unite the North 
Western pole of dualism with the South-Eastern pole of "Union" found in classi-
cal Greece "far away and long ago." Hegel and Schelling presumably regarded 
their native Swabia as the geographical "point of indifference" on this axis. 

93 
Contemporary Philosophy 
ness, and from the secret fear that plagues anything limited, by 
whitewashing its particularities with a semblance of Reason. The con-
tempt for Reason shows itself most strongly, not in Reason's being 
freely scorned and abused, but by the boasting of the limited that it 
has mastered philosophy and lives in amity with it. Philosophy must 
refuse friendship with these false attempts that boast insincerely of 
having nullified the particularities, but which issue from limitation, 
and use philosophy as a means to save and secure these limitations. 
In the struggle of the intellect with Reason the intellect has strength 
only to the degree that Reason forsakes itself. Its success in the strug-
gle therefore depends upon Reason itself, and upon the authenticity 
of the need for the reconstitution of totality, the need from which 
Reason emerges. 
The need of philosophy c~n be called the presupposition of philoso-
phy if philosophy, which begins with itself, has to be furnished with 
some sort of vestibule; and there has been much talk nowadays about 
an absolute presupposition.11 
What is called the presupposition of 
philosophy is nothing else but the need that has come to utterance. 
Once uttered, the need is posited for reflection, so that {because of 
the very nature of reflection J th·ere must be two presuppositions. 
One is the Absolute itself. It is the goal that is being sought; but it 
is already present, or how otherwise could it be sought?12 Reason pro-
duces it, merely by freeing consciousness from its limitations. This 
suspension of the limitations is conditioned by the presupposed un-
limitedness. 
The other presupposition may be taken to be that consciousness 
has stepped out of the totality, that is, it may be taken to be the split 
into being and not-being, concept and being, finitude and infinity. 
From the standpoint of the dichotomy, the absolute synthesis is a be-
yond, it is the undetermined and the shapeless as opposed [16] to the 
determinacies of the dichotomy. The Absolute is the night, and the 
light is younger than it; and the distinction between them, like the 
emergence of the light out of the night, is an absolute difference-the 
nothing is the first out of which all being, all the mainfoldness of the 
finite has emerged. B_u_t the task of philosophy consists in uniting 
these presuppositions: to posit being in non-being, as becoming; to 
11. Hegel is principally thinking of Reinhold with his "founding and ground-
ing" and his "arch-truth" (compare pp. 179-86 below). 
12. There may perhaps be an echo of Pascal here: "Tu ne me chercherais pas, 
si tu ne m'avais trouve" (Pensees, VII, 553). 

94 
Difference 
posit dichotomy in the Absolute, as its appearance; to posit the finite 
in the infinite, as life. 
Still, it is clumsy to express the need of philosophy as a presupposi-
tion of philosophy, for the need acquires in this way a reflective form. 
This reflective form appears as contradictory propositions, which we 
shall discuss below _13 One may require of propositions that they be 
justified. But the justification of these propositions as presuppositions 
is still not supposed to be philosophy itself, so that the founding and 
grounding gets going before, and outside of, philosophy. 
REFLECTION AS INSTRUMENT OF PHILOSOPHIZING 
The form that the need of philosophy would assume, if it were to be 
expressed as a presupposition, allows for a transition from the need 
of philosophy to the instrument of philosophizing, to reflection as 
Reason. The task of philosophy is to construct the Absolute for con-
sciousness. But since the productive activity of reflection is, like its 
products, mere limitation, this task involves a contradiction. The .Ab-
solute is to be posited in reflection. But then it is not posited, but can-
celled; for in having been posited it was limited [by its opposite]. 
Philosophical reflection is the mediation of this contradiction. What 
must be shown above all is how far reflection is capable of grasping 
the Absolute, and how far in its speculative activity it carries with it 
the necessity and possibility of being synthesized with absolute intui-
tion. To what extent can reflection be as complete for itself, subjec-
tively, as its product must be, which is constructed in consciousness 
as the Absolute that is both conscious and non-conscious at the same 
time? 
Reflection in isolation is the positing of opposites, and this would 
be a suspension of the Absolute, reflection being the faculty of being 
and limitation. But reflection [17] as Reason has connection with the 
Absolute, and it is Reason only because of this connection. In this 
respect, reflection nullifies itself and all being and everything limited, 
because it connects them with the Absolute. But at the same time the 
limited gains standing precisely on account of its connection with the 
Absolute. 
Reason presents itself as the force of the negative Absolute, and 
13 See pp 103-9 

95 
Contemporary Philosophy 
hence as a negating that is absolute; and at the same time, it presents 
itself as the force that posits the opposed objective and subjective to-
tality. Reason raises the intellect above itself, driving it toward a 
whole of the intellect's own kind. 14 Reason seduces the intellect into 
producing an objective totality. Every being, because it is posited, is 
an opposite, it is conditioned and conditioning. The intellect completes 
these its limitations by positing the opposite limitations as condi-
tions. These need to be completed in the same way, so the intellect's 
task expands ad infinitum. In all this, reflection appears to be merely 
intellect, but this guidance toward the totality of necessity is the con-
tribution and secret efficacy of Reason. Reason makes the intellect 
boundless, and in this infinite wealth the intellect and its objective 
world meet their downfall. For every being that the intellect produces 
is something determinate, and the determinate has an indeterminate 
before it and after it. The manifoldness of being lies between two 
nights, without support. It rests on nothing-for the indeterminate is 
nothing to the intellect-and it ends in nothing. The determinate and 
the indeterminate, finitude and the infinite that is to be given up for_ 
lost, 15 are not united. The intellect stubbornly allows them to subsist 
side by side in their opposition. And stubbornly it holds fast to being 
as against not-being; yet being and not-being are equally necessary to 
it. The intellect essentially aims at thoroughgoing determination. But 
what is determinate for it is at once bounded by an indeterminate. 
Thus its positings and determinings never accomplish the task; in the 
very positing and determining that have occurred there lies a non-
positing and something indeterminate, and hence the task of positing 
and determining recurs perpetually. 
If the intellect fixes these opposites, the finite and the infinite, so 
that both are supposed to subsist together as opposed to each other, 
then it destroys itself. For the opposition of finite and infinite means 
that to posit the one is to cancel the other. When Reason recognizes 
this, it has suspended the intellect itself., Its positing then appears to 
14. We have omitted the einmal at the beginning of this sentence, because 
Hegel seems to have forgotten it himself. But it should be noticed that in the 
present paragraph Hegel seeks to show that "Reason makes the intellect bound-
less," and in the next that "Reason suspends itself." 
lS. Aufgegeben may means either "given up" or "set as task." It is likely that 
Hegel is employing it in both meanings here. To the intellect, totality is some-
thing that is only present as infinite regress (or progress). Hence the totality is 
for it a task that is for ever set anew. But this "bad·'' concept of the infinite is 
the same as "giving it up" altogether. 

96 
Difference 
Reason to be non-positing, its products to be negations. If Reason is 
placed in opposition to the objective infinite, this nullification of the 
intellect or Reason's pure positing without oppositing is subjective in-
finity: the realm of freedom as opposed to the objective world. But in 
this form, the realm of freedom is itself something opposite and con-
ditioned. In order to suspend opposition absolutely, Reason must also 
[18] nullify the independence of this realm. It nullifies both of the 
opposed realms by uniting them; for they only are in virtue of their 
not being united. Within the union, however, they subsist together; 
for what is opposite and therefore limited is, in this union, connected 
with the Absolute. But it does not have standing on its own account, 
but only insofar as it is posited in the Absolute, that is, as identity. 
The limited is either necessary or free, according to whether it be-
longs to one or the other of the mutually opposed and therefore rela-
tive totalities. Insofar as the limited belongs to the synthesis of both 
totalities, its limitation ceases: it is free and necessary at the same 
time, conscious and nonconscious. This conscious identity of the finite 
and infinite, the union of both worlds, the sensuous and the intelli-
gible, the necessary and the free, in consciousness, is knowledge. Re-
flection, the faculty of the finite, and the infinite opposed to it are 
synthesized in Reason whose infinity embraces the finite within it. 
So far as reflection makes itself its own object, its supreme law, 
given to it by Reason and moving it to become Reason, is to nullify 
itself. Like everything else, reflection has standing only in the Abso-
lute; but as reflection it stands in opposition to it. In order to gain 
standing, therefore, reflection must give itself the law of self-destruc-
tion. The immanent law, the law through which reflection by its own 
power' would constitute itself as absolute, would be the law of contra-
diction: namely that, being posited, reflection shall be and remain 
posited. Reflection would thus fix its products as absolutely opposed 
to the Absolute. It would have as its eternal law to remain intellect 
and not to become Reason and to hold fast to its own work, which, as 
limited, is opposed to the Absolute and as opposed to the Absolute, is 
nothing. 
When placed in an opposition, Reason operates as intellect and its 
infinity becomes subjective. Similarly, the form which expresses the 
activity of reflecting as an activity of thinking, is capable of this very 
same ambiguity and misuse. Thinking is the absolute activity of Rea-
son itself and there simply cannot be anything opposite to it. But if it 
is not so posited, if it is taken to be nothing but reflection of a purer 
kind, that is, a reflection in which one merely abstracts from the op-

97 
Contemporary Philosophy 
position, then thinking of this abstracting kind cannot advance be-
yond the intellect, not even to a Logic supposed capable of compre-
hending Reason within itself, still less to philosophy. Reinhold sets up 
identity as "the essence or inward character of thinking as such": 
"the infinite repeatability of one and the same as one and the same, 
in and through one and the same."16 One might be tempted by this 
semblance of identity into regarding this thinking as Reason. But be-
cause this thinking has its antithesis (a) in an application of thinking 
and (b) in absolute materiality (Stoffheit),17 it is clear that this is not 
the absolute identity, the identity of subject and object which sus-
pends both in their opposition and grasps them within itself, but a 
pure identity, that is, an identity [19] originating through abstraction 
and conditioned by opposition, the abstract intellectual concept of 
unity, one of a pair of fixed opposites. 
Reinhold sees the fault of all past philosophy in "the habit, so 
deeply rooted and widespread among contemporary philosophers, of 
regarding thinking both in general and in its application as something 
merely subjective."18 If Reinhold were truly serious about the identity 
~nd non-subjectivity of this thinking, he could not make any distinc-
tion between thinking and its application. If thinking is true identity, 
and not something subjective, where could this application that is so 
distinct from it come from, let alone the stuff that is postulated for 
the sake of the application? To the analytic method an activity must 
appear to be synthetic precisely because it is to be analysed. The ele-
ments that originate in the analysis are unity and a manifold opposed 
to it. What analysis presents as unity is called subjective; and think-
ing is characterized as a unity of this sort opposed to the manifold, 
that is, it is an abstract identity. In this way thinking has become 
something purely limited, and its activity is an application [of the 
identity] to some independently extant material, an application which 
conforms to a law and is directed by a rule, but which cannot pierce 
through to knowledge. 
<;.... 
Only so far as reflection has connection with the Absolute is it 
Reason and its deed a knowing. Through this connection with the 
Absolute, however, reflection's work passes away; only the connec-
tion persists, and it is the sole reality of the cognition. There is there-
fore no truth in isolated reflection, in pure thinking, save the truth of 
16. Beytn:ige I, 106 
17. Compare ib1d., pp. 108-12. 
18 Ibid, p 96 

98 
Difference 
its nullification. But because in philosophizing the Absolute gets pro-
duced by reflection for consciousness, it becomes thereby an objective 
totality, a whole of knowledge, an organization of cognitions. Within 
this organization, every part is at the same time the whole; for its 
standing is its connection with the Absolute. As a part that has other 
parts outside of it, it is something limited, and is only through the 
others. Isolated in its limitation the part is defective; meaning and 
significance it has solely through its coherence with the whole. Hence 
single concepts by themselves and singular cognitions (Erkenntnisse) 
must not be called knowledge. There can be plenty of singular empir-
ical known items (Kenntnisse). 19 As known from experience they ex-
hibit their justification in experience, that is, in the identity of concept 
and being, of subject and object. Precisely for this reason, they are 
not scientific knowledge: they find their justification only in a limited, 
relative identity. They do not justify themselves as necessary parts of 
a totality of cognitions organized in consciousness, nor has specula-
tion recognized the absolute identity in them, i.e., their connection 
with the Absolute. 
R E L A T I 0 N 
0 F 
S P E C U L A T I 0 N 
T 0 
C 0 M M 0 N S E N S E 20 
What the so-called common sense takes to be the rational, consists 
similarly of single items drawn out of the Absolute into consciousness. 
19. The "singular empirical known items" would here include-and indeed 
largely consist of-generic classifications and laws or law-like statements. The 
"limited, relative identity" in which they find their JUstification would be a basic 
assumption or general explanatory hypothesis of some kind 
20. De1· geszmde Menschenverstand is very much what "common sense" is in 
English (and "le bon sens" in French). We have therefore followed the general 
practice of Hegel translators in rendering it thus. However, in its Hegelian con-
text the German phrase has two advantages over its English and French counter-
parts. It carries in its "Menschen Verstand" an opposition to the divine intellect, 
and in its "Menschen Verstand" an opposition to Vermmft. These contrasts are 
lost in "common sense" and "bon sens." They could only be preserved by a lit-
eral rendering ("healthy human intellect") which would mislead the reader be-
cause of its seemingly technical character. Hegel's attitude to the boasted "sound-
ness" or "health" of "common sense" when it is exploited in support of a philo-
sophical position is highly ironic. For this reason, although he has nothing 
against "common sense" in its proper sphere (the making of practical decisions 
in ordinarv hfe) he sometimes switches from the honorific "gesunde Menschen-
verstand" .to "gemeine Menschenverstand" which has a slightly pejorative ring 

99 
Contemporary Philosophy 
They are points of light that rise out of the night of totality and aid 
men to get through life in an intelligent way. They serve as correct 
standpoints from which one takes off and to which one returns. 
In fact, however, men only have this confidence in the truth of 
these points of light because they have a feeling of the Absolute at-
tending these points; and it is this feeling alone that gives them their 
significance. As soon as one takes these truths of common sense by 
themselves and isolates them as cognitions of the intellect, they look 
odd and turn into half-truths. Reflection can confound common sense. 
When common sense permits itself to reflect, the proposition it states 
for the benefit of reflection claims to be by itself knowledge and valid 
cognition. Thus sound sense has given up its strength, the strength of 
supporting its pronouncements and counteracting unsteady reflection 
solely by the obscure totality which is present as feeling. Although 
common sense expresses itself for reflection, its dicta do not contain 
the consciousness of their connection with the absolute totality. The 
totality remains inward and unexpressed. 
For this reason, speculation understands sound intellect well enough, 
but the sound intellect cannot understand what speculation is doing. 
Speculation acknowledges as the reality of cognition only the being of 
cognition in the totality. For speculation everything determinate has 
reality and truth only in the cognition of its connection with the Ab-
solute. So it recognizes the Absolute in what lies at the basis of the 
pronouncements of sound sense too. But since, for speculation, cogni-
tion has reality only within the Absolute, what is cognized and known 
in the reflective mode of expression and therefore has a determinate 
form, becomes nothing in the presence of speculation. The relative 
identities of common sense which pretend to absoluteness in the lim-
ited form in which they appear, become contingencies for philosophi-
cal reflection. Common sense cannot grasp how what has immediate 
certainty for it, can at the same time be nothing to philosophy. For in 
its immediate truths it only feels their connection with the Absolute, 
and it does not separate this Feeling from their appearance, wherein 
they are limitations, and yet they are supposed as such to have stand-
ing and absolute being. But in the face of speculation they vanish. 
Common sense cannot understand speculation; and what is more, it 
must come to hate speculation when it has experience of it; and, un-
Where he does this, we have used "ordinary common sense." We have also used 
"sound sense" and "sound intellect" occasionally-to remind the reader of 
gesund. 

100 
Difference 
less if is in the state of perfect indifference that security confers, it is 
bound to detest and persecute it.21 For common sense, the essential 
and the contingent in its utterances are identical and this identity is 
absolute; and, just as it cannot separate the limits of appearance from 
the Absolute, so what it does separate in its consciousness, becomes 
absolutely opposed, and what it cognizes as limited it cannot in con-
sciousness unite with the unlimited. Limited and unlimited are, to be 
sure, identical for common sense, but this identity is and remains 
something internal, a feeling, something unknown and unexpressed. 
Whenever it calls the limited to mind, and the limited is raised into 
consciousness, the unlimited is for consciousness absolutely opposed 
to the limited. 
In this relation or connection of the limited with the Absolute there 
is consciousness of their opposition only; there is no consciousness at 
all of their identity. This_ relation is called faith. 22 Faith does not ex-
press the synthesis inherent in feeling or intuition. It is, rather, a re-
lation of reflection to the Absolute, and one in which reflection is cer-
tainly Reason. But though it nullifies itself as something that sunders 
and is sundered, and also nullifies its product too-an individual con-
sciousness-it still preserves the form of sundering. The immediate 
certitude of faith, which has been much talked of as the ultim,ate and 
highest consciousness, is nothing but the identity itself, Reason, 
which, however does not recognize itself, and is accompanied by the 
consciousness of opposition. Speculation, however, lifts the identity 
of which sound sense is not conscious into consciousness. In other 
words, speculation constructs consciou~ identity out of what, in the 
consciousness of the ordinary intellect, ~re necessarily opposites; and 
this. synthesis of what is sundered in faith is an abomination to faith. 
In fis consciousness the holy and the divine only have standing as ob-
t 
21. Speculative philosophers had, of course, hosts of critics who attacked spec-
ulation in the name of common sense. Among the so-called Popular Philosophers 
of the Enlightenment F. Nicolai (1733-1811) comes to mind, and among the fol-
lowers of Kant and Fichte perhaps W. T. Krug (1770-1842). It is more probable, 
though, that Hegel's reference, if it is to any particular person or event at all, is 
to the Atheismusstreit through which Fichte had lost his chair at Jena in 1799. 
22. Just as, in the preceding page~, the target of Hegel's attack is not so much 
common sense as the role that certain philosophers give to it, so here he is not 
so much arguing against faith as such, as against certain philosophic conceptions 
of faith. He is probably thinking mainly of Jacobi, but Kant, Fichte and Schleier-
macher-besides a host of lesser figures-may be in his mind too. Compare Faith 
and Knowledge, passim. 

101 
Contemporary Philosophy 
jects. So the healthy intellect sees only destruction of the divine in the 
suspended opposition, in the identity brought into consciousness. 
In particular, ordinary common sense is bound to see nothing but 
nullification in those philosophical systems that satisfy the demand 
for conscious identity by suspending dichotomy in such a way that 
one of the opposites is raised to be the absolute and the other nulli-
fied. This is particularly offensive if the culture of the time has already 
fixed one of the opposites otherwise. Speculation, as philosophy, has 
here indeed suspended the opposition, but speculation, as system, has 
elevated something which in its ordinary familiar form is limited, to 
absolute status. The only aspect here relevant is the speculative, and 
this is simply not present for ordinary common sense. Viewed from 
this speculative aspect, the limited is something totally different from 
what it appears to ordinary common sense; [22] having been elevated 
into being the Absolute, it is no longer the limited thing that it was. 
The matter of the materialist is no longer inert matter which has life 
as its opposite and its formative agent; the Ego of the idealist is no 
longer an empirical consciousness which, as limited, must posit an in-
finite outside itself. The question that philosophy has to raise is 
whether the system has truly purified all finitude out of the finite ap-
pearance that it has advanced to absolute status; or whether specula-
tion, even at its furthest distance from ordinary common sense with 
its typical fixation of opposites, has not still succumbed to the fate of 
its time, the fate of positing absolutely one form of the Absolute, that 
is, something that is essentially an opposite. But even where specula-
tion has actually succeeded in freeing from all forms of appearance 
~which 
it has made infinite, ordinary common sense primarily 
takes offense over the name though it may take no other notice of the 
business of speculation. Speculation does indeed elevate finite things-
matter, the Ego-to the infinite and thus nullifies them: matter and 
Ego so far as they are meant to embrace totality, are no longer matter 
and Ego. Yet the final act of philosophical reflection is still lacking: 
that is to say, the consciousness of the nullification of these finite 
things. And even though .thgAbsolute within the system has still pre-
served a determinate form, in spite of the fact that this nullification 
has actually been accomplished, still the genuinely speculative ten-
dency is unmistakable anyway. But ordinary common sense under-
stands nothing about it, and does not even see the philosophic prin-
ciple of suspending the dichotomy. It only sees the systematic prin-
ciple by which one of the opposites is raised to the Absolute and the 
other nullified. So it has an advantage over the system with respect to 

102 
Difference 
the dichotomy. For there is an absolute opposition present in both of 
them. But in ordinary common sense there is completeness of opposi-
tion [whereas the system makes one of the opposites explicitly abso-
lute]; and hence common sense is enraged on two counts. 
Nevertheless, apart from its philosophical side, there accrues to a 
philosophical system of this kind, encumbered as it is with the defect 
of raising to the Absolute something that is still in some respect an 
opposite, another advantage and a further merit, which are not only 
incomprehensible but must be abhorrent to the ordinary intellect. The 
advantage is that by raising something finite to an infinite principle, 
the system has struck down with one stroke the whole mass of fini-
tudes that adhere to the opposite principle. And the merit with regard 
to culture consists in having made the dichotomy that much more 
rigid and hence strengthened the urge toward unification in totality 
in the same measure. 
Common sense is stubborn; it stubbornly believes itself secure in 
the force of its inertia, believes the non-conscious secure in its primor-
dial gravity and opposition to [23] consciousness; belie~t: !}lf,~te,r, se-
cure against the difference that light brings into it just iD or<Mr t'o. re-
construct the difference into a new synthesis at a higher level. In 
northern climates this stubborness perhaps requires a longer period of 
time to be so far conquered that the atomic matter itself has become 
more diversified, and inertia has first been set in motion on its own 
ground by a greater variety of their combination and dissolution23 
and next by the multitude of fixed atoms thus generated. Thus the 
human intellect becomes more and more confused in its own proper 
doings and knowings, to the point where it makes itself capable of 
enduring the suspension of this confusion and the opposition itself.24 
The only aspect of speculation visible to common sense is its nulli-
23. Kombinieren und zersetzen derselben. The reference of derselben is gram-
matically unclear: it may be either to "inertia" or to "atomic matter"; but the 
context is in favor of "atomic matter." 
24. This paragraph relates the overcoming of "common sense" theories-and 
all forms of what Hegel and Schelling called Unphilosophie-by speculative 
idealism to the similar overcoming of Newtonian physics by Schelling (and his 
friends and followers) in the new "philosophy of Nature" for which the Journal 
of Speculative Physics was the official organ. It is not clear whether the analogy 
is meant simply as a metaphor, or whether a strict Spinozist parallel is intended. 
It is hard to believe that the paragraph is more than a metaphor, however, be-
cause a literal interpretation would seem to commit Hegel to an atomistic theory 
of mind. But the real thrust of the paragraph is precisely that we have to over-
come our atomistic notions about matter. 

103 
Contemporary Philosophy 
fying activity; and even this nullification is not visible in its entire 
scope. If common sense could grasp this scope, it would not believe 
speculation to be its enemy. For in its highest synthesis of the con-
scious and the non-conscious, speculation also demands the nullifica-
tion of consciousness itself. Reason thus drowns itself and its knowl-
edge and its reflection of the absolute identity, in its own abyss: and 
in this night of mere reflection and of the calculating intellect, in this 
night which is the noonday of life, common sense and speculation can 
meet one another. 
PRINCIPLE OF A PHILOSOPHY IN THE FORM OF AN 
ABSOLUTE BASIC PROPOSITION 
Philosophy, as a totality of knowledge produced by reflection, becomes 
a system, that is, an organic whole of concepts, whose highest law is 
not the intellect, but Reason. The intellect has to exhibit correctly the 
opposites of what it has posited, as well as its bounds, ground and 
condition. Reason, on the other hand, unites these contradictories, 
posits both together and suspends them both. One might demand that 
the system as an organization of propositions should present the Ab-
solute which lies at the basis of reflection in the fashion of reflection, 
that is, as the highest, or absolutely fundamental proposition. But 
such a demand at once entails its own nullity. For a proposition, as 
something posited by reflection, is something limited and conditioned 
on its own account. It requires another proposition as its foundation, 
and so on ad infinitum. Suppose that the Absolute is expressed in a 
fundamental proposition, validated by and for thinking, a proposition 
whose form and matter are the same. Then either mere sameness is 
posited, and the inequality of form and matter is excluded, so that the 
fundamental proposition is conditioned by this inequality.25 In this 
25. These and similar passages may perhaps be more easily understood by LOn-
necting them with Kant's distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments, 
a distinction which in Hegel's terms is typical of the reflective philosophy of the 
intellect and must be overcome in the speculative philosophy of Reason. The 
connection is by way of conceptual transformations which need not be actual 
historical steps. 
The first set of transformations concerns the copula "is." The judgment "5 is 
P" is taken to mean "5 equals P." And "5 equals P" is further taken to mean the 
same as "5 is identical with P." Next, the identity relation is taken to be the 

104 
Difference 
case the fundamental [24] proposition is not absolute but defective; it 
expresses only a concept of the intellect, an abstraction. Or else the 
fundamental proposition also contains both form and matter as in-
equality, so that it is analytic and synthetic simultaneously. In that 
case the fundamental proposition is an antinomy, and therefore not a 
proposition. As a proposition it is subject to the law of the intellect, 
the law that it must not contradict itself, that it cannot suspend itself, 
form of the judgment while "S" and "P" are symbols for the matter (material, 
content, stuff) of the judgment. 
The second set of transformations concerns the grammatical categories of sub-
ject and predicate. Paradigmatically, 5 is always taken to be a particular being 
and P a general concept or thought. So the first step is to replace the grammati-
cal categories of subject and predicate by the ontological categories of being and 
thought. These, in turn, are tied to the epistemological categories of object and 
subject. Particular beings are objects; concepts or thoughts pertain to the subject. 
Finally, matter and form enter once more; for thought gives the form, and being 
gives the matter of the judgment. 
If we take these two sets of transformations together, "5 is P" becomes the ex-
pression of the identity of being and thought, of object and subject, of matter 
and form. But this is awkward. Within the idealistic current, the identity should 
be expressed as identity of thought and being and not of being and thought; of 
subject and object and not of object and subject; of form and matter and not of 
matter and form-just as, say, Queen Elizabeth would prefer to say that the 
Prime Minister is close to her rather than that she is close to the Prime Minister. 
Here, the equivocation of "subject" is a great help. The grammatical subject, 
whose correlate is the predicate, is allowed to swallow up the epistemological 
subject, whose correlate is the object; "5 is P" becomes "subject is identical with 
object" ("5=0"). In the wake of that transformation, all other identities are re-
versed. Thought is identical with being; form with matter. 
With these transformations as background, Hegel's treatment of the formulas 
"A=A" and "A=B" becomes somewhat more intelligible. A radical change in 
the meaning of "analytic" and "synthetic" is involved. In the language of the in-
tellect any sentence is either analytic or synthetic. But in the language of specu-
lation, in which Reason expresses itself, a proposition must be both analytic and 
synthetic; for a speculative proposition asserts the identity of the opposites, that 
is, of thought and being, of subject and object, of form and matter. That they 
are opposites is the synthetic element; that they are posited as identical is the 
analytic element. To the intellect, which takes "A= A" and "A= B" in isolation 
from one another, "A=A" would be the analytic judgment and "A=B" the syn-
thetic judgment. The speculative elite, however, is aware of the intrinsic unity of 
what reflection separates into "A=A" and "A=B." Either "A=A" or "A=B" 
can function as the highest expression of Reason in the medium of intellect. 
Reason can see in either "A=A" or "A=B" the identity of what is antinomical 
to the intellect (although "A=B" is its more striking manifestation, to those at 
least who are only on their way from reflection to speculation, from intellect to 

105 
Contemporary Philosophy 
that it be something posited. As an antinomy, however, it does sus-
pend itself. 
It is a delusion that something merely posited for reflection must 
necessarily stand at the summit of a system as the highest or absolute 
and basic proposition; or that the essence of any system is expressible 
as a proposition that has absolute validity for thinking. This delu-
sion makes the business of judging a system easy. For of any thdught 
expressed by a proposition it can be shown very easily that it is con-
ditioned by an opposite and therefore is not absolute: and _one proves 
for this opposite that it must be posited, hence that the thought ex-
pressed by the fundamental proposition is a nullity. The delusion ac-
counts itself all the more justified if the system itself expresses the 
Absolute which is its principle, in the form of a proposition or defini-
tion which is basically an antinomy, and for this reason suspends it-
self as something posited for mere reflection. For example, Spinoza' s 
concept of substance, defined as both cause and effect, concept and 
being, ceases to be a concept because the opposites are united in a 
contradiction. 
No philosophical beginning could look worse than to begin with a 
definition as Spinoza does. This offers the starkest contrast to 'found-
ing and grounding/ or the 'deduction of the principles of knowledge/ 
or the laborious reduction of all philosophy to the 'highest facts of 
consciousness/ etc.26 But when Reason has purified itself of the sub-
jectivity of reflection, then Spinoza's artlessness which makes philoso-
Reason.) "A= A" obviously affirms identity; yet it acknowledges difference by 
placing "A" in the opposite roles of subject and predicate (which, according to 
the transformation rules, stand for thought and being). And "A=B" obviously 
affirms difference by placing different symbols in the opposite roles of subject 
and predicate, yet acknowledges their identity by "=". Thus both "A=A" and 
"A= B" are analytic and synthetic at once. That is to say, they express in the 
language of reflection the identity of thought and being, subject and object, form 
and matter. Not only is Kant's distinction between analytic and synthetic "an-
nulled/' it is turned from a logical weapon against metaphysics into the heart-
beat of metaphysics as speculation. Cf. pp. 109, 118 below. 
26. "Founding and grounding" is Reinhold's special trademark: compare p. 88 
above, and pp. 179-81 below. The other catchwords remind us first of Kant and 
of Fichte respectively. But probably Reinhold is the principal target of Hegel's 
irony throughout, since he first came to prominence as a disciple of Kant, and 
he had been an enthusiast for the new "science of knowledge" in its turn. He 
continued to use the vocabulary of both~ In any case Hegel is certainly thinking 
of the contemporary epigones of the different "schools" of Critical Philosophy 
rather than of Kant and Fichte. 

106 
Difference 
phy begin with philosophy itself, and Reason come forward at once 
with an antinomy, can be properly appreciated too. 
If the principle of philosophy is to be stated in formal propositions 
for reflection, the only thing that is present, at the outset, as the ob-
ject of this task is knowledge, i.e., in general terms the synthesis of 
the subjective and objective, or absolute thinking. But reflection can-
not express the absolute synthesis in one proposition, if this proposi-
tion has to be valid as a proper proposition for the intellect. Reflection 
must separate what is one in the absolute Identity; it must express 
synthesis and antithesis separately, in two propositions, one contain-
ing the identity, the other dichotomy. 
In A = A, as principle of identity, it is connectedness that is re-
flected on, and in this connecting, this being one, the equality, is con-
tained in this pure identity; [25] reflection abstracts from all inequal-
ity. A= A, the expression of absolute thought or Reason, has only 
one meaning for the formal reflection that expresses itself in the prop-
ositions of the inteUect. This is the meaning of pure unity as conceived 
by the intellect, or in other words a unity in abstraction from opposi-
tion. 
Reason, however, does not find itself expressed in this onesidedness 
of abstract unity. It postulates also the positing of what in the pure 
equality had been abstracted from, the positing of the opposite, of in-
equality. One A is subject, the other object; and the expression of 
their difference is A =I= A, or A= B. This proposition directly contra-
dicts the first. It abstracts from pure identity and posits the non-iden-
tity, the pure form of non-thinking,27 just as the first proposition is 
the form of pure thinking, which is not the same thing as absolute 
thinking, or Reason. Only because non-thinking too, is thought, only 
because A =,t' A is posited through thinking, can it be posited at all.28 
In A =I= A, or A= B there also is the identity, the connection, the"=" 
of the first proposition, but it is here only subjective, that is, only in-
sofar as non-thinking is posited by thinking. But if non-thinking is 
posited for thinking this is entirely incidental to the non-thinking, it 
is a mere form for the second proposition. One must abstract from 
this form in order to have its matter pure. 
27. See Reinhold, Beytriige I, 111 
28. Kann er iiberhaupt gesetzt werden. The most immediate and natural ante-
cedent for er is "[der Satz] A nicht = A." But the alert reader will soon notice 
that Hegel may very possibly mean "der erste Satz" (i.e., "A = A" or "the 
form of pure thinking"). 

107 
Contemporary Philosophy 
This second proposition is as unconditioned as the first and qua 
unconditioned it is condition of the first, as the first is condition of 
the second. The first is conditioned by the second in that it is what 
it is through abstraction from the inequality that the second proposi-
tion contains; the second conditioned by the first, in that it is in need 
of a connection in order to be a proposition. 
The second proposition has also been stated in the subordinate 
form of the principle of sufficient reason. Or rather, it was first 
brought down to this extremely subordinate meaning when it was 
turned into the principle of causality. A has a ground means: to A 
pertains an existhoce,: tha.J;.. i~ not an 'Jf' istelce of A: A is a being pos-
,, t/11 
'111 '/ti'l ,, , xr" dl"MJ rr~, , ,!;/tiL: 7 ' 11 
ited that is not t e beu~g poSi ea of' . t1~ ce, A =!= A, A = B. If one 
abstracts from A's being something posited, as one must in order to 
have the second proposition in its purity, it expresses A's not being 
posited. To posit A as something posited and also as something not 
posited is already the synthesis of the first and second proposition. 
Both propositions are principles of contradiction, but in an inverse 
sense. The first, the principle of identity, states that contradiction is 
= 0. The second proposition, insofar as one relates it to the Hrst, 
states that contradiction is as necessary as non-contradiction. Taken 
separately (fur sich) both propositions are posits on the same level. 
[But] if the [26] second one is so stated that the first proposition is 
connected with it at the same time, then it is the highest possible ex-
pression of Reason by the intellect. This connection of the two prop-
ositions expresses the antinomy; and as an antinomy, as an expression 
of the absolute identity, it makes no difference whether we posit A = 
A or A = B as long as each of them, A = B and A = A, is taken as 
connection of both propositions. A = A contains the difference of A 
as subject and A as object together with their identity, just as A = B 
contains the identity of A and B together with their difference. 
The intellect has not grown into Reason if it does not recognize the 
antinomy in the principle of sufficient reason which is a connection of 
both propositions. In that case the second proposition is not, formali-
ter, a new one for it: for the mere intellect A= B does not say more 
than the first proposition and consequently it conceives A's being 
posited as B only as a repetition of A. That is to say, the intellect just 
holds fast to the identity and abstracts from the fact that when A is 
repeated as B or as posited in B, something else, a non-A, is posited 
and posited as A, hence, A is posited as non-A. If one reflects only on 
the formal aspect of speculation and holds fast to the synthesis of 

108 
Difference 
knowledge [only] in analytic form, then antinomy, that is, the contra-
diction that cancels itself, is the highest formal expression of knowl-
edge and truth. 
Once antinomy is acknowledged as the explicit formula of truth, 
Reason has brought the formal essence of reflection under its control. 
The formal essence still has the upper hand, however, if thought, 
[conceived merely] in its character of abstract unity, i.e., exclusively 
in the form of the first proposition as opposed to the second, is pos-
ited as the first t~;uth of philosophy, and a system of the reality of 
cognition is supposed to be erected by analysis of the application of 
thinking.29 In that case, the entire course of this purely analytic busi-
ness will be as follows: 
Thought, as infinite repeatability of A as A, is an abstraction, the 
first proposition expressed as activity. But now the second proposition 
is lacking, the non-thought. There must necessarily be a transition to 
it as the condition of the first; it, too, i.e., the matter, must be posited. 
Then the opposites will be complete; the transition from the first to 
the second is a certain kind of reciprocal connection between them, 
which is a very inadequate synthesis called an application of thought.30 
But even this weak synthesis goes counter to the presupposition that 
thought is a positing of A as A ad infinitum. For in the application, A 
is at the same time posited as non-A; and thought, in its absolute 
standing as infinite repetition of A as A, is suspended. 
What is opposite to thought is, through its connection with thought, 
determined as something thought = A. But such a thought, such a 
positing = A is conditioned by an abstraction and is hence something 
opposite. Hence, that which is thought, besides the fact that it [27] 
has been thought = A, has still other determinations = B, entirely 
independent of being merely determined [as something thought] by 
pure thought. These other determinations are brute data for thought. 
Hence for thought as the principle of the analytic way of philosophiz-
ing, there must be an absolute stuff. We shall discuss this further be-
low.31 With this absolute opposition as foundation the formal pro-
gramme, in which the famous discovery that philosophy must be re-
duced to logic32 consists, is allowed no immanent synthesis save that 
29. This paragraph is definitely aimed at Reinhold and Bardili. In the previous 
paragraph Hegel may have Jacobi in mind (as well). 
30. See Reinhold; Beytrage, No. I, pp. 100 ff. (especially p. 106 ff). Compare 
pp. 188-92 below. 
31. See pp. 188-9, 191-3, 194-7 below. 
32. Reinhold, Beytrage I, 98. 

109 
Contemporary Philosophy 
provided by the identity of the intellect, i.e., the repetition of A ad 
infinitum. But even for this repetition the identity needs some B, C, 
etc. in which the repeated A can be posited. In order for A to be re-
peatable, B, C, 0, etc. have to be [literally "are"] a manifold, in which 
each is opposed to the other. Each of them has particular determina-
tions not posited by A. That is to say, there exists an absolutely mani-
fold stuff. Its B, C, 0, etc. must fit in with A, as best it can.33 This 
fitting in without rhyme or reason takes the place of an original iden-
tity. The basic fault can be presented as follows. There is no reflec-
tion, in respect to form, on the antinomy of the A = A and A = B. 
This whole analytic approach lacks the basic consciousness that the 
purely formal appearance of the Absolute is contradiction. Such con-
sciousness can only come into being where speculation takes its point 
of departure in Reason and in the A = A as absolute identity of sub-
ject and object. 
TRANSCENDENTAL INTUITION 
When speculation is viewed from the standpoint of mere reflection, 
the absolute identity appears in 'syntheses of opposites, i.e., in antino-
mies. The relative identities into which absolute identity differentiates 
itself are limited to be sure; they belong to the intellect and are not 
antinomic. At the same time, however, since they are identities, they 
are not pure concepts of the intellect. And they must be identities be-
cause nothing can stand as posited in a philosophy unless it is con-
nected with the Absolute. But on the side of its connection with the 
Absolute, everything limited is a (relative) identity and hence some-
thing that is antinomic for reflection.-And this is the negative side 
of knowing, the formal aspect which, ruled34 by Reason, destroys it-
self. Besides this negative side knowing has a positive side, namely 
intuition. Pure knowing, which would be knowing without intuition, 
is the nullification of the opposites in contradiction. Intuition without 
33. The first edition printed "b, c, d, etc." here, but this seems to be just a 
typographical anomaly. Hegel emphasized "sich fugen" (fit in) because it is a 
technical term in Bardili's "reduction of philosophy to logic" (on which he is 
here commenting). Compare note 3 above and pp. 188, 190 below. 
34. T\le editors of the New Critical Edition suggest that regiert may be a mis-
print for negiert-but it need not be; for Hegel has explained above, how when 
the intellect becomes Reason, it gives itself the law of self-destruction. 

110 
Difference 
this synthesis of opposites, [on the other hand,] is empirical, given, 
non-conscious. Transcendental knowledge unites both reflection and 
intuition. It is at once concept and being. Because [28] intuition be-
comes transcendental, the identity of the subjective and objective, 
which are separated in empirical intuition, enters consciousness. 
Knowledge, insofar as it becomes transcendental, posits not merely 
the concept and its condition-or the antinomy of both, the subjec-
tive-but at the same time the objective, that is, being. 
In philosophical knowledge, what is intuited is an activity of both 
intelligence and nature,a3 of consciousness and the unconscious to-
gether. It belongs to both worlds at once, the ideal and the real. It be-
longs to the ideal world because it is posited in the intelligence and, 
hence, in freedom. It belongs to the real world because it gets its place 
in the objective totality, it is deduced as a link in the chain of neces-
sity. If we take up the standpoint of reflection or freedom, the ideal is 
the first, and essence and being are only schematized intelligence. If 
we take up the standpoint of necessity or being, thought is only a 
schema of absolute being. In transcendental knowledge both being 
and intelligence are united. Likewise, transcendental knowledge and 
transcendental intuition are one and the same. The variation of ex-
pression merely indicates the prevalence of the ideal or real factor. 
It is of the profoundest significance that it has been affirmed with 
so much seriousness that one cannot philosophize without transcen-
dental intuition.a6 For what would this be, philosophizing without in-
tuition? One would disperse oneself endlessly in absolute finitudes. 
Whether these finitudes are subjective concepts or objective things 
and even though one may pass from one to the other, philosophizing 
without intuition moves along an endless chain of finitudes, and the 
transition from being to concept or from concept to being is an unjus-
tified leap. Philosophizing of this sort is called formal. For thing as 
well as concept is, each taken by itself, just a form of the Absolute. 
Formal philosophizing presupposes destruction of the transcendental 
intuition, an absolute opposition of being and concept. If it talks of 
the unconditioned, it converts even that into something formal, say 
the form of an Idea that is opposed to Being for instance. The better 
35 For the systems of Nature and Intelligence see pp lD0-71 below 
36 This is affirmed by Fichte (e.g in the "Second Introduction to the Science 
of Knowledge," Werke I, 466-7, 472 [Heath and Lachs, pp. 41, 46]). The claim 
also recurs frequently (and even more explicitly) in Schelling See, for instance, 
his System of Trrmscendental ldealzsm, Introduction § 4 or the lectures of 1802, 
On Univets1ty Education ed. N Guterman, p 19 

111 
Contemporary Philosophy 
the method, the more glaring the results. To speculation, [on the con-
trary,] the finitudes are radii of the infinite focus which irradiates 
them at the same time that it is formed by them. In the radii the focus 
is posited and in the focus the radii. In the transcendental intuition all 
opposition is suspended, all distinction between the universe as con-
structed by and for the intelligence, and the universe as an organiza-
tion intuited as objective and appearing independent, is nullified. 
Speculation produces the consciousness of this identity, and because 
ideality and reality are one in it, it is intuition. 
POSTULATES OF REASON 
As a work of reflection the synthesis of the two opposites posited by 
reflection required its completion; as antinomy that suspends itself, it 
needs its standinga7 in intuition. Speculative knowledge has to be con-
ceived as identity of reflection and intuition. So if one posits only the 
share of reflection, which, as rational, is antinomic, but stands in a 
necessary connection with intuition, one can in that case say of intui-
tion that it is postulated by reflection. Postulating Ideas is out of the 
question; for Ideas are the products of Reason or rather, t.hey are the 
rational, posited as a product by the intellect.38 The rational must be 
deduced in its determinate content, that is, it must be deduced start-
ing from the contradiction of determinate opposites, the.rational being 
their synthesis.39 The only thing that can be postulated is the intuition 
that fills and sustains this antinomic aspect. This sort of 'Idea' that 
used to get postulated, is the 'infinite progress,' which is a mixture of 
empirical and rational elements: the intuition of time is empirical, 
37. lhr Beste hen: ihr may refer to "the synthesis," or (as Mery thinks) to "the 
two opposites," or again to "antinomy" (as we take it). 
38, The "postulation of Ideas" is first discussed in Kant's "Dialectic of Pure 
Practical Reason" (Akad, V, 107-48), The crucial comment by Fichte about the 
right of the Ego to "postulate absolutely" is his footnote in Werke I, 260 (Heath 
and Lachs, p 230). From Fichle's earlier use of the term (Werke I, 218; Heath 
and Lachs, p. 196) we can gather that he regarded the fundamental theoretical 
principle of his "science of knowledge": "The Ego posits itself as limited by the 
non-Ego" as a postulate. Hegel has both Kant's practical and Fichte's theoretical 
"postulates of Reason" in mind here, 
39. See especially Kant's "Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason," Akad. V, 112-
19; and Fichte, Werke I, 125-27 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 122-23). The whole pro-
cedure of the Science of Knowledge from this point onwards is here alluded to 

112 
Difference 
while the suspension of all time, its expansion to infinity (Verunend-
lichung) is rational. But in the empirical progress, time is not purely 
infinitized, for in this progress time is supposed to have standing as 
something finite, as limited moments. It is an empirical infinitude. The 
true antinomy which posits both the limited and unlimited, not just 
side by side but together as identicat must ipso facto suspend the op-
position. The antinomy postulates the determinate intuition of time, 
and this determinate intuition must be both the limited moment of 
the present and the unlimitedness of the moment's being self-exter-
nalized (Aussersichgesetztsein). That is to say, it must be eternity.-
It is equally impossible to postulate intuition as something that is 
opposed to the Idea or rather, to the necessary antinomy. The intui-
tion that is opposed to the Idea is a limited existent, precisely because 
it excludes the Idea. Intuition is indeed postulated by Reason, but not 
as something limited; it is postulated in order to complement the one-
sidedness of the work of reflection in such a way that the intuitive 
complement does not remain opposed to reflection but is one with it. 
In general one can see that this whole manner of postulating has its 
sole ground in the fact that the onesidedness of reflection is accepted 
as a starting point. This onesidedness requires, as the complement of 
its deficiency, the postulation of the opposite that is excluded from it. 
But this point of view places the essence of Reason in distorted per-
spective, for it here appears as something that is not self-sufficient but 
needy. When Reason recognizes itself as absolute, however, philoso-
phy begins where reflection and its style of thinking ends, that is, it 
begil).s with the identity of Idea and [30] Being. Philosophy does not 
havg)to postulate one of the opposites for in positing absoluteness it 
immediately posits both Idea and Being, and the absoluteness of Rea-
son is nothing else but the identity of both. 
RELATION OF PHILOSOPHIZING TO A 
PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 
The need of philosophy can satisfy itself by simply penetrating to the 
principle of nullifying all fixed opposition and connecting the limited 
to the Absolute. This satisfaction found in the principle of absolute 
identity) is characteristic of philos~phy as such. [For a philosophizing 
that did no more than this] the known, as to its content, would be 
something contingent; the dichotomies, from whose nullification the 

113 
Contemporary Philosophy 
known emerged,40 would have been given and would have vanished, 
but they would not themselves be reconstructed syntheses. The con-
tent of such philosophizing would have no internal coherence and 
would not constitute an objective totality of knowledge. But the phil-
osophizing would not necessarily be abstract reasoning simply on ac-
count of the incoherence of its content. Abstract reasoning only dis-
perses the posited into ev.er greater manifoldness; thrown into this 
stream the intellect drifts without an anchor, yet the whole extension 
of its manifold is supposed to stand fast unanchored. For true philoso-
phizing on the other hand, even though it may be incoherent, the 
posited and its opposites disappear because it does not simply put 
them in context with other finite things, but connects them with the 
Absolute and so suspends them. 
Since the finite things are a manifold, the connection of the finite 
to the Absolute is a manifold. Hence, philosophizing must aim to posit 
this manifold as internally connected, and there necessarily arises the 
need to produce a totality of knowing, a system of science. As a re-
sult, the manifold of these connections finally frees itself from con-
tingency: they get their places in the context of the objective totality 
of knowledge and their objective completeness is accomplished. The 
philosophizing that does not construct itself into a system is a con-
stant flight from limitations-it is Reason's struggle for freedom rath-
er than the pure self-cognition of Reason that has become secure in 
itself and clear about itself. Free Reason and its action are one, and 
Reason's activity is a pure self-exposition. 
In this self-production of Reason the Absolute shapes itself into an 
objective totality, which is a whole in itself held fast and complete, 
~.having no ground outside itself, but founded by itself in its begin-
ning, middle and end. [31] A whole of this sort appears as an organi-
zation of propositions and intuitions. Every synthesis of Reason is 
united[~n speculatiorl> with the intuition corresponding to it; as iden-
tity of the conscious and non-conscious it is for itself in the Absolute 
and infinite. But at the same time, the synthesis is finite and limited, 
insofar as it is posited within the objective totality and has other syn-
theses outside itself. The identity that is least dichotomous-at the 
objective pole, matter, at the subjective pole, feeling (self-conscious-
40. We follow the text of the first edition. If, with the editors of Hegel's Werke 
(1832, 1845 and the "Jubilee" edition) one changed aus deren Vernichtung es 
ging to auf deren Vernichtung es ging one would get " ... the dichotomies whose 
nullification was the aim .... " 

114 
Difference 
ness)-is at the same time an infinitely opposed identity, a thoroughly 
relative identity. Reason, the faculty of totality (qua objective total-
ity), complements this relative identity with its opposite, producing 
through their synthesis a new identity which is in turn a defective one 
in the face of Reason, and which completes itself anew in the same 
way. The method of the system should be called neither synthetic nor 
analytic. It shows itself at its purest, when it appears as a develop-
ment of Reason itself. Reason does not recall its appearance, which 
emanates from it as a duplicate, back into itself-for then, it would 
only nullify it. Rather, Reason constructs itself in its emanation as an 
identity that is conditioned by this very duplicate; it opposes this rel-
ative identity to itself once more, and in this way the system advances 
until the objective totality is completed. Reason then unites this ob-
jective totality with the opposite subjective totality to form the infinite 
world-intuition, whose expansion has at the same time contracted into 
the richest and simplest identity. 
It can happen that an authentic speculation does not express itself 
completely in its system, or that the philosophy of the system and the 
system itself do not coincide. A system may express the tendency to 
-nullify all oppositions in the most definite way, and yet not pierce 
through to the most perfect identity on its own account. So in judging 
philosophical systems it is particularly important to distinguish the 
philosophy from the system. If the fundamental need has not achieved 
perfect embodiment in the system, if it has elevated to the Absolute 
something that is conditioned and that exists only as an opposite, 
then as a system it becomes dogmatism. Yet true speculation can be 
found in the most divergent philosophies, in philosophies that decry 
one another as sheer dogmatism or as mental aberration.c~ 1 The history 
of philosophy only has value and interest if it holds fast to this view-
point. For otherwise, it will not give us the history of the one, eternal 
Reason, presenting itself in infinitely manifold forms; instead it will 
give us nothing but a tale of the accidental vicissitudes of the human 
spirit and of senseless opinions, which the teller imputes to Reason, 
though they should be laid only to his own charge, because he does 
not recognize what is rational in them, and so turns them inside out.42 
An authentic speculation, even when it does not succeed in con-
41 Cc!stcsvcrirrung, the word that Reinhold used for d'Holbach's materialism 
(See below p 177.) 
-±2 The model "teller" here ts Reinhold Hegel's own aim in all historical in-
lUiriec was alwc1ys to "give the history of the one eternal Reason." 

115 
Contemporary Philosophy 
structing itself completely into a system, necessarily begins from the 
absolute identity. The dichotomy of the absolute identity into subjec-
tive and objective is a production by [or of] the Absolute. The basic 
principle then, is completely transcendenta!,43 and from its standpoint 
there is no absolute opposition of the subjective and objective. But as 
a result the appearance of the Absolute is an opposition. The Absolute 
is not in its appearance, they are themselves opposites. The appear-
ance is not identity. This opposition cannot be suspended transcen-
dentally, that is to say, it cannot be suspended in such a fashion that 
there is no opposition in principle (an sich). For then appearance 
would just be nullified, whereas it is supposed to have being just like 
[the Absolute does]. It is as if one were to claim that the Absolute, in 
its appearance, had stepped out of itself. So, the Absolute must posit 
itself in the appearance itself, i.e., it must not nullify appearance but 
must construct it into identity. 
. 
· 
. 
The causal relation between the Absolute and its appearance is a 
false identity; for absolute opposition is at the basis of this relation. 
In the causal relation both opposites have standing, but they are dis-
tinct in rank. The union is forcible. The one subjugates the other. The 
one rules, the other is subservient. The unity is forced, and forced 
into a mere relative identity. The identity which ought to be abso-
lute, is incomplete. Contrary to its philosophy, the system has turned 
into a dogmatism, it has either turned into realism positing objectivity 
absolutely, or into idealism positing subjectivity absolutely. Yet both 
realism and idealism emerged from authentic speculation, though this 
is more doubtful with respect to realism than to idealism. 
Pure dogmatism, if it is a dogmatism of philosophy, remains within 
the opposition even as a tendency. The basic governing principle in it 
is the relation of causality in its more complete form as reciprocal 
interaction: the intelligible realm has effects upon the sensible realm 
43. Kant generally use> the adjective "transcendental" to designate philosophi-
cal investigations into the possibility of S'jnthetic a priori judgments. Schelling's 
use of the term in the System of Transcendental Idealism is cognate with this 
Kantian definition, for "transcendental philosophy" is there opposed to "philoso-
phy of nature." But for Schelling, the ultimate principle of Identity is the goal 
both of "transcendental" and of "natural" inquiry; and with his "breakthrough" 
to. a clear "intellectual intuition" of the "Absolute Identity," that principle itself 
could begm to be called 2 "transcendental" one. Until this "breakthrough" trans-
cendentality is itself "something opposite" (as Hegel says of Fichte's "system" 
on p.l17 below) 

116 
Difference 
or the sensible upon the intelligible.44 In consistent realism and ideal-
ism the relation of causality plays only a subordinate role, even 
though it appears to govern-for in realism the subject is posited as 
produced by the object, and in idealism the object as produced by the 
subject. But the causal relation is essentially suspended, for the pro-
ducing is an absolute producing, the product an absolute product; that 
is to say, the product has no standing apart from the producing; it is 
not posited as something self-sustaining, as something that has stand-
ing prior to and independent of the producing, as is the case with the 
pure causality relation, the formal principle of dogmatism. In dog-
matism, the product is something posited by A and also, at the same 
time, not posited by A, so A is absolutely only subject, and A = A 
expresses merely an identity of the intellect. Even though philosophy 
in its transcendental business makes use of the causal relation [33] 
yet B, which appears to be opposed to the subject, is in its opposite-
ness a mere possibility and it remains absolutely a possibility, i.e., it 
is only an accident.45 Thus the true relation of speculation, the sub-
stantiality relation [i.e., the relation of substance and accident] is the 
transcendental principle, though it appears under the guise of the 
causal relation. Or again, we might express this formallyf thus: genu-
ine dogmatism acknowledges both principles A = A and A = B, but 
they remain in their antinomy side by side, unsynthesized. Dogma-
tism does not recognize that there is an antinomy in this and hence 
does not recognize the necessity of suspending the subsistence of the 
opposites. The transition from one to the other by way of the causal-
ity relation is the only synthesis possible to dogmatism, and this is an 
incomplete synthesis. 
Notwithstanding this sharp difference between transcendental phil-
osophy and dogmatism, the former is apt to pass over into the latter, 
when it constructs itself into a system. This is the case if transcenden-
tal philosophy while [rightly] refusing to allow any real causal rela-
tion on the ground that nothing exists but the absolute identity in 
which all difference and standing of opposites is suspended, yet intro-
duces the causality relation, insofar as appearance is also supposed to 
44. The reciprocal force of the "or" here makes it virtually equivalent to "and." 
Hegel is using Kant's distinction between the intelligible (or "noumenal") and 
the sensible (or "phenomenal") worlds to embrace at the same time various 
other, more or less cognate, oppositions. 
45. That is to say it inheres in the substance A (or it is an attribute of the One 
Substance of the Identity Philosophy). 

117 
Contemporary Philosophy 
have a standing so that the Absolute must have a relation to appear-
ance other than that of nullification. Thus appearance is turned into 
something subservient, and likewise46 transcendental intuition is pos-
ited as something merely subjective and not objective, which is to say 
that the identity is not posited in the appearance. A = A and A = B 
remain both unconditioned whereas only A = A ought to be abso-
lutely valid; that is, their identity is not set forth in their true synthe-
sis which is no mere ought. 
Thus in Fichte's system Ego = Ego in the Absolute.47 The totality 
sought by Reason leads to the second proposition which posits a non-
Ego. Not only is this antinomy of the positing of both complete, but 
also their synthesis is postulated. But in this synthesis the opposition 
remains. It is not the case that both, Ego as well as non-Ego, are to 
be nullified, but one proposition is to survive, is to be higher in rank 
than the other. The speculation at the basis of the system demands 
the suspension of the opposites, but the system itself does not sus-
pend them. The absolute synthesis which the system achieves is not 
Ego = Ego, but Ego ought to be equal to Ego. The Absolute is con-
structed for the transcendental viewpoint but not for the viewpoint of 
appearance. Both still contradict each other. The identity was not also 
placed in the appearance, or [in other words] the identity did not also 
pass completely into objectivity.48 Therefore transcendentality is itself 
something opposite, the subjective. One may also say that the appear-
ance was not completely nullified. 
In the following presentation of Fichte's system an attempt will be 
made to show that pure consciousness, the identity of subject and ob-
ject, established as absolute in the system, is a subjective identity of 
subject and object. The [34] presentation will proceed by showing 
that the Ego, the principle of the system, is a subjective Subject-Ob-
ject. This will be shown directly, as well as by inspecting [not only] 
the deduction of nature, [but also] and particularly, the relations of 
identity in the special sciences of morality and natural law and the 
relation of the whole system to the aesthetic sphere. 
It will be clear from what has been said that we are concerned in 
this presentation with Fichte's philosophy as a system and not as au-
46. In Hegel's time, and with his pen, also still has, occasionally, the meaning 
"likewise" rather than "hence." 
47. Hegel here goes on to discuss the opening sections of Fichte's Science of 
Knowledge (1794). See Werke I, 91-122 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 93-119). 
48. This was the aim of Schelling's philosophy of nature. 

118 
Faith and Knowledge 
thentic philosophizing.49 As philosophy it is the most thorough and 
profound speculation, all the more remarkable because at the time 
when it appeared even the Kantian philosophy had proved unable to 
awaken Reason to the lost concept of genuine speculation. 
49. We should remember that the title of the essay is "Difference Between 
Fichte's and Schelling's System"; qua philosophy there cannot be a difference be-
tween them. 

Exposition of Fichte' s System 
The foundation of Fichte's system is intellectual intuitio~, pure think-
ing of itself, pure selfconsciousness, Ego = Ego, I am. The Absolute 
is Subject-Object, and the Ego is this identity of subject and object. 1 
In ordinary consciousness the Ego occurs in opposition. Philosophy 
must explain this (opposition to an object, To explain if means to show 
that it is conditioned by something else and hence that it is appear-
ance. Now, if empirical consciousness is shown to be completely 
grounded in, and not just conditioned by, pure consciousness, then 
their opposition is suspended as long as the explanation is otherwise 
completely shown-i.e., as long as it is not merely a pazltial ,identity 
of pure an:d empirical consciousness that has been shown. The iden-
tity is only a partial one if there remains an aspect of the empirical 
consciousness in which it is not determined by the pure conscious-
ness, but is unconditioned. And as only pure consciousness and em-
pirical consciousness are presented as the elements of the highest 
opposition, pure consciousness itself would then be determined and 
conditioned by the empirical consciousness so far as this was uncon-
ditioned. The relation would in this way be a sort of reciprocal rela-
tion, comprised of a mutual determining and being determined. It pre-
supposes, however, an absolute opposition of the reciprocally effective 
1. Hegel's exposition is based mainly on the Grundlage der gesamten Wissen-
schaftslehre of 1794. But Fichte's first explicit statement that "intellectual intui-
tion" is the foundation of the system occurs in the "Second Introduction to the 
Science of Knowledge," § 5, Werke I, 463-8 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 38-42). "In-
tellectual intuition" is the identity of thought and being. Thus Cogito ergo sum 
beco~'!s: "Whatever is aware of itself as thinking, knows itself as being"; or "In 
thinking, thinking thinks itself, and in thinking itself as thinking it knows itself 
as being." This is expressed as "the identity of thought and being"; and since 
thought (das Denken) is on the side of the subject, being is put on the side of the 
object. Thus the identity of thought and being is expressed also as "the identity 
of subject and object." To these identities of identities-(thought=intuition) = 
(thinking= being)= (subject= object)-the next paragraph adds the identity of 
pure consciousness with empirical consciousness, which by implication Kant did 
not reach, and which Fichte will be accused of having failed to reach also. 

120 
Difference 
terms; and then it would be impossible to suspend their dichotomy in 
absolute identity.2 
[35] 
For the philosopher, this pure consciousness originates be-
cause he abstracts(in his thinking from all the extraneous things that 
are not Ego and holds on only to the connection of subject and object. 
In empirical intuition, subject and object are opposites; the philoso-
pher apprehends the activity of intuiting, he intuits intuiting and thus 
conceives it as an identity. This intuiting of intuiting is, on the one 
hand, philosophical reflection and as such opposed both to ordinary 
reflection and to the empirical consciousness in general which does 
not raise itself above itself and its oppositions. On the other hand, 
this transcendental intuition is at the same time the object of philoso-
phical reflection; it is the Absolute, the original identity. The philoso-
pher has risen into freedom and to the standpoint of the Absolute. 
His task-is now to suspend the apparent opposition of transcenden-
tal and empirical consciousness; and, in general terms, this is done by 
deducing the latter from the former. Of necessity, the deduction can-
not be a transition to something alien. Transcendental philosophy 
aims just to construct the empirical consciousness not from a principle 
external to it, but from an immanent principle, as an active emanation 
or self-production of the principle. Something that is not constructed 
out of pure self-consciousness can no more occur in empirical con-
sciousness than pure consciousness can be distinct in its essence from 
empirical conciousness. They are distinct in form, in just this way: 
what appears to empirical consciousness as object opposed to the sub-
ject, will be posited, in the intuition of this empirical intuiting, as 
identical. Thus empirical consciousness will be made whole by that 
which constitutes its essence even though it has no consciousness of 
this essence. 
This task can also be expressed as follows: philosophy is to sus-
pend pure consciousness as concept. When it is placed in opposition 
to empirical consdousness, intellectual intuition, the pure thinking of 
itself, appears as concept, that is to say, it appears as an abstraction 
from the whole manifold, from all inequality of subject and object. Of 
course, intellectual intuition is nothing but pure activity, doing, intuit-
2. Die Entzweiung in absoluter Identitat zu heben: in absoluter Identitat an-
swers the question "Where?"'. "Whither" would require in absolute Identitat. So 
heben must here be equivalent to aufheben. 

~ 
121 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
ing; it is only present in the pure sp6ntaneity which produces it and 
which it produces.3 This act tears itself away from everything empiri-
cal, manifold, and opposite; it lifts itself to the unity of thinking, to 
Ego = Ego, to the id~ntity of subject and object. But it has an aspect 
of opposition still; it is opposed to other acts. So it is capable of being 
determined as a concept, and it shares with its opposites a common 
higher sphere, the general sphere of thinking. Besides the thinking of 
itself, there is still other thinking, besides self-consciousness there is 
.still a manifold of empirical [36] consciousness, besides the Ego as 
object there is a variety of other objects of consciousness. The act of 
self-consciousness differs decisively from all other consciousness in 
that its object is the same as the subject. Ego = Ego is in this regard 
opposed to an infinite objective world. 
Transcendental intuition fails to produce philosophical knowledge in 
this way. On the contrary, philosophical knowledge becomes impos-
sible when reflection gets control of transcendental intuition, opposes 
it to other intuitings, and holds fast to this opposition. This absolute 
.act 9f free self-activity is the condition of philosophical knowledge, 
but it is not yet philosophy itself. Philosophy posits the objective 
totality of empirical knowledge as identical with pure self-conscious-
ness, so that the latter becomes totally suspended as concept or oppo-
site, and with it the former too. It is asserted that the only conscious-
ness that exists is pure consciousness, Ego = Ego is the Absolute; all 
empirical consciousness is taken to be nothing but a pure product of 
Ego = Ego, and it is flatly denied that empirical consciousness is, or 
originates, an absolute duality, or that a positing could occur in it that 
would not be the positing of an Ego for and by the Ego. With the 
Ego's self-positing everything is posited and outside of it nothing. 
The identity !of pure and empirical consciousness is not an abstraction 
from their original opposition. On the contrary, their opposition is an 
abstraction from their original identity. 
Intellectual intuition is herewith posited as identical with every-
thing, it is the totality. This identity of all empirical consciousness 
with pure consciousness is knowledge, and philosophy, knowing this 
identity, is the science of knowledge. Philosophy must show that em-
pirical consciousness in all its manifoldness is identical with pure con-
sciousness, and it must show this by its deed, through the real evolu-
3. Hegel here writes only die sie hervorbringt, which can be taken either way 
and is presumably meant both ways (as in the translation). 

122 
Difference 
tion of the objective out of the Ego.4 Philosophy must describe the to-
tality of empirical consciousness as the objective totality of self-con-
sciousness. The whole variety of knowledge is given to philosophy in 
Ego = Ego. To mere reflection this deduction appears as the contra-
dictory enterprise of deducing the manifold from unity, duality from 
pure identity. But the identity of the Ego = Ego is no pure identity, 
that is, it does not arise through reflective abstraction. If reflection 
conceives of Ego= Ego as unity, it must at the same time conceive of 
it as duality. Ego = Ego is both identity and duplication at once: 
there is an opposition in Ego = Ego. Ego is subject on the one hand 
and object on the other. But what is set against the Ego is itself Ego; 
the opposites are identical. Hence, empirical consciousness cannot be 
viewed as stepping out of pure consciousness. If it were so viewed, 
then, of course, a science of knowledge starting from pure conscious-
ness would be nonsensical. The basis of the view that empirical con-
sciousness has stepped right out of pure consciousness is the above [37] 
abstraction in which reflection isolates its opposites. Reflection as in-
tellect is in and of itself incapable of grasping transcendental intui-
tion; and even if Reason has pushed through to self-cognition, reflec-
tion will, if it is given leeway, invert the rational into somethipg 
opposite once more. 
So far, we have described the purely transcendental side of the sys-
tem, the side where reflection is powerless, but where Reason deter-
mines and describes the task of philosophy. Because of this genuinely 
transcendental aspect, it is all the more difficult either to apprehend 
the point of departure of that other side where reflection governs, or 
to hold on to it [as a whole]. For the retreat to the transcendental side 
remains always open for the propositions of the intellect into which 
reflection has inverted the ration~!. What we have to show, then, is 
that reflection does not have a subordinate place in the system, and 
that [on the contrary] the two standpoints, that of speculation and 
that of reflection, are absolutely necessary and without union at the 
center of the system.-In other words, Ego = Ego is the absolute 
principle of speculation, but the system does not display this identity. 
The objective Ego does rtot become identical with the subjective Ego; 
4. This programme for philosophy appears to have originated with Schelling 
rather than with Fichte. On pp. 129-30 below Hegel speaks as if the language, 
at least, comes directly from Fichte. But we have not been able to trace his refer-
ence at that point either. The passage that Lasson refers to here (Echte, Werke 
I, 43) can hardly be the source of anything that Hegel says either here or below 

123 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
they remain absolutely opposed to one another. The Ego does not find 
itself in its appearance, or in its positing; it must annul its appearance 
in order to find itself as Ego. The essence of the Ego and its positing 
do not coincide: Ego does not become objective to itself. 
In the Science of Knowledge Fichte has chosen to present the prin-
ciple of his system in the form of basic propositions. We have already 
enlarged upon the awkwardness of this approach.5 The first basic 
proposition is absolute self-positing of the Ego, the Ego as infinite 
positing. The second is absolute oppositing, or positing of an infinite 
non-Ego. The third is the absolute unification of the first two by way 
of an absolute dividing (Teilen) of Ego and non-Ego and an appor-
tioning (Verteilen) of the infinite sphere between a divisible Ego and 
divisible non-Ego. These three absolute basic principles set forth 
_three absolute acts of the Ego. From this plurality of absolute acts it 
follows immediately that these acts and the principles are only rela-
tive. That is to say, the three acts, to the extent that they enter into 
the construction of the totality of consciousness, are merely ~ea1 fac-
~Counterposed as it is to other absolute acts, Ego = Ego simPly 
means pure consciousness as opposed to empirical consciousness. As 
such it is conditioned by abstraction from empirical consciousness, 
and the first basic proposition is as much a conditioned proposition as 
are the second and the thirc;L The very plurality of absolute acts im-
mediately indicates this even if their content were entirely unknown. 
But it is quite unnecessary to comprehend Ego = Ego, the [38] abso-
lute self-positing, as something conditioned. On the contrary, we have 
viewed it above6 in its transcendental significance as absolute identity 
(and not merely as an identity of the intellect). But in this form in 
- which Ego = Ego is established as only one of several principles, it 
has no other meaning than that of pure consciousness as opposed to 
empirical consciousness, of philosophical reflection as opposed to com-
mon reflection. 
[One might argue that] it is only for the sake of philosophical re-
flection that [Fichte] posits these ideal factors, that is, the pure posit-
ing and the pure oppositing. The point of departure for philosophical 
reflection is, to be sure, absolute identity; but precisely in order to 
describe the true essence of this identity, this reflection begins by 
setting forth absolute opposites and binds them together to form the 
antinomy; and this is the only way in which reflection can expound 
5. See above pp. 103-9. 
6. See pp. 119-22 ff. 

124 
Difference 
the Absolute, in order to take absolute identity out of the sphere of 
co~epJ~. at once, .and to cons!i!ut~ it as an identity that does not\.@-
~tra~from subject and object but :~s_the identity of subject and object. 
This identity cannot be so grasped that the pure self-positing and 
the pure oppositing are both activities of one and the same Ego. 
·~For then it would most assuredly not be a transcendental identity, but 
N~ransc~:t:t~nt one, in which the absolute contradiction of the oppo-
sites would be-meant to subsist, and their union would be reduced to 
a union in the generic concept of activity. What is required is a trans-
cendental union in which the contradiction of the two activities is 
itself suspended and a true synthesis, both real and ideal at once, is 
constructed out of the ideal factors. The third basic proposition gives 
this transcendental union: the Ego posits, within the Ego, a divisible 
non-Ego as opposed to a divisible Ego. 7 The infinite objective sphere, 
the opposite, is neither absolute Ego nor absolute non-Ego. Rather, it 
is that which envelops the opposites, that which is filled out by oppo-
site factors whose relation is this: to the degree that the one is pos-
ited, the other is not; so far as the one rises, the other falls. 
In this synthesis, however, the objective Ego is not identical with 
the subjective Ego. The subjective Ego is Ego, the objective is Ego, + 
non-Ego. This synthesis is not an exposition of the original identity: 
p_ure conscio_!lsness, Ego= Ego, anq.empirical [consciousness], Ego= 
Eg~ T non-Ego, with all the form~· in -~hid{ the latter constructs it-
self, remain opposites. The incompleteness of this synthesis expressed 
by the third basic proposition is necessary if the acts of the first and 
second basic propositions are activities absolutely opposed one to the 
it' other; or in other words, no synthesis is basically possible at all. The 
· · , sy.n!besis is possible only if the activities of positing [39] and of op-
positing are posited a~1aeal factors. But it certainly does seem to be 
>self-contradictory to tr~activities that are quite strictly not sup-
, posed to be concepts, simply as ideal· factors....lt makes no difference 
either in itself or with respect to a system whose principle is Identity, 
whether what is to be llr4ted, Ego afld non-Ego, the subjective and the 
objective, are expressed as activities-positing and oppositing-or as 
products-objective Ego and non-Ego. Their being characterized as 
absolutely opposed to each other stamps them immediately as some-
thing merely ideal, and Fichte does recognize their pure ideality. He 
takes the opposites to be entirely different bef~g)he synthesis from 
what they are after tfie synthesis. Before th~ synthesis they are sup-
7. See Fichte, Werke I, 110 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 109-10). 

125 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
posed to be "merely opposites and nothing else; the one is what the 
other is not, and the other is what the one is not [ ... ] a mere thought 
without any reality and what is worse, a thought of mere reality.8 As 
one comes in, the other goes out. But the one can only come in with 
the predicate of being the contrary of the other. Hence, where the one 
concept comes in, the other one comes in too, and nullifies it. So not 
even this one can come in, and nothing at all is present." Only "a 
beneficent deception of the imagination, which foisted a substratum 
upon the mere opposites, without being noticed" made it possible to 
think about them.9 
It follows from the ideality of the opposite factors that they are 
nothing apart from the synthetic activity; only the latter posits them 
and their being opposite/0 and their opposition is used only for the 
purpose of philosophical construction in order to make the synthetic 
faculty understandable. Productive imagination would be absolute 
identity itself, absolute identity represented as activity which, simply 
by positing the product, the boundary, posits at the same time the op-
posites as the bounding agents. It would only be valid to conceive the 
imagination as a synthetic faculty conditioned by opposites from the 
standpoint of reflection, which begins from the opposites and con-
ceives intuition only as their unjon. But, in order to characterize this 
view as a subjective one pertaining to reflection, philosophical reflec-
tion would simultaneously have to establish the transcendental stand-
point by recognizing that with respect to the absolute identity those 
absolutely opposed activities are nothing but icLeal faii~Wrs, thoroughly 
relative identities. In the absolute identity empirical consciousness is 
no less suspended than its antithesis, pure consciousness, which, as 
abstraction from the empirical, has an antithesis in it. It is only in this 
sense that the Ego is the transcendental center of both opposed activi-
ties and indifferent toward both. Their absolute opposition is signifi-
cant only with respect to their .. 
y. 
[40] 
However, the synthesis expressed in the third proposition is 
imperfect. The objective Ego here is an Ego + non-Ego. This in itself 
already arouses the suspicion that the opposed activities [of the first 
two basic propositions] are not to be taken merely as relative identi-
ties, as ideal factors; though they can be so regarded if one considers 
only their relation to the synthesis, and abstracts from the title of ab-
8. Fichte: "a thought of a mere relation." 
9. Werke I, 224-5 (Heath and Lachs, p. 200). 
10. The German text allows also the following translation: "only the latter 
posits their being opposite and their ideality itself" (cf. Mery, p. 114). 

126 
Difference 
soluteness that both activities carry with them just as the third one 
does. 
This, however, is not the relation which the self-positing and the 
oppositing are meant to have mutually and towards the synthetic ac-
tivities. Ego = Ego is absolute activity; in no respect should it be 
regarded as relative identity and as ideal factor. To the Ego = Ego a 
non-Ego is something absolutely opposed. Yet their union is neces-
sary, and is the unique concern of speculation. 11 What union is pos-
sible, though, once absolute opposites are presupposed? Strictly speak-
ing none at all, obviously. Or [to put the point another way] since the 
absoluteness of their opposition must be removed at least partially, 
and the third basic proposition must necessarily come in, even where 
opposition remains basic, only a partial identity is possible. Absolute 
identity is, of course, the principle of speculation; but like its expres-
sion, Ego = Ego, this principle remains only the rule whose infinite 
fulfillment is postulated but not constructed in the system. 
The main point must be to prove that self-positing and oppositing 
are activities absolutely opposed to one another within the system. 
Fichte does say this directly, in so many words. 12 But this absolute 
opposition is just meant to be the very condition which alone makes 
productive imagination possible. Productive imagination, however, is 
the Ego only as theoretical faculty which cannot raise itself above the 
opposition. For the practical faculty, the opposition falls away; and it 
is only the practical faculty that suspends it.13 So [to prove Ol_!_r claim] 
we have_to show that the opposition is absolule-for- the practical fac-
ulty too, and that even in the practical faculty Ego does not posit 
itself as Ego: on the contrary, here again the objective Ego is an Ego 
+ non-Ego and J:he priJ.ctical faculty does not penetrate to Ego = Ego. 
Putting it the other way round: the absoluteness of opposition eme~ges 
from the incompleteness of the highest synthesis offered in the sys-
tem. Opposition is still present in Jhe highest synthesis. \, 
Dogmatic idealism maintains its monism (Einheit des Prinzips) by 
denying the object altogether: it posits one of the opposites, the sub-
ject in its determinateness, as absolute. Likewise, the dogmatism 
which in its pure form is materialism, denies the subjective. If it is 
only the need for an identity of this sort that lies at the basis of 
11. Compare pp. 90-1 above. 
12. See Fichte, Werke I, 214-7 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 192-5). 
13. Compare pp. 132-4 ff below. 

127 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
philosophizing-the need for an identity that can be brought to pass 
by denying, and absolutely abstracting from, one of the opposites-
[ 41] then it does not matter which of the two is denied, the subjective 
or the objective. Their opposition is in consciousness, and the reality 
of the objective, just as much as that of the subjective is founded in 
consciousness. Empirical consciousness offers no more and no less 
warrant for pure consciousness than for the thing in itself of the dog-
matist. Neither the subjective nor the objective alone exhausts con-
sciousness. The purely subjective is just as much an abstraction as the 
purely objective. Dogmatic idealism posits the subjective as the real 
ground of the objective, dogmatic realism the objective as the real 
ground of the subjective. Consistent realism denies consciousness as 
spontaneous self-positing activity altogether. But even when the ob-
ject, which the realist takes to be the real ground of consciousness, is 
expressed as non-Ego = non-Ego, when he exhibits the reality of his 
object in consciousness, and is therefore validly challenged by the 
identity of consciousness as sorrething absolute over and against his 
objective serialization of finites running on and on; then he must cer-
tainly abandon the form of his principle of pure objectivity. As soon 
as the realist admits that there is thinking, the analysis of thinking 
will lead to Ego = Ego. This is thinking expressed as a proposition; 
for thinking is a spontaneous activity of connecting opposites and the 
connection is the positing of the opposites as identical. Still, just as 
idealism validly asserts the unity of consciousness, so realism can val-
idly assert its duality. The unity of consciousness presupposes a dual-
ity, connecting presupposes an oppositeness. Ego = Ego is opposed 
by an equally absolute proposition: the subject is not the same as the 
object. Both propositions are of the same rank. 
Some of the forms in which Fichte has presented his system might 
mislead one into believing that it is a system of dogmatic idealism 
denying the opposite principle. Indeed, Reinhold overlooks the trans-
cendental significance of the Fichtean principle which requires one to 
posit the difference of subject and object in Ego = Ego at the same 
time as their identity. He regards Fichte's system as a system of abso-
lute subjectivity, that is, a dogmatic idealism.14 But precisely what dis-
tinguishes Fichte's idealism is that the identity which it establishes is 
one that does not deny the objective but puts the subjective and the 
objective in the same rank of reality and certainty; and that pure and 
14. Compare Beytriige I, 77, 82 ff., 124-5. 

128 
Difference 
empirical consciousness are one. For the sake of the identity of sub-
ject and object I posit things outside myself just as surely as I posit 
myself. The things exist as certainly as I do.-But if the Ego posits 
things alone or itself alone-just one of the two terms or even both at 
once but separately-then the Ego will not, in the system, come to be 
Subject-Object to itself. True, the subjective is Subject-Object, but 
the objective is not. Hence subject is not equal to object. 
[42] 
As theoretical faculty, the Ego is unable to posit itself with 
perfect objectivity, and escape from the opposition. "Ego posits itself 
as determined by non-Ego"15 is that part of the thircl:jasic proposi-
tion, whereby the Ego constitutes itself as intelligence.J1 Now, the ob-
jective world has shown itself to be [not a~ce-but] an accident 
of intelligence) and the-!:.-J;Ion-Ego, which intelligence posits itself as de-
termined by, has shown itself to be something undetermined-every 
determina-tion oHi'( ~s..a product of intelligence. But still, there remains 
one ~e of the tl{eoretical f·aculty- from ~t 
is conditioned. To 
wit, the objective world, in its endless determinacy through intelli-
gence, still remains a something for intelligence which is at the same 
time undetermined for it. The non-Ego has no positive character, to be 
sure; but it does have the negative character of being something other, 
i.e., something opposite in general. As Fichte expresses this: intelli-
gence is conditioned by an impact, but the impact is in itself entirely 
undetermined. 17 Because the non-Ego expresses only the negative, 
something undetermined, even this character pertains to it only 
through the Ego's positing. The Ego posits itself as not posited. The 
positing of the opposite in general, the positing of something that is 
absolutely undetermined by the Ego, is itself a positing of [and by] 
• 1 the Ego. In this move the immanence of the Ego even as intelligence 
' is asserted in respect of its being conditioned by something ot~r = X . 
. ,.But this only gives the contradiction another form; it has no~ become 
':'immanent itself. The Ego's positing of the opposite and its positing of 
itself contradict each other, and the theoretical faculty is not able to 
extricate itself from this opposition which therefore remains absolute 
for it. Productive imagination is a ho~ering between absolute oppo-
15. Fichte, Werke I, 127 (Heath and Lachs, p. 123). In his initial statement of 
the third or grounding principle (Werke I, 125-6, Heath and Lachs, p. 122) Fichte 
speaks of Ego and non-Ego as limited (beschriinkt) by one another. But he shifts 
here to "determined" (bestimmt). 
16. I.e., as vorstellend, as representing (or as having ideas of ... ). Cf. Werke 
I, 227-46, 248 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 203-17, 219-20). 
17. See Fichte, Werke I, 210-7, 248-51 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 189-95, 219-22). 

129 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
sites; it can synthesize them at the boundary, but cannot unite their 
opposite ends. 
1 
Through the theoretiCal faculty, the Ego does not succeed in mak-
ing itself objective to itself. It does not penetrate to Ego = Ego. In-
stead, the object originates for ~a( 
Ego plus non-Ego)Or in other 
words, pure consciousness is not shown to be equal to empirical con-
sciousness. 
The characteristics of a [Fichtean] transcendental deduction of an 
objective world can now be stated. Ego = Ego is the principle of 
speculation or of the subjective philosophical reflection which is op-
posed to empirical consciousness. It must prove itself objective as the 
principle of philosophy, and the proof will consist in the suspending 
of its opposition to empirical consciousness. This suspension must 
occur when pure consciousness produces out of itself a manifold of 
activities that is identical with the manifold of empirical conscious-
ness. Thus Ego = Ego would show itself to be the immanent real 
ground of the totality of objects in their externality to one another 
(des Aussereinander der Objektivitiit). In empirical consciousness, 
however, there is an opposite, an X; and pure consciousness, since it 
is a positing of itself, can neither [43] produce this X from itself nor 
conquer it; instead, it must presuppose it. The question is this: is it 
the case that the absolute identity, insofar as it appears as theoretical 
faculty,·cannot abstract entirely from subjectivity and from the oppo-
sition to empirical consciousness? Within the sphere of the theoretical 
faculty can it not become objective to itself, A = A? [Our own an-
swer must be: No.] For this theoretical faculty, the Ego positing itself 
as(Ego determined by the non-Eg~is not a purely imman~nt..~ere at 
all. Even within it every product of the Ego is also some-thing nOt de-
termined by the Ego. In so far as iJi.,produces the manifold-of empi~cal 
~out 
of itself, pure consciousness appears for this_rea5on 
with the character of defectiveness. This primordial defectiveness of 
pure consciousness is accordingly what constitutes the possibility of a 
deduction of the objective world in general, and in the deduction the 
subjectivity of pure consciousness becomes most clearly apparent. The 
Ego posits an objective world because in positing itself it recognizes 
its own defectiveness, and consequently the absoluteness of pure con-
sciousness falls away. The relation that is taken to hold between ob-
jective world and self-consciousness is that the former is the condition 
of the latter. Pure consciousness and empirical consciousness condi-
tion one another mutually, one is as necessary as the other. As Fichte 
puts it, the advance to empirical consciousness is made because pure 

130 
Difference 
consciousness is not a complete consciousness. 18 -In this reciprocal 
relation pure consciousness and empirical consciousness remain abso-
lutely opposed. The identity which can come about is a highly incom-
plete and superficial one. Another identity is necessary, an identity 
which grasps both pure and empirical consciousness within itself and 
yet suspends them both as what they are. 
We shall speak later of the form which the objective (or nature) 
gets in a deduction of this sort. 19 But the subjectivity of pure con-
sciousness which results from the form of deduction that we have just 
discussed provides the key to another form of it, in which the produc-
tion of the objective is taken as a pure act of free activity. If self-con-
sciousness is conditioned by empirical consciousness, then empirical 
consciousness cannot be a product of absolute freedom. The free ac-
tivity of the Ego would become only one factor in the construction of 
the intuition of an objective world. That the world is a product of the 
freedom of intelligence is the determinate and express principle of 
idealism. If Fichte's idealism has not succeeded in constructing a sys-
tem upon this principle the reason for its failure will be found in the 
characteristic way in which freedom appears in this system: 
Philosophical refleCtion is an act of absolute freedom. It lifts itself 
out of the sphere of giv·enness by an act of absolutely free choice (mit 
absoluter Willkiir) and produces consciously what, in the empirical 
consciousness, intelligence produces non-consciously so that it appears 
to be given. In the sense in which the (44] manifold of necessary 
ideas arises for philosophical reflection as a system produced by free-
dom, the non-conscious production of an objective world is not 
asserted to be an act of freedom, for in this aspect empirical and phil-
osophical consciousness are both the identity of self-positing. Self-
positing, the identity of subject and object, is free activity. 
-~ 
In the above exposition of the production of the objectiy~ world 
out of pure consciousness or self-positing, an absclute positing of the 
18. We have not been able to find this phrase in Fichte. The reference that 
Lasson gives (Werke I, 168 [Heath and Lachs, pp. 156-7]) does not contain it. 
The closest parallel that we have found is in the "Second Introduction" (1797): 
"This [intellectual] intuition, however, never occurs in isolation, as a complete 
act of consciousness; any more than sensory intuition occurs singly or renders 
consciousness complete" (Werke I, 463-4 [Heath and Lachs, p. 38]). Professor 
C. K. Hunter has kindly found for us the following passages dealing with the 
"completion" of consciousness or the "advance" to empirical consciousness: 
Werke I, 178 (Heath and Lachs, p. 164); Werke IV, 92 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 95), 
Werke VI, 313 (Smith, I, 172-3). 
19. See below, pp. 135-42. 

131 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
opposite necessarily turned up.20 If, now, the objective world is to be 
deduced as an act of freedom, this absolute positing of the opposite 
comes into view as a self-limiting of the Ego by itself; and productive 
imagination will be constructed from two factors, the indeterminate 
activity that moves toward the infinite, and the limiting activity that 
aims at finitization (Verendlichung). If the reflecting activity is like-
wise posited as an infinite one, then it, too, can be posited as an act 
of freedom, and the Ego limits itself freely. And it must be so posited 
because it is an ideal factor here, i.e., it is an absolute opposite. In 
this way, freedom and limit would not oppose each other, but would 
posit themselves as infinite-and as finite, which is just what appeared 
above as the opposition of the firs~ and second basic proposition.21 
But now the limitation is something immanent, for it is the Ego that 
limits itself. The objects are only posited in order to explain this lim-
itation; and the self-limiting of intelligence is the only real. Thus the 
absolute opposition which empirical consciousness sets up between 
subject and object is suspended; but it is transferred in another form 
into intelligence itself, and intelligence finds itself closed in by incom-
prehensible limits ;22 its law of self-limitation is absolutely in~;:ompre­
hensible to it. Yet it is precisely the incomprehensibility for/ ordinary 
consciousness of the opposition present in it, that is the spur to :;pee.,. 
ulation. But the incomprehensible element still remains in the system 
in the form of the limits posited by intelligence itself. Yet to break 
out of this circle is the sole concern of the philosophical need.-
If freedom is set up against the limiting activity as self-positing 
against oppositing, then freedom is conditioned, which must not hap-
pen; whereas if the limiting activity is posited as an activity of free-
dom [too]-as both self-positing and oppositing were transferred into 
the Ego above23-then freedom is absolute identity but it contradicts 
its appearance, which is always something that is not identical, some-
thing finite and unfree. In the system fre~dom does not succeed in 
producing itself; the product does not correspond to the producing. 
The system, which starts out from self-positing, leads intelligence to 
its conditioned condition in an endless sequence of finitudes, without 
reestablishing it [as self-positing] in and through them. 
20. See above, p. 129. 
21. See pp. 123-5. 
22. Here again einmal appears to be superfluous and we have omitted it (com-
pare p. 95 above). 
23. See p. 128. 

132 
Difference 
Speculation cannot completely reveal its principle, Ego = Ego, in 
non-conscious productive activity; the object of the theoretical faculty 
necessarily [ 45] contains something not determined by the Ego. We 
are therefore directed to the practical faculty. 24 The Ego cannot suc-
ceed in positing itself as Ego = Ego or intuiting itself as Subject = 
Object through its non-conscious production; so the demand is still 
present that the Ego should produce itself practically as identity, as 
Subject = Object-that the Ego should metamorphose itself into the 
object. This supreme demand remains, in Fichte's system, a demand. 
Not only is it not dissolved into an authentic synthesis, it is fixed in 
the form of a demand; so that the idealt is absolutely opposed !Q_the 
real and the supreme self-intuition of the Ego and Subject-Object is 
made impossible. 
Ego = Ego is postulated practically, and this is thought of as fol-
lows: Ego would become object for itself as Ego by entering into a 
relation of causality with the non-Ego, in which the non-Ego would 
disappear and the object would be something absolutely determined 
by the subject, so that the object would = Ego. Here the causality re-
lation becomes the governing factor, which means that Reason, or the 
~.J,lbject = Object, becomes fixed as one of the opposites and that true 
synthesis is made impossible. 
It is impossible for the Ego to reconstruct itself out of the opposi-
tion between subjectivity and the X that originates for it in a non-
conscious producing, and so becomes one with its appearance. This 
impossibility is what is expressed in the fact that the highest synthe-
sis revealed in the system is an ought. Ego equals Ego turns into Ego 
ought to equal Ego. The result of the system does not return to its 
beginning. 
The Ego ought to nullify the objective world, it ought to ~ve ab-
solute causality with respect to the non-Ego. This is found [by Fichte] 
to be contradictory, for it would imply suspending the non-Ego; and 
the PQsiting of the opposite,4he positing of a non-Ego, is absolute.25 
So, the connection of pure activity with an object can only be posited 
as striving.~ 6 Because it represents Ego = Ego, the objective Ego that 
.24. For the discussion that follows (down to p. 135) see, in general, Fichte, 
Werke I, 246-85 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 218-51). We have given a few more pre-
cise indications (specifically those suggested by Buchner and Poggeler). But these 
more specific indications are neither definitive nor exhaustive. 
25. Compare Fichte, Werke I, 250-2, 254 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 221-2, 224-5). 
26. Compare Fichte, Werke I, 261-2 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 23Q-1). 

133 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
equals the subjective Ego, has at the same time an oppositing, and 
hence a non-Ego opposed to itself. The former is the ideal,f the latter 
is the real; and these two ought to be the same. This practical postu-
late of the absolute ought, expresses no more than the thought of a 
uniting of the opposition; it does not unite it in an intuition. It ex-
presses only the antithesis between the first and second basic propo-
sition. 
At this point Ego = Ego has been abandoned by speculation and 
has fallen prey to reflection. Pure .consciousness noJange.r_fun~!t9Il}~­
as absolute identity; in its highest dignity it is [now] opposed to the 
empirical consciousness. 
This make~ the char"lcter of freedom in Fichte's system clear: it is 
not the suspension of the opposites, but the opposition to them, and 
in this opposition it gets fixed as negative freedom. Reason constitutes 
itself through reflection as a unity that is absolutely opposed by a 
manifold. The ought expresses this standing opposition; [46] it ex-
presses the non-existence of the absolute identity. The pure positing, 
free activity, is posited as an abstraction, in the absolute form of 
something subjective. The transcendental intuition, from which the 
system starts, was, in the form of philosophical reflection which raises 
itself thr<?u~h absolute abstraction to the pure thinking of itself, some-
thing subjective. To get hold of transcendental intuition in its true 
formlessness it was necessary to abstract from this cb~ra~;ter of sub-
jectivity; speculation had to detach thts forrn from its' subjective prin-
ciple in order to raise this principle to the true identity of subject and 
object.27 Instead, transcendental intuition as it pertains to philosophi-
cal reflection, and transcendental intuition as being neither subjective 
-nor objective, still remain [in Fichte] one and the same. The Subject 
= Object does not get away anymore from difference and reflection. 
It remains a subjective Subject= Object to which appearance remains 
absolutely alien and which does not succeed in intuiting itself in its 
appearance. 
The practical faculty of the Ego can no more achieve absolute self-
intuition than its theoretical faculty could. Both alike are conditioned 
by an impact which, as a [brute] fact, cannot be derived from the 
Ego; the deduction of it amounts to a demonstration that it is the 
condition of the theoretical and practical faculty. The antinomy re-
mains an antinomy and is expressed in striving, which is the ought as 
27. This was what Schelling did. 

134 
Difference 
activity. Now there is no way in which reflection can get hold of the 
Absolute except by antinomy; but the antinomy we have here is ·not 
the form in which the Absolute appears to reflection. On the contrary, 
this antinomical antithesis is what is fixed, it is the Absolute. As ac-
tivity, namely as striving, it is supposed to be supreme synthesis, and 
the Idea of the infinite is to remain an Idea in the Kantian sense, i.e., 
it is something absolutely opposed to intuition. 
This absolute opposition of Idea and intuition, and their synthesis 
which is nothing but a self-destructive demand, since it postulates a 
union which still must not happen-all this is expressed in the, in-
finite progress. Absolute opposition is thus shoved into the for~ it 
haJ at a lower standpoint which had for a long time passed current as 
the true suspension of opposition and the highest solution of the an-
tinomy by Reason. Existence prolonged into eternity involves both the 
infinity of the Idea and intuition within itself, but in forms which 
make their synthesis impossible. The infinity of the Idea excludes alL 
manifoldness. Time, on the contrary, immediately involves opposition, 
extraneousness (ein Aussereinander). What exists in time is something_ 
that is opposed to itself, a manifold; and infinity is outside of time.-
Space is similarly a [realm of] posited self: externality (ein Ausser-
sichgesetztsein), but [47] because of its type of opposition it may be 
said to be an infinitely richer synthesis than time.28 The preference 
that time acquires in that progress is supposed to take place in it, can 
only be grounded in the fact that striving is posited as something ab-
solutely opposed to an outer world of sense and as something inward. 
Thus the Ego is hypostatized as absolute subject, as the unity of a 
point, and in popular parlance, as a soul.-[But] if time is to be total-
ity, as infinite time, then time itself is suspended, and it was not nec-
essary to take refuge in its name and in a progress of the l~thened 
existence. The true suspension of time is a timeless present1_ i.e., eter-
nit-y, and in it striving falls away, and absolute opposition loses its 
standing. The lengthening of existence simply palliates the opposition 
in a synthesis of time, the poverty of which, instead of being fully 
supplied, just becomes more conspicuous as a result of this palliative 
union with an infinity that is absolutely opposed to it. 
28. The parts of space are coexistent while the moments of time are not. 
Hence Spinoza speaks of "the face of the whole universe" as "the immediate in-
finite mode of extension"; whereas "duration" is always finite. This may be what 
Hegel has in mind here. We should note, in any case, that he certainly struggled 
to achieve a richer concept of time in his own later work. 

135 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
All the further developments of what is contained in the striving, 
and all the(syntheses of the opposition~ that arise from the develop-
ment) carry within them the principle of non-identity. The further 
workmg out of the system belongs as a whole to consistent reflection; 
speculation has no part in it. Absolute identity is present only in the 
form of an opposite, namely as Idea. The incomplete causal relation is 
the ground of every synthesis of the Idea with its opposite. The Ego 
that posits itself in opposition, or in other words limits itself, is called 
the subjective Ego; and the Ego that tends toward the infinite is called 
the objective Ego. The joining of the two consists in this: the self-de-
termining of the subjective Ego is made in accordance with the Idea of 
the objective Ego, of absolute spontaneity, of infinity; and the objec-
tive Ego, absolute spontaneity, is determined according to this Idea by 
the subjective Ego. Their determination is reciprocal. The subjective, 
ideal Ego receives, so to speak, the material of its Idea from the ob-
jective Ego; that is to say, it receives absolute spontaneity, indeter-
minateness. On the other hand, the objective, real Ego, the Ego tend-
ing toward the infinite, is bounded by the subjective Ego. But since 
the subjective Ego does its determining according to the idea of infin--
ity, it suspends the bounding once more. While it makes the objective 
Ego finite in its infinity, it simultaneously makes it infinite in its fini-
tude. In this reciprocal determination the opposition of finitude and 
infinity, of real determination and ideal indeterminateness endures. 
Ideality and reality remain disunited. In other words, the Ego is both 
ideal and real activity, the distinction being merely a matter of direc-
tion; it has united these different directions in particular incomplete 
syntheses such as drive and feeling, as will be shown below;29 [48] 
but it does not achieve a complete exposition of itself in them. In the 
infinite progress of its lengthened existence it endlessly produces more 
parts of itself, but it never produces itself in the eternity of intuiting 
itself as Subject-Object. 
The Ego remains a subjective Subject-Object because the subjectiv-
ity of transcendental intuition is held fast. This is most strikingly ap-
parent in the relation of the Ego to nature.30 We can see it both in the 
deduction of nature and in the sciences founded on that deduction. 
29. See pp. 136-7. 
30. For this part of Hegel's discussion (down to p. 142 below) see, in general, 
Fichte, Werke I, 285-322 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 251-81) and the System der 
Sittenlehre (1798), §§4-5 (Werke IV, 76-88; Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 79-91). 

136 
Difference 
Because the Ego is subjective Subject-Object, there is a side from 
which it continues to have an object that is absolutely opposed to it 
and from which it continues to be conditioned by the object. As we 
have seen, the dogmatic positing of an absolute object is transformed 
in this idealism into a ·self-limiting that is absolutely opposed to .free-
activity.31 This being posited by the Ego is the deduction of nature, 
and it is the transcendental viewpoint. We shall see 'how far it goes 
and what its significance is. 
As condition of intelligence32 [Fichte] postulates a primordial deter-
mination [i.e., limitation]. Because pure consciousness is not complete 
consciousness, this appeared above33 as necessity to proceed toward 
empirical consciousness. The Ego is to bound itself absolutely, to op-
pose itself absolutely; it is subject, and the limit is in and through the 
Ego. This self-bounding becomes a bounding both of the subjective 
activity, that is, of intelligence, and of the objective activity. The 
bounded objective activity is drive; 34 the bounded subjective activity 
is the concept of purpose. The synthesis of this twofold determina-
tion is feeling. Feeling unites cognition and drive; but at the same time 
it is something merely subjective.35 It appears, to be sure, as some-
thing in general determinate, in antithesis to· the indeterminate, the 
Ego = Ego, and indeed as ~omething subjective in antithesis to the 
objective Ego. It appears as something finite in general, as against 
both the infinite real activity and the ideal infinity, and in relation to 
the latter it appears as something objective. But [this Fichtean deduc-
tion does not work, for] in itself feeling is characterized as synthesis 
of the subjective and the objective, of cognition and drive, and be-
cause it is a synthesis, its antithesis to something indeterminate van-
ishes, whether the indeterminate opposite is an infinite objective or an 
infinite subjective one. Altogether, feeling is finite only from th~ point 
of view of reflection which produces this opposition of the infinite. In 
itself it is, like matter, something subjective and objective at.the same 
time; it is identity insofar as identity has not reconstructed itself into 
totality. 
Feeling as well as impulse appear as bounded, and "the manifesta-
tion of the bounded and the bounding in us is drive and feeling. The 
31. See above pp. 130-1. 
32. Compare n. 16 above. 
33. See pp. 122-8. 
34. See System der Sittenlehre, Werke IV, 105-7 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 109-11). 
35. Compare Fichte, Werke I, 289 (Heath and Lachs, pp. 254-5). 

137 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
original and determinate system of drives and feelings is nature. Con-
sciousness of them36 obtrudes on us and, at the same time, the sub-
stance in which this system of boundaries [ 49] is found is supposed 
to be the substance which freely thinks and wills, and which we posit 
as ourselves. So the nature that obtrudes is our nature,"37 and Ego 
and my nature constitute the subjective Subject-Object: my nature is 
itself in the Ego. 
What have to be distinguished here, however, are two kinds of 
mediation of the opposition of nature and freedom, of the originally 
limited and the originally unlimited; and it is essential to show that 
mediation occurs [in these] in different ways. This will show us the 
distinction between the transcendental standpoint and the standpoint 
of reflection in a new form; it is because the latter displaces the for-
mer that there is a difference between the starting point of this sys-
tem and its result. 
On the one hand, [the starting point is] Ego = Ego; freedom and 
grive are one and the same. This is the transcendental standpoint. 
"Part of what pertains to me is to be possible only through freedom, 
while another part is to be independent of freedom, just as freedom is 
independent of )ti yet the substance to which both [the free and the 
non-free] pertain is all one and the same and is so posited. I who feel 
and I who think, I who am driven and I who make a decision with 
free will, am one and the same."38 -"From the transcendental stand-
point, my drive as natural being, and my tendency as pure spirit are 
the same basic drive (Urtrieb), the drive that constitutes my being; 
but it is viewed from two distinct aspects ;"39 the distinction exists 
only in appearance. 
- On the other hand, [in the result] freedom and drive are distinct, 
one is the condition of the other, one dominates over the other. Na-
ture as impulse must, of course, be thought as determining itself 
through itself; "but it is characterized by its antithesis to freedom. 
[ ... ] Nature determines itself must be translated into, nature is deter-
mined by its essence, forma1i'ter, to determine itself; nature can never, 
be indeterminate, as a free being can very well be; and materialiter' 
too, nature is determined [to determine itself] just in one way and no 
other; unlike a free being, it does not have the choice between a cer-
36. Derselben may refer either to "drives and feelings" or to "nature." 
37. Fichte, Werke IV, 109 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 113-4). 
38. System der Sittenlehre, Werke IV, 108 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 112). 
39. Ibid., p. 130 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 135). 

138 
Difference 
tain determination and its opposite."40 The synthesis of nature and 
freedom provides now the following reconstruction of identity out of 
dichotomy into totality: I, as intelligence, as the undetermined-and 
I who am driven, Ego as nature, as the determined, shall become the 
same through the raising of impulse into consciousness. For then drive 
"comes within my control. [ ... ] In the-region of consciousness the 
drive does not act at all; I act or do not act according to it."41 -That 
which reflects is higher than what is reflected: the drive of him who 
does the reflecting,,that is, of the subject of consciousness, is called 
the higher drive.42 The lower drive, that is, nature, must be placed in 
subservience to the higher, that is, to reflection. This relation of sub-
servience which one appearance of the self has to the other is to be 
the highest synthesis. 
However, this latter identity and the identity of the transcendental 
viewpoint are totally opposed one to the other. Within the transcen-
dental scope Ego = Ego, that is to say, the Ego is posited in a [50] 
relation of substantiality or at the least in a relation of reciprocity. By 
contrast in [Fichte's] reconstruction of identity one Ego dominates 
and the other is dominated; the subjective is not equal to the objec-
tive. They stand in a relation of causality instead; one of them goes 
into servitude, and the sphere of necessity is subordinated to that of 
freedom. Thus the end of the system is untrue to its beginning, the 
result is untrue to its principle. The principle was Ego = Ego; the re-
sult is Ego not = Ego. The former identity is an ideal-real one; form 
and matter are one. The latter is merely ideal, form and matter are 
divided; the identity is a merely formal synthesis. 
This synthesis by way of domination comes about as follows. Pure 
drive aims at determining itself absolutely toward activity for the 
sake of activity. It is confronted by an objective drive, a system of 
limitations. In the union of freedom and nature, freedom surrenders 
some of its purity, and nature some of its impurity. In order for the 
synthetic activity to be pure and infinite still, it must be thought as 
an "objective activity whose final purpose is absolute freedom, abso-
lute independence from all of nature. This final purpose can never be 
achieved; [it turns into] an infinite series through whose continuation 
the Ego would become absolutely equal to Ego.43 Or in other words, 
40. Ibid., pp. 112-3 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 117). 
41. Fichte, Werke IV, 125-6 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 130-1). 
42. Fichte, Werke IV, 131 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 136). 
43. Compare Fichte, Werke IV, 149 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 157-8). 

139 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
the Ego suspends itself as object and therewith also as subject. But it 
should not suspend itself. There remains, then, for Ego only time, in-
definitely extended, filled with limitations and quantities; our old friend 
the infinite progress must help out. Where one expects the supreme 
synthesis one finds always the same ant~ thesis between a limited present 
and an infinity extraneous to it. Ego = Ego is the Absolute, is totality; 
there is nothing outside the Ego. In the system, however, the Ego does 
not get that far, and it never will, once time is to be mixed in; the 
Ego is absolutely infected with a non-Ego, and can only ever posit it-
self as a quantum of Ego. 
It follows that both in the theoretical and in the practical respect 
Nature is something essentially determined and lifeless. In the theo-
retical respect, nature is .self-limitation intuited, that is to say, it is the 
objective side of self-li~itation. Inasmuch as it is deduced as condi-
tion of self-consciousness, and posited in order to explain self-con-
sciousness, nature is simply something that reflection posits for the 
sake of the explanation, it is a [merely] ideal result. Since self-con-
sciousness is shown to be conditioned by nature, nature is accorded 
the dignity of an independent standing equal to that of self-conscious-
ness; but its independence is nullified again, because it is only posited 
by reflection and its fundamental character is oppositeness. 
In the practical respect, it is the same story. Here the terms of the 
synthesis are 'Self-determination without consciousness\ and self-deter-
mination by way of a concept, i.e., of natural drive and the drive to-
ward freedom for freedom's sake.44 In the synthesis nature becomes 
[51] something that the causality of freedom produces as a real result. 
The outcome is that the concept is supposed to be causal with respect 
to nature, and nature is supposed to be posited as absolutely deter-
mined. 
Reflection may set up its analysis of the Absolute wholly in terms 
of an antinomy. One term of this antinomy is the Ego, i.e., indeter-
minateness, or self-determination, and the other is the object, deter-
minateness. Since reflection recognizes both terms as original, it as-
serts of both that they are relatively unconditioned,· and so also 
relatively conditioned. But now reflection cannot get beyond this re-
ciprocity of mutual conditioning. It reveals itself as Reason by estab-
44. Each of these two basic drives tends towards a goal: the Naturtrieb tends 
towards enjoyment (Genuss), and the Trieb der Freiheit tends towards freedom 
itself. See especially Fichte, Werke IV, 128-31, 139-42 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 133-
7, 145-9). 

140 
Difference 
lishing this antinomy of the unconditioned that is conditioned. For 
through this antinomy reflection points towards an absolute synthesis 
of freedom and natural impulse; and in doing so, it has not main-
tained but nullified the opposition and the standing of the two terms 
or of either of them, and it has not maintained but nullified [the 
claim] that it is itself the Absolute and the eternal; it has thrown itself 
into the abyss of its perfection. On the other hand, if reflection asserts 
that it itself and one of its opposites is the Absolute and if it holds 
fast to the relation of causality, then the transcendental viewpoint and 
Reason have succumbed to mere reflection and to the intellect; the 
intellect has succeeded in fixing the rational as an absolute opposite in 
the form of an Idea. For Reason itself nothing is left but the impo-
tence of self-suspending requirements and the semblance of a formal 
mediation of nature and freedom by the intellect through the mere 
Idea of the suspension of the antitheses, the Idea of the independence 
of the Ego and of the absolute determinacy of nature which is posited 
as something to be negated, something absolutely dependent. But the 
antithesis itself has not vanished. On the contrary, it has been made 
infinite; for as long as one of its terms has standing the other has too. 
From this highest standpoint [of reflection] nature has the character 
of absolute objectivity, that is, of death; only from a lower standpoint 
does nature, as Subject-Object, have the semblance of life. Just as the 
Ego does not lose the form of its appearance as subject, when viewed 
from the highest standpoint [that Fichte reaches], so the character of 
nature as Subject-Object becomes a mere illusion, and absolute ob-
jectivity becomes its essence. 
For nature is the non-conscious production by [or of] the Ego and 
[any] production by [or of] the Ego is a self-determining, so that na-
ture itself is Ego, it is Subject-Object. "And just as my nature is pos-
ited, so there is also nature outside mine, for my nature is not the 
whole of nature [ ... ] Nature outside myself [ ... ] is posited in order 
to explain [ ... ] my nature. Since my nature is determined as a drive, 
a determining of self by self, nature outside myself must also be de-
termined in the same way, and this determination outside myself is 
the ground of the explanation of my nature."45 
The products of reflection, such as cause and effect, whole and part, 
etc. must now be predicated in their antinomy of this [unconscious] 
determining of self by self. [52] In other words, nature must be pos-
ited as cause and effect of itself, as being whole and part at once, etc. 
45. Fichte, Werke IV, p. 113 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. ll8). 

141 
Exposition of Fichte's System 
In this way nature takes on the semblance of being alive and organic.46 
However, this standpoint of the faculty of reflecting judgment, from 
which the objective is characterized as something alive, turns out to be 
a lower standpointY For the Ego finds itself as nature only so far as 
it intuits just its original boundedness, and posits the absolute limita-
tion of the basic drive objectively, or in other words when it posits 
itself objectively. From the transcendental standpoint, however, the 
Subject-Object is only acknowledged in pure consciousness, i.e., in 
unlimited self-positing; but this self-positing is confronted by an ab-
solute positing of the opposite, which is thus determined as the abso-
lute limit of the basic drive. Insofar as the_l~go qua drive does not 
determine itself according to the Idea of infinity, and hence posits 
itself as finite, there is this finitude, there is nature ;48 [but the Ego] 
qua "l;go is at the same time infinite and Subject-Object. Since the trans-
cendental viewpoint posits only the infinite as Ego, it thereby sepa-
rates the finite from the infinite. It extracts the subject-objectivity 
from what appears as nature, and there remains nothing to nature but 
the dead shell of objectivity. Nature, which was the finite-infinite be-
fore, is now deprived of its infinity and remains pure finitude opposed 
to Ego = Ego. What was Ego in it is pulled over to the subject. The 
transcendental viewpoint proceeds~ the.-identity, Ego = Ego, in 
which there is neither subjective nor objective, t_d~ their differentiation, 
which continues to be [conceived] as oppositing contrasted with self 
positing, or with Ego = Ego; and as the transcendental viewpoint de-
termines the opposites ever further, it, too, comes to a standpoint 
from which nature is posited for itself as Subject-Object. It should 
not be forgotten, however, that [for Fichte] this view of nature is only 
a product of reflection at a lower standpoint. In [his] transcendental 
deduction [of nature] the limit of the basic drive (posited as object, 
that is, nature) remains a pure objectivity absolutely opposed to the 
basic drive, the true being which is Ego = Ego, Subject = Object. 
46. Compare Fichte, Werke IV, 113-5 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 118-9). 
47. Compare pp. 151-4 below; also Hegel's criticism of Kant in Faith and 
Knowledge, pp. 85-92. 
48. The German text reads Insofern ich als Trieb ... sich endlich setzt, ist 
dieses Endliche, die Natur. This is what we have translated. However, if one 
were to delete the comma after Endliche, one would have "this finite is nature" 
(cf. Mery). And if one were to read ist [es] dieses Endliche, die Natur, one would 
have "it [the Ego] is this finite, [it is] nature." Either of these emendations 
makes good sense in this sentence, which confronts "Ego qua drive"· with "Ego 
qua Ego." 

142 
Difference 
This oppositiOn is the condition in virtue of which the Ego becomes 
practical: [for as practical] the Ego must suspend its opposite. The 
suspension Is thought of in such a way that one of the opposites is 
made dependent on the other. With respect to the practical sphere, 
nature is posited as absolutely determined by the concept. Insofar as 
nature is not determined by the Ego, the Ego has no causality, in oth-
er words, it is not practical. The standpoint which posited nature as 
living, disappears again; for the essence, the In-itself of nature, must 
now be nothing but a limit, a negation. From this practical standpoint, 
Reason is nothing but the dead and death-dealing rule of formal un-
ity, given over into the hands of reflection which puts subject and 
object into the [53] relation of dependence of the one on the other, 
the relation of causality. So it comes about that the principle of spec-
ulation, identity, is wholly set aside. 
In the exposition and deduction of nature, as it is given in [Fichte's] 
System of Natural Law the absolute opposition of nature and Reason 
and the domination of reflection reveal themselves in all their harsh-
ness.~!) 
For any rational being (Vernunftwesen) must make unto itself a 
sphere for its freedom; it ascribes this sphere to itself. But it is only 
by antithesis that it is itself this sphere; the sphere is constituted only 
insofar as the rational being posits itself exclusively in it, so that no 
other person can have any choice within it. In ascribing the sphere to 
itself, the rational being essentially sets it over against itself also. The 
subject qua the Absolute, spontaneously active, and determining itself 
to the thinking of an object-sets up its own sphere of freedom out-
side itself, and posits itself divorced from it. Its connection with its 
sphere is merely a having. The basic character of nature is to be a 
world of the organic being, an absolute opposite; the essence of na-
ture is atomistic lifelessness,;;o matter more or less fluid, or more or 
less tough and durable, matter which in a variety of ways is recipro-
cally cause and effect. 51 The concept of reciprocity does little to the 
49 For this part of Hegel's discussion (down to p 1-1-1 below) see 1n general 
Fichte, Werke Ill, 23-29, 56-85 (Kroeger, Rights, pp. 40-48, 87-125) 
50 Hegel is here criticizing Fichte's deduction of the body as a necessary con-
dition of a person's being the sub1ect of rights. His complaint is that, because of 
Its opposition to the Ego qua Ego, the body (and the organic in general) is for 
Fichte no more than a piece of atomistic matter, however complex the "articula-
tion" (Fichte's word for organic structure) of the body may be 
51. Compare Fichte, Werk" Ill, 68-70 (Kroeger, Rigl1ts, pp 103-4) 

143 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
total opposition of that which is merely cause or merely effect. Matter 
now becomes mutually modifiable in a variety 6f ways, but even the 
force for this impoverished union lies outside matter. Both the inde-
pendence of the parts in virtue of which they are supposed to be or-
ganic wholes themselves, and the dependence of the parts on the 
whole, make up the teleological dependence on the concept; for the 
articulation [of matter] is posited in behalf of another being, the ra-
tional being who is essentially divorced from it. Air, light, etc. turn 
into atomistic, shapeable, moldable matter; and matter here is meant 
in a quite ordinary sense, i.e., it is something strictly opposed to that 
which posits itself. 
By this route, Fichte comes closer than Kant to managing the anti-
thesis of nature and freedom and exhibiting nature as an absolute ef-
fect and as dead. In Kant, too, nature is posited as absolutely deter-
mined. But it cannot be thought of as determined by what Kant calls 
understanding (Verstand) ,52 for the variety of particular phenomena 
are left undetermined by our human discursive understanding; so they 
must be thought of as determined by another understanding. How-
ever, this determination by another understanding is to be taken 
merely as a maxim of our reflecting judgment.5'3 Nothing is asserted 
about the actual existence of this other understanding. Fichte does not 
need this detour, this idea of a separate understanding that is other 
than human, in order to let nature become determined. Nature is de-
termined immediately by and [54] for intelligence. 34 The latter sets 
absolute limits to itself and this self-limiting cannot be derived from 
Ego = Ego. It can only be deduced from it: 5" its necessity is to be 
52. We follow the model of all or almost all English translators of Kant in 
rendering his Verstand as understanding But the reader should remember that 
the word is the same as that which in its Hegelian use is here rendered through-
out as intellect. 
53. See above, note 6. 
54. In the Science of Knowledge Fichte defines "intelligence" as "the Ego posit-
ing itself as vorstellend" (Werke I, 228; Heath and Lachs, p. 219). This is the 
theoretical Ego, the Ego that posits itself as limited or determined by the non-
Ego. In Fichte's Science of Rights this theoretical Ego is the Venmnftwesen, or 
rational being. Once he has taken this first step in the self-limitation of the ab-
solute Ego, Fichte makes a further descent to "persons'· and finally to "individ-
uals" (as persons having bodies). 
55. Hegel does not explain this distinction between AbleTtzmg and Oeduktion 
(i.e., "transcendental deduction" a Ia Fichte) anywhere. But by Ableitzmg he 
probably means a simple and direct cognitive operation based on some elemen-
tary logical relation such as entailment or implication; whereas Oeduktion is a 

144 
Difference 
shown from the deficiency of pure consciousness. The intuition of 
this absolute limitedness of intelligence, of this negation, is objective 
nature. 
Because of its consequences, nature's relation of dependence on the 
concept, the opposition of [nature to] Reason, becomes even more 
striking in the two systems of the community of men. 56 
This community is conceived as a community of rational beings, a 
community forced to take the detour through the dominion of the 
concept. Any rational being has a double aspect for any other: (a) it 
is a free, rational being; (b) it is modifiable matter, something that can 
be treated as a mere thing (Sache). 57 This separation is absolute and 
once it has, in all its unnaturalness, been made basic, there is no long-
er the possibility of a pure mutual connection in which the original 
identity could present and recognize itself. Rather, every connection 
is one of dominating and being dominated according to the laws of a 
consistent intellect. The whole edifice of the community of living be-
ings is built by reflection. 
The community of rational beings appears as one conditioned by 
the necessary limitation of freedom; freedom gives itself the law of 
self-limitation.58 This concept of limitation constitutes a realm of free-
dom where every truly free reciprocal relation of life, every relation 
that is infinite and unlimited for itself, that is to say, beautiful, is nul-
lified; for the living [being] is rent into concept and matter and nature 
goes into servitude. 
Freedom is the characteristic mark of rationality; it is that which in 
itself suspends all limitation, and it is the summit of Fichte's system. 
In a community with others, however, freedom must be surrendered 
in order: to make possible the freedom of all rational beings living in 
community. Conversely the community is a condition of freedom. So 
freedom must suspend itself in order to be freedom. This again makes 
complex and indirect cognitive operation in which teleological and moral necessi-
ties are mixed with logical necessity through the use of the conveniently ambigu-
ous German verb sollen. Thus for instance: if perfect moral autonomy is to be 
(soil), then such and such requirements must be (soli) fulfilled. And perfect moral 
autonomy ought to (soli) be. Therefore these requirements are necessarily (soli) 
fulfilled. 
56. The "two systems" are the "Systematic Applications" of the Science of 
Rights (Fichte, Werke III, 92-303; Kroeger, Rights, pp. 137-387) and of the Sys-
tem of Ethics (Fichte, Werke IV, 157-365; Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 167-378). 
57. Compare Fichte, Werke III, 86-87 (Kroeger, Rights, pp. 127-8). 
58. Compare Fichte, Werke III, 86-93 (Kroeger, Rights, pp. 128-38). 

145 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
it clear that freedom is here something merely negative, namely, abso-
lute indeterminateness, i.e., it is a purely ideal factor as the self-posit-
ing was shown to be above :59 freedom regarded from the standpoint 
of reflection. This freedom does not come upon itself as Reason, but 
as the rational being,60 that is to say, in a synthesis with its opposite, 
a finite being. This synthesis of personality already includes the limi-
tation of one of the ideal factors, which is what freedom here is. Rea-
son and freedom in the rational being are no longer Reason and free-
dom but a singular entity. Hence the community of a person with 
others must not be regarded as a limitation of the true freedom of the 
individual but essentially as its enlargement. Highest community is 
highest freedom, both in terms of power and of its exercise. But it is 
precisely in thjs highest [55] community that freedom as an ideal fac-
tor and Reason as opposed t_o nature disappear completely. 
If the community of rational beings were essentially a limitation of 
true freedom, the community would be in and for itself the supreme 
tyranny. But only freedom as indeterminacy, and as ideal factor is 
being limited at this point [in Fichte], so that tyranny does not yet 
arise in the community directly from this idea by itself. But it does 
arise in the highest degree from the way that freedom is to be limited, 
in order to make possible the freedom of the other rational beings. For 
freedom is not supposed to lose, through the community, its form of 
being something ideal and opposite; on the contrary it is going to be 
fixed in this form and made dominant. Through a genuinely free com-
munity of living connections the individual renounces his indetermin-
acy [which is what Fichte calls] his freedom. In a living connection 
there is only freedom in the sense that it includes the possibility of 
suspending itself and entering into other connections. That is to say, 
freedom as ideal factor, as indeterminacy, disappears. In a living rela-
tion, insofar as it is free, the indeterminate is nothing but the possible, 
it is neither something actual made dominant, nor a concept that com-
mands. In the System of Natural Law, however, this suspension of 
indeterminacy is not what is understood as the free limitation of one's 
freedom. On the contrary, when limitation by the common will is 
raised to the status of law and fixed as a concept, true freedom, the 
possibility of suspending a determinate connection, is nullified. The 
living connection can no longer be indeterminate, so it is no longer 
rational but absolutely determined and made fast by the intellect. Life 
59. See p. 133 and the subsequent discussion. 
60. See note 54 above. 

146 
Difference 
has given itself up to servitude. Reflection dominates it and has gained 
the victory over Reason. 
This state of indigence and necessity61 is asserted to be natural law. 
The assertion does not, of course, carry any implication that the high-
est goal would be the suspension of this state and the construction 
through Reason of an organization of life free from all bondage to the 
concept, an organization that takes the place of this non-rational com-
munity of the intellect. On the contrary, the state of indigence and its 
infinite extension over all the stirrings of life is accepted as an abso-
lute necessity. This community under the dominion of the intellect 
is not presented [by Fichte] as one that is bound to make it its su-
preme law to suspend this indigence of life in which it is placed by 
the intellect, and to suspend this endless determination and domina-
tion in the true infinity of a beautiful community where laws are 
made superfluous by customs, the excesses of an unsatisfied life by 
hallowed joys, and the crimes of oppressed forces by the possibility of 
[56] activities directed toward great objects. But instead the lordship 
of the concept and the bondage of nature are made absolute and ex-
tended infinitely. 
The intellect is bound to fall into the making of endless determina-
tions. This exhibits in the most direct way the defectiveness of its 
principle, which is domination through the concept. Even [Fichte's] 
Need State62 does entertain the aim of preventing its citizens from 
doing harm rather than avenging it when it is done. It follows that it 
must not only forbid the actual commission of offenses under [threat 
of] punishment, but it must obviate the possibility of offenses. And to 
this end it must prohibit "actions which, though they will hurt no one 
and seem entirely indifferent, will yet make the harming of others 
easier, and their protection or the discovery of the guilty more diffi-
cult."63 Now, on the one hand, man submits to the State with no other 
desire but that of employing and enjoying his resources as freely as 
possible. But, on the other hand, there is simply no action at all from 
which the State could not with abstract consistency calculate some 
possible damage to others. And it is this endless possibility which the 
6/ Stand der Not: this condition is illustrated and discussed in Hegel's Early 
THeological Writings (e.g., Noh!, p. 262, Knox and Kroner, p. 208; and Noh!, PP· 
,_373-4). 
62. Notstaat: i.e., the State based on the conception of our natural condition as 
an "estate of need" (Stand der Not). 
63. Fichte, Werke III, 294 (Kroeger, Rights, p. 377). Compare Hegel, Philoso-
phy of Right, section 183. 

147 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
preventive intellect and its coercive authority, the police, have to deal 
with.64 So in this Ideal of a State there is no doing or stirring that is 
not bound to be subject to some law, subject to direct supervision and 
duly noticed by the police and the rest of the rulers; so that "in a 
State whose constitution is established on this principle, [ ... ] the 
police know pretty well where every citizen is at any time of day and 
what he is doing"* (see page 155 of the second part [of Fichte's Nat-
ural Law]).65 
64. Hegel actually says "its Gewalt, the duty of the police." 
*Just how these determinations and their purpose get lost in their own end-
lessness will best be made dear by some examples. The whole variety of crimes 
possible in imperfect States is prevented by making the police more perfect. 
Thus with respect to counterfeit bills of exchange [cashable by bearer upon his 
own signature] and money, we see how, on pp. 148 ff. [Werke III, 297-8; Kroeger, 
Rights, p. 381]: "Anyone handing in a check must prove through his passport 
that he is this definite person, where he can be found, etc. The recipient [ ... ] 
then simply adds on the back of the check to the name of the signer, 'With pass-
port from such and such authority.'-Just two additional words to write and one 
or two additional minutes to inspect pass and person; otherwise the transaction 
is as simple as before." (Or rather simpler, for a cautious man will probably be 
on his guard and not accept a check, though it appears quite all right, from a 
man he does not know; and to inspect a pass and a person is infinitely more 
simple than to get to [57] know him a bit in some other way.)-"In case the 
check stiq turns out to be bad, the person will soon be found when the investi-
gation has established who it is. Nobody is permitted to leave a place; he can be 
stopped at the gate." (The fact that our villages and many of our cities have no 
gates-not to speak of isolated dwellings-is no objection. On the contrary, the 
necessity of gates is herewith deduced.) "The traveller must state his destination, 
and this will be entered in the town's register and in his pass" (which entails the 
postulate that the gate attendant will be able to distinguish each traveller from 
ali the other folk passing through the gate)-"The traveller will nowhere be re-
ceived and accepted except at the destination entered in his pass. In the pass 
there is a factual description of the man (p. 146 [i.e., Werke III, 295; Kroeger, 
Rights, p. 379]) or, since descriptions must always remain ambiguous, a good 
portrait in its place in the case of persons who are important, and therefore able 
to pay for it" (in our case, persons capable of issuing bad checks). "The pass is 
made out of specially manufactured paper [ ... ] exclusively owned and super-
vised by the highest authority and the subordinate authorities which have to 
account for the paper consumed. This paper will not be imitated, for there is 
need of only one pass for a false check, and that one pass would require too 
many preparations and the cooperation of too many arts." (Here it is postulated 
that in a well-ordered State the need for more than one single counterfeit pass-
port could not arise. Factories for counterfeit passports, which are occasionally 
discovered in ordinary States, would find no customers.) Another State institu-
tion would also assist in preventing the counterfeiting of the privileged paper (p. 
152 [i.e., Werke III, 299-300; Kroeger, Rights, pp. 382-3]). This is the institution 

148 
Difference 
The determining and being determined are self-suspended in the 
infinity of the series to which they must proceed. The bounding of 
freedom must itself be infinite. This is the antinomy of a boundedness 
that is unbounded, in which the limitation of freedom and the State 
have disappeared. The theory has nullified its own principle, deter-
mination, by extending it to infinity. 
[According to Fichte] ordinary States are inconsistent in that they 
extend their policing authority (Ober-Polizei-Recht) to just a few 
types of possible offenses. For the rest, they entrust the citizens to 
themselves. They do this in the hope that a citizen does not first [58] 
have to be barred (beschriinkt) from modifying another citizen's 
modifiable matter through a concept and by means of a law. Yet every 
one of them could quite properly do so, for as a rational being he 
must in conformity with this freedom posit himself as determining 
the non-Ego and ascribe to himself the faculty of modifying matter in 
general. Imperfect States are imperfect because they must fix some 
antithesis or other; they are inconsistent because they do not follow 
their [chosen] antithesis through all [social] ties. But to make the anti-
thesis which splits man absolutely into rational being and modifiable 
matter, infinite [as Fichte does] and then make determination endless, 
is a consistency that is self-suspending. So this inconsistency is what 
is most perfect in the imperfect States. 
As a result of the absolute antithesis between pure drive and natur-
al drive [Fichte's] Natural Right offers us a picture of the complete 
lordship of the intellect and the complete bondage of the living being. 
It is an edifice in which Reason has no part and which it therefore 
repudiates. For Reason is bound to find itself most explicitly in its 
self-shaping ~s a people (Volk), which is the most perfect organiza-
tion that it can give itself. But that State as conceived by the intellect 
aimed at "preventing the counterfeiting of coins; [ ... ] since the State owns the 
monopoly of metals, etc., the State must not distribute the metals to the retailers 
without proof as to whom and for what use the received metals were issued." In 
the Prussian army a foreigner is supervised by only one trustee. In Fichte's state 
every citizen will keep at least half a dozen people busy with supervision, ac-
counts, etc., each of these supervisors will keep at least another half dozen busy, 
and so on ad infinitum. Equally, the simplest transaction will cause an infinite 
number of transactions. [Hegel marked the quotations by using spread type, but 
they are sometimes rather free.] 
65. Hegel refers to the first edition of 1798. See Fichte, Werke III, 302 (Kroeger, 
Rights, p. 386). 

149 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
is not an organization at all, but a machine;66 and the people is not 
the organic body of a communal and rich life, but an atomistic, life-
impoverished multitude. The elements of this multitude are absolutely 
opposed substances, on the one hand the rational beings as a lot of 
[atomic] points, and on the other hand a lot of material beings modi-
fiable in various ways by Reason, i.e., by intellect, the form in which 
Reason is here present. The unity of these elements is a concept; what 
binds them together is an endless domination. This absolute substan-
tiality of the points makes the basis for an atomistic system of practi-
cal philosophy in which, as in the atomistic system of nature, an 
intellect alien to the atom becomes law in the practical sphere under 
the name of Right. This Right is a concept of totality which must con-
front every action as its opposite, for every action is a determined 
one; a concept that is to determine every action and thus kill the liv-
ing element of true identity in it. Fiat justitia, pereat mundus is the 
law, and not even in the sense that Kant gave it: "let right be done 
though all the scoundrels in the world perish."67 But rather in this 
sense: right must be done, even though for its sake, all trust, all joy 
and love, all the potencies of a genuinely ethical identity, must be 
eradicated root and branch, as we say. 
We move on now to the system of the ethical community of man. 
It is common ground for [Fichte's] Ethics and his Natural Law alike, 
that the Idea must absol:ut_ely dominate over drive, that freedom must 
_9,ominate nature~ What distinguishes them is this: in the Natural Law, 
the subservience of free beings to the concept is strictly the absolute 
end in itself68 so that the fixed abstraction of the general will must 
here subsist apart and far from the individual, and have coercive au-
thority over him. In the Ethics, on the other hand, concept and nature 
must be posited as united in one and the same person. In the State, 
Right alone is to govern, while in the realm of morality, duty will 
only [59] have power insofar as the individual's Reason acknowledges 
it as law. 
Now, of course, it seems preferable to be one's own lord and bonds-
man than to be the bondsman of a stranger. But if in ethical life the 
relation of freedom and nature is supposed to become one of subjec-
66. Compare Hegel's "German Constitution" essay (Knox and Pelczynski, pp. 
159-63) and his Philosophy of Right, section 183. 
67. Perpetual Peace, Akad. VIII, 378; Beck, On History, p. 126. 
68. Or: "subservience ... to the concept in general is the absolute end in it-
self." 

150 
Difference 
tive lordship and bondage, a suppression of nature by oneself, then 
this is much more unnatural than the relation in the Natural Law 
where the commanding power appears as something other, as some-
thing outside the living individual. In this relation, the living being 
has always a certain independence locked up within it; what is not at 
one with it ( einig) is excluded from the self; the antagonist is an alien 
might. And even if faith in the oneness of the inner and the outer 
falls away still faith in one's inner harmony, an identity of character 
(eine Identitiit als Charakter) can endure; the inner nature is true to 
itself. In the Ethics, however, once the commander is transferred with-
in man himself, and the absolute opposition of the command and the 
subservience is internalized, the inner harmony is destroyed; not to be 
at one, but to be an absolute dichotomy constitutes the essence of 
man. He must seek for unity; but with absolute non-identity at his 
very basis only a formal unity remains for him. 
The formal unity of the concept, which is to govern, contradicts the 
manifold of nature (and vice versa); and the tug of war between them 
soon produces a significant drawback. The formal concept is to domi-
nate. But the formal concept is empty, it must get its content through 
connection with [natural] drive; thus there arises an infinite number 
of possibilities to act. On the other hand, if science [i.e., here, practi-
cal philosophy] maintains the concept in its unity, then it has not 
achieved anything with an empty formal principle such as this. 
The Ego is to determine itself to suspend the objective world, ac-
cording to the Idea of absolute spontaneity. It is to have causality 
with respect to the objective Ego with which it therefore forms ties. 
The ethical drive becomes a mixed one69 and hence it becomes as man-
ifold as the objective drive itself, with the result that a great number 
and variety of duties arise. Their number can be greatly reduced if 
one sticks to the universality of concepts, as Fichte does; but in that 
event one has only formal basic propositions again. Opposition among 
the manifold duties occurs under the name of "collisions" and this 
leads to an important contradiction. If the duties deduced are abso-
lute, they cannot collide. Yet they collide necessarily because they are 
opposite. Because the duties are equally absolute, choice is possible, 
and because of their collision, choice is necessary; and there is nothing 
present to do the deciding, except whim. If whim were to be excluded, 
69. For the distinction between "pure" and "objective" (or natural) drive, and 
for the ethical drive as a mixture of both, see Fichte, Werke IV, 141-2, 151-2 
(Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 148-9, 160-1). 

151 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
the duties could not have the same degree of absoluteness. In that 
case we would have to say that one duty is more absolute than the 
other. This contradicts the concept, [60] for every duty is, as duty, 
absolute. Yet where there is such a collision, if one must act, absolute-
ness has to be given up and one duty preferred to another. So, if self-
determination is to be possible, everything depends on finding the 
way to decide which concept of one's duty is to be preferred to the 
other, and on choosing among the conditional duties according to 
one's best insight. If whim and the contingency of inclinations are ex-
cluded from the self-determination of freedom through the highest 
concept, then self-determination now passes over into the contingency 
of insight and hence into sheer unawareness of what it is that decides 
a contingent insight. Kant, in his "Doctrine of Ethics," adds c~ 
questions to every duty established70 as absolute. Since we cannot 
suppose that, in doing this, he genuinely meant to scoff at the abso-
luteness of the duties he had established, we must obviously take it 
that he was rather seeking to indicate the necessity of casuistry in his 
"Doctrine of Ethics" and hence the necessity of not trusting one's 
own insight, because that is, of course, completely contingent. But it 
is precisely contingency that should be suspended by a "Doctrine of 
Ethics." Simply to exchange the contingency of inclinations for the 
contingency of insight cannot satisfy the ethical impulse which aims 
at necessity. 
In Systems of Ethics and Natural Law like these [of Fichte] there 
can be no thought of a synthesis [of nature and freedom] or an indif-
ference point/1 for the polarity of nature and freedom is fixed and 
absolute. Transcendentality gets lost in appearance, and in the intel-
lect which is the faculty of appearance. Absolute identity cannot find 
or establish itself here. Opposition remains absolutely fixed, even in 
its palliative, the infinite progress. It cannot be truly dissolved either 
for the ~individual in the indifference point which is the beauty of the 
soul and of the work [of art]; or for the complete and living common-
weal of individuals in a [religious] community (Gemeinde). 
70. Part II of the Metaphysik der Sitten (see, for example, Akad. VI, 422-3, 
425, 427); The Doctrine of Virtue, translated by M. J. Gregor, pp. 86-7, 89-90, 
. 91-2. 
71. The metaphor of the "indifference point" derives from the phenomena of 
magnetism. The crucial fact to keep in mind is that if a simple bar magnet is 
broken at the "point of indifference" we obtain two magnets each with its own 
indifference point. The old indifference point is now the North pole of one mag-
net and the South pole of the other. 

152 
Difference 
In his discussion of the duties of the various classes, Fichte does, to 
be sure, add a sort of last appendix to moral theory in which he speaks 
of the duties of the aesthetic artist. 72 He treats the aesthetic sense as 
a unifying bond between intellect and heart. Unlike the scholar who 
appeals only to the intellect and the [moral] folk teacher who appeals 
only to the heart, the artist addresses himself to "the whole mind in 
the unison of all its faculties." 73 Fichte therefore ascribes to the aes-
thetic artist and to aesthetic education .ua supremely effective connec-
tion with the promotion of the rational purpose."74 
Now, to begin with, it is incomprehensible, how in a science which 
is based, like this System of Ethics, on absolute opposition, there can 
be talk of a bond that unifies [61] intellect and heart, or of the whole-
ness of the mind. For, after all, absolute determination of nature ac-
cording to a concept is the absolute domination of the intellect over 
the heart, a domination that is predicated on the suspension of their 
union. But then, too, the quite subordinate role that is allotted to aes-
thetic education shows how little it counts on the whole toward the 
completion of the system. Art is credited with a supremely effective 
connection with the promotion of the rational purpose, because "it 
prepares the soil for morality, so that when morality comes on the 
scene, it finds that half of its work is already done. Man has freed 
himself from the fetters of sensibility."75 
It is remarkable how Fichte can express himself so well about beau-
ty, when what he says is inconsistent with regard to his system; and 
he does not apply what he says to his system at all, but immediately 
proceeds to apply it wrongly to the idea of the ethical law. 
"Art," Fichte says, "makes the transcendental point of view into 
the ordi~ary one. [ ... ] From the former the world is made, from the 
latter 1( is given: from the aesthetic point of view the world is given 
as it is made."76 -Through the aesthetic faculty we acknowledge a 
true union of the productive activity of the intelligence with the prod-
uct that appears to lf as given, of the Ego that posits itself as unlim-
ited with the Ego that posits itself as being limited, or rather, a union 
72. In the remainder of this section Hegel quotes liberally from section 31 of 
Fichte's System of Ethics (Werke IV, 353-6; Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 367-70). 
73. Fichte, Werke IV, 353 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 367). 
74. Fichte, Werke IV, 354-5 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 369). 
75. Fichte, Werke IV, 354-5 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 369). 
76. Fichte, Werke IV, 353-4 (Kroeger, Ethics, pp. 367-8). Hegel marked this 
quotation himself by the use of spread type. 

153 
Exposition of Fichte' s System 
of intelligence with nature, where, precisely for the sake of this pos-
sible union, nature has another side than that of being a product of 
intelligence. 77 The acknowledgment of the aesthetic union of produc-
ing and product is something quite different from the positing of the 
absolute ought, the absolute striving, and the infinite progress. For 
these latter are concepts, which, as soon as this highest [aesthetic] 
union is acknowledged, announce themselves to be antitheses or only 
the syntheses of subordinate spheres, which are therefore in need of a 
higher synthesis. 
The aesthetic view is further described as follows. "The given 
world, nature, has two sides: it is the product of our [self] limiting; 
and it is the product of our free, idealf action. [ ... ] Every shape in 
space should be viewed [ ... ] as an utterance of the inner fullness and 
force of just the body that has that shape. But one who accepts the 
first viewpoine8 sees nothing but forms that are distorted, oppressed, 
fear-ridden; he sees ugliness. He who accepts the second viewpoint 
sees vigorous fullness of nature, life and aspiration; he sees beauty."79 
-The action of intelligence in [Fichte's] Natural Law only produced 
nature as modifiable material; so it was not a free, ideait action; it 
was the action of intellect, not of Reason. 
The aesthetic view of nature is now applied to the ethical law; and 
certainly, the capacity for being regarded as beautiful cannot be an 
advantage that nature has over the ethical law. "The ethical law com-
mands absolutely and crushes all natural inclinations. He who looks at 
it in this fashion, relates himself to it like a slave. But the ethical law 
[ 62] is still, at the same time, the Ego itself, it comes out of the inner 
depth of our own being (Wesen); and if we obey it, we obey in the 
end only ourselves. He who looks upon it thus, sees it aesthetically.''80 
'We obey ourselves' means 'our natural inclination obeys our ethical 
law.' But in the aesthetic intuition of nature as the "expression of the 
inner fullness and force of bodies" the sort of sundered condition that 
belongs to obedience does not occur at all; while we do find it in ethi-
77. The text could also be translated: "nature has another side, as being a 
product of intelligence." (Compare Mery, p. 137). But compare the following 
quotation from Fichte. 
78. Fichte: "to view every shape in space as limitation by the adjacent bodies" 
(Werke IV, 354; Kroeger, Ethics, p. 368). 
79. Fichte, Werke IV, 354 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 368). 
80. Fichte, Werke IV, 354 (Kroeger, Ethics, p. 368). Hegel marked this quota-
tion himself by the use of spread type. 

154 
Difference 
cal life, according to this system, because in self-obedience we intuit 
natural inclination as bounded by its neighbour Reason, and drive as 
subservient to concept. This necessary viewpoint of [Fichte's] Ethics, 
far from being aesthetic, is precisely the one that reveals distorted, 
fear-ridden, oppressed forms, or ugliness. 
If the ethical law demands autonomy only in the sense of a deter-
mination by and through concepts; if nature can receive its due simply 
through a limiting of freedom according to the concept of the freedom 
of many rational beings; if these two types of oppression are the high-
est modes in which man constitutes himself as man, then there is no 
place for the aesthetic sense either in its pure form, as unlimited self-
enjoyment, or in its limited appearances, that is to say, in civil justice 
(burgerliche Rechtlichkeit) and in morality. For the aesthetic sense 
must be taken in its largest scope, as the perfected self-shaping of the 
totality within the union of freedom and necessity, of consciousness 
and the non-conscious; and in the aesthetic sense all determination 
according to concepts is so thoroughly suspended that all this business 
of the intellect (verstiindige Wesen) with domination and determina-
tion is ugly and hateful to it (hiisslich und zu hassen) wherever it 
comes across it. 

Comparison of Schelling's Principle 
of Philosophy with Fichte' s 
The basic character of Fichte's principle, as we have shown, is that 
the Subject-Object steps out of its i~ntity and is unable to reestab-
lish itself in it; because the different [i.e., pure and empirical con-
sciousness] g~-ts transposed into the causal relation. The principle of 
identity does not become principle of the _system; as soon as the for-
mation of the system begins, identity is abandoned. The system itself 
is a consistent product of the intellect, a mass of finitudes, which the 
original identity [ 63] cannot draw together into the focus of totality 
or to its absolute self-intuition. The Subject-Object, therefore, turns 
itself into a subjective Subject-Object and it does not succeed in sus-
pending this subjectivity and positing itself objectively. 
The principle of identity is the absolute principle of Schelling's sys-
tem as a whole. Philosophy and system coincide. Identity does not 
lose itself in the parts, still less in the result. 
For absolute identity to be the principle of an entire system it is 
necessary that both subject and object be posited as Subject-Object. 
In Fichte's system identity constitutes itself only as subjective Sub-
ject-Object. [But] this subjective Subject-Object needs an objective 
Subject-Object to complete it, so that the Absolute presents itself in 
each of the two Subject-Objects, and finds itself perfected only in 
both together as the highest synthesis that nullifies both insofar as 
they are opposed. As their point of absolute indifference, the Absolute 
encloses both, gives birth to both and is born of both. 
If the formal task of philosophy is taken to be the suspension of 
dichotomy/ Reason may try to solve it by nullifying one of the oppo-
sites and exalting the other into something infinite. This in effect [der 
Sache nach] is what happened in Fichte's system. But, in this solution, 
the opposition remains. For the opposite that is posited as Absolute is 
conditioned by the other, and just as it stands firm, so does the other. 
Both of the opposites, subject as well as object, must be suspended if 
the dichotomy is to be suspended; and they will be suspended as sub-
ject and object, if they are posited as identical. In the absolute iden-
tity subject and object are related to each other, and thus nullified; so 
1. Compare pp. 9Q-91 above. 

156 
Difference 
far there is nothing present for reflection and knowledge. Any phil-
osophizing that cannot achieve systematic form gets to this point. It is 
satisfied with the negative side, where everything finite is drowned in 
the infinite. It might, of course, emerge again as knowledge, and it is 
a matter of subjective contingency whether this kind of philosophizing 
is bound up with the need for a system or not. But if this negative 
side is itself the principle, there must not be any way out to knowl-
edge, since all knowledge has one foot in the sphere of finitude. 
Mystic rapture [Schwiirmerei] holds fast to this intuition of colorless 
hght; there is manifoldness in it only because it fights against the 
manifold. It lacks consciousness of itself, it is not aware that its con-
traction is conditioned by an expansion.2 So it is onesided, because it 
holds fast to an opposite and turns the absolute identity into an oppo-
site. In the absolute identity subject and object are suspended, but be-
cause they are within the absolute identity they both have standing 
too. This standing is what makes a knowledge possible; for in knowl-
edge their separation is posited up to a point. The separating activity 
is reflection; considered in isolation, reflection suspends identity. and 
the [64] Absolute, and every cognition should strictly be considered 
an error because there is a separating in it. This aspect of cognition-
that it is a separating and its product is something finite-turns all 
knowledge into something limited and hence into a falsehood. But in-
asmuch as every knowledge is at the same time an identity, there is 
no absolute error.-
The claims of separation must be admitted just as much as those of 
identity. When identity and separation are placed in opposition to 
each other, both are absolute, and if one aims to maintain identity 
through the nullification of the dichotomy, they [identity and dichot-
omy] remain opposed to each other. Philosophy must give the separa-
tion into subject and object its due. By making both separation and 
ifhe identity, which is opposed to it, equally absolute, however, philos-
'ophy has only posited separation conditionally, in the same way that 
such an identity-conditioned as it is by the nullification of its oppo-
site-is also only relative. Hence, the Absolute itself is the identity of 
identity and non-identity; being opposed and being one are both to-
gether in it. 
In its separating, philosophy cannot posit the separated [opposites] 
2 For the first mention of this antinomy see p 114 above Hegel return- to 
the problem of reconciling the principles of "contraction" and "expe1nsion" at 
the end of the essay-see below pp. 192-5. 

157 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
without positing them in the Absolute. Otherwise they would be pure 
opposites, having no character save that the one is not if the other is. 
This connection with the Absolute is not [the same as] their being 
suspended again, for then there would be no separation. Rather, they 
are to remain separate and must not lose this character when they are 
posited in the Absolute or the Absolute in them. Indeed, both must be 
posited in the Absolute, for what right could one of them have to 
priority over the other? And it is not only a matter of equal right, but 
of equal necessity; for if only one of them were connected with the 
Absolute and not the other, they would be posited as essentially un-
equal, their union would be impossible, and so would philosophy's 
task of suspending the dichotomy. Fichte posited only one of the op-
posites in the Absolute, or in other words, as the Absolute. For him, 
the right and the necessity reside in self-consciousness; for only self-
consciousness is a self-positing, a Subject-Object, and it does not first 
have to be connected with the Absolute as something higher; rather 
self-consciousness is itself the Absolute, that is, it is absolute identity. 
It has a stronger right to be posited as the Absolute, precisely because 
it posits itself; whereas the object does not: it is only posited by con-
sciousness. But this is only a contingent status for the object, a fact 
which becomes clear from the contingency of the Subject-Object 
posited as self-consciousness; for this Subject-Object is itself condi-
tioned. Its standpoint is therefore not the highest. It is Reason posited 
in a limited form, and it is only from the standpoint of this limited 
form that the object appears as something that is not self- [65] deter-
mining, but absolutely determined. Both of them, therefore, must be 
posited in the Absolute, or the Absolute must be posited in both 
forms while yet both of them retain separate standing. The subject, 
then, is subjective Subject-Object, and the object is objective Subject-
Object, and since a duality is now posited, each one of the opposites 
is opposed to itself and the partition goes on ad infinitum. Hence, 
every part of the subject and every part of the object is itself in the 
Absolute, an identity of subject and object; every cognition is a truth 
just as every speck of dust is an organization. 
It is only because the object itself is a Subject-Object that Ego = 
Ego is the Absolute. For it is only when the objective is itself Ego, 
only when it is itself Subject-Object, that Ego = Ego does not change 
into Ego ought to be equal to Ego. 
Because both subject and object are Subject-Object, the opposition 
of subject and object is real; for both are posited in the Absolute and 
through it they have reality. The reality of opposites and real opposi-

158 
Difference 
tion only happen because of the identity of the opposites.* If the 
object is an absolute object, it is something merely ideal and the oppo-
sition is likewise merely ideal. Since the object is merely ideaP and 
not in the Absolute, the subject, too, becomes something merely ideal. 
The Ego as the self-positing, and the non-Ego as the self-oppositing 
are such ideait factors. It is no help [to claim] that the Ego is sheer 
life and quickness, is doing and acting themselves, the most real+ 
[Allerrealste], the most immediate in the consciousness of everyone. 
As soon as the Ego is placed in absolute opposition to the object, it is 
nothing real, t but is only something thought, a pure product of re-
flection, a mere form of cognition.3 And out of products of mere re-
flection identity cannot construct itself as totality; for they arise 
through abstraction from the absolute identity which can only relate 
itself to them immediately through nullification, not through construc-
tion. Infinity and finitude, indeterminateness and determinateness, etc. 
are reflective products of the same sort. There is no transition from 
the infinite to the finite, from the indeterminate to the determinate. 
The transition as synthesis becomes an antinomy; for reflection, which 
* Plato expresses real opposition throu~h absolute identity thus: "The truly 
beautiful bond is that €vhkh makes itsel6 and ~hat it binds;~n; [ ... ]. For 
whenever, of any three numbers, or masses, or forces, the middle is such that 
what the first is for it, it is for the last, and conversely, what the last is for the 
middle, the middle is just that for the first, then since the middle has become the 
first and last, and the last and first conversely, have both become the middle, in 
this way they will all necessarily be the same; but things which are the same as 
against each other are all one." 
[The passage comes from Timaeus (31c-32a). Hegel used the "Bipontine" edi-
tion of Plato, which included the Latin translation of Marsilio Ficino, 11 vols. 
(Zweibrugge, 1781-86). His rendering of Plato is a fairly literal one, and we have 
tried to translate it accordingly. For comparison, and to facilitate understanding, 
here is the version of Cornford: "And of all the bonds the best is that which 
makes itself and the terms it connects a unity in the fullest sense; and it is of 
the nature of a continued geometrical proportion to effect this most perfectly. 
For whenever, of three numbers, the middle one between any two that are either 
solids (cubes?) or squares is such that, as the first is to it, so it is to the last, and 
conversely as the last is to the middle, so is the middle to the first, then since 
the middle becomes first and last, and again the last and first become middle, in 
that way all will necessarily come to play the same part toward one another, and 
by so doing they will all make unity." (Plato's Cosmology, p. 21).] 
3. In this paragraph, at least, Hegel seems to use the forms reel!, real, and 
ideell, ideal quite indifferently. (The reader should note that except where marked 
with a dagger [f] "ideal" always represents ideell and "real" represents reel!). 

159 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
separates absolutely, cannot allow a synthesis of the finite and the 
infinite, of the determinate and the indeterminate [66] to be brought 
about, and it is reflection that legislates here. It has the right to allow 
a unity that is only formal, once the dichotomy into the infinite and 
the finite, which is its work, has been permitted and accepted. But 
Reason synthesizes them in the antinomy, and so nullifies them. An 
ideal opposition is the work of reflection, which totally abstracts from 
absolute identity; while a real opposition, on the other hand, is the 
work of Reason, which posits the opposites, identity and non-identity, 
as identical, not just in the form of cognition, but in the form of being 
as well. And the only real opposition of this kind is the one in which 
subject and object are both posited as Subject-Object, both subsisting 
in the Absolute, and the Absolute in both, and hence reality in both. 
For this reason it is only in real opposition that the principle of iden-
tity is a real principle. If the opposition is ideal and absolute, identity 
remains a merely formal principle, for it is posited in only one of the 
opposite forms, and cannot claim recognition as Subject-Object. A 
philosophy based on a formal principle becomes itself a formait phil-
osophy. After all, as Fichte says somewhere,4 his own system would 
be only formally correct for God's self-consciousness-a conscious-
ness in which everything would be posited through the Ego's being 
posited. But, on the other hand, if the matter, the object, is itself a 
Subject-Object, then the separation of form and matter can drop out, 
and the system, like its principle, is no longer merely formal, but for-
mal and material at the same time: everything is posited through ab-
solute Reason. Only in realf opposition can the Absolute posit itself 
in the form of the subject or of the object; and only then can there be 
a transition of subject into object or of object into subject in their 
essence: the subject can become objective to itself-because it is orig-
inally objective, that is, because the object itself is Subject-Object, or 
the object can become subjective because originally it is just Subject-
Object. Both subject and object are Subject-Object. This is just what 
their true identity consists in, and so does the true opposition they 
are capable of. When they are not both Subject-Object, the opposition 
is merely ideal and the principle of identity is formal. Where the iden-
tity is formal and the opposition is ideal, nothing more than an in-
complete synthesis is possible. Or in other words, the identity, insofar 
as it synthesizes the opposites, is itself just a quantum, and the differ-
4. See Fichte, Werke I, 253 (Heath and Lachs, p. 224). 

160 
Difference 
ence is qualitative;5 in the fashion of the categories where the first, 
for example, reality, is posited in the third, and so is the second, but 
only quantitatively.6 On the other hand, if the opposition is real, it is 
merely quantitative. The principle is simultaneously ideal and real, it 
is the only quality; and the absolute, which reconstructs itself out of 
the quantitative difference, is not a quantum, but totality. 
[ 67] 
To posit true identity of subject and object, both must be pos-
ited as Subject-Object; each of them is now capable of being, on its 
own, the object of a special science. Each of these sciences requires 
abstraction from the principle of the other. In the System of Intelli-
gence the objects are nothing in themselves; nature only has standing 
in consciousness. That the object is a nature, and that intelligence, as 
consciousness, is conditioned by it-this is what we abstract from [in 
the System of Intelligence]. In the System of Nature, on the other 
hand, we forget that nature is something known; the ideait determin-
ations nature receives in science, are also immanent in it. Still this 
mutual abstraction is not a onesidedness of the sciences; it is not a 
subjective abstraction from the real principle of the other science, 
supposedly made for the sake of knowledge, and destined to disap-
pear at a higher standpoint. It is not here the case that, considered in 
themselves, the objects of consciousness which idealism takes to be 
nothing but products of consciousness, are properly something abso-
lutely different and have an absolute standing outside consciousness 
(ausser dem Wesen des Bewusstseins); or that nature, on the other 
hand, which is posited in its science as self-determining and having 
its own ideaJf side (in sich selbst ideell) is, considered in itself, only 
object, and any identity Reason recognizes in nature is only a form 
lent to it by knowledge. We abstract not from the inner principle, but 
only from the peculiar form of the other sciente, and our purpose is 
to obtain purity for each, that is to say, the inner identity of both. 
Abstraction from what is peculiar to the other is abstraction from 
onesidedness. Nature and self-consciousness are in themselves as they 
are posited by speculation in their respective science. They are so in 
themselves because it is Reason that posits them. Reason posits them 
as Subject-Object, hence as the Absolute; the Absolute is the only 
In-itself. Reason posits them as Subject-Object, because it is Reason 
5. Lasson simply deletes this semicolon in the text of the first edition. Glockner 
preserves it. Mery, who follows Lasson, discusses this difficult passage at length 
(pp. 183-5, note m). 
6. See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 80, B 106; B 111. 

161 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
itself that produces itself as nature and as intelligence, and cognizes 
itself in them. 
The standpoints of the two sciences differ but do not contradict 
each other; and this is so because of the true identity in which sub-
ject and object are posited, both being Subject-Object, and because 
the opposition of subject and object is therefore a real one, so that 
each is capable of passing over into the other. If subject and object 
were absolutely opposed and only one of them were Subject-Object, 
the two sciences could not stand side by side in equal dignity. Only 
the one standpoint would be that of Reason. It is only because one 
and the same [Absolute] is being constructed in the necessary forms 
of its existence in both of the two sciences that either of them is pos-
sible at all. They appear to contradict each other because in each of 
them the Absolute is posited in a form opposite to that of the other, 
and this contradiction is not suspended by asserting that just one of 
the two is the unique science, [68] and nullifying the other one from 
the standpoint of that one. The higher standpoint from which the 
onesidedness of both sciences is truly suspended is the standpoint 
which recognizes the same Absolute in both of them. The science of 
the subjective Subject-Object has hitherto been called transcendental 
philosophy; that of the objective Subject-Object, philosophy of na-
ture. Insofar as each is opposed to the other, the subjective has prior-
ity in transcendental philosophy, the objective in the philosophy of 
nature. In both of them the subjective and objective are placed in the. 
relation of substantiality. 7 In transcendental philosophy, the subject, 
as intelligence, is the absolute substance and nature is an object, an 
accident. In the philosophy of nature, the absolute substance is na-
ture, of which the subject, intelligence, is only an accident. Now, the 
higher standpoint is not one that suspends one or the other of the two 
sciences, and asserts that the subject alone, or the object alone is the 
Absolute. Nor is it a standpoint which mixes the two sciences to-
gether. 
What happens when they are mixed together is this. If what be-
longs to the science of nature is mixed up in the system of intelli-
gence, transcendent hypotheses arise. 8 Because of the false semblance 
7. Compare Kant, Critique of Judgment, section 73. 
8. If "transcendent" in Kant meant "beyond those limits of any possible ex-
perience which The Critique of Pure Reason established," "transcendent" here 
means "below that authentic union of the dichotomies which the speculative 
philosophy establishes." 

162 
Difference 
of a union of consciousness and the non-conscious, these can be 
blinding. They pretend to be natural and, in fact, they do not fly be-
yond the palpable. The fiber theory of consciousness is an example. 9 
On the other hand, if intelligence as such is mixed up in the doctrine 
of nature, hyperphysical, and especially teleological explanations re-
sult. Both of these mixture blunders arise from the urge to explain. 
For the sake of explanation intelligence and nature are put into a rela-
tion of causality, the one being the ground, and the other that which 
is grounded. Nothing is achieved in this way, however, except that 
the opposition gets fixed as absolute, and through the semblance of a 
merely formal identity-such as causal identity is-the way to abso-
lute unification is completely cut off. 
The other standpoint from which the contradictory aspect of the 
two sciences is supposed to be suspended depends on denying that 
one or the other of the two sciences is a science of the Absolute. 
Dualism may very well fall in with the science of intelligence; and 
yet still allow that things [in the objective realm] are proper beings 
(Wesen); with this in mind it can take the science of nature to be such 
a system of the proper being of things: let each of the two sciences 
be as valid as it likes; there is room for both to stay peacefully side 
by side. The trouble with this view is that the essence of the two sci-
ences as sciences of the Absolute has been overlooked; for the Abso-
lute is no [mere] juxtaposition. 
Or there is yet another standpoint which denies that one or other 
of the two sciences is a science of the Absolute. This is the one [69] 
which would suspend the positing of the principle of one science in 
the Absolute, or the positing of the Absolute in the appearance of 
this principle. The most remarkable example in this regard is the 
standpoint of what is ordinarily called transcendental idealism. We 
have maintained that this science of the subjective Subject-Object is 
one, and only one of the [two] integrating sciences of philosophy. We 
have shown that this science is onesided when it claims to be science 
par excellence and we have exhibited the shape that nature has from 
9. Mery suggests that the Traite des membranes (Paris, 1800) of M. F. X. Bichat 
(1771-1802) may be meant. But (i) it is unlikely that Hegel was so completely 
au fait with medical research in 1801; and (ii) when he did read Bichat he always 
regarded him with a respect that was well merited (see the Philosophy of Nature, 
additions to sections 354-5). Mery's other candidate, J. C. Lossius (1748-1813), 
is a much more probable target. His book Physical Causes of Truth (1775) "at-
tempts to explain contradictions as 'conflicts between nerves'" (L. W. Beck, Early 
German Philosophy, p. 322 n.). 

163 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
its standpoint. But we still want to consider here the form which the 
science of nature assumes when it is constructed from this standpoint. 
Kant acknowledges nature: he posits the object to be something 
undetermined (by understanding) 10 and he views nature as Subject-
Object in that he treats the product of nature as an end of nature, as 
purposeful without a concept of purpose, as necessary without being 
mechanistic, as identity of concept and being. But at the same time 
this view of nature is supposed to be merely teleological/1 that is to 
say, it only serves validly as a maxim for our limited human under-
standing whose thinking is discursive and whose universal concepts 
do not contain the particular phenomena of nature. This human per-
spective is not supposed to affirm anything concerning the reality of 
nature. The perspective remains wholly subjective, therefore, and na-
ture purely objective, something merely thought. The synthesis of 
nature as determined and yet also not determined by understanding, 
is supposed to remain a mere Idea in a sensuous understanding; and 
for us men it is quite impossible that explanation in the mechanical 
mode should ever converge with purposiveness. These positions 
adopted in the critical philosophy are on a most subordinate, non-ra-
tional plane because they posit human reason in strict opposition to 
absolute Reason. All the same, they do rise to the Idea of a sensuous 
intellect, and sensuous intellect is Reason. Yet in itself, that is to say, 
in Reaso"n, the convergence of mechanism of nature and purposiveness 
of nature is not supposed to be impossible. But Kant has not given up 
the distinction between what is in itself possible and what is real. Nor 
has he raised the necessary supreme Idea of a sensuous intellect to 
reality. 12 So in his science of nature13 he cannot, in the first place, 
10. Verstand: see note 52 on p. 143 above. 
11. Compare the Critique of Judgment, sections 62-68 (Akad. V, 362-84). 
12. This curious remark about a sinnliche Verstand refers to Kant's discussion 
of the "intuitive intellect" in the Critique of Judgment, sec. 77 (Akad. V, 405-10; 
Meredith, Teleological Judgment, pp. 60-7). In fact the whole "Dialectic of the 
Teleological Judgment" (sections 69-78) should be studied here, especially sec-
tions 75-78. The Critique of Judgment is more helpful than any of Kant's scat-
tered remarks about "intellectual intuition" and "intuitive intellect (or under-
standing)''' in the Critique of Pure Reason (for which see Norman Kemp Smith's 
index). Fichte's attempts to revise the Kantian conception of intellectual intuition 
and intuitive intellect (see for instance Werke I, 471-4; Heath and Lachs, pp. 45-
7) also throw some light on the way Schelling and Hegel went about their more 
radical tran~formation. 
13. Hegel now turns his attention to Kant's Metaphysical Foundations of Nat-
ural Science (1786). 

164 
Difference 
allow any insight into the possibility of basic forces; and in the sec-
ond place, a science of nature of this kind, a science for which nature 
is matter-i.e., something absolutely opposite, something that does 
not determine itself-can only construct a mechanics. And even with 
all the poverty of its forces of attraction and repulsion, it has yet 
made matter too rich; for force is something internal that produces 
something external, it is a self-positing = Ego, and from the purely 
idealistic viewpoint no such thing can pertain to matter. [Kant]l4 con-
ceives matter simply as the [70] objective, as that which is opposed to 
the Ego. For him, attractive and repulsive forces are not merely super-
fluous; they are either purely ideal, in which case they are not forces, 
or else they are transcendent. The only construction of phenomena 
that he can allow is mathematical, not dynamical. 15 The phenomena 
must be given, and they are filtered by the categories. Now this filter-
ing may produce all sorts of correct concepts, to be sure, but it does 
not confer any necessity on the phenomena; and the chain of neces-
sity is the formal aspect of what is scientific in the construction. The 
concepts remain contingent with respect to nature just as nature does 
with respect to the concepts. For this reason correctly constructed 
syntheses by way of the categories would not necessarily have to be 
corroborated by nature itself. Nature can only offer variegated dis-
plays that could count as contingent schemata for laws of the under-
standing, exemplary by-plays whose living peculiarity would fade 
away precisely because only the determinations of reflection [i.e., the 
categorized aspects] are recognized in them. And conversely the cate-
gories are only impoverished schemata of nature. 
If nature is only matter, if it is not Subject-Object, then no scien-
tific construction of nature is possible for which knower and known 
(Erkennendes und Erkanntes) are necessarily one. A Reason which 
has made itself into reflection by opposing itself to the object abso-
lutely, can only proceed by deduction when it lays down more about 
nature a priori than its universal character as matter. This universal 
14. The intended subject of this and the next two sentences is not quite cer-
tain. Hegel's er could refer to "the purely idealistic viewpoint." For "Kant" we 
have to go back to the beginning of a long and complex sentence. 
15. For this basic distinction see Critique of Pure Reason, B 110. (Kant's vari-
ous discussions of it in the first Critique are easily located with the aid of N. K. 
Smith's index.) But the essential context of Hegel's discussion here is in the 
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. See Akad. IV, 467-79 and 496-553 
(especially p. 470). See also Kant's "Comment" regarding "Explication 4" of the 
"Phoronomy" (Akad. IV, 486-7; Ellington, p. 27). 

165 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
character remains basic; the manifold further determinations are pos-
ited for and by reflection. A deduction of this kind gives the illusion 
of a-priority because it posits the concept, the product of reflection, as 
something objective. Because it posits nothing else, it remains, of 
course, immanent. Essentially this kind of deduction is identical with 
the view [Wolff's] that acknowledges only external purposiveness in 
nature. The sole distinction is that this deduction develops more sys-
tematically from a determinate point, for example, from the body of 
the rational being; 16 but in both views nature is something absolutely 
determined by the concept, i.e., by something alien to it. The teleolog-
ical view which only acknowledges nature as determined according to 
external purposes, has an advantage in respect of completeness, for it 
is able to absorb the manifold of nature as it is given in experience. 
[Fichte's] deduction of nature, on the other hand, has a determinate 
point of departure and because of the latter's incompleteness, it pos-
tulates more and more-that is what the deduction consists of. It is 
immediately satisfied with what it postulates, and the postulation is 
supposed to supply directly whatever the concept requires. Whether 
an actual natural object can really supply what is required by itself is 
of no concern to the deduction, which can only find this out by ex-
perience. If the directly postulated object cannot be found in an ade-
quate form in nature, then another object is deduced, and so on, until 
the purpose is found to be fulfilled. The order of these deduced ob-
jects depends upon the definite ends that serve as points of departure, 
and it is only to the extent that the objects [71] have a connection 
with respect to this end, that they are coherent among themselves. 
Properly speaking, however, they are not capable of an inner coher-
ence. For if the object that was directly deduced is found by experi-
ence to be inadequate to the concept that has to be satisfied, then this 
single object, since it is infinitely determinable externally, gives rise 
to an infinite dispersion. The only way in which this dispersion could 
be avoided at alC would be for the deduction to draw its various 
points into a circle; but it cannot establish itself at the inner center of 
the circle because from the outset it is outside it.17 Concept and object 
are mutually external to each other. 
So then [we have seen that] neither of the two sciences can estab-
lish itself as the only one, neither can suspend the other. For then the 
Absolute would be posited in only one form of its existence; and as 
16. It is clear that Hegel's example is now Fichte once more, rather than Kant. 
17. Literally "it is at the outer center." 

166 
Difference 
soon as it posits itself in the form of existence, it must posit itself in 
a duality of form; for appearing and dichotomy [of subject and ob-
ject] are the same thing. 
Both sciences present the Absolute as it emerges from the lower 
levels of one form of its appearance and gives birth to itself as the 
totality in this form. Because of this inner identity, the two sciences 
are equal as to their coherence and their sequence of stages. They 
corroborate each other. One of the older philosophers put it somewhat 
like this: the order and coherence of ideas (the subjective) is the same 
as the coherence and order of things (the objective) .18 Everything is in 
one totality only: the objective totality and the subjective totality, the 
system of nature and the system of intelligence are one and the same; 
to any subjective determination there corresponds the very same ob-
jective determination. 
As sciences they are objective totalities and proceed from one lim-
ited item to another. But each limited item is itself in the Absolute 
and is thus internally unlimited. It loses its external limitedness by 
being placed in the systematic context of the objective totality. In this 
totality it has truth even as a limited item, and to determine its place 
is to know it.-Jacobi said that systems are organized structures of 
not-knowing. 19 We have only to add that the non-knowing-the cog-
nition of single items-becomes knowledge by becoming organized. 
Apart from this external equality which holds between these sci-
ences insofar as they are mutually isolated, their principles also nec-
essarily permeate each other directly. The principle of the one is the 
subjective Subject-Object, and of the other the objective Subject-Ob-
ject; hence the system of subjectivity also contains the objective, and 
the system of objectivity contains the subjective. Nature is an imma-
nent ideality just as intelligence is an immanent reality. The two poles 
of cognition and being [72] are present in each, so that each has also 
the point of indifference in itself; but in one system the ideal pole 
prevails, in the other the real pole. In nature, the ideal pole does not 
reach the point of absolute abstraction, that posits itself over and 
against the infinite expansion as a point within itself. This is how the 
ideal pole constructs itself in Reason. In the intelligence, the real pole 
18. Spinoza, Ethics, Part II, prop. VII. 
19. Jacobi, Werke III, 29. Jacobi an Fichte: "Our sciences, taken merely as 
such, are games which the human spirit invents to pass its time. In these games 
the human spirit organizes only its ignorance without coming a hair's breadth 
closer to what is true." 

167 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
does not achieve the envelopment of the infinite, which in this con-
traction posits itself as infinitely outside itself. This is the way the 
real constructs itself in matter. 
Each of the two systems is both a system of freedom and a system 
of necessity at the same time. Freedom and necessity are ideal factors, 
so they are not in real opposition. Hence the Absolute cannot posit 
itself as Absolute in either of these two forms; and the philosophical 
sciences cannot be, the one a system of freedom, the other a system 
of necessity. A freedom set apart like that would be a formal freedom, 
just as a necessity set apart would be a formal necessity. Freedom is 
the character of the Absolute when it is posited as something inner, 
s'Omething that remains unlimited even when it posits itself in a lim-
ited form, i.e., in definite points of the objective totality. That is to 
say, it remains what it is, even when it is viewed as opposed to its 
being; and when so viewed, it is viewed as something inner, hence as 
capable of relinquishing its being and passing into another appear-
ance. Necessity is the character of the Absolute viewed as something 
outer, as an objective totality, hence as a [system of] externality 
whose parts, however, have no being apart from the whole [system] 
of objectivity. Intelligence and nature are in real opposition because 
they are posited in the Absolute. For this reason, the ideal factors, 
freedom and necessity, pertain to both of them. But whim and con-
tingency have their place only from subordinate standpoints and are 
banished from the concept of the science of the Absolute. For whim is 
only the semblance of freedom, it is a freedom wholly abstracted from 
necessity, or from freedom as a totality-and this abstraction can only 
take place where freedom is already posited within a single sphere20 
-just as contingency, which is what corresponds to whim in the 
realm of necessity, is the positing of single parts as if they were for 
themselves, and did not exist solely in and through the objective to-
tality. The truth, however, is that necessity belongs to intelligence 
just as it does to nature. For since intelligence is posited in the Abso-
lute, the form of being pertains to it, too: it must split itself and ap-
pear; it is a fully developed organization of cognition and intuition. 
Every shape that it assumes is conditioned by opposed shapes, and if 
their abstract identity is isolated from the shapes themselves as free-
20. Innerhalb einer einzelnen Sphiire: probably this means "within the sphere 
of a singular [rational] agent." (Compare the following remark about contingen-
cy. If this view is right, then "freedom as a totality" refers to the politically ar-
ticulated autonomy of the Volk.) 

168 
Difference 
dom, this freedom is only an ideal pole of the indifference point of 
intelligence-the other immanent pole here being an objective totality. 
[73] And on the other side, nature has freedom. For nature is not a 
stillness of being, it is a being that becomes; or in other words, it is 
not split and synthesized from the outside, it sunders itself and unites 
itself by itself; and in all of its shapes it posits itself freely, not just 
as something limited, hut as the whole. Its non-conscious development 
is a reflection of the living force which, endlessly splitting itself, yet 
posits itself in every limited shape and is identical [in all of them]. 
To this extent no configuration of nature is limited, each is free.-
Hence, the science of nature is the theoretical part of philosophy, 
and the science of intelligence its practical part; but at the same time 
each science has for itself a theoretical and a practical part of its own 
in its turn. In the system of nature, identity, at the level of light, is 
alien to heavy matter, not in itself but as a potency;:'!~ is an alien 
[force] which splits and integrates matter into cohesion'-and produces 
a system of inorganic nature. In the same way for the intelligence that 
produces itself in objective intuitions, identity is not present at the 
level of self-positing. The identity does not cognize itself in the [ ob-
jective] intuition. The identity produces both [the system of inorganic 
nature and the world of objective intuitions] without reflecting upon 
its action; and both are therefore the concern of a theoretical part. 
The intelligence, however, does cognize itself in the will, and places 
itself as itself [i.e., consciously] within objectivity nullifying the in-
tuitions that it produced non-consciously. And equally nature be-
comes practical in organic nature in that light joins its product and 
becomes internal. In inorganic nature, light posits the point of con-
traction outside in crystallization as an external ideality. In organic 
nature, light forms itself as something internal, into the contraction 
that is the brain; already at the level of plant life, there is the blossom 
in which the inner light-principle disperses itself in colors and rapidly 
fades away in them. Yet through the polarity of the sexes the inner 
light posits itself as both subjective and objective in the plant; and it 
does so still more firmly in the animal: the individual seeks and finds 
itself in another. In the animal the light remains more intensely in-
ward; it posits itself as more or less changeable voice, or in other 
words, it posits animal individuality as something subjective in uni-
versal communication: it posits itself as cognizing and to he recog-
nized. The identity [of the inner light] is set forth by the science of 
nature through the reconstruction of the moments [i.e., moving pow-
ers] of inorganic nature from the inside outwards. Because of this the 

169 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
science has a practical part. [For instance] reconstructed [i.e., repeated 
at the organic level] practical magnetism is the suspension of the 
gravity that expands itself outwardly into poles; it is the recontraction 
of gravity into the point of indifference which is the brain, and the 
transposition of the two poles into the inner life, as a pair of indiffer-
ence-points, such as nature has already set up [outwardly] in the 
elliptical orbits of the planets.21 Electricity, reconstructed from the 
inside, posits the sexual difference of organisms. Each organism pro-
• 
duces [74] the [sexual] difference through itself, posits itself ideally 
on account of the lack [it feels], finds itself objectively in another or-
ganism.-Nature, so far as it becomes practical through the chemical 
process has put the third which mediates between the two different 
organisms back into them as something inward. The third appears as 
a tone, an inward sounding that produces itself. Like the third body 
of the inorganic process,22 this sounding [an animal voice] is without 
potency and passes away; it extinguishes the absolute substantiality 
of the different beings and brings them to the indifference of mutual 
self-recognition, an ideaif positing which does not die out again in a 
real identity, as the sexual relation does. 
We have thus far set the two sciences with their inner identity 
against each other. In one of them, the Absolute is subjective in the 
form of" cognition, in the other it is objective in the form of being. 
Because they are placed in opposition to each other, being and cogni-
tion become ideal factors or forms; each of them is present in both 
sciences, but in one science cognition is ma~ter and being is form, 
while in the other being is matter and cognition is form. The Abso-
lute is the same in both, and is set forth by the sciences not merely as 
opposite in form, but insofar as the Subject-Object posits itself in 
them. Hence the sciences themselves are not just ideally, but really 
opposed, and for this reason they must also be treated as a single co-
herent science forming one continuous whole. Insofar as they are op-
posed to each other, they are, to be sure, internally closed in them-
selves and form totalities; but the totalities are at the same time only 
relative, and as such they tend toward the point of indifference. As 
21. The construction of the planetary orbits by way of a line with two indif-
ference points was a principal task of Hegel's Latin dissertation On the Orbits 
of the Planets (1801; already drafted in German before the present essay was 
Written). 
22. The reference is probably to the acid medium between the two poles of a 
Voltaic pile. 

170 
Difference 
identity and relative totality, the indifference point always lies within 
the sciences themselves; but as absolute totality it lies outside them. 
But inasmuch as both sciences are sciences of the Absolute and their 
opposition is real, they are the poles of the indifference [point] and 
cohere with one another at this point itself; they are themselves the 
lines which link the pole with the center. The center is itself doubled, 
however, identity being one, and totality the other, and in this per-
spective the two sciences appear as the progressive evolution, or self-
construction, of identity into totality. 
The indifference point towards which the two sciences strive (inas-
much as they are opposed when looked at in terms of their ideal fac-
tors) is the whole regarded as a self-construction of the Absolute; 
this is their ultimate peak. The point of transition, the middle term 
through which identity constructing itself as nature passes over to 
Qdentity constructing itself as intelligence, is the internalization of the 
light of nature, the lightning stroke of the ideal upon the real, as 
Schelling calls it,23 its self-constitution as point. This [75] point is 
Reason, the turning point of both sciences; and it is the ultimate apex 
of nature's pyramid, its final product, the point of arrival at which it 
becomes complete. But as a point it must likewise expand into a na-
ture. Science establishes itself at this point as its center and divides 
from here into two parts, assigning the non-conscious production to 
one side and the conscious production to the other. But at the same 
time science knows that intelligence as a real factor takes the whole 
self-construction of nature on the other side over into its own realm 
, -it has all that precedes it or stands beside it within itself; and it 
, ~· ·J ·knows, too, that ~ature as a real factor has equally immanent in it 
what is set against it in science. In this knowledge all the ideality of 
the factors together with their onesided form is suspended; this is the 
unique higher standpoint where both sciences are lost in each other: 
for the division between them is acknowledged to be just a scientific 
one, and the ideality of the factors is only posited for the purposes of 
science. 
This view is immediately only negative. It simply suspends the sep-
aration of the two sciences and of the forms in which the Absolute 
has posited itself. It is not a real synthesis, it is not the absolute in-
difference point where these forms are nullified in that they both sub-
sist united. The original identity expanded its non-conscious contrac-
23. The reference is to "Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie" (1801) 
§ 145, Zusatz 3. See Schelling, Werke IV, 205. 

171 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
tion-subjectively feeling, objectively matter-into the objective to-
tality, the endlessly organized arrays and sequences of space and time. 
AgaJnst this expansion the original identity set the subjective totality, 
the contraction which is self-constitutive by nullifying the expansion, 
in the self-cognitive point of (subjective) Reason. The original iden-
tity must now unite both in the self-intuition of the Absolute, which 
is becoming objective to itself in completed totality. It must unite 
them in the intuition of God's eternal human Incarnation, the beget-
ting of the Word from the beginning.24 
This intuition of the self-shaping or objectively self-finding Abso-
lute can be viewed once more as a polarity, by positing one of the 
factors of the equilibrium as predominant, consciousness, on the one 
hand, or the non-conscious on the other.25 In art this intuition appears 
more concentrated in a point, and consciousness is stricken down. 
This happens either in art properly speaking or in religion. In art 
properly speaking, the intuition appears as a work which, being ob-
jective, is enduring, but can also be regarded by the intellect as an 
external dead thing; it is a product of the individual, of the genius, 
yet it belongs to mankind. In religion the intuition appears as a living 
24. This is the first explicit reference to Hegel's life-long concern with the in-
terpretation of the Christian dogma of the Trinity. The Son, or Second Petson of 
the Trinity, has always been identified by orthodox theologians with the Logos 
or Word referred to in the first chapter of the Gospel of John. According to the 
Creeds, God the Father created the world, but the Son was "begotten, not made" 
and "begotten of the Father, before all worlds." John, however, says of the Logos 
"by him (it) all things were made, and without him (it) was not anything made, 
that was made." Hegel seems to have been more influenced by John than by 
Genesis or the Creeds. We know that sometime between 1800 and 1804 he at-
tempted to lay out his philosophy of Nature schematically as a "Divine Triangle" 
based on the Trinitarian dogma (see Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, pp. 101-2). If we 
take the present passage together with the similar remark in Faith and Knowl-
edge (Cerf and Harris, p. 81) we can see clearly that Hegel did not in':erpret the 
distinction between the "begetting of the Son" and the "creation of the world" in 
an orthodox way. By treating the "creation" as the "moment of difference"' in the 
"begetting" he could legitimately assert "all things came to be through the Logos 
and apart from it not even one thing came to be that did come to be," (which is 
what John asserts in the most literal translation possible). Also he could avoid 
the philosophical inconvenience of a creation of the world in time (which does 
appear to be implied by the priority which the Nicene Creed gives to the beget-
ting of the Logos). For the way Hegel himself distinguished "the Son" from "the 
world" in the summer of 1802 see Rosenkranz' reports of his lecture-manuscripts 
(Hegel's Leben, pp. 133-41). 
25. The relation of art, religion and speculation set out in the following pas-
sage is discussed above in our introduction, pp. 51-2. 

172 
Difference 
(e)motion (Bewegen) which, being subjective, and only momentary, 
can be taken by the intellect as something merely internal; it is the 
single individual. In speculation, the intuition appears more as con-
sciousness, and as extended in consciousness, as an activity of subjective 
Reason which suspends objectivity and the non-conscious. Whereas 
the Absolute appears in art, taken in its true scope, more in the form 
of [76] absolute being, it appears in speculation more as begetting it-
self in its infinite intuition. But though speculation certainly conceives 
the Absolute as becoming, it also posits the identity of becoming and 
being; and what appears to speculation as self-begetting is at the 
same time posited as the original absolute being which can only come 
to be so far as it is. In this way, speculation can rid itself of the pre-
ponderance that consciousness has in it; the preponderance is in any 
case something inessential. Both art and speculation are in their es-
sence divine service-both are a living intuition of the absolute life 
and hence a being at one with it. 
Speculation, then, and its knowledge are at the point of indiffer-
ence, but not essentially and demonstrably [an und fiir sich] at the 
true point of indifference. This will depend on whether speculation 
recognizes itself to be only one side of it or not. Transcendental phil-
osophy is one science of the Absolute, for the subject is itself Subject-
Object and to that extent Reason. But if this subjective Reason posits 
itself as the Absolute, then it is a pure Reason,' i.e., a formal ReaSQn, 
whose products, the Ideas, are the absolute opposite of a sensibility or 
nature, and can serve the phenomena only as the rule of a unity that 
is alien to them. In setting the Absolute into the form of a subject, 
this scien~ has an immanent boundary. Only by recognizing this 
boundary and being able to suspend itself and the boundary-and 
that, too, scientifically-does it raise itself to the science of the Abso-
lute and to the absolute indifference point. For there used to be much 
talk about the boundary stakes of human Reason, and even transcen-
dental idealism acknowledges "incomprehensible limits" of self-con-
sciousness, "in which we happen to be enclosed."26 But since the 
limits have traditionally been given out as boundary stakes of Reason, 
and nowadays as incomprehensible, science recognizes its incapacity 
to suspend itself by itself, i.e., not by a salta mortale; or in other 
words, its incapacity to abstract again from the subjective in which 
it has posited Reason. 
26. See Fichte, "Ueber den Grund unseres Glaubens an eine giittliche Welt-
regierung" (Werke V, 184). 

173 
Comparison of Principles of Philosophy 
Transcendental philosophy posits its subject as a Subject-Object 
and is thus one side of the absolute point of indifference. So the total-
ity is in it, certain).y. The entire philosophy of nature falls, as knowl-
.edge, within it's sphere. And one can no more prevent the Science of 
Knowledge-though it would be only part of [a complete] transcen-
dental philosophy-from laying claim to the form it gives to knowl-
edge [i.e., the title of absolute science] and from laying claim to the 
identity which is in knowledge than one can prevent logic from doing 
the same thing. That is to say, one cannot prevent them from isolating 
the form as consciousness and constructing the appearance for them-
selves. However, this identity, separated from all the manifold that is 
known, as pure self-consciousness, shows itself to be a relative iden-
tity in that it cannot get away from being conditioned by an opposite 
in any of its forms.27 
Intellectual intuition is the absolute principle of philosophy, the one 
real ground and firm standpoint in Fichte as well as in Schelling. [77] 
Expressed for reflection, this is the identity of subject and object. In 
science, intellectual intuition becomes the object of reflection, and for 
this reason philosophical reflection is itself transcendental intuition. 
Philosophical reflection makes itself into the ·object and is one with it: 
this is what makes it speculation. Hence Fichte's philosophy is an au-
thentic product of speculation. Philosophical reflection is conditioned, 
or [to ·put it another way] the transcendental intuition enters con-
sciousness through free abstraction from the whole manifold of em-
pirical consciousness, and in this respect it is something subjective. 
When philosophical reflection becomes its own object, it is taking 
something conditioned as the principle of its philosophy. In order to 
grasp transcendental intuition in its purity, philosophical reflection 
must further abstract from this subjective aspect so that transcenden-
tal intuition, as the foundation of philosophy, may be neitl er sub-
jective nor objective for it, neither self-consciousness as opposed to 
matter, nor matter as opposed to self-consciousness, but pure trans-
cendental intuition, absolute identity, that is neither subjective nor 
27. Hegel wants to exhibit the latest "philosophical revolution" as a degenerate 
form of what he calls in Faith and Knowledge "the reflective philosophy of Sub-
jectivity." The "boundary stakes of Reason" were established in Locke's Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding (see Faith and Knowledge, pp. 68-9). Fichte 
set up the "Science of Knowledge" as the whole of philosophy (within its "in-
comprehensible limits"). Finally Bardili (seconded by Reinhold) proclaimed the 
"reduction of philosophy to Logic" (see p. 79 above and pp. 179, 186-8, 192-5 
below). 

174 
Difference 
objective. As the object of reflection transcendental intuition becomes 
subject and object. Philosophical reflection posits these products of 
pure reflection in the Absolute in their abiding opposition. Opposition 
as it pertains to speculative reflection is no longer an object and a sub-
ject, but a subjective transcendental intuition and an objective trans-
cendental intuition. The former is the Ego, the latter is nature, and 
both are the highest appearances of absolute, self-intuiting Reason. 
These two opposites, whether they are called Ego and nature, or pure 
and empirical self-consciouness, or cognition and being, or self-pos-
iting and oppositing, or finitude and infinity, are together posited in 
the Absolute. Ordinary reflection can see nothing in this antinomy 
but contradiction; Reason alone sees the truth in this absolute con-
tradiction through which both are posited and both nullified, and 
through which neither exists and at the same time both exist. 
(ON REINHOLD'S VIEW AND PHILOSOPHY] 1 
It still remains for us to say something about Reinhold's view of 
Fichte' s and Schelling's philosophy and something about his own 
philosophy. 
As for his view of Fichte and Schelling, to begin with, he has over-
looked the difference between these philosophies as systems, and, in 
the second place, he has not taken them as philosophies. 
Reinhold seems to have not the slightest inkling that for years 
there has been a philosophy other than pure transcendental idealism 
before the public. It is marvellous how he manages to see nothing but 
an [abstract] principle in philosophy as Schelling has established it, 
nothing but Egoity, the principle that makes subjectivity comprehen-
sible.2 Reinhold can say all in one breath that Schelling "discovered 
that the Absolute so far as it is not mere subjectivity, is nothing more, 
and cannot be anything more [78] than mere objectivity or mere na-
ture as such:" and that the way to this discovery was the positing of 
the Absolute in the absolute identity of intelligence and nature.3 So, 
at one stroke he presents Schelling's principle thus: (a) the Absolute, 
so far as it is not mere subjectivity, is mere objectivity and, hence, not 
1. This heading is not in the first edition (a new page begins with some blank 
space left). 
2. Compare Beytriige I, 86-7. 
3. See Beytriige I, 85-6. 

175 
Reinhold 
the identity of both, and (b) the Absolute is the identity of both. 
Quite the reverse: the principle of the identity of subject and object 
had to become the road to the insight that the Absolute as identity is 
neither mere subjectivity, nor mere objectivity. Later on he presents 
the relation of the two sciences correctly. They are "two different 
views," not, certain! y [as he says], "of one and the same thing 
(Sache)'' but [as he goes on to say], "of the absolute self-sameness, 
of the all-one."4 And precisely for this reason neither the principle of 
the one nor that of the other science is mere subjectivity or mere ob-
jectivity. Still less is that in which alone they permeate each other, 
pure Egoity. Pure Egoity, like nature, gets swallowed up in the point 
of absolute indifference. 
One who is committed to love of and faith in truth, and is not tak-
en in by system, will easily convince himself, so Reinhold opines, that 
the fault of this solution lies in the way the problem was formulated. 5 
But it is not quite so easy to detect where the fault in Reinhold's de-
scription of what Schelling conceived to be philosophy lies, nor how 
it was possible for him to get hold of it in the way that he has done. 
It will not help to point to the Introduction of [Schelling's System 
of] Transcendental Idealism itself where the relation of transcenden-
tal idealism to the whole of philosophy is established, along with the 
concept of this whole, for in his discussions of the System of Trans-
cendental Idealism Reinhold confines himself to this Introduction, and 
he sees in it the opposite of what is there. Nor is it any use to draw 
attention to certain passages in it, where the true viewpoint is most 
definitely expressed; for Reinhold himself adduces the most definite 
passages in his first discussion of this system.6 These passages assert 
that in one and only one [of the two] necessary basic sciences of phil-
osophy namely in Transcendental Idealism, the subjective is the first/ 
not that it is the first principle of all philosophy-which is how it is 
at once turned upside down in Reinhold-; and as purely subjective it 
is not even the principle of transcendental idealism-it is the subjec-
tive Subject-Object that is the principle. 
For those who are capable of not taking definite statements to 
mean the opposite of what they say, it may perhaps not be superflu-
4. Ibid., p. 86. 
5. Ibid., p. 87. 
6. Reinhold does not actually quote any passages or give specific references in 
his first Beurteilung of Schelling's system (Beytrage I, 85-9). 
7. Schelling, Werke III, 342-3. 

176 
Difference 
ous to draw attention to the second issue of the first volume of the 
Journal for Speculative Physics-leaving aside the introduction to the 
System of Transcendental Idealism itself, and of course the more re-
cent issues of the Journal. 8 In Volume I, no. 2, [79] Schelling ex-
presses himself as follows: "The philosophy of nature is a physical 
explanation of idealism;-in the far distance nature has already sown 
the seed for the height it achieves in Reason.-The philosopher is 
only apt to overlook this, because already in his first act he takes up 
his object, at its highest level, that is, as the Ego, as consciousness. 
Only the physicist sees through this illusion. The idealist is right in 
making Reason the self-creator of everything. He has on his side the 
very intention of nature with respect to man; but precisely because it 
is the intention of nature, the idealism [of creative Reason] becomes 
itself something explicable; and the theoretical reality of idealism co-
incides with this intent.-When men finally learn to think in a purely 
theoretical way, in an exclusively objective way without any admix-
ture of the subjective, they will learn to understand this."9 
Reinhold claims that the main weakness of [modern] philosophy 
hitherto is this: that thinking has so far been regarded as having the 
character of a merely subjective activity. He demands that we should 
attempt to abstract from the subjectivity of thinking. 10 Now, abstrac-
tion from what is subjective in the transcendental intuition is the basic 
characteristic formula (der formelle Grundcharakter) of Schelling's 
philosophy. This is inherent, not only in the passages quoted, but in 
the very principle of his whole system. It is expressed even more 
definitely in the Journal for Speculative Physics, vol. II, no. 1, in the 
discussion of Eschenmayer's Objections to the Philosophy of Nature, 
objections which are derived from the grounds of transcendental 
idealism where the totality is posited only as an Idea, a thought, or 
in other words as something subjective.11 
As far as Reinhold's view of what is common to both systems is 
concerned, i.e., their being both speculative philosophies, from Rein-
hold's own peculiar standpoint they must appear to be personal pe-
8. Hegel is referring especially to the first issue of the second volume of Zeit-
schrift fiir spekulative Physik. This issue contained both the controversy with 
Eschenmayer (see note to p. 79 above) and the new "Exposition of My System of 
Philosophy." 
9. The emphasis is Hegel's rather than Schelling's. The quotation is very much 
abbreviated and rather free (see Schelling, Werke IV, 75-7). 
10. Compare the passages Hegel quotes on pp. 97 above and 187 below. 
11. See Schelling, Werke IV, 86-104 (compare note 1 on p. 79 above). 

177 
Reinhold 
culiarities, so they do not appear to him as philosophies at all. The 
most essential business, theme and principle of philosophy according 
to Reinhold is to ground the reality of cognition by way of analysis, 
that is, by separation. 12 So speculation whose supreme task is to sus-
pend the separation of subject and object in their identity, can, of 
course, have no significance at all; and thus the most essential aspect 
of a philosophical system, that of being speculation, cannot come into 
consideration; it will be nothing but a personal peculiarity and a more 
or less serious case of mental aberration. 13 Materialism, for example, 
appears to Reinhold only as a sort of mental aberration that is not in-
digenous to Germany, and he fails to recognize in it the authentic 
[80] philosophical need to suspend the dichotomy that takes the form 
of spirit and matter.14 If the western locality of the culture from 
which this system emerged keeps it at a distance from another coun-
try the question then is: whether this distance does not originate in an 
opposite onesidedness of [that country's] culture. And even if the 
scientific value of materialism may be quite small, still we should not 
fail to appreciate that [in O'Holbach's] Systeme de la Nature, for ex-
ample, a spirit that is profoundly bewildered by its time is speaking 
out, and reproducing itself in science. We should not fail to see how 
the grief over the universal deceit of its time, over the bottomless cor-
ruption of nature, over the infinite lie that was called truth and jus-
tice,-how this grief, that spreads through the whole, has still kept 
enough strength to construct for itself the Absolute which had taken 
flight from the phenomena of life, and to construct it as truth, out of 
genuinely philosophical need, and with authentic speculation, in a 
science which appears in a form concordant with the local principle of 
objectivity-while German culture, on the contrary, nestles down in 
the form of subjectivity-to which love and faith belong-and often 
without speculation. 
Since the analytical way of philosophizing rests on absolute oppo-
sition, it is bound to overlook the philosophical [i.e., speculative] as-
pect of philosophy precisely because the latter aims at absolute syn-
thesis. It must therefore strike the analyst as a most extraordinary 
thing that Schelling, as Reinhold puts it, introduced the joining of the 
12. Compare pp. 86-7 above and Beytriige I, passim (especially pp. 1 ff., 90 ff.). 
13. Geistesverirrung. In Beytriige I, 86, Reinhold calls Schelling's principle "the 
non plus ultra of all aberration (Verirrung) in speculation thus far, and even of 
all possible aberration." 
14. Beytriige I, 77. 

178 
Difference 
finite and the infinite into philosophy15-as if philosophy were any-
thing else but the positing of the finite in the infinite. In other words, 
it strikes him as the most extraordinary thing that philosophizing 
should be introduced into philosophy. 
Reinhold not only overlooks the speculative, philosophical aspect 
of Fichte's and Schelling's systems altogether. He even regards it as 
an important discovery and revelation when the principles of this 
philosophy transform themselves for him into what is most idiosyn-
cratic of all things; and what is most universal, the identity of subject 
and object, is transformed into what is most particular, namely the 
very personal, individuated individuality of Messrs. Fichte and Schel-
ling.16 Still it is understandable and necessary enough that Reinhold 
should thus tumble from the mountain peak of his limited principle 
and his own peculiar view into the abyss of his limited view of these 
systems. But it is an unnecessary and spiteful twist for him to explain 
the private oddity of these systems in terms of ethical corruption 
(Unsittlichkeit). Reinhold uses this explanatory twist in a preliminary 
way in the Deutsche Mercur, and he will use it more extensively in 
the next issue of the Contributions,* and the explanation consists in 
saying that in these systems ethical corruption has been given the 
form of a principle and of philosophy. We can call this a wretched 
evasion, a convenient outlet for embittered malice, etc.; indeed we can 
scold and miscall it as we like, for this sort of thing is fair game. It is 
true that a philosophy issues from its time, and if one wants to call 
the [81] fragmentation of the time its ethical corruption, then philoso-
phy issues from that corruption; but it does so in order to reestablish 
man from within himself, against the confusion of the time and in 
order to restore the totality which the time has rent. 
As for Reinhold's own philosophy, he gives a public history of it 
to the effect that in the transmigrations of his philosophical soul 
15. What Reinhold said was: "It was reserved for Schelling to introduce the 
absolute finitude of the infinite into philosophy" (Beytriige I, 85). 
16. Reinhold boasts of this "secret" that he has "revealed" in Beytriige I, 153-
4 (cf. ibid., p. 146). Bardili gives the same individualistic interpretation of ideal-
ism (Grundriss, section 15, p. 112). 
* Since this was written he has done so. 
[Reinhold's article in Wieland's Neuer Deutscher Merkur (1801, n. 3, PP· 167-
93) had a preliminary note which announced: "This essay consists of fragments 
from a treatise in the second volume of my Contributions etc." So Hegel knew 
what to expect. The "treatise" (Beytriige II, 104-40) was entitled: "On AutonomY 
as the Principle of the Practical Philosophy of the Kantian School-and of the 
Whole Philosophy of the School of Fichte and Schelling."] 

179 
Reinhold 
he first wandered into Kant's philosophy, and after laying that aside, 
into Fichte's; from there into Jacobi's, and, after he had left that 
too, he moved in on Bardili's Logic. 17 According to the Contribu-
tions (p. 163) "he limited his occupation with Bardili's Logic to sheer 
learning, pure receiving and following its thought in the most exact 
meaning of the term in order to subdue his pampered imagination and 
let the new rationalistic models expel the old transcendental ones from 
his brain."18 After this discipline he has now begun to work up Bar-
dili's Logic in his Contributions (to a more convenient Survey of the 
State of Philosophy at the Beginning of the 19th Century). These 
Contributions take the occasion of an event so important for the cul-
tural progress of the human spirit as the dawning of a new century 
to "congratulate the new century upon the fact that the cause of all 
philosophical revolutions was actually discovered and so overcome at 
its very heart-no earlier and no later than in the next to last year of 
the 18th century."19 La revolution est finie has been very frequently 
decreed in France. Similarly, Reinhold has already announced several 
endings of the philosophical revolution. He now recognizes the final 
end of the ends, even though "the bad consequences of the transcen-
dental revolution will persist for some time." But he adds the question 
"whether he might not be mistaken once again and whether even this 
true and genuine end might not again be only the beginning of still 
another wrong turning."20 The question should rather be whether this 
end, incapable as it is of being an end, could possibly be the begin-
ning of anything. 
The founding and grounding tendency, the tendency to philoso-
phize before getting to philosophy has here finally succeeded in ex-
pressing itself completely. It has found out just what should be done: 
philosophy is to be transmuted into the formal element of cognition, 
that is, into logic.21 
Philosophy as a whole grounds itself and the reality of its cogni-
tion, both as to form and as to content, within itself. The founding 
and grounding tendency on the other hand, with all the crowded press 
of its corroborations and analyses, its becauses and insofars, its there-
17. This "public history" is in Beytriige I, "Vorrede" and pp. 118-34. 
18. This acknowledged quotation is actually a conflation of two passages on 
the page Hegel refers to. But it is fairly exact. The context is a letter to Bardili. 
19. Hegel here conflates a passage on p. III of Reinhold's "Vorrede" with a re-
mark on pp. V-VI. 
20. The quotations and echoes come from Reinhold's "Vorrede," p. IV-VI. 
21. Compare note 3 top. 79 above and pp. oll6-8, 192-5 below. 

180 
Difference 
fores and ifs neither gets out of itself nor into [82] philosophy. To 
the rootless worry that grows ever greater the busier it is, every inves-
tigation is premature, every beginning is rashness, and every philoso-
phy is a mere preparatory exercise.22 Science claims to found itself 
upon itself by positing each one of its parts absolutely, and thereby 
constituting identity and knowledge at the beginning and at every 
single point. As objective totality knowledge founds itself more effec-
tively the more it grows, and its parts are only founded simultaneous-
ly with this whole of cognitions. Center and circle are so connected 
with each other that the first beginning of the circle is already a con-
nection with the center, and the center is not completely a center un-
less the whole circle, with all of its connections, is completed: a whole 
that is as little in need of a particular handle to attach the founding to 
as the earth is in need of a particular handle to attach the force to that 
guides it around the sun and at the same time sustains it in the whole 
living manifold of its shapes. 
But the founding-hunt is always busy searching for the handle, and 
making the run-up for living philosophy. Making the run-up becomes 
its true work; its very principle makes it impossible for it to arrive at 
knowledge and philosophy. Logical cognition, if it actually does ad-
vance toward Reason, must be led to the result that it nullifies itself 
in reaching Reason; it must recognize antinomy as its supreme law. 
Reinhold's theme is the application of thinking, and thinking is de-
fined as the infinite repeatability of A as A in A through A.23 Of 
course, this is antinomical too; for in application A is in actual fact 
posited as B. But [Reinhold has] no awareness and no recognition of 
the presence of this antinomy; thinking, its application and its stuff 
rest peacefully side by side. For this reason thinking, as the faculty of 
abstract unity, is, like cognition, merely formal [in Reinhold] and all 
the foundations are supposed to be only problematic and hypothetical 
until such time as, in the progress through the problematic and hypo-
thetical, we stumble upon "the arch-true in our truth and upon truth 
through the arch-true."24 But, to begin with, this is impossible, for 
from what is formal in an absolute sense one cannot reach anything 
22. Compare pp. 86-9 above. 
23. Compare p. 97 above; and Reinhold, Beytriige I, 108. 
24. Hegel (or his printer) made a slip in transcribing Reinhold here which we 
have corrected. The first edition read "Unwahre" in place of the second "Ur-
wahre": " ... and upon truth through what is untrue." 

181 
Reinhold 
material; the formal and the material are absolutely opposed.25 Still 
less can one arrive at an absolute synthesis-which must be more than 
a mere fitting together. And i.n the second place, nothing at all is ever 
founded by way of the hypothetical and the problematic. The alterna-
tive to all this is to connect cognition with the Absolute, so that it be-
comes an identity of subject and object, of thinking and its stuff, but 
then cognition is no longer formal; that awkward thing, knowledge, 
has arisen; and the founding that was meant to come first [83] has 
got lost again. The fear of slipping into knowledge has no recourse 
left but to comfort itself with its love, and its faith, and its fixed ten-
dency to keep on to the end with its analyzing, methodizing and 
storytelling. 
If making the run-up does not get one over the ditch, the blame is 
shoved, not onto its perennial repetition, but onto its method. The 
true method is supposed to be the method whereby knowledge has 
already been pulled over to this side of the ditch, to the playground 
where the running is done. This is the method whereby philosophy is 
reduced to logic. 
We cannot pass at once to the consideration of this method which 
is to transfer philosophy into the region of the run-up. We must first 
talk about the presuppositions Reinhold believes are necessary for 
philosophy-in other words, we must talk about the run-up for the 
run-up. 
The [first] antecedent condition for philosophizing is what Rein-
holds calls the love of truth and certainty; this is the condition with 
which the effort to ground cognition must start.26 And since this will 
25. "Stuff" is the most indefinite category here. The implicit contrast is with an 
activity that molds or shapes "stuff." For this activity the "stuff" is "(raw) ma-
terial" as opposed to "shaped result." But in the "shaped result" the "matter" 
can be distinguished from the "form" (and hence the "material" side can be op-
posed to the "formal" side). Thus there is an unavoidable ambiguity of contrast 
when "material" is used as a substantive. We use "material" only in contrast to 
"formal." There are other ambiguities which only the context can clarify (and 
sometimes it does not do it very adequately). Thus "form" as essential is opposed 
to "matter," while "form'' as accidental is opposed to "content." "Matter" is of-
ten contrasted with "mind" or "spirit"; and "materialism" always contrasts with 
"idealism" but "ideal" generally contrasts with "real." "Materiality" might be 
contrasted with "spirituality":_but we use it only to translate Materiatur, which 
seems to be Bardili's ''raw material" synonym for "stuff," or his "prime matter" 
as contrasted with the "form" supplied by the "application of thought." 
26. Compare p. 88 above. The reference is to Beytriige I, 67. 

182 
Difference 
be quickly and easily assented to, he does not dilly-dally over it. And 
indeed, [we agree that] the object of philosophical reflection cannot 
possibly be anything else but the true and the certain. However, if 
consciousness is filled with this object, then a reflection on the sub-
jective, in the form of some love, can find no room in it. It is reflection 
which first makes the love by fixing the subjective; and of course it 
makes the love that has so sublime a concern as truth into something 
utterly sublime-and the individual [Reinhold] who postulates truth 
because he is animated by this love is utterly sublime too. 
The second essential condition of philosophizing is the faith in 
truth as truth, and this, Reinhold thinks, will not be so easily as-
sented to as the love of it. The word faith alone would have sufficient-
ly expressed what he meant to express. With regard to philosophy one 
might speak of the faith in Reason as being genuine health. The su-
perfluity of the phrase, "faith in truth as truth," instead of making it 
more edifying, introduces something odd. The main thing is that 
Reinhold seriously declares that he should not be asked "what faith 
in truth is. For he to whom this [ ... ] is not clear in himself does not 
have, and does not know, the need to find it confirmed in knowledge 
which can solely proceed from this faith. He does not understand 
himself in this question," and so Reinhold "has nothing further to say 
to him."27 
If Reinhold has faith that he is justified in postulating [truth]-
then we can with equal justification find in the postulate of transcen-
dental intuition the presupposition that there is something that is su-
perior to, and elevated above, all proof and, following from this, the 
right and necessity of postulating. Reinhold himself admits that Fichte 
and Schelling have described [84] transcendental intuition, the activ-
ity peculiar to pure Reason, as an acting that returns upon itself.28 
But Reinhold, for his part, has nothing to say to anyone who might 
want to ask for a description of this faith of his. Still he does do more 
than he feels himself bound to do; he defines faith at least by setting 
it in an antithesis with knowledge: faith is "holding something to be 
true, with no firm foundation in knowledge."29 The definition of what 
it is to know will be developed by pursuing the problematic and hy-
pothetical founding; there too the sphere that is common to know!-
27. Hegel used spread type to indicate his quotation-more exactly delimited 
by our quotation marks (see Beytrage I, 69). 
28. See Beytrage I, 141. 
29. Ibid., p. 68. 

183 
Reinhold 
edge and faith will be marked out and thus the description will be 
completed. 
Although Reinhold believes that a postulate has spared him the 
trouble of further argument, it still appears strange to him that 
Messrs. Fichte and Schelling go in for postulating. He takes their pos-
tulate to be an idiosyncrasy "in the consciousness of certain extraord-
inary individuals endowed with a special sense for postulating, in 
whose writings pure Reason itself has published its knowledge that is 
action and its action that is knowledge."30 Reinhold thinks (p. 143) 
that he, too, was once a member of this magic circle, and that, having 
escaped from it, he is now well situated to reveal the secret. His tale 
told out of school amounts to this: that for him what is most univer-
sal, the activity of Reason, is transformed into what is most particular, 
into Messrs. Fichte and Schelling's idiosyncracy.31 -Anyone to whom 
Reinhold's love and faith are not clear on their own account, and to 
whom he has nothing further to say, must similarly view him as a 
member of the magic circle of an arcanum whose possessor, as repre-
sentative of love and faith, pretends to be furnished with a peculiar 
sense, an arcanum that establishes and presents itself in the conscious-
ness of this extraordinary individual, an arcanum that seeks to pub-
lish itself in the world of sense through [Bardili's] Outline of Logic 
and the Contributions in which this Outline is being worked up, etc. 
The postulate of love and faith sounds a bit nicer and gentler than 
that queer requirement of a transcendental intuition; the public will 
be more edified by a gentle postulate, and it will be put off by the 
rough postulate of the transcendental intuition;-but this is not a 
relevant contribution to the main issue. 
We come now to the main presupposition which, finally, is of more 
direct concern to philosophizing. What must be presupposed ante-
cedently, in order even for the attempt at philosophy to be thinkable, 
is the arch-true,* as Reinhold calls it, [85] that which is true and cer-
30. Ibid., p. 140. 
31. Compare note 16 above. 
*[84] Reinhold here retains Jacobi's language, but not his thought. As he says 
[Beytriige I, 126] he had to quit him. When Jacobi speaks of Reason as the facul-
ty for presupposing the true [in his "Letter to Fichte," Werke III, 32; compare 
Beytriige I, 124], he sets up the true, as the true being (Wesen) in contrast with 
formalt [85] truth; but as a sceptic he denies that the true being could be hu-
manly known. Reinhold, on the contrary, says that he has learned to think the 
true-through a formalf proof (Begrunden). In Jacobi's view, the true cannot be 
found in any such thing. 

184 
Difference 
tain for itself, the [inconceivable] ground of explanation for every-
thing that is conceivably true. But what philosophy begins with must 
be the truth that is the first conceivable one-and indeed it must be 
the conceivable, i.e., the true first one, which in the meantime is only 
problematically and hypothetically presupposed in philosophy as a 
striving. In philosophizing as knowledge, however, the first will only 
prove itself to be the one possible first solely if and when and so far 
as one can first show with absolute certainty how and why the first 
conceivable truth, and the possibility and actuality of the cognizable, 
as well as of cognition, are possible through the arch-true as the arch-
ground of everything manifested in the possible and the actual, and 
how and why it is true because of the arch-true, which, "outside of 
its relation to the possible and the actual in which it manifests itself, 
is the absolutely inconceivable, the absolutely inexplicable and the ab-
solutely unnameable."32 
We can see that where the Absolute has the form of the arch-true, 
as it does here, philosophy is not concerned with producing knowl-
edge and truth through Reason. We can see that [Reinhold's] Abso-
lute in the form of truth is not the work of Reason, because it is 
already in and for itself something true and certain, that is, something 
cognized and known. Reason cannot assume an active relation to the 
Absolute. On the contrary, if Reason were active in any way, if the 
Absolute were to receive any form through it, the activity would have 
to be viewed as an alteration of the Absolute, and an alteration of the 
arch-true would be the production of error. So [for Reinhold] philoso-
phizing means absorbing into oneself with absolute passive receptiv-
ity something that is already [in and by itself] fully completed knowl-
edge. One cannot deny that this sort of approach has its conveniences. 
But there is no need for a reminder that outside of cognition, whether 
it be belief or knowledge, truth and certainty are absurdities, and that 
the Absolute becomes something true and certain solely through the 
spontaneous activity of Reason. But once the convenient device of 
presupposing a ready made arch-true is adopted, it is easy to compre-
hend how odd the claim must appear that thinking should be up-
32. Only the last part of this sentence is (as shown) a direct quotation from 
Reinhold (Beytrage I, 73). But Hegel did not mark off the direct quotation from 
the exaggerated caricature of Reinhold's style which he himself furnished as its 
context. We have to remember that, for the learned public of the time, Reinhold 
and Jacobi were luminaries (almost) as bright as Fichte and more prominent than 
Schelling. But perhaps only Reinhold himself would immediately know how 
much was quotation here, and how much was burlesque. 

185 
Reinhold 
graded to knowledge by the spontaneous activity of Reason, or again 
the claim that nature should be created for consciousness by science, 
or the claim that the Subject-Object is nothing save what it makes 
itself by its own activity. According to that convenient habit of 
thought, the union of reflection and the Absolute in knowledge takes 
place in perfect accord with the Ideal of a philosophical utopia in 
which the Absolute itself readies itself for being something true and 
known, and [86] surrenders itself for total enjoyment to the passivity 
of a thinking which only needs a mouth agape. Strenuous creative 
construction, in assertoric and categorical statements, is banished 
from this utopia. A problematic and hypothetical shaking of the tree 
of knowledge, which grows in a sandy grounding, brings the fruit 
tumbling down, already chewed and self-digested. When the entire 
business of a philosophy is reduced to wishing to be nothing but a 
problematic and hypothetical trial and prelude, the Absolute must 
necessarily be posited as arch-true and known;-for how else could 
truth and knowledge issue from the problematic and hypothetical? 
But if and insofar as the presupposition of philosophy consists in 
that which is inconceivable in itself and arch-true, then because and 
insofar as this is so, the presupposition can only announce itself in a 
truth that is conceivable. Philosophizing cannot begin from something 
arch-true but inconceivable; it must begin from a truth that is con-
ceivable. -But not only is this conclusion [of Reinhold's] quite un-
proven; the fact is rather that one has to draw the opposite conclu-
sion. If the presupposition of philosophy were the arch-true that is 
inconceivable, then the arch-true would be announcing itself in its 
opposite, that is, falsely, if it were to announce itself in something 
conceivable. One would rather have to say that, though philosophy 
must begin with, advance through and terminate in concepts, the con-
cepts must be inconceivable. For within the limitation of a concept, 
the inconceivable is suspended instead of being announced. The union 
of opposite concepts in the antinomy-which is a contradiction for 
the faculty of concepts-is the assertoric and categorical appearance 
of the inconceivable. It is not its problematic and hypothetical appear-
ance; but in virtue of its immediate relation with the inconceivable 
the antinomy is the true revelation of the inconceivable in concepts, 
the revelation that is possible through reflection. According to Rein-
hold, the Absolute is only inconceivable outside of its relation to the 
actual and the possible in which it manifests itself, which is to say 
that it can be cognized in the possible and the actual. But this would 
only be cognition through the intellect and not cognition of the Abso-

186 
Difference 
lute. For when Reason intuits the relation of the actual and possible 
to the Absolute, it thereby suspends the possible and actual as pos-
sible and actuaP3 These determinations vanish from the sight of Rea-
son along with their opposition. Thus Reason knows, not external 
appearance as revelation, but the essential being that reveals itself; 
and it is obliged to recognize that a concept for itself_ the abstract 
unity of thinking, is not an announcing of that being, but its disap-
pearance from consciousness. Of course, in itself the essential being 
has not disappeared, but it has disappeared from a speculation of this 
kind. [87] 
We now pass to the consideration of what the true business of a 
philosophy reduced to logic is. Its business is this: "Through the 
analysis of the application of thinking as thinking, the arch-true is to 
be discovered and established along with the true, and the true is to 
be discovered and established through the arch-true."34 We can see 
the various absolutes required for this. 
(a) "Thinking does not first become thinking in and through its 
application, and as something applied."35 Instead, it is its inner 
character that must here be understood, and this is "the infinite 
repeatability of one and the same in one and the same and through 
one and the same. This is the pure identity [ ... ] the absolute in-
finity that excludes all externality from itself, all temporal and 
spatial order. "36 
(b) Totally different from the thinking itself is the application of 
thinking. "It is certain that thinking and application of thinking 
are not at all the same. It is equally certain that in and through the 
application 
(c) some third thing = C must be added to thinking. This is the 
matter for the application of thinking."37 This materialitl8 which 
is partly nullified by thinking, and partly fits into it, is postulated. 
The warrant and the necessity for accepting and presupposing mat-
ter is to be found in the fact that thinking could not possibly be 
applied if there were none. Matter cannot be what thinking is; for, 
. 33. Compare Kant, Critique of Judgment, section 76. 
34. Beytriige I, 91. 
35. Ibid., p. 100. 
36. Ibid., pp. 106-7. Compare pp. 97 and 175. 
37. Ibid., p. 110 (the citation is abbreviated but direct). What follows is sum-
marized from ibid., pp. 111-12 . 
.38. Materiatur. See above, note 25. 

187 
Reinhold 
if it were the same, it would not be another, and no application 
could take place because the inner character of thinking is unity. 
Hence, the inner character of matter is just the opposite, in other 
words it is manifoldness. What used formerly to be simply accepted 
as given in experience, has since Kant's time been postulated, and 
this sort of thing they call "remaining immanent." It is only within 
the subjective realm, under such names as "facts of consciousness," 
that empirically given laws, forms or what you will, are still per-
mitted. The objective realm must be postulated. 
To begin, then, with Reinhold's concept of thinking. As we have 
already noted above, he locates the basic mistake of all recent philoso-
phy in the basic prejudice and bad habit of taking thinking to be a 
merely subjective activity. He asks that for the present and provision-
ally we should make the attempt to abstract from all subjectivity and 
objectivity of thinking.39 But it is not difficult to see that this basic 
mistake or basic prejudice emerges at full strength when thinking is 
taken to be pure unity, the unity that abstracts from all materiality 
and is therefore its opposite-especially when this abstraction is fol-
lowed, as it must be, by the postulate of a matter essentially distinct 
from and independent of thinking. Thinking, here, is essentially not 
the identity of subject and object, which is how it [88] must be char-
acterized as the activity of Reason; and it is only in this way, through 
thinking being both subject and object at once, that abstraction is 
made from subjectivity and objectivity. In Reinhold's view, on the 
other hand, the object is a matter postulated for thinking, so that 
thinking is nothing but a subjective affair. So even if one wanted to 
accede to Reinhold's request, and abstract from the subjectivity of 
thinking, and posit thinking as being both subjective and objective, 
and hence as having neither of these predicates, one would still not be 
permitted to do it. For through the opposition of something objective, 
thinking is determined as something subjective; absolute opposition 
becomes the theme and principle of a philosophy that has fallen into 
reduction through logic. 
As the principle is, so the synthesis turns out of course. In his pop-
ular jargon Reinhold calls it an "application"; but even in this anemic 
shape, from which the two absolute opposites would not profit much 
towards their synthesis, the synthesis does not agree with Reinhold's 
39. Compare p. 97 above where the passage is more directly quoted. See also 
p. 176. 

188 
Difference 
claim that the first theme of philosophy should be something conceiv-
able. For even the slight synthesis called application involves a transi-
tion of the unity into a manifold, a union of thinking and matter, and 
hence includes what is called the inconceivable. To be capable of syn-
thesis, thinking and matter must not be absolutely opposed to each 
other; they must be posited as originally one, and so we would be 
back with that tiresome identity of subject and object in transcenden-
tal intuition, the thinking that is insight (intellectuelles Denken). 
In this preliminary and introductory exposition, however, Reinhold 
does not adduce everything in [Bardili's] Outline of Logic which 
might serve to tone down the sort of difficulty that is involved in the 
absolute opposition. In addition to the postulated matter and its de-
duced manifoldness, the Outline also postulates an inner capacity and 
suitability of matter to be thought. Besides the materiality that is to 
be annulled in thinking, there must be something that cannot be an-
nulled by thinking; and even the perceptions of a horse do not lack 
it. It is a form that is independent of thinking, and since by the law 
of nature form cannot be destroyed by form, the form of thinking 
has to fit itself into it. In other words, besides the materiality that 
cannot be thought, besides the thing in itself, there must be an abso-
lute stuff which can be represented and is independent of the repre-
senting subject, though in representation it is connected with the 
form. 40 Reinhold always calls this connecting of the form with the 
stuff 'application of thinking' and he avoids the expression 'represen-
tation' used for it by Bardili. It has, indeed, been asserted that [Bar-
dili's] Outline of Logic is nothing but [Reinhold's] Elementary Phil-
osophy warmed over.41 It does not seem, however, that the reviewer 
was ascribing to Reinhold the intention of wanting to re-introduce 
the Elementary [89] Philosophy in the [supposedly] almost unchanged 
form [of Bardili's Outline] to a philosophical public which no longer 
appreciates it. He meant rather that, in his sheer receiving and pure 
learning of logic, Reinhold had all unknowingly gone to school with 
himself. 
40. These ideas recur continually in Bardili's Grundriss der Logik. 
41. This was asserted (anonymously) by Fichte in a review of Bardili's Grund-
riss published in the Erlangen Literatur Zeitung (30/31 October, 1800-see now 
Werke II, 491). It is virtually certain that Hegel knew who wrote this review. 
Reinhold's Elementar-Philosophy consisted of three volumes: (1) Versuch einer 
neuen Theorie des mensch lichen Vorstellungsvermiigens (1789); (2) Beitriige zur 
Berichtigung bisheriger Missverstiindnisse der Philosophie (1790); (3) Fundament 
des philosophischen Wissens (1791). 

189 
Reinhold 
In the Contributions Reinhold himself proposes the following argu-
ments against this view of the matter: 
[1] 
First, he [Reinhold] had not looked for his Elementary Phil-
osophy in Bardili's Outline of Logic. Instead, he had seen in it a cer-
tain kinship with idealism. Indeed, because of the bitter scorn with 
which Bardili referred to Reinhold's theory every time he had occa-
sion to mention it, he would have expected to find any philosophy 
rather than his own in Bardili's. 
[2] 
The words "representation," "represented," and "mere repre-
sentation" etc. consistently occur in Bardili's Outline in a sense radi-
cally opposed to the sense in which they were used by the author of 
the Elementary Philosophy, a fact he [Reinhold], must know better 
than anyone else. 
[3] 
Anyone who claims that the Outline is in any imaginable 
sense a recasting of Reinhold's Elementary Philosophy makes mani-
fest the fact that he has not understood the book he is reviewing.42 
We don't have to go into the first argument, about the "bitter 
scorn." The others are assertions whose cogency can be gleaned from 
a brief comparison of the main features of [Reinhold's] Theory43 with 
[Bardili' s] Outline. 
According to Reinhold's Theory, "the essential constituents of rep-
resentations, which form their inner conditions," are: 
(a) a ·stuff of representation, which is given to the receptivity and 
whose form is manifoldness, 
(b) a form of representation, which is produced by spontaneity. 
This form is unity.44 
According to Bardili's Logic, 
(a) thinking, an activity whose basic character is unity. 
(b) a matter whose character is manifoldness. 
(c) both in Reinhold's Theory and in Bardili's Logic the connecting 
of the two elements (a) and (b) to each other is called "representing," 
except that [nowadays] Reinhold always says "application of think-
42. Although Hegel puts this passage in quotation marks it is in the main 
only a paraphrase (from Beytriige I, 128-9; the context is an "Open Letter" to 
Fichte). 
43. The Versuch einer neuen Theorie des menschlichen Vorstellungsvermogens 
(more usually abbreviated as Versuch) appeared in 1789. It was the first volume 
of the Elementar-Philosophie (seen. 41 above). 
44. See Versuch, pp. 227-91, especially pp. 230, 235, 255, 264, 267, 283. (By 
"Vorstellung in its narrowest sense" Reinhold means "what sensation, thought, 
intuition, concept, and Idea have in common": Versuch, p. 214.) 

190 
Difference 
ing."45 Furthermore, form and stuff, or thinking and matter are equal-
ly self-subsistent in both books.46 
With further reference to matter: 
(a) one part of it, both in the Theory and in the Logic, is the thing 
in itself. In the Theory this is the object itself insofar as it cannot be 
represented, and yet can no more be denied than the representable 
objects themselves ;47 in the Logic it is the materiality that is to be an-
nulled in thinking, the aspect of matter that is unthinkable.48 
[90] 
(b) In the Theory the other part of the object is the familiar 
stuff of the representation,49 and in the Logic, the indestructible form 
of the object, a form that is independent of thinking and into which 
the form of thinking must fit itself since form cannot annul form. 50 
This, then, is the bipartite character of the object. On the one hand 
an absolute materiality. Thinking cannot fit itself into it; indeed, it 
does not know what to do with it except to annul it, that is, to ab-
stract from it. On the other hand, a property that again pertains to 
the object independent of all thinking, and yet a form that makes it 
suitable to be thought and which thinking must fit into as well as it 
can. And across this bipartite character of the object, thinking must 
plunge headlong into life.51 Thinking comes to philosophy with a 
broken neck from the tumble into such absolute duality. Although 
the forms of the duality may change unceasingly, it always gives 
birth to the same non-philosophy. Not unlike the man who was un-
knowingly hosted to his own perfect satisfaction from his own cellar, 
Reinhold finds all hopes and wishes fulfilled in this freshly garnished 
version of his own doctrine, and finds the philosophical revolutions 
45. As Reinhold does not seem to use this expression at all in his Versuch-
which aims to be quite Kantian-we must choose between assuming that Hegel 
really meant to write "Bardili always says 'application of thinking,' or else as-
suming that he is referring to the Reinhold of the moment who had gone to 
school under Bardili. 
46. Hegel"s report here seems to be contrary to what Reinhold himself says in 
the Versuch, pp. 244 ff. Hegel seems to be replacing Reinhold's "form" and "mat-
ter" in the Vorstellung either by its subject and object, or by the thing-in-itself 
and the subject-in-itself. 
47. See Versuch, section XVII, pp. 244-55. 
48. Compare Grundriss, pp. 31, 35, 39-40, 67, etc. 
49. See Versuch, pp. 230 ff. and 304 ff. 
50. See Grundriss, pp. 81, 115. 
51. Bardili speaks of thinking "plunging headlong" into life (Grundriss der 
Logik, p. 69); and he uses the expression sich fiigen (fit in) frequently (e.g., ibid., 
pp. 114-5). 

191 
Reinhold 
are at an end in the new century. In the universal reduction of phil-
osophy through logic perpetual peace52 can now come at once upon 
the philosophical scene. 
Reinhold begins his new labor in this philosophical vineyard-as 
the Political Journal also begins every issue53-with the story that, 
over and over again, things have turned out differently from what he 
had predicted. They turned out "different from what he had pro-
claimed at the outset of the revolution, different from the way he was 
trying to advance it in mid course, different from the goal which he 
believed it had attained towards its end; he asks if he might not be 
mistaken a fourth time."54 Besides, if the number of previous mis-
takes can facilitate the calculation of probability, and be relevant with 
respect to what is called an authority, then we may add several other 
mistakes to these three that Reinhold acknowledges from the Contri-
butions of this authority55 who cannot [by this criterion] actually be 
one. 
For instance, on p. 126 Reinhold felt compelled to abandon forever 
the intermediate standpoint that he believed he had found between 
Fichte's and Jacobi's philosophy.56 
On p. 129 he believed, wished, etc. "that the essential core of Bar-
dili's philosophy could be shown to follow from that of Fichte's and 
vice versa," and "he tried quite seriously to convince Bardili that he 
was an idealist." But Bardili was not to be convinced; on the contrary, 
it was Reinhold who was forced by Bardili's letters (p. 130) to give 
up idealism altogether. 
52. The echo of Kant's title can be heard here. 
53. The Politische Journal was edited by a committee of scholars in Hamburg. 
We have not been able to discover whether it was still being published at this 
date. If it had ceased publication before July 1801 then "used to" is the proper 
rendering of sonst. 
54. Beytriige I, iii-iv. In spite of Hegel's quotation marks, this is not quite a 
direct quotation. Hegel has turned Reinhold's first personal locutions into the 
third person and omitted his specification of references. The 'proclamation at the 
beginning' was in the Letters on the Kantian Philosophy; the labors in the mid-
dle were in the Versuch; and Reinhold thought the revolution had reached its 
end in Fichte"'s Wissenschaftslehre. 
55. We read von dieser instead of vor dieser. 
56. The transcendental idealists accused Jacobi of "dogmatism" (by which they 
meant what in pre-Wittgensteinian epistemological controversies would have 
been classified as realism-more particularly as an empirical realism with a re-
ligious basis). Hegel's assault on Jacobi's empirico-religious realism can be found 
in the "Jacobi" section of Faith and Knowledge. 

192 
Difference 
[91] 
As the attempt with Bardili was a failure, Reinhold appealed 
urgently to Fichte to take the Outline to heart (p. 163), exclaiming: 
"What a triumph it would be for the good cause if Fichte could man-
age to penetrate through the bastion of his own terminology and 
yours (Bardili's) to achieve unity with you!''57 We all know how this 
turned out.58 
Finally, with respect to Reinhold's historical views, it should not 
be forgotten that things are not the way he thought when he believed 
he could see the whole system in one part of Schelling's philosophy, 
and when he took this philosophy to be what is usually called idealism. 
How things will turn out in the end for the logical reduction of 
philosophy is not easy to predict. As a device for keeping oneself out 
of philosophy, while continuing to philosophize, it is too serviceable 
not to be in demand. But it carries its own verdict along with it. For 
since it must choose one of the many possible forms of the standpoint 
o.f reflection, everyone else may create another form for himself at his 
own pleasure. This sort of thing is what is called "an old system being 
pushed out by a new system/' and so it must be called, since one is 
forced to take the reflective form for the essence of the system. Rein-
hold himself, for instance, managed to see in Bardili's Logic a system 
different from the one in his own Theory. 
The founding program aims to reduce philosophy to logic. In it one 
side of the universal need of philosophy appears and fixes itself; and 
as an appearance it must take its necessary, definite and objective 
place in the manifold of cultural tendencies which are connected with 
philosophy, but which assume a rigid shape before they arrive at phil-
osophy itself. At every point on the line of its development, which it 
produces until it reaches its own completion and perfection, the Abso-
lute must curb itself and organize itself into a pattern; and it appears 
as self-forming in this manifold. 
Where the need of philosophy does not reach to the centre of phil-
osophy, it shows up the two sides of the Absolute, which is at the 
same time inner and outer, essence and appearance, in a sundered 
57. This quotation is from one of the published letters of Reinhold to Bardili. 
Reinhold subsequently published their correspondence as a book (Munich, 1804) 
with the subtitle "On the Essential Being of Philosophy and the Non-Being of 
Speculation." 
58. This is probably a reference to Fichte's review of Bardili's Grundriss der 
Logik (Fichte, Werke II, 490-504); Reinhold commented on this review (in Bey-
triige I, 113-34) and Fichte retorted again in a pamphlet (Ti.ibingen, 1801; see 
Werke II, 504-34). 

193 
Reinhold 
form, inward essence and outward appearance separately. Outward 
appearance becomes for itself the absolute objective totality. It be-
comes the manifold dispersed ad infinitum, which manifests its non-
conscious coherence with the Absolute in its striving towards infinite 
multitude. One must be just to this unscientific effort: in its striving 
to expand the empirical infinitely it does feel the need for totality; 
even though precisely because of this striving [towards infinity] the 
stuff [of experience] necessarily wears very thin in the end. This la-
boring over the infinite objective [92] stuff constitutes the opposite 
pole to that of density, which strives to remain within the inward es-
sence and cannot emerge from the contraction of its sterling stuff into 
scientific expansion. Through its infinite bustling the empirical labor 
causes a stir in the deadness of the essential being that it deals with, 
though it does not introduce life. And whereas the Danaides could 
never fill up [their jars) because the water forever ran out59 these em-
pirical labors do not come to fruition because by constantly pouring 
water into their ocean they give it an infinite breadth. The Danaides 
could not achieve satisfaction because there always remained some-
thing that still needed to be watered; the empirical bustling, on the 
contrary, finds eternal nourishment in the immeasurable surface. Tak-
ing its stand upon the proverb that no created spirit penetrates into 
Nature's inwardness,60 empiricism gives up hope of creating spirit 
59. Forty-nine of the fifty daughters of Danaus murdered the husbands they 
were forced to marry. For this they were condemned in Hades to pour water into 
a sieve (or alternately a pot with a hole in it). Hegel does not mention the uten-
sil so we cannot be sure which version he had in mind, but he had probably 
read Lucretius, who speaks of a pot (III, 1009). It is quite likely that he also has 
in mind Plato''s comparison of the sensual man's life to a leaky pot (Gorgias, 
493-4). If this is right then he means to contrast the endless flowing away of ex-
perience in practical life, with its endless flowing in upon the theoretical investi-
gator. 
60. Hegel referred to Albrecht von Haller's pious poem "Human Virtues" sev-
eral times in his books and lectures. This is the first occasion-but see also Faith 
and Knowledge, (p. 174). Line3 289-90 of the poem, which achieved the status 
of a proverb, ran: "Ins Innre der Natur dringt kein erschaffner Gei~t I Zu gliick-
lich, wenn sie noch die aussre Schale weist" ["To Nature's heart there penetrates 
no mere created mind I Too happy if she but display the outside of her rind"-
Wallace]. In 1820 Goethe published a response, "Heiteres Reimstiick": "Ins Innre 
der Natur I 0 du Philister! I dringt kein erschaffner Geist I ... I Gliickselig! 
wenn sie nur I Die aussre Schale weis't I Das hor' ich sechzig Jahre Wieder-
holen I Ich fluche drauf, aber verstohlen: I Sage mir tausend tausend Male I 
Alles giebt sie reichlich und gern; I Natur hat weder Kern noch Schale, I Alles 
ist sie mit einem Male." (Adapting Wallace slightly we may render the comment 

194 
Difference 
and an inwardness itself, and bringing its dead [stuff] to life as Na-
ture.-The inward gravity of the enthusiast, on the other hand, scorns 
the water through whose addition the stuff might have been able to 
crystallize itself into a living shape. The seething urge, that originates 
in the natural necessity to take shape, repels the possibility of shape, 
and dissolves nature into spirits, forming it into shapeless shapes. Or, 
where reflection prevails over fancy, genuine scepticism comes into 
being.61 
thus: "I swear-of course but to myself-as rings within my ears I That same 
old warning o'er and o'er again for sixty years, I And thus a thousand thousand 
times I answer in my mind:- I With gladsome and ungrudging hand metes Na-
ture from her store; I Nature has neither core nor rind I But all in each both 
rind and core has evermore combined." This response delighted Hegel as soon 
as he saw it. He cited it in the Encyclopaedia of 1830 [§ 140 Anm.].) 
61. Here the cultural situation of Germany is characterized through an analogy 
drawn from Schelling's "construction" of the Potenz of light in his philosophy of 
nature (compare what Hegel says about this on pp. 168-9 above, and the discus-
sion in the Introduction, pp. 55-6). At this "level," the active power of light is 
alien to the dark and dead matter which is the dependent focus of gravitational 
force. But in the phenomena of crystallization this opposition is overcome. The 
crystal forms itself by precipitation from a watery medium; and instead of sim-
ply repelling light, it focuses it, reflects it in an intensified form, or breaks it up 
and transforms it, etc. In Schelling's construction, water, which is the medium of 
crystallization, is said to be potenzlos (i.e., unable to give itself shape, unable to 
crystallize itself). (Darstellung [1801], section III, Werke IV, 182). 
The formal principle of identity in the logic of Reinhold and Bardili is similar-
ly potenzlos (i.e., unable to generate and shape its own content). Anyone who 
accepts the Ding an sich will find that his absolute or philosophical knowledge 
is thus watery. From the point of view of a speculative comprehension of nature 
as a whole, all the labors of the empirical scientists, when poured into the formal 
patterns of such a logic as this, are an ocean of water poured into a leaky pot or 
through a sieve. It runs away uselessly and no philosophical insight into nature 
is gained. This is the point of Hegel's Danaid metaphor. 
On the other side stands the mystic who has an "intuition" of the absolute 
Whole. He has the (dark, impervious) raw material for crystallization, but he 
needs the water of finite experience as a medium. Then his mystic fervor can 
crystallize into genuine speculative knowledge. (The remark about "shapeless 
shapes" may be a glancing hit at Schleiermacher, whose religious ideal is said to 
be "art without the work of art" in Faith and Knowledge.) 
The birth of "genuine scepticism" through the prevailing of "reflection over 
fancy" should most probably be taken as comment on the outcome of Kant's 
third Critique. Hegel would be more willing to grant the status of a genuine 
sceptic to Kant himself than to a declared sceptic among the epigones, like G. E. 
Schulze. This is evident from his long review of Schulze, published in 1802, for 
which see N.K.A. IV, 197-238. 

195 
Reinhold 
A false mid-point between these two poles [of dispersal into empir-
ical acquaintance and contraction into religious enthusiasm] is consti-
tuted by a popular philosophy, a philosophy of formulae, which has 
grasped neither of the poles. This popular philosophy thinks it can not 
only please both sides by leaving the essence of each unchanged, but 
also let them cling together by a modification of the principles. It does 
not embrace both poles within itself, but rather causes the essence of 
both of them to disappear in its superficial modification and neighbor-
ly union. Thus popular philosophy is a stranger to both of the prin-
ciples as it is to [speculative] philosophy. From the pole of dispersat 
popular philosophy takes the principle of opposition. The opposites, 
however, are not supposed to be mere appearances and concepts ad 
infinitum, but one of them is itself something infinite and inconceiv-
able. In this way the enthusiast's desire for something supersensuous 
should be satisfied. But the principle of dispersal despises the super-
sensuous, just as the principle of enthusiasm despises opposition to 
the supersensuous or [the granting of] standing for a limited entity 
alongside it. [Speculative] philosophy in its turn, rejects every sem-
blance of being a mediating position that popular philosophy seeks to 
confer on its principle of the absolute non-identity of the finitE: and 
the infinite. That which has died the death of dichotomy philosophy 
raises to life again through the absolute identity. And through Rea-
son, which devours both [finite and infinite] and maternally posits 
them both equally, philosophy strives towards the consciousness of 
this identity of the finite and the infinite, or in other words, it strives 
towards knowledge and truth. 62 
62. This paragraph compares two ways of mediating the extremes of finite cog-
nition and infinite enthusiasm. "Popular" philosophy offers a false mean in which 
each extreme is allotted to a world of its own (and each world is an object of be-
lief or faith rather than of genuine knowledge). Thus the "principle of opposi-
tion" between subject and object is preserved in both realms. In this world ex-
perience continually accumulates, but the ultimate reality eludes us and makes 
its home in the other. This side-by-side conciliation is unacceptable to serious 
adherents of either principle. (If we want to put a name to this extreme it is 
worth remembering that Fichte remarked on the "formula-method" that Bardili 
used to achieve a standpoint between Fichte's and Jacobi's: Werke II, 491.) 
The true mean of speculative philosophy suspends the principle of opposition 
and replaces faith with knowledge. It unites the rational identity of the empiricist 
with the density of religious experience in a philosophical "crystallization." Thus 
the opposed principles of the two poles are reunited in the absolute indifference 
point. The one world of nature and intelligence is seen from the standpoint of 
the divine creative act: the "begetting of the Word from the beginning." 


Bibliographic Index 
All works referred to in Hegel's text or in the translator's introduction and notes 
are listed here (and identified as fully as possible) except classical and medieval 
authors (e.g., Aristotle, Lucretius), where the reference can be found in any 
good modem edition (where a specific edition has been cited-e.g., Cornford's 
translation of the Timaeus-details are included). 
Baillie, Sir James Black. See Hegel, Phenomenology of Mind. 
Bardili, Christoph Gottfried (1761-1808). Grundriss der Ersten Logik. Stuttgart: 
Loflund, 1800. 
Beck, L. W. Early German Philosophy: Kant and His Predecessors. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1969. 
Bichat, Marie Fran~ois Xavier (1771-1802). Traite des Membranes en general et 
des diverses membranes en particulier. Paris: Richard, Caille et Ravier, An 
VIII (1799 I 1800). 
Brown, John (1735-88). The Elements of Medicine. 2 vols. London, 1788. (First 
published in Latin, Edinburgh 1780; German translation, Copenhagen, 
1796.) 
Chisholm, Roderick M. See Fichte. Die Bestimmung des Menschen (The Vocation 
of Man). 
Croce, Benedetto (1866-1952). What is Living and What is Dead in the Philoso-
phy of Hegel. Translated from the third Italian ed. (1912) by Douglas 
Ainslie. London: Macmillan, 1915. 
Dusing, Klaus. "Spekulation und Reflexion." Hegel-Studien 5 (1969): 95-128. 
Ellington, James. See Kant, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. 
Eschenmayer, Adam Karl August (1770-1852). "SpontaneiHit = Weltseele oder 
das hochste Prinzip der Naturphilosophie." Zeitschrift fur spekulative 
Physik, II, 1800-1801, 1-68. 
---. Satze aus der Naturmetaphysik. Tiibingen: Cotta, 1797. 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814). Antwortschreiben an Prof. Reinhold. Ham-
burg: Perthes, 1801. Reprinted in Werke II, 504-31. 
---. Die Anweisung zu einem seligen Leben oder die Religionslehre. Leipzig, 
1806. (English translation by William Smith, The Way to the Blessed Life, 
in Popular Works, Vol. II.) 
---. Appellation an das Publikum. Jena/Leipzig: Gabler; Tiibingen: Cotta, 
1799. Reprinted in Werke V. 
---.Die Bestimmung des Menschen. Berlin: Vossische Buchhandlung, 1800. 
Reprinted in Werke II. (The Vocation of Man, translated by William 
Smith and edited by R. M. Chisholm, Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-
Merrill, Library of Liberal Arts, 1956.) 
---. Briefwechsel. Edited by Hans Schulz. 1930. Hildesheim: Georg Olms 
Verlag, 1967. 

198 
Difference 
---. "Erste Einleitung in die Wissenschaftslehre." Philosophisches Journal, V. 
Jena/Leipzig: Gabler, 1797. Reprinted in Werke I. (For translation see 
Science of Knowledge.) 
---. "Zweite Einleitung in die Wissenschaftslehre." Philosophisches Journal, 
VI. Reprinted in Werke I. (For translation see Science of Knowledge.) 
---. Grundlage des N aturrechts. 2 vols. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1796, 1797. 
---. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre. Leipzig: Gabler, 1794. 
(Reprinted in Werke. [For translation see Science of Knowledge].) 
---. Popular Works. Translated by William Smith. 2 vols. London: Triibner, 
1889. 
---. Sammtliche Werke. Edited by I. H. Fichte. 8 vols. Berlin: Veit, 1845-46. 
---. Science of Knowledge (Wissenschaftslehre, 1794, with the First and Sec-
ond Introductions). Edited and translated by Peter Heath and John Lachs. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970. 
---. The Science of Rights. Translated by A. E. Kroeger. London, 1889. Re-
printed by Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970. 
---. System der Sittenlehre. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1798. 
---. System of Ethics. Translated by A. E. Kroeger. London, Triibner, 1897. 
---. Uber der Begriff der Wissenschaftslehre. Weimar: Industrie-Comtoir, 
1794. Revised and augmented, Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1798. Reprinted 
in Werke I. 
---. "Uber den Grund unseres Glaubens an eine gottliche Weltregierung." 
Philosophisches Journal, VIII, 1799. Reprinted in Werke V. 
---. Review of Aenesidemus [G. E. Schulze], Uber Reinholds Elementarphilo-
sophie, Jenaer Allgemeine Literaturzeitung, 1794. Reprinted in Werke I. 
---. Unsigned review of Bardili's Grundriss, Literatur-Zeitung, Erlangen, II, 
1800, 214-15. Reprinted in Werke II. 
Fuhrmans, Horst. See Schelling, Briefe. 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1831). "Faust. Ein Fragment" in Goethes 
Schriften, vol. 7. Weimar: Goschen, 1790. Reprinted in Werke, Berlin edi-
tion, Aufbau Verlag, VIII, 69-143. 
---. "Faust: Der Tragodie Erster Teil" in Goethes Werke, vol. 8. Tiibingen: 
Cotta, 1808. Reprinted in Werke, Berlin edition, Aufbau Verlag, VIII, 145-
300. (Translated by W. Kaufmann, Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor 
Books, 1961.) 
---. "Allerdings. Dem Physiker" in Zur Morphologie, vol. I, 1821. Reprinted 
in Werke, Berlin edition, Aufbau Verlag, I, 555-56. 
Haller, Albrecht von. "Die Falschheit der menschlichen Tugenden." In Versuch 
Schweizerischer Gedichte. Bern, 1732. 
Haldane, Edward S. and Simson, Frances H. See Hegel, Lectures on the History 
of Philosophy. 
Harris, Henry Silton. Hegel's Development I: Toward the Sunlight (1770-1801). 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972. 
Heath, Peter and Lachs, John. See Fichte, Science of Knowledge. 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (177Q-1831). On Art, Religion, Philosophy. 
Edited by J. G. Gray. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1970. 
---. Briefe von und an Hegel. Edited by Johannes Hoffmeister and Rolf 
Flechsig. 4 vols. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1961 (Briefe). 

199 
Bibliographic Index 
---. De Orbitis Planetarum. Jena: Seidler, 1801. Reprinted in Erste Druck-
schriften. 
---. Differenz des Fichte'schen zmd Schelling'schen Systems der Philosophic. 
Jena: Seidler, 1801. (For current editions see Hegel, Erste Druckschriften, 
Gesammelte Werke, and Siimtliche Werke.) 
---. Early Theological Writings. Translated by T. M. Knox with an introduc-
tion, and fragments translated by Richard Kroner. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1948. 
---. Hegels Erste Druckschrift. (Jean Jacques Cart, Vertrauliche Briefe.) 
Gottingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht, 1970. 
---. Erste Druckschriften. Edited by Georg Lasson. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1928. 
(The texts of this edition of Differenz des Fichte'schen und Schelling'schen 
Systems der Philospphie and of Glauben und Wissen were each reprinted 
separately at Hamburg by Meiner in 1962.) 
---. Faith and Knowledge. Translated by Walter Cerf and H. S. Harris. Al-
bany: State University of New York Press, 1976. 
---. Gesammelte Werke, Band 4, lenaer Kritische Schriften. Edited by Hart-
mut Buchner and Otto Poggeler. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1968. (The present 
translation is based on the text of this edition, and the pagination of this 
edition is indicated herein [N.K.A.].) 
---. Glauben und Wissen in Kritisches Journal der Philosophic, Band 2, n. 1. 
Tiibingen: Cotta, 1802. (For current editions see Hegel, Erste Druck-
schriften and Gesammelte Werke.) 
---. Lectures on the History of Philosophy. Translated by E. S. Haldane and 
F. H. Simson. 3 vols. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1892. Reprinted 
1955. 
---. Logic. Translated from the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences 
by William Wallace. Second edition, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1892. Re-
printed 1975. 
---.Natural Law. Translated by T. M. Knox, with an introduction by H. B. 
Acton. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975. 
---. Phiinomenologie des Geistes. Edited by Johannes Hoffmeister. Hamburg: 
F. Meiner, 1952. 
---. Philosophy of Nature. Translated by A. V. Miller. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1970. (Also translated by M. J. Petry, 3 vols. London: Allen and 
Unwin, 1970). 
---. Philosophy of Right. Translated with notes by T. M. Knox. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1945. 
---. Political Writings. Translated by T. M. Knox with an introductory essay 
by Z. A. Pelczynski. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964. 
---. Premieres Publications. Translated by Marcel Mery. 3d edition. Paris: 
Ophrys, 1970. (French translation of Difference and Faith and Knowledge 
with analytical introductions and explanatory notes.) 
---. "Das System der spekulativen Philosophie" (1803-04). First published in 
lenenser Real Philosophie I, edited by]. Hoffmeister. Leipzig: Meiner, 
1931. Critical edition in Gesammelte Werke, Band 6, lenaer Systement-
wiirfe I, edited by K. Diising and H. Kimmerle. Hamburg: Meiner, 1975. 
---. Siimtliche Werke. "Jubilee edition" edited by H. Glockner. Stuttgart: 
Frommann, 1927-30 (see vol. I for Differenz). 

200 
Difference 
---. Theologische ]ugendschriften. Edited by Hermann Noh!. Tiibingen: Mohr, 
1907. Reprinted 1968. 
---. System der Sittlichkeit. Edited by Georg Lasson. Hamburg: Meiner, 
1967. (Reprinted from Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, second 
edition, 1923.) 
---. "Ober das Wesen der philosophischen Kritik." (Introduction for) 
Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, I, Heft 1. Tiibingen, 1802. Reprinted in 
Gesammelte Werke IV, 117-28. 
---. "Die Verfassung Deutschlands." (Written 1799-1802, first complete pub-
lication in) Hegel, Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, edited by 
G. Lasson. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1913 (second edition, 1923). Translated in 
Political Writings. 
---. "Verhiiltniss des Scepticismus zur Philosophie." Kritisches Journal der 
Philosophie, I, Heft 2. Tiibingen, 1802. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke 
IV, 197-238. (French translation by B. Fauquet. Paris: Vrin, 1972.) 
---. "Wie der gemeine Menschenverstand die Philosophie nehme" (review of 
Krug). Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, I, Heft 1, 1802. Reprinted in 
Gesammelte Werke IV, 174-87. 
---. Werke (Complete edition edited by a committee of his friends), Duncker 
and Humblot, 1832 ff. Vol. I: Philosophische Abhandlungen. Edited by 
K. L. Michelet. 1832 (second edition, 1845). 
Hegel-Studien. Bonn: Bouvier, 1961 ff. 
Hegel, Hannelore: Isaak von Sinclair zwischen Fichte, Holderlin und Hegel. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Klostermann, 1971. 
Herder, Johann Gottfried (1744-1803). Gott: Einige Gespriiche. First edition, 
1787. Second edition, revised, Gotha, 1800. Both editions collated in Werke 
XVI (and in the translation below). 
---. God: Some Conversations. Translated by F. H. Burkhardt. Indianapolis: 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1940. 
---. Siimmtliche Werke. Edited by B. Suphan eta!. 33 vols. Hildesheim: 
Georg Olms Verlag, 1967. 
Hoffmeister, Johannes. See Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes. 
Halbach, Paul H. D. Baron d', Systeme de Ia Nature. Paris, 1770. German trans-
lation, 1783. 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-1819). An Fichte, Hamburg: Perthes, 1799. Re-
printed in Werke III. 
---. Ober die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn. 
Neue verm. Ausg. Breslau: Loewe, 1789. Reprinted in Werke IV, i. 
---. Werke. 6 vols. Leipzig: Fleischer, 1812-25. Reprinted Darmstadt: Wissen-
schaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968. 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804). Critik der reinen Vernunft. Riga: Hartknoch, 1781 
[=A]. Second edition improved throughout, 1787 [=B] (the two editions 
collated by R. Schmidt. Hamburg: Meiner, 1930). 
---. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated from R. Schmidt's collation of edi-
tions A and B by Norman Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan, 1933. (The 
pagination of both A and B is indicated in the margin.) 
---. Critik der praktischen Vernunft. Riga: Hartknoch, 1788. Reprinted in 
Akad. V. 

201 
Bibliographic Index 
Critique of Practical Reason. Translated by L. W. Beck. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1949. Reprinted New York: Library of Liberal Arts, 
1956. (The pagination of Akad. V is indicated in the margin.) 
---. Critik der Urteilskraft. Berlin and Libau: Lagarde and Friederich, 1790. 
Second edition, 1793. Reprinted in Akad. V. 
---. Critique of Aesthetic Judgement. Translated by J. C. Meredith. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1911 (Preface, Introduction and sections 1-60 of the 
Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1793; the pagination of Akad. V is given in the 
margin). 
---. The Analytic of the Beautiful [Critique of Judgment, §§ 1-22] and the 
Feeling of Pleasure and Displeasure [Anthropology, Book II] translated, 
with an introduction by Walter Cerf. New York: Library of Liberal Arts, 
1956. 
---. Critique of Teleological Judgment. Translated by J. C. Meredith. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1928 (sections 61-91 of Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1793; 
the pagination of Akad. V is indicated in the margin). 
---. The Doctrine of Virtue. Translated by M. J. Gregor. New York: Harper 
Torchbooks, 1964 (Part II of Metaphysik der Sitten; there is another 
translation, by James Ellington, in the Library of Liberal Arts series). 
---. Gesammelte Schriften. Edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of Sci-
ences. 24 vols. Berlin: Reimer, 1902-38 (Akad.). 
---. On History. Translated by L. W. Beck. New York: Liberal Arts Press, 
1963. 
---. The Metaphysical Elements of Justice. Translated by John Ladd. Indian-
apolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, Library of Liberal Arts, 1965. 
(Abridged version of "Doctrine of Right" from Metaphysik der Sitten.) 
---. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. Translated by James El-
lington. Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, Library of Liberal 
Arts, 1970. 
---. Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaften. Konigsberg, 
1786. Reprinted in Akad. IV. 
---. Metaphysik der Sitten (1797}. Reprinted in Akad. VI, 203-493. 
---. Philosophical Correspondence 1759-99. Edited and translated by Arnulf 
Zweig. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967. 
---. Prolegomena. 1783. Reprinted in Akad. IV, 253-383. Translated by L. W. 
Beck. Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, Library of Liberal Arts, 
1950. 
---. Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft. Konigsberg, 
1793. Reprinted in Akad. VII. 
---. Religion Within the Bounds of Reason Alone. Translated by T. M. 
Greene and H. H. Hudson. 1934. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1960. 
Kaufmann, Walter. Hegel: Reinterpretation, Texts and Commentary. 2 vols. 
Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor Books, 1965. 
Kimmerle, Heinz. Das Problem der Abgeschlossenheit des Denkens. Bonn: Bou-
vier, 1970 (Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 8}. 
Knox, T. M. and Kroner, Richard S. See Hegel, Early Theological Writings. 
Kritisches Journal der Philosophie. Edited by F. W. J, Schelling and G. W. F. 
Hegel. Jena: Cotta, 1801-02. (Reprinted completely in N.K.A. IV). 

202 
Difference 
Kroeger, A. E. See Fichte, Science of Ethics and Science of Rights. 
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott (1770-1842). Briefe uber den neuesten Idealismus. Leip-
zig: Muller, 1801. 
Laube, Heinrich. Moderne Charakteristiken. Mannheim, 1835. 
Locke, John (1632-1704). Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Edited by 
J. W. Yo! ton. 2 vols. London: Dent, Everyman's Library, 1961. 
Lossius, Johann Christian (1743-1813). Physische Ursachen des Wahren. Gotha: 
C. W. Ettinger, 1775. 
Mery, Marcel. See Hegel, Premieres Publications. 
Neuer Deutscher Merkur. Edited by C. M. Wieland. Weimar, 1801. 
Nicolin, Gunther, ed. Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen. Hamburg: Meiner, 
1970. 
Noh!, Hermann. See Hegel, Theologische ]ugendschriften. 
Pascal, Blaise. Pensees. Edited by Leon Brunschvicg. Paris: Hachette, 1897. (Most 
modern editions show Brunschvicg's numbering in a concordance.) 
Pelczynski, Zygmunt A. See Hegel, Political Writings. 
Plato''s Cosmology [The Timaeus]. Translated by F. M. Cornford. New York: 
Liberal Arts Press, 1957. 
Politisches Journal, nebst Anzeige von gelehrten und andern Sachen, heraus-
gegeben von einer Gesellschaft von Gelehrten, Hamburg. 
Reinhold, Karl Leonard (1758-1823). Beytriige zur leichtern Uebersicht des 
Zustandes der Philosophie. 6 vols. Hamburg: Perthes, 1801-03. 
---. Beytriige zur Berichtigung bisheriger Missverstiindnisse der Philosophie. 
Jena, 1790. 
---. Fundament des philosophischen Wissens. Jena, 1791. 
---. Versuch einer neuen Theorie des menschlichen Vorstellungsvermogens. 
Prague and J ena: Widtmann and Mauke, 1789. Reprinted Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963. (These last three volumes make 
up Reinhold''s Elementarphilosophie.) 
---. Briefe uber die Kantische Philosophie. New augmented edition. Leipzig, 
1790-92. (Originally published in Deutscher Merkur, 1786-87.) 
---. "Der Geist des Zeitalters als Geist der Philosophie." Neuer Deutscher 
Merkur, 1801, Heft 3, 167-93. 
---. "Sendschreiben an Fichte." Beytriige I, 113-134. 
---. Ed. C. G. Bardilis and C. L. Reinholds Briefwechsel uber das Wesen der 
Philosophie und das Unwesen der Spekulation. Munich, 1804. 
Rosen, Stanley. G. W. F. Hegel: An Introduction to the Science of Wisdom. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1974. 
Rosenkranz, Karl (1805-1879). Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben. Berlin, 
1844. Reprinted Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963. 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernst (1768-1834). Ueber die Religion: Reden an 
die Gebildeten unter ihren Veriichtern. Berlin, 1799. (Abridged transla-
tion: On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers. Edited by John 
Oman. New York: Ungar, 1955.) 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph (1775-1854). Briefe und Dokumente. Edited 
by Horst Fuhrmans. Bonn: Bouvier, 1962 ff. (2 vols. to date). 
---. "Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie." Zeitschrift fur Spekula-
tive Physik II, Heft 2, 1801. Reprinted in Werke IV, 105-212. 

203 
Bibliographic Index 
---. Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie and Einleitung zu 
dem Entwurf. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 1799. 
---. "Fernere Darstellungen aus dem System der Philosophie." Neue Zeit-
schrift fur Spekulative Physik I, Heft 1, 1802. Reprinted in Werke IV, 
333-510. 
---. Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur. Leipzig: Breitkopf und Hartel, 
1797 (second edition, Landshut: 1803) 
---. "On the Possibility of a Form of Philosophy in General" (1794). Trans-
lated by Fritz Marti in Metaphilosophy VI, Number 1, 1975. 
---. On University Education. Edited by N. Guterman. Athens, Ohio: Ohio 
University Press, 1966. 
--'-. Siimtliche Werke. Edited by K. F. A. Schelling. 14 vols. Stuttgart and 
Augsburg: Cotta, 1856-1861. (The pagination of this edition is preserved 
in the photo-reprinted Ausgewiihlte Werke. 8 vols. Darmstadt: Wissen-
schaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1966-1968.) 
---. System des Transzendentalen Idealismus. Tii.bingen: Cotta, 1800. Re-
printed in Werke III (and in Ausgewiihlte Werke, 1799-1801). 
Schelling, F. W. J. "Dber das Absolute Identitats-System." Kritisches Journal 
der Philosophie I, Heft 1. Tii.bingen, 1802. Reprinted in Hegel, Gesammelte 
Werke IV, 129-73. 
---.Von der Weltseele. Hamburg: Perthes, 1798. Reprinted in Werke II, 
345-583. 
Schiller, Friedrich. On The Aesthetic Education of Man. Translated with an in-
troduction by Reginald Snell. New York: Ungar, 1971. 
Schulze, Hans. See Fichte, Briefe. 
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst (1761-1833). Kritik der Theoretischen Philosophie. 2 vols. 
Hamburg: Bohn, 1801. 
Smith, William. See Fichte, Popular Works. 
Spinoza, Benedictus de (1632-1677). Chief Works. Translated by R. H. M. Elwes. 
2 vols. New York: Dover, 1951. 
---. Opera Omnia. Edited by H. E. G. Paulus. 2 vols. Jena: Akademische 
Buchhandlung, 1802-03. 
---. Opera. Edited by Karl Gebhardt. 4 vols. Heidelberg, n.d. 
Schulz, Hans. See Fichte, Briefe. 
Schwarz, Hermann. Immanuel Kant, ein Lebensbild. Halle: Hugo Peter, 1907. 
Tiedmann, Dietrich. Geist der Spekulativen Philosophie. 3 vols. Marburg, 
1791-97. 
Tilliette, Xavier. Schelling: Une Philosophie en Devenir. Paris: Vrin, 1970. 
Wallace, William. See Hegel, Logic. 
Zeitschrift fur spekulative Physik. Edited by F. W. J. Schelling. 2 vols. Jena and 
Leipzig: Gabler, 1800-1801; continued as Neue Zeitschrift fur spekulative 
Physik (Tiibingen: Cotta, 1802-3). 
Zimmerli, Walter C. Die Frage nach der Philosophie. Bonn: Bouvier, 1974 
(Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 11). 
Zweig, Arnulf. See Kant, Philosophical Correspondence. 


Absolute, the: XVI, 19-20, 24-
25,29,31-32,33,37,41,48, 
so, 54,58,60,80-81,93-103, 
109, 110, 113-115, 120-121, 
124,155-162,167,169-175, 
184-185; and appearance 33-
34,89,165-166,172,193;and 
common sense 98-102; nega-
tive 24, 94; and the limited 109, 
112; and Reason 87-88; and 
reflection 94, 96-98, 134, 139-
140; for Schelling 28, 57, 59; 
self-knowledge of 24, 28; self-
positing 91 
activity: 124-125; absolute 28-
29, 96,128, 138; of conscious-
ness SO; creative 22, 51; free 
130, 133, 136; ideal and real 
110, 135; mental23, 108; 
moral 44; productive 49; pure 
120, 132; of Reason 184-185; 
self-constitutive 13, 16, 18, 
185; self-positing 127 
aesthetics: 40; artist 152; faculty 
152; perfection 92; sphere 117 
alienation: XIV, 4, 19 
analogy: in Philosophy of Nature 
43,56 
antinomy: in Fichte 123-124, 
133-134, 139-140; in Hegel4, 
24,28,30,32,71,104-109, 
111,112, 156n, 174,180,185; 
in Kant 4, 24, 32, 70, see also 
antithesis, dichotomy 
Analytic Index 
antithesis (Gegensatz): 28-29, 38, 
71,90-91,136,137,139,140, 
143,153 
appearance (Erscheinung): 20, 85, 
151, 173; and the Absolute 33-
34,89,100,109,115-117, 193; 
and being 41; of the Ego 119, 
123, 133; of Reason 114; and 
speculation 101; of truth 99; 
see also phenomena 
art: 20,58,60,152, 171-172; and 
culture 92; philosophy of 51; 
in Schelling XII, 51, 53, 58, 74; 
see also aesthetics 
Bardili, Cristoph Gottfried (1761-
1808):16,70,75,108n,109n, 
173n, 179; Outline of Primary 
Logic 30, 63, 179,183, 188, 
189-190, 192; and Reinhold 
30,63-66, 173n,179,183, 188-
189, 191; philosophy reduced 
to logic (see logic) 
Bergson, Henri (1859-1941): elan 
vital, XIII 
Berkeley, George {1685-1753): 
26,33 
Bottinger, Karl August {1760-
1835):67 
Brown, John (1735-1788): 88n 
Cart, Jean Jacques (1748-1813): 
Confidential Letters 66 
categories: 160, 164; deduction in 
Kant 8, 16, 79-80, 81; in Schel-
ling and Fichte 9 

206 
Difference 
causality: 33, 40, 115-116, 132, 
138, 142,150,162;andiden-
tity 29; for Kant 10; principle 
of 107 
Christianity: dogma of Trinity 
22; dualism of 92n; origin of 1; 
see also Protestantism 
cognition (Erkennen): analytic 
108; animal 56; common sense 
26, 41, 99; reflective 31, 70, 
97-98, 156, 184, 195n; singular 
25, 98, 99,156, 166; see also 
knowledge 
common sense (gemeine Men-
schenverstand): 46; and the 
Absolute 98-102; and philos-
ophy 26-27; and speculation 
98-103 
community (Gemeinschaft): 39, 
48; ethical149-154; of men 
144-146; religious 151 
concept (Begriff): 98, 103, 120, 
121, 142, 164-165; absolute 
50; and being 98, 110; for 
fichte 136,144, 153; for Kant 
9, 16-17; and life 144, 146, 
149-150; practical38; pure 109 
consciousness (Bewusstsein): 19, 
23,46,50,88,93,100, 110, 
154, 160; and the Absolute 94; 
empirical101, 119, 129; and 
pure 35-37, 40,119-123, 125-
130,133, 136,155;andtran-
scendentall20; finite 41; origin 
in sensation 14; pure 42, 81, 
117, 141, 144; religious 29, 35 
contraction, pole of: see indiffer-
ence point 
Critical Journal of Philosophy: 
63,67,74,83 
Croce, Benedetto (1866-1952): 43 
culture (Bildung): 20-21, 23, 32, 
55,62,90,92,101,102,177; 
cultural world 19; German 177, 
194n; modern 23 
Descartes, Rene {1596-1650): 11, 
20-21,23,27,33,46,70,91n 
determinism: 4, 38; see also 
necessity 
dichotomy (Entzweiung): 89, 91-
92, 102, 112, 138; and the Ab-
solute 93-94; suspension of 
101, 155-156, 177; see also 
antinomy, antithesis 
Oilthey, Wilhelm {1833-1911): 
XXV 
dogmatism: 4, 26, 33, 67, 72, 
114-116, 126; fichte's 34, 67 
drive (Trieb): see Fichte 
duty:40, 149,150-151 
Ego: empirical 35; of idealism 
101; in Fichte (see Fichte) 
empiricism: XVII, 56, 193 
Enlightenment: XVII, XXVIII, 21, 
27,70 
Eschenmeyer, Karl August (1768-
1852): 53,79,176 
ethics (Sittlichkeit): ethical cor-
ruption 178; for Fichte 39, 
144-152; for Hegel17, 39, 70; 
for Kant 151; see also morality 
existentialism: XVI, XVIII 
expansion, pole of: see indiffer-
ence point 
experience: 32, 98; and the Abso-
lute 24, 26; for fichte 4; finite 
28-29, 41; for Kant 13; princi-
ple of 21; religious 5, 48 
Faith (Glauben): 26, 27, 100, 177, 
182; and knowledge 10 
feeling: 32, 37, 136-137 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb {1762-

1814): 2,3,6, 11,28,33,34-
40,68,71,72, 100n,l05n, 
liOn, 119-154,173,191,192; 
Absolute 117, 119, 157; Act 
(Tathandlung) 11, 40; "Appeal 
to the Public" 67; concept 136; 
consciousness 8, 35, 119; drive 
(T rieb) 36-37, 136-141, 148, 
149, 153; Ego XXXI, XXXIV, 
11,34,40,44,47,49,81-82, 
llln, 117,119-143,150,157-
159, 174; and non-Ego 36, 73, 
123-124, 132, 158; self-posit-
ing 4, 28, 38, 71, 123-124, 132, 
152, 158, 164; in Faith and 
Knowledge 69, 72; feeling 136-
137; freedom 5, 37-39, 130-
131,133,137-145,148;God 
31-32, 73, 159; identity of sub-
ject and object 117, 128; intel-
lect 81-82; intellectual intuition 
11-15,36,119;andKant3,9-
11, 67; knowledge 11, 13; 
morality 117; nature 34,36-39, 
44,117, 130,135-144,149; 
productive imagination 125-
126, 128, 131; Reason 11, 39-
40,81-82, 122,133-134;and 
Schelling 7, 52, 60-61,67,68, 
69,70,79, 178, 182-183; 
Science of Knowledge XV, 
XXII, XXXIV, 4, 9, 28, 35, 36, 
61,68,70,80n,8ln,11ln, 
117n, 119n, 143n; Science of 
Rights 12, 35, 144n; and Spi-
noza 4-5, 9, 19, 87; striving 32, 
37, 40, 132-133, 153; Subject-
Object 117, 119, 128, 132-135; 
System of Ethics 12, 35, 38, 40, 
135n,137n,144n,149,150-
152; System of Natural Law 
207 
Analytic Index 
142,145,147,148,149,151, 
153; transcendental deduction 
129, 136,141-142, 165; Voca-
tion of Man 34-35, 73 
finitude (Endlichkeit): 27, 57, 
101, 102, 131; absolute fini-
tudes110-111,155;andinfin-
ity 4, 41, 52-53, 90, 95-96, 
141,156, 158-159,178;and 
nature 141; and reflection 96 
freedom: 19, 73-74, 85, 90, 113, 
120, 131; absolute 130, 138; 
for Fichte 5, 37-39, 130, 133, 
137-145, 148, 154; moral14, 
41; and necessity 31, 49-50, 
92,110, 154, 167; noumenal 
world of 24-25; rational 24; 
realm of 96, 144 
God: 29; and common sense 26; 
and creation 22, 41; the divine 
100-101; in Fichte 31-32, 159; 
in Kant XXI; and nature 19, 32, 
42, 44-45; for Schelling 57, 58; 
self-knowledge of XXXIV, 159; 
self-revelation of XII, XXX; 
Subject-Object XXIII; and the 
Word 171, 195n; and the world 
19,54 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 
(1749-1832): 2,66,73,193n; 
Faust 89n 
Greece, ancient: XIV, 19-20 
ground: 107, 179; grounding ten-
dency 18, 88, 93n, 105n, 177, 
179-180, 192; see also principle 
Haller, Albrecht von (1708-
1777): 193n 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm friedrich 
(1770-1831): "Constitution of 
Germany" 67, 73; Creation 22; 
Difference 1, 2-3, 5-7, 8, 13, 

208 
Difference 
21,34-35,52,53,59,60,63-
65; "doctorate" 68; Encyclo-
pedia 72; ethics 17, 39, 70; 
Faith and Knowledge 12, 20, 
21,23,34-35,53,60,63-65, 
83n, 173n, 19ln, 194n; History 
of Philosophy 8, 34, 35, 86n; 
Logic XII, XXIV, 64, 73; Orbits 
of the Planets 68, 74, 169n; 
Phenomenology XII, XXII, 
XXIII, XXIV, 6, 21, 64, 71, 72; 
Philosophy of Art 53; Philos-
ophy of History XXII, XXIV; 
philosophy of nature 15, 56, 
61, 74-75; and Schelling 2-7, 
72; and Spinoza 5-6; System 
of Ethical Life 32, 37, 56, 60, 
72,74 
Holbach, Paul-Henry Thiry, 
Baron d' (1723-1789): 26-27, 
33, 72, 114n, 77 
Holderlin, Friedrich (1770-1843): 
2,3,5,67 
Homer (c. lOth century B.C.): 89 
Idea (Idee): 81, 110, 111, 140, 
149, 163, 172; absolute 54; and 
being 112; and intuition 112, 
134-135; necessary 10 
idealism: 33, 115-116, 126-127, 
160, 176; authentic 7-8, 79; 
Fichte's 36, 136; moral34; 
speculative 102n; transcenden-
tal IS, 162, 174 
identity: 96, 97,100, 103n, 117, 
124, 138,168, 170; absolute 20, 
52,57,103, 106,109,115-116, 
123-126,129,133,135,151, 
155-157,173, 195; absolute 
point of 54; and causality 29; 
of finite and infinite 53, 96, 
195; of identity and non-iden-
tity 46, 60, 65, 156; philoso-
phy I theory of-see philoso-
phy; principle of 21,27-30, 62, 
64, 106, 112,155, 159; pure 97, 
106, 122, 186; relative 99, 114, 
125-126, 173; of subject and 
object 41, 80-81, 97, 98, 109, 
110,121,124,128,132,160, 
173,175,177, 181,188;of 
thought and being 29, 61, 98, 
163, 181, 188; and totality 54 
imagination: productive 55, 125-
126, 128, 131; sensory 14 
indifference, point of: 40-41, 42, 
48-49,54,56-60,151,169-
170, 172; absolute 51, 60-61, 
155, 173; contraction and ex-
pansion 42, 49, SO, 55,113, 
156,165-167,170-171,195 
infinite progress: 17, 37, 81,111, 
134-135,139,151,153;andre-
gress 24, 30 
infinity: 101, 102, 113, 131,134-
136; bad 37, 49; and finitude 4, 
41,52-53,90,95-96,141,156, 
158-159, 178; Idea of 135, 141; 
objective 96; and Reason 81, 
96; subjective 96; and time 112 
intellect (Verstand): XVII, XXX, 
99-103, 108-109, 113, 145, 
148-149,155, 185; as common 
sense 25-26 (see common 
sense); and heart 152; intuitive 
(see intuition); Kantian, 9, 20, 
80; and Reason 21, 24-25, 29, 
38,80-82,89-93,95-97,107, 
111,122,153, 155; reflective 
19-20, 24; and speculation 40, 
99-100; see also reflection, un-
derstanding 
intelligence: 38-39, 153; and na-

ture 31, 46, 59-60, 110, 143, 
152-153,160-163,166-170 
intelligible realm: see supersensi-
ble 
intuition (Anschauung): 100, 
110-113, 144, 167; of the Ab-
solute 171; empirical14, 120; 
intellectual4, 9, 11-13,17, 36, 
58, 61, 71, 121, 173; Kantian 9, 
16-17; metaphysical45, 50; of 
self 132-133, 135,155, 174; 
sensible 13-14; transcendental 
30,32,33,41,60,71, 81,109-
111, 11~ 120-121,133,135, 
173-174, 182-183;ofthe 
whole 31 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-
1819): XXVII, 30, 32, 48, 64, 
65,100n,166,183n,l91 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804): 
XXV, XXXV, 60, 64, 67, 70, 79, 
100n,103n,105n,llln, 116n, 
118, 149, 151,163, 179; cate-
gories XXVI, XXIX, 8, 15, 47; 
deduction of, XXX; Critique of 
Pure Reason XVI, XXVII, 
XXVIII, 9, 13, 23, 80n, 164n; 
Critique of Judgement XVII, 4, 
9,14, 16,25,40,46,163n, 
186n; and Fichte 3,9-11, 73; 
his God 31; influence on Hegel 
2, 16; intellectual intuition 9-
10, 16-17, 69, 71; intellect 
XXX, 9, 20, 80; knowledge 10, 
13; Metaphysics of Ethics 69; 
Metaphysical Foundations of 
Natural Science 47, 163n, 
164n; noumena 20; Ontologi-
cal Argument 71; productive 
imagination XXX-XXXI, 36; 
Reason 9, 17, 32; reflection 
209 
Analytic Index 
XVII; speculation 7-8; synthe-
tic a priori XXVI; teleological 
judgement 14, 46; thing in 
itself XXVI, 8, 15, 20, 24, 35, 
36, 45, 80; understanding 9, 
11, 16-17, 20,163, 183; unity 
of apperception XXVI, 8, 15, 
36 
Kierkegaard, Soren Aabye (1813-
1855): XIV /XV, XVI, XXII 
Knowledge (Wissen): 8, 103, 108, 
156, 166,173, 184, 195; Abso-
lute 41, 46; and being 56; and 
common sense 99; for Fichte 
11, 13; for Hegel25, 26; for 
Kant 10; philosophical110, 
121; pure 109; for Schelling 
59; science of-see Fichte; self 
31, 44, 56; speculative-see 
speculation; transcendental 
110; union of opposites as 96 
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott (1770-
1842): 65, lOOn 
La Mettrie, Julien Offray de 
(1709-1751): 26 
Laube, Heinrich (1806-1884): 
Moderne Charakteristiken 68 
law: 39, 98n, 145, 147-149; eth-
icall52-154; moral12, 34, 37, 
61; natural19, 117, 146; of re-
flection 96; of the understand-
ing 164 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm Frei-
herr von (1646-1716): 33, 44, 
48 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim 
(1729-1781): 21 
level (Potenz): 52-55, 59-60, 71, 
74, 166,168-169,194n 
life: 56, 58, 85, 90-92, 144-146, 
190, 193-194; divine 19, 172; 

210 
Difference 
ethical60, 149, 153; infinite 5; 
and nature 140, 144; and rea-
son 12, 144 
Locke, John (1632-1704): 21, 23, 
24, 25, 66, 70; Essay Concern-
ing Human Understanding 23, 
173n 
logic: 64-65, 97; philosophy re-
duced to 63-65, 79, 108, 109n, 
173n,179,186,187,192 
Logos: 50-51; in Creation 22, 
171n, 195n; of things 29; Uni-
versalll 
Lossius,J. C. (1748-1813): 46,73 
matter: 101, 102, 113,136, 142-
144,159,164,169,173,186-
187, 190; for Kant 47; materi-
alism 26, 33, 114n, 126, 177 
mechanism: XVIII; of nature 10, 
11, 31; and teleology 30, 163; 
mechanics 47, 49, 164 
Mendelssohn, Moses (1729-
1786): 73 
Mery, Marcel: 64, 75, 91n, 125n, 
14ln,l60n,l62n 
morality (Moralitiit): Fichtean 
17,37,117,149-152, 154; 
Kantian 12, 38; moral law-
see law; ought (Sollen) 9, 37, 
44,11~132-133,153;seea~o 
ethics 
mysticism: 29, 32, 156, 194n 
nature: and the concept 146, 
149-150, 152, 164; in Fichte 
XXXIV, 34,36-39,44,117,130. 
135-144,152-153, 174;and 
freedom 130, 137-140, 142, 
149,154, 168; and God 19, 31; 
human 14, 40; and intelligence 
31,110,143,152-153,160-
161, 166-170; in Kant XXXIV, 
10, 31, 47; organic and inor-
ganic 168-169; philosophy of 
XII-XIII, 5, 15, 34, 42, 48-52, 
56,61,79,102n,161, 173;and 
Reason 38, 83, 142, 144; for 
Schelling 41, 59-60; science of 
160-165; self-positing of 55 
necessity: 38, 96; and freedom 
31,49-50,92, 110,154,167; 
phenomenal world of 24-25; 
for Spinoza 5; totality of 95 
Newton, Isaac (1642-1727): 27, 
47; and Hegel62; Newtonian 
physics 102n 
Nicolai, Cristoph Friedrich (1733-
1811): lOOn 
noumena: see supersensible 
nullification (Vernichten): 57, 
103, 158; of appearance 117; 
of faith 100; of finite beings 
85n, 101; of the intellect 96; of 
limitations 90; of opposites 
109,112, 114; of particulari-
ties 93 
object (Gegenstand, Objekt): 41, 
92,106,116,120,126,132, 
155, 158; knowledge of 44; 
pure 40; objectivity 56, 91, 
127, 166,174, 187; absolute 
140; Subject-Object-see sub-
ject 
opposition (Entgegensetzung): 
absolute 20, 36, 90-91, 102, 
108, 115, 120, 128-129, 134, 
151,152,162, 177,187;of 
being and concept 110; of con-
scious and unconscious 42; of 
freedom and necessity 42; 
principle of 195; real and ideal 
41-42, 159; of subject and ob-
ject 131, 157-158; suspension 

of 111, 116-117, 155-158; see 
also antithesis 
organism: 14, 43, 55, 56, 142, 
168-169 
ought (Sollen): see morality 
Parmenides (fl. c. 475 B.C.): 29, 
30-31 
phenomena: 20,172, 177; infinite 
ground of 19; natural17, 143, 
163-164; nature as 10; phe-
nomenal world 24, 60-61, 96, 
115-116 
philosophy: XVII, XX-XXI, 53-
54,61,85-94,97,108,112-
114, 120-121; analytic XVIII; 
critical 4-5, 6, 9, 13, 17, 80, 
163 (sec also Kant); dogmatic 
4; dualistic 20-21, 162; goal of 
24, 155; history of 18,32-33, 
66, 86, 114; of identity XV, 
XXIV, XXV, XXIX, XXVV, 
3-5,8, 15,20,27,31,41-44, 
48-51, 61, 64, 116n; natural-
see nature; need for 20, 28, 
89-94, 112, 192; philosophia 
perennis 18; practical 51, 149, 
150, 168; presupposition of 
93-94, 181, 185; principle of 
54,103,106,173, 177; specu-
lative-see speculation; tran-
scendental 34, 42, 48-52, 56, 
61, 116, 161, 172-173 
Plato (427-347 B.C.): 71, 75, 
158n 
positing: 106; absolute 20, 101, 
131; of the Ego-see Ego, 
Fichte; and oppositing 124-
126;sclf4,28,38,55,123-
124, 130-131, 141-142, 145, 
157,167-169 
Potenz: see level 
211 
Analytic Index 
principle: of contradiction 96, 
104, 107; of non-identity 135; 
of sufficient reason 107; tran-
scendentall16 
proposition: 105-106; analytic 
104; fundamental103, 105; 
synthetic 104 
realism: and idealism 115-116 
Raphael (Raffaello Sanzio, 1483-
1520): 89 
Reason (Vernunft): XI, XVII, 12, 
19,21,22,25,26,29,32,33, 
34,51,55,6~90-99,103, 
105-109, 111-114, 148-149, 
155,159-161,164,170-171, 
179, 184; and the Absolute 87-
88; for Fichte 11,39-40, 81-
82, 122,133-134,145,153; 
and intellect 90-93, 140, 153; 
for Kant 9, 17, 32, 48, 80, 163; 
and nature 38, 83,142, 144; 
postulates of 111-112; andre-
flection 24, 27, 90, 94-97, 100, 
139-140, 146; for Schelling 5, 
59; self-production of 113, 
speculative see speculation; for 
Spinoza 23; subjective 171-172 
recognition: 56, 169 
reflection: 30, 32, 57, 61, 90,93-
97,99,103,105-106,108-112, 
121-123, 133-135, 139, 141, 
144-145,156,158-159,165, 
173, 192, 194; consciousness as 
22-23; philosophical XVII, 
XX-XXI, 4, 23, 25, 26, 27, 31, 
80,101,120,123,125,130, 
174, 182; and Reason-see 
Reason 
Reformation: 20, 91n 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard {1758-

212 
Difference 
1823):36,69,75,93n,l05n, 
106n, 174-192; the arch-true 
180,183-184, 186; and Bardili 
30,63-66,173n, 179,183, 
188-189, 191; Contributions 
62-63,82, 108n, 178,183, 
189, 191; Elementary Philoso-
phy 70, 188, 189; history of 
philosophy in 18-19,86-87, 
88, 114n, 177, 191-192; mat-
ter in 29,186,187, 189-190; 
his principle of identity, 21, 
27-30, 97; reflection in 23, 24-
25; and speculation 15-16, 68, 
72, 174-178, 182-184 
religion: 4, 20, 51, 58, 92, 171 
Revolution: French 1, 20, 91n; 
German 2; Kant's Copernican 
23-24; philosophicall79, 190-
191 
romanticism: 62 
Rosenkranz, Karl (1805-1879): 
Hegels Leben 70, 75, 171n 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1712-
1778):39 
scepticism: 32, 64, 75, 194 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm J o-
seph von (1775-1854): XXII, 
2,32,40-62,79,102n,l22n, 
155-176, 192; Absolute 28, 57; 
Critical Journal of Philosophy 
63, 83n, 9ln; and critical phi-
losophy 9; "Exposition of my 
System" 4, 6, 52, 170n, 176n; 
and Fichte 7, 52, 60-61, 67, 68, 
69,70,172,178, 182-183;God 
57, 58; and Goethe 66; and 
Hegel 2-7, 72; intuition in 14, 
173-174; Journal for Specula-
tive Physics 176; method 28,. 
68, 71; nature in XII-XIII, 15, 
41,52-53,59-60,117,160-
161, 166-167; philosophy of 
identity XI-XII, XV (see phi-
losophy); Reason in 5, 59; his 
system XII, XVI, 5, 7, 40, 48-
54,59-60,67,68,74,155,192; 
System of Transcendental 
Idealism XVII, 9, 14, 60, 68, 
72, llOn, 175; On University 
Education llOn 
Schiller, Friedrich (1759-1805): 
66; Aesthetic Letters 40 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst 
Daniel (1768-1834): lOOn, 
194n; Speeches on Religion 75, 
83 
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst (1761-
1833): 70, 75, 194n; Critique 
of Theoretical Philosophy 64 
science (Wissenschaft): 85, 86, 
113, 121, 173, 180; of the Ab-
solute 167; of nature and of 
intelligence 160-162, 167-170; 
see also knowledge 
self: 31, 34, 36-37, 42; absolute 
18-19, 40; and nature 45, 140; 
see also Ego, subject 
self-consciousness: XI, 48, 49, 
113-114,119,121-122,129-
130,139,157,160,173;pure 
121, 173; theory of 51 
sensible realm-see phenomena 
sex: 56,59,74-75,168 
Shakespeare, William (1564-
1616): 89 
Socrates (c. 469-399 B.C.): 26 
space: 42, 49, 134 
speculation: XI-XIII, 8, 16, 17, 
22,32,33,35,41,51,57,58, 
88, 107, 109, 111, 113-114, 
116,118,122,128,133,135, 

172, 177; and common sense 
27, 98-103; and intellect 99; 
principle of 80, 122, 126, 129, 
132, 142; speculative knowl-
edge 26-27; speculative philos-
ophy XVI, XX-XXI, 11, 14, 15, 
32,34,103n 
Spinoza, Baruch (1632-1677): 
XXXV, 21, 27, 31-32, 33, 48-
49, 70, 74, 80, 87; Ethics 24, 
166n; and Fichte 4-5, 9, 11, 
19; and Hegel 5-6; nature 14, 
38; and Schelling 28, 68; sub-
stance 70-71, 105 
state: Fichte's147-149; of need 
146 
Stoicism: XXVIII-XXXI 
Stolberg, F. L. von (1750-1819): 
73 
striving-see Fichte 
subject:41,44,92, 106,116,120, 
126,132, 155; absolute 134, 
142; pure 46; Subject-Object 
44-46,81,117,119,128,132-
133, 135-137, 140-141, 155, 
157-164, 166, 169, 172-173, 
185, 187; subjectivity 56, 61, 
91,129,132,166, 174,177;of 
reflection 105 
supersensible: 10, 24, 37,60-61, 
115-116, 195; unity with the 
sensuous 96 
synthesis (Synthesis): absolute 
94, 100, 102-103, 106, 177, 
181; of intuition and reflection 
111,113, 153; of nature and 
freedom 136,138-140, 151; 
real and ideal124-125; syn-
thetic faculty 125 
system, philosophical: 27, 32, 
103, 112-116; Fichte'sl17, 
213 
Analytic Index 
122, 132, 144, 152, 155; Schel-
ling's (See Schelling) 
teleology: XVIII; for Fichte 11, 
47, 143; for Kant 10, 30, 65, 
163; teleological explanation 
162; telos 45 
thought: 108; absolute 106; ap-
plication of 97, 108, 180, 186-
187, 189-190; and being 29, 
61, 98, 110, 190; and proposi-
tions 105, 127; and Reason 
96-97; and reflection 96-97 
Tiedmann, Dietrich: 86n 
time: 50, 112, 139; and infinity 
134; intuition of 111, 112 
totality: 25, 32, 42, 49, 58, 85, 
91,93,95,99,102, 117,121, 
134,138,149,154,155,158, 
160; absolute 99; of conscious-
ness123; and identity 54; ob-
jective 98,110,122, 129,166, 
167; of knowledge 71, 113, 
121, 180; relative 58, 96, 114, 
169-170; subjective 114, 166 
truth: and antinomy 108; arch-
true (Urwahre) 180,183-184, 
186; of common sense 99; 
faith in 182; and opinion 86; 
and reflection 97; and specula-
tion 99 
understanding (V erstand) : in 
Kant9,11,16-17,20,143, 
163; see also intellect 
Vernunft-see Reason 
Verstand-see intellect, under-
standing 
Virgil (P. Vergilius Mara, 70-19 
B.C.): 89 
Wolff, Christian (1679-1754): 
46,47, 73,165 
Zimmerli, W. C.: 69,75 

