
CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF POLITICAL THOUGHT
G. W. F. HEGEL
Political Writings

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF POLITICAL THOUGHT
Series editors
RG
Lecturer in Philosophy, University of Cambridge
QS
Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge
Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought is now ﬁrmly estab-
lished as the major student textbook series in political theory. It aims to make
available to students all the most important texts in the history of western
political thought, from ancient Greece to the early twentieth century. All the
familiar classic texts will be included but the series seeks at the same time to
enlarge the conventional canon by incorporating an extensive range of less
well-known works, many of them never before available in a modern English
edition. Wherever possible, texts are published in complete and unabridged
form, and translations are specially commissioned for the series. Each volume
contains a critical introduction together with chronologies, biographical
sketches, a guide to further reading and any necessary glossaries and textual
apparatus. When completed, the series will aim to offer an outline of the
entire evolution of western political thought.
For a list of titles published in the series, please see end of book.

G. W. F. HEGEL
Political Writings

LAURENCE DICKEY
Professor of History, University of Wisconsin-Madison
and
H. B. NISBET
Professor of Modern Languages, University of Cambridge,
and Fellow of Sidney Sussex College

H. B. NISBET

         
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
  
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcón 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
First published in printed format 
ISBN 0-521-45369-0 hardback
ISBN 0-521-45975-3 paperback
ISBN 0-511-03764-3 eBook
in the selection, translation and editorial matter, Cambridge University Press 2004
1999
(Adobe Reader)
©

Contents
Editors’ note
page vi
General introduction
vii
Chronology of Hegel’s life and career
xlii
Translator’s preface
xlv
List of abbreviations
xlix
The Texts
The Magistrates should be Elected by the People
()

The German Constitution (–)

On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law,
on its Place in Practical Philosophy, and its
Relation to the Positive Sciences of Right
(–)

Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of
Berlin (October )

Address on the Tercentenary of the Submission of
the Augsburg Confession (June )

Lectures on the Philosophy of History (–)

The Relationship of Religion to the State ()

On the English Reform Bill ()

Editorial notes

Glossary

Bibliography of works cited in this edition

Index of names

Index of subjects

v

Editors’ note
Although this volume has been a joint endeavour from the begin-
ning, each of the editors had special tasks to perform in assembling
the volume. The translation was the work of H. B. Nisbet, who has
also used the translator’s preface and the glossary to explain some
of the ﬁner points of rendering Hegel’s difﬁcult German into
English. The general introduction was written by Laurence Dickey,
who was also responsible for the chronology of Hegel’s life and
career and the editorial notes. Laurence Dickey, however, is greatly
indebted to H. B. Nisbet for the many contributions he generously
made to each of these parts of the book. Indeed, H. B. Nisbet not
only provided suggestions and information that considerably
improved the editorial notes but also commented extensively on
various drafts of the general introduction. His observations on these
drafts – as to style and to the structural balance of the argument –
proved immensely helpful.
Laurence Dickey and H. B. Nisbet would respectively like to
express their thanks to two colleagues for their friendship and sup-
port over many years: they accordingly dedicate this volume to
Marc Raeff and Hans Reiss.
vi

General introduction
In , T. M. Knox and Z. A. Pelczynski published their well-
known edition of what they called Hegel’s ‘minor’ political writ-
ings.1 They claimed that these writings were ‘a most valuable sup-
plement’ to Hegel’s major political work, the Philosophy of Right
(henceforth PR). In addition, they saw the minor works as in some
ways providing ‘a clearer insight into Hegel’s basic political ideas’
than PR, a work which, they noted, was ﬁlled with metaphysical
arguments, esoteric vocabulary, and obscurities associated with
Hegel’s life-long commitment to the ideals of speculative philos-
ophy. By contrast, the minor writings were ‘relatively free’ from the
jargon of metaphysics and addressed in plain language ‘topical pol-
itical issues’ of the day. The down-to-earth quality of these works,
in turn, prompted Knox and Pelczynski to present them as journal-
istic pieces that showcased Hegel’s talents as a ‘publicist’.2 If, in
that capacity, Hegel could be seen struggling with practical rather
than metaphysical problems, then so much the better for appreciat-
ing his realistic political outlook.
On a deeper level, though, Knox and Pelczynski wished to use
the writings in their edition to introduce students to a more ‘liberal’
Hegel, one whose ideas were more in line with the mainstream of
western political thinking.3 This Hegel, they argued, while certainly
not absent from PR, is clearly on display in the minor political
writings, for in these, he reveals himself as a supporter of consti-
tutional government and as a critic of absolutism, autocracy, and
reaction. To bolster this thesis, Knox and Pelczynski show how,
in the minor writings, Hegel was ‘the resolute opponent of . . .
vii

General introduction
e´tatisme’ from the beginning to the end of his career, from the essay
on The German Constitution (henceforth GC, pp. –below),
begun in the late s, to the essay entitled On the English Reform
Bill (henceforth ERB, pp. –below), published just before his
death in .
The stress here on the long-term continuity of development in
Hegel’s political thinking is important, because it calls into question
the conventional view of him as having become the philosopher of
the reactionary Prussian state after , the year in which he
assumed the chair of philosophy at the University of Berlin, Prus-
sia’s new but most prestigious university.4 On the basis of the minor
political writings, Knox and Pelczynski seek not only to correct the
misconception of Hegel as a reactionary but also to draw attention
to what they call the ‘rational’ core of his political philosophy.5
Going further still, they argue that, once we recognise that Hegel
was a ‘champion of political rationality’, it is incumbent on us to
treat him as a western-style political thinker rather than as a thinker
who upheld the values of ‘Prussianism’.6
To make this line of argument convincing, Knox and Pelczynski
have to play down two crucial aspects of Hegel’s political thinking,
both of which, they contend, are ‘metaphysical’ and can be found
prominently displayed in PR as well as in sections of the Lectures
on the Philosophy of History (henceforth PH). On the one hand, in
PR, Hegel consistently discusses the modern state in terms of his
‘general theory of ethical life’ (Sittlichkeit). On the other hand, he
insists in PH that the emergence of the modern state is inseparable
from a growing realisation among certain groups of Protestants that
Sittlichkeit fulﬁls religious as well as political needs in the modern
world. As Knox and Pelczynski see it, this mixing of religious and
political values in the concept of Sittlichkeit results in a theory of
the modern state that is metaphysical. It is their contention that
Hegel’s minor political writings, by way of contrast, show him to
be a practical and pragmatic thinker who ‘can be read, understood,
and appreciated without having to come to terms with his
metaphysics’.7
Viewed in this way, Knox and Pelczynski’s edition of the minor
political writings seems to offer more than just a ‘supplement’ to
our knowledge of Hegel’s political ideas. Rather, its aim seems to
be to make him appear a more liberal, rational, and mainstream
viii

General introduction
political thinker than he has been taken to be in the past. But they
are able to do so only by explaining away the metaphysical dimen-
sion of his political thought, especially as it relates to the idea of
Sittlichkeit. The present edition of his political writings is informed
by the converse view that any attempt to rehabilitate Hegel’s politi-
cal thought by ignoring its metaphysical aspects will necessarily be
one-sided and unsatisfactory.
After all, as J. Ritter has observed, Hegel knew very well that his
conception of Sittlichkeit was to a large extent grounded in ‘meta-
physical’ assumptions and was part of a long tradition of philosophi-
cal thinking in which the political sphere functioned as a point of
mediation between universals and particulars, wholes and parts,
divine things and human things, and so on.8 But in Hegel’s judge-
ment, the boundaries of the political sphere were becoming so nar-
rowly drawn in his own age that citizens were on the verge of
becoming depoliticised. In this context, he wished from the s
on to recall citizens to public life and civic engagement by ident-
ifying the political sphere, with the help of his own metaphysical
theory of the state, as a point where human beings can aspire to
higher things. And he proposed to do so mainly by using the idea
of Sittlichkeit to stretch the boundaries of the political in directions
that would permit him to bring religious and ethical considerations
into the political sphere.
It is for this reason, of course, that Hegel has been accused of
‘transposing politics to the metaphysical plane’9 and condemned –
especially by liberals – for mixing religious and political values in a
way that deiﬁed the state in relation to society and to individuals.10
But whereas liberals tend to believe that Sittlichkeit plays an instru-
mental ideological (i.e. metaphysical) role in the subordination of
‘individual rights’ to the ‘superior rights of the state’,11 Hegel in
fact envisaged Sittlichkeit as an ideological tool for extending the
scope of citizenship from the private to the public sphere. In this
respect, one of the great shortcomings of Hegel scholarship is that
it has been so convinced that Sittlichkeit is an anti-liberal conception
that it has forgotten the challenge which the philosophy of Sittlich-
keit posed to that reactionary alliance of throne and altar that domi-
nated Prussian public policy during the Restoration.12
In the light of these considerations, this volume seeks to give
students of Hegel’s political ideas access to texts which do justice
ix

General introduction
to the metaphysical as well as the practical aspects of his thinking.
To this end, ﬁve of the texts included in this volume (discussed in
part II of the introduction below) show in detail why Hegel became
a philosopher of Sittlichkeit and what practical problems he thought
could be addressed, perhaps even resolved, by means of this con-
cept. At the same time, our volume includes three texts (discussed
in part I of the introduction below) in which he adopts a compara-
tive historical perspective on the evolution of feudalism in Europe
in order to examine current political conditions in several of the
major European states. The three texts in question are not meta-
physical, and they do not feature Sittlichkeit as their organising
principle. But these texts, especially GC and ERB, are extremely
interesting because they show Hegel drawing conclusions about pol-
itical life in the modern world from remarkable comparative analy-
ses of recent political developments in England, France, and
Germany.
In this general introduction we provide an overview of some of
the major themes Hegel develops both in his more metaphysical
and his more practical political writings. Both groups of writings
are important for developing a historical understanding of his politi-
cal ideas. We refrain, therefore, from using the labels ‘major’ and
‘minor’ to characterise these writings, for no useful historical pur-
pose is served by privileging one group of writings as against the
other. As a matter of presentation, however, we discuss the practical
essays ﬁrst because, in his own manner of thought-progression,
Hegel liked to proceed from historical-empirical to philosophical-
metaphysical concerns.
I
The European states in comparative political
perspective
Although Hegel devoted much attention throughout his life to
developing a metaphysical view of political life, he also engaged in
more practical political commentary. Indeed, four of his political
works fall into this category – the fragment of a pamphlet
entitled The Magistrates Should be Elected by the People (henceforth
M); The German Constitution (GC; –); the equally long
essay on the proceedings of the Estates Assembly in Wu¨rttemberg
in –(; henceforth PWE); and On the English Reform Bill
x

General introduction
(ERB; ). Of these, two testify to Hegel’s abiding interest in the
political affairs of his native Wu¨rttemberg; one tries to explain the
relationship between state and society in England by examining the
politics of the English Reform Bill from a unique non-British per-
spective; and one, while explaining the breakdown of the Holy
Roman Empire in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, offers
a remarkable analysis of the historical processes which, according to
Hegel, accounted for the different paths of political development
followed by England, France, and the German states in early
modern European history.
In some respects, these four pieces, three of which are translated
here,13 all try to identify institutional and cultural obstacles to what
Hegel regarded as truly political reform in the modern world. For
example, in M, he tries to ﬁnd an institutional mechanism in Wu¨rt-
temberg through which initiatives for responsible political reform
could ﬂow. But in whichever institutional direction he turns, he
discovers good reasons for pursuing his political objectives by other
means. Thus, as he surveys the political landscape in Wu¨rttemberg,
he becomes uneasy about leaving the responsibility for reform either
in the hands of government ofﬁcials (even if they are enlightened)
or in the control of the various Councils of the Wu¨rttemberg
Estates.14 At the same time, he expresses reservations about the
wisdom of empowering the people to make such decisions.15
Given his perception of ever-narrowing institutional options,
Hegel proposes to revitalise public life in Wu¨rttemberg in a rela-
tively new and progressive way: by politicising citizens through
‘publicity’ (Publizita¨t). Since the s, reform-minded Germans
had advocated publicity – i.e. the dissemination and public dis-
cussion of information relative to the public good – as a means of
raising public consciousness concerning political matters. In M,
Hegel endorses this view. And by suggesting that ‘enlightened and
upright’ (p. below) citizens should actually form themselves into
a citizens’ association which would operate outside of Wu¨rttem-
berg’s ofﬁcial political institutions, he also underlines the need for
citizens to create associations among themselves through which they
could participate in the decision-making political process. He
thereby develops a view of political associations which had already
been common among German political reformers since the s.
M is important in this respect because it shows how, in certain
xi

General introduction
circumstances, the inertia of public institutions frustrated political
reformers in Germany to the point where they had no option but
to identify extra-political groups (Hegel’s ‘body’ of citizens) as
agents of the public good. This attitude, as it turns out, is respon-
sible for much of the discussion in the twentieth century about the
supposedly ‘unpolitical’ Germans.16
In GC, Hegel continues to emphasise the need for citizens to be
actively involved in German public life (pp. , , below). In
his view, such action must involve their participation in the exercise
of rulership (pp. –below). It is not enough, he argues, for citi-
zens to pay lip-service to the abstract cultural ideals of cosmopoli-
tanism or to endorse the utopian political ideals of revolutionary
democracy. Nor, he adds, should they measure political partici-
pation in terms of a ‘theory of happiness’ (Glu¨ckseligkeitslehre) or
eudaemonism whereby civil liberties are expanded by the govern-
ment in exchange for the citizens’ acquiescence in the government’s
wishes in all political matters. Indeed, like some ‘republicans’ of the
German Enlightenment, Hegel associates civic engagement with the
exercise of political liberty rather than with enhanced civil liberty.17
In accordance with this view, he holds up to citizens the ideal of
the Staatsbu¨rger (p. and n below) – that is, the ideal of
the citizen who understands that sharing in and promoting the
public good constitutes not only the mark of a mature citizen, but
of a truly civilised people as well.18 It is true, as Rudolf Vierhaus
has pointed out, that the patriotic discourse of the late German
Enlightenment encompassed a wide range of meanings,19 many of
which downplayed (if they mentioned it at all) the importance of
active participation by the citizens in the political decision-making
process.20 But as Vierhaus suggests, if the idea of the Staatsbu¨rger
called citizens to active civic engagement, it did so without support-
ing the extension of suffrage to everyone. From what Hegel says in
GC, we can see that, for him at least, patriotic discourse did entail
civic engagement for everyone.
In GC, Hegel reveals his commitment to participatory govern-
ment in two important ways. First of all, like the enlightened
German patriots of the late eighteenth century, he uses a discussion
of the feeble political condition of the German Empire to emphasise
the need for more ‘public spirit’ (Gemeingeist) among Germans.21
He develops this point in a remarkable way, for he relates the
xii

General introduction
decrepit political condition of the Empire to the stages by which
feudalism had evolved as a system of social organisation in European
history.22 Proceeding historically, he draws attention to three fea-
tures of feudalism: () it had once been the common form of social
organisation in Europe and Britain; () it gave impetus to the
emergence of representative government in Europe and Britain; and
() it had Germanic origins, arising ‘in the forests of Germania’ as
he puts it in GC (p. below). Secondly, he then explains how
the interplay between various historical forces in feudal societies –
especially in the domains of law, property, and politics – led to
different systems of government in France, England, and the states
of the German Empire.
In the end, his point is that, while feudalism degenerated into
despotism in France (p. below) and into an institutional system
of controlled political anarchy in the German Empire (p. below),
it evolved under different circumstances in England into a consti-
tutional form of government – a system of representative govern-
ment (i.e. limited monarchy) – which, as Montesquieu had noted,
showed great ﬂexibility in maximising the liberty of citizens in ever-
changing economic circumstances. Following Montesquieu (who
appealed to German thinkers for this as well as other reasons),23
Hegel argues that German liberty found its most mature political
expression in England. Accordingly, in GC, he sees valuable politi-
cal lessons for the Germans in English constitutional history.
Hegel’s discussion of the evolution of feudalism as a social and
political system originates and culminates in celebrations of Ger-
manic liberty. This allows him to take pride in his German heritage,
while at the same time associating himself with modern English
political institutions and values. This strategy – whereby he depicts
England as a fellow ‘Germanic’ community – helps us to locate his
position in the political landscape of the s. For as it turns out,
his admiration for England’s political institutions is not only close
to that of Montesquieu but also mirrors a view of England pro-
claimed in Germany by the so-called ‘Hanover Whigs’ during the
closing decades of the eighteenth century.24
In the s, for example, these Hanoverians had praised English
constitutional liberties in order to encourage German princes to
moderate their rule and to initiate a range of English-style reforms,
many of which demanded that the economic interests of non-landed
xiii

General introduction
groups as well as landowners be represented in government.25 In
addition to asking for a more representative government throughout
the system of German states, the Hanoverians (e.g. Ernst Brandes)
had also complained bitterly about the way in which absolute
princes in Prussia and Austria had turned their states into ‘machine
states’, with the result, as Brandes puts it, that these states had lost
their character as organic communities.26 In GC, Hegel reiterates
many of the points which the Hanoverians had made before him.
If GC has many afﬁnities with the pre-revolutionary political out-
look of the Hanoverians, it also voices complaints about the French
Revolution which echo those articulated by the Hanoverians
throughout the s. Hegel’s view in GC is that the Revolution
not only polarised European political discourse but forced a false
political choice upon citizens, insisting that they choose between
absolute tyranny on the one hand or absolute freedom on the other.
He registers his dissatisfaction with this political choice by
expanding on the idea of the ‘machine state’ (pp. –below).27
Hegel had addressed the issue of the machine state several times
in the s.28 Early in GC (p. below), he associates this idea
with Prussia – just as the Hanoverians had done. However, in the
course of the s, he became persuaded – perhaps by Friedrich
Schiller29 – that the revolutionary state in France also exhibited the
qualities of a machine state. So, in GC, he adds France to the list of
machine states, thereby collapsing the political differences between
revolutionary French democracy and Prussian absolutism (p. 
below). Both forms of government, he now proceeds to argue, are
inappropriate ways of dealing politically with the increasingly frag-
mented (i.e. ‘atomised’) character of modern life; he indeed declares
that the machine state is the political correlate of modern atomism.30
This argument, of course, enables him to present himself as the
voice of moderation between political extremes. The Hanoverians
had done much the same thing in the s.
In , reacting to the political debate in England over the
Reform Bill, Hegel revisits several of the themes which he had earl-
ier discussed in GC.31 In ERB, which he published shortly before
he died, his main concern is to show how a large part of the agricul-
tural class in Britain failed to become property owners during the
‘transition from feudal tenure to property’ (p. below). This
development, he notes, created socio-economic problems in Britain,
for, without the protection of certain provisions of the old feudal
xiv

General introduction
law, agricultural workers were dependent for their livelihood on the
ability of economic markets to absorb them as free labourers.32
Given the growing European awareness of the cyclical character of
market production patterns,33 which Hegel had become aware of in
the late s,34 the gloomy prospect of agricultural workers becom-
ing a permanent pauper class was, in his and others’ judgement, a
disturbing possibility.
In ERB, Hegel uses the depressed condition of the propertyless
agricultural class, which was a European as well as a British
phenomenon, as a point of departure for analysing the Reform Bill.
How, he asks (p. below), will the Reform Bill enable Parliament
to respond to the pauperisation of Britain’s rural population? It is
signiﬁcant that he does not simply allow English supporters and
opponents of the Reform Bill to answer this question for him, for
neither group, he reports, has taken much interest in the plight of
the agricultural workers. Instead, he ﬁrst frames the question in
comparative historical terms and then puts it to the English political
class in the light of the way in which the ‘civilised states on the
Continent’ (pp. , below) had responded to the social distress
of agricultural workers in their own countries. This comparative
procedure, which he had used to great effect in GC to discuss the
evolution of feudalism in Europe and Britain, produces one of the
principal themes of ERB: namely that, in comparison with the con-
tinental countries, England is politically backward in matters relat-
ing to the ‘material rights’ (p. ) of its citizens.
This evaluation of England, of course, stands in sharp contrast
to that which Hegel had developed in GC. Perhaps with his own
earlier celebration of English constitutional liberty in mind, he says
in ERB that Europeans had once been ‘impressed’ (p. ) by the
way the English government had been able to maximise the liberty
of the citizens by constantly balancing and adjusting the claims of
positive law vis-a`-vis the private rights of groups and individuals.
Throughout ERB, however, he contends that, in the course of the
eighteenth century, the constitutional balance in England had
shifted signiﬁcantly – to the detriment of the monarchy and to the
advantage of the long-standing privileges and private rights of par-
ticular propertied groups.35
On the basis of their property, Hegel observes, these groups are
both represented in Parliament and control it. In this respect,
he says, propertied interests in England represent a ‘class’ in
xv

General introduction
Parliament – a class, however, which is not without its own internal
tensions between its agricultural and commercial components, as
well as between ﬁnancial and manufacturing interests within the
commercial group itself. Although he draws attention to these ten-
sions within the English political class, he treats them as less
important than the fact that the propertied class as a whole seems
to be quite indifferent to the material well-being of the propertyless
agricultural workers (pp. –below). In these circumstances, he
thinks, the depressed economic and psychological condition of the
bulk of the rural population in England will not be addressed by
political means – that is, through the agency of the Reform Bill. In
fact, he believes that the ‘non-recognition’ of the material rights of
the
propertyless
will
turn
social
paupers
into
political
revolutionaries.36
According to Hegel, the continental states had reacted in a more
responsible way to the pauperisation of their agricultural workers.
They had been able to do so, he argues, because of the concerted
efforts of a group of dedicated and well-trained civil servants who,
while working through the due power of their respective monarchs,
developed social legislation that provided state assistance to those
whose well-being had been adversely affected by the transition from
feudal tenure to property. Indeed, like many German liberals of the
s and s,37 Hegel thinks it is incumbent on the state to accept
some responsibility for ensuring the material rights of all citizens.
Throughout the s, he associates this kind of state-sponsored
interventionism with what he calls the ‘police’ (Polizei) function of
government.38 He does not, of course, wish to restrict the function
of the state to matters which involve only the material needs of
citizens – which is why, in a lecture of –, he limits the focus
of ‘police’ legislation to questions of welfare and physical need as
distinct from those which involve Sittlichkeit.39 But just because he
separates the welfare and ethical functions of government does not
mean that a state which takes heed of the material well-being of its
citizens has achieved its end in a teleological sense. On the contrary,
Hegel’s expectation is that, to enable civilised people to realise
themselves fully as human beings, states must help their citizens to
form themselves into truly ethical communities. It is, however, the
English government’s lack of an ameliorative ‘police’ function that
induces Hegel to depict England as politically backward in compari-
xvi

General introduction
son with the legislative achievements of the civilised states of the
Continent.40 But since neither England nor the continental states
had, in his opinion, yet reached the level of Sittlichkeit, he refrains
from talking about that realm – the ethical life of the state – altog-
ether. As we shall soon see, this was despite the fact that Sittlichkeit
was very much on his mind at the time when he wrote ERB.
Obviously, this criticism of English political institutions stems,
in part, from the comparative perspective which Hegel brings to his
analysis of the Reform Bill. But throughout ERB, he also criticises
the English political class more directly, faulting it both for the
(false) ‘pride’ (p. ) it allegedly took in its own private rights and
for the excessively narrow and self-serving way in which it reduced
political questions about the common good to economic questions
about what was good for the particular interests of particular indi-
viduals within Britain’s propertied class.41 In the past, he concedes,
the English had been right to take pride in the rationality of their
political institutions (p. below), especially in the way in which
those institutions defended private rights against encroachments of
the absolute state. In the face of changing historical circumstances,
though, that pride had impeded the promulgation of legislation
which would address the socio-economic distress of Britain’s agri-
cultural class.42 Just as the Germans had once had to overcome the
illusions they had formed about themselves as a uniﬁed people, so
now the political class in England had to see that social justice in
modern market societies occasionally requires the state to abridge
the private rights of some for the sake of a more comprehensive
social justice.43
Throughout ERB, Hegel suggests that, in the absence both of a
strong monarchy and of any inclination on the part of the govern-
ment to improve the training of civil servants, and in the absence
of any commitment by the middle class to extend voting rights to
non-propertied groups, England’s political class will fail to respond
to the social situation of the pauper class. It would be wrong to
interpret this concern as evidence of any desire on Hegel’s part to
have ‘persons’ rather than ‘property’ represented in Parliament.44
This certainly is not his intention. (Nor was it the intention of many
liberal reformers in England in the s.)45 But, as he had already
noted in the s in the face of lessons drawn from the French
Revolution,46 if governments fail to minister to the needs (i.e.
xvii

General introduction
‘material rights’) of impoverished citizens, then those citizens, when
driven by ‘external necessity’ (p. below), will sooner or later
not only seek non-political ways to achieve social justice for them-
selves but will do so in the name of those ‘formal principles of
abstract equality’ (p. below) which had underpinned radical
French thinking on the rights of citizens since (pp. –
below). In this context, Hegel speculates, citizens who are not rep-
resented in Parliament will eventually ﬁnd voices among politically
ambitious ‘new men’ in Parliament to articulate the concerns of the
propertyless in the language of ‘French abstractions’ (p. below).
This combination of political ambition and social distress, he fears,
will lead to revolution rather than reform in Britain.
Although Hegel invokes the civilised states of the Continent as a
means of exposing the myopic political vision of the English ruling
class, it would be wrong to assume that he is recommending the
‘police state’ as a model for Britain to emulate. On the contrary, his
argument unfolds within a conceptual framework in which four
types of modern political regime are either discussed or alluded
to: () the laissez-faire regime of liberal political economy; () the
interventionist regime of qualiﬁed liberalism; () the political regime
of French revolutionary democracy; and () the ethico-political
regime of Sittlichkeit. In his view, the ﬁrst, second, and fourth types
constitute an evolutionary pattern which moves modern societies on
towards true liberty. The third type, by way of contrast, interrupts
that progression; and it is the failure of the ﬁrst type of regime to
transform itself into the second that paves the way for the third
type to emerge in history. In this respect, Hegel sees the regime of
Sittlichkeit as the mature expression of a liberal progression in his-
tory and the French Revolution as a threat to liberal values rather
than an agent of them. To understand why he holds that view, we
need to examine the idea of Sittlichkeit more closely.
II
Hegel as a philosopher of Sittlichkeit
The origins of Sittlichkeit in Hegel’s early writings
That the concept of Sittlichkeit plays a major role in Hegel’s politi-
cal philosophy is beyond dispute. As is well known, it is central to
the argument of PR (), his greatest political work, and it ﬁgures
prominently in PH (–), especially in the section included in
xviii

General introduction
this volume (pp. –below). To understand how Sittlichkeit
came to command so much of Hegel’s attention it is necessary to
look at his long-term development as a political thinker.
First of all, it is important to realise that the concept of Sittlich-
keit is already present in his so-called ‘early theological writings’.47
In these writings, which he composed between and , he
studies the civil history of religion in the ancient world, especially
among the Greek, Roman, and Jewish peoples. He himself emerges
as a religious optimist who believes that Christianity has the poten-
tial to become what he variously calls a ‘rational’ or ‘virtue-’ or
‘public’ or ‘folk religion’.48 By these designations, he means to sug-
gest that Christianity is a religion that asks individuals to assume
responsibility for acting ethically in the world. This is especially
true, he says, if one’s view of Christianity is based on what he
identiﬁes as the ‘religion of Jesus’ (die Religion Jesu) as distinct from
the ‘Christian religion’.49 The latter, he argues, is a ‘private
religion’;50 the former is a religion of Sittlichkeit that was optimistic
about the capacity of human beings both to cope with sin and to
realise the ‘spark’ of divinity which God had originally implanted
in them. Given these premises, Hegel says, Jesus expected Christi-
ans to carry Christian principles into the world through their ethical
actions, forming communities of religious fellowship in the process.
In the language of the religious history of Christianity, Hegel could
be said to view the latter as an ‘ethical religion’ whose task was to
persuade Christians to strive for perfection in their individual and
communal lives. Sittlichkeit is the word he often uses in the early
theological writings to give ideological focus to this conviction.51
Secondly, in the early s (just after he started to teach philos-
ophy at the University of Jena), Hegel begins formally to organise
his thinking around the idea of Sittlichkeit. He does so most con-
spicuously in his essay on Natural Law (henceforth NL; pp. –
below), a work which he published in two instalments in 
and . In this essay, he announces his intention of becoming
a philosopher of Sittlichkeit. In so doing, he makes comments on
Sittlichkeit that anticipate arguments which he develops later in PR
(e.g. on the differences between Moralita¨t and Sittlichkeit). Not for
nothing has NL been described as the ‘ﬁrst philosophy of right’.52
Although Hegel scholars have long been aware of the importance
of this essay, the pivotal role which it plays in the development of
Hegel’s political ideas has not always been fully appreciated. For
xix

General introduction
one thing, if NL is read in the light of Hegel’s earlier religious
arguments concerning Sittlichkeit, then it becomes clear that the
philosophy of Sittlichkeit expresses in new terminology the optimis-
tic view of human nature which he had developed in his earlier
theological writings. For example, at a number of places in the latter
(as well as at several places in the present volume), he grounds his
optimism regarding human nature, and the capacity of human
beings to form themselves into communities of fellowship, in the
‘fact’ that God created human beings in his own image and like-
ness.53 From this ‘fact’, Hegel derives the notion that human beings
have a spiritual essence which, with God’s help, they can cultivate –
but only if they are of a mind to do so. As they are more or less
successful in this endeavour, they become more spiritual, more
mature, and more capable of Christianising the world through their
ethical actions. Or – to use another of Hegel’s formulations from
the s – by striving for ethical and spiritual perfection in their
lives, human beings begin to ‘approach’ God.54
In NL, Hegel struggles to ﬁnd ways to express this optimism
about the human spirit (Geist) in philosophical terms. To achieve
this end, he develops a distinction, insisting throughout the essay
that human beings are not initially formed ‘by nature’ for what they
are meant to be ‘by nature’.55 On the still deeper philosophical level
of ontology, he sometimes registers this distinction in NL by differ-
entiating between ‘existence’ and ‘essence’. In the case of the indi-
vidual, the latter represents potential being, the former immediately
existing being. At other times, he equates the idea of existence with
the ‘subject’ and the idea of essence with a ‘substance’ that is imma-
nent in the subject but has not yet been either developed in the
subject’s self-consciousness or translated by the subject into ethical
action in the world.
Whatever the terminology, the point of philosophy for Hegel in
–is twofold: to ‘awaken’ human beings to what is immanent
in them (i.e. to their Geist);56 and to urge them to organise their
communities in accordance with this immanent substance which,
when externalised, becomes Sittlichkeit.57 In other words, subjective
individuals have to realise themselves as ethical substance in the
external world – to think of themselves, that is, not as isolated exis-
tential beings with immediate natures but as communal beings with
spiritual natures.
xx

General introduction
Two pivotal arguments of NL follow from this. Firstly, the phil-
osophy of Sittlichkeit implies that human beings can realise their
communal natures only when they begin to envisage themselves as
spiritual rather than as natural beings. This explains why Hegel
talks so much in this essay about the externalisation of inner dispo-
sitions (e.g. ethical intuitions, rational spirit, ethical reason, ethical
nature) and about the differences between the ‘natural’ and the
‘ethical’.
Secondly, Hegel indicates in NL that the impulse towards
Sittlichkeit involves an elevation and expansion of consciousness
which reveals the shortcomings of a life lived in accordance with the
Kantian doctrine of Moralita¨t. Indeed, as Hegel sees it, Moralita¨t
is a sophisticated form of philosophical subjectivism which, while
undoubtedly high-minded, ultimately contributes to the isolation of
human beings from one another.58 For this reason, he offers Sittlich-
keit as a corrective to Moralita¨t on the grounds that, in the ﬁnal
analysis, Moralita¨t is inimical to community (i.e. in the terminology
of NL, it is unsittlich). In this respect, the movement from Moralita¨t
to Sittlichkeit that is so central to the arguments of NL and PR
is governed by the same concerns that induced Hegel to identify
Sittlichkeit as an agent of religious fulﬁlment in the early theological
writings. Throughout the writings in the present volume, he indi-
cates again and again that Sittlichkeit as religious praxis is related to
the transformation of Moralita¨t into Sittlichkeit.
Sittlichkeit and Protestantism in the development of Hegel’s
political thinking
If, as we have seen, the discussion of Sittlichkeit in NL foreshadows
much of the argument of PR, then PR registers Hegel’s intention
of making Sittlichkeit an agent of Protestant religious fulﬁlment as
well. Nothing like this can be found in the writings from the early
Jena period.59 Indeed, during the early Jena years (–), Hegel
connects Protestantism with religious and philosophical values that
were, for him, alarmingly subjectivist in nature, scope, and pur-
pose.60 As we have seen, he deliberately develops his conception of
Sittlichkeit in NL as a corrective to moral subjectivism in philos-
ophy; and from some of his other writings of –we learn that
he also believes that Sittlichkeit provides a communal religious
xxi

General introduction
alternative to the privatising and atomising tendencies of Prot-
estantism.61 There is even evidence in these other writings that he
considered Moralita¨t to be the philosophical expression of Prot-
estant subjectivism.62 Thus later, when he declares in the Preface
to PR that Protestantism is destined to become the agent of Sittlich-
keit in the modern world,63 he commits himself to becoming a phil-
osopher not only of Sittlichkeit but of Protestantism as well. This
development means that there is discontinuity as well as continuity
between NL and PR.
In the light of Hegel’s embracing of Protestantism and his will-
ingness to put the Protestant ‘principle’ at the centre of his concep-
tion of Sittlichkeit as essential to modern freedom,64 the present
edition of his political writings includes four texts that testify to
the increasing importance he attached to Protestant values in his
discussions of Sittlichkeit, the modern state, and the philosophy of
history. These texts, two of which have never before been translated
into English, all date from his so-called Berlin period (–) –
the time when his philosophy was in the ascendant in Germany in
general and throughout the Prussian educational system in
particular.65
As these texts conﬁrm, Hegel develops during his years in Berlin
a theory of the modern state in which Protestantism becomes a
political ideology through the agency of Sittlichkeit, and Sittlichkeit
becomes an agent of Protestant religious fulﬁlment in the course of
Hegel’s various reﬂections on the philosophy of history. For stud-
ents of his political ideas, this means that the philosophy of Sittlich-
keit can no longer be grasped by studying PR alone. Indeed, despite
its monumental character, PR should not be viewed as the culmi-
nation of Hegel’s development as a thinker. Rather, in keeping with
the trajectory of his political thinking in Berlin, it is more accurate
to see PR as the beginning of a project in which he tries to explain
the political interplay between Protestantism and Sittlichkeit in
terms of a philosophy of history in which the modern state occupies
a central place. It is in fact in his reﬂections on history that he
develops an agenda for political change in Europe as well as in
Prussia; and Sittlichkeit is the point on which his meditations on
history, politics, and religion converge.
The ﬁrst of the texts in question is the Inaugural Address that
Hegel delivered in at the University of Berlin (henceforth
xxii

General introduction
BIA; pp. –below).66 Although it has never before been trans-
lated into English, it has drawn the attention of Hegel scholars for
several reasons. For some, BIA offers proof of his servility before
the idol of the Prussian state and of his willingness to act as a
spokesperson for its reactionary religious and political policies.67
Others have interpreted BIA as an integral part of an ambitious
effort by a group of liberal reformers in the Prussian bureaucracy
to develop a mental culture in the university which would offset
attempts by political forces on the right and the left to shape the
direction of education in Prussia’s leading university.68 Still others
see BIA as aimed at philosophical subjectivists (e.g. J. F. Fries)
who, Hegel thought, had debased philosophy by reducing it to mat-
ters of mere feeling.69 Finally, some read BIA as a call to the young
people of Germany to become more engaged in public life70 – ﬁrst
through their achievements in education (Bildung) and then by
applying what they have learned about ‘the ethical power of the
spirit’ (die sittliche Macht des Geistes) to public life.
For our present purposes, what is intriguing about BIA is the
way in which Hegel argues for Germany’s emerging supremacy in
European philosophy. Although he had held this view since at least
,71 he clearly regards his call to Berlin as part of this broader
European pattern of cultural development.72 To this end, he uses
BIA to outline a fourfold agenda for the cultivation of philosophy
and the sciences in Germany.
Firstly, as part of his life-long antipathy towards subjectivism, he
pleads for a shift in the focus of philosophy from ‘feeling’ to ‘think-
ing’.73 Secondly, he identiﬁes the university as the particular place
where, among other things, people can begin to think seriously and
freely about the universal, essential, and spiritual substance of ‘ethi-
cal life’ (Sittlichkeit).74 Next, he suggests that Germany has become
the custodian of the ‘sacred light’ of philosophy at this particular
moment in history because the ‘world spirit’ (Weltgeist) demands
emancipation from the ‘religious’, ‘philosophical’, and ‘ethical’ shal-
lowness of French thinking.75 (Though he does not say so in BIA,
he states in , in PWE, that the movement of philosophy from
France to Germany has a political dimension which involves deﬁn-
ing political rationality in terms of Sittlichkeit rather than
‘atomism’.76) Finally, he is convinced that, as philosophy shifts from
France to Germany, the ‘spiritual culture’ (Geistesbildung) of Europe
xxiii

General introduction
will become not only more German but more Protestant as well.
For him, this means that education and learning will be less Cath-
olic (i.e. ‘hierarchical’ and ‘closed’) and more open to ‘laymen’
(Laien) and to critical ways of thinking that are essential for the
cultivation of the sciences.77
If BIA held up high-minded ideals for Prussia and Protestants
to aspire to in , Hegel’s Latin oration of on the tercen-
tenary of the Augsburg Confession – now for the ﬁrst time trans-
lated into English (henceforth AC; pp. –below) – again
appears to extol the ‘cause’ of Prussian and Protestant values. But
the political circumstances in which Hegel delivers AC are very
different from those that existed in . For while there were few
signs in of the coming political and religious reaction, by 
an alliance of throne and altar dominated the Prussian state, ensur-
ing that a reactionary religious and political agenda would be at the
centre of public life in Restoration Prussia. It is well known that
the various groups that had formed this alliance (e.g. orthodox
Lutherans, neo-Pietists, and advocates of ‘feudal theology’ and the
‘ideology of patrimonialism’) distrusted Hegel as much as he dis-
dained them.78 Given this mutual suspicion, which surfaced in
Prussia as early as ,79 the question to ask is this: is the ‘cause’
which Hegel promotes in AC the alliance’s or his own?80
To answer this question, we need to bear three things in mind.
Firstly, by , shortly after his arrival in Berlin, Hegel wrote the
famous Preface to PR. In this Preface, he continues his assault on
subjectivism by reiterating the need to shift the focus of philosophy
from feeling to thinking.81 In so doing, however, he adds a religious
dimension to the discussion, arguing that, in Protestantism, feeling
stands to thinking as an immature Lutheran attitude towards
religion stands to a mature Hegelian one. As the Preface reveals,
Hegel uses the progression from feeling to thinking to exhort Prot-
estants to turn their inner-directed piety outwards – towards
Sittlichkeit and civic engagement.82 Throughout AC, he underscores
this point. It could not have gone down well with either the ortho-
dox Lutherans or the neo-Pietists, both of whom encouraged inner-
directed piety and embraced what Hegel called Luther’s doctrine of
‘faith in feeling’.83
Secondly, the oration’s repeated references to Protestantism
as a ‘lay’ religion are designed to operate on two different rhetorical
xxiv

General introduction
levels. On the one hand, Hegel shows that Luther’s doctrine of
conscience and his understanding of ‘subjective freedom’ abolished
priestly control of Christianity by Catholics. On the other hand –
and here Hegel draws on arguments he had developed in the
s84 – he implies that orthodox Lutheranism had itself fettered
the spirit of Protestant religious freedom in order to preserve the
letter of orthodoxy. As was the case with Catholicism before it, this
‘positive’ form of Lutheranism cut Protestants off from free access
to God by denying them the capacity to realise in their ethical lives
the ‘spark’ of divinity within them. Such an observation could not
have pleased members of the alliance of throne and altar in Prussia.
Finally, AC illustrates how Hegel uses history to promote his own
Hegelianised version of Protestantism’s role in the modern political
world. He does this in several ways. To begin with, he suggests
that, as Protestants become more mature in a spiritual sense, their
piety should become more ethically and communally focused in a
religious sense. Secondly, he indicates that, while Protestantism had
its origins in Luther’s Reformation, the Lutheran doctrine of inner-
directed ‘subjective freedom’ itself needed to be reformed – that is,
it needed to be re-directed outwards before Protestantism could
provide constructive ‘principles of action’ for the organisation of
communal life in the modern world. Thirdly, he thereby associates
himself with an older tradition of Protestant discourse which had
raised questions as to whether the scope of Luther’s Reformation
extended to matters of ‘life’ (Leben) or was limited to matters of
‘doctrine’ (Lehre) alone.85 For Hegel – and this is very clear in PH
(pp. –below) – Luther’s Reformation had succeeded admir-
ably in reforming Christian doctrine by providing a religious sanc-
tion for subjective freedom (i.e. freedom of conscience); but it had
fallen short of reforming Christian life. Thus, like others before
him, Hegel distinguishes between a ‘ﬁrst’ and a ‘second Refor-
mation’.86 The ﬁrst Reformation, he implies in AC, gives us the
idea of ‘freedmen’ (liberi) in terms of abstract theory; the second
Reformation demands that human beings become ‘genuinely free’
(liberti) in terms of the practice of piety in life. As Hegel under-
stands it, Sittlichkeit is the agent of the latter, but not of the
former.
Thus, at the end of AC, when he speaks of the Protestant ‘cause’,
Hegel is referring to Protestant norms that were neither those of
xxv

General introduction
Lutheran orthodoxy nor those of the existing Prussian state.87
Rather, these norms expressed the values of a liberal Protestant
humanist who, for religious and political reasons, wished to turn
Lutheranism ‘inside out’ by insisting that subjective freedom can
be realised in the world only through the agency of Sittlichkeit.88 In
this respect, AC calls on Prussia to complete the work which, in
retrospect, Hegel thought the Reformation had begun.
Towards the end of AC, Hegel alludes to political developments
in France. His comments follow remarks on how different the pol-
itical histories of Catholic and Protestant nations had been in
Europe in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In various
of his Berlin lectures in the s, he had devoted more and more
attention to this theme,89 the results of which can be seen in two
other works from his late Berlin period included in the present
volume: the famous section on modern history from PH (pp. –
below), and the section on The Relationship of Religion to the
State from the lectures on the philosophy of religion
(henceforth RRS).
At the outset, it is worth noting that both of these texts contain
material that Hegel added to his lectures after the Revolution of
in France. This allows students of his political ideas to meas-
ure continuity and change in his political thinking before and after
the Revolution.90
Of the two texts, PH is the more important. It shows Hegel
developing a philosophy of history in which subjective freedom
evolves historically into Sittlichkeit as the focus of Protestant piety
shifts from doctrine to life and from feeling to thinking. His claim
is that, in so far as Protestants act to realise Sittlichkeit in the world,
they become progressively more free – both as citizens and as Chris-
tians.91 Since increasing freedom is, in Hegel’s judgement, part of
God’s plan for human salvation in history, he has no reservation
about designating a political association – the state rather than
society – as the sphere in which Sittlichkeit has to be developed in
order for humanity to realise its divine essence in the modern world.
Obviously, Protestant values inform much of this argument. And
scholars have been right to note that Hegel’s conception of modern
freedom unfolds in accordance with a Christian philosophy of his-
tory.92 But with only a few exceptions, Hegel scholars have badly
misconstrued how the Protestant aspects of his philosophy of his-
xxvi

General introduction
tory shape the story he tells about freedom’s progress in the world
as it advances from the Reformation through the Enlightenment to
the French Revolution. The conventional view of his understanding
of modern freedom has long been that () it starts with Luther’s
doctrine of religious individualism; () it is then shaped by the
Enlightenment (i.e. secularised and rationalised) into a philosophy
that celebrates the critical thinking of free, morally autonomous, and
self-determining individuals; and () it culminates in the political
individualism of the French Revolution.93 In keeping with this, it
has been said that Hegel regarded the French Revolution as ‘a kind
of political Reformation’ because it gave priority to the exercise of
private judgement in political as well as religious life.94
Now, this judgement may certainly be applied to Novalis, who
in the late s called the French Revolution a ‘second Refor-
mation’.95 But whereas Novalis used the idea of a second Refor-
mation to link the religious anarchy of the Reformation with the
political anarchy of , Hegel used the same idea to separate
Hegelianised Protestantism from political anarchy. Therefore, to
interpret him as if he were saying in a positive sense that the French
Revolution was a kind of political Reformation is a serious error,
for it makes it impossible to explain all the negative things which
he has to say throughout his life about the subjectivism of Luther’s
Reformation, the abstractionism of the Enlightenment, and the
unfreedom of the French Revolution. In addition, it overlooks his
interpretation
of
the
Reformation–Enlightenment–Revolution
sequence as, respectively, the religious, philosophical, and political
moments of a single process of ‘atomisation’. Clearly, in his Berlin
period, Hegel means to use the idea of a ‘second Reformation’ to
distance himself from the atomising tendencies of each of these
major historical events. So, far from seeing as marking the
political fulﬁlment of Protestant freedom – which, instructively, was
the basis of the French theocrats’ charge in the s that Prot-
estantism was responsible for the anarchy of the French Revol-
ution – Hegel identiﬁes the ‘second Reformation’ simultaneously as
an agent of Sittlichkeit and as an ethical, political, and religious
corrective to the atomistic course which European history had been
following since the Reformation.
In this respect, the close connection which he draws in PH
between Protestantism, Sittlichkeit, and the second Reformation
xxvii

General introduction
aims at reasserting human control over the direction of history in
the face of anarchy and atomisation. This means, in turn, that his
idealised view of religious and political community is predicated on
the idea of Sittlichkeit becoming a new form of praxis for Protestants
and burghers alike. It is an ideal, in short, that urges a people to
take collective responsibility for its own future through the agency
of political association. If a people does so, Hegel says, spirit will
triumph over nature in history.
Sittlichkeit and the critique of civil society
Given what these four texts from Hegel’s Berlin period say, it
should be apparent that his Berlin project required the boundaries
of the political to expand in a religious direction, one that would be
consistent with his understanding of the course of European history
since the Reformation. It is worth observing, though, that this is
the second time he had sought to expand the scope of the political
sphere. He had done so for the ﬁrst time as a young man in NL –
when he began to include economic factors in his understanding of
the role which Sittlichkeit might play in the political sphere in the
modern world.
His youthful project of assimilating economics to politics
undoubtedly culminates in PR.96 But it is in NL that he ﬁrst begins
to write in detail about the triangular interplay between Sittlichkeit,
economic processes, and the loss of political liberty in the ancient
(and presumably modern) world. As we have seen, he wishes in NL
to use Sittlichkeit to ennoble human beings by raising the focus of
their ethical and religious lives above the narrow concerns of
immediate existence. But from his readings in political economy in
the late s he had learned how economic and social develop-
ments can together not only militate against ethical uplift, but erode
existing communal ties as well.97 As NL shows (pp. –below),
he explains the loss of Sittlichkeit from antiquity onwards as a result
of the people’s growing ﬁxation with their immediate existence –
with their private lives, that is. In this context, he explains how
privatising processes in economics, property law, and morality pro-
duced a class of citizen-proprietors whose primary interest lay more
in acquiring economic possessions and securing them legally than
in participating in public life through membership of a political
xxviii

General introduction
association. In NL, he connects this development with the depoli-
ticisation of Roman political life. And by calling these citizens bour-
geois (see p. below), he suggests that privatising processes simi-
lar to those which had depoliticised Roman citizens were drawing
the burgher, as bourgeois, away from public life in the modern world
too.98
Given the lofty ideal of Sittlichkeit that he brought to NL from
the early theological writings, it cannot be surprising that Hegel
depicted the bourgeoisie, and their privatised notion of Moralita¨t, as
an obstacle to the realisation of Sittlichkeit among human beings.
Thus, one of the principal aims of NL is to repoliticise the bour-
geoisie – that is, to persuade them of the need to develop that politi-
cal part of their natures which, while ‘immanent’ within them, still
remained to be developed. To do this, Hegel idealises the notions
of citizenship and of membership in the political community and
holds them up to the bourgeoisie of his own day as ideals to which
they ought to aspire. In this respect, NL must be interpreted as
marking the moment when Sittlichkeit becomes for Hegel a political
as well as an ethico-religious ideal.
But there is more to it than this, for the ideological connection
which he draws between Sittlichkeit and citizenship is constructed
with an eye to how developments in economics and property law
‘atomise’ society and isolate citizens from one another. Such devel-
opments occur, Hegel explains, because economic expansion creates
opportunities for individuals to realise themselves outside the politi-
cal sphere. As NL argues, the more citizens come to deﬁne liberty
in ‘civil’ rather than ‘political’ terms, the more subjective and self-
regarding they are likely to become.
For all that, Hegel does not blame the bourgeoisie for being bour-
geois. They are as they are because, in his opinion, the organisation
of civil society actually encourages individuals to put their private
lives before the public good. At best, this arrangement creates
depoliticised individuals who hold high personal standards of Mora-
lita¨t and are industrious, frugal, and honest.99 At worst, the organis-
ation of civil society produces a mental outlook that is conducive to
what scholars from Carl Schmitt to C. B. Macpherson have called
‘possessive individualism’.100
In the end, what is important about the economic aspect of NL
is that it induces Hegel to designate the sphere of bourgeois liberty –
xxix

General introduction
the sphere of political economy, private property, property law,
Moralita¨t, and subjectivism in philosophy and religion – as a depol-
iticised sphere of atomised individuals who, paradoxically, are
unsittlich even though – or perhaps precisely because – they are
‘moral’. Needless to say, this formulation largely anticipates the
view of civil society later expounded in PR – that is, in NL, Hegel
begins to develop Sittlichkeit as an alternative – at once political,
ethical, and religious – to the way in which life is organised in the
civil sphere. In so far as the civil realm is the preserve of liberal
values – and Hegel says as much in PH (pp. –below) – his
conception of Sittlichkeit tends to be critical of those values because
they underestimate the role of political association in public life.
But in so far as Sittlichkeit is the agent of civic Protestantism and
of a repoliticised bourgeoisie, he intends that it should promote
rather than discourage participation in public life.101 As recent stud-
ies of Berlin in the s have shown, it took civic courage to do
this in the face of Prussia’s illiberal power structure.102 It would
seem fair to say, therefore, that after stretching the boundaries of
the political sphere in the direction of economics, Hegel turns round
and stretches them in the other direction. By initiating the ﬁrst
move, he becomes open to – and develops an appreciation of –
many of the values of economic liberalism. With the second move,
however, he registers his growing discontent not only with econ-
omic liberalism but also with many of the values of liberalism itself.
The dialectic of Sittlichkeit and Hegel’s myth of the state103
In many interpretations of Hegel’s political philosophy, his strategy
of stretching the boundaries of the political ﬁrst one way then
another constitutes the ‘dialectic of Sittlichkeit’.104 Within the
framework of that dialectic, it is often argued, Hegel discusses sev-
eral other key conceptual movements: from inner- to outer-directed
piety; from Moralita¨t to Sittlichkeit; from parts to wholes; from par-
ticulars to universals; from burgher as bourgeois to burgher as
citoyen; from civil society to the state; from Gesellschaft to Gemein-
schaft; from the ﬁrst to the second Reformation; and, within the
framework of Franco-German relations, from ‘atomism’ to Sittlich-
keit and from Catholicism to Protestantism. The enormous import-
ance which he attaches to the transformative power of Sittlichkeit,
xxx

General introduction
however, has been viewed by generations of Hegel scholars as
grounded in metaphysics and rooted in an attempt to turn the
world, especially the political world, ‘upside down’ (to borrow a
phrase from Schopenhauer’s mid-nineteenth-century critique of
Hegel’s theory of the state).105
Among critics of Hegel’s political philosophy, the dialectic of
Sittlichkeit invariably leads to a gloriﬁcation of political power that
is sustained by a myth of the state in which free and autonomous
moral persons are reduced to the status of bees in a hive. Ralf
Dahrendorf is especially clear on the ideological dynamic here,106
arguing that the ‘dialectic of Sittlichkeit’ turns ‘the world . . . upside
down so that the myth of the state becomes reality [i.e. the universal]
and the tangible reality of society [a congeries of particulars] a kind
of ground fog above which one has to rise’.107 In this inverted world,
Dahrendorf continues, citizens become subjects, liberty is deﬁned in
terms of obligations, rights evolve into duties, and questions of justice
become questions of mere legality. Just as vehemently, he denounces
Hegel’s dialectic of Sittlichkeit for abolishing the rights of ‘free per-
sons’ in the name of ‘membership’ of the state.108
In his representation of Hegel’s position, Dahrendorf self-
servingly associates the free person with Moralita¨t and the member
of the state with Sittlichkeit. Thus, as the dialectical process unfolds,
the free person gives way to the member of the state in the same
way that Moralita¨t gives way to Sittlichkeit. The process unfolds in
this way, Dahrendorf says, because Hegel’s metaphysics values
wholes more than parts. Dahrendorf is convinced, moreover, that
this way of thinking underpins the widespread belief in the myth
of the state in German history.109
Sittlichkeit and Hegel’s concept of political association
Any rehabilitation of Hegel as a political thinker must explain why
the dialectic of Sittlichkeit does not, as Ernst Barker insinuates,
transform free persons into bees who operate in accordance with
the ‘instinctive automatism of the hive’.110 This question must be
addressed here.
The idea that Hegel reduced free persons to the status of bees is
indefensible. After all, as his writings make perfectly clear, he never
proposes to eliminate subjective freedom from human life or to
xxxi

General introduction
abolish the institutions of civil society, which is the sphere of sub-
jective freedom par excellence. With regard to the latter, Cassirer
correctly notes that Hegel’s doctrine of Sittlichkeit never aimed – as
totalitarian regimes do – at assaulting and obliterating civil
society.111 In the same connection, Carl Schmitt argues that, for
Hegel, Sittlichkeit has less to do with abolishing individual morality
for the sake of strengthening the sovereignty of the state than with
creating within the political sphere an association in which citizens
can think in common about the purpose and direction of public
life.112 This, Schmitt says, is why the ‘state is qualitatively distinct
from society and higher than it’ in Hegel’s political philosophy.113
The fact that Hegel approaches the political sphere with the idea
of promoting membership of a political association rather than with
that of buttressing the sovereignty of the state can be grasped if we
distinguish between his ‘idealisation’ of membership in the political
sphere and subsequent German ‘idolisations’ of the state.114 This
distinction helps us to see how indictments of Hegel’s conception
of Sittlichkeit often result from interpreting a call for citizens to join
together in political association as an ‘invitation to totalitarianism’
(to borrow a phrase from Sheldon Wolin).115 After all, identifying
the political sphere as an agent of ‘universal values’ does not neces-
sarily entail granting the state unlimited power in the exercise of its
sovereign ‘will’.116 Aristotle understood this with reference to
Plato;117 and Hegel understands it with reference to modern
totalitarians.
Is it at all surprising to think that Hegel envisaged the political
sphere in this way? Hardly, for there is a long tradition in western
political thinking, one with which he is often associated when he is
described as the ‘modern’ Aristotle,118 in which the meaning of pol-
itical membership turns far more on questions about the character
of the good life in an ethical sense than on questions about sover-
eignty. In this tradition, a political association is judged to be
superior to non-political associations (of the sort found in civil
society) because, through membership of a political association,
individuals form themselves into a community of fellowship whose
purposes are truly comprehensive. Membership in a political associ-
ation, therefore, makes each individual responsible for the whole,
and not just for a part of the whole that may be of particular interest
to the individual citizen or to the group to which that citizen
xxxii

General introduction
belongs. It is, therefore, in view of its purpose that Aristotle and
Hegel deem membership of a political association to be qualitatively
superior to membership of non-political forms of association. There
is accordingly a hierarchy of value here, but no involuntary subordi-
nation of the individual to the state.119
Indeed, in this tradition of political thinking, a middle way does
exist between anti-individual collectivism (totalitarianism) and
depoliticised individualism (liberalism). Accordingly, it is easy to
see why, for Hegel, membership in a political association need not
involve engulfment of the individual by the state. Rather, the chief
function of Sittlichkeit seems to be to reassert the importance of
what – following Wolin – we might call the ‘politicalness’ of citizen-
ship in the modern world.120 For in Hegel’s hands, Sittlichkeit’s
main aim is to focus the attention of citizens – as bourgeoisie and as
Protestants – on ethical and spiritual values that they may have,
or potentially have, in common with each other. Sittlichkeit is the
ideological centrepiece of such a community.
Notes to general introduction
For much of what follows, see the long introduction to Knox and
Pelczynski’s edition of Hegel’s Political Writings, pp. –
(henceforth KP).
In , a translation of a section of one of Karl Rosenkranz’s
many books on Hegel appeared in The Journal of Speculative Phil-
osophy (vol. ). It was entitled ‘Hegel as Publicist’ and made many
of the points which Knox and Pelczynski advance here.
Some Hegel scholars perceived this as a provocative act. See the
essays collected in Kaufmann (), especially the one by Sidney
Hook.
A claim made famous by Haym (), pp. ff.
KP, p. .
For the ‘Prussianism’ argument, see Knox’s sensible and still
important essay of in Kaufmann (), pp. –. The
essays collected in Stewart (), pp. –, also discuss the
charge of Prussianism.
KP, p. .
Ritter (), pp. ff, develops this point in his famous essay of
entitled ‘Hegel and the French Revolution’.
KP, p. .
Schopenhauer (), p. , took this view in the early s. A
xxxiii

General introduction
modern essay on this theme can be found in Stewart (), pp.
–.
See, for example, Dahrendorf (), p. .
On the religious aspects of this alliance, see Bigler (); for a
more politically focused study of the alliance, see Berdahl ().
Although PWE is a remarkable work, we have chosen not to
include it in this volume of writings for a variety of reasons. For
one thing, it dwells at great length on esoteric and antiquarian
matters peculiar to the political history of Wu¨rttemberg. What is
more, many of the broader themes that Hegel does develop in it
are dealt with in other essays included in this collection. An
English translation of extracts from PWE can be found in Hegel
(), pp. –.
In PWE, Hegel associates himself with a reform impulse within
Wu¨rttemberg’s government. By contrast, he is sharply critical of
the obstructionism (i.e. unreﬂective traditionalism) of the Estates.
Harris (), p. , explains how similar Hegel’s position is here
to the one articulated by Charles Fox, the liberal English reformer.
The themes addressed in this paragraph have been the focus of
much recent scholarly interest in the politicisation of German
thinking in the late eighteenth century. Helpful essays on ‘pub-
licity’, the ‘association’ movement, and the ‘unpolitical German’
argument can be found in Vierhaus (), and in the essays col-
lected in Hellmuth () and Schmidt ().
Klippel () is particularly helpful in sorting out the differences
between civil and political liberty in German thought in the late
eighteenth century.
In one of his early theological writings, he had already declared
his intention of repoliticising the idea of the Staatsbu¨rger. See
Hegel (), p. .
Vierhaus (), p. .
Ibid., pp. –.
In Hegel’s mind, promoting such a spirit was a precondition of
the exercise of the Gemeinwillen of citizens in the public sphere.
The interpretation of feudalism as an evolving system of social
organisation was a widespread tendency in eighteenth-century
European thought. For a view of British developments, especially
on how the evolution of property shapes political institutions, see
Smith (), pp. –, , and .
Montesquieu’s importance for German political thinking in the
late eighteenth century has been discussed by Vierhaus (), pp.
–.
xxxiv

General introduction
Hegel began studying Montesquieu in the mid-s. The Hanov-
erians, who were champions of Montesquieu in Germany, were
also Anglophiles, very much aware of the dynastic connection
between Hanover and England.
Useful information on these points can be found in McClelland
(), esp. pp. –.
See Brandes (), pp. –and ff. Although they were not
published until , Brandes’s essays date back to the s.
Parry (), pp. –, discusses the role of the machine state in
eighteenth-century German political thinking.
Beiser (), pp. ff, discusses the Hanoverians’ response to
the French Revolution in terms of the machine state.
See, for example, the fragment of in Harris (), pp. –
; and Hegel (), p. .
We refer here to Schiller’s On the Aesthetic Education of Man.
Hegel (b), p. , called this work a ‘masterpiece’. Schiller
discusses the machine state in Letter : see Schiller (), pp.
–.
In , Hegel identiﬁed Fichte as the thinker who had connected
the two. See GW, vol. , p. .
Similarities between the earlier and later essays conﬁrm that there
is a high degree of continuity in Hegel’s practical approach to
modern political life throughout his career.
Waszek (), esp. pp. ff, provides an excellent analysis of the
role of free labour in the evolution of Hegel’s thinking about politi-
cal economy and market societies.
This awareness is usually associated with arguments advanced by
J. C. L. de Sismondi in the late s.
Avineri () shows that Hegel was aware of the theory of econ-
omic cycles in –– in lectures he gave in Berlin. Similar
arguments concerning over-production and the like can be found
in PR, p . (It is important to note that in these instances Hegel
is discussing factory work in England, not just the hardships faced
by propertyless agricultural workers.)
In SL (p. ), Montesquieu attributes the decline of monarchical
power in England to the growing participation of the nobility in
commerce.
As early as –, Hegel had been concerned about the kind of
response the ‘non-recognition’ of such rights by the political class
would provoke among the poor: see PR, pp. –. It is the lack
of any meaningful response, he implies, that turns a class of paup-
ers into a ‘rabble’.
xxxv

General introduction
On these German liberals, see Sheehan ().
Hegel discusses the ‘police’ function of government in PR, pp.
ff. A good deﬁnition of how Hegel uses the term ‘police’ can
be found in the editorial note in PR, p. : ‘[it] includes all the
functions of the state which support and regulate the activities of
civil society with a view to the welfare of individuals. Thus it
includes public works (e.g. highways, harbours, and waterways),
all economic regulatory agencies, and also what we would call the
‘‘welfare’’ system’. Under no circumstances should this concept be
uncritically equated with the policy of an authoritarian government
or police state.
For the full quotation, see Waszek (), p. .
There is evidence in the writings of J. S. Mill and of various
Saint-Simonians in those years that some progressive thinkers out-
side Germany admired the achievements of Prussia’s civil servants.
Hegel appears here to be taking his cues from various statements
in the Morning Chronicle (January ) concerning the ‘ignorance
and imbecility’ of England’s ruling class: see Petry (), pp.
–.
Compare Hegel’s line of argument with that developed by Turgot
() in his famous eulogy of Gournay () in which the per-
sistence of ‘vestiges’ of feudalism in England are explained as a
consequence of a ‘republican’ reluctance to use state power to
effect reform, even when the reform is deemed progressive.
Waszek (), pp. ff, discusses this topic in terms of what he
calls ‘Hegel’s qualiﬁcations of liberalism’.
The contrast between ‘property’ and ‘persons’ in England goes
back to the s – speciﬁcally to Major Cartwright’s criticism of
Parliament for its failure to expand the basis of political represen-
tation. The argument surfaced again in in the pages of the
Edinburgh Review, in James Mackintosh’s criticism of Bentham for
having seemingly aligned himself with Cartwright on the issue of
universal suffrage. Mackintosh’s fear was that expansion of the
suffrage would not only pit ‘property’ against ‘opinion’ but would
lead to political revolution as well. Mackintosh’s views are import-
ant in the present context because they are those of a liberal
reformer, and because there is evidence – adduced by M. J. Petry
in – that Hegel’s views on the Reform Bill mirrored those of
the group in England around Mackintosh and James Mill.
See Petry (), esp. pp. and –, for some striking similarit-
ies of attitude.
Ibid., pp. –, alludes to James Mill’s political strategy of using
xxxvi

General introduction
the threat of revolution on the part of others to win reforms from
the government. Hegel, we have seen, (M, p. ), had used the
same strategy in (although he did not learn it from Mill).
These writings, not published until , inaugurated a new era
of Hegel scholarship. Much of what was published at that time
has now been translated into English. The most famous of these
writings are translated in Hegel (). For some of the other
translated pieces, see Hegel (a).
These terms are used in Hegel (), pp. –, , , and n
; and in Hegel (a), pp. , , , , and .
See Hegel (), pp. –, . Lessing (), p. , had already
drawn this distinction in .
Hegel (a), pp. , –, and .
See Hegel (a), pp. –, , , , –, , , and
.
See Hyppolite (), pp. ff. Hegel delivered his ﬁrst formal set
of lectures on the philosophy of right in . Student notes on
these lectures have recently been discovered and published in
Hegel (). The editors of these lectures refer to them as ‘Heg-
el’s ﬁrst philosophy of right’. Obviously, Hyppolite thinks NL
deserves that designation.
The argument concerning man as an ‘image’ or ‘likeness’ of God
has long been associated with religious optimism and ethical per-
fectionism. For its background in the ancient world, see Jaeger
(), esp. p. . O’Regan () offers an excellent discussion
of the role which ‘the theology of the image’ plays in Hegel’s
thought. Similarly, Steven Ozment (: esp. pp. –) dis-
cusses the image and likeness argument in the thought of German
mystics of the late Middle Ages (e.g. in Tauler). Tauler, of course,
is a thinker whom Hegel studied in the s.
Hegel (b), p. . In the history of Christian thought, the idea
of ‘approaching’ or ‘drawing near to’ or ‘assimilating’ to God has
often been associated with that of man as God’s image and likeness
(referred to in note above). Towards the end of his life, Hegel
discusses this relationship at length in AC (p. –below).
Late in his life, in PH, he still has recourse to this distinction. See
p. n below.
Throughout the s, Hegel uses the word ‘awaken’ to explain
what occurs when human beings become receptive to ennobling
religious instruction. See, for example, Hegel (), p. .
See Hegel (a), pp. –, –, and –. Hegel discusses
‘the process of externalisation’ in philosophical language in FK,
p. .
xxxvii

General introduction
The argument is developed in FK, pp. –and –. At this
time, Schelling also held this view. See Schelling (), pp. –.
In FK and NL, Hegel repeatedly links Protestantism with subjec-
tivism. At this time, however, he hesitates to associate his search
for a new religion of Sittlichkeit with a reform of Protestantism.
That change will come later.
See, for example, FK, p. .
Ibid., pp. –.
Both, he says (FK, p. ), delight in ‘deiﬁcation of the subject’.
PR, pp. –. Here he argues that Sittlichkeit prevents the pene-
tration of ‘atheism’ into the ‘ethical world’. Implicit in this formu-
lation is the idea that atheism and atomism are connected in civil
society.
Among Hegel scholars, Harris is almost alone in appreciating the
circumstances in the early s in which Hegel began to Prot-
estantise Sittlichkeit. See Harris (), pp. and –, and
Harris (), p. n.
Toews () is excellent both on the limited extent of Hegel’s
inﬂuence in Prussia and on the way in which his philosophy
worked its way into the Prussian educational system.
BIA is similar to, but more fully developed than, the inaugural
address Hegel delivered in Heidelberg in (henceforth HIA).
See for example, Haym (), pp. ff.
Rosenberg () and Sheehan (), p. . The particulars of
the political situation at the university around are discussed
by Jaeschke and Meist (), pp. –; by Hoover (); and
by Crouter ().
Avineri (), p. ; Toews (), pp. –.
This view is supported by what Hegel says in in PWE. See
Hegel (), p. .
FK, p. .
Hegel’s growing commitment to this pattern of development has
been remarked upon by Clark Butler. See the commentary in his
splendid edition of Hegel’s correspondence (Hegel b: pp. ,
–, , and ).
Hegel continues to contrast feeling and thinking throughout the
s. See the discussion in Dickey ().
In a letter of , he writes ‘[Among Protestants] our universities
and schools are our churches’. See Hegel (b), pp. –. On
the basis of this remark, it appears that Hegel sees Protestant Prus-
sia as an agent of common or collective culture rather than of an
individualising one.
xxxviii

General introduction
In HIA, Hegel refers to the ‘sacred ﬁre’ which has been passed
from nation to nation since antiquity. In this earlier address, he
also likens Germany’s mission to that once undertaken by the
Jewish people.
See Hegel (), p. .
To appreciate the Protestant dimension of BIA, one needs to
understand the connection Hegel had been making since 
between advances in science and an emerging liberal Protestant
outlook. For the background to this connection, see Hegel (b),
pp. –and –.
Berdahl () discusses each of these groups.
For the situation in , see Jaeschke and Meist (), pp. –
; Hoover (); and Crouter ().
Dickey (), pp. –, explains some of the religious conﬂicts
in Prussia in .
PR, pp. –.
See PR, p. , where Hegel associates Sittlichkeit with the ‘right
kind of piety’.
PR, p. .
See Hegel (), esp. pp. , –, and .
Hegel contrasts ‘doctrine’ and ‘life’ as early as . See Hegel
(a), p. .
Although these terms were used by Protestants in the early
modern period of European history, our usage of them refers to
the important historiographical debate that surrounds them today.
On this debate, see the collected essays in Schilling (). Refer-
ences to late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century thinkers who
used these terms can be found in the same collection – in the
essays of P. Munson (pp. –) and W. Neuser (pp. –) –
as well as in Schilling (), pp. –.
Although the use of Protestant norms to criticise Prussia is often
discussed in relation to the Young Hegelians’ critique of the Prus-
sian state in the late s, it is already present in Hegel’s writings
in the s. Jaeschke (), p. , has understood this very well.
Despite his biases against Hegel, Schopenhauer (), p. , was
one of the ﬁrst to appreciate how and why Hegel proposed to turn
Christianity ‘inside out’. Schopenhauer was critical of that turn.
In the early twentieth century, George Santayana (, p. )
indicted Hegel for the same reason, citing the inside-out move-
ment of his religious thinking as evidence of Hegel’s alleged
Calvinism.
Many of the additions Hegel makes to the and editions
xxxix

General introduction
of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences contain comments
on Catholicism and Protestantism as political ideologies.
Jaeschke () shows how important the matter of continuity and
change in Hegel’s political thinking is with regard to the Revol-
ution of in France. The issue is crucial for Hegel scholars
since much of the animus against Hegel as a political thinker arises
from the perception – articulated by J. G. Droysen (–) in
– that Hegel was a ‘philosopher of the Restoration’ because
he criticised the Revolution. See Nicolin (), p. , for
Droysen’s remark.
They do not, however, become more free as self-regarding individ-
uals. Rather, they gain more freedom by becoming members of a
political association.
See, for example, Ritter (), pp. –.
We summarise Pelczynski’s argument in KP, pp. –.
KP, p. .
See Novalis (), p. . The structure and direction of Novalis’s
argument mirrors the negative view of the French Revolution
advanced by one of the main theorists of the Catholic counter-
revolution in France in the s, namely Joseph de Maistre: see
de Maistre’s diatribe of against Protestantism and the French
Revolution in de Maistre (), pp. –. It is the link between
Protestantism and the French Revolution in Catholic thinking that
forced Hegel to separate the second Reformation from the
Revolution.
Riedel (), pp. –, offers an astute analysis of this develop-
ment in Hegel’s thinking.
See Hegel (), pp. –and .
In , in On the Social Contract, Rousseau had contrasted bour-
geois and citoyen (Rousseau, , p. n). Among German think-
ers in the s, similar contrasts abounded. Hegel’s distinction
may be understood, in part, as having evolved from that
discussion.
Hegel elaborates this point in –in his long essay System of
Ethical Life, translated in Hegel (), pp. –.
In , Schmitt (, p. ) used this phrase in discussing NL.
Macpherson () develops the idea in his famous study of
English political thought in the seventeenth century.
Harris (, p. n ) uses the phrase ‘civic Protestantism’
to characterise the religio-political aspect of Sittlichkeit in Hegel’s
writing after .
See Knudsen ().
xl

General introduction
The phrase ‘dialectic of Sittlichkeit’ comes from Dahrendorf
(), pp. ff. He uses it in conjunction with an argument
about the German fascination with the ‘myth of the state’. In the
English translation of Dahrendorf ’s German, Sittlichkeit is mis-
leadingly rendered ‘morality’; we therefore use the German here.
See, for example, Santayana (), where this dialectic is dis-
cussed in terms of what Santayana calls the ‘migratory ego’.
Schopenhauer (), pp. and .
Dahrendorf (), pp. ff, bases his analysis of Hegel’s political
ideas on the connection between the dialectic of Sittlichkeit and
the myth of the state. Both, as it turns out, reduce free individuals
to the status of bees in a hive (p. ). Schopenhauer (), pp.
and , twice uses the beehive image to disparage Hegel’s
theory of the state.
Dahrendorf (), p. .
Ibid., pp. and –.
For a discussion which distances Hegel from the myth of the state
in German history, see Cassirer (), pp. –, esp. p. .
Barker (), p. xvii.
Cassirer (), p. .
Schmitt (), pp. –.
Ibid., p. .
Cassirer (), p. , makes this all-important distinction.
Wolin (), p. .
Schmitt (), p. , suggests that a state may be ‘universal’ with-
out being ‘total’. The inclusion of ‘will’ in the latter distinguishes
it from the former.
Aristotle, Politics, a –, b –, and b –.
Royce (), p. .
In formulating the above argument, we found Wolin (), pp.
–, helpful (although Wolin is not discussing Hegel here). In
NL, p. , Hegel speaks of ‘non-subjugated oneness’ as the key
to Sittlichkeit.
Wolin (), p. .
xli

Chronology of Hegel’s life and career

Born August in Stuttgart, Germany. His father
was a minor civil servant in the state government
of Wu¨rttemberg.
–
Schoolboy years, during which his mother dies
().
–
Attends the University of Tu¨bingen. Holds a ducal
scholarship to study theology in the famous
theological seminary (Stift). Develops friendships
with his classmates Ho¨lderlin and Schelling.
Observes the polarisation between Kantians of the
‘letter’ and ‘spirit’ at the university. Composes in
the important ‘Tu¨bingen Essay’ in which
religious and theological themes are addressed.
–
Unable to secure a university position, is employed
as a tutor – ﬁrst (–) by a wealthy family in
Berne, Switzerland, and then (–) by a
family in Frankfurt. Reads widely during these
years and writes extensively on the civil history of
religion in the ancient world (the ‘early theological
writings’). Becomes interested in, and writes on,
political affairs in Berne, Wu¨rttemberg, and the
German Empire. Probably begins to study political
economy around .
–
Following his father’s death in , receives an
inheritance which allows him to accept an
unsalaried teaching position in philosophy at the
xlii

Chronology of Hegel’s life and career
University of Jena (helped by Schelling, who is
already teaching there). Co-edits CJ with Schelling
and begins to write philosophical essays, including
The Difference between Fichte’s and Schelling’s
System of Philosophy (). Publishes FK and NL
in CJ (–). Offers lectures throughout the Jena
period (–) which culminate in the publication
of the Phenomenology of Mind ().
–
Napoleon’s occupation of much of Germany results
in the closing of the University of Jena.
Unemployed, Hegel accepts a position as a
newspaper editor in Bamberg (). Becomes
principal of a Gymnasium (secondary school) in
Nu¨rnberg one year later. Marries in ; son born
in . (In , he had fathered a child out of
wedlock.) Volume of the Logic published in ,
volume in .
–
Accepts an appointment to teach philosophy at the
University of Heidelberg in . Among other
things, he sees his role as combating the pernicious
inﬂuence of Fries in philosophy. Within the
student movement of these years (the
Burschenschaften), which was dominated by Fries’s
students, Hegel’s own students offer an ideological
alternative to the nationalistic and anti-semitic
views of the Friesians. Publishes the Encyclopedia of
the Philosophical Sciences and PWE in . Also
begins in to lecture on the philosophy of
right.
–
Called to Berlin to teach philosophy, gaining the
appointment in preference to Fries. As political
reaction grows in Prussia and central Europe after
, Hegel’s liberal supporters in the bureaucracy
lose much of their inﬂuence. Important ﬁgures in
the university and government distrust Hegel and
persecute his students. Publishes PR in and is
accused – by Fries among others – of ‘servility’ to
the Prussian state. Beginning in , lectures
regularly on religion, art, the history of philosophy,
xliii

Chronology of Hegel’s life and career
and the philosophy of history. In and 
greatly expanded versions of the Encyclopedia
appear. Many of the additions to this text
incorporate changes he had been making in his
lectures during the s. Takes ill in a cholera
epidemic and dies November .
xliv

Translator’s preface
Hegel’s writings, particularly his more abstract and systematic
works, confront the translator with numerous problems. The prin-
ciples which I have followed in translating the more abstract texts
in this collection – especially On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating
Natural Law, but also The Relationship of Religion to the State and
parts of the extract from the Lectures on the Philosophy of History –
are identical with those which I followed in my translation of Heg-
el’s Elements of the Philosophy of Right (Cambridge, ; published
in the same series as the present volume) and which I described in
detail in my preface to that translation (pp. xxxv–xliv). The most
important of these principles is the need to adopt consistent render-
ings of key expressions in Hegel’s system and to avoid confusion
between similar or related terms with different nuances of meaning;
the English equivalents for all such terms are listed, with explana-
tory comments where necessary, in the glossary towards the end of
this volume.
One of the main difﬁculties in translating the present collection
was due to the fact that the texts included in it vary considerably
in form and subject matter and were written at widely separated
stages of Hegel’s career, from his earliest phase as a writer to the
last year of his life. Their style and linguistic register are corre-
spondingly varied, from the impassioned youthful rhetoric of the
early pamphlet The Magistrates should be Elected by the People ()
to the discursive historical prose of The German Constitution (–
), the dense abstraction of the essay on Natural Law (–),
the academic formalities of the Berlin Inaugural Address (), the
xlv

Translator’s preface
Ciceronian Latin of the Address on the Tercentenary of the Augsburg
Confession (), and the political journalism of On the English
Reform Bill (). One of the consequences of this variety is that
the kind of terminological consistency which is possible and desir-
able in translating the systematic works of Hegel’s later years could
not be sustained throughout the collection: for example, words
which, in a given work or period, are invested with semi-technical
or programmatic meanings (as with such terms as aufnehmen/Auf-
nahme, Bestimmtheit, and Potenz in the essay on Natural Law) may
subsequently revert to their traditional meanings or be abandoned
altogether in favour of new expressions whose meaning is itself sub-
ject to further variation. Considerations such as these explain why
some of the renderings listed in the glossary to this volume differ
from those in the corresponding glossary to my translation of Heg-
el’s Philosophy of Right, and why a greater number of alternative
renderings for certain terms are listed here than were listed in the
earlier glossary. In translating the less technical pieces in the present
collection such as the essays on The German Constitution and On the
English Reform Bill – I have made greater concessions to readability
and naturalness of English expression than were feasible in translat-
ing the more abstract and systematic works; in such cases, I followed
the same procedure as I did many years ago in translating the
(relatively non-technical) Introduction to Hegel’s Lectures on the
Philosophy of World History (Cambridge, ).
As on previous occasions, I have consulted – and frequently ben-
eﬁted from – the work of earlier translators. In particular, I am
indebted to T. M. Knox’s translation of the essay on Natural Law
(University of Pennsylvania Press, ; reprinted ) for its
illuminating renderings of some of Hegel’s most obscure and idio-
syncratic formulations. It must, however, be said that the overall
accuracy of Knox’s translation of this work, and of the works trans-
lated in his and Z. A. Pelczynski’s edition of Hegel’s Political Writ-
ings (Oxford, ), is lower than that of some of his other trans-
lations, such as that of the Philosophy of Right (Oxford, ). For
example, I was able to correct over seventy substantial errors and
omissions in his translation of the essay on Natural Law, almost as
many in that of the essay On the English Reform Bill, and well over
a hundred in his translation of The German Constitution; these
included such basic mistakes (page references to the Knox–
xlvi

Translator’s preface
Pelczynski edition) as ‘France’ instead of ‘Franconia’ for Franken
(pp. , , ), ‘they became subjects’ instead of ‘they acquired
subjects’ for sie bekamen Untertanen (p. ), ‘mercenaries’ instead
of ‘paymasters’ for Soldherren (p. ), ‘early in ’ instead of ‘at
the end of ’ for zu Ausgang des Jahres (p. ), ‘possession
of abbeys’ instead of ‘ﬁlling of ofﬁces’ for Besetzung der A¨ mter (p.
), ‘for more than years’ instead of ‘more than years ago’
for vor mehr als anderthalbhundert Jahren (p. ), and many more.
J. Sibree’s translation of the Philosophy of History, ﬁrst published
in but still in widespread use (revised edition by Dover Publi-
cations, New York, ), cannot strictly be described as a trans-
lation at all, for much of it consists of loose paraphrase, with Sib-
ree’s own elaborations and interpretations, often with serious
misunderstandings, masquerading as Hegel’s text. In welcome con-
trast, the translation by P. C. Hodgson, R. F. Brown, and J. M.
Stewart of The Relationship of Religion to the State (in Hegel’s Lec-
tures on the Philosophy of Religion, ed. Peter C. Hodgson, vols.,
Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London, –, volume , pp. –
) is generally reliable and workmanlike, despite a handful of
errors, and I was glad to adopt various of their renderings.
Two items in this volume are translated into English for the ﬁrst
time, namely Hegel’s Inaugural Address at the University of Berlin
and his Latin Address on the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession.
Johannes Hoffmeister’s edition of the latter text (in volume of
his edition of Hegel’s Sa¨mtliche Werke, Hamburg, , pp. –
) includes a parallel German translation by Georg Lasson, with
Hoffmeister’s revisions; but this contains so many omissions and
inaccuracies that I found it preferable to work directly from Hegel’s
original Latin.
All but two of the texts in this volume are translated from Hegel’s
Werke, edited by Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel (
vols., Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main, ). The originals
can be found in volume , pp. –(The Magistrates should be
Elected by the People), volume , pp. –(The German Con-
stitution), volume , pp. –(the essay on Natural Law), vol-
ume , pp. –(the Berlin Inaugural Address; my translation
also takes account of the corrections to this text in Hegel’s Gesam-
melte Werke. Kritische Ausgabe, ed. Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft, Hamburg, –, volume , pp. –), volume , pp.
xlvii

Translator’s preface
–(On the English Reform Bill), and volume , pp. –,
–, and –(Lectures on the Philosophy of History). The
Address on the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession is translated
from volume of Hoffmeister’s edition of the Sa¨mtliche Werke (see
previous paragraph), and The Relationship of Religion to the State is
translated from Hegel’s Sa¨mtliche Werke, ed. Hermann Glockner
(vols., Stuttgart, –), volume , pp. –.
Square brackets are used throughout the English translations to
indicate material interpolated by the translator. Such material
includes original German terms where it seemed to me helpful to
supply these after their English equivalents (see glossary for further
explanation), and English words or phrases which I have added to
complete the sense or otherwise facilitate comprehension of Hegel’s
argument, but for which no equivalent is present in the German
text. As in my translation of the Philosophy of Right, I have retained
both of the devices which Hegel employs to mark paragraph div-
isions, namely a new line plus indentation for major divisions, and
a dash before the beginning of a new sentence for minor divisions.
I am indebted to Laurence Dickey for his scrutiny of the trans-
lated texts.
H. B. Nisbet
xlviii

Abbreviations
The translator’s preface provides references to the German editions
of Hegel’s works which are translated in this volume.
AC
Hegel,
Address on the Tercentenary of the Submission of
the Augsburg Confession (June )
BIA
Hegel,
Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of
Berlin (October )
CJ
Critical Journal of Philosophy. Some of the
items in CJ are translated in Harris ().
CPR
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, nd
edn (), tr. Norman Kemp Smith (London,
)
CPrR
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Practical Reason
(), tr. Lewis White Beck (Indianapolis,
IN, )
ERB
Hegel,
On the English Reform Bill ()
FK
Hegel,
Faith and Knowledge (), tr. W. Cerf and
H. S. Harris (Albany, NY, )
GC
Hegel,
The German Constitution (–)
GG
Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, eds. O. Brunner,
W. Conze, and R. Koselleck (vols., Stuttgart,
–)
GW
Hegel,
Gesammelte Werke, ed. Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (vols., Hamburg, –
)
HIA
Hegel,
Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of
Heidelberg (October ). The German
xlix

List of abbreviations
text can be found in GW, vol. 
(Du¨sseldorf, )
KP
Refers to Z. A. Pelczynski’s ‘An Introductory
Essay’ in Hegel’s Political Writings, tr. T. M.
Knox, ed. Z. A. Pelczynski (Oxford, ), pp.
–.
M
Hegel,
The Magistrates should be Elected by the People
()
NL
Hegel,
On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law,
on its Place in Practical Philosophy, and its
Relation to the Positive Sciences of Right (–
)
PH
Hegel,
Lectures on the Philosophy of History (–
)
PR
Hegel,
Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen
Wood, tr. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge, )
PWE
Hegel,
Proceedings of the Estates Assembly in the
Kingdom of Wu¨rttemberg –. An
extensive excerpt can be found in Hegel
(), pp. –.
RRS
Hegel,
The Relationship of Religion to the State ()
SL
Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (),
trs. A. Cohler, B. Miller, and H. Stone
(Cambridge, )
SR
Johann Gottlieb Fichte, The Science of Rights
(–), tr. A. E. Kroeger (London,
). The German original, Grundlage des
Naturrechts nach Prinzipien der
Wissenschaftslehre, appears in Fichte’s Werke,
vol. /(Stuttgart, ).
Werke
Hegel,
Werke: Theorie Werkausgabe, eds. E.
Moldenhauer and K. M. Michel (vols.,
Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt, )
l

The Magistrates should be Elected by the
People1
[On the recent internal affairs of Wu¨rttemberg, in particular the
inadequacies of the municipal constitution]2
()
To the people of Wu¨rttemberg
It is time that the people of Wu¨rttemberg ceased to vacillate
between hope and fear, to alternate between expectancy and frus-
trated expectations.3 I will not say that it is also time for everyone
who, in the midst of change or in preserving the old, seeks only his
own limited advantage or the advantage of his class [seines Standes]
and consults only his own vanity, to renounce these paltry desires,
to cast aside these petty concerns, and to ﬁll his soul with concern
for the general [good]. For men of nobler aspirations and purer zeal,
it is time above all to focus their undirected [unbestimmten] will on
those parts of the constitution which are founded on injustice, and
to apply their efforts to the necessary change which such parts
require.
Peaceful satisfaction with the present [dem Wirklichen], hope-
lessness, and patient acceptance of an all-too-vast and omnipotent
fate have given way to hope, expectation, and courage to face the
new. A vision of better, juster times has come to life in the souls of
men, and a longing and yearning for a purer and freer destiny has
moved all hearts and alienated them from the present reality [der
Wirklichkeit].4 The urge to break down paltry barriers has ﬁxed its
hopes on every event, every glimmering [of change] – even on


Political writings
criminal actions. From what quarter could the people of Wu¨rttem-
berg expect more just help than from the Assembly of their Estates?
Time and deferment of the satisfaction of their hopes can only
reﬁne their longing and separate the pure from the impure; yet it
can only intensify the urge to remedy a genuine need, and any delay
will make the longing eat more deeply into men’s hearts, for it is
not just a fortuitous attack of light-headedness which will soon pass
away. You may call it a paroxysm of fever, but it can end only with
death, or when the diseased matter has been sweated out. It is the
effort of a still robust constitution to expel the illness.5
The feeling that the political ediﬁce as it still exists today cannot
be sustained is universal and profound. The anxiety that it may
collapse and injure everyone in its fall is also universal. – With this
conviction in our hearts, is this fear to become so powerful that it
will be left to chance to decide what shall be overthrown and what
shall be preserved, what shall stand and what shall fall? Ought we
not ourselves to try to abandon what cannot be sustained, and to
examine with a dispassionate eye what makes it unsustainable? Jus-
tice is the only yardstick for such a judgement, and the courage to
do justice is the only power which can honourably and peacefully
remove the unstable ediﬁce and produce secure conditions in its
place.
How blind are those who like to believe that institutions, consti-
tutions, and laws which no longer accord with men’s customs,
needs, and opinions, and from which the spirit has departed, can
continue to exist, or that forms in which feeling and understanding
no longer have an interest are powerful enough to furnish a lasting
bond for a nation [eines Volkes]!6
All the attempts of pompous bungling to restore conﬁdence in
constitutional elements and arrangements in which no one any
longer has faith, and to conceal the gravediggers behind a screen of
ﬁne words, not only cover their ingenious instigators with shame,
but also prepare the way for a much more terrible outburst in which
vengeance will ally itself to the need for reform and the ever-
deceived, ever-oppressed mass will mete out punishment to dis-
honesty.7 To do nothing when the ground shakes beneath our feet
but wait blindly and cheerfully for the collapse of the old building
which is full of cracks and rotten to its foundations, and to let
oneself be crushed by the falling timbers, is as contrary to prudence
as it is to honour.8


The Magistrates should be Elected by the People
If a change has to happen, then something has to be changed. So
banal a truth needs to be stated, given the difference between fear
which must and courage which will; for whereas those who are
driven by fear may well feel and admit that change is necessary,
they nevertheless display the weakness, as soon as a start has to be
made, of trying to hold on to everything they possess. They are like
a spendthrift who is obliged to cut his expenditure but cannot dis-
pense with any article he has hitherto required and has now been
advised to do without, and who refuses to give up anything – until
he is ﬁnally deprived of dispensable and indispensable alike. No
nation [Volk], including the Germans, can afford to display such
weakness. In the cold conviction that a change is necessary, they
should not be afraid to scrutinise every detail; the victim of injustice
must demand the removal of whatever injustice they discover, and
the unjust possessor must freely give up what he possesses.
This strength to rise above one’s own small interests for the sake
of justice is presupposed in the following enquiry, as is the honesty
to will this end, and not just to pretend to do so. Only too often,
wishes and zeal for the common good conceal the reservation ‘in so
far as it coincides with our own interest’. Such willingness to con-
sent to every reform takes fright and grows pale as soon as demands
are made of those who express it.
Far from this hypocrisy, let each individual and each class [Stand]
look ﬁrst to themselves to weigh up their own rights and circum-
stances before they make demands on others and look outside them-
selves for the cause of the evil; and if they ﬁnd themselves in pos-
session of inequitable rights, let them strive to restore the balance
in favour of others. Anyone who wishes may regard this demand to
begin with oneself as blind and ineffectual, and the hope for this
kind of injustice set aside for [. . .]9
So long as it is not in one’s power to reform or reverse those
reforms which have already been attempted and found to be harm-
ful, it is as well not to go beyond those changes whose consequences
can be foreseen and assessed throughout their entire extent, and to
be content with eliminating the sources of abuse.
Both in earlier and more recent times, the primary cause of all
the troubles of the provincial assembly [Landschaft] was the pre-
sumptuousness of the senior ofﬁcials.10 The Council [Ausschuß], of
course, found it very convenient to employ men to speak and write
on its behalf (or even, at a pinch, to think for it). Meanwhile, a


Political writings
large proportion of the Council’s members spent their income in
comfortable ease, and no doubt looked after their own spiritual wel-
fare on the side, leaving the country’s affairs to run their course as
providence and its leaders wished. To be sure, the common herd
fared badly if one of its herdsmen proposed to lead it east, and
another west. The majority naturally followed the one who had the
key to the hayloft, who could tempt them with fairer words and
more ably conceal his wolﬁsh nature beneath his sheep’s clothing.
In this way, the Council – and with it the country – was led by the
nose by the Council’s ofﬁcials.11
The Council itself was never presumptuous. But its consultants
and lawyers were. It was merely indolent, and it unthinkingly put
its name to all the high-handed actions of these ofﬁcials. It was they
who seduced the Council into a [degree of] generosity towards the
Court which was equalled only by the frivolity of the reasons which
were adduced in order to justify such expressions of devotion. It
was they whom the Court sought to enlist, because it was sure of
attaining its end once it had managed to harness the lawyers and
consultants to its interests. It was they who determined whether the
complaints and wishes of individual classes [Sta¨nde] were to be
heeded. It was they who took charge of the incoming documents
and kept their existence secret from the Council until such time as
they chose to bring the relevant matter up for discussion. And in
fact, no priest has ever exercised greater control over the con-
sciences of his penitents than these political confessors did over the
ofﬁcial consciences of the Councillors to whom they were
answerable.12
The consultants in the narrower sense had, incidentally, nothing
to do with ﬁnancial matters. They were not privy to the operations
of the secret account. The self-interest of the members of the Coun-
cil could therefore expect no favours from them. They were not
consulted over the making of appointments, and they played no
direct part in any election. This ensured that the lawyers were at a
marked advantage, even if they were without talents or knowledge.
But even in the elections, the indirect inﬂuence of the consultants
was unmistakable. A candidate for ofﬁce had every hope of outdoing
the favourite of a lawyer if the most inﬂuential consultant was his
friend and advocate.
Fortunately, the Council has also at times had right-minded and


The Magistrates should be Elected by the People
well-disposed men as consultants;13 and although they did keep the
Council on leading-strings – because it had not learned to walk
unaided – they never (or at least not knowingly and deliberately)
led it into the mire.
As far as the Diet is concerned, the dangerous inﬂuence of this
monstrous ofﬁcialdom has increased rather than diminished. We
have grown accustomed to regarding the consultants as essential
elements of the provincial assembly’s constitution [der land-
schaftlichen Verfassung]. Their ofﬁcial sphere of inﬂuence has been
enlarged. They have reaped beneﬁts from the rivalry of the depu-
ties. They have contrived to make themselves independent of the
Council, their employer and judge in ofﬁcial matters. Until the Diet
[was set up], the Council could dismiss an incompetent consultant
without argument, and it did so on more than one occasion. Now,
perhaps, the consultant might demand that the ruler, to whom he
betrays the interests of the provincial assembly [Landschaft], should
be his judge [. . .]
[. . .] as long as everything else remains as it was, as long as the
people do not know their rights, as long as there is no collective
spirit [Gemeingeist], and as long as the power of the ofﬁcials remains
unchecked, popular elections would serve only to bring about the
complete overthrow of the constitution.14 The chief priority is to
place the right of election in the hands of a body of enlightened and
upright men who are not dependent on the Court.15 But I fail to
see what kind of election might give us any expectation of an
assembly of this kind, however carefully one deﬁned active and
passive [kinds of] eligibility [. . .]


The German Constitution (–)1
[Introduction]
Germany is no longer a state.2 The older teachers of constitutional
law had the idea of a science in mind when they dealt with the
constitutional law of Germany, and they accordingly set out to spec-
ify a concept of the German constitution. But they could not reach
agreement on this concept, and their modern counterparts ﬁnally
gave up looking for it. The latter no longer treat constitutional law
as a science, but as a description of what is present empirically
without conforming to a rational Idea; and they believe that it is
only in name that they can describe the German state as an empire
or body politic.
There is no longer any argument about which concept the
German constitution falls under. What can no longer be related to
a concept [begriffen] no longer exists. If Germany were supposed to
be a state, we could only describe the present condition of the state’s
dissolution as anarchy (as a foreign scholar3 of constitutional law
did), were it not that the parts have reconstituted themselves into
states which have retained a semblance of unity,4 derived not so
much from a bond which still exists as from the memory of an
earlier one. In the same way, fallen fruit can be seen to have
belonged to a particular tree because it lies beneath its branches;
but neither its position beneath the tree nor the shade which the
tree casts over it can save it from decomposition and from the power
of the elements to which it now belongs.


The German Constitution
The health of a state generally reveals itself not so much in the
tranquillity of peace as in the turmoil of war.5 The former is a state
[Zustand] of enjoyment and activity in isolation, in which govern-
ment is a wise paternalism which makes only ordinary demands
upon its subjects; but in war, the strength of the association between
all [individuals] and the whole is displayed, both in the extent of
the demands which this association has managed to impose on indi-
viduals and in the worth of what the latter are prepared to do for
it of their own initiative and inclination [Trieb und Gemu¨t].6
Thus, in the war with the French Republic, Germany has found
by its own experience that it is no longer a state. Both in the war
itself and in the peace which concluded it, it has become aware of
its political condition. The following are the tangible results of this
peace: some of the ﬁnest German territories have been lost, together
with several million of the country’s inhabitants; a burden of debt,
which weighs more heavily on the southern than on the northern
half, prolongs the misery of war far into the peace; and apart from
those states which have come under the rule of the conquerors, and
hence also of foreign laws and customs, many others will lose what
is their highest good, namely their existence as independent states.
The present peace affords an opportunity to consider the inner
causes, or spirit, of these results, which are merely the external and
necessary appearances of this spirit. Besides, this consideration is in
itself worthy of anyone who does not simply surrender to current
happenings but recognises the event and its necessity. By such rec-
ognition, he distinguishes himself from those who see only arbitrar-
iness and chance through the eyes of their own vanity, and thereby
convince themselves that they would have exercised wiser and more
effective control over all that happened. For most people, such rec-
ognition is of importance only because they [can derive enjoyment
from]a it and from the intelligent judgements on individual things
which it makes possible, not in order that they may learn by experi-
ence how to act better on a future occasion. For there are very few
people who can act in these great events in such a way as to direct
a Translator’s note: Werke (p. ) ﬁlls the bracketed lacuna in Hegel’s text with the
words bru¨sten ko¨nnen (‘can brag about’). I ﬁnd no evidence in the passage for this
pejorative term, and conjecture instead unterhalten ko¨nnen (‘derive enjoyment
from’) or some similar expression.


Political writings
their course, whereas the others must serve the events with under-
standing and insight into their necessity. But those who learn from
the experience of mistakes which areb an expression of inner weak-
ness and imprudence are not so much those who have made the
mistakes: on the contrary, they are merely conﬁrmed in their habit
of making them. It is others who take note of [kennenlernen] them
and are enabled by this insight to proﬁt accordingly; and if they are
at all capable of doing so, and if their external circumstances make
this possible, they are in possession of an insight which may well
be lacking in the thought of a private individual.
The thoughts which this essay contains can have no other aim or
effect, if expressed publicly, than that of promoting an understand-
ing of what is, and hence a calmer attitude and a tolerant moderation
both in words and in actual contact [with events]. For it is not what
is that makes us impetuous and causes us distress, but the fact that
it is not as it ought to be; but if we recognise that it is as it must
be, i.e. that it is not the product of arbitrariness and chance, we
also recognise that it is as it ought to be.7 But it is difﬁcult for
human beings in general to rise to the habit of trying to recognise
and think [in terms of] necessity. For between the events and their
free apprehension they interpose a mass of concepts and ends, and
they expect what happens to conform to these. And when it doubt-
less turns out otherwise in most cases, they get round their concepts
by arguing that, whereas these were governed by necessity, the
events were governed by chance. For their concepts are just as lim-
ited as their view of things, which they interpret merely as individ-
ual events and not as a system of events ruled by a spirit; and
whether they suffer from these events or merely ﬁnd that they con-
tradict their concepts, they ﬁnd in asserting their concepts the right
to complain bitterly about what has happened.
It is no doubt recent developments above all which have afﬂicted
the Germans with this vice. In the perpetual contradiction between
what they demand and what happens contrary to their demand,
they appear not only censorious but, when they talk only of their
concepts, untruthful and dishonest; for they attribute necessity to
their concepts of right [Recht] and duties, whereas nothing happens
b Translator’s note: I follow T. M. Knox (p. ) in reading sind (‘are’) for Hegel’s
ist (‘is’).


The German Constitution
in accordance with this necessity, and they are themselves all too
accustomed on the one hand to a constant contradiction between
their words and the deeds [of others], and on the other to trying to
make of the events something quite different from what they really
are, and to twisting their explanation of them to ﬁt certain concepts.
But anyone who tried to understand [kennenlernen] what normally
happens in Germany by looking at the concepts of what ought to
happen – namely the laws of the state – would be utterly mistaken.
For the dissolution of the state can be recognised primarily from
the fact that everything is at variance with the laws. He would like-
wise be mistaken if he took the formc assumed by these laws to be
the true ground and cause of this dissolution. For it is precisely
with regard to their concepts that the Germans seem dishonest
enough not to acknowledge anything as it is, and not to present it
as either more or less than the facts actually warrant. They remain
true to their concepts, to right and the laws, but the events tend
not to correspond with these, so that whichever party [Seite] stands
to gain an advantage by doing so strives to reconcile the two by
means of words with the force of concepts. But the concept which
embraces all the others is that Germany is still a state today only
because it once was a state, and because those forms whose inner
life has [now] departed are still with us.
The organisation of that body known as the German constitution
took shape in [the context of] a life quite different from that which
later invested it and does so now. The justice and power, the
wisdom and valour of times gone by, the honour and blood, the
well-being and misfortune of long-deceased generations and of the
manners and relationships which perished with them, are [all]
expressed in the forms of this body. But the course of time, and of
the culture [Bildung] which develops within it, has cut the destiny
of that age off from the life of the present.8 The structure in which
that destiny resided is no longer supported by the destiny of the
present generation;d it stands without sympathy for the latter’s
interests and is unnecessary to them, and its activity is isolated from
c Translator’s note: Werke reads Form, whereas Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben (Berlin,
), p. reads Farbe (‘colour’). The word is indistinct in the original
manuscript.
d Translator’s note: Geschlechts; Hegel’s manuscript reads Schicksals (‘destiny’ or
‘fate’), which is plainly an error.


Political writings
the spirit of the world. If these laws have lost their former life, the
vitality of the present age has not managed to express itself in laws.
The vital interest of each has gone its own way and established
itself separately, the whole has disintegrated, and the state no longer
exists.
This form of German constitutional law is deeply grounded in
that quality for which the Germans have become most famous,
namely their drive for freedom.9 It is this drive which did not
permit the German people to become subject to a common political
authority [Staatsgewalt], [even] after all the other peoples of Europe
subjected themselves to the rule of a common state. The obduracy
of the German character has never yielded sufﬁciently for the indi-
vidual parts [of Germany] to sacriﬁce their particular characteristics
to society, to unite in a universal [whole], and to discover freedom
in common, free subjection to a supreme political authority.
The quite distinctive principle of German constitutional law has
an unbroken connection with the condition of Europe [as it was]
when the nations participated directly in the supreme authority,
and not indirectly through laws. Among the peoples of Europe, the
supreme political power was a universal authority in which each
was accorded a kind of free and personal share; and the Germans
have not wished to transform this free personal share, which is
dependent on the arbitrary will, into a free share independent of
the arbitrary will and consisting in the universality and force of
laws. Instead, they have based their most recent condition entirely
on the foundation of the previous condition of an arbitrary will
which, though not opposed to law, is nevertheless lawless.
The later condition arises immediately out of that condition in
which the nation constituted a people without being a state. In that
age of ancient German freedom, the individual stood on his own in
his life and his actions; his honour and destiny were not based on
his association with a class [Stand], but on himself. Relying on his
own sense and powers, he was either destroyed by the world, or
shaped it to please himself. He belonged to the whole by virtue of
custom, religion, an invisible living spirit, and a few major interests.
Otherwise, in his activity and deeds, he did not allow himself to be
limited by the whole, but imposed restrictions on himself, without
fear or doubt, solely on his own [initiative]. But what lay within his
sphere was so very much and so completely himself that it could


The German Constitution
not even be called his property; on the contrary, he would put life
and limb, soul and salvation at risk for what belonged to his sphere,
for what we would describe as [only] a part and [for which we]
would therefore risk only a part of ourselves. He knew nothing of
that division and calculation on which our legal arrangements
depend, so that it is not worth the trouble of risking one’s neck for
a stolen cow or openly setting one’s individuality against a power –
like that of the state – which is ten times or inﬁnitely superior [to
one’s own]; instead, he was completely and wholly [involved] in
what was his own. (In French, entier means both ‘entire’ and
‘obstinate’.)10
Out of this self-willed activity, which alone was called freedom,
spheres of power over others were shaped by chance and character,
with no regard for a universal and with little restriction by what is
known as political authority; for the latter, as opposed to individ-
uals, scarcely existed at all.
These spheres of power were ﬁxed by the passage of time. The
parts of the universal political power became a multiplicity of
exclusive property, independent of the state itself and distributed
without rule or precept. This manifold property does not constitute
a system of rights, but a collection without principle, whose incon-
sistencies and confusion required the most acute perception to
rescue it as far as possible from its contradictions whenever a colli-
sion occurred; or rather, it required constraint and superior strength
[for the conﬂicting elements] to be reconciled with one another, but
as far as the whole was concerned, it required above all the most
special divine providence for it to survive at all.e
Political powers and rights are not ofﬁces of state designed in
accordance with an organisation of the whole, and the services and
duties of individuals are not determined by the needs of the whole.
On the contrary, every individual member of the political hierarchy,
every princely house, every estate [Stand], every city, guild, etc. –
everything which has rights or duties in relation to the state – has
e Translator’s note: (Deleted passage in Hegel’s MS): German constitutional law is
therefore a collection of private rights; every individual part of the state, every
princely house, every estate [Stand], every town, guild, etc., everything which has
rights in relation to the state, has acquired these for itself; the state had in the ﬁrst
instance no other function in this regard but to conﬁrm that it had been deprived
of its power.


Political writings
acquired them for itself; and in view of this reduction of its power,
the state has no other function but to conﬁrm that it has been
deprived of its power. Consequently, if the state loses all authority,
and individual ownership [Besitz] rests on the power of the state,
the ownership of those who have no other support but the power of
the state, which is virtually nil, must necessarily be very precarious.
The principles of German public law [o¨ffentliches Recht] should
therefore not be derived from the concept of the state or the concept
of a speciﬁc constitution such as monarchy, etc., and German con-
stitutional law is not a science based on principles but a register of
the most varied constitutional rights acquired in the manner of civil
law [Privatrecht].11 Legislative, judicial, spiritual and military
powers are intermingled, divided, and combined in the most irregu-
lar manner and in the most disparate proportions, just as diverse as
the property of private individuals.
The political property of every member of the German body
politic is most carefully deﬁned by decrees of the Imperial Diet,12
peace treaties, electoral contracts [Wahlkapitulation], domestic
settlements, decisions of the Imperial Court, etc. The care devoted
to this has been extended, with the most religious punctiliousness,
to absolutely everything, and years of effort have been devoted to
apparently insigniﬁcant things such as forms of address, orders of
procession and seating, the colour of various furnishings, etc. Given
the utmost precision with which it determines every circumstance
relating to right, however trivial, the German state must be credited
with the best organisation in this regard. The German Empire, like
the realm of nature in its productions, is unfathomable on a large
scale and inexhaustible on a small scale, and it is this aspect which
ﬁlls those who are initiated into the inﬁnite details of the [various]
rights with such wonder at the venerability of the German body
politic and with such admiration for this most scrupulous system of
justice.
This [system of] justice, whereby each part is maintained in sep-
aration from the state, stands in absolute contradiction to the neces-
sary claims of the state on its individual members. The state
requires a universal centre – a monarch and Estates – in which the
various powers, foreign relations, defence, and their relevant
ﬁnances etc. are united, a centre which not only directs [the whole]
but also has the necessary power to assert itself and its resolutions


The German Constitution
and to keep the individual parts in [a state of] dependence on itself.
On the other hand, the individual estates are assured by right of
almost complete – or rather wholly complete – independence. If
there are aspects of independence which are not expressly and sol-
emnly deﬁned in electoral contracts, decrees of the Imperial Diet,
etc., they are [nevertheless] sanctioned in practice – a more import-
ant and comprehensive legal title [Rechtsgrund] than all the others.
The German political ediﬁce is nothing other than the sum of the
rights which the individual parts have extracted from the whole,
and this justice, which watches carefully to ensure that no power
remains in the hands of the state, is the essence of the constitution.
Even if the unfortunate provinces which come to grief through
the helplessness of the state to which they belong should denounce
its political condition; even if the head of the Empire and the patri-
otic estates which ﬁrst came under pressure should vainly appeal to
the others for collective action; even if Germany should be pillaged
and abused – the constitutional lawyer will know how to demon-
strate that all this is wholly in accordance with rights and with
practice, and that all these misfortunes are triﬂes in comparison
with the operation of this [system of] justice. If the unfortunate
manner in which the war has been conducted derives from the
behaviour of individual estates, one of which contributed no contin-
gent at all and very many of which sent raw recruits instead of
soldiers; if another paid no Roman Months,13 a third withdrew its
contingent at the hour of greatest need, many concluded peace
agreements and treaties of neutrality, and the great majority, each
in its own way, nulliﬁed the defence of Germany – constitutional
law can [nevertheless] prove that the estates had a right to behave
in this way, a right to plunge the whole into the greatest danger,
havoc, and misfortune. And since these are rights, the individuals
and the whole must most rigorously guard and protect such rights
[even the right] to be destroyed completely. There is perhaps no
more ﬁtting motto for this legal ediﬁce of the German state than
this:
Fiat iustitia, pereat Germania!14
It is a feature of the German character – if not a rational one,
then at least to some extent a noble one – that it regards right in
general, whatever its basis and consequences, as something


Political writings
sacrosanct. If, as seems very likely, Germany should entirely cease
to exist as a separate independent state, and [with it] the German
nation as a people, it would still be gratifying to observe that, amidst
the spirits of destruction, the fear of the law [Recht] was still
conspicuous.
The political condition and constitutional law of Germany would
afford such a spectacle if Germany could be regarded as a state;
its political condition would have to be viewed as legal [rechtliche]
anarchy,15 and its constitutional law as a legal system opposed to
the state. Yet everything supports the conclusion that Germany
should no longer be regarded as a uniﬁed political whole, but rather
as a collection of independent and essentially sovereign states. But
it is said that Germany is an empire or body politic under a common
imperial head and within an imperial union. There can be absolutely
no objection to these expressions as legal titles; but an enquiry deal-
ing with concepts is not concerned with these titles (although the
deﬁnition of the concepts [in question] may clarify what such titles
may mean). Admittedly, such expressions as ‘empire’ and ‘imperial
head’ are often treated as concepts, and they must act as stop-gaps
when the need arises.
The teacher of constitutional law who can no longer call Germ-
any a state because he would then have to concede various conse-
quences which ﬂow from the concept of a state but which he ﬁnds
inadmissible, adopts the expedient – since Germany is not supposed
to be regarded as a non-state either – of treating the title ‘empire’
as a concept. Or, since Germany is neither a democracy nor an
aristocracy, but ought essentially to be a monarchy – although the
Emperor is not supposed to be regarded as a monarch either – the
Emperor’s title of ‘Imperial head’ is adopted as an expedient, even
within a system in which determinate concepts rather than titles are
supposed to predominate.
To apply the completely general concept of ‘Imperial head’ to
the Emperor is to consign him to the same category as the former
Doge of Venice and the Turkish Sultan. Both of these are likewise
heads of state, but the former was the very limited head of an aris-
tocracy, while the latter is the most unlimited head of a despotism.
And since the concept of a head [of state] applies to the most diverse
range of supreme political authority, it is completely indeterminate


The German Constitution
and consequently valueless. It purports to express something, but
has in fact expressed nothing at all.
Such meaningless expressions should be avoided in scientiﬁc and
historical [contexts], even if the German character requires them as
stop-gaps in actual life. For given the inherent stubbornness of the
Germans in sticking ﬁrmly to their own will in civil life, and given
the separate and irreconcilable interests of the state in [the sphere
of] politics, if there are other important reasons why unity should
nevertheless be achieved in these two areas, there is no better means
[of attaining it] than by ﬁnding a general expression which satisﬁes
both [parties], and which nevertheless respects the will of each. In
this case, the difference remains as before; or if one party really
must give ground, the same general expression at least allows it to
avoid admitting that it has done so.
The Germans have for centuries kept up a semblance of unity
with the help of such general expressions, although no party has in
fact renounced one iota of its claims to independence. Reﬂection on
this matter, particularly if it aims to be scientiﬁc, must stick to
concepts, and in judging whether a country is a state, it must not
waste its time with general expressions, but should consider what
degree of power remains to that [body] which is to be called a state;
and since it appears on closer examination that what is generally
described as constitutional law [Staatsrecht] consists [in fact] of
rights against the state [Rechte gegen den Staat],16 the question arises
of whether, in spite of this, the state still [possesses] a power by
virtue of which it really is a state. And if one looks more closely at
what is required for this purpose, comparing it with the situation
of Germany in this respect, it will emerge that Germany can in fact
no longer be called a state. We shall [now] review the various princi-
pal powers which must be present within a state.
I The Concept of the State
A mass of people can call itself a state only if it is united for the
common defence of the totality of its property.17 Although this is
in fact self-evident, it should nevertheless be pointed out that this
union should not only have the intention of defending itself, but
actually does defend itself by force of arms, whatever power and


Political writings
success it may have. For no one will be able to deny that Germany
is united in law and in words for its common defence; but we cannot
distinguish here between laws and words on the one hand and deeds
and actuality on the other, or say that Germany defends itself col-
lectively at least in law and in words, if not in deeds and actuality.
For property and its defence through a political union are things
which refer exclusively to reality [Realita¨t], and whose ideal equival-
ent [Idealita¨t] is anything but a state.
Plans and theories have a claim to reality in so far as they are
practicable, but their value is the same whether they exist in actuality
or not; a theory of the state, on the other hand, can be called a state
and constitution only in so far as it actually exists. If Germany were
to claim to be a state and constitution despite the fact that the forms
of these were devoid of life and their theory lacked actuality, it
would be stating an untruth; but if it actually promised in words
[to provide] a common defence, we would have to attribute this
either to senile weakness, which still has volition but is no longer
able [to put it into practice], or to dishonesty, which does not keep
its promises.
For a mass [of people] to form a state, it is necessary that it
should form a common military force and political authority. But
the manner in which the particular effects and aspects of the union
which result from this are present, or the particular constitution
[which is chosen], is irrelevant to the formation of an authority
by a mass [of people]. The ingredients required for this particular
operation may in any case be present in the most diverse ways;
and in a speciﬁc state, there may even be complete irregularity and
disparity in such matters. In considering these, we must distinguish
between two things: between what is necessary for a mass [of
people] to become a state and common authority, and what is
merely a particular modiﬁcation of this authority and does not
belong to the sphere of the necessary but, in conceptual terms, to
the sphere of greater or lesser improvement and, in terms of actu-
ality, to the sphere of chance and arbitrary will.
This distinction has a very important aspect for the peace of
states, the security of governments, and the liberty of peoples. For
if the universal political authority demands of the individual only
what is necessary for itself, and places appropriate limits on the
measures required for the performance of this necessary service, it


The German Constitution
may in other respects grant the citizens their living freedom and
individual [eigenen] will and even leave considerable scope for the
latter.18 In the same way, the political authority, which is concen-
trated in the government as its necessary centre, is looked on less
enviously by the individuals on the periphery if it demands [only]
what is necessary and what everyone can recognise as indispensable
to the whole. It thereby avoids the danger that, if the central politi-
cal authority is responsible both for what is necessary and for more
arbitrary things, and if both are demanded with equal strictness as
[requirements] of the government, the citizens may also confuse the
two and, if they grow equally impatient with both, they may place
the necessary demands of the state in jeopardy.
The manner in which the whole political authority exists in a
supreme point of convergence [Vereinigungspunkt] must be relegated
to that part of the state’s actuality which is governed by chance.
Whether the authority is vested in one [person] or many, whether
the one or the many are born to such majesty or elected to it, is
of no importance in relation to the one essential factor [das einzig
Notwendige], namely that a mass [of people] should form a state; it
is just as irrelevant as the uniformity or lack of uniformity of civil
rights among the individuals who are subject to the universal politi-
cal authority. We are not in any case concerned with that inequality
of nature, talents, and mental energy [Energie der Seele] which
creates a much more considerable difference than does inequality of
civil circumstances. The fact that a state counts among its subjects
serfs, burghers, free nobility, and princes who in turn have subjects
themselves, and that the relationships of these particular classes
[Sta¨nde], even as particular members of the polity, do not exist in
a pure form but in endless modiﬁcations, does as little to prevent a
mass [of people] from forming a political authority as does the fact
that the particular geographical members [of the state] constitute
provinces with different relations to the inner constitutional law.
As far as actual civil laws and the administration of justice are
concerned, neither identical laws and legal processes nor identical
weights, measures, and currency would make Europe a state; nor
does their diversity nullify [aufheben] the unity of a state. If it were
not inherent in the very concept of the state that the more precise
determinations of legal relationships involving the property of indi-
viduals in opposition to other individuals do not impinge on the


Political writings
state as a political authority – for the latter has to determine only
its own relationship to property – the example of nearly all Euro-
pean states could teach us as much, because the most powerful of
the genuine states have utterly disparate laws. Before the Revol-
ution, France had such a multiplicity of laws that, in addition to
the Roman law which obtained in many provinces, Burgundian law,
Breton law, etc. prevailed in others, and almost every province,
indeed almost every city, had a particular inherited law. A French
writer truthfully said that anyone who travelled through France
changed laws as often as he changed post-horses.
Another question extraneous to the concept of the state is which
particular power is responsible for legislation, and what relative
share the various estates or citizens in general have in this process.19
Likewise irrelevant is the character of the courts of law – whether,
in the various instances of the administration of justice, the mem-
bers inherit their ofﬁce, are appointed to it by the supreme auth-
ority, or are freely entrusted with it by the citizenry or nominated
by the courts themselves. It is also immaterial what the scope of a
speciﬁc court’s jurisdiction is, whether this has been determined by
chance, whether there is a common supreme court for the entire
state, etc.
Equally independent of the state is the form of administration in
general; it may likewise lack uniformity, as may the institutions
of the magistracy, the rights of cities and estates, etc. All these
circumstances are only relatively important for the state, and the
form of their organisation is irrelevant to its true essence.
In all European states, unequal taxes are imposed on the various
classes according to their material worth; but there is even more
inequality on the ideal side, namely in their rights and duties and
in the origin of these. The inequality of wealth gives rise to an
inequality of contributions to the state’s expenditure, but this is so
little a hindrance to the state that the more modern states are in
fact based on it. It is just as little affected by the inequality of
contributions by the different estates of nobility, clergy, and the
burghers and peasantry; and apart from everything that is called
privilege, the reason why these estates contribute in different pro-
portions lies in the difference between the estates [themselves], for
the proportion can be determined only in terms of what they pro-
duce, not in terms of the essential aspect of what the contribution


The German Constitution
is levied on, namely in terms of work – for work cannot be quant-
iﬁed and is inherently unequal.
It is also fortuitous whether the different geographical parts of a
state are differently weighted [for tax purposes], what transform-
ations and subordinate systems the taxes pass through, whether a
city receives the land tax, a private individual the ground rent, an
abbey the tithes, the nobleman the hunting rights, the [rural] com-
mune the grazing rights, etc. from one and the same ﬁeld, and
whether the various estates and bodies of all kinds develop their
own arrangements with regard to taxation. All such fortuitous cir-
cumstances remain external to the concept of political authority, to
which, as the central point, only the determinate quantity [of tax-
ation] is necessary, whereas the unequal proportions in which the
contributions ﬂow in are irrelevant as far as their origin is con-
cerned. Besides, the entire ﬁscal arrangements may in any case lie
outside the state while the latter is nevertheless very powerful, as
in the old feudal system, in which [the vassal], in serving the state
in emergencies, at the same time supplied all his needs by his per-
sonal efforts, while the state derived from its own domains the
income it required for other purposes. Alternatively, it is also con-
ceivable that all expenditure might be ﬁnanced in the latter manner,
in which case the state [in question], even as a monetary power –
which a state has to be in modern times – would not be a centre of
taxation; on the contrary, what the state collected as taxes, given
the actual arrangements applying to most of these, would be on the
same footing of particular right [Recht] as [the income of] other
people whose relationship to the state was that of private
individuals.
In our times, the links between members [of a state] may be
equally loose, or even non-existent, as far as customs, education,
and language are concerned; and identity in these respects, which
was once a pillar of national union, now counts as one of those
fortuitous circumstances whose nature does not prevent a mass [of
people] from constituting a political authority. Rome or Athens, and
even any small modern state, could not have survived if the many
languages in use in the Russian empire had been spoken within
their frontiers, or if the customs of their citizens had been as varied
as they are in Russia (or as customs and culture [Bildung] are even
in any major city in a large country). Diversity of language and


Political writings
dialect, the latter of which makes divisions more vexatious than
does total incomprehensibility, and diversity of customs and culture
among the separate estates, which makes it almost impossible for
people to recognise one another except by their outward appear-
ance – such heterogeneous and at the same time most powerful
elements could be overcome and held together in the enlarged
Roman Empire only by the weight of superior power, just as they
are in modern states by the spirit and art of political organisation.
Consequently, disparity of culture and customs has become a neces-
sary product, as well as a necessary condition, of the continued
existence of modern states.20
It is in religion that the innermost being of mankind is expressed
and in which, as a ﬁxed centre, human beings can still recognise
themselves, even if all other external things scattered around them
are of no consequence. Only by this means could they manage to
trust and be sure of one another, despite the inequality and muta-
bility of their other relationships and situations. But even the need
to ﬁnd identity at least in this sphere has been found superﬂuous
in modern states.
Even in the northern part of Europe, religious unity has always
been the prerequisite of a state. No alternative was known, and
without this original oneness, no other oneness or trust seemed
possible. At times, this bond has itself become so powerful that,
on certain occasions, it has suddenly transformed peoples who had
previously been alien to one another or national enemies into a single
state. A state of this kind has been not just a holy community of
Christians, nor a coalition uniting their interests and the activity
associated with these, but a single secular power and state which, as
a single people and army, has also conquered the homeland of its
own eternal and temporal life in a war against the East.21
Neither before this time nor after the fragmentation [of Christen-
dom] into nations [Vo¨lker] has a shared religion prevented wars or
united the nations into a single state – no more than religious diver-
sity causes any state to break up in our own times. Political auth-
ority, as pure political right [Staatsrecht], has managed to separate
itself from religious authority and its right, to preserve sufﬁcient
stability of its own, and to organise itself in such a way that it has
no need of the Church; it has thereby returned the Church to that
condition of separation from the state which it occupied in relation
to the Roman state at the time of its origin.


The German Constitution
Admittedly, in those political theories which, in our own times,
have either been propounded by would-be philosophers and teach-
ers of human rights or realised in vast political experiments,22 every-
thing we have excluded from the necessary concept of political auth-
ority – except the most important [aspects] of all, namely language,
culture [Bildung], customs, and religion – is subordinated to the
immediate activity of the supreme political authority. As a result, it
is determined by this authority, and all these aspects [referred to
above] are drawn into it even in their smallest ramiﬁcations.
It is self-evident that the highest political authority must exercise
ultimate control of the internal relations of a people and of their
organisation as determined by chance and the arbitrary will of
former times, and ensure that these factors do not impede the main
activity of the state; on the contrary, the latter activity must secure
itself above all these, and to this end, it must not spare the subordi-
nate systems of rights and privileges. But it is a great advantage of
the older European states that, while their political authority is
secure in respect of its needs and functions, it leaves free scope for
the citizens’ own activity in individual aspects of judicial procedure
[Rechtspﬂege], administration, etc. – both in the appointment of the
necessary ofﬁcials and in the conduct of current business and the
application of laws and conventions.
Given the size of modern states, it is quite impossible to realise
the ideal of giving all free men a share in the discussion and resol-
ution [Bestimmung] of universal political issues. Political authority
must be concentrated in one centre, both for the implementation
[of decisions] by the government, and for the decisions themselves.
If popular respect ensures that this centre is secure in itself and
immutably sanctiﬁed in the person of a monarch chosen by birth
and in accordance with natural law, the political authority can freely
allow the subordinate systems and bodies, without fear or jealousy,
to regulate a large part of the relationships which arise in society,
and to maintain them in accordance with the laws; and every estate,
city, village, commune, etc. can enjoy the freedom to do and
implement for itself what lies within its province.23
Just as the laws on such matters have gradually arisen as a hal-
lowed tradition directly out of custom itself, so the legal consti-
tution, the institutions of the lower judiciary, the corresponding
rights of the citizens, the rights of city administrations, the collec-
tion of taxes (whether national or those required for the needs of


Political writings
the cities themselves) and the lawful application of such taxes –
everything is this category has come together of its own accord and
developed by itself, and it has likewise maintained itself ever since
it ﬁrst emerged.
The highly complex organisation of the ecclesiastical establish-
ments is not the work of the supreme political authority either, and
the whole [ecclesiastical] estate maintains and renews itself more or
less internally. – The large sums spent annually on the poor in a
large state, and the extensive arrangements made for this purpose
throughout all parts of a country, are not ﬁnanced by state-imposed
charges, nor is the whole establishment maintained and run on the
state’s instructions. The mass of property and income devoted to
this end derives from foundations and gifts by individuals, just as
the whole establishment and its administration and operation [are]
independent of the supreme political authority. In the same way,
the majority of internal social arrangements for each speciﬁc area of
need have been created by the free action of the citizens, and their
continuance and life are sustained by this very freedom, undis-
turbed by any jealousy or anxiety on the part of the supreme politi-
cal authority – except that the government to some extent protects
them, or limits the excessive growth of any part of such arrange-
ments which might suppress other necessary parts.
It is, however, a basic prejudice of those recent theories which
have been partially translated into practice that a state is a machine
with a single spring which imparts movement to all the rest of its
inﬁnite mechanism, and that all the institutions which the essential
nature of a society brings with it should emanate from the supreme
political authority and be regulated, commanded, supervised, and
directed by it.24
The pedantic craving to determine every detail, the illiberal jeal-
ousy of all direction and administration by an estate, corporation,
etc., of its own affairs, this pusillanimous carping at all independent
activity on the part of the citizens25 – even if its signiﬁcance is
purely general and of no relevance to the political authority – has
been dressed up in the guise of rational principles. According to
these principles, not one farthing of the communal expenditure for
the relief of poverty in a country of twenty or thirty million inhabi-
tants [may be spent] unless it has ﬁrst been not merely approved,
but ordained, controlled, and inspected by the supreme govern-


The German Constitution
ment. As for educational provisions, the appointment of every vil-
lage schoolmaster, the expenditure of every penny on a pane of glass
in the village school or the parish council chamber, the appointment
of every toll-clerk, bailiff, or village magistrate should be directly
instigated and effected by the highest governmental authority; and
in the entire state, every morsel of food, from the soil that produces
it to the mouth that consumes it, should follow a course that is
examined, computed, corrected, and ordained by state, law, and
government.
This is not the place to argue in detail that the centre, as the
political authority and government, must leave to the freedom of
the citizens whatever is not essential to its own role [Bestimmung]
of organising and maintaining authority, and hence to its external
and internal security, and that nothing should be so sacred to it as
the approval and protection of the citizens’ free activity in such
matters, regardless of utility; for this freedom is inherently sacred.
But as far as utility is concerned, if we are to calculate the advan-
tage that is gained if the citizens administer their own affairs
through particular bodies, their own judicial procedure, their own
appointments to the ofﬁces required for this purpose, etc., three
calculations are necessary. The ﬁrst concerns the tangible factor, i.e.
the money which thereby accrues to the supreme political authority;
the second concerns the ingenuity [Verstand] and efﬁciency with
which all the operations of a machine proceed at a regular pace, in
accordance with the shrewdest calculation and the wisest ends; but
the third concerns the vitality, the contented spirit and free and
self-respecting conﬁdence which result if the individual will has a
share in universal affairs (in so far as their ramiﬁcations are contin-
gent from the point of view of the supreme political authority).
As to the ﬁrst calculation (concerning tangible advantage), the
state whose principle is universal mechanism fancies that it has an
undoubted advantage over the state which leaves [matters of] detail
largely to the rights and individual action of its citizens. But it
should be noted in general that the former state cannot possibly
have the advantage unless it imposes altogether heavier taxes. For
when it takes over all branches of administration, judicial pro-
cedures, etc., it simultaneously incurs all the associated costs; and
if the whole [state] is organised as a universal hierarchy, these costs
must also be covered by regular taxation. Conversely, the state


Political writings
which leaves it to interested individual groups [Einzelheiten] to make
the necessary arrangements for such purely contingent individual
matters as the administration of justice, costs of education, contri-
butions to poor relief, etc., and to bear the associated costs, will ﬁnd
that these costs are met in a form other than by taxation. Whoever
requires a judge, an advocate, or a teacher, or who cares for the
poor on his own initiative, alone bears the cost. No tax is levied,
and no one pays for a court, an advocate, a teacher, or a clergyman
unless he requires one. Similarly, if [someone] is elected to [one of]
the lower positions of authority in a court of law or the adminis-
tration of civic or corporate affairs, and if he is elected by the mem-
bers themselves, that person is paid by the honour which is thereby
done to him; but if he is employed by the state, he must demand
that the latter pay him, because this inherent honour is no longer
present. Even if more money might have to be spent by the people
in the ﬁrst of these two cases than in the second (although this is
unlikely), the effects in each case are as follows. The ﬁrst makes the
difference that no one spends money on something which he ﬁnds
unnecessary, on something which is not a universal need of the
state; and the second produces an actual saving for everyone. The
overall effect is that the people feel themselves treated in the ﬁrst
case in a rational manner and in accordance with necessity, and in
the latter case with trust and freedom; and this is what constitutes
the main difference between the second and third types of calcu-
lation [referred to above].
The mechanistic hierarchy, highly ingenious and dedicated to
noble ends, extends no trust whatsoever towards its citizens, and
therefore cannot expect any from them in return. It has no conﬁ-
dence in any achievement whose direction and execution it did not
itself organise; it therefore prohibits voluntary donations and sacri-
ﬁces, and displays to its subjects its conviction of their lack of
understanding, its contempt for their ability to judge and perform
what is conducive to their private welfare, and its belief in universal
depravity. It therefore cannot hope for any lively activity or support
from the self-conﬁdence of its citizens.
There is a difference here which is too great to be grasped by a
statesman who takes account only of what can be quantiﬁed in pre-
cise ﬁgures. This difference can be seen most obviously in the pros-
perity, well-being, probity, and contentment of the inhabitants of


The German Constitution
the one state, as compared with the apathy, baseness (which con-
stantly turns into effrontery), and poverty of the other. In matters
of major importance where only the contingent aspect of the event
is outwardly visible, a state of the latter kind determines this very
contingency and renders it necessary.
It makes an inﬁnite difference whether the political authority is
organised in such a way that everything on which it can rely is in
its own hands (although for this very reason it cannot rely on any-
thing else), or whether, apart from what is in its own hands, it
can also rely on the free allegiance, self-conﬁdence, and individual
enterprise of the people – on an all-powerful, indomitable spirit
which the hierarchical state has expelled and which lives only where
the supreme political authority leaves as much as possible in the
care of the citizens themselves. Only the future can tell how dreary
and spiritless life will be in a modern state like that which the
French Republic has become,26 in which everything is regulated
from above, and where nothing of universal signiﬁcance is entrusted
to the management and execution of interested sections of the
people – if, that is, the present pedantic style of government can
survive. But what [sort of] life and what aridity prevails in another
similarly regulated state, namely Prussia, will strike anyone who
enters its ﬁrst village or observes its complete lack of scientiﬁc and
artistic genius, and who does not measure its strength in terms of
the transient energy which a solitary genius was able for a time to
extract from it.27
Thus, we do not only distinguish between that necessary element
within a state which must remain in the hands of the political auth-
ority and be directly determined by it, and that element which,
though absolutely necessary for the social cohesion of a people, is
contingent as far as the public authority as such is concerned. We
also regard a people as fortunate if the state allows it considerable
freedom in subordinate activities of a universal kind, and we like-
wise regard a political authority as inﬁnitely strong if it can be sup-
ported by a greater spirit of freedom, untainted by pedantry, among
its people.
Thus, the illiberal demand that laws, the administration of jus-
tice, the imposition and collection of taxes, etc., language, customs,
culture [Bildung], and religion should be regulated and governed
from a single centre is not fulﬁlled in Germany; on the contrary,


Political writings
the most disparate variety prevails in these matters. But this would
not prevent Germany from constituting a state it if were organised
in other respects as a political authority [. . .]28
[II History and Critique of the Constitution of the
German Empire]
[. The Armed Forces]
The propagation of this warlike talent proves in itself that these
hosts of armed men are not idle. For centuries, no major war has
been waged among the European powers in which German valour
has not invariably won honour, if not laurels, and in which rivers
of German blood have not been shed.
Despite its populousness, the warlike talents of its people, and
the readiness of its rulers to shed their blood, and despite its wealth
of resources – both living and inanimate – required for warfare, no
land is more unprotected, more incapable of self-defence – let alone
conquest. Neither its attempts to defend itself nor even its aspir-
ations to do so are signiﬁcant or creditable.
It is common knowledge that the armed forces [of the Empire]
consist in the military units of the larger and smaller estates. As far
as the latter are concerned, these armies, regiments [Heere], contin-
gents, or whatever we choose to call them are usually soldiers who
can perform only police functions or parade duties, not warriors
who know nothing higher than the fame of the regiment and service
to which they belong. The military spirit which lifts the heart of
every warrior in a great regiment when he hears the words ‘our
army’, this pride in his estate and service [which is] the soul of a
ﬁghting force, cannot prosper in the Town Watch of an Imperial
City or the personal bodyguard of an abbot. The kind of respect
which the uniform of a great regiment arouses for a hitherto
unknown individual who wears it cannot be accorded to the uniform
of an Imperial City. When the bravest soldier of a small Imperial
estate declares ‘I have been in this service for twenty (or thirty)
years’, his words evoke a quite different feeling and effect from
what they would produce if they came from an ofﬁcer of a great
regiment, because the man’s own self-esteem and the respect which
others have for him grow with the size of the whole to which he


The German Constitution
belongs; he shares in the fame which the latter has accumulated
over the centuries.
The insigniﬁcance of these sundry little military units as a result
of their small numbers is serious enough without being made even
more so by ineptitude and other unfavourable circumstances. Very
great disadvantages must ensue if the smaller estates recruit their
soldiers, and often appoint their ofﬁcers, only when war breaks out,
and consequently send untrained men into the ﬁeld; if one estate
has to supply the drummers and another the drums, etc.; if the
merging of contingents from numerous estates leads to incompati-
bility of weapons, drill, etc., and to unfamiliarity of the troops with
their ofﬁcers; if each estate is actually entitled to provision its forces
itself, so that the greatest disorder prevails in the service and – not
to mention the unnecessary expense – operations are hindered by
superﬂuous civilians and camp followers. According to legal theory,
a detachment of twenty men from different estates may in fact be
served by twenty of their own supply clerks, bakers, etc.. Since the
Imperial Register29 is several centuries old, it no longer reﬂects the
relative size and strength of the estates and consequently gives rise
to discontent, complaints, and permanent deﬁcits; it also includes
territories whose geographical position can indeed no longer be
identiﬁed. But these and a hundred other circumstances are so fami-
liar that it is tiresome even to mention them.
Now if the insigniﬁcance of the military units of the smaller
estates disappears when they come together and coalesce as an
Imperial Army, the disadvantages described above, along with
innumerable others, render this force less useful in war than any
army in the rest of Europe, including even that of Turkey; besides,
the very name ‘Imperial Army’ has had other associations of a par-
ticularly unfortunate kind. While the names of other armies, includ-
ing foreign ones, awaken thoughts of valour and formidable
strength, the name of the Imperial Army, if mentioned in German
company, used rather to brighten every face, to provoke all kinds
of witty reactions according to circumstances and the class [of those
present], and everyone would dip into his fund of anecdotes on the
subject to entertain the others. Those who consider the German
nation serious and incapable of comedy have forgotten the farces
of the Imperial wars, which were conducted with every possible
appearance of gravity but were at bottom genuinely ridiculous.


Political writings
While the organisation of the Imperial Army, with all its conse-
quences, has not improved in the slightest, an awareness of the
misfortune it has generated, and of Germany’s dishonour, has
diminished the general predilection for jokes at its expense. It is
only because some aspects of its organisation in the last war – for
example, the commissariat – were run illegally and unconsti-
tutionally that its troops were of any use at all.
What is even more of a disadvantage than all these speciﬁc fea-
tures of the Imperial Army is that, in point of fact, no such army
has ever been assembled; and this is the most tangible proof of
Germany’s dissolution into independent states.
According to the theory of the basic laws [of the Empire], the
Imperial Army might be a formidable force, but practice, that
powerful principle of German constitutional law, tells a very differ-
ent story. If only too often one sees a vast number of German
soldiers in the ﬁeld, one may assume that they are acting not as an
Imperial Army to defend Germany, but rather to inﬂict internal
injuries on it. What is known as the German constitution is not
only incapable of preventing such wars, but in fact makes them
right and lawful.
The German army is all the more inconsiderable [a force] when
it is mobilised for the protection of Germany. For although the
ﬁvefold contingents of Brandenburg, Saxony, Hanover, Bavaria, and
Hesse are ﬁghting forces in their own right and together make up
a formidable army in which the ineptitude of the smaller associated
contingents disappears from view, they are dependent on something
very different from the laws of Germany, and their contribution to
its defence is just as unreliable and fortuitous as the contribution of
any foreign power.
The Austrian contingent is an exception, for the Emperor, as
monarch of other kingdoms, is obliged to raise its strength far
beyond what his estate requires him to do, given the weakness and
unreliability of the statutory army. He is consequently also obliged
to let Germany enjoy the full range and exercise of his extra-
territorial power. But in the case of the other large contingents, the
Empire cannot count on their statutory strength, or even on their
availability; and even if an estate has supplied its contingent, there
is no guarantee that, in the midst of war and at moments of the
greatest danger, it will not enter into separate treaties of neutrality


The German Constitution
or peace with the enemy of the Empire and abandon its beleaguered
fellow estates to their own weakness and to the devastating superior-
ity of the enemy.
Despite the fact that the right of the estates, under Imperial law,
to form alliances with foreign powers and to choose between
foreigners and Germany is limited by the clause ‘in so far as such
alliances do not conﬂict with their duties to the Emperor and
Empire’, this clause is in practice rendered ambiguous as a legal
principle, or rather eliminated altogether. Not only the actions of
the estates, but also their votes in the Imperial Diet, may ensure
that they are prevented by their other commitments from participat-
ing in the formation of an Imperial contingent or paying contri-
butions towards the war.
This withdrawal of support for the common defence on the part
of the more important estates places others in a helpless position,
and this in turn compels them to retreat not just from difﬁculty and
danger, but also from their obligations to the whole. It would be
wholly unnatural to demand that they should rely on and contribute
to a protection which, as all the world knows, protects nothing at
all, and which is legally and constitutionally withheld as a result of
the right [of the estates] to form alliances. Under these circum-
stances, it becomes necessary for the weaker to put themselves
under the protection of those powerful fellow estates which are on
friendly terms with the enemy, thereby diminishing the overall mass
of the collective might. In this way, the powerful estates in question
proﬁt not only by a saving of effort, but also by obtaining advantages
from the enemy in return for their inactivity. Finally, in weakening
the overall mass by the contribution they receive from those whom
they compel to accept their protection, they simultaneously derive
beneﬁt from the latter in exchange for the protection which they
give them.
But even if several large contingents actually amalgamate, their
joint effectiveness is prejudiced by the instability of their relation-
ships and the fragility of their alliance. That free disposition of
troops which is needed for the successful execution of a military
plan is impossible with such bodies, and negotiations rather than
orders are required before the plan not just of a campaign, but even
of individual operations, can be implemented. Calculations will also
inevitably be made as to whether the contingent of one particular


Political writings
estate is being overused while others are spared, and whether the
equality of rights is thereby infringed, just as there used to be com-
petition, under other political circumstances, for the most danger-
ous position, and discontent if a unit was not sent into action.
The jealousy of the different corps, which regard themselves as
different nations, and the possibility of their withdrawal at the most
critical moments – all such circumstances make it inevitable that an
Imperial Army cannot generate an effect commensurate with its
considerable numbers and military strength.
If the military weakness of Germany is neither a consequence of
cowardice, nor of military inadequacy and unfamiliarity with those
skills which, in modern times, are no less necessaryf than courage
if victory is to be won, and if at every opportunity the Imperial
contingents offer the strongest proofs of their courage and military
sacriﬁce and show themselves worthy of their ancestors and of the
ancient military fame of the Germans, then it is the disposition of
the whole and its general dissolution which allow the efforts and
sacriﬁces of individuals and corps to go to waste. This lays a curse
on them which nulliﬁes all the effects and consequences of their
efforts, however great these may be, and puts them on the same
level as a farmer who sows the sea or attempts to plough the rocks.
[. Finance]
The German political authority is in the same position in ﬁnancial
matters as it is in respect of military power; and since the European
states have now more or less abandoned the feudal system, ﬁnance
has become an essential part of that power which must be under
the direct control of the supreme political authority.30
One extreme of ﬁnancial organisation is that whereby all expendi-
ture required for a public ofﬁce, down to [that of] the most humble
village magistrate or constable and below (or for some public necess-
ity which is still conﬁned to a single village), as well as all types of
revenue, ﬁrst ﬂows upwards to the supreme political authority in
the form of tax, and then back down again to the smallest branches
of public activity in the form of state expenditure, through all the
f Translator’s note: Reading nachstehen for entstehen, which, though it appears in both
Lasson and Werke, is plainly wrong.


The German Constitution
intermediate stages of laws, decrees, settlements of accounts, and
public ofﬁcials, no group of whom is in any sense an ultimate auth-
ority. The opposite extreme is Germany’s complete lack of a ﬁnan-
cial system.
Germany is not plagued by worries over major political issues
and problems concerning what kind of taxes, national debt or public
credit is fairest, most economical, or least likely to burden one estate
more than another; nor is it troubled by other matters which in
other states demand the application of the greatest talents, and in
which any mistakes have the most terrible consequences. There is
in Germany no superﬂuous interference by the state in any public
spending; on the contrary, each village, town, municipal guild, etc.
itself takes care of those ﬁnancial matters which concern it alone,
under the general supervision of the state, but not at its behest. Nor
is there any ﬁnancial institution attached to the political authority
itself.
The ordinary ﬁnances of Germany are in fact conﬁned solely to
the cameral taxes [Kammersteuern]31 which are paid by the estates
for the maintenance of the Supreme Court [Kammergericht].32 They
are accordingly very simple, and no Pitt is required to administer
them.
The regular costs of the other supreme court of the Empire are
in any case borne by the Emperor. A start has been made in recent
times to setting up a fund for this purpose by auctioning ﬁefs on
their reversion to the Empire.
Even with regard to that one ﬁnancial institution just referred
to, the [so-called] Kammerzieler,33 there are often complaints that
payments are inadequate, and the reason why Brandenburg does
not pay the increased amount which was approved several years ago
throws an interesting light on the German constitution. Branden-
burg withholds payment because it is doubtful whether a majority
vote is binding on individual parties in such matters as general con-
tributions to the needs of the state. If there is any doubt about this,
the one factor which constitutes a state – namely unity with regard
to the political authority – is missing.
Under the principles of the feudal system, the contingents are paid
and supplied with all their needs by the estates themselves. As
already mentioned, pressing needs led several estates to give up
exercising this right during the last war, and to negotiate through


Political writings
the Emperor the convenient alternative of a private agreement to
establish a joint commissariat. Similarly, smaller estates made no
use of their right to send their own soldiers into the ﬁeld on this
occasion, and they came to an arrangement with the larger estates
whereby the latter took responsibility for recruiting the contingent
which the smaller estates were supposed to provide. This may be
the ﬁrst hint of a change to a new situation in which the estates are
no longer responsible for raising their own contingents and supply-
ing their own needs, but instead make ﬁnancial contributions to a
common centre which then takes over these commitments and sees
to it that they are met. This might mark the beginning of a tran-
sition from separate, and in a sense personal, services to a genuine
state organisation of military and ﬁnancial affairs whereby the latter
come under the control of the supreme head, by which means alone
the concept of a state is realised. But even if this were so, it is plain
that this whole situation has affected only minor estates, and that it
was the fortuitous product of temporary circumstances.
As for the expenses which are supposed to be collected under the
name of ‘Roman Months’ to pay for those aspects of a modern war
which are not covered by the sending of troops, the same applies
to them as to the sending of contingents. Estimates of these cash
contributions to the German Empire for military operations have
shown that roughly half of the agreed sums were actually received.
In the last months of the war before the Congress of Rastatt34 was
convened, published ﬁgures of the cash received showed totals of
and guilders [per month]; and although in other states the
balance of the supreme war chest is not made public at all –
especially if it is as small as this – the publication of these ﬁgures
by the German Empire has had no further effect on the enemy’s
operations against those of the Empire in war or peacetime.
The principles which prevail here, whereby the decisions of the
majority have no binding force on the minority, and the latter,
because of its other commitments, cannot assent to the imposition
of Roman Months approved by the majority, are the same as those
which apply to the duties of the estates in relation to the military
power.
Although there was in former times a kind of state authority in
ﬁnancial matters in the shape of Imperial customs, taxes paid by
Imperial cities, and the like, those times were so far removed from


The German Constitution
the idea of a state and the concept of a universal [authority] that
such receipts were regarded as the exclusive private property of the
Emperor and could be sold by him. But what is wholly incompre-
hensible is that the estates could buy them or mortgage them, in
the long run irredeemably, and that even the direct authority of the
state could be bought or accepted as security. No clearer sign than
this can be found of the barbarity of a people which constitutes a
state.
It is nevertheless undeniable that the need to generate ﬁnances
for Germany has been felt from time to time, and that proposals
have been made to establish sources of capital for the Empire as a
state. But since the estates could not contemplate setting up this
ﬁnancial authority by laws which required contributions to be
made – for this would have produced something akin to a state
institution – two things had to be combined: a permanent fund had
to be set up for the state, but without imposing a burden on the
estates or obligating them in any way. Since this requirement that
the estates should neither be [ﬁnancially] encumbered nor put under
any obligation was the overriding consideration, the whole was more
of a pious wish than a serious proposition; and with wishes of this
kind, a true inner indifference towards the object wished for – or
at least a ﬁrm determination not to let it cost one anything – tends
to hide behind an attitude and demeanour of quite exceptional
patriotism. Thus, if the Empire were currently planning to set up a
ﬁnancial institution, and if someone in a company of honest citizens
expressed a wish, in the interests of the German Empire, that a
mountain of gold might rise up in Germany, and that every ducat
minted from it which, on ﬁrst issue, was not spent on the Empire
might at once turn to water, there is no doubt that such a well-
wisher would be regarded as the greatest German patriot who ever
lived. For the ﬁrst reaction of those present would be to feel that
this would not cost them anything, before it occurred to them that
such a wish would not bring one penny into the Imperial treasury;
and when this did occur to them, they would ﬁnd that what had
been said was no different from what, despite their own words, they
themselves wished for.
Apart from all this, Imperial Diets in the past have not proposed
to meet the need for such a fund by drawing on such ideal and
purely imaginary sources as these. On the contrary, without any


Political writings
estate having to sacriﬁce anything of its own, they have suggested
that expenditure on Imperial affairs should be paid for out of real
and existent territories, just as the hunters [in the story] offered a
real bear rather than an imaginary one in payment of their account.35
Several hundred years ago, a law was passed specifying that all
those territories which had fallen into the hands of other nations
should form the basis for an Imperial fund – when, that is, the
Empire should recover them; and in those wars in which the oppor-
tunity to recover them duly presented itself, the Empire has always
managed to ensure that it lost even more, thereby increasing the
Imperial fund further. Thus, even the loss of the left bank of the
Rhine has its consolations: it may be a way of providing a ﬁnancial
endowment for the Empire.
One may be sure that, if a teacher of German constitutional law
were reminded of this woeful lack of ﬁnances even now, he would
defend the perfection of this very aspect of the German constitution
in the manner just described. Even if thoughts of this kind, which
were cogent enough in their own day, were still able to awaken any
hopes which the German character, ever sanguine in such respects,
might place in them in the present political situation of Europe and
Germany, they are irrelevant when we consider whether Germany
possesses that kind of power which is essential to a state in our
times, namely a ﬁnancial power in point of fact and at the time at
which we are speaking.
In the past, when one estate incurred costs on behalf of the state
in a war fought not against a foreign power but against a rebellious
estate on which an Imperial ban had been imposed, there was a
special way of meeting this general expenditure and compensating
the estate in question. Thus, if the execution of bans and other
decisions of the Imperial courts was actually put into operation –
which is not always the case – the costs were borne by the losing
party, i.e. the party defeated not only in law but also in war. The
Imperial army of execution in the Seven Years War received no
compensation for its trouble. In past ages, this mode of exacting
payment for the costs of execution sometimes provided a powerful
incentive to execute a ban, since the party which did so retained
the territories of the party on whom the ban was executed, with no
need for any additional right or other more detailed consideration.


The German Constitution
In this way, the Swiss gained possession of most of the old ancestral
properties of the Habsburgs, and Bavaria of Donauwo¨rth, etc.
A mass of people which, in view of this dissolution of military
power and lack of ﬁnances, has not managed to form political auth-
ority, is unable to defend its independence against external enemies.
It must necessarily see its independence collapse, if not all at once
then in gradual stages; it must be exposed in war to all kinds of
plundering and devastation, and must inevitably bear the bulk of
the cost for friend and foe alike; it must lose its provinces to foreign
powers, and since its political authority over its individual members
has been destroyed and it has lost its sovereignty over its vassals, it
will contain only sovereign states. The mutual relations of these
states, as such, will be governed by force and guile, the stronger
will expand and the weaker will be devoured, and even the more
prominent among them will still be impotent in face of a major
power.
[. Territory of the Empire]36
The territories which the German Empire has lost over the passage
of several centuries make up a long and melancholy list. Since the
laws of the constitution in general and of the organisation of political
authority have lost their validity and afford little or no scope for
discussion, the constitutional lawyers must conﬁne themselves to
describing the outward appearances [Zeichen], now empty and
meaningless, as symbols of the past, and the claims [embodied in
them].37 On the other hand, these claims evoke that comforting
feeling with which an impoverished nobleman cherishes the last
reminders of his departed ancestors – a consolation which has the
advantage of safety and freedom from disturbance. These [ancestral]
portraits cannot raise protests against the present owners of their
estates any more than the constitutional claims of the German
Empire have ever caused a minister to fear that the latter might
contradict him; both the nobleman and the constitutional lawyer
can safely abandon themselves to their innocent and harmless
amusements.
If the constitutional lawyers still derive pleasure from expounding
the Holy Roman (and German) Empire’s claims to Hungary,


Political writings
Poland, Prussia, Naples, etc., it should also be noted that such pol-
itically insigniﬁcant rights do not pertain to the German Empire as
such, but rather to the ‘Roman Imperium’, the ‘Heart of Christen-
dom’ and the ‘Lord of the World’, and that the ‘Roman Emperor’
and ‘King of the Germans’, as his title has it, were essentially dis-
tinct. The German Empire could have neither the interest, the will,
nor latterly the power to assert what might be considered appropri-
ate to the Emperor’s role as sovereign, and to uphold so unnatural
a union of territories which are separated by their geographical pos-
ition as well as by the individuality of their peoples – especially
since it neither would nor could support even those territories
which were integral parts of itself.
Even down to recent times, traces have survived of the [Empire’s]
connection with the Kingdom of Lombardy; but it cannot be con-
sidered an essential part of the German Kingdom proper, especially
since it was a kingdom in its own right and also because that recog-
nition as estates of the German Empire which some of its own
states had once enjoyed had long since lost its validity. As to those
territories which were essential parts of the German Empire and
which possessed and exercised the rights of estates within it, almost
every Imperial war has ended with the loss of some of them.
This loss in fact assumes two distinct forms. For apart from the
actual subjection of German lands to foreign rule and their complete
severance from all Imperial rights and duties, it must also be
regarded as a loss to the state that so many territories, while retain-
ing all their previous legal and ostensible connections with the
Emperor and Empire, at the same time acquired rulers who, though
already members – or now becoming members – of the Empire,
were also monarchs of independent states. Although this circum-
stance appears to entail no loss but rather to leave everything as it
was, it has nevertheless undermined the basic supports which hold
the state together, for it has made the territories in question inde-
pendent of the state’s authority.
Without reverting to earlier times, we shall now conﬁne ourselves
to a brief review of the way in which, from the Peace of Westphalia
onwards, Germany’s impotence and inevitable fate found expression
in its relations with foreign powers. We can, of course, deal only
with its loss of territories in the peace agreements, for the damage
done by war is far greater than any account could encompass.


The German Constitution
In the Peace of Westphalia,38 the German Empire lost all connec-
tion not only with the United Netherlands but also with Switzer-
land, whose independence had long since been attained in practice,
but was now formally recognised. This was a loss not of possessions
but of claims, and although it was insigniﬁcant in itself, it was
important for the German Empire, which has often shown that it
values chimerical claims and wholly unreal rights more highly than
actual possessions. – Thus, in addition, Germany now formally
ceded to France the bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun which
it had already lost a century previously. But it was a genuine loss
to the Empire when it ceded [to France] the Landgraviate of
Alsace – or rather the Austrian part of it – and the Imperial City
of Besanc¸on to Spain.
While these territories gave up all their associations with Germ-
any, a greater number retained their legal and theoretical depen-
dence [on the Empire]; but since their rulers were also foreign mon-
archs, the basis was laid for their real separation in practice. Thus,
Sweden acquired Western Pomerania and part of Eastern Pomer-
ania, the archbishopric of Bremen, the bishopric of Verden, and the
city of Wismar. The Margrave of Brandenburg (Duke and sub-
sequently King of Prussia) gained the archbishopric of Magdeburg
and the bishoprics of Halberstadt, Kammin, and Minden.
Even if the ruler of Brandenburg had not also been a sovereign
prince, the effect of this reduction in the number of German estates
and their fusion into a single mass would not have been very differ-
ent, for it would still have created a powerful state which could
henceforth resist the German Empire and refuse to submit to its
authority, which it could not have done if it had been divided up
among several states.
Apart from the reduction just mentioned, several other individual
estates such as Schwerin, Ratzeburg, etc. ceased to exist.
Equally destructive for the German state was the fact that under
this peace treaty, the German Empire made foreign powers the
guarantors of its constitution and internal relations – the same
powers which, whether by force or invitation, had interfered in
Germany’s affairs, laid waste to it from one end to the other, and
more or less dictated the [conditions of] peace. It thereby acknowl-
edged its inability to preserve its constitution and its existence as a
state, and surrendered its internal affairs to foreign interests.


Political writings
Other internal weaknesses [were] the granting of privileges to
various countries in the matter of appeals, and also to some extent
the permitting of a defendant to choose which Imperial court he
wished to appear in (for by delaying his choice, the defendant could
delay the legal process even further). More serious than all this was
the conﬁrmation of the right whereby not only in religious ques-
tions – including those relating entirely to the external and purely
secular aspects of religion – but also in other matters concerning
the Empire as a whole, a majority vote in the Imperial Diet could
not be binding. A further weakness was that the German Empire
could no longer redeem its rights of sovereignty which had been
mortgaged to the Imperial cities – etc.
In the next peace treaty, namely that of Nijmegen,39 which was
conducted without a delegation from the Empire (although the
Empire ratiﬁed it, including its clause that no objection to it on the
part of the Empire should be accepted), the Empire relinquished its
sovereignty over the County of Burgundy; a few pieces of territories
in the north of Germany changed their rulers; and in the south, the
French rights of occupation in German fortresses were modiﬁed.
But apart from its losses in peace treaties, the German Empire
exhibits some quite unique phenomena which have rarely arisen in
other states: in the midst of peace – namely after the Treaty of
Nijmegen had been concluded – ten Imperial cities in Alsace, along
with other territories, were lost to France.
The Peace of Ryswick40 was concluded in the presence of an
Imperial delegation, but the latter was excluded from the dis-
cussions with the foreign ambassadors; it received information only
as the Imperial ambassador saw ﬁt, and was duly asked to endorse
the agreement. This peace treaty conﬁrmed the French annexation
of the territories referred to, while the Empire in turn gained the
Imperial fortress of Kehl; but the treaty contained that celebrated
clause concerning the religious situation in the conquered territories
returned by France, that clause which gave the Protestant estates
so much concern and helped to bring so much misfortune to the
Palatinate.
In the negotiations over the Peace of Baden,41 no Imperial del-
egation took part, nor did the treaty itself bring any immediate
change for the German Empire; Austria regained Breisach and
Freiburg.


The German Constitution
This is in fact the last peace which the German Empire con-
cluded. Since a tabular survey of Imperial history from the Peace
of Baden to the Seven Years War shows neither declarations of war
nor peace treaties, one might well believe that Germany enjoyed the
profoundest peace throughout this long period; but its soil was actu-
ally as much the scene of battles and devastation as ever.
The peace treaties which Sweden made with Hanover, Prussia,
Denmark, and Russia after Charles XII’s death not only deprived
it of that place among the European powers which its intrepid king
had won for it; it also lost its power in Germany. But the power of
the German state gained nothing in the process, for the territories
which Sweden lost went to German princes, who assumed Sweden’s
place as a formidable threat to German unity.
In the Peace of Vienna,42 Germany lost nothing except its link
with Lorraine, which was in any case tenuous; but this treaty was
never ratiﬁed by the Empire.
In the war of the Austrian Succession, Germany was the theatre
of prolonged devastation. Its greatest princes were involved in it,
the armies of foreign monarchs fought each other on German soil,
yet the German Empire was in the depths of peace. Prussia, the
power which had taken Sweden’s place, expanded in the course of
this war.
Much more disastrous still – especially for northern Germany –
was the Seven Years War. It is true that the German Empire was
itself at war on this occasion (in order to execute an Imperial ban);
but its friends did not even do it the honour of recognising that it
was at war, or of making peace with it.
Finally, the Peace of Lune´ville43 has not only deprived Germany
of numerous rights of sovereignty in Italy; it has also robbed it of
the entire left bank of the Rhine. This in itself has reduced the
number of princes in Germany, and has laid the basis for reducing
the number of its estates much further still and for making the
individual parts all the more formidable [a threat] to the whole and
to the smaller estates.
If a country is at war, and half of it is either embroiled in civil
conﬂict, or abandons the collective defence and sacriﬁces the other
half to the enemy by remaining neutral, it must suffer serious
damage in the war itself and be dismembered when peace returns.
For the strength of a country consists neither in the number of its


Political writings
inhabitants and troops, nor in its fertility, nor in its size, but solely
in the way in which all of this can be used towards the great end of
common defence through the rational union of its parts under a
single political authority.
[. Jurisdiction]
Germany does not in itself constitute a political authority in its
military and ﬁnancial affairs. It must therefore be regarded not as a
state, but as a mass of independent states, the larger of which act
independently even in foreign relations, whereas the smaller must
follow some broader movement. The associations which are formed
from time to time to pursue some speciﬁc end in the name of the
German Empire are always partial,44 and they are set up as the allies
themselves see ﬁt, so that they lack all the beneﬁts which the coali-
tions of other powers may enjoy. For even if such coalitions are
short-lived, and even if in certain cases – as in wars – they do not
function with the success and energy which they would have if the
same power were completely under the control of a single govern-
ment, they do sensibly adopt the means and measures most appro-
priate to the end of the coalition, and everything is subsequently
directed towards that end. But the coalitions of the German estates
are hampered by such formalities, restrictions, and endless con-
siderations – which they have created for this purpose – that the
whole functioning of the coalition is paralysed, and it is made
impossible in advance to achieve the end which it has set itself.
The acts of the German Empire as such are never acts of the
whole, but only of an association of greater or lesser scope. But the
means of attaining what the members of this association propose
are not chosen with this end in view; on the contrary, the ﬁrst and
sole concern is to adhere to those conditions which preserve the
separateness of the members and ensure that they do not become
associates.
Such associations are like a heap of round stones which combine
to form a pyramid. But since they are completely round and must
remain so without interlocking, as soon as the pyramid begins to
approach the end for which it was constructed, they roll apart, or
at least offer no resistance [to such movement]. Through an
arrangement of this kind, these states lack not only the inﬁnite


The German Constitution
advantage which any political association possesses, but also the
advantage of independence, which would enable them to unite with
others for speciﬁc common ends. For in this instance, they have
tied themselves down in such a way that any union is rendered void,
or is already worthless from the outset.
Now despite the fact that the German estates have annulled [auf-
gehoben] their union in this way and denied themselves the oppor-
tunity of uniting in a sensible manner for temporary or immediate
ends as need or emergency requires, the demand is still present that
Germany should be a state. The following contradiction is set up:
relations between the estates are to be determined in such a way
that no state either can or does exist, yet Germany is supposed to
count without qualiﬁcation [schlechthin] as a state and likewise
wishes to be regarded as a single body. This spirit has for centuries
plunged Germany into a series of inconsistencies between its will
to render a state impossible and its will to be a state, and placed it
unhappily between the estates’ resentment [Eifersucht] of any kind
of subjection to the whole and the impossibility of surviving without
this subjection.45
The solution to the problem of how it is possible for Germany
not to be a state yet [at the same time] to be one is easily found. It
lies in the fact that Germany is a state in [the realm of] thought but
not in actuality, that formality and reality are separate, so that
empty formality belongs to the state, whereas reality belongs to the
non-existence of the state.46
The system of the state in thought [des Gedankenstaates] is the
organisation of a constitution which is powerless in all that is essen-
tial to a state. The obligations of each estate to the Emperor and
the Empire, to the supreme government which consists in the head
[of the Empire] in conjunction with the estates, are deﬁned in the
most precise manner in an endless number of solemn acts of consti-
tutional law. These duties and rights make up a system of laws
which specify precisely the constitutional relationship of each estate
and the compulsory nature of its service, and the contribution of
each individual estate to the common weal [das Allgemeine] is to be
made only in accordance with these legal determinations. But the
nature of this legal system [Gesetzlichkeit] lies in the fact that the
constitutional relationship and its associated obligations are not
deﬁned by universal laws in the strict sense; on the contrary, the


Political writings
relationship of each estate to the whole is a particular matter – in
the same way as in civil rights – which takes the form of a [private]
property. This has an essential effect on the nature of the political
authority.47
An act which emanates from the political authority is a universal
act, and by virtue of its true universality, it also bears the rule of
its application within itself. What it refers to is universal and ident-
ical with itself. The act of the political authority imparts a free
and universal determinacy, and its execution is at the same time its
application. Since no distinctions can be made in what it applies to,
its application must be deﬁned in the act itself, and no refractory
or disparate material offers resistance in its application.48
If the political authority passes an act to the effect that every
hundredth man of a speciﬁc age must enlist as a soldier, or that a
certain percentage of wealth or a speciﬁc tax on every acre of land
must be paid, the decree applies to something wholly universal,
such as men of a speciﬁc age, or wealth, or land, and no distinction
is made between some men and others, this or that wealth, and this
or that land; the determination [of quantities] applied to a uniform
area can be ﬁxed entirely by the political authority. The hundredth
man, ﬁve per cent, etc. are wholly universal determinations of this
kind, and no special measures are needed in order to apply them to
the uniform material; for no lines have already been drawn which
would ﬁrst have to be removed or to which those now determined
would have to be accommodated, as with the straight line drawn on
a tree-trunk to indicate where it is to be cut.
But if the area to which the law is to be applied is [already]
determined in multifarious ways from the point of view of the law
itself, then the law cannot contain within itself the complete rule of
its own application. On the contrary, a distinct application [of the
law] is needed for each particular part of the material, and between
the law and its execution a distinct act of application intervenes, an
act for which the judicial authority is responsible.
An Imperial law cannot therefore furnish a universal rule for
[drawing] the requisite lines and divisions as if on a blank sheet,
nor execute the actual arrangement [of these] in accordance with
one and the same rule of this kind. On the contrary, the material to
which an Imperial law applies confronts it with its own determinate


The German Constitution
characteristics already present, and before the law can be executed,
one must ﬁrst discover to what extent the particular line and shape
which each part displays can be reconciled with those prescribed by
the law, or how much binding force the universal law has for each
part. If contradictions should arise, these questions must be ans-
wered by a judicial authority. In the course of such an enquiry, the
following conclusions emerge: ﬁrstly, while the enquiry is certainly
necessary, its organisation is such that it can discover very little;
secondly, what it discovers in theory is not subsequently realised,
but remains a discovery in thought [alone]; and ﬁnally, the whole
business of the enquiry is rendered well nigh impossible, because
the particular determinacy which the material [already] has stands
in the same relation to a universal law as a straight line does to the
arc of a circle, so that there is already an incompatibility in advance
between a law of the political authority and the determinacy of the
universal material upon which this authority acts. In this way, the
state in thought [der Gedankenstaat] and the system of constitutional
law and laws enacted by the state are the straight line, while the
area in which the state in thought is to be realised has the shape of
a circular line; and everyone knows that the two lines are incom-
mensurable. Nor is it the case that this circular ﬁgure renders itself
incompatible with the straight line de facto; it does not assume the
form of violence, illegality, and arbitrariness. On the contrary, the
fact that it is this incommensurable line is likewise elevated to the
form of right [Rechtsform]: it acts in accordance with right [rechtlich]
despite its incompatibility with political right [Staatsrecht], and it
acts legally despite its incompatibility with the laws of the state.
Thus, if the problem of how Germany can simultaneously be a
state and not be a state is to be solved, it must, in so far as it is
a state, exist only as a state in thought [Gedankenstaat], while its
non-existence must possess the reality. Now if the state in thought
is to have being for itself, the judicial authority which is to overcome
[aufheben] the contradiction and apply to actuality what was merely
thought, thereby realising it and making actuality correspond to it,
must be so constituted that even its application remains merely a
thought. Thus, those universal orders [Ordnungen] which might
transform the country into a state would be paralysed in their tran-
sition to reality; and although this transition would itself be posited


Political writings
and decreed – for such arrangements have no meaning unless they
are meant to be executed – the act of transition would also be turned
into a work of thought [Gedankending].49
This transition can be paralysed at any one of its stages. A univer-
sal ordinance is passed; it is to be put into execution, and in the
event of resistance, legal procedures will be instituted. If the resist-
ance offered is not referred to a court of law, the execution in itself
remains unimplemented; but if it is referred to a court, a verdict
may be delayed; and if a verdict is reached, it may not be complied
with. But this judgement in the realm of thought [Gedankending von
Beschluβ] is supposed to be executed and a penalty imposed, so an
order is given to enforce its execution. This order in turn is not
executed, so a judgement must follow against those who failed to
execute it, in order to compel them to do so. This in turn is not
complied with, so a ruling must be given to the effect that punish-
ment shall be carried out on those who fail to carry it out on anyone
who fails to carry it out, etc. This is the arid history of how one
stage after another in the implementation of a law is turned into a
work of thought [Gedankending].
Thus, if the judicial authority is to discover how universal obli-
gations towards the Empire are to be rated in comparison with the
particular rights of individuals, and if a contradiction between the
two is actually referred to a court, it depends on the organisation of
that court in its business of pronouncing judgement (irrespective of
the subsequent execution of that judgement) whether it does not
encounter difﬁculties in performing even this function and – since
the judgement in itself is no more than a thought if it is not
executed – whether the arrangement is not such that it does not
even get as far as this thought, so that even the latter remains a
mere work of thought [Gedankending].
Even with regard to the pronouncement of judgement, the very
organisation of the judicial authority is such that the essential aspect
with which we are here concerned – namely its function of
upholding the universal ordinances of the state qua state against
individuals – is subject to the greatest hindrances. In the judiciary
of the Empire, the administration of civil justice and that of consti-
tutional law are intermixed. Constitutional law and civil law are
subject to the same courts. The Imperial courts are the supreme
courts of appeal for civil actions and for constitutional rights. The


The German Constitution
scope of their judicial authority in the latter area is already limited,
because the most important matters of this kind are the responsi-
bility of the Imperial Diet and are in any case often resolved by
courts of arbitration; but it is also subject to endless difﬁculties even
in pronouncing judgement, and is made to depend on a mass of
fortuitous circumstances which become necessary conditions of its
own ineffectiveness.
This combination of civil and constitutional processes generally
has the effect of increasing the volume of business of the existing
Imperial courts to such an extent that they are unable to cope with
it. It is recognised by the Emperor, the Empire, and the Supreme
Court that the Supreme Court is even less equal to the volume of
its business than is the Aulic Council.50
No evil seems easier to remedy, and nothing simpler to deal with
than this. Even without the introduction of several separate courts,
the number of judges in the existing courts could be increased. This
would simultaneously expedite the conduct of business and allow a
single court to be split up into several departments, thereby creating
several courts to deal with different areas of business. But it is not
possible in Germany to implement so simple a measure as this. It
was indeed decided to do so, and the number of assessors in the
Supreme Court was increased to ﬁfty; but the German Empire was
unable to ﬁnd the money to pay these [extra] judges. In the course
of time their number sank to twelve or even fewer, until it ﬁnally
rose to twenty-ﬁve.
The ofﬁcial statistics show that the annual number of actions
pending far exceeds the number of those on which decisions can be
given, even if the presentation of a single case sometimes takes only
several months (rather than years, as used to happen). It is conse-
quently inevitable, and conﬁrmed by statistical analysis, that many
thousands of cases remain undecided, and recourse to petitions
remains a necessary evil (even if the worst abuses are a thing of the
past, and Jews no longer operate a trade in this item); for since it
is impossible for judgements to be delivered on all pending actions,
the parties are compelled to make every effort to ensure that their
cases are favoured with a court decision.
A thousand other collisions over the nomination of assessors or
the itio in partes51 have often immobilised the Supreme Court for
several years; and even if the court did not deliberately delay its


Political writings
own proceedings (on the principle of making the great aware of its
power), these factors alone impede the course of justice.
Many of these abuses are not encountered in the Aulic Council,
whose members are appointed by the Emperor. For example, no
case of itio in partes has arisen, despite the right to request it; and
many forms [of the Council’s procedure] are directly conducive to
justice [Recht] itself, instead of holding it up with pure formalities.
It is therefore natural that, in recent times, people have increasingly
looked to the Aulic Council for justice.
The need for judicial reform has always been too obvious to be
overlooked. But the consequences of the last attempt by Joseph II
to organise a visitation of the Supreme Court – a procedure sanc-
tioned by Imperial law but out of use for two centuries – and the
reasons why it was terminated before it completed its business, are
in general no different from those which characterise the state of
Imperial justice at large. In short, while the estates do associate for
the administration of justice, they are unwilling, in this union, to
give up anything of their mutually opposed existence, based as it is
on separation and lack of solidarity; they form an association, but
they lack the will for any common purpose.
In this way, jurisdiction in and for itself, quite apart from the
execution of its judgements, is impeded. But everyone knows how
matters stand with the execution of such decisions of the Imperial
courts if they happen to involve constitutional law or important
issues connected with it. The more important concerns of this type
are not in any case the responsibility of the Imperial courts, but of
the Imperial Diet. They are accordingly passed on directly from the
legal sphere to the sphere of politics; for when the supreme political
authority speaks, it is not applying the laws, but giving them.
Furthermore, matters of major signiﬁcance (such as the owner-
ship of territories etc.) have even been exempted from the formal
procedures of the Imperial Diet. It is laid down by the Compact of
Election and other basic laws that decisions on such matters should
not be taken by the Imperial courts and the supreme judicial auth-
ority, but by amicable agreement between the contending estates;
and if this cannot be done by amicable agreement, it must inevitably
be settled by war.
The case of the Ju¨lich-Berg succession was so far from being
resolved by legal means that it gave rise to the Thirty Years War.52


The German Constitution
In the case of the Bavarian succession in more recent times, it was
once again cannons and politics rather than the Imperial courts
which spoke. Even in cases involving less powerful estates, it is not
Imperial justice which pronounces the decisive verdict. It is well
known that, in the disputes over the succession in the [ruling]
houses of Saxony, decisions were issued by the Aulic Council
concerning the territories of the extinct lines of Coburg-Eisenberg
and Coburg-Ro¨mhild, although the most important points were in
fact settled by agreement. We have likewise experienced how, in the
Lie`ge dispute, the Supreme Court not only pronounced judgement,
ordered its execution, and called on several estates to carry it out;
in addition, these estates actually fulﬁlled their obligation. But no
sooner had a start been made than the most powerful estate among
the executors became dissatisﬁed with its role as a mere executor of
the Supreme Court’s judgements, and set to work with good inten-
tions of its own; and when the attempt to resolve the matter by
non-legal methods failed, it in turn gave up its role as executor.
In such a delicate situation [as this] where there is a misunder-
standing between prince and subject, mediation may be desirable.
If, however, after judicial pronouncements have been made, their
execution is to be set aside in favour of a further mediation, the
whole viewpoint at the stage of development which the case has now
reached is shifted, and the essential principle of the constitution is
likewise displaced by an inﬂuence which seems to offer a momen-
tary beneﬁt; or rather, it becomes apparent on such occasions that
this principle has already been displaced long before.
It seems that a distinction must be made here. It is [all] too
obvious that the mutual relations between the powerful estates are
governed by politics. On the other hand, the lesser estates appear
to owe their existence entirely to the constitutional union of the
Empire. No Imperial city would consider itself capable of resisting
the larger of its neighbouring fellow-estates – no more than a knight
of the Empire imagines he can defend his direct dependence on the
Emperor against a prince, either on his own or even in association
with the rest of the body of knights. The matter speaks for itself,
and it is superﬂuous to quote the fate of the Imperial knights in
Franconia. Any attempt, like that of Franz von Sickingen, to con-
quer an Electoral principality – let alone a successful attempt of this
kind – is no longer in the realm of possibility nowadays, just as


Political writings
associations of Imperial cities or abbots can no longer achieve what
they could in the past.
Now if it is not the power of the individual estates – nor even
their combined power – which preserves them, they appear to owe
their existence as relatively independent states and direct subjects
of the Empire to nothing other than the Imperial union itself and
to the legal constitution established by the prohibition of private
warfare [Landfrieden].53 But the question still arises of what it is that
preserves this so-called legal relationship, and hence the continued
existence of the knights, abbeys, Imperial cities, counts, etc. Obvi-
ously, it is not their own power which preserves them, for they lack
the power of a state; once again, it is politics which does so.54 If
politics is not immediately recognised as the foundation on which
the existence of the less powerful estates rests, this is only because
reasoning stops at the Imperial union – which is an intermediate
link – as the [supposed] foundation, and forgets what it is that
supports this union itself.
States like Lucca, Genoa, etc. managed to survive for centuries
without an Imperial union, until they experienced the fate of Pisa,
Siena, Arezzo, Verona, Bologna, Vicenza, etc., etc. – in short, one
could list the whole gazetteer of cities, principalities, counties, etc.
of Italy. That apparently more powerful republic [of Venice] which
had previously swallowed up so many independent cities was
brought to an end by the arrival of an adjutant who merely conveyed
an order from the general of a foreign power.55 Those states which,
in the lottery of fate, scored the few winning numbers in the shape
of a slightly longer [period of] independence while several hundred
sovereign territories in Italy drew blanks, continued to exist only
because of the jealous politics of the greater states around them;
and although, in earlier centuries, they had been able to engage in
conﬂict with their powerful neighbours, they had meanwhile – with-
out any external loss – become quite disproportionately weak in
comparison with them. But the jealousy of politics is also satisﬁed
by an equal sharing of booty and by parity of expansion and con-
traction, and in the resultant combinations of interests, states like
Venice, Poland, etc. were lost.
The change from the right of private warfare [Faustrecht] to poli-
tics should not be regarded as a transition from anarchy to consti-


The German Constitution
tutionalism. The true principle remains the same, and the change
is purely superﬁcial. In the days before the prohibition on private
warfare [Landfrieden], the injured party or anyone bent on conquest
simply struck out at his enemies. In politics, on the other hand,
calculations are made before battle is joined, and major interests are
not put at risk for the sake of minor gain; but if this gain seems
assured, the opportunity is not missed.
Since the mass of German states does not constitute a power, the
independence of its parts can be respected only so long as the advan-
tage of other powers requires it and no higher interests or rights of
indemniﬁcation etc. are involved. As far as interest is concerned,
France, for example, when its armies had occupied half of Germany,
abolished [aufgehoben] the independent states and direct Imperial
dependencies in the Netherlands, and among those territories on the
left bank of the Rhine which were subsequently ceded to France when
peace was restored. It could equally well have abolished the consti-
tutions of the territories on the right bank; and even if this destruction
of the independence of so many principalities, counties, bishoprics,
abbeys, Imperial cities, and baronies could not have endured, the ter-
ritories in question would still have been plunged into far greater mis-
fortune [than they were already in]. But politics – namely the need to
take account of Prussia and fear of rendering peace more difﬁcult –
prevented France from doing so. It was also deterred by the advantage
of having a ready-made system for the collection of contributions,
which – according to the ofﬁcial French press – were raised ‘in meagre
amounts’ in these territories.
This transition from the state [Zustand] of overt power to that of
calculated power was not, of course, accomplished all at once; on the
contrary, it was made possible by a legal constitution. [Immediately]
after the prohibition on private warfare, it was easier to regard Germ-
any as a state than it is today. Under the feudal constitution, the politi-
cal authority was split up into numerous parts, but because there were
so many of them, no individual parts were powerful enough to oppose
the whole. But, as if fate had simply not destined Germany for a con-
dition such as this, it soon overcame its aversion to lawlessness and set
aside the attempt to establish a ﬁrmer framework through the prohib-
ition of private warfare.56 It did so by means of the deeper interest of
religion, which divided the peoples for all time.


Political writings
[. Religion]57
Amidst all the storms of the lawless state in the age of feuds, the
whole still retained a certain cohesion, both in the relation of the
estates towards one another and in their relation to the universal
[interest]. Even if the fulﬁlment of obligations seemed to depend
not only on the free will of the estates in general, but also on the
will of individual estates, and even if the legal bond [Zusammenhang]
seemed very weak, an inner bond of dispositions [Gemu¨ter] never-
theless prevailed. When there was religious unity, and before the
rise of the middle class [Bu¨rgerstand] brought great variety into the
whole, princes, counts, and lords could regard one another more
readily and more correctly as a whole, and could accordingly act as
a whole. There was no political authority [Staatsmacht] opposed to
and independent of individuals as there is in modern states; the
political authority and the power and free will of individuals were
one and the same thing. But these individuals were more disposed
to allow themselves and their power to coexist within a [single]
state.
But when, with the rise of the Imperial cities, that civic con-
sciousness [bu¨rgerliche Sinn] which cares only for individual inter-
ests [ein Einzelnes] without self-sufﬁciency or regard for the whole
began to gain power, this isolation of [individual] dispositions
[Gemu¨ter] really required a more universal and positive bond. And
when, through the progress of culture [Bildung] and industry, Ger-
many was now confronted with the difﬁcult choice of either decid-
ing to obey a universal [authority] or destroying the union alto-
gether, the original German character, which insists on the free will
of the individual and resists subservience to a universal, won the day
and determined Germany’s fate in accordance with its old nature.
In the course of time, great numbers of states had taken shape
and trade and commercial wealth became dominant. The intracta-
bility of the German character was not directly conducive to the
development of independent states, and the old free strength of the
nobility could not stand up to the rise of the masses; but above all,
that civic spirit [Bu¨rgergeist] which was gaining prestige and political
signiﬁcance needed some kind of inner and outer legitimation. The
German character seized upon the innermost being [das Innerste] of
man, upon religion and conscience, and ﬁrmly established the iso-


The German Constitution
lation [of individuals] on this basis; the separation of the external
realm [des A¨ ußeren] into states seemed merely a consequence of this.
The original, untamed character of the German nation deter-
mined the iron necessity of its fate.58 Within the sphere which this
fate has assigned to them, politics, religion, privation [Not], virtue,
coercion, reason, cunning, and all the powers that move the human
race play out their momentous and seemingly chaotic game on the
broad ﬁeld of conﬂict that is open to them. Each behaves as an
absolutely free and self-sufﬁcient power, unaware of the fact that
all of them are instruments in the hands of higher powers – primor-
dial fate and all-conquering time – which laugh at their supposed
freedom and self-sufﬁciency. Even the mighty force of privation has
not subdued the German character and its destiny. The universal
misery of the wars of religion, especially the Thirty Years War, has
rather advanced and reinforced the development of its fate, and its
results were a greater and more consolidated separation and
isolation.
Religion, far from cutting itself off from the state by its own
[internal] division, has in fact introduced this division into the state
itself and made the greatest contribution to abolishing [aufzuheben]
the state.59 It has become so interwoven with what is known as the
constitution that it is a precondition of constitutional rights.
In the particular states of which Germany is composed, even civil
rights are tied to religion. The [two] religions have an equal share
in this intolerance, and neither is in a position to reproach the other.
Despite the intolerance sanctioned by the laws of the Empire, the
rulers of Austria and Brandenburg have rated religious freedom of
conscience more highly than this legalised barbarity.
The disruption caused by the religious division was particularly
acute in Germany because the political bond was looser here than
in any other country. The dominant religion was necessarily all the
more embittered at those who abandoned it, not only because the
religious division destroyed the innermost bond between human
beings, but also because this was in a sense almost the only bond
[which united them], whereas in other states numerous other links
still held ﬁrm. Community of religion is a deeper community,
whereas the community of physical needs, property, and income is
of a lower order,60 and the demand for separation is inherently more
unnatural than the demand that an existing union should be


Political writings
preserved. Consequently, the Catholic Church showed itself more
fanatical, because its demand was in general directed towards union
and the most sacred aspect of this union. It was prepared at most
to admit grace and tolerance, but not right – i.e. it was not prepared
to consolidate the [religious] division as Protestantism insisted. The
two parties ﬁnally agreed to exclude each other from civil rights,
and to surround and reinforce this exclusion with all the pedantry
of law [des Rechts].
The outward appearances are the same: civil rights are denied to
Protestants in Catholic territories, and to Catholics in Protestant
territories. But the basis seems to be different. The Catholics had
been in the position of oppressors, and the Protestants of the
oppressed. The Catholics had treated the Protestants as criminals,
and denied them the free exercise of their religion in their midst;
but where the Protestant Church was dominant, this basis was
removed, along with the fear of oppression. The basis of Protestant
intolerance could only be either the right of retaliation for the hatred
and intolerance of the Catholics61 – which would have been too
unchristian a motive – or distrust in the power and truth of their
own faith, and fear that they might easily be seduced by the splen-
dour of Catholic worship and the zeal of its adherents, etc.
In the last century in particular, this perpetual fear that the Prot-
estant faith might be outwitted and surreptitiously overrun, this
belief – like that of the watchers on Zion – in their own impotence,
this fear of the enemy’s cunning prevailed, and became an incentive
to fortify the grace of God with untold precautions and legal
bulwarks.
This legal position has been asserted with the greatest acrimony
whenever it was presented by individuals of the opposite party as a
matter of grace. Grace is indeed in one respect inferior to law
[Recht], for law is determinate, and whatever is legal has lost its
arbitrariness for both parties, whereas grace is purely arbitrary in
legal terms. But this clinging to pure legality as such also obscured
the higher signiﬁcance of grace, so that for a long time neither party
rose above the law or allowed grace to take precedence over law.
What Frederick II did for the Catholics and Joseph [II] did for the
Protestants was grace in contravention of the rights laid down in
the Treaties of Prague and Westphalia. It was indeed in keeping


The German Constitution
with the higher natural rights of freedom of conscience and the
non-dependence of civil rights on faith; yet these higher rights are
not only not acknowledged in the religious settlement and the Peace
of Westphalia, but are actually excluded by them, and their
exclusion was guaranteed with the utmost solemnity by both Prot-
estants and Catholics. From this point of view, these legal guaran-
tees are nothing to boast about; on the contrary, the grace which
they reject is inﬁnitely superior.
Religion is an even more important basic determinant of the
relationship between the individual parts of Germany and the
whole; it has probably contributed most to the destruction of
the political union and to legalising this destruction. The era of
the religious schism lacked the competence to separate church and
state and to preserve the latter despite the separation of the faiths;
and the princes could ﬁnd no better ally in their attempt to with-
draw from the supremacy of the Empire than the conscience of
their subjects.
The Imperial laws which have gradually developed in conse-
quence have ensured that the religion of every territory and every
Imperial city is legally deﬁned, whether as purely Catholic, purely
Protestant, or as a parity of the two. But what would happen if a
country were to infringe the Treaty of Westphalia to the extent of
transferring from one form of purity to the other, or from parity to
purity?
Equally ﬁxed is the religion of the votes in the Imperial Diet, the
Supreme Court, the Aulic Council, the individual ofﬁces and ser-
vices, etc. The most important of those political matters which are
determined by religion is the famous itio in partes, the right of one
or other religious party not to submit to a majority vote. If this
right were conﬁned to religious matters, its justice and necessity
would be self-evident. The separation [of the religions] would do
no direct harm to the state, because it would affect only those issues
which have basically nothing to do with the state. But by virtue of
the itio in partes, the separation of the minority from the majority
is legitimised in all political matters, even if they are unconnected
with religion. On [questions of] war and peace, the mobilisation of
an Imperial army, or taxation – in short, on all of those few issues
which earlier times have left in being as shadows of a [former]


Political writings
whole – the majority vote is not legally binding. Even without
resorting to politics, a minority, if it forms a religious party, can
obstruct the activity of the state.
It is going too far to draw a parallel, as some people do, between
this right and that right of rebellion which is sanctiﬁed in some of
the various constitutions drawn up over the last decade in France.
For Germany must be regarded as a state which has already dis-
solved; and its parts, which do not submit to a majority [decision]
of the whole, should be regarded as independent and self-subsistent
states whose divergence, if no joint conclusion can be reached, does
not invariably lead to the dissolution of all social bonds or to inevi-
table civil war.62
But while religion has completely torn the state apart, it has also
given a remarkable intimation of certain principles on which a state
can be based.63 The religious schism divided people from one
another in their innermost being, yet there was still supposed to be
a bond between them. This bond must therefore be of an external
nature, relating to external things such as warfare, etc. – like the
bond which is the principle of modern states. The very fact that
the most important parts of constitutional law were interwoven with
the religious schism has also woven two religions into the state,
thus making all political rights dependent on two (or actually three)
religions.64 This is admittedly contrary to the principle of the state’s
independence from the church, and to the possibility of there being
a state despite the differences of religion; but the principle is in
fact recognised, because different religions [really] are present and
Germany [really] is supposed to be a state.
Another more important division which is also produced by
religion is even more closely linked to the possibility of a state.
Originally, votes in general debates and on decisions [of the
Imperial bodies] depended entirely on the personal presence of the
princes; they had votes only when they appeared in person, and the
prince of different and [geographically] separate territories had only
one vote. His person and his territory, his personality and his quality
as representative of the territory, did not appear as distinct. The
distinction arose as a result of the religious schism. On which side
was a vote to be cast if the prince and his territory were of different
religions, and if the Imperial constitution speciﬁed that a vote must
be allocated to only one religious party?65


The German Constitution
As a political power, the prince ought not to have been on either
of the two sides, but the times were not yet ripe for this. Besides,
no one reﬂected on such matters initially. The ruler of Protestant
Neuburg Palatine, who became a Catholic in the seventeenth cen-
tury, was included among the Catholic voters both in the Imperial
Diet and in the Imperial courts, whereas the vote of the Elector of
Saxony, who changed his religion at the end of the same century,
remained Protestant (as likewise happened when the rulers of Hesse
and Wu¨rttemberg subsequently changed their religion).
Even before all this, only those princes with a territory and sub-
jects of their own were entitled to a seat and a vote in the Imperial
Diet, so that a territory seemed inseparable from the concept of
membership of the Diet. But this distinction between the person-
ality of the prince and his representation of a territory – even in
relation to the German state in general – became more conspicuous
and easier to draw when this separation of prince and subjects had
already been introduced in the provincial Diet [Landsta¨nde] of that
prince’s own territory. The Palatinate, which had no provincial
Diet, went over to the Catholic party without resistance, and the
struggle of its citizens with their Catholic princes over religious
grievances has continued until the most recent times. In Hesse and
Wu¨rttemberg, on the other hand, the separation [of prince and sub-
jects] had already been legalised by the provincial Diet. The religion
of these territories was also defended in the context of their relations
with the German Empire, and given precedence over the person-
ality of the prince; the latter accordingly appeared in the Imperial
Diet not as an individual, but as a representative.
The attention which was devoted to this distinction occasioned
by religion has now been extended to other differences, and territor-
ies which have come under a single ruler have passed on their indi-
vidual votes to him. In this case too, the individual as a unit, i.e.
the individual personality, is no longer made into a principle, as
occurred in the past when even the ruler of various principalities
had only one vote, or when several princes among whom a single
principality was divided each had a vote of his own. The principle
now is the ruler in his capacity as a representative.
But just as the food which nourishes the healthy body further
undermines a sick one, so too has this true and genuine principle
that it is the territory which confers the power and the right to vote


Political writings
contributed all the more to the dissolution of the German Empire
since it was applied to the situation in Germany.
[. The Power of the Estates]
In the course of time, changes in customs, religion, and particularly
in the relative wealth of the estates served to disrupt that internal
cohesion which relies on character and general interests, so that
external legal bonds became necessary to unite Germany into a state
once its inhabitants ceased to be one people and became [no more
than] a mass.
A theory of such unifying factors is furnished by part of German
constitutional law. The old feudal constitution could evolve into
that type of modern state on which all those European states which
have not undergone a revolution in recent times are more or less
modelled – provided that none of the individual vassals was, or
could become, excessively powerful.66 Admittedly, even a mass of
weaker vassals can become a power by organising themselves into a
solid opposition to the state, as happened in Poland; and the aura
which surrounded the [Holy] Roman Emperor could not of itself
have given him sufﬁcient power to resist it. But even if the minority
in Germany is not bound by the decisions of the majority, this
right, based as it is on the itio in partes, is nevertheless subject to
certain limits. Besides, the activity of the whole cannot be paralysed
by an individual veto, but only by a religious party; and even if an
individual estate does not for its part consider itself in any way
subject to the majority (as when Prussia, in refusing to pay the
increased Kammerzieler, put forward the principle that it had not
yet been established whether decisions of the majority were in any
way binding in ﬁscal matters), and even if each estate makes peace
or signs treaties of neutrality on its own account, all such rights and
relationships are of later date. It was conceivable that, if the
Emperor had possessed sufﬁcient political power on the strength of
his hereditary territories, and if the individual vassals had not been
able to grow to an overwhelming size, Germany’s feudal consti-
tution might have supported the state. It is not the principle of
feudalism which has cut off the possibility of Germany becoming a
state;67 on the contrary, the disproportionate expansion of individual


The German Constitution
estates has destroyed both the principle of feudalism itself and Ger-
many’s continued existence as a state.
The power of these individual estates has not allowed the state
to develop a power of its own in Germany, and their expansion has
made this increasingly impossible. The German character, with its
stubborn insistence on independence, has made a complete for-
mality out of everything which might serve to establish a [central]
political power and to unite society in a single state, and it has clung
to this formality with equal stubbornness. This stubborn attachment
to formality can only be interpreted as a resistance to the reality of
[political] union, which is averted by the adoption of this formal
character [Wesen], and this immutability of form is passed off as
immutability of substance [der Sache].
Just as the Roman Emperors, in putting an end to the anarchy
of the Roman Republic and reconstituting the realm as a state, kept
all the external forms of the Republic intact, so also in Germany –
though with the opposite end in view – all the symbols of the
German political union were conscientiously preserved for centur-
ies, even after the thing itself, the state, had disappeared and dis-
solved (not indeed into open anarchy, but into many separate
states). The constitution in fact seems to have undergone no change
at all during the thousand years which have elapsed since the time
of Charlemagne, for at his coronation, the newly elected Emperor
bears the crown, sceptre and orb of Charlemagne, and even wears
his shoes, coat, and jewels. An Emperor of modern times is thus
identiﬁed with Charlemagne as Emperor to such an extent that he
even wears the latter’s own clothes. Even if the Margrave of Brand-
enburg now has an army of ,troops, his relationship to the
German Empire does not seem to have changed since he had fewer
than ,regular soldiers in his pay, for the Brandenburg envoy
still presents the Emperor with oats at his coronation, just as he did
in the past.
This German superstition regarding purely external forms and
ceremony, so ridiculous in the eyes of other nations, does not lack
self-awareness. It is a manifestation of the original German charac-
ter, which clings with unbridled tenacity to its headstrong indepen-
dence. In the preservation of these forms, the German convinces
himself that he can discern the preservation of his constitution.
Manifestos and state papers tell exactly the same story.


Political writings
Mention has already been made of the loss which Germany has
suffered at the hands of foreign powers. But for Germany as a state,
it must be reckoned as even more of a loss that foreign princes have
become the owners of German Imperial territories, and hence also
members of the German Empire. Every increase in the power of
such a house further detracts from Germany’s constitution, which
has remained in being only because the house of Austria (which
may be described as the Imperial house) has been made strong
enough – not by the German Empire, but by the power of its other
territories – to offer some resistance to the principle of complete
dissolution. Germany’s constitution does not even have a guarantee
against several German territories combining under a single house,
in a perfectly legal manner, through inheritance. On the contrary,
since the power of the state itself is consistently treated in the legal
form of private property, there can be no question of any resistance
to a uniﬁcation of this kind, which is usually more important in
politics than are private and family rights; Naples and Sicily were
separated from Spain, and the right of this [Imperial] family to
them was recognised in the same way as Tuscany, once it became
separate, reverted to the Imperial house.
Just as the old Roman Empire was destroyed by northern bar-
barians, so also did the principle which destroyed the Roman-
German Empire come from the north. Denmark, Sweden, England,
and above all Prussia are the foreign powers68 whose position as
estates of the Empire simultaneously gave them a centre outside the
German Empire and a constitutionally recognised inﬂuence in the
Empire’s affairs.
In this respect, Denmark played only a temporary and short-lived
role in the initial years of the Thirty Years War.
The Peace of Westphalia generally consolidated the principle of
what was then called German freedom, namely the dissolution of
the Empire into independent states. It reduced the number of such
states, [and hence] the only possibility which still remained of the
whole predominating over the parts;69 and by fusing independent
states into larger ones, it increased the [degree of] separation. It also
granted foreign powers the right to interfere in the internal affairs
[of Germany], partly by granting them territories within the
Empire, and partly by making them guarantors of the constitution.


The German Constitution
It has at all times been regarded as [an act of] extreme malevol-
ence if one party in a state which is torn by internal conﬂict calls
on a foreign power for help; and – if there could be any question
of punishment when a state is in the process of dissolution – it has
even been considered the greatest of crimes. When a state is deeply
wounded by civil wars, in the throes of this most terrible of all
afﬂictions and despite the hatred (which surpasses all other hatreds)
of such hostile elements, the principle that they ought nevertheless
to form a single state still prevails; and even if this union is itself
the product of tyranny, the most sacred of human aims – namely
the need [Forderung] for union – still remains [valid]. But the party
which calls on foreign powers to assist it renounces this principle;
through its action, it has annulled [aufgehoben] the political union,
even if its true and conscious intention is simply to ﬁnd protection,
through this foreign help, against an oppression which it is power-
less to resist on its own.
In the Thirty Years War, after Denmark’s attempt to become
Germany’s saving genius had failed, and when not just what is
known as German constitutional law but all laws in general, without
resistance or protest, fell silent before Ferdinand’s armies, the noble
Gustavus Adolphus made his appearance, almost against the will of
the German estates. His heroic death on the battleﬁeld did not allow
him to fulﬁl his role as saviour of Germany’s political and religious
freedom. Gustavus declared in advance that this was his intention;
he entered into the most speciﬁc treaties with the German princes
on the general affairs of the nation, and placed himself at their head
in a spirit of free and noble magnanimity; he defeated the armies of
oppression, freeing the lands from this burden and from the even
heavier burden of the loss of their religious rights; his camp was a
church, and he and his army went into battle singing the most
fervent hymns. Through his victories, he restored religion and the
rights of which the German princes had been deprived. He did not
return the reconquered hereditary lands of the Count Palatine; he
kept other territories under his control and had other plans in his
head which his death did not permit him to realise, and which
the subsequent course of the war allowed his chancellor to fulﬁl
only to the extent that, when peace was restored, the foreign power
retained Western Pomerania and part of Eastern Pomerania, the


Political writings
archbishopric of Bremen, the bishopric of Verden and the city of
Wismar. In theory, these territories remained dependent on the
German Empire, but in practice, they were separated from it and
its interest, so that, apart from its political inﬂuence as a power –
including its legal inﬂuence as a guarantor [of the constitution] –
Sweden gained a lasting inﬂuence, as of right, as a member of the
Empire itself.
Human beings are foolish enough to allow their ideal visions of
selﬂess champions of freedom in religion and politics, and the inner
warmth of their enthusiasm, to distract them from the truth which
resides in power, and so to believe that a work of human justice and
dreams of the imagination are secure against the higher justice of
nature and truth.70 But this justice makes use of necessity [Not] to
compel human beings to accept its authority, in deﬁance of all their
convictions, theories, and inner fervour. This justice, whereby a for-
eign power which a weak state allows to participate in its internal
affairs will also acquire possessions within it, duly expressed itself in
the Peace of Westphalia in the case of the Duchy (subsequently the
Kingdom) of Prussia: the Prussian Duke received the archbishopric
of Magdeburg, and the bishoprics of Halberstadt, Kammin, and
Minden. Even if the house of Brandenburg, like the [Swedish] house
which now succeeded to the ducal title of Pomerania etc., had not sim-
ultaneously been an external foreign power, the reduction in the
number of German estates and their amalgamation into a single (albeit
domestic) power would still have had the effect of reducing the power
of the [Empire in] general, because the previously smaller parts now
constituted a power capable of resisting the power of the whole.
Through the peace treaties which it was compelled to make, after
the death of Charles XII, with Hanover, Prussia, Denmark, and
Russia, Sweden lost that place among the European powers which
its valiant king had won for it in so meteoric a fashion, and it like-
wise lost its power in Germany. But the power of the German state
gained nothing in the process, for another centre of resistance to it
was already developing ever greater strength. The territories which
Sweden lost to Germany neither came directly into the possession
of the German Empire to serve as a fund for the Imperial
exchequer, nor into that of their own princes, but of princes who
were already fellow-members of the Empire and who now in turn
became a formidable threat to the unity of the state.


The German Constitution
During that profound peace which the German Empire claimed
to enjoy while engaged in general warfare, Hanover, which now
shared a single ruler with England, played a part which nevertheless
remained without further consequence; it had no principle to assert
which was directly linked with Germany’s interest. Neither political
nor religious freedom had to be defended, and even in later years,
Hanover never rose to that degree of inﬂuence in Germany which
Sweden, and later Prussia, commanded. England’s constitution and
all-too-remote interests did not allow it to amalgamate Hanover –
and hence its relations with Germany – with England’s political
relations in the way that had been possible, because of his natural
allegiance to his German connection, in the case of the ﬁrst ruler
of Brunswick who ascended the English throne.71 The divergence
of interests between England and the Electorate of Brunswick
became most obvious during the Seven Years War, when France
was so gratiﬁed with its project of conquering America and India
through Hanover but realised in the event how little damage the
devastation of Hanover did to the English nation. Despite this
divergence (and consequently despite the reduced inﬂuence of Eng-
land in Germany), the English monarch remains a member of the
German Empire.
In the same war, Germany did not lose Silesia; but that power
whose size constitutes the greatest threat to the unity of the German
state became larger still by annexing it, and it retained its hold
over it in the Seven Years War to which the conquest of Silesia
subsequently gave rise. It is true that, in this war, the German
Empire declared war on one of its members;72 but the latter did not
do it the honour of recognising it. It may indeed happen that a
state against which war is actually waged is not recognised [by its
adversary]; but the very fact that war is waged against it amounts
to recognition, and the state in question is recognised in full when
peace is concluded with it. But the enemy of the German Empire
scarcely did it the honour of waging war on it, and its war was not
recognised in a peace [treaty]; for no peace was concluded with the
German Empire.
This war shared with earlier wars the character of being an
internal war between German estates. One group of estates sent its
troops to join the Imperial army of execution, in keeping with the
decisions of the Imperial Diet; another group of estates abstracted


Political writings
completely from this relationship to the German Empire and allied
themselves, as sovereign territories, with Prussia. No universal
interest was any longer recognised. An old Protestant jealousy of
Austria meant that religion became to some extent involved, and
this was fostered by the Empress’s known Catholic zeal, which had
exposed her otherwise maternal heart to intrigues in which Prot-
estants were oppressed within her states, and by certain other cir-
cumstances such as the Pope’s consecration of the Austrian supreme
commander’s sword, etc. But the element of animosity which came
from this quarter was present on both sides only as a public attitude
[Geist]; the war itself was not concerned with more general interests
of this kind, but only with the private interests of the warring
powers.
Since that time, Prussian power has expanded in Poland. The
number of German estates has again been reduced by three, namely
Bavaria, Anspach, and Bayreuth. In this respect, the results of the
war with France have not yet reached their full development.
Thus, it was partly religion and the progress of culture [Bildung],
partly the fact that the Germans were united not so much by the
power of an external political bond as by that of their inner charac-
ter, and partly the absence of any political principle to limit the
supremacy of the individual estates, which dissolved the German
state by leaving it bereft of political power. The old forms have
remained, but the times have changed, and with them manners,
religion, wealth, the position of all political and civil estates, and
the whole condition of the world and of Germany. The old forms
do not express this actual condition; the two are separate, mutually
contradictory, and reciprocally devoid of truth.
Germany arose out of the same condition as nearly all other
European states and at the same time as they did.73 France, Spain,
England, Denmark and Sweden, Holland, and Hungary each grew
into a single state and have continued as such, whereas Poland has
ceased to exist. Italy has broken up, and Germany is disintegrating
into a mass of independent states.
Most of the above states were founded by Germanic peoples, and
their constitutions have developed out of the spirit of these peoples.
Among the Germanic peoples, reliance was originally placed on the
arm of every free man, and his will was involved in the nation’s
deeds. The election of princes, war and peace, and all collective


The German Constitution
enterprises were decided by the people. Anyone who wished to do
so took part in debates in person; whoever did not so wish abstained
of his own free will and relied on his common interest with the
others.
As manners and way of life changed, each individual became
more preoccupied with his own needs and private affairs; the over-
whelming majority of free men – the middle class [Bu¨rgerstand]
proper – had to look exclusively to its own needs and livelihood;
the states became larger, the external circumstances became more
complex, and those who had to concern themselves exclusively with
the latter became a class [Stand] of their own; the mass of things
required by free men and by the nobility, by those who had to
maintain themselves in their position [Stand] either by industry or
by service to the state, grew larger. Thus, national affairs became
increasingly remote from each individual, and responsibility for
them therefore became more and more concentrated in a single
centre consisting of the monarch and the Estates – i.e. one part of
the nation made up of the nobility and clergy on the one hand, who
spoke for themselves and in person, and of the third estate on the
other, which represented the rest of the people. The monarch looks
after national affairs, especially in so far as they concern external
relations with other states; he is the centre of political power, and
everything which requires legal enforcement emanates from him.
The legal power is accordingly in his hands; the Estates have a share
in legislation, and they furnish the means which sustaing his power.
This system of representation is the system of all modern European
states. It did not exist in the forests of Germania, but it did emerge
from them; it marks an epoch in world history. The continuum
[Zusammenhang] of world culture [Bildung] has led the human race
from oriental despotism to a republic which ruled the world and
then, through the decay of this republic, to the present mean
between the two extremes; and the Germans are the people from
whom this universal shape [Gestalt] of the world spirit was born.
This system did not exist in the forests of Germania, for each
nation must ﬁrst have gone through its own phases of culture
[Kultur] independently before it intervenes in the universal world
continuum; and the principle which elevates it to universal
g Translator’s note: Reading the plural erhalten for Hegel’s singular erha¨lt.


Political writings
dominion does not arise until its own distinct principle is applied
to the rest of the unstable world system [Weltwesen]. Thus, the
freedom of the Germanic peoples necessarily became a feudal system
when they overran the rest of the world with their conquests.
Among themselves, in their relations with one another and with
the whole, the ﬁef-holders remained what they were before, namely
free people; but they acquired subjects, and in doing so, they also
entered into a relationship of duty towards the individual whom,
without any such relationship, they had freely followed or placed at
their head. These contradictory attributes of the free man and the
vassal can be reconciled inasmuch as the ﬁefs were not ﬁefs of the
prince in person, but of the Empire. The individual’s connection
with the whole people now takes on the form of duty, and his pos-
session of a ﬁef and authority is not dependent on the arbitrary will
of the prince, but is legal and proper to himself and hence heredi-
tary. If, in despotisms, the title of a hospodar can have a kind of
inherited status, even this has an arbitrary character; or if a heredi-
tary authority of this kind is associated with a distinct and relatively
independent state like Tunis, etc., this state is liable to pay tribute –
and, unlike ﬁef-holders, it has no share in collective deliberations.
In such deliberations, the vassal’s personal and representative
capacities are combined; as a representative, he acts on behalf of his
territory; he is its man, and he stands at the head of its interest with
which he is personally identiﬁed. Besides, the vassal’s own fol-
lowers, apart from being subjects, have in many states also become
citizens; or the individual free men who have not become barons
have united into citizens’ assemblies [Bu¨rgerschaften], and this
middle class [Bu¨rgerstand] has acquired a further representation of
its own.
In Germany, that portion of the middle class which has represen-
tation in its own right within the universal state does not also have
the status of a subject, and those who are subjects are not separately
represented within it; but they are represented through their
princes, and they again have representation in relation to their
princes within the frontiers of the particular state which they
constitute.
Along with its territorial sovereignty, the upper and lower
nobility in England lost some of its function of representing a sec-
tion of the people; but this does not mean that its signiﬁcance within


The German Constitution
the state has become entirely personal. The peer with a seat and a
vote in the national parliament is, by virtue of primogeniture, the
representative of his great family; but the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the younger son of the Earl of Chatham, is simply Mr
Pitt. Unless he is the eldest son, a nobleman must surmount the
same hurdles as all commoners face at the start of their careers,
and the path to the highest honours through talent, character, and
education is no less open to the commoner than to the son of a
duke. Similarly, in the Austrian monarchy, it is part of social con-
vention to address every well-dressed man as Herr von; the way to
the highest military and political ofﬁces is open to everyone, and
whoever attains them is elevated to the nobility and treated as its
equal (except in those circumstances which, as in England, entail a
[right of parliamentary] representation).
[The causes of] France’s misfortune must be sought entirely in
the complete degeneration of the feudal system and the consequent
loss of its true character. When the Estates General ceased to meet,
the higher and lower nobility no longer appeared in that character
in which its main strength within the political organisation consists,
namely its representative function.74 Conversely, its personal
character was developed to an extreme and provocative extent.
From youth upwards, the nobility is exempted by wealth from
the sordidness of business and the rigours of deprivation. This, and
its inherited carefree attitude, untroubled by affairs, have enabled
it to maintain a free state of mind, so that it is more capable of
that warlike courage which sacriﬁces all possessions, all cherished
property and habits, in favour of limitation and adaptation to the
whole existing order. It is likewise better equipped to deal with state
business in a more liberal manner, and is more capable, in such
contexts, of a certain freedom which is less dependent on rules and
which – according to circumstances, situation and need – can show
a greater self-conﬁdence and impart greater freedom and vitality to
the mechanical aspects of administration. Thus, if the nobility is at
a personal advantage in all states, it must also be freer, and therefore
open to possible competition, because its qualities are personal. For
the organisation of our states, which is artiﬁcial, labour-intensive,
and exceptionally demanding in terms of effort, in any case requires
the assiduous application and laboriously acquired skills and knowl-
edge of the middle class. Given the previous rise of this class [dieses


Political writings
Standes] and its increased importance in recent times, the way must
remain open to the knowledge and skills through which it tran-
scends its [original] character.
This process whereby the difference [between nobility and com-
moners] is diminished by nature and by most modern states – in
Prussia, for example, to some extent in civil affairs, but in England,
Austria, and other states in military aspects too – has been taken to
an extreme in France. There, judicial positions and a military career
are open toh them [i.e. members of the middle class], and the purely
personal has been made into a principle.
Representation is so intimately bound up with the essence of the
feudal constitution in its further development, in conjunction with
the rise of a middle class, that it may be classed as the silliest of
illusions to regard it as an invention of very recent times.i All
modern states exist through representation, and only its degener-
ation, i.e. the loss of its true nature, has destroyed France’s consti-
tution (though not France as a state). It came [originally] from Ger-
many, but it is a higher law that any people from which the world
receives a new and universal impulse must itself ﬁnally perish before
all the others, while its principle – though not the people itself –
survives.
[. The Independence of the Estates]
Germany has not developed for itself the principle which it gave to
the world, nor managed to sustain itself by it. It has not organised
itself by this principle; on the contrary, it has disorganised itself, in
that it did not develop the feudal constitution into a political power,
but sought at all costs to remain true to its original character
whereby the individual is independent of the universal, i.e. the
state.75 It has disintegrated into a mass of states whose mode of
h Translator’s note: Reading erschlossen for Hegel’s verschlossen, as in Werke, vol. , p.
.
i Translator’s note: (Hegel continues as follows in a marginal addition): By trans-
forming free men into rulers, a feudal constitution – i.e. in modern countries, a
state – has been established in which each individual no longer has an immediate
will of his own in all national affairs; instead, all obey a whole which they them-
selves have founded, along with its branches and individuations (i.e. the state and
its laws), as a ﬁxed and permanent centre to which each [individual] has a mediate
relationship made possible by representation.


The German Constitution
subsistence is ﬁxed by solemn mutual treaties and guaranteed by
major powers. But this mode of subsistence is not based on their
own power and strength; it is dependent on the politics of the major
powers.
What true guarantee remains for the existence of these individual
states?
Since they lack a true political power, this guarantee can be based
only on the venerability of those rights in and for themselves –
rights which, over a period of centuries, have been elevated by a
multitude of solemn peace treaties to the point where they cannot
possibly be infringed. Indeed, it is common practice to treat the
mode of political subsistence of the individual states as a moral
power, and to impress its sanctity on people’s minds [Gemu¨ter] so
that it becomes something as ﬁxed and inviolable as the universal
manners or religion of a people.
But we have often seen the most violent attacks on religion and
manners themselves, backed by orders and authority, even in the
most recent times in France; and even if such highly dangerous
experiments usually lead to the downfall of their instigators – or at
least produce only a very ambiguous effect – even religion and man-
ners are exposed to the inﬂuences of changing times and to imper-
ceptible change.
But apart from this, manners and religion are of a quite different
order from constitutional rights. When we say that nothing can be
more sacred than right, then as far as private right is concerned,
even grace is superior, because it can relinquish its rights. The right
of the state is also superior, for if the state is to survive, it cannot
allow private right to prevail in its full force;76 for even the taxes
which it must impose are a suspension [Aufheben] of the right of
property. And if political rights were to have the force of private
rights, they would involve a kind of internal contradiction; for they
would imply that those who had ﬁrm and reciprocal political rights
of this kind stood in a legal relationship under a higher instance
which exercised power and authority. But if this were the case, the
reciprocal rights in question would no longer be political rights, but
private rights or rights of property.
The German Empire is supposed to furnish the basis for a
relationship of this kind. But on the one hand, it is already a contra-
diction in and for itself if not only property, but relationships which


Political writings
directly involve the state, are to have the form of private rights; and
on the other hand, since no political power exists any longer in
Germany, political rights can no longer be treated as private rights
and no longer have the same security and stability as the latter, but
fall into the category of political rights in general.
We already know what venerability these political rights have in
and for themselves. Every peace treaty – and peace treaties are the
true contracts on which the reciprocal political rights of the powers
are based – contains the central article that friendship shall prevail
between the contracting powers. Apart from this article, it contains
a deﬁnition of their other relations, especially those which pre-
viously gave rise to conﬂict. Although the central article expresses
in general terms the need to preserve a good understanding, it is
clear in itself that this is not to be taken in an absolute [unbedingt]
sense.
The Turkish Empire seems to conduct its relations with foreign
powers almost in the spirit [Sinn] of being generally at peace with
them until it is itself attacked, and the politics of the rest of Europe
have only rarely succeeded in embroiling it in a political war. Other-
wise, the relations between states are so many-sided, and each indi-
vidual strand of these relations as deﬁned in a peace treaty has in
turn so many aspects, that however precisely they are deﬁned, inﬁ-
nite other aspects remain over which conﬂict is still possible. No
power attacks a stipulated right directly and openly. Rather, differ-
ences arise over some undeﬁned aspect and then destroy the peace
altogether; through the effects of war, they subsequently undermine
the foundations of the other deﬁned rights as well.
This suspension [Aufhebung] of mutual political rights occurs
only as a result of war. The treaties and the relations deﬁned in
them might well remain in being; they are not directly infringed or
attacked outright with open force, for treaties are not to be triﬂed
with. But if a conﬂict arises over other points and circumstances
which have not been clearly resolved, everything else which had
previously been settled by treaty collapses.
Wars, whether they are described as wars of aggression or as wars
of defence (and the parties can never agree over such designations)
could be called unjust only if the terms of the [previous] peace
treaty stipulated an unconditional peace between the parties; and


The German Constitution
even if we do use such expressions as ‘perpetual peace’ and ‘eternal
friendship between the powers’, they should be understood as sub-
ject to the essential qualiﬁcation ‘until one party attacks or acts in
a hostile way [towards the other]’. For no state can be obliged to
let itself be attacked or treated in a hostile manner without
defending itself, and at the same time to keep the peace.
But the potential modes of hostility are so inﬁnite that the human
understanding cannot possibly deﬁne them [all], and the more
deﬁnitions there are, i.e. the more rights are established, the more
easily a contradiction can arise between such rights. If one party
pursues a right conceded to him as far as the concession allows, he
will come into conﬂict with some other right enjoyed by the other
party. One need only look at the reciprocal manifestos and political
documents which, in the event of a disagreement between two
states, contain accusations concerning the other power’s behaviour
and justiﬁcations of the accuser’s own!
Each party bases its own behaviour on rights and accuses the
other of infringing a right. The right of state A has been infringed
by state B in respect of right a which state A enjoys, but state B
maintains that it asserted its own right b and that this cannot be
interpreted as an infringement of the right of A. The public takes
sides, each party claims it has right on its side, and both parties
are right; for it is precisely the rights themselves which come into
contradiction with each other.
It is the philanthropists and moralists who decry politics as an
attempt and artiﬁce to pursue one’s own advantage at the expense
of right, as a system and work of injustice.77 And the carping, indif-
ferent public – i.e. that uninterested, unpatriotic mass whose ideal
of virtue is the peace of the alehouse – accuses politics of question-
able faith and lack of justice and stability; and if they do at least
take an interest in it, they are for that very reason distrustful of the
legal form [Rechtsform] which the interests of their state assume. If
these interests coincide with their own, they will duly defend the
legal form; but their own interests rather than the legal form are
their true inner motive.
If the philanthropic friends of right and morality did have an
interest, they might realise that interests, and hence also rights
themselves, can come into collision, and that it is foolish to set up


Political writings
a dichotomy between right and the interest of the state (or, to use
a morally more repugnant expression, the advantage [Nutzen] of the
state).
Right is the advantage of a particular state, speciﬁed and acknowl-
edged by treaties; and since, in treaties in general, the different
interests of states are speciﬁed, despite the fact that these interests,
as rights, are inﬁnitely complex, these interests – and hence also the
rights themselves – must come into contradiction with each other.
It depends entirely on circumstances, on the combinations of
power – i.e. on the judgement of politics – whether an endangered
interest or right will be defended with all the force a power can
muster, in which case the other party can also, of course, adduce a
right of its own, since it has itself exactly the opposite interest which
collides with the ﬁrst, and hence also a right. Thus, war or some
other means must now decide – not which of the rights asserted by
the two parties is the genuine right (for both parties have a genuine
right), but which right should give way to the other. War or some
other means must decide the issue, precisely because both contra-
dictory rights are equally true; hence a third factor – i.e. war – must
make them unequal so that they can be reconciled, and this occurs
when one gives way to the other.
The venerability and moral power of rights may last and hold
ﬁrm, but how could these qualities possibly preserve the rights
themselves? Because of the indeterminacy of rights, conﬂict may
arise, and because of their determinacy, contradictions between
them must arise, and in the resultant dispute, right must assert itself
through its power.
It makes no sense that what are called ‘the rights of the German
estates’ should subsist as a moral power by virtue of their inherent
venerability, although – given the contradiction mentioned above –
no power is or can be available to uphold them throughout their
whole multifarious range. The result would be a situation in which
true anarchy – not just passive but active anarchy – prevailed, like
the genuine ancient right of private warfare [Faustrecht] which, in
the constant disputes over such confused ownership, gave tempor-
ary possession to the stronger arm and sustained it therein until the
arm of its adversary grew stronger.
This situation was remedied, however, by the prohibition on pri-
vate warfare [Landfriede]. This prohibition inaugurated a state of


The German Constitution
peace among the smaller estates, which is sustained by their impo-
tence in relation to the larger ones. As for the more powerful estates,
it has already been noted that the ownership of the Ju¨lich-Cleve78
inheritance gave rise to the Thirty Years War, and the issue was no
more resolved by courts of law than were others such as the Bav-
arian succession. But apart from this, the number of contentious
issues which have led to wars would appear very small in compari-
son with the inﬁnity of contentious issues which must have arisen
from the inﬁnite complexity of rights, and which have been settled
peacefully – or rather, left in abeyance. It is well known that the
German nobility is embroiled in countless and interminable law-
suits, and that proceedings instituted one or more centuries ago are
still pending; in addition, an inﬁnite number of claims – that is,
rights which have not been fulﬁlled – lie buried in the archives of
every prince, count, Imperial city, and nobleman. If all these rights
were suddenly given a voice, what a confused and endless clamour
would result!
Claims are undecided rights. Remission is imposed on them not
by judicial decision – for they have not been decided – but by fear
of the law [des Rechts] (for a claim is always preferable to a right
denied, a possible lawsuit preferable to a lost one), and by fear of
those with greater power who, if an open feud takes place in their
neighbourhood, must, on the basis of the more general legality
[Rechtsgrund] of modern times, take sides in order to secure their
territory and its frontiers; and in this case, those with less power,
whether this intervention [of their more powerful neighbours] was
directed against them or designed to beneﬁt them, would gain no
advantage. Consequently, feuds have come to an end, the prohib-
ition on private warfare [Landfriede] has restored peace – i.e. it has
silenced the contradiction of rights, but not resolved it – and the
party which happens to be in current possession continues to enjoy
the legally disputed object (beati possidentes!)79 even if no legal title
to it has been established. Thus, what preserves a certain measure
of peace in Germany is not a condition – like that of a state – in
which possession is determined by right. On the contrary, given the
astonishing differences in the power of the estates, their guarantee
is fear and politics, not the venerability of the actual rights on which
they depend, nor any inner power which these might possess.
Given this lack of political power [Staatsmacht] in Germany –


Political writings
and it is a necessary lack, as has been shown, because the object of
such a power, namely the permanent preservation of rights, would
be impossible to attain – it is conceivable that the mass of isolated
estates, since they are still in the old situation of collaborating
towards a universal end when and in so far as the individual estates
wish to do so, might revert to their old behaviour. That is, even if
they are not already members of a lasting and established union,
they might freely come together in times of danger or emergency
and thereby constitute a state and a political power [Staatsmacht]
out of their separate powers in order to meet the current need, both
in their internal affairs (if their rights were attacked) and in their
external relations (if they were attacked collectively or through one
of their particular members).
One speciﬁc instance of this kind was [prompted by] the attacks
on the Protestant religion in former times, in which the [common]
objective did not arise out of the ambition [of the princes] – which
was quite indifferent to their subjects – but from the innermost
interests of the common people. No other objective could have
united the princes and their peoples so unanimously, so freely and
with such enthusiasm, to the extent that their other rivalries were
forgotten. All other objectives have less impact on the peoples them-
selves, for other disputed interests may spring to mind again and
assert themselves alongside them.
We know, however, what an ignominious end befell the Smal-
kaldic League.80 The whole League was full of vain and petty aspir-
ations, and was so immersed in smug complacency with regard to
itself and its noble work – even before it had done anything – that
it disintegrated at the ﬁrst assaults. Yet even here, some members of
the League behaved courageously and actually ventured into battle,
whereas the Protestant Union of the following century advertised its
own complete inanity in advance by the inanities in which it
indulged when it ﬁrst arose, and this quality was fully revealed as
soon as it had work to do.
The so-called League of Princes81 opposed to Joseph II, whose
behaviour appeared dangerous to many estates, may be regarded as
the only other example of an internal association of this kind. The
idea of this League made a splendid impression, as much because
of the prince who led it as of the prince against whom it was
directed, and also because popular opinion was much engaged by


The German Constitution
numerous writers on both sides, some of whom were talented. The
public voice seemed to have some kind of signiﬁcance here; if Fred-
erick II was surrounded by the glory of his deeds, these deeds
belonged to the past, and their result – Silesia in Prussian hands,
state control and religious and civil laws in the Prussian territories –
was already present; and if nothing more could be expected for the
rest of Germany from this direction (and indeed nothing further
emerged from it), all the more interest was aroused by the hope
that an all-embracing new German century was about to dawn. But
there is nothing further to remark concerning the League of
German Princes except that it caught the attention of public opinion
and aroused many hopes and anxieties. Since it neither acted nor
expressed itself, nothing further can be said of its essential charac-
ter. Brandenburg’s independence of the German Empire was estab-
lished long before, and the possibility that this would have increased
or diminished if the League of Princes had been put into operation
is something on which there is nothing to be said.
As for free alliances against external powers, these took the place
of Imperial wars in the proper sense whenever Germany was not
torn by internal conﬂict but defended itself against an external
enemy (Mu¨ller,82 p. ; alliance with William of Orange against
Louis XIV; League of Augsburg, ). What the princes and
estates did was rather the free will of individual circles of associates
than the legal and universally binding resolution of a body politic.
Brandenburg still appears in association with the Empire, but not
on account of its obligations towards the latter; it acts indepen-
dently, and its chief end is the Prussian crown.
The wars of this century were internal wars.
In the course of the last war against France, at the moment when
danger threatened for Germany, rather more of a common will for
the defence of Germany did seem to be developing. Nearly all the
German states took part in it, but one cannot identify any single
moment at which all of them collaborated simultaneously. On the
contrary, the most powerful of them distanced themselves from it
for most of the time.
In the Peace of Westphalia, the old independence of the parts of
Germany was consolidated – albeit in completely changed circum-
stances – and Germany was thereby prevented from becoming a
modern state with a political power [Staatsmacht].83 Subsequent


Political writings
experience has taught us that the spirit of the age which followed
has changed completely, for each individual part has acted for the
whole only of its own free will and by agreement; even in the direst
emergencies in which interests of the most pressing concern to all
parts are involved, no common and united action is to be expected.
In the Peace of Westphalia, Germany’s statelessness became
organised. Writers like Hippolytus a Lapide84 have expressed the
inner character and tendency of the nation in precise [bestimmt]
terms. In the Peace of Westphalia, Germany gave up the task of
establishing itself as a secure political power [Staatsmacht] and aban-
doned itself to the good will of its members.
One may, if one wishes, regard this conﬁdence with which the
common weal of Germany was entrusted to the free will of its parts
as an effect of that spirit of integrity of which the German nation
is so proud. It sounds admirable if, on the one hand, the power of
the state [Staatsmacht] is dissolved and placed in the hands of the
individual estates [der Einzelnen], while on the other hand, there is
a demand – and with it an expectation – that these individuals will
co-operate freely. The German estates which concluded the Peace
of Westphalia would have considered themselves offended by lack
of trust if anyone had mentioned to them the possibility that, after
this division [of powers], they might disregard the best interests of
the whole, and that each [estate] could and would act for its own
interest, even if this interest did not coincide with the general inter-
est but ran counter to it. The general context, the obligations of the
individuals towards the whole, and the best interests of the latter
were most solemnly acknowledged and secured, and at every dis-
agreement on such matters – even if it erupted into the most terrible
wars – each of the two parties justiﬁed itself legally by detailed
manifestos and [legal] deductions.
By these means, the matter is transferred from the sphere of will
and particular [eigenen] interest to the sphere of insight, and, given
a general will to act in the best interests of the whole, it would be
up to the understanding to discover the mode of action most con-
ducive to the general good; and if this were determined by the
majority, the minority would necessarily have to follow suit. But
this is not the case, nor can it be so, not only because no political
power [Staatsmacht] is present, but also because the individual
[estate] has the right to form alliances, make peace, etc. according


The German Constitution
to its own insight with regard to the general good. If, in the event
of disunity and war, someone – of necessity a private individual, for
a minister cannot adopt this course – were honestly to believe that
the reason for the war was simply a lack of general insight into
whether something was in keeping with the good of Germany, and
cherished the hope of creating unanimity by acting upon this con-
viction, the only effect he would produce would be to make himself
ridiculous through his good nature. He should try instead to pro-
mote the insight that a mode of action which ought to be general is
also in keeping with the particular interest of every individual.
It is a widely acknowledged and familiar principle that this par-
ticular interest is the main consideration. It cannot be held to con-
tradict rights, duties, or morality; on the contrary, each individual
estate, as a particular state, must not sacriﬁce itself to a universal
from which it can expect no help, whereas the prince of a speciﬁc
territory or the magistrate of an Imperial city is invested with the
sacred duty of caring for his land and his subjects.
[. The Formation of National States]
It was the Peace of Westphalia which secured this independent
status for the parts [of Germany]. On their own, they would not
have been capable of attaining it; on the contrary, their alliance had
disintegrated, and both in politics and religion, they themselves and
their territories were in the despotic hands of Ferdinand,85 with no
possibility of resistance.
Gustavus Adolphus’s campaign might itself be placed in exactly
the same class as the campaigns of his successor Charles XII – not
with regard to his own person, for he died at the height of his
fortune, but with regard to his nation. In both cases, the Swedish
power would have failed completely in Germany if Richelieu’s poli-
tics, continued in the same direction by Mazarin, had not adopted
and sustained its cause.
Richelieu was accorded the rare good fortune of being considered
its greatest benefactor both by the state of whose greatness he laid
the true foundation and by that at whose expense this was done.
Both France as a state and Germany as a state had within them
the same two principles of dissolution. In the one, Richelieu
destroyed these principles completely and thereby raised it to be


Political writings
one of the most powerful states; but in the other, he gave these
principles free rein and thereby annulled [aufhob] its continued
existence as a state. In both countries he brought the principle on
which they were inherently grounded to complete maturity; the
principle of monarchy in France, and in Germany the principle of
forming a mass of distinct states.86 Both principles still had to strug-
gle against their opposites; but Richelieu succeeded in guiding both
countries to their ﬁxed and mutually opposed systems.
The two principles which prevented France from becoming a
single state in the form of a monarchy were the great nobles and
the Huguenots;87 both engaged in wars with the kings.
The great nobles, who included members of the royal family,
intrigued with armies against the minister [of the crown]. It is true
that the sovereignty of the monarch had long been treated as sacro-
sanct and elevated above all claims, and the great nobles did not
lead armies into the ﬁeld to claim sovereignty for themselves, but
to become the foremost subjects of the monarchs – as ministers,
provincial governors, etc. Richelieu’s achievement in subjecting
them to the political authority in its immediate forms of expression,
i.e. to the ministry, has at ﬁrst glance the appearance of ambition.
Those who had been his enemies seem to have fallen victim to his
ambition; in their rebellions and conspiracies, they protested their
innocence and their dutiful dedication to their sovereign – no doubt
with complete veracity – and regarded their armed opposition to
the minister in person as neither a civil nor a political crime. But
they were defeated not by Richelieu as a person, but by his genius,
which linked his person to the necessary principle of the unity of
the state and made political ofﬁces dependent on the state. And
this is what constitutes political genius, i.e. the identiﬁcation of the
individual with a principle; given this association, the individual
must necessarily triumph. In terms of ministerial achievement,
Richelieu’s success in conferring unity on the executive power of
the state is inﬁnitely superior to the achievement of adding a further
province to a country, or of rescuing it in some other way from
adversity.
The other principle which threatened the dissolution of the state
was the Huguenots, whom Richelieu suppressed as a political party;
his measures against them should by no means be regarded as a
suppression of freedom of conscience. They had their own armies,


The German Constitution
fortiﬁed cities, alliances with foreign powers, etc. and accordingly
constituted a kind of sovereign state. In contrast to them, the great
nobles had formed the League, which had brought the French state
to the edge of the abyss. Both opposing parties were an armed
fanaticism beyond the reach of the political authority. In destroying
the Huguenot state, Richelieu simultaneously destroyed the rights
of the League, and he then disposed of its lawless [rechtlosen] and
unprincipled legacy, the insubordination of the great nobles. But
while he eradicated the Huguenot state, he left the Huguenots their
freedom of conscience, their churches, worship, and civil and politi-
cal rights, on an equal footing with the Catholics. Through his con-
sistent statesmanship, he discovered and practised that toleration
which was implemented more than a century later as the product
of a more cultivated humanity and as the most splendid achieve-
ment of philosophy and more reﬁned manners; and it was not ignor-
ance or fanaticism on the part of the French when, in the [Thirty
Years] War and in the Peace of Westphalia, they gave no thought
to the separation of church and state in Germany, made religion
the basis of a distinction between political and civil rights, and
applied in Germany a principle which they abolished [aufhoben] in
their own country.
Thus France, as well as England, Spain, and the other European
countries, succeeded in pacifying and uniting those elements which
fermented within them and threatened to destroy the state; and
through the freedom of the feudal system which Germany [Germ-
ania] taught them, they managed to create a centre which is freely
determined by laws and in which all powers are concentrated
(irrespective of whether it assumes a truly monarchic form or that
of a modern republic, which nevertheless also comes under the
principle of limited monarchy, i.e. a monarchy based on laws).
From this epoch in which the [European] countries developed into
states, we can date the period of the power and wealth of the state
and of the free and lawful welfare of individuals.
Conversely, the fate of Italy has run the same course as that of
Germany, except that Italy, since it had already attained a greater
degree of culture, brought its fate sooner to that level of develop-
ment which Germany is now approaching in full.
The Roman–German Emperors long claimed over Italy a
supremacy which, as in Germany, usually had only so much force –


Political writings
or indeed any force at all – if it was backed up by the personal
power of the Emperor. The Emperors’ urge to keep both countries
under their rule destroyed their power in both.
In Italy, every point of the country acquired sovereignty. It
ceased to be one state and became a host of independent states –
monarchies, aristocracies, democracies, just as chance dictated; and
the degeneration of these constitutions into tyranny, oligarchy, and
ochlocracy even made its appearance for a time. The condition of
Italy cannot be called anarchy, for the mass of opposing parties were
organised states. Despite the lack of a proper association of states,
a large proportion of them always united in joint resistance to the
head of the Empire, while the rest united to make common cause
with him. The parties of Guelphs and Ghibellines, which at one
time extended to Germany as well as Italy, reappeared in the eight-
eenth century in Germany as the Austrian and Prussian parties
(with modiﬁcations derived from the changed circumstances).
It was not long after the individual parts of Italy had dissolved
the former state and risen to independence that they aroused a
desire for conquest on the part of larger powers and became the
theatre of wars between foreign powers. The small states, which
measured themselves against a power over a thousand times greater
than their own, met the inevitable fate of their own downfall, and
our regret at this fate is accompanied by an awareness of the necess-
ity and guilt which pygmies bring upon themselves when they
square up to giants and are trampled underfoot. Even the larger
Italian states, which had grown by devouring a mass of smaller
states, continued to vegetate, without strength or true indepen-
dence, as counters in the schemes of foreign powers. They survived
a little longer by their skill and astuteness in abasing themselves at
the right moment, and in avoiding total subjection by constantly
accepting semi-subjection, although they did not escape the former
in the long run.
What became of the mass of independent states – Pisa, Siena,
Arezzo, Ferrara, Milan, and those hundreds of states which
included every city among them? Or of the families of the many
sovereign dukes, margraves, etc., the princely houses of Bentivoglia,
Sforza, Gonzaga, Pico, Urbino, etc., and the innumerable minor
noblemen? The independent states were swallowed up by larger
ones, and these in turn by larger ones still, and so on. One of the


The German Constitution
greatest, namely Venice, was ﬁnished off in our own times by a
letter from a French general, delivered by an adjutant. The most
illustrious princely houses no longer have sovereignty, nor even pol-
itical or representative signiﬁcance. The noblest families have
become courtiers.
In that unfortunate period when Italy hastened towards its ruin
and was the battleﬁeld in those wars which foreign princes fought
over its territories, it both furnished the resources for the wars and
was itself the prize of victory. It entrusted its own defence to
assassination, poison, and treason, or to hordes of foreign rabble
whom their paymasters always found costly and destructive, and
often formidable and dangerous; and some of whose leaders rose to
the rank of princes. Germans, Spaniards, French, and Swiss plun-
dered the country, and foreign cabinets decided the fate of the
nation. Deeply conscious of this state of universal misery, hatred,
upheaval, and blindness, an Italian statesman,88 with cool deliber-
ation, grasped the necessary idea of saving Italy by uniting it into a
single state. With rigorous logic, he mapped out the way forward
which both the country’s salvation and the corruption and blind
folly of the age made necessary, and appealed in the following words
to his prince to assume the exalted role of saviour of Italy and to
earn the fame of bringing its misfortune to an end:89
I have maintained that the Israelites had to be enslaved in Egypt
before the ability of Moses could be displayed, the Persians had
to be oppressed by the Medes before Cyrus’s greatness of spirit
could be revealed, and the Athenians in disarray before the
magniﬁcent qualities of Theseus could be demonstrated.90
Likewise, in order for the valour and worth of an Italian spirit
to be recognised, Italy had to be reduced to the desperate straits
in which it now ﬁnds itself: more enslaved than the Hebrews,
more oppressed than the Persians, more scattered than the
Athenians, without an acknowledged leader, and without order
or stability, beaten, despoiled, lacerated, overrun, in short,
utterly devastated. And although recently a spark was revealed
in one man that might have led one to think that he was
ordained by God to achieve her redemption, yet it was seen
that he was struck down by misfortune at the highest point of
his career. Thus, remaining almost lifeless, Italy is waiting for
someone to heal her wounds, and put an end to the ravaging of
Lombardy, to the extortions in the Kingdom of Naples and


Political writings
Tuscany, and to cure the sores that have been festering for so
long [. . .] This is a very righteous cause: ‘iustum enim est
bellum quibus necessarium, et pia arma ubi nulla nisi in armis
spes est’91 [. . .] Everything points to your future greatness. But
you must play your part, for God does not want to do every-
thing, in order not to deprive us of our freedom and the glory
that belongs to us [. . .] I have no doubt at all that he would be
received with great affection in all those regions that have been
inundated by the foreign invasions, as well as with a great thirst
for revenge, with resolute ﬁdelity, with devotion and with tears
of gratitude. What gate would be closed to him? What people
would fail to obey him? What envious hostility would work
against him? What Italian would deny him homage?
It is evident that a man who speaks with such true gravity was
neither base-hearted nor frivolous-minded. As for the ﬁrst of these
qualities, the very name of Machiavelli carries with it the guarantee
of disapproval in public opinion, in which Machiavellian principles
and obnoxious principles are synonymous. The idea that a state
should be constituted by a people has for so long been obscured by
the senseless clamour for so-called ‘liberty’ that the entire misery
which Germany suffered in the Seven Years War and in the recent
war with France, along with all the advances of reason and the
experience of the French obsession with liberty, has perhaps not
been enough to establish as an article of faith among peoples or as
a principle of political science the truth that freedom is possible
only when a people is legally united within a state.
Even Machiavelli’s basic aim of raising Italy to statehood is mis-
construed by those who are short-sighted enough to regard his work
as no more than a foundation for tyranny or a golden mirror for an
ambitious oppressor. But even if his aim is acknowledged, it is
alleged that his means are abhorrent, and this gives morality ample
scope to trot out its platitudes that the end does not justify the
means, etc. But there can be no question here of any choice of
means: gangrenous limbs cannot be cured by lavender-water, and a
situation in which poison and assassination have become common
weapons permits no half-measures. Life which is close to decay can
be reorganised only by the most drastic means.
It is quite senseless to treat the exposition of an idea directly
derived from observation of the Italian predicament as a compen-


The German Constitution
dium of moral and political principles applicable indiscriminately to
all situations – i.e. to none at all. One must study the history of the
centuries before Machiavelli and of Italy during his times, and then
read The Prince in the light of these impressions, and it will appear
not only as justiﬁed, but as a distinguished and truthful conception
produced by a genuinely political mind of the highest and noblest
sentiments.
It may not be superﬂuous to say something on a matter which is
commonly overlooked, namely the other genuinely idealistic
demands which Machiavelli makes of an excellent prince, and which
have probably never been fulﬁlled by any prince since his times (not
even by the one who refuted him).92 But what are described as the
abhorrent means advocated by Machiavelli must be viewed from a
different angle. Italy was supposed to become a state, and this was
recognised as a principle even at a time when the Emperor was still
regarded as the supreme feudal lord. Machiavelli starts from this
general premise; this is his demand and the principle which he
opposes to the misery of his country. From this point of view, his
procedure in The Prince appears in a very different light. What
would indeed be abhorrent if done by one private individual to
another, or by one state to another (or to a private individual), is
now [seen to be] a just punishment. The promotion of anarchy is
the ultimate – or perhaps the only – crime against the state; for all
crimes which the state has to deal with tend in this direction. Those
who attack the state itself directly, not indirectly like other crimi-
nals, are the worst offenders, and the state has no higher duty than
to preserve itself and to destroy the power of such offenders in the
surest way it can. The state’s performance of this supreme duty is
no longer a means, but a punishment; and if punishment is itself a
means, then every punishment of every criminal would have to be
classed as abhorrent, and every state would be in the position of
using abhorrent means, such as death and lengthy imprisonment,
for its own preservation.
Cato the Younger of Rome enjoys the privilege of being invoked
by every libertarian agitator.93 He was the greatest supporter of the
plan to make Pompey the sole ruler, not out of friendship for
Pompey but because he considered anarchy to be the greater evil;
and he killed himself not because what the Romans then still called
freedom (i.e. anarchy) had disappeared – for the party of Pompey,


Political writings
of which Cato was a member, was merely a different party from
that of Caesar – but because of his stubborn character which would
not submit to his despised and hated enemy.94 His death was a party
matter.
The man whom Machiavelli had hoped to see as the saviour of
Italy was by all accounts the Duke of Valentinois,95 a prince who,
with the help of his uncle and through his bravery and all kinds of
deception, had constructed a state out of the principalities of the
Dukes of Ursino, Colonna, Urbino, etc. and the domains of the
Roman barons. Even if we discount all the deeds which mere
rumours and the hatred of their enemies have imputed to him and
his uncle, their memory as human beings is blemished in the eyes
of posterity (if posterity should presume to pass such moral
judgements); and the Duke and his uncle have perished, though
their work remains. It was they who obtained a state for the papal
throne, a state whose existence Julius II96 knew very well how to
exploit and to render formidable, and which is still extant today.
Machiavelli ascribes the fall of Cesare Borgia not just to political
mistakes, but also to the accident which consigned him to his sick-
bed at that most critical moment when Alexander died. But we
should rather see in his fall a higher necessity which did not allow
him to enjoy the fruits of his deeds or to make them the foundation
of an increased power; for nature, as his vices indicate, seems to
have destined him rather for ephemeral glory and a purely instru-
mental role in the founding of a state, and a large part of the power
to which he rose was based not on any internal or even external
natural right, but was grafted on to the alien branch of his uncle’s
spiritual dignity.
Machiavelli’s work remains a major testimony to his age, and to
his own belief that the fate of a people which rapidly approaches
political destruction can be averted by a genius. In view of the
misunderstanding and hatred which The Prince has encountered, it
is a noteworthy feature of this work’s peculiar fate that, as if by
instinct, a future monarch97 whose entire life and deeds were the
clearest expression of the German state’s dissolution into indepen-
dent states made this same Machiavelli the subject of an academic
exercise.98 He opposed him with moral lessons whose hollowness he
himself demonstrated both through his own behaviour and quite
explicitly in his literary works; for example, in the preface to his


The German Constitution
history of the ﬁrst Silesian War, he declares that treaties between
states cease to be binding when they no longer serve a state’s best
interests.
But apart from this, the more astute public, which could not fail
to notice the genius of Machiavelli’s works yet was too morally
inclined to approve of his principles, nevertheless wished, in a well-
meaning way, to rescue him [from his detractors]. It accordingly
resolved the contradiction honourably and subtly enough by main-
taining that Machiavelli was not serious in what he said, and that
his entire work was a subtle and ironic persiﬂage. One can only
compliment this irony-seeking public on its ingenuity.
Machiavelli’s voice has died away without effect.
[. The Politics of the Two Great German Powers]
Germany shares the fate which Italy once experienced: it has been
the theatre of civil wars for many centuries. But it has also been a
theatre for the wars of foreign powers; it has been plundered,
robbed, viliﬁed, and despised by friends, and it has usually lost
territory when peace was restored. It suffered this fate much later
than Italy. Sweden was actually the ﬁrst foreign power to gnaw
signiﬁcantly at its entrails and to help to demolish the previous
unstable system of [political] association. From that time onwards,
foreign powers decided Germany’s lot. Even before then, it had
ceased to inspire any fear abroad. Thenceforth, it ceased to settle
its own internal affairs independently and to decide its own course;
it has handed over its destiny to others.
But Germany’s fate differs essentially from that of Italy in that
the states into which Italy had split up were long able, in view of
the world situation in general, to assert themselves even against
much greater powers, and their disproportion in size had not yet
rendered their power equally disproportionate. On the contrary, just
as Greece was capable not only of resisting the Persians but also of
conquering them, so was a city like Milan able in former times to
defy the power of Frederick99 and to hold out against it; and
later still, Venice stood ﬁrm against the League of Cambrai.100 But
the possibility of small states resisting large ones has now com-
pletely vanished; and the sovereignty of the German states devel-
oped mainly at a time when this possibility no longer existed.


Political writings
Consequently, the German states have not exchanged association
for complete separation, but have entered at once into associations
of a different kind. The mass [of Germany] has not split up into
numerous pieces and then remained fragmented for a time; instead,
new centres have formed within the mass, and the parts which broke
away from the whole gathered round them to form new masses.
Religion and independent statehood were at one time the inter-
ests and focal points round which the German estates rallied, and
which together shaped their political system. But those focal points
have now vanished. Religion has not only been preserved; the spirit
of the times has placed it beyond all danger. Similarly, the estates
have now acquired their independence. But alongside the Austrian
power, whose claims as a universal monarchy used to give rise to
anxiety, the Prussian monarchy has developed. Strong enough in
itself, it held its own in the Seven Years War against the power not
only of the Austrian monarchy, but of several others too, and since
then it has expanded even further in Poland and Franconia.
By virtue of this power, Prussia has ceased to share in the
common interest in preserving independence, and it cannot conse-
quently be regarded any longer as the natural centre for those
estates which wish to preserve theirs. It may wish to ally itself with
other estates; in this respect, it does not depend on the support of
the German princes, but can look after itself on its own. Its partner-
ship with the German estates is therefore an unequal one, for it has
less need of this partnership than they do, and the beneﬁts [which
ﬂow from it] must also be unequal. Prussia itself may [now] give
cause for anxiety.
In the last war, four political systems could be discerned in Ger-
many: ﬁrstly the Austrian one, secondly, the Imperial one, [thirdly,]
the neutral one, and fourthly, the Prussian one.
Austria has had no immediate support, except perhaps from a
few lesser princes such as the Bishop of Brixen,101 who lives in the
midst of the Austrian states. As the Imperial house, Austria
demands the support and collective co-operation of the German
estates, and all the less powerful estates which can preserve some
degree of independence only if a German Empire continues to
exist – especially those in the south of Germany – have maintained
their allegiance to the Imperial system; these include above all the
ecclesiastical estates and the Imperial cities.


The German Constitution
The third system is chieﬂy that of Bavaria, Baden, and Saxony,
which – without any political association with Austria, Prussia, or
the Empire – have acted in accordance with their own particular
interest as regards war or peace or neutrality.
The fourth system includes those estates of northern Germany
which, through the mediation of Prussia, concluded a treaty of neu-
trality with France and placed themselves under the protection of
Prussia, which undertook to guarantee the peace of northern
Germany.
After Prussia had concluded peace with France, several northern
states associated themselves with this peace treaty, and, terriﬁed by
France’s military success in the campaign of , more than half
of Germany joined in this neutrality. When the French advanced
as far as Bavaria in , the city of Nuremberg wished not only to
associate itself with this neutrality, but to turn itself into a town
wholly under Prussian jurisdiction. Nuremberg was occupied by
Prussian troops after Prussia, on the strength of old claims, had
declared itself owner of part of its territory a few years earlier and
duly taken it over; it likewise abolished [aufhob] the direct depen-
dence on the Empire102 of many Imperial knights in Franconia. For
these reasons, neither Nuremberg nor the knights could obtain any
help from the German Empire.
The estates of northern Germany did not undertake to guarantee
their neutrality themselves by means of the regional associations
usually employed [for this purpose], and Prussia is not one of the
[ordinary] members of this confederation, but its head and guaran-
tor; the estates contribute to the costs of the Demarcation Com-
mission.103 But there is no standing federal council in permanent
session; instead, it has assembled only at certain times to discuss
and determine the regulation and continued use of these measures
and the contributions towards their cost.
But the true political position of the estates came fully to light at
the end of 104 when the estates in question, which were not
assembled, formed the intention of holding a new assembly. Prussia
refused to permit this assembly and debate on the ground that, as
the guarantor of peace in the north, it was its responsibility to judge
which measures were necessary for this purpose.
When the northern coalition against England’s claims concerning
neutral shipping seemed to be moving towards war with England,


Political writings
one of the principal members of the league whose neutrality was
guaranteed, namely Hanover, was occupied, along with other
Imperial cities, by Prussia. It had to disband its own troops and
assume responsibility for the maintenance of the Prussian corps.
The peace was ratiﬁed by the estates of the German Empire, but
Prussia promptly had its own independent ratiﬁcation of the peace
announced ofﬁcially in Paris.
The whole history of the war, the split between the north and
south of Germany, the separate conventions of neutrality and peace
which the north concluded while the south languished in the most
relentless misery and hence found itself totally abandoned by the
north, make it clear not only that Germany is split up into indepen-
dent states, but also that their interests are completely separate; and
while the political bond is as loose as it was in the Middle Ages, no
free uniﬁcation can now be expected. When Germany was deprived
of the territories on the left bank of the Rhine, and when half of it
was overrun and plundered by the enemy, the most powerful of all
interests105 offered no help, either voluntarily or within the terms
of its association with the Empire. The other estates had broken off
all collaboration, and by having its neutrality guaranteed by a for-
eign prince, one group of them thereby also surrendered its right to
collaborate or to join in future collaboration with the estates at large,
and even its ability to discuss such matters with the other estates.
When war broke out once again, Sweden did in fact publicly offer
to send its contingent. But it was reported that Prussia had refused
to allow it transit through the line of neutrality. Not only in this
war, Brandenburg accordingly divorced its interest entirely from
that of the German Empire and led other estates to do likewise. It
then put them in a position in which it could compel them, legally
and by its power as their guarantor, to remain divorced from the
Empire. It also deprived the Franconian knights of their direct
dependence on the Empire and the Imperial city of Nuremberg of
part of its territory, and accepted the complete surrender of the
magistrates’ powers to the occupying forces in that city’s hour of
need. It subsequently occupied and disarmed Hanover, with which
it was allied for the peace and security of northern Germany, and
imposed on it a requisition to maintain the occupying troops. All
these circumstances have made clear what had long been the case,


The German Constitution
namely that Prussia should not be regarded as a German Imperial
principality on the same footing as the other estates, nor as an estate
capable of accepting the same conditions as other estates within an
association, but as a powerful sovereign state in its own right.
Generally speaking, the last [war] has brought more truth into
international relations. In so far as the relationship between states
is one of power, illusions on this score have vanished, and this
relationship has been brought to light and endorsed everywhere; the
weaker states have been made to recognise that they cannot claim
equal status with the stronger ones. Even if a republic such as
Geneva behaved like a sovereign state and prided itself on being the
ﬁrst, ευ χετο,106 to send an ambassador to the French Republic and
to recognise it formally, its relationship with France quickly
assumed a different character as soon as it was taken seriously; on
the other hand, Bonaparte presented a few cannons to the Republic
of San Marino, because in this case, there was no connection which
could become a serious issue, but simply an occasion for high-
sounding words concerning respect for republics.
The Republic of Geneva has vanished, whereas the indepen-
dence, peace, and – so to speak – the neutrality of the Batavian,
Helvetian, Cisalpine, and Ligurian Republics are guaranteed by
strong garrisons.
Such are the relations which link more powerful states with
weaker ones according to their true differences in strength.
The relations between Austria and Germany date back to ancient
times, and they would necessarily take a very different course if
Austria gave up the Imperial crown and, purely as a major sovereign
power, subsequently entered into treaties involving mutual protec-
tion and guarantees (especially if there were a risk that hard times
lay ahead). In this respect, Austria is at a serious disadvantage in
comparison with Prussia, for although Austria has old relationships,
Brandenburg does not need to enter into any speciﬁc relationships
in peacetime, while in wartime, it can impose conditions on the
hard-pressed and weak who turn to it for help. Since everything is
subject to calculation nowadays, these conditions can be made ten
per cent less [stringent] than those which are feared from the
enemy; or, since the enemy is altogether such an indeﬁnite quantity
that everything is to be feared from him, any deﬁnite condition


Political writings
whatsoever will seem less [stringent] than the indeﬁnite conditions
to be feared from that quarter. In this case, at least the extent of
one’s loss is known, and this is in itself a major consolation.
It used to be popularly supposed in the Rhineland that, if one
part of a state lay within the line of demarcation and the other lay
outside it and was liable to pay public and private contributions to
the French, and if the provincial assemblies of both parts were sup-
posed to act together for the joint settlement of their liabilities, the
part which was under French rule refused to accept parity and equal
shares because it expected to lose in the process. This popular opi-
nion may be without foundation; but it does at least give us a gen-
eral indication of the people’s judgement.
[Thus, Brandenburg enjoys the advantage of] either having the
more powerful states as its friends or, since it has no other alliances
or protective relationships, of treating them as enemies. It can even
suspend [aufheben] a treaty of guarantee immediately, because this
is merely a speciﬁc and individual matter, like any other political
treaty, and it is in the nature of political treaties that its suspension
does not constitute perﬁdy – as this war in particular has taught us,
when so many treaties have been suspended, renewed, and sus-
pended once again. Austria’s links with the estates, on the other
hand, do [not] seem to be in the same class as ordinary political
treaties; on the contrary, whenever it has entered into an ordinary
relationship with an Imperial estate, as Prussia can, all the estates
feel thereby attacked. With Prussia this seems natural, just as it
does with France, etc.
Through its power and its display of the latter in the cases
referred to above, Prussia has ceased to be on the same level as the
other estates. The latter can ﬁnd a pure interest in their political
independence only among themselves, and in this respect a joint
association, a true federation of estates, is conceivable. But it is also
no more than conceivable, for some of the estates are themselves so
disparate in terms of power that they are not capable of any true
and equal association.
An abbey, Imperial city, or such nobility as is directly dependent
on the Empire may have less fear of falling victim to the Austrian
monarchy’s expansionist ambitions than to those of a lesser power.
Although the Prussian power is a major monarchy, it is closer to
the level of less powerful estates with regard to this capacity for


The German Constitution
arousing anxiety among small estates and for exploiting minor
advantages. For its political art, like that of France, is entirely calcu-
lating, and since its military power was [always] disproportionate to
its size, it was compelled to seek the sum of small advantages – just
as the French Republic consistently acted in accordance with gen-
eral principles, used all its power to follow these down to the small-
est details, and subordinated all particular rights and relationships
to the principles in question. One might also say that Prussia’s
recent policy has not been based on the royal principle of majesty,
but on that of the middle class [Bu¨rgerlichkeit];107 its relation to the
power of Austria, for example, is like that of a [middle-class] citizen
who has laboriously accumulated his assets penny by penny to a
free nobleman with inherited wealth whose property is based on his
land and remains the same, even if he allows his servants or neigh-
bours latitude in minor matters. His wealth is not a sum – which
would be diminished by individual withdrawals – but a permanent
and invariable asset.
The lesser estates, whose anxieties over their independence must
be greatest, can only rely on associating themselves with a power
whose politics and magnanimity give it the will and capacity to
guarantee their survival. We have accordingly seen how the ecclesi-
astical princes, abbots, and Imperial cities have always associated
themselves with the Emperor and observed their obligations
towards him and the German Empire with the greatest loyalty.
Even if the more powerful Imperial estates wished to form an
alliance amongst themselves and devised a method for preventing
such a coalition from sharing the fate of all coalitions, and even if
the combined strength of their troops formed a power capable of
resisting a single great power, they would never be in the position
of having to worry about one power only, for this one power would
necessarily fear the intervention of other powers against it; but
against a consortium of several powers, a coalition would be ineffec-
tual, both because of its inferior military power and because of the
scattered geographical position of its members. This position has
been shaped along similar lines to that of the territory of great
empires. In military respects, it is inherently extremely weak, and
since the coalition would be a new development, the states taking
part in it would also not be rich enough to surround themselves
with rings of fortresses.


Political writings
The politics of this coalition would have to tie it to this or that
greater power according to circumstances, and its fate would be the
common fate of a weaker ally or a weak enemy.
The fate of the German estates lies directly between the politics
of two great powers. These two powers are now equal inasmuch as
their relationship with Germany is primarily a political one – more
so in the case of Prussia than in that of Austria, because the latter
carries with it the Imperial crown and has consequently been ham-
pered since ancient times by the pressure of an inﬁnite number of
rights.
The remaining interests in which the powers formerly differed
have now balanced out. It was through this difference of interests
that Prussia became great, by allying itself with – or placing itself
at the head of – those interests which were opposed to the house of
Austria. But time itself has both overcome [aufgehoben] the division
of interest between Austria and a large part of Germany, and separ-
ated Prussia’s interest from that of the German estates.
One major interest in whose defence Prussia took a leading part
was religion.
The German estates themselves (especially Saxony and Hesse in
earlier times) and foreign powers (Sweden and France) had for-
merly defended this interest against the Emperor, and Prussia at
that time played no part at all – or, as Brandenburg, only a subordi-
nate part. In the Seven Years War, this interest was still apparent,
not so much on the part of the opposing powers as in popular
opinion, and it did not fail to have an effect. A kind of distrust still
remained, and even if the Protestants did not ﬁnd themselves
attacked as such, they still feared this possibility. They still attri-
buted to the house of Austria the will [to mount such an attack] if
it were in a position to do so; as well as the utmost bigotry and the
inﬂuence of a new and indulgent Pope, of the Jesuits, and of priests
in general; and they saw in Prussia the guarantor and – if the worst
came to the worst – the saviour of their freedom of faith and
conscience.
The politics of the Jesuits, petty and fanatical in its aims, has
long ceased to be the politics of the courts. Especially since Joseph
II’s time, the Protestants have had no need for anxiety on this score.
Joseph II’s policy was not just the sudden inspiration of a single
monarch, which can die away again on his demise; on the contrary,


The German Constitution
these principles have not only been preserved by his successors, but
have also been absorbed as a whole into the ﬁxed body of culture
[Bildung] and political principles in general.
The predicament of the Protestants in the Palatinate, as the one
remaining relic which ran counter to the principles of our age, was
subsequently an object of special interest to the Protestant party
among the princes of the Empire; but even this has now been recti-
ﬁed. The spirit of the times, the mode of operation of governments,
now ﬁxed and based on principles, has dramatically reduced the
importance of the corpus evangelicorum, and hence also of its
supreme head.108
The obsession of the Catholic estates with ensuring the
supremacy of the Catholic religion has now disappeared, and with
it the nefarious means which were formerly employed to induce
princes of the German Empire to convert to Catholicism, thereby
arousing such an astonishing degree of fear and anxiety among Prot-
estants. The Catholic side no longer places any value on such
means, for even on its own account, the state has managed to separ-
ate itself from the church, and experience has also shown that such
means have produced more ill effects in the shape of mistrust and
increased obstinacy than any actual beneﬁt. It was not long before
the person of the prince was separated from his country in the
context of religion. Even if the prince became a Catholic, the
relationship of his country to the Imperial Diet remained Protestant.
Indeed, if the prince converted to Catholicism, he lost power within
his Protestant country, not only through the mistrust which his
conversion generated, but also because he was deprived, by his
undertakings [Reversalien]109 to respect his subjects’ rights, etc., of
the inﬂuence which a Protestant prince has over the ecclesiastical
affairs of his country. He is thereby placed in the position of a
Catholic prince of a Catholic country, in which the church is com-
pletely independent of the secular power with regard to its property,
appointments to ofﬁces, and other arrangements, whereas the Prot-
estant prince of a Protestant country is both head of the church and
bishop. Furthermore, princely houses which were formerly Catholic
have reverted [to Protestantism] in recent times.
Such means [as described above] are no longer employed on the
Catholic side: the Jesuit order has been abolished, tolerance has
been introduced even in the Catholic countries, and the Protestants


Political writings
have been granted civil rights, despite the ungenerous provisions of
the Peace of Westphalia. Consequently, the long lists which consti-
tutional lawyers used to draw up of Protestant princes who went
over to Catholicism, the detailed accounts of Jesuit villainy, and
the descriptions of the oppression and tribulations of Protestants in
Catholic countries have become objects of history devoted to things
of the past, rather than nightmares for the present.
With powerful foreign support, the Protestants have long been
free from the fear of seeing their faith suppressed by force, while
they have never in any case thirsted greatly for the martyr’s crown.
And the fact that systematic proselytising is no longer practised by
any court has also freed them to some extent from their previous
mortal fear that they might be cunningly deprived of their faith and
surreptitiously robbed of their conscience. The passage of time has
in itself given them greater conﬁdence and certainty that they are
in possession of the truth. It is a long time since we last heard
reports of the Imperial Diet regarding a Catholic confessor as a
power to be reckoned with, and presenting demands to the Emperor
on this score.
Although freelance writers in Berlin have sought to reawaken this
mortal terror among Protestants by making a fearful clamour about
suspected Jesuits,110 this kind of thing is no longer a matter for
cabinets or debates in the Imperial Diet. On the contrary, it looks
like plain stupidity, or else the outburst of an extremely blinkered
attitude or a disagreement between different branches of Free-
masonry.
Another concern was to rescue what used to be called ‘German
freedom’ from what was described as ‘universal monarchy’ or sub-
sequently even ‘the oriental system’.
Since the attention of the whole of Europe has been focused for
the last ten years on a people’s tremendous struggle for freedom,
and all Europe has been in general agitation as a result, it is inevi-
table that concepts of freedom have undergone a change and been
reﬁned beyond their earlier emptiness and indeterminacy. German
freedom used to mean simply the independence of the estates from
the Emperor. The alternatives were either slavery and despotism, or
the abolition of the political union; no third possibility was known in
earlier times.111


The German Constitution
The Spanish and Austrian monarchies have not been combined
since the time of Charles V, and the two have been in the hands of
quite different families for the last century. Austria has lost large
provinces, France and England have risen to the same level of
power, and Prussia and Russia have developed; Austria has long
ceased to be a monarchy without equal in Europe. A system of the
balance of power in Europe has taken shape, i.e. a system whereby,
in the event of war, all European powers will usually have an inter-
est at stake and each of them (either on its own or simply in pro-
portion to the advantages it has gained) will be prevented from
reaping the fruits of even the most fortunate war. Even in their own
right, wars have changed so greatly in character that the conquest
of a few islands or of a province costs many years of effort and
enormous sums of money, etc.
The idea of a universal monarchy has always been an empty
word. The fact that it was never implemented when the plan for it
was ﬁrst laid shows that it is impossible to do so, and that it is
therefore an empty thought; but in any case, there can no longer be
any question of it in more recent times.
Nevertheless, Austria remains predominant in Germany, i.e.
more powerful than any single German estate and more powerful
than many of them combined. But Prussia has now likewise attained
this status. As a danger to the German estates, Austria and Prussia
are on the same level. What used to be called German freedom
should be on its guard against them both.
[. Freedom of Citizens and Estates]
As for those two principles whose adoption made it possible for a
state to attain great inﬂuence in Germany – the threat to Prot-
estantism and the fear of a universal monarchy – the former no
longer exists; and as for the second – the quest for expansion at the
cost of the German estates – Austria and Prussia are at least on a
par, if Austria does not in fact still have certain advantages.
It is evident, however, that ten years of struggle and the misery
of a large portion of Europe have taught us enough – at least in
terms of concepts – to make us more impervious to the blind clam-
our for freedom. In this bloody game, that cloud of freedom which


Political writings
nations sought to embrace, only to plunge into an abyss of misery,
has evaporated, and certain ﬁgures [bestimmte Gestalten] and con-
cepts have found their way into public opinion. The clamour for
freedom will have no effect; anarchy has been distinguished from
freedom, and the realisation that a ﬁrm government is necessary for
freedom has made a deep impression; but an equally deep
impression has been made by the realisation that the people must
take part in the making of laws and in the most important affairs of
the state. In the organisation of a body which represents it, the
people has a guarantee that the government will act in accordance
with the laws, and [it can observe in this body] the participation of
the general will in the most important matters of general concern.112
This body has to give the monarch its approval for a proportion of
national taxation, especially for extraordinary taxes; and just as in
former times the most essential issue, namely personal service,
depended on free agreement, the same is true now of money, which
comprehends all other factors.
Without such a representative body, freedom is no longer con-
ceivable. All other indeterminate notions and all the empty clamour
for freedom disappear when freedom is so deﬁned. This is not
something which individuals come to know as a scientiﬁc concept
through learning or as the result of arbitrary study. This deﬁnition
is rather a principle which underlies public opinion, and which has
become part of sound common sense. Most German states have
representation of this kind, and the provincial assemblies of Austria,
Bohemia, and Hungary have freely made extraordinary payments to
their monarchs for the war with France.
It is more natural for the interest of this German freedom to
seek protection from a state which is itself based on this system
of freedom. The interests which used to be dominant in Germany
have to some extent disappeared. Prussia can consequently no
longer associate itself with them, and public opinion can no
longer regard any war involving Prussia as a war for German
freedom. The true, lasting interest [of the German estates], which
has become particularly acute in our time, can ﬁnd no protection
from Prussia. The Prussian provincial assemblies have lost their
signiﬁcance under the pressure of royal power. A new and arti-
ﬁcial system of taxation has been introduced in the Prussian
territories, and it has also been enforced in the recently acquired


The German Constitution
territories which used to have privileges and taxes governed by
ancient rights and traditions.
The German subjects of Prussia cannot expect help either from
the Emperor or from the Imperial courts of justice against this
burden of taxes in the Prussian states and against the suppression
of their privileges.
Apart from the less powerful estates like the Imperial cities etc.,
the provincial assemblies of the German territories have a natural
interest in looking to the Emperor’s court and expecting to ﬁnd
support there for what the world now understands as German free-
dom – not least because the Emperor’s hereditary domains are
themselves a state which is based on representation and in which
the people has rights, and especially because of the legal help which
the Aulic Council can offer.
This kind of freedom has, of course, had to suffer increasingly
the more the other kind of German freedom has grown, and the
more the power of the state over its individual members has
diminished.
In the Peace of Westphalia, the sovereignty – or at least the
supremacy – of the Emperor over Imperial cities, a sovereignty
which belonged to the Emperors but was mortgaged in the course
of time to the cities (i.e. to their magistrates) was declared to be
irredeemable. The mayor (or whatever his title was in other cities)
appointed by the Emperor must always have commanded a certain
respect among the magistrates. They were under a kind of super-
vision, under the eye of a person who was independent of them and
who necessarily carried weight by virtue of his connection with the
head of the Empire. After the Imperial cities became completely
assured of one kind of freedom when the Peace of Westphalia
declared that the political power which had been mortgaged to them
was irredeemable, the other kind of freedom suffered all the more.
It is well known under how great a burden of taxes, judicial neglect,
and debt so many Imperial cities sank, and in general, what inner
corruption they experienced. The citizenry had no control over the
administration and use of public ofﬁces, nor any say in the impo-
sition of taxes; taxation and its expenditure and appointments to
public ofﬁces have come entirely under the arbitrary control of the
magistrates. Some [Imperial cities] have succeeded, with the
Emperor’s help, in liberating themselves completely from this


Political writings
‘German freedom’ of the magistrates; as a result of this system,
others were plunged, before the last war, into the greatest embar-
rassment and ﬁnancial confusion which the war in no small measure
exacerbated.
As for the states ruled by princes, the cameral taxes [Kammer-
zieler] and costs of military contingents, embassies to the Imperial
Diet, etc. have been transferred, since the Peace of Westphalia, to
the provincial assemblies.
In the year – twenty-two years after German freedom was
achieved through the Peace of Westphalia – the Council of Princes
conveyed to the Emperor a memorandum of the Imperial Diet in
which the previous mode of contributing to state expenditure by
contractual agreement was abolished and the princes were to be left
to judge what they considered necessary for the requirements of
their country. This extension of their power, whereby the princes
of that time would have abolished the entire principle on which
modern states are based (with who knows what consequences for
their successors) – this extension of (if one may so call it) German
freedom was prevented by the Emperor Leopold. He did not ratify
the memorandum of the Diet, although it would have entitled him
to abolish the territorial rights of his own German lands, Bohemia
and Austria. Or if the link, which was still to some extent present,
between the Empire and the Burgundian sphere had been re-
afﬁrmed, he would also have been entitled by the [recommendation
of the] Diet to abolish the rights of the Burgundian estates, which
had degenerated into an aristocratic despotism, and to implement
those measures over which Joseph II came to grief more than a
century later.
As far as the interest of this [kind of] German freedom is con-
cerned, the Emperor’s relationship with Germany appears in a dif-
ferent light, very different from that of Prussia. Through the power
of time, the great interest of the people returned to its source – but
as a need which has not as yet found satisfaction in an appropriate
political organisation.
The principle of the original German state, which spread from
Germany throughout the whole of Europe, was the principle of
monarchy, a political power under a supreme head for the conduct
of business of universal concern, in which the people were involved
through their representatives.113 The form of this [monarchic prin-


The German Constitution
ciple] has even survived in what is known as the Imperial Diet; but
the substance [die Sache] has vanished.
In Europe’s protracted oscillation between barbarism and civilis-
ation [Kultur], the German state has not fully accomplished its tran-
sition to the latter, but has succumbed to the convulsions which
accompany it; its members have broken away to complete indepen-
dence, and the state has dissolved. The Germans have not managed
to ﬁnd the mean between oppression and despotism [on the one
hand] – i.e. what they described as universal monarchy – and com-
plete dissolution [on the other].114
In its negative sense, the ‘struggle for German freedom’ signiﬁed
the endeavour to oppose universal monarchy; in positive terms, it
became the attainment of complete independence by each member.
In this enterprise, the countries stood by their princes and were at
one with them, but they inevitably found that German freedom was
not attained when their princes gained their sovereignty – quite the
reverse.
But at the same time, the tendency of the provincial assemblies
is primarily to favour their own country; they have lost all connec-
tion with the whole. In former times, the princes often convened a
Provincial Diet before they attended the Imperial Diet, and held
joint consultations with their country. That contradiction whereby
the provincial assemblies are most strongly opposed to Imperial
wars and to contributions towards their cost, yet at the same time
owe their existence to the Empire – this division within Germany
has taken root universally within the popular mind [Volksgeist]. Bav-
aria, Hesse, etc. regard each other as foreigners; the provincial
assemblies, which are in immediate contact with the people, express
this division most clearly and regard everything which the prince
does through his own connections as alien and as no concern of
theirs; they simply wish to remain separate, just as the Swiss wish
to remain neutral. But the whole constellation of circumstances goes
against such separation. There is no longer any neutrality for a weak
state close to – let alone in between – powerful states if the latter
are at war; or it can remain neutral in the sense of allowing itself to
be plundered and abused by both.
However much our insight may tell us that the interest of the
provinces and their assemblies is bound up with the continued
existence of a political power in Germany, in the provinces


Political writings
themselves this interest has in practice [fu¨rs Handeln] become alien
to Germany. Alien to Germany – but who has any concern for that
country now, and where might any German patriotism come
from?115 The individual provinces and their assemblies enjoy and
recognise whatever passive beneﬁt they may gain from Germany,
but they do nothing in return; for it is fundamental to human nature
to be interested only in something which we can actively support,
with which we can co-operate and share decisions, with which our
will can identify itself.116 The provinces need to ﬁnd some mode of
joint action towards a universal end.
[III Proposals for Constitutional Reform]
It has been the fate of Italy to come for the most part under the
authority of foreign powers. Even if a few of its estates – two, three,
or thereabouts – have continued to exist for longer as states the size
of one or more districts, the majority of them, politically speaking,
have gradually become entirely dependent on these great powers
and gradually been completely devoured by them (the smaller and
ecclesiastical estates being the ﬁrst to go). If Germany is not to
suffer the same fate as this after a few wars, it should re-organise
itself as a state. The essential constituent of a state, namely a politi-
cal power governed by a supreme head with the co-operation of the
parts, would have to be established. All inessential elements – the
dependence of the administration of justice, the management of rev-
enues, religion – all of these must be excluded from the necessary
attributes of a state.
The only way in which the German Empire might continue to
exist would be by organising a political power and restoring the
German people’s connection with Emperor and Empire.
The former could be accomplished by amalgamating the whole
military strength of Germany into a single army. In this army, every
major prince would be a general by birth, and each would be in
charge of his own regiment and appoint its ofﬁcers, or have detach-
ments from it as his lifeguard and to garrison his capital. Companies
or smaller units would be assigned to the smaller estates. The
Emperor would, of course, have supreme command of this army.
Its costs, which are now paid chieﬂy by the provincial assembly –


The German Constitution
and not, as in earlier times, by the prince from his hereditary
domains – would also be borne by the provinces. These costs would
be approved annually by the provincial assemblies, all of which
would combine to perform this task. This could not be done by
delegating some members of the existing assemblies for this pur-
pose, partly because many provinces have no assembly, and partly
because the costs would be too great for the very small estates. But
given that it would in any case be necessary to divide Germany into
military regions in order to raise the army, and to subdivide each
district into smaller districts quite independently of other jurisdic-
tions and sovereignties unconnected with the military regions, del-
egates could be selected from these subdivisions, according to their
relative populations, in order to approve the levies required for the
maintenance of the state’s power.
These delegates would for this purpose form a single body with
the Cities Bench of the Imperial Diet; for this Bench has in any
case again been depleted by the loss of several cities, and it is uncer-
tain whether it may not suffer further reductions, with consequent
beneﬁt in the matter of compensation117 to some of the smaller
cities. Hamburg would also have to be required to send its deputy. –
The smallest Imperial cities with one thousand or a few thousand
citizens have votes in the Imperial Diet, whereas a whole province
like Bohemia or Saxony has none. Such small Imperial cities as still
remained would have to allow the territories around them to share
in their entitlement to send a deputy.
In any case, no one knows what the [precise] signiﬁcance of the
Cities Bench is. There are three Colleges within the Imperial Diet,
but a majority vote is not decisive. If the College of Electors and the
College of Princes do not agree, the matter rests, and the College of
Cities cannot decide the issue.
The complete change would be that the provinces would now
pay directly to the Emperor and Empire that money which they at
present grant directly to the princes, and only indirectly to the
Emperor and Empire.
The Emperor would again be placed at the head of the German
Empire.
The question would arise as to whether the knights’ cantons
would send deputies to the Council of Princes or to the College of


Political writings
Cities. They would approve their charitable subsidies along with
the others, and as rulers of their domains, they would have to be
associated with the College of Princes.
The question would also arise of whether the princes would
decide to make a joint contribution from their [personal] domains
and other territorial incomes, or whether each would meet part of
the cost of his regiment or guard from these sources. At all events,
each would be at liberty to contribute as much of his own income
as he wished for the embellishment of his regiment, over and above
the subsidy it would receive from the Empire as a whole. In the
former case, i.e. if the princes authorised and contributed payments
from their own domains to a central fund, the knights would have
to be associated with them; for in any case, the true nobility –
i.e. rulers and owners of knightly estates directly dependent on the
Empire – originally belonged entirely to the class of princes and
were no different from them in their origin.
The question would also be asked whether the princes should be
represented in the College of Electors or the College of Princes by
relatives of princely rank, or at least by their most eminent vassals,
if they did not wish to appear in person. Besides, in an assembly
such as this, the [present] kind of procedure whereby statements
are dictated for minuting would not be applicable; there would be
oral discussions and votes, and if the representatives were drawn
exclusively from princely houses and the most noble families, their
talents and brilliance would give an exalted status and appearance
to such a princely assembly.
Although all parties might gain if Germany were to become a
state, an event such as this has never been the fruit of deliberation,
but only of force – even if it were in keeping with the general [level
of] culture [Bildung], and even if its need were deeply and distinctly
felt. The common mass of people in Germany, together with their
provincial assemblies, who know only the segregation of communi-
ties in Germany and to whom a uniﬁcation of such communities is
something utterly alien,118 would have to be brought together into
a single mass by the power of a conqueror.119 They would have to
be compelled to regard themselves as belonging to Germany.
This Theseus would have to possess enough magnanimity to
grant the people he had created out of scattered groups a share in
matters of common concern.120 Since a democratic constitution such


The German Constitution
as Theseus gave his people is, in our times and within large states,
a contradiction in itself, this share would have to be an organisation
[of some kind]. And even if he could be assured, by having the
direction of the state’s power within his hands, that he would not
be repaid with ingratitude as Theseus was, he would also have to
possess sufﬁcient character to be ready to endure the hatred which
Richelieu and other great men who destroyed the particular and
distinctive characteristics of their fellows brought upon themselves.
Once the social character of human beings has been disturbed
and forced to throw itself into idiosyncrasies [Eigentu¨mlichkeiten], it
becomes so profoundly distorted that it expends its strength on this
separation from others and proceeds to assert its isolation to the
point of madness; for madness is simply the complete isolation of
the individual from his kind.121 The German nation may not be
capable of intensifying its stubborn insistence on particularity to
the degree of madness encountered in the Jewish nation, which is
incapable of uniting with others in common social intercourse.122
Nor may it be able to attain so pernicious a degree of isolation as
to murder and be murdered until the state is obliterated.123 Never-
theless, particularity, prerogative, and precedence are so intensely
personal in character that the concept of necessity and insight into
its nature are much too weak to have an effect on action itself.
Concepts and insight are fraught with such self-distrust that they
must be justiﬁed by force before people will submit to them.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural
Law, on its Place in Practical Philosophy, and
its Relation to the Positive Sciences of Right
(–)1
It is true that the science of natural law, like other sciences such as
mechanics and physics, has long been recognised as an essentially
philosophical science and – since philosophy must have parts – as
an essential part of philosophy.2 But it has shared the fate of the
other sciences in that the philosophical element in philosophy has
been assigned exclusively to metaphysics, and the sciences have
been allowed little share in it; instead, they have been kept com-
pletely independent of the Idea, within their own special principle.
The sciences cited as examples have ﬁnally been compelled more or
less to confess their remoteness from philosophy. They conse-
quently acknowledge as their scientiﬁc principle what is commonly
called experience, thereby renouncing their claim to be genuine
sciences; they are content to consist of a collection of empirical
knowledge [Kenntnisse] and to make use of the concepts of the
understanding as postulates [bittweise], without claiming to make
any objective assertion.3 If whatever has called itself a philosophical
science has been excluded from philosophy and from the category
of science in general, at ﬁrst against its will but in eventual accept-
ance of this situation, the reason for this exclusion is not that these
so-called sciences did not originate in philosophy itself and did not
maintain a conscious connection with it. For every part of philos-
ophy is individually capable of being an independent science and


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
attaining complete inner necessity, because it is the absolute which
makes it a genuine science. In this shape, the absolute is the distinc-
tive principle which stands above the sphere of that science’s cog-
nition and freedom, and in relation to which the science partakes of
an external necessity. But the Idea itself remains free from this
determinacy and can reﬂect itself in this determinate science just as
purely as absolute life expresses itself in every living thing –
although the scientiﬁc element in such a science, or its inner ration-
ality, does not come to light [within this science] in the pure form
of the Idea, which is the essence of every science and exists [ist] as
this pure Idea in philosophy, as the absolute science. Geometry
furnishes a brilliant example, envied by the other sciences, of this
distinctive [eigenen] yet free scientiﬁc development of a science. Nor
is it [i.e. the reason why the sciences were excluded from philos-
ophy] because sciences of the kind mentioned above must be denied
all reality on the grounds that they are in fact empirical. For just as
each part or aspect of philosophy is capable of being a self-sufﬁcient
science, so in consequence is each [of these sciences] also in an
immediate sense [unmittelbar] a self-sufﬁcient and complete image;
and in the shape of an image, it can be registered and represented
by a pure and felicitous intuition which avoids contamination by
ﬁxed concepts.
But the completion of a science demands not only that intuition
and image be combined with the logical [dimension] and taken up
into the purely ideal [realm]; the separate (though genuine) science
must also be divested of its singularity [Einzelheit], and its principle
must be recognised in its higher context and necessity and thereby
itself be completely freed. Only by this means is it possible to recog-
nise the limits of the science, and without this principle, the science
must remain ignorant of its limits, because it would otherwise have
to stand above itself and recognise in the absolute form the nature
of its principle in its determinacy; for from this knowledge [Er-
kenntnis], it would directly obtain the knowledge and certainty of
the extent to which its various determinacies were equal. But as
matters stand, it can take only an empirical attitude towards its
limits, and must at one moment make misplaced attempts to over-
come them, and at another suppose them to be narrower than they
are, and consequently experience quite unexpected enlargements [of
its horizons], just as geometry (which is able to demonstrate, for


Political writings
example, the incommensurability of the diameter [i.e. diagonal] and
side of a square, but not that of the diameter and circumference of
a circle),*4 or even more so arithmetic, and most of all the combi-
nation of the two, afford the greatest examples of science groping
in the dark at its [outer] limits.
The critical philosophy has had the important negative effect on
the theoretical sciences [ﬁrstly] of demonstrating that the scientiﬁc
element within them is not something objective, but belongs to the
intermediate realm between nothingness and reality, to a mixture of
being and not-being, and [secondly] of inducing them to confess
that they are [engaged] only in empirical conjecture [Meinen].5 The
positive effect of the critical philosophy has proved all the poorer
from this point of view, and it has not succeeded in restoring these
sciences to philosophy.6 Conversely, it has placed the absolute
wholly within practical philosophy, and in the latter [realm], it [i.e.
the critical philosophy] is positive or dogmatic knowledge. We must
regard the critical philosophy (which also describes itself as ‘tran-
scendental idealism’) as the culminating point, both in a general
sense and especially in natural law, of that opposition which – like
rings on the surface of water which spread concentrically outwards
from the point of disturbance until, in tiny movements, they lose
their connection with the centre and become inﬁnite – grew ever
greater, from weaker beginnings in earlier scientiﬁc endeavours
through the constraints of barbarism, until it came to understand
itself in the critical philosophy by means of the absolute concept of
inﬁnity and, as inﬁnity, is in turn superseded. Thus, the earlier
ways of treating natural law, and what must be regarded as its vari-
* Hegel’s note: In the introduction to his Natural Law, Fichte prides himself some-
what on the simplicity of his insight into the reason for this latter incommensura-
bility, declaring in all seriousness that curved is not [the same thing as] straight.
The superﬁciality of this reason is self-evident, and it is also directly refuted by
the former incommensurability of the diameter [i.e. diagonal] and side of a square,
both of which are straight lines, and by the quadrature of the parabola. As for the
help which he seeks in the same context from ‘sound common sense’ in the face
of the mathematical inﬁnite, [arguing] that a polygon of inﬁnitely many sides
cannot be measured, precisely because it is a polygon of inﬁnitely many sides, the
same help should be available in dealing with the inﬁnite progression in which the
absolute Idea is supposed to be realised. Besides, this gives us no means of
determining the main point at issue, namely whether positive inﬁnity, which is
not an inﬁnite quantity but rather an identity, should be posited – which amounts
to saying that nothing has been determined with regard to either commensurability
or incommensurability.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
ous principles, must be denied all signiﬁcance for the essential
nature [das Wesen] of science. For although they are in [the realm
of] opposition and negativity, they are not in [that of] absolute nega-
tivity or inﬁnity, which alone is appropriate to science. On the con-
trary, they no more contain the purely positive than they do the
purely negative, for they are mixtures of both. Only an interest
based on curiosity concerning the history of science could dwell on
them, ﬁrstly in order to compare them with the absolute Idea and
to perceive in their very deformation the necessity with which, dis-
torted by a determinate principle, the moments of absolute form
present themselves and, even under the aegis of a limited principle,
nevertheless dominate these attempts [at self-representation] – and
secondly, in order to see the empirical condition of the world
reﬂected in the ideal mirror of science.
For as far as the second is concerned, it is indeed the case that both
empirical existence [Dasein] and the condition of all the sciences will
also express the condition of the world, given that all things are
connected. But the condition of natural law will do so most directly
[am na¨chsten], because natural law has immediate reference to the
ethical [das Sittliche], the [prime] mover of all human things; and
in so far as the science of the ethical has an existence [Dasein],
natural law belongs to [the realm of] necessity. It must be at one
with the ethical in its empirical shape, which is equally [grounded]
in necessity, and, as a science, it must express this shape in the
form of universality.7
As far as the ﬁrst is concerned, the only true distinction that can
be recognised as [constituting] the principle of a science is whether
that science lies within the absolute, or outside absolute unity and
[hence] in opposition. But in the latter case, it could not be a science
at all unless its principle were some incomplete and relative unity,
or the concept of a relation, even if this were only the empty
abstraction of relation itself under the name of attractive force or
the force of identity [des Einsseins]. Sciences whose principle is not
a concept of relation, or is merely the empty force of identity, retain
nothing ideal except the ﬁrst ideal relation which differentiates the
child from the world, namely the form of representational thought,
in which such sciences present empirical qualities and can enumer-
ate their variety; these would be described primarily as empirical
sciences. But since practical sciences are by nature focused on


Political writings
something both real and universal, or on a unity which is a unity
of differences, the feelings [Empﬁndungen] likewise, in practical
empiricism, must embrace not pure qualities but relations, whether
negative ones like the drive for self-preservation or positive ones
like love and hate, sociability, and the like.8 And the more scientiﬁc
[kind of] empiricism is in general distinguished from this pure
empiricism not by having relations rather than qualities as its object,
but by ﬁxing these relations in conceptual form and sticking to this
negative absoluteness (though without separating this form of unity
from its content). We shall call these the empirical sciences; and con-
versely, we shall describe as purely formal science that form of
science in which the opposition [of form and content] is absolute,
and pure unity (or inﬁnity, the negative absolute) is completely div-
orced from the content and posited for itself.
Although we have thus identiﬁed a speciﬁc difference between
the two inauthentic [unechten] ways of treating natural law scientiﬁ-
cally – inasmuch as the principle of the ﬁrst consists of relations
and mixtures of empirical intuition with the universal, while that of
the second is absolute opposition and absolute universality – it is
nevertheless self-evident that the ingredients of both, namely
empirical intuition and concept, are the same, and that formalism,
as it moves from its pure negation to a [speciﬁc] content, can like-
wise arrive at nothing other than relations or relative identities; for
the purely ideal, or the opposition, is posited as absolute, so that
the absolute Idea and unity cannot be present. With the principle
of absolute opposition or the absoluteness of the purely ideal, the
absolute principle of empiricism is posited; thus, with reference to
intuition, the syntheses – in so far as they are meant to have not
just the negative meaning of cancelling [der Aufhebung] one side of
the opposition, but also the positive meaning of intuition – rep-
resent only empirical intuitions.
In the ﬁrst place, these two ways of treating natural law scientiﬁcally
must be characterised more precisely, the ﬁrst with reference to the
manner in which the absolute Idea appears within it in accordance
with the moments of absolute form, the second with regard to the
way in which the inﬁnite (or the negative absolute) vainly attempts
to arrive at a positive organisation. Our exposition of the latter
attempt will lead directly to a consideration of the nature and relation-
ship of the ethical sciences as philosophical sciences, and of their relation-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
ship to what is known as the positive science of right.9 Although the
latter holds itself apart from philosophy and, by voluntarily
renouncing it, believes it can escape its criticism, it also claims to
have an absolute subsistence and true reality; but this pretension is
inadmissible.
[I]10
With regard to that way of treating natural law which we have called
empirical, it must ﬁrst be said that we cannot materially concern
ourselves with those determinacies and concepts of relation which
it fastens upon and afﬁrms under the name of principles; on the
contrary, it is precisely this separating out and ﬁxing of determina-
cies which must be negated.11 The nature of this separation presup-
poses that the scientiﬁc aspect consists solely in the form of unity;
and if, in an organic relationship between the manifold qualities
into which such a relationship can be divided, a unity is to be found
within this multiplicity (and the qualities are not just to be
enumerated), some determinacy must be singled out and regarded
as [constituting] the essence of the relation. But the totality of the
organic is precisely what this procedure fails to grasp, and its
remaining aspects, which were excluded from the determinacy
already selected, are subordinated to the latter, which is elevated to
the essence and end [Zweck] of the relation. Thus, in order to deﬁne
[erkennen] the relation of marriage, for example, reproduction, the
sharing of goods in common, etc. are adduced, and the whole
organic relation is deﬁned and contaminated by [exclusive insistence
on] this determinacy, which is elevated into a law as the [supposed]
essence [of the relation]. Or in the case of punishment, one determi-
nacy is seized upon – be it the moral improvement of the criminal,
the damage caused, the awareness of the punishment among others,
the criminal’s own awareness of the punishment before the crime
was committed, or the need to give this awareness reality by carry-
ing out the threat, etc. – and the detail in question is made the
end and essence of the whole. It naturally follows that, since this
determinacy has no necessary connection with the other determin-
acies which can also be brought to light and distinguished, endless
agonising takes place to discover their necessary relationship or the
dominance of one over the others; and since inner necessity, which


Political writings
is not present in individual detail [in der Einzelheit], is lacking, each
[determinacy] can very well justify its independence of the others. –
Such qualities, picked out from the multiplicity of relations into
which the organic is broken up by empirical or imperfectly reﬂected
intuition and then given the form of conceptual unity, are what
knowledge of the kind described calls the essence and ends [of the
organic whole in question]. And since their conceptual form is
expressed as the absolute being of the determinacy which consti-
tutes the content of the concept, they are set up as principles, laws,
duties, etc. Of this transformation of the absoluteness of pure
form – which, however, is negative absoluteness or pure identity,
the pure concept, or inﬁnity – into an absoluteness of the content
and of the determinacy which is elevated to [aufgenommen in] the
form, more will be said in connection with the principle of the
critical philosophy; for that transformation which takes place
unconsciously in the empirical knowledge presently under dis-
cussion is accomplished by the critical philosophy with reﬂection
and as absolute reason and duty.12
This formal unity into which thought converts determinacy is
also what provides the semblance of that necessity which science
seeks; for the unity of opposites, regarded as a real unity in the
context of science, is a necessity for the latter. But since the material
of the formal unity in question is not the [two] opposites as a whole
but only one of them (i.e. one determinacy), the necessity is likewise
merely a formal, analytic necessity which pertains only to the form
of an identical or analytical proposition in which the determinacy
may be presented. On the strength of the absoluteness of this prop-
osition, however, an absoluteness of content is likewise falsely
claimed, so that laws and principles are [thereby] constituted.
But since this empirical science ﬁnds itself [immersed] in a multi-
plicity of such principles, laws, ends, duties, and rights, none of
which is absolute, it must also have before it the image of, and need
for, [both] the absolute unity of all these unconnected determinacies
and an original simple necessity; and we shall consider how it will
satisfy this demand, which is derived from reason, or how the absol-
ute Idea of reason will be presented in its [different] moments
[while] under the domination of the one and the many which this
empirical knowledge cannot overcome.13 On the one hand, it is
inherently interesting to perceive how, even in this scientiﬁc


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
endeavour and its turbid medium, the reﬂection and domination of
the absolute are still present (though at the same time distorted).
And on the other, the forms which the moments of the absolute
have here assumed have turned into a kind of prejudice and of
unquestioning, universally valid thoughts whose nullity criticism
must point out in order to justify science in ignoring them. This
proof of their nullity is accomplished most effectively by showing
the unreality of the whole ground from which they have sprung,
and whose ﬂavour and nature are implemented in them.
In the ﬁrst place, empirical science conceives of scientiﬁc totality
as a totality of the manifold or as completeness, whereas true for-
malism conceives of it as consistency. The former can raise its
experiences to universality as it pleases, and pursue consistency in
its thought determinacies [gedachten Bestimmungen] until it reaches
the point where further empirical material which contradicts the
previous material, but has an equal right to be thought and
expressed as a principle, no longer sustains the consistency of the
previous determinacy but forces it to be abandoned. Formalism can
extend its consistency as far as the vacuity of its principle – or a
content to which it has falsely laid claim – will at all permit; but it
is at the same time justiﬁed in proudly excluding whatever lacks
completeness from its apriorism and its science and in denigrating
it as ‘the empirical’.14 For it asserts its formal principles as the a
priori and the absolute, thereby implying that whatever it cannot
master by means of these principles is non-absolute and contin-
gent – unless it can get out of the difﬁculty by ﬁnding, in the
empirical realm at large and between one determinacy and the next,
the formal transition of a progression from the conditioned to the
condition [itself] and, since the latter is in turn conditioned, so on
in an inﬁnite sequence. But in so doing, formalism not only
renounces all the advantages it has over what it calls empiricism; in
addition, since the conditioned and the condition, as interconnected
opposites, are posited as subsisting absolutely, formalism itself sinks
totally into empirical necessity and lends the latter a semblance of
genuine absoluteness by means of the formal identity, or negative
absolute, with which it holds the opposites together.
But this combination of consistency with completeness of pic-
ture – whether the consistency in question is the latter (more
complete) formal and empty consistency or the former consistency


Political writings
which, with determinate concepts as principles, passes from one of
these to the others and is consistent only in its inconsistency –
immediately alters the position of multiplicity in relation to pure
empiricism. For pure empiricism, everything has equal rights with
everything else, and it gives no precedence to any [one] determin-
acy, since each is as real as the other. We shall return to this topic
later in comparing pure empiricism with the scientiﬁc empiricism
with which we are at present concerned.
After this formal totality, we must consider how absolute unity
makes its appearance both as simple unity – which we may call the
original unity – and as totality reﬂected in empirical knowledge
[Wissen]. Both unities, which are one [and the same] in the absolute
and whose identity is the absolute, must appear separate and distinct
within this knowledge.
As for the former [absolute] unity, it must ﬁrst be said that
empiricism can have nothing to do with it as that essence of necess-
ity which, for appearance, is an external bond of this unity. For in
the essential [kind of] unity, the manifold is immediately annihilated
and nulliﬁed; and because manifold being is the principle of empiri-
cism, the latter is denied [the possibility of] pressing on to the absol-
ute nullity of its qualities, which for it are absolute and (by virtue
of the concept according to which they are purely and simply many)
inﬁnitely many. Consequently, this original unity can only signify –
as far as is possible – a simple and small number of qualities, which
it believes are sufﬁcient for it to attain knowledge [Erkenntnis] of
the rest. For empiricism, this ideal, in which what counts roughly
speaking as arbitrary and contingent is effaced and the smallest
necessary quantity of the manifold is posited, is chaos, both in the
physical and in the ethical realm.15 In the latter, chaos is sometimes
represented by the imagination rather in the image of being – as
the state of nature; and at other times, it is represented by empirical
psychology rather in the form of possibility and abstraction, as an
enumeration of the capacities encountered in man – i.e. as the nature
and destiny of man. In this way, what is declared on the one hand
to be utterly necessary, in itself, and absolute, is simultaneously
acknowledged on the other to be something unreal, purely imagin-
ary, and a product of thought; in the ﬁrst case, it is treated as a
ﬁction, in the second, as a mere possibility – which is a blatant
contradiction.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
For the common understanding, which sticks to the obscure mix-
ture of what is in itself [was an sich ist] and what is transient, nothing
is more plausible than that it should be able to discover the former
by removing all arbitrary and contingent elements from the com-
posite image of the state of law [des Rechtszustandes], and that by
means of this abstraction, it should at once be left with the absol-
utely necessary. If [, it imagines,] one mentally subtracts everything
that it dimly suspects may belong to the particular and transient, as
pertaining to particular customs, to history, culture [Bildung], or
even the state, we are left with the human being in the image of the
bare state of nature, or the abstraction of the human being with his
essential capacities, and we have only to glance at it to discover
what is necessary. What is recognised as having a connection with
the state must therefore also be separated out, because the chaotic
image of the necessary cannot contain absolute unity, but only
simple multiplicity [Mannigfaltigkeit], or atoms with the fewest
possible properties.16 Thus, whatever may come under the concept
of a linking and ordering of these [atoms] as the weakest unity of
which the principle of multiplicity [Vielheit] is capable, is excluded
from this multiplicity as an adventitious and later accretion.17 Now
in making this distinction [between unity and multiplicity], empiri-
cism in the ﬁrst place lacks any criterion whatsoever for drawing
the boundary between the contingent and the necessary, between
what must be retained and what must be left out in the chaos of
the state of nature or the abstraction of the human being. The
determining factor here can only be that it [i.e. the required deﬁ-
nition] must contain as much as is needed to represent what is
encountered in actuality; the guiding principle for this a priori is
the a posteriori. If a point is to be made regarding the representation
[Vorstellung] of the state of law [des Rechtszustandes], all that is
required in order to demonstrate its connection with the original
and necessary – and hence also its own necessity – is to project a
distinct [eigene] quality or capacity into the chaos, and, in the
manner of the empirically based sciences in general, to construct
hypotheses for the so-called explanation of actuality, hypotheses in
which this actuality is posited in the same determinate character
[Bestimmtheit], but in a purely formal and ideal shape – as force,
matter, or capacity – so that one thing can very readily be grasped
and explained in terms of the other.18


Political writings
On the one hand, this dim inkling of an original and absolute
unity, a unity which is expressed in the chaos of the state of nature
and in the abstraction of capacities and inclinations, does not get as
far as absolute negative unity, but seeks only to eliminate a large
mass of particularities and oppositions. But there still remains an
indeﬁnable mass of qualitative determinacies which likewise have
only an empirical necessity for themselves and have no inner neces-
sity for one another.19 Their only relationship consists in being
many, and since this many is for one another and yet is devoid of
unity, they are destined to be mutually opposed and in absolute
conﬂict with one another. In the state of nature or the abstraction
of man, the isolated energies of the ethical realm must be thought
of as embroiled in a war of mutual annihilation.20 For precisely this
reason, however, it is easy to show that, since these qualities are
purely and simply opposed to each other and consequently purely
ideal, they cannot survive in this ideality and separation as they are
supposed to do, but cancel each other out [sich aufheben] and reduce
each other to nothing. But empiricism cannot attain to this absolute
reﬂection, or to an insight into the nullity of [all] determinacies in
the absolutely simple; instead, the many nullities remain for it a
mass of realities. But the positive unity, expressing itself as absolute
totality, must, for empiricism, be added on to this multiplicity as a
further and alien factor; and it is inherent even in this form of
linkage between the two aspects of absolute identity that their total-
ity will present itself just as dimly and impurely as that of the
original unity. It is easy for empiricism to supply a reason why one
of these separated unities exists for the other, or a reason for the
transition from the ﬁrst to the second, for [the activity of] giving
reasons in general comes easily to it. According to the ﬁction of the
state of nature, this state is abandoned because of the evils it
entails – which simply means that the desired end is assumed in
advance, namely that a reconciliation of the elements which, as
chaos, are in mutual conﬂict is the good or the end which must be
reached; or a similar reason for change, such as the social instinct,
is introduced directly into the notion [Vorstellung] of original quali-
ties as potentialities; or the conceptual form of the [human] capacity
is dispensed with altogether, so that one can proceed at once to the
purely particular qualities of the second unity’s appearance, i.e. to
the historical as the subjugation of the weak by the strong, etc.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
The unity itself, however, can only follow the principle of absolute
qualitative multiplicity, as in empirical physics, representing a mul-
tiplicity of divisions or relations; that is, it merely replaces the many
atomic qualities with further manifold complications of the simple
isolated [elements of a] multiplicity which was assumed to be orig-
inal, i.e. with superﬁcial contacts between these qualities which, for
themselves, are indestructible in their particularity and capable of
entering into only simple [leichte] and partial combinations and mix-
tures. And in so far as the unity is posited as a whole, it is given
the empty name of a formless external harmony called ‘society’ and
‘the state’. Even if this unity – whether it is considered in itself [fu¨r
sich] or, in a more empirical sense, in relation to its emergence – is
represented as absolute, i.e. as originating directly from God, and
even if the centre and inner essence of its subsistence are rep-
resented as divine, this representation [Vorstellung] nevertheless
again remains something formal, which merely hovers above the
multiplicity without penetrating it. God may certainly be recognised
not only as the founder of the association, but also as its preserver,
and in the latter connection, the majesty of the supreme authority
may well be recognised as his reﬂection and as in itself divine;
nevertheless, the divine aspect of the association is an external qual-
ity for the associated many, whose relationship with it can only be
that between ruler and ruled, because the principle of this empiri-
cism excludes the absolute unity of the one and the many. At this
point of the relation, empiricism coincides directly with its opposite
principle, for which abstract unity is primary, except that empiri-
cism is not embarrassed by its inconsistencies, which arise out of
mixing together things posited as so speciﬁcally different as abstract
unity and absolute multiplicity; and for precisely this reason, it also
has the advantage of not closing the door on views which, apart
from their purely material aspect, are manifestations [Erscheinungen]
of a purer and more divine inwardness [Innern] than can arise under
the principle of opposition, within which only domination and
obedience are possible.
The state of nature, and that majesty and divinity of the whole
state of law [Rechtszustand] which is alien to individuals and is
consequently itself individual and particular, as well as the relation
whereby the subjects [Subjekte] are absolutely subordinated to this
supreme authority,21 are the forms in which the fragmented


Political writings
moments of organic ethical life are ﬁxed as particular essences and,
like the Idea, thereby distorted [verkehrt];22 these moments are that
of absolute unity (and of unity in so far as it encompasses the oppo-
sition of unity and multiplicity and is absolute totality), and the
moment of inﬁnity (or of the nullity of the realities of the opposition
in question). The absolute Idea of ethical life, on the other hand,
contains both majesty and the state of nature as altogether identical,
for majesty itself is nothing other than absolute ethical nature;23 and
there can be no thought, in the real existence [Reellsein] of majesty,
of any loss of absolute freedom (which is what we should under-
stand by ‘natural freedom’) or of any abandonment of ethical nature.
But the natural, which in an ethical context must be thought of as
something to be abandoned, would not itself be ethical and therefore
could not remotely represent the latter in its original form. Nor is
inﬁnity, or the nullity of the individuals and subjects, in any way
ﬁxed in the absolute Idea, or relatively identical with majesty as a
relation of subjugation in which individuality [Einzelheit] would also
be something purely and simply posited. On the contrary, inﬁnity
in the Idea is genuine, and individuality as such is nothing and
completely at one with absolute ethical majesty; and this genuine,
living, non-subjugated oneness is the only genuine ethical life of the
individual.24
We have accused scientiﬁc empiricism – in so far as it is scien-
tiﬁc – of positive nullity and untruth in respect of its principles,
laws, etc., because it endows determinacies with the negative absol-
uteness of the concept by means of the formal unity in which it
places them, and expresses them as positively absolute, having being
in themselves [an sich seiend], as end and destiny, principle, law,
duty, and right – [all of] which forms signify something absolute.
But in order to preserve the unity of an organic relationship which
presents this qualitative determination with a mass of such concepts,
one of the determinacies – expressed as end, destiny, or law – must
be given supremacy over the other determinacies within the mani-
fold, and these others must be posited as unreal and as nothing in
comparison with it. It is by this application [of reasoning] and its
consistency that intuition is nulliﬁed as an inner totality; it is there-
fore by inconsistency that this incorporation [Aufnahme] of deter-
minacies into the concept can be corrected and the violence done
to intuition overcome, for inconsistency immediately nulliﬁes the


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
absoluteness previously attributed to a single determinacy.25 From
this point of view, the old and utterly inconsistent [kind of] empiri-
cism must be vindicated, not in relation to absolute science as such,
but in relation to the consistency of that empirical scientiﬁc pro-
cedure which we have hitherto been discussing. A great and pure
intuition can in this way express the genuinely ethical in the purely
architectonic qualities of its exposition, in which the context of
necessity and the dominance of form do not become visible – just
as in a building which mutely reveals the spirit of its originator
throughout its diversiﬁed mass, without setting up his actual image
concentrated into a single shape within it. In an exposition of this
kind, presented with the help of concepts, it is only through inepti-
tude that reason fails to elevate what it encompasses and penetrates
to the ideal form, and so to become conscious of it as Idea. If only
intuition remains true to itself and does not allow the understanding
to confuse it,26 it will [admittedly] be inept in its use of concepts
(inasmuch as it cannot dispense with these in order to express
itself); it will assume distorted shapes in its passage through the
consciousness; and it will be both incoherent and contradictory with
regard to the concept; but the disposition of the parts and of the
determinacies in their modiﬁcations does give an indication of the
invisible but rational spirit within,27 and in so far as this manifes-
tation [Erscheinung] of the spirit is regarded as a product and result,
it will, as a product, correspond perfectly with the Idea.
In these circumstances, nothing is easier for the understanding
than to mount an attack on this empiricism, to oppose its inept
reasons with alternative ones, to expose the confusion and contra-
diction of its concepts, to draw consequences of the most extreme
and irrational kind from its individual propositions, and in numer-
ous ways to demonstrate its unscientiﬁc character.28 Empiricism
justly deserves this treatment, especially if it has scientiﬁc preten-
sions or adopts a polemical stance in relation to science as such.
Conversely, if determinacies are ﬁxed and their law is consistently
applied to all the aspects which empiricism has brought to light, if
intuition is subordinated to them, and if in general what is com-
monly called a theory is constructed, empiricism can rightly accuse
this of one-sidedness; and by virtue of the complete range of deter-
minacies which it brings into play, it is within its power, by
[citing individual] instances, to force this theory to adopt a [level


Political writings
of] generality which becomes totally empty. This conceptual limi-
tation, the ﬁxing of determinacies and the elevation of one selected
aspect of appearance to universality so as to give it precedence over
others, is what in recent times has described itself not just as theory,
but as philosophy and – since it has ascended to more vacuous
abstractions and got hold of purer negations such as freedom, pure
will, humanity, etc. – as metaphysics. It believed it had ac-
complished philosophical revolutions in natural law, and especially
in constitutional and criminal law, when it dragged these sciences
in one direction or another with such insubstantial abstractions and
positively expressed negations as freedom, equality, the pure state,
etc., or with equally insubstantial determinacies picked up from
ordinary empiricism such as coercion (especially psychological
coercion, with its whole paraphernalia of opposition between practi-
cal reason and sensuous motives, and whatever else is at home in
this psychology); and with greater or lesser consistency, it likewise
compelled the science in question to incorporate insigniﬁcant [nich-
tige] concepts of this kind as absolute ends of reason, rational prin-
ciples, or laws. Empiricism rightly demands that such philosophis-
ing should take its directions from experience. It rightly insists on
stubbornly opposing such a contrived framework of principles. It
rightly prefers its own empirical inconsistency – based as it is on
an (albeit dim) intuition of the whole – to the consistency of such
philosophising; and it prefers its own confusion – for example, of
ethical life, morality, and legality, or, in the more speciﬁc case of
punishment, its confusion of revenge, national security, reform [of
the criminal], the carrying out of a threat, deterrence, prevention,
etc. (whether in a scientiﬁc context or in practical life) – to the
absolute separation of these various aspects of one and the same
intuition, and to the deﬁnition of the latter as a whole in terms of
a single one of these qualities. It rightly maintains that the theory,
and what calls itself philosophy and metaphysics, has no application
and contradicts practical necessity (although this non-applicability
would be better expressed if one were to say that there is nothing
absolute, no reality, and no truth in the theory and philosophy in
question). Finally, empiricism rightly reproaches such philosophis-
ing with ingratitude, because it is empiricism which furnishes it
with the content of its concepts and must then see this content
corrupted and distorted by this philosophising; for the determinacy


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
of the content, as supplied by empiricism, forms, with other deter-
minacies, a complex combination which is essentially an organic
and living whole, and this is killed by such fragmentation and such
elevation of insubstantial abstractions and details to absolute
status.29
If empiricism were itself pure and remained so, it would be
fully justiﬁed in asserting itself against such theory and philos-
ophy, and in regarding the mass of principles, ends, laws, duties,
and rights not as something absolute, but as distinctions of
importance for that [process of] education [Bildung] through
which its own intuition becomes clearer to it. But when empiri-
cism appears to seek a conﬂict with theory, it usually emerges
that both of them embody an intuition which is already contami-
nated and superseded by reﬂection and a distorted reason; and
what professes to be empiricism is merely weaker in abstraction
and shows less initiative, in that it has not itself selected, dis-
tinguished, and ﬁxed its own limited concepts [Beschra¨nktheiten],
but is tied to concepts which have become ﬁrmly entrenched in
general culture [Bildung] as ‘sound common sense’ and hence
appear to have been derived directly from experience. The con-
ﬂict between such entrenched distortions of intuition and the
newly ﬁxed abstractions offers a spectacle which is necessarily as
motley as the combatants themselves. Each side deploys against
the other at one moment an abstraction, at another some so-called
experience; and on both sides, empiricism is destroyed by empiri-
cism, and [conceptual] limitation by [conceptual] limitation. At
one moment principles and laws are vaunted against philosophy,
which is ruled out as an incompetent judge of those [supposedly]
absolute
truths
with
which
the
understanding
has
become
obsessed, at another philosophy is misused for ratiocination in
the name of philosophy.
This relative right which was conceded to empiricism – [at least]
when intuition is the dominant factor within it – against the com-
bining of empirical and reﬂective elements, refers, it will be recalled,
to its unconscious inner nature. But the intermediate term between
this inner nature and its external expression – i.e. consciousness –
is the area where its deﬁciency (and hence its one-sidedness) lies;
and its tendency to go against the scientiﬁc, its incomplete link with
the concept (with which it only just makes contact and is merely


Political writings
contaminated in the process), derives from the necessity that multi-
plicity and ﬁnitude should be absolutely submerged in inﬁnity or
universality.
[II]
But it is the aspect of inﬁnity which constitutes the principle of that
apriorism which sets itself against the empirical, and we must now
consider this in turn.
In the absolute concept of inﬁnity, the drift of empirical opinion
(with its mixing of the manifold with the simple) in relation to the
concept is released from its vacillation, and the incomplete separ-
ation [of the two elements] is resolved. It is true that, at a lower
level of abstraction, inﬁnity is also emphasised (as the absoluteness
of the subject) in the theory of happiness in general and especially
in natural law, by those systems which are described as anti-
socialistic and which posit the being of the individual as the primary
and supreme value;30 but it is not raised to the pure abstraction
which it has attained in the idealism of Kant or Fichte.
It is not appropriate in the present context to give an account of
the nature of inﬁnity and its manifold transformations. For since it
is the principle of movement and change, its essence is itself none
other than to be the unmediated opposite of itself; or [to put it
differently,] it is the negatively absolute, the abstraction of form.
Inasmuch as this is pure identity, it is immediately pure non-
identity or absolute opposition; inasmuch as it is pure ideality, it is
equally immediately pure reality; inasmuch as it is the inﬁnite, it is
the absolutely ﬁnite; inasmuch as it is the indeterminate, it is absol-
ute determinacy. That absolute transition to its own opposite which
is its essence, and the disappearance of every reality in its opposite,
cannot be halted except in an empirical manner, by ﬁxing one of its
aspects (namely reality, or the subsistence of the opposites) and
abstracting from the opposite of this (namely the nullity of this
subsistence). This real opposition consists, on the one hand, of
manifold being or ﬁnitude, and on the other, of inﬁnity as the
negation of multiplicity (or, in a positive sense, as pure unity); and
the absolute concept which is thereby constituted supplies, within
this unity, what has been called ‘pure reason’. But the relation of
this pure unity to the manifold being [dem mannigfaltigen Seienden]


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
which is opposed to it is also itself a double relationship [Bezie-
hung] – either the positive relationship of the subsistence of both, or
the nulliﬁcation of both. Both this subsistence and this nulliﬁcation
should, however, be understood as only partial; for if the subsist-
ence of both were absolute, the two could have no relationship
whatsoever, and if the complete nulliﬁcation of both were posited,
there could be no subsistence of either. This partial subsistence and
partial negation of both – the opposition of a divisible ‘I’ to a divis-
ible not-‘I’ within the ‘I’ (i.e. in a relationship which, for this very
reason, is likewise partial) – is the absolute principle of this philos-
ophy. In the former, positive relationship, the pure unity is called
theoretical reason, and in the negative relationship, practical reason;
and since, in the latter, the negation of the opposition is primary
(so that unity is more subsistent), whereas in the former, the sub-
sistence of the opposition is primary (so that multiplicity [Vielheit]
is primary and more subsistent), practical reason appears here as
real, whereas theoretical reason appears as ideal. – One can see,
however, that this deﬁnition is wholly concerned with opposition
and appearance. For that pure unity which is posited as reason is,
of course, negative and ideal if what is opposed to it, namely the
many (which is accordingly the irrational), is purely and simply
subsistent – just as it will appear more subsistent and real if the
many is posited as negated (or rather as what should be negated).
But if nature is posited in opposition to reason as pure unity, this
irrational many is irrational only because it is posited as the non-
essential [wesenlose] abstraction of the many, whereas reason is pos-
ited as the non-essential abstraction of the one. Regarded in itself,
however, this many is just as much absolute unity of the one and
the many as unity is; and nature, or theoretical reason (which is the
many), must, as the absolute unity of the one and the many, con-
versely be deﬁned rather as real reason. But ethical reason (which
is unity) must, as the absolute unity of the one and the many, be
deﬁned as ideal reason, because in the opposition, reality belongs
with multiplicity, while identity belongs with unity.
Consequently, in what is known as practical reason, one can
recognise only the formal Idea of the identity of the ideal and the
real, and this Idea should be the absolute point of indifference in
these [philosophical] systems.31 But this Idea does not escape from
difference [Differenz], and the ideal does not attain reality; for


Political writings
despite the fact that the ideal and the real are identical in this practi-
cal reason, the real remains purely and simply opposed [to the
ideal]. This real is essentially posited [as] outside reason, and practi-
cal reason is [to be found] only in its difference [Differenz] from it.
The essence of this practical reason is to be understood as a causal
relation to the many – as an identity which is absolutely encumbered
[afﬁziert] with a difference and does not emerge from [the realm of]
appearance. This science of the ethical, which talks of the absolute
identity of the ideal and the real, accordingly does not do what it
claims to do: its ethical reason is, in truth and in its essence, a
non-identity of the ideal and the real.
Ethical reason has already been deﬁned as the absolute in the
form of unity; consequently, since it is itself posited as a determin-
acy, it immediately seems, in this determination, to be posited just
as essentially with an opposite. There is, however, a difference
[Unterschied] here, in that true reality and its absolute are com-
pletely free from this opposition to nature, and are the absolute
identity of the ideal and the real. The absolute, in accordance with
its Idea, is recognised as this identity of different things, whose
determinate character [Bestimmtheit] is to be unity and multiplicity
respectively; and this determinate character is ideal, i.e. it resides
only in inﬁnity in accordance with the concept of inﬁnity as indi-
cated above: it is both superseded and posited. Each of the two, the
unity and the multiplicity, whose identity is the absolute, is itself a
unity of the one and the many. But that unity whose ideal determin-
acy is multiplicity is the subsistence of the opposites (i.e. positive
reality), and it therefore itself necessitates an opposite and double
relation. Since the real subsists within it, its identity is a relative
one, and this relative identity of opposites is a necessity. Since it
[i.e. this unity] thus resides [ist] in difference [Differenz], its relation
itself or the identity of the relation must also be a difference [ein
Differentes]; that is, both unity and multiplicity must be primary
within it. This twofold relation determines the dual aspect of the
necessity, or the appearance, of the absolute. Since this twofold
relation refers to multiplicity, if we then describe as ‘indifference’
that unity of different things which stands on the opposite side and
in which the reality [of these things], or the many, is superseded,
then the absolute is the unity of indifference and relation. And since
this relation is a double one, the appearance of the absolute is deter-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
mined [ﬁrstly,] as the unity of indifference and of that relation – or
that relative identity – in which the many is primary and positive,
and [secondly,] as the unity of indifference and of that relation in
which the unity is primary and positive. The former is physical
nature, and the latter is ethical nature.32 And since indifference or
unity is freedom, whereas relation or relative identity is necessity,
each of these two appearances is the oneness and indifference of
freedom and necessity. Substance is absolute and inﬁnite; in this
predicate of inﬁnity, the necessity of the divine nature, or its
appearance, is entailed, and this necessity is expressed as reality in
none other than a double relation. Each of the two attributes itself
expresses the substance, and is absolute and inﬁnite, or the unity of
indifference and relation. And in the relation, the distinction
between them is posited in such a way that, in the relation of the
ones, the many is the primary element which stands out from the
others, and in the relation of the others, the one is the primary
element which stands out from these. But since unity is primary in
the relation of ethical nature itself, this nature is free even in this
relative identity, i.e. in its necessity. Or, since the fact that unity is
primary does not mean that this relative identity is superseded, this
second freedom is so determined that, although the necessary is
indeed [present] for ethical nature, it is posited negatively. Now if
we were to isolate this aspect of the relative identity of ethical
nature, and to acknowledge as the essence of ethical nature not the
absolute unity of indifference and of this relative identity, but the
aspect of relation or necessity, we would be at the same point at
which the essence of practical reason is deﬁned as possessing absol-
ute causality, or as being free while necessity is only negative, but
for that very reason nevertheless posited. Consequently, this very
freedom does not escape from difference; relation or relative ident-
ity is made the essence, and the absolute is understood only as
negatively absolute or inﬁnite.
The empirical and popular expression through which this notion,
which envisages ethical nature solely in terms of its relative identity,
has recommended itself so widely is [the claim] that the real, under
such names as sensuousness, inclinations, the lower appetitive fac-
ulty, etc. (the moment of the multiplicity of the relation), and reason
(the moment of the pure unity of the relation) do not coincide (the
moment of the opposition of unity and multiplicity); and that reason


Political writings
consists in willing out of its own spontaneity and autonomy, and in
limiting and dominating that sensuousness (the moment whereby
the relation is determined in such a way that unity, or the negation
of multiplicity, has primacy within it). The reality of this notion is
based on the empirical consciousness, and on the universal experi-
ence of everyone in ﬁnding within the self both that division and
that pure unity of practical reason (or the abstraction of the ‘I’)
[referred to above]. Nor can there be any question of denying this
point of view; on the contrary, it has already been deﬁned as the
aspect of relative identity, of the being of the inﬁnite within the
ﬁnite. But it must at least be stated that it is not the absolute point
of view, in which it has been shown that the relation proves to be
only a single aspect, whose isolation consequently proves to be a
one-sided thing; and [it must also be stated] that, since morality
[Sittlichkeit] is something absolute, the point of view referred to is
not that of morality – on the contrary, there is no morality within
it.33 And as for the appeal to ordinary consciousness, morality
[Sittlichkeit] itself must be present within this consciousness just as
necessarily as that point of view which, since the relation, isolated
for itself, is posited not as a moment, but as having being in itself,
is the principle of immorality [Unsittlichkeit]. The empirical con-
sciousness is empirical because within it, the moments of the absol-
ute appear scattered, co-existent, consecutive, and fragmented; but
it would not in itself be an ordinary consciousness if morality
[Sittlichkeit] were not likewise present within it. That formal philos-
ophy [referred to above] was able to choose among these manifold
appearances of the moral and the immoral [des Sittlichen und des
Unsittlichen] which are present in the empirical consciousness, and
it is not the fault of ordinary consciousness, but of philosophy, that
it chose the appearance of the immoral and imagined that it had
[found] the genuine absolute in negative absoluteness or inﬁnity.
The exposition of this practical philosophy is based on a presen-
tation of what this negative absoluteness can accomplish, and we
must review the chief moments in this mistaken attempt to discover
a genuinely absolute [quality] in the negatively absolute.
It at once becomes clear that, since pure unity constitutes the
essence of practical reason, a system of morality [Sittlichkeit] is so
much out of the question that not even a plurality of laws is poss-
ible; for whatever goes beyond the pure concept, or – since this


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
concept, in so far as it is posited as negating the many (i.e. as
practical) is duty – whatever goes beyond the pure concept of duty
and beyond the abstraction of a law, no longer pertains to this pure
reason. Thus Kant, as the one who presented this abstraction of the
concept in its absolute purity, fully recognises that practical reason
is completely lacking in any content of the [moral] law and that
it can do no more than make the formal appropriateness [Form der
Tauglichkeit] of the will’s maxim into a supreme law. The will’s
maxim has a content and includes a determinacy; the pure will, on
the other hand, is free from such determinacies. The absolute law
of practical reason is to raise this determinacy to the form of pure
unity, and the expression of this determinacy elevated to this form
is the law. If the determinacy can be elevated to the form of the
pure concept, and if it does not thereby cancel itself [sich aufheben],
then it is justiﬁed and has itself become absolute, through its nega-
tive absoluteness, as law and right or duty. But the material [aspect]
of the maxim remains what it is, a determinacy or individual quality
[Einzelheit]; and the universality which its formal elevation confers
on it is consequently a purely analytic unity, so that, when the unity
conferred on it is expressed in a proposition purely for what it is,
that proposition is an analytical one and a tautology. In truth, the
sublime capacity of pure practical reason to legislate autonomously
consists in the production of tautologies; and the pure identity of
the understanding, expressed in theoretical terms as the principle
of contradiction, remains exactly the same when applied to the prac-
tical form. If the question ‘What is truth?’, when put to logic and
answered by it, provides Kant with ‘the ridiculous spectacle of one
man milking a billy-goat while another holds a sieve beneath it’,
then the question ‘What is right and duty?’, put to and answered
by pure practical reason, is of exactly the same kind. Kant recog-
nises that ‘a universal criterion of truth would be one which would
apply to all knowledge [Erkenntnisse], irrespective of the objects of
this knowledge, but it is clear that, since this involves abstracting
from the whole content of knowledge (although truth is concerned
with precisely this content), it is quite impossible and absurd to ask
for a test of the truth of this content’34 (because this test is supposed
to have nothing to do with the content of knowledge). With these
words, Kant in fact passes judgement on the principle of duty and
right which is set up by practical reason. For the latter abstracts


Political writings
completely from all material [aspects] of the will; any content pre-
supposes a heteronomy of the arbitrary will [Willku¨r]. But our inter-
est here is precisely to establish what right and duty are; we enquire
what the content of the moral law is, and our sole concern is with
this content. But the essence of pure will and of pure practical
reason is to abstract from all content, so that it is self-contradictory
to look to this absolute practical reason for a moral legislation –
which would have to have a content – because the essence of this
reason consists in having no content at all.35
Thus, before this formalism can pronounce a law, it is necessary
that some material [aspect], some determinacy, should be posited
to supply its content; and the form which is conferred upon this
determinacy is that of unity or universality. ‘That a maxim of your
will must simultaneously count as a principle of universal legis-
lation’36 – this basic law of pure practical reason implies that some
determinacy which constitutes the content of the maxim of the par-
ticular will should be posited as a concept, as a universal. But every
determinacy is capable of being elevated to conceptual form and
posited as a quality [Qualita¨t], and there is nothing which could not
be made into a moral law in this way.37 But every determinacy is
particular in itself, and is not a universal; it is confronted by an
opposite determinacy, and it is determinate only in so far as it has
such an opposite. Each of the two determinacies is equally capable
of being thought; which of the two is to be elevated to unity (or
to be thought), and which is to be abstracted from, is completely
indeterminate and free. If one of them is ﬁxed as subsisting in and
for itself, the other cannot, of course, be posited; but this other can
equally well be thought and (since the form of thought is [of] the
essence) expressed as an absolute moral law. That ‘the commonest
understanding, without any guidance’, can perform this simple
operation and distinguish what form of maxim is appropriate for
universal legislation or not, Kant shows by the following example.38
I ask whether the maxim that I should increase my wealth by all
reliable means can count as a universal practical law if such a means
should present itself to me in the shape of a deposit [with which I
am entrusted].39 The content of this maxim should thus be ‘that
anyone may deny having received a deposit if no one can prove that
he did so’. This question supplies its own answer [according to
Kant], because ‘such a principle, as a law, would destroy itself,


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
since its effect would be that no deposits would be made’. But what
contradiction is there in no deposits being made? The absence of
deposits will contradict other necessary determinacies, just as the
possibility of a deposit will be compatible with other necessary
determinacies and consequently itself be necessary. But it is not
other ends and material reasons which have to be invoked; on the
contrary, the immediate form of the concept is to decide the cor-
rectness of the ﬁrst or the second assumption. But the two opposing
determinacies are equally indifferent as far as the form is concerned;
each can be conceived as a quality, and this conception can be
expressed as a law. If the determinacy of property in general is
posited, the following tautological proposition can be constructed:
‘Property is property and nothing else besides’; and this tautological
production is the legislation of the practical reason already referred
to: property, if there is property, must be property. But if the
opposite determinacy, i.e. the negation of property, is posited, the
legislation of the same practical reason results in the tautology: non-
property is non-property. If there is no property, anything which
claims to be property must be annulled [aufgehoben]. But the inter-
est [at stake] is precisely to prove that there must be property; we
are solely concerned with what lies outside the competence of this
practical legislation of pure reason, namely with deciding which of
the opposing determinacies must be posited. But pure reason
requires that this should have been done in advance, and that one
of the opposing determinacies should already have been posited;
only then can it enact its now superﬂuous legislation.
The analytic unity and tautology of practical reason is not only
superﬂuous, however, but – in its present application – false, and
it must be recognised as the principle of immorality [Unsittlichkeit].
The mere elevation of a determinacy to the form of unity is sup-
posed to change the nature of its being; and the determinacy, which
by its nature is opposed by another determinacy so that each is the
negation of the other and neither is absolute (and as far as the
functioning of practical reason is concerned, it is a matter of indif-
ference which of the two it has to deal with, for it supplies only the
empty form), is itself supposed to become absolute, as law and duty,
by means of this union with the form of pure unity. But whenever
a determinacy or individual quality is raised to [the status of] some-
thing in itself [zu einem Ansich], irrationality and (in a moral


Political writings
context) immorality [Unsittlichkeit] are posited. – The illegitimacy
of this transformation of the conditioned and unreal into something
unconditioned and absolute is easily recognised, and its subterfuges
are easily detected. When the determinacy is elevated to the form
of pure unity or formal identity and the determinate concept is
expressed as a proposition, the result is the tautology of the formal
proposition ‘determinacy A is determinacy A’. But the form, as
expressed in the proposition ‘the identity of the subject and predi-
cate is an absolute’, yields only a negative or formal [statement]
which has nothing to do with determinacy A itself; this content is
entirely hypothetical as far as the form is concerned. But the absol-
uteness which is present in the proposition by virtue of its form
takes on a wholly different signiﬁcance within practical reason; for
it is also transferred to the content, which is by nature a conditioned
thing [ein Bedingtes], and contrary to its essence, this non-absolute,
conditioned thing is raised to [the status of] an absolute as a result
of this confusion. It is not in the interest of practice to produce a
tautology, and practical reason would not make so much fuss just
for the sake of this empty form (although this is the only power
which it has); but through this confusion of the absolute form with
the conditioned material, the absoluteness of the form is imposed
by stealth on the unreal and conditioned character of the content,
and this inversion and sleight of hand lies at the heart of the practi-
cal legislation of pure reason. The true meaning of the proposition
‘property is property’ is ‘the identity which this proposition
expresses through its form is absolute’; but instead, the meaning
‘the material [content] of this proposition, namely property, is
absolute’ is falsely attributed to it, and any determinacy can at once
be made into a duty. The arbitrary will can choose between oppos-
ing determinacies, and it would be sheer ineptitude if, for any [par-
ticular] action, some ground could not be found which not only
possessed the form of probability – as with the Jesuits – but also
acquired the form of right and duty; and this moral formalism is
no better than the moral artiﬁce of the Jesuits or the principles of
eudaemonism,40 which are one and the same thing.
It should be clearly noted in this connection that the elevation of
a determinacy to the concept must be understood as a [purely]
formal operation, or as implying that the determinacy remains [as
it was], so that matter and form contradict one another (inasmuch


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
as the former is determinate and the latter inﬁnite). But if the con-
tent were genuinely equated with the form, and determinacy with
unity, no practical legislation would be possible: the determinacy
would simply be annulled. Thus, property itself is directly opposed
to universality;41 but if it is equated with it, it is superseded. – This
annulment of determinacy by elevating it to inﬁnity or universality
also causes problems for practical legislation. For if the determinacy
is such that it itself expresses the superseding of a determinacy,
then the elevation of this supersession [Aufheben] to universality or
supersededness [Aufgehobensein] annuls both the determinacy which
is to be superseded and the supersession itself; consequently, a
maxim which refers to a determinacy of this kind, which is annulled
when thought of in terms of universality, would be incapable of
becoming the principle of a universal legislation, and would conse-
quently be immoral. In other words, the maxim’s content, which is
the supersession of a determinacy, contradicts itself if it is raised to
the concept. For if the determinacy is thought of as superseded, its
supersession no longer obtains; but if this determinacy is supposed
to remain [in being], then the supersession which was posited in
the maxim is in turn no longer posited – and whether the determin-
acy remains [in being] or not, it cannot in either case be superseded.
But a maxim which is immoral [unmoralisch] in principle (because
it is self-contradictory) is absolutely rational, and hence absolutely
moral, inasmuch as it expresses the supersession of a determinacy;
for the rational in its negative aspect is the indifference of determin-
acies, the supersededness of the conditioned. Thus, the determinate
injunction [die Bestimmtheit] to help the poor expresses the super-
session of the determinacy which is poverty; but if the maxim whose
content is this determinacy is tested by raising it to a principle of
universal legislation, it will prove to be false, because it annuls itself.
If it is thought that the poor should be helped universally, then
there are either no longer any poor, or there are only the poor (in
which case no one remains to help them), so that in both cases, the
help becomes irrelevant; thus, if the maxim is thought of as univer-
sal, it cancels itself [hebt sich selbst auf]. But if the determinacy which
is the condition of the supersession – namely poverty – should
remain [in being], the possibility of help also remains, but only as
a possibility and not as the actuality implied by the maxim. If pov-
erty is to remain in order that the duty of helping the poor can be


Political writings
fulﬁlled, this very retention of poverty runs directly against the
fulﬁlment of the duty. Thus, the maxim that one should honourably
defend one’s fatherland against its enemies, and an inﬁnite number
of other maxims, cancel themselves out [heben sich auf] whenever
they are thought of as principles of universal legislation; for when,
for example, the above maxim is extended in this way, the determi-
nacy of a fatherland, like those of enemies and defence, cancels itself
out.
Unity neither has the purely negative meaning of the mere super-
session of determinacies, nor is it genuine unity of intuition or the
positive indifference of such determinacies. Comparison with the
latter [kind of] unity will clarify the distorted nature [Wesen] of the
former from another angle. For the former unity of practical reason
is essentially encumbered [afﬁziert] with a difference [Differenz],
because it is posited either as the ﬁxing of a determinacy, so that
others are thereby immediately excluded (or negatively posited), or
as an analytic proposition, in which case the identity of this prop-
osition (i.e. its form) immediately contradicts its content. This can
also be formulated as follows: given its content, this proposition
contradicts the requirement that it should be a judgement. The
proposition was supposed to say something, but an identical prop-
osition says nothing, for it is not a judgement, because the relation
of the subject to the predicate is merely formal, and no difference
between them is posited. Or if the unity is understood as univer-
sality, then it refers entirely to an empirical multiplicity, and the
present determinacy is opposed to an inﬁnite mass of empirically
different determinacies. The unity of intuition, on the other hand,
is the indifference of the determinacies which constitute a whole;
in this unity, they are not ﬁxed as separate and opposed, but inte-
grated and objectivised. And since this indifference and the differ-
ent determinacies are completely united, this unity does not involve
a division either between indifference as possibility and the deter-
minacies as actualities, or between some of the determinacies as
possible and others as actual; on the contrary, it is absolute pres-
ence. And in this power of intuition and presence lies the power
of morality [Sittlichkeit] in general42 – and, of course, of morality
[Sittlichkeit] in particular, with which that legislative reason referred
to above is primarily concerned, and from which that form of the


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
concept, of formal unity and universality, must rather be kept com-
pletely separate. For the essence of morality is immediately annulled
[aufgehoben] by this very form, in that it renders contingent what is
morally necessary by making it appear in opposition to other things;
but in morality [Sittlichkeit], the contingent – which is identical
[eins] with the empirically necessary – is immoral [unsittlich]. A pain
which is [present] is raised by the power of intuition out of [the
realm of] sensation, in which it is accidental and contingent, to
unity, and [given] the shape of something objective and necessary
which has being for itself; and through this immediate unity, which
gives no thought to what possibilities formal unity offers on one
side or the other, it is preserved in its absolute presentness. But as
a result of the objectivity of intuition and the raising [of the sen-
sation of pain] to this unity of being-for-itself, it is genuinely
detached from the subject and rendered ideal in the ﬁxed intuition
of this unity.43 If, on the other hand, the pain is compared with
other determinacies by the unity of reﬂection, or thought of as uni-
versal and found not to be so, it is in both cases rendered contin-
gent, and the subject thereby recognises itself in its mere contin-
gency and particularity; this cognition is the sensibility [Empﬁnd-
samkeit] and immorality [Unsittlichkeit] of impotence. Or if
morality [das Sittliche] is concerned with relations between individ-
uals, it is pure intuition and ideality (as in the entrusting of a
deposit) which must be held on to and kept free from any inter-
ference on the part of formal unity and of the thought of other
possible determinacies. The expression of this unity of intuition
(‘someone else’s property entrusted to me is someone else’s prop-
erty entrusted to me and nothing else besides’) has a completely
different meaning from the universally expressed tautology of prac-
tical legislation (‘an alien property entrusted to me is an alien prop-
erty entrusted to me’). For the latter proposition can equally well
be confronted by another to the effect that ‘something entrusted to
me which is not the property of another is not the property of the
other’; that is, a determinacy raised to the concept thereby becomes
ideal, and the opposite determinacy can equally well be posited. On
the other hand, the expression of intuition contains a ‘this’, a living
relation and absolute presence whose possibility is inseparably con-
nected [schlechthin verknu¨pft] with it, whereas any possibility distinct


Political writings
from it, or any [possibility of] otherness [Anderssein], is simply
annulled,
for
in
this
possible
otherness
lies
immorality
[Unsittlichkeit].44
Now if the unity of practical reason were not this positive unity
of intuition but had only the negative meaning of annulling the
determinate, it would simply express the essence of negative reason
or of inﬁnity, of the absolute concept. But because inﬁnity becomes
ﬁxed and divorced from the absolute, it shows itself in its essence
as being its own opposite. It makes a mockery of reﬂection, which
seeks to pin it down and grasp in it an absolute unity, and it does
so by also giving rise to the complete opposite of such unity, namely
a difference [Differenz] and multiplicity; thus, within this opposition
(which reproduces itself inﬁnitely), it permits only a relative ident-
ity, and even as inﬁnity, it is consequently its own opposite, namely
absolute ﬁnitude. And as it thus becomes isolated, it is itself only
the powerless form, abandoned by the genuinely nullifying power
of reason; it takes up and accommodates determinacies without
annulling them, but rather perpetuating them.
It is on the opposition described above, on its ﬁxation as a reality
and its incomplete connection [Verknu¨pfung] as a relative identity,
that the recent deﬁnition of the concept of natural law and of its
position within the whole science of ethics [des Sittlichen] depends.45
We must now consider from this more speciﬁc angle what has hith-
erto been examined in general terms, [and so discover] how that
separation, insuperable as soon as it was posited, appears in its own
distinctive way in the science of natural law.
The absolute concept, which is both the principle of opposition
and opposition itself, presents itself – since it is ﬁxed – within this
separation in such a way that, as pure unity, it is opposed to itself
as multiplicity. As a result, it can remain the absolute concept both
in the form of pure unity and in that of pure multiplicity; and in
the form of multiplicity, it is not a varied range [Mannigfaltigkeit]
of differently determined concepts, but is subsumed under unity as
well as under multiplicity. The concept itself is subsumed in many
determinate concepts, and is [nevertheless] not many but one. The
absolute concept, being itself a multiplicity, is a mass of subjects,
and in the form of pure unity – as absolute quantity – it is opposed
to these as its own qualitative and posited being [Gesetztsein]. Thus,
both [aspects] are posited – an inner oneness of the opposites, which


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
is the essence of both (i.e. the absolute concept), and a division of
the concept under the form of unity (in which it is right and duty)
and under the form of multiplicity (in which it is the thinking and
willing subject). The ﬁrst of these aspects, whereby the essence of
right and duty and the essence of the thinking and willing subject
are totally one, is the main aspect of the philosophy of Kant and
Fichte (as is, generally speaking, the higher abstraction of inﬁnity).
But this philosophy has not remained true to this oneness; instead,
although it does acknowledge this oneness as the essence and absol-
ute, it posits the separation into the one and the many just as absol-
utely, according equal dignity to both. Consequently, it is not the
positive absolute which constitutes the essence of both and in which
the two are one, but the negative absolute or the absolute concept;
furthermore, this necessary oneness becomes formal, and the two
opposite determinacies, posited as absolute, accordingly belong in
their subsistence to ideality, which is in this respect the mere pos-
sibility of both. It is possible for right and duty to have reality
independently, as a particular [realm] separate from the subjects
and from which the subjects are separate; but it is also possible for
the two to be linked.46 And it is absolutely necessary for these two
possibilities to be kept apart and distinguished from one another,
so that each may form the basis of a separate science – one con-
cerned with the oneness of the pure concept and the subjects (or the
morality [Moralita¨t] of actions), the other with their non-oneness
[Nichteinssein] (or legality), but in such a way that if, in this division
of the ethical realm [des Sittlichen] into morality [Moralita¨t] and
legality, these two become mere possibilities, they are both for that
very reason equally positive. Admittedly, the one is negative for the
other – but both are equally so. It is not that one is the absolutely
positive, and the other the absolutely negative; on the contrary, each
is both [positive and negative] within their mutual relation, and
since both are only relatively positive in the ﬁrst instance, neither
legality nor morality is absolutely positive or truly ethical. But then,
since each of the two is as positive as the other, both are absolutely
necessary, and the possibility that the pure concept and the subject
of duty and right are not one must be posited unalterably and with-
out qualiﬁcation.
The basic concepts of the system of legality ﬂow directly from
the above, in the following manner. The pure self-consciousness,


Political writings
the ‘I’, is the true essence and the absolute, but it is nevertheless
conditioned. The condition to which it is subject is that it should
progress to real consciousness. In this relation of mutual con-
ditionedness, the two forms [of consciousness] remain totally
opposed to one another. The former pure self-consciousness, pure
unity, or the empty law of ethics [Sittengesetz] – the universal free-
dom of all – is opposed to the real consciousness, i.e. to the subject,
the rational being, and individual freedom – which Fichte, in a
more popular manner, expresses as the presupposition that ‘loyalty
and faith are lost’.47 On this presupposition, a system is established
which aims to unite both the concept and the subject of ethical life,
despite their separation (although because of the latter, their union
is only formal and external); the resultant relation is called coercion.48
Since this externality of oneness is thereby totally ﬁxed and posited
as something absolute which has being in itself, the inner dimension
[Innerlichkeit], the reconstruction of the lost loyalty and faith, the
oneness of universal and individual freedom, and ethical life [in
general] are rendered impossible.
We shall refer here to Fichte’s exposition as the most consistent
and least formal account, which actually attempts to create a con-
sistent system with no need of an ethics [Sittlichkeit] and religion
that are alien to it. In a system of such externality (as in any system
which proceeds from the conditioned to the unconditioned), it is
either impossible to discover anything unconditioned, or if some-
thing of this kind is posited, it is [merely] a formal indifference
which has the conditioned and the different outside it; it is essence
without form, power without wisdom, quantity without inner qual-
ity or inﬁnity, rest without movement.
The supreme task in an arrangement which works with mechan-
ical necessity so that the activity of each individual is coerced by
the general will is one which presupposes an opposition between
the individual will and the general will (given that this general will
must necessarily be real in those subjects [Subjekte] who are its
organs and administrators). Oneness with the general will conse-
quently cannot be understood and posited as inner absolute majesty,
but as something to be produced by an external relation, or by
coercion. But in reality, in the process of coercion and supervision
which must in this case be posited, one cannot continue in inﬁnite
series and make a leap from the real to the ideal; there must be a


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
supreme positive point from which coercion in accordance with the
concept of universal freedom originates. But this point, like all other
points, must itself be coerced into coercing [others] in accordance
with the concept of universal freedom; for any point within this
universal system of coercion which were not itself coerced would
depart from the principle [of the whole] and become transcendent.
The question is therefore how this supreme will, by coercion and
supervision, can likewise be made to conform to the concept of
the general will so that the system remains wholly immanent and
transcendental. The only way in which this could happen would be
for the power of the whole to be divided between the two opposing
sides so that the governed are coerced by the government and the
government by the governed. If we assume that the power – and
hence the possible coercion – exercised by the two sides is of
unequal strength, then only one part, rather than its opposite, is
subject to coercion, inasmuch as the one has more power than the
other or the power of both is excessive; and this ought not to
happen. But in point of fact, only the possessor of excess power
is genuinely powerful, for before something can impose limits on
something else, it must be equal to it.49 The weaker [of the two]
cannot therefore limit the other; both must consequently coerce and
be coerced by one another with equal power. But if in this way
action and reaction, stance and resistance, are equally strong, the
power on both sides is reduced to equilibrium; thus all functions,
actions, and expressions of will are annulled [aufgehoben]. This
reduction may be thought of in positive or negative terms; that is,
action and reaction may be posited as existing [seiend] and working,
or posited negatively, so that the equilibrium arises because neither
action nor reaction is present. Nor is it a true solution to try to
remedy this stagnationa by opening out the direct confrontation [of
the two sides] into a circle of effects, so that the central point of
contact at which the reduction of the opposites takes place may be
annulled [aufgehoben] by deceptively leaving the centre empty. In
opposition to the hierarchy of coercion which descends from the
supreme authority [Gewalt] through all its ramiﬁcations down to
every individual unit [allen Einzelheiten], a corresponding pyramid
is in turn supposed to ascend from the latter to an uppermost point
a Translator’s note: Literally, ‘this death’.


Political writings
of counter-pressure acting against the downward pressure.50 The
whole is thus supposed to turn round in a circle in which the
immediacy of contact would vanish; the forces – in so far as they
constitute a mass – would be kept apart, and intermediate elements
would create an artiﬁcial difference [Differenz] so that no single
element [Glied] would react directly upon the one which moved it
(so reducing the two to equilibrium), but always on another
element, so that the ﬁrst would move the last and the last would in
turn move the ﬁrst. But instead of moving, such a perpetuum mobile
whose parts are all supposed to move one another round in a circle
will at once achieve perfect equilibrium and become a perfect perpet-
uum quietum; for pressure and counter-pressure, coercion and expo-
sure to coercion are precisely equivalent, and they are just as
directly opposed to one another, and produce the same reduction
of forces, as in the original model [Vorstellung]. Pure quantity
cannot be subverted by such mediation, which brings no difference,
true inﬁnity, or form whatsoever into it; on the contrary, it remains,
as before, a completely undivided, pure, and shapeless power. It is
impossible to compel such a power to conform in this way to the
concept of universal freedom, for no authority can be found outside
it, and no division can be established within it.
For this reason, the expedient of a purely formal distinction is in
turn adopted. Actual power is admittedly posited as one, and as
united in the government; but it is contrasted with possible power,
and this possibility is supposed as such to be capable of coercing
the actuality in question. This second, powerless existence of the
general will is supposed to be in a position to judge whether the
power has deserted the ﬁrst [existence of the general will] with
which it is associated, and whether or not this power still accords
with the concept of universal freedom.51 Indeed, the general will is
supposed to supervise the supreme power in general, and, if a pri-
vate will takes the place of the general will within it, to wrest the
power from this private will; the manner in which this is supposedly
accomplished is by a public declaration, possessing absolute force,
of the complete nullity of all actions of the supreme political auth-
ority from that moment onwards. What should and may not happen
is for the power to detach itself on its own independent judgement,
as this would amount to insurrection; for this pure power consists
solely of private wills, which are consequently unable to constitute


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
themselves as a collective [gemeinsame] will. But it is the second
collective will [referred to above] which declares that this mass [of
private wills] is united as a community, or that the pure power is
also united with the general will, since the general will is no longer
present in the former powerholders. Whatever determinate element
[Bestimmtheit] is posited as a means of enforcing anything against
the supreme power must be invested not just with the possibility of
power, but with real power. But since this power is in the hands of
other representatives of the collective will, it is able to thwart [the
efforts of] any such determinate element [Bestimmtheit], and to nul-
lify whatever operations are entrusted to the ephorate – such as
supervision, the public declaration of the interdict, and whatever
formalities it may devise.52 And it does so with the same right as
those who were made responsible for the business of the [proposed]
determinate element [Bestimmtheit]; for such ephors are likewise just
as much private wills as the others, and whether the private will of
the ephors has detached itself from the general will can just as
readily be judged by the government as the latter can be judged by
the ephorate – and the government can enforce its judgement absol-
utely [schlechthin]. It is well known that, when a government in
recent times set about dissolving a rival legislative power which was
paralysing its activity, a man who was himself involved rightly
judged – when it was suggested that the establishment of a supervis-
ory commission like Fichte’s ephorate would have prevented such
an outrage – that such a supervisory council would have been
treated just as violently if it had attempted to oppose the govern-
ment.53 – But ﬁnally, even if those in supreme authority voluntarily
agreed to permit these secondary representatives of the general will
to summon the community to choose between the government and
the supervisors, what could one do with such a mob, which also
interferes in all private affairs, which is itself remote from public
life, and whose education has not equipped it to be conscious of the
collective will or to act in the spirit of the whole, but to do precisely
the opposite?54
What this has shown is that, if ethical life [das Sittliche] is posited
solely in terms of relations, or if externality and coercion are
thought of as a totality, they cancel themselves out [sich selbst
aufhebt]. This certainly proves that coercion is not something real
and that it is nothing in itself; but this will become even clearer if


Political writings
we demonstrate it in terms of coercion itself, in accordance with its
concept and with the determinate character [Bestimmtheit] which
the relation of this association [Beziehung] assumes; for the fact that
relation is absolutely nothing in itself is something which must in
part be proved by dialectics, and which has in part already been
brieﬂy outlined above.
As to those concepts in general which have to do with coercion
and which express this same relation, it has in part already been
shown that they are insubstantial abstractions, products of thought
or ﬁgments of the imagination without reality. In the ﬁrst place,
there is the hollow abstraction of the concept of the universal free-
dom of all, supposedly distinct from the freedom of individuals;
then on the other hand, there is the latter freedom of the individual,
equally isolated. Each, posited on its own [fu¨r sich], is an abstraction
without reality; but both, as absolutely identical and then posited
merely in terms of this ﬁrst basic identity, are a very different thing
from those concepts whose signiﬁcance lies solely in their non-
identity.55 Then natural or original freedom is supposed to be lim-
ited by the concept of universal freedom; but the former freedom,
which can be posited as subject to limitation, is for that very reason
not something absolute. And then it is self-contradictory to con-
struct an idea to the effect that the freedom of the individual,
because of the externality of coercion, conforms with absolute
necessity to the concept of universal freedom – which simply
amounts to imagining that the individual, by virtue of something
which is not absolute, is nevertheless absolutely equal to the univer-
sal. In the concept of coercion itself, something external to freedom
is directly posited. But a freedom for which something is genuinely
external and alien is not freedom at all; its essence and formal deﬁ-
nition is precisely that nothing is absolutely external [to it].
That view of freedom which regards it as a choice between
opposite determinacies (so that if +A and −A are given, freedom
consists in determining oneself either as +A or as −A, and is com-
pletely tied to this either-or) must be utterly rejected. Anything
resembling this possibility of choice is purely and simply an empiri-
cal freedom, which is the same thing as ordinary empirical necessity
and is completely inseparable from it. Freedom is rather the
negation or ideality of the opposites, of +A as well as −A, the
abstraction of the possibility that neither of the two exists; some-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
thing external would exist for it only if freedom were determined
solely as +A or solely as −A. But freedom is the direct opposite of
this: nothing is external to it, so that no coercion is possible for it.
Every determinacy is in essence either +A or −A, and the −A is
indissolubly joined to the +A, just as the +A is to the −A. Thus,
whenever an individual has adopted determinacy +A, he is also tied
to −A, and −A is for him an external [element] over which he has
no control. In fact, because of the absolute link between +A and
−A, he would be brought, by the determinacy +A, directly under
the alien power of −A, and the freedom which supposedly resides
in determining itself either as +A or −A would never escape from
necessity. If it determines itself as +A, it has not nulliﬁed −A; on
the contrary, −A subsists absolutely necessarily for it as an external
[element], and the converse applies if it determines itself as −A.
Freedom is freedom only in so far as, either positively or negatively,
it unites −A with +A and thereby ceases to occupy the determinacy
+A. In the union of the two determinacies, both are nulliﬁed: +A −
A = . If this nought is thought of only in relation to +A and −A,
and the indifferent A itself is thought of as a determinacy and as a
plus or minus in opposition to another minus or plus, absolute free-
dom stands above this opposition, and above any opposition or
externality; it is utterly incapable of any coercion, and coercion has
no reality whatsoever.
But this idea of freedom seems itself to be an abstraction; and if
it were a question of concrete freedom and the freedom of the indi-
vidual, for example, the existence [Sein] of a determinacy – and
with it a purely empirical freedom as the possibility of choice –
would be posited, and hence also empirical necessity and the pos-
sibility of coercion, and in general the opposition of universality
and singularity [Einzelheit]. For the individual is a single entity
[Einzelheit], and freedom is the nulliﬁcation of singularity. By virtue
of singularity, the individual is [placed] directly among determina-
cies, so that something external is present for him, and coercion is
accordingly possible. But it is one thing to impose determinacies on
the individual under the form of inﬁnity, and another to impose
them absolutely. Determinacy under the form of inﬁnity is thereby
superseded, and the individual exists [ist] only as a free being; that
is, inasmuch as determinacies are posited within him, he is the
absolute indifference of these determinacies, and it is in this that


Political writings
his ethical nature formally consists. And in so far as individuals in
general are different [different] – whether in relation to themselves
or to something else – and have a relationship [Beziehung] to some-
thing external, this externality is itself indifferent and a living
relationship; and it is in this that organisation and (since totality is
[to be found] only in an organisation) the positive [aspect] of ethical
life consists. – But the indifference of the individual as a single
entity is a negative one in relation to the being of the determinacies;
when his being is actually posited as individuality, however (i.e. as
a negation which he cannot positively overcome and a determinacy
by which the external as such is maintained), all that he is left with
is completely negative absoluteness or inﬁnity – the absolute
negation of both −A and +A, or the absolute elevation of this indi-
vidual being to the concept. Since −A is an external element in
relation to the subject’s determinacy +A, the subject is under alien
control as a result of this relation; but since the subject can equally
well posit its +A negatively as a determinacy and supersede and
dispose of it, it remains completely free in face of the possibility
and actuality of alien power. If it negates +A as well as −A, it is
constrained [bezwungen] but not coerced [gezwungen]; it would have
to suffer coercion only if +A were absolutely ﬁxed within it, because
this would allow an inﬁnite chain of further determinacies to be
attached to this same subject as a determinacy itself. This possibility
of abstracting from determinacies is unlimited; or [to put it differ-
ently,] there is no determinacy which is absolute, for this would be
a direct self-contradiction. But though freedom itself – or inﬁnity –
is the negative, it is also the absolute, and the individual being of
the subject is absolute singularity elevated to the concept, negatively
absolute inﬁnity, or pure freedom. This negatively absolute
[element], this pure freedom, makes its appearance as death, and
through his ability to die, the subject proves that he is free and
utterly above all coercion. Death is the absolute constraint [Bezwin-
gung]; and because this constraint is absolute, or because individu-
ality becomes completely pure individuality within this constraint,
and not a positing of +A to the exclusion of −A (an exclusion which
would not be a true negation, but merely the positing of −A as
something external and at the same time of +A as a determinacy),
but the cancellation [Aufhebung] of both the plus and the minus,
this individuality is its own concept, and consequently inﬁnite. It is
the opposite of itself, or absolute liberation, and the pure individu-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
ality which is in death is its own opposite, namely universality.
Within this constraint, there is accordingly freedom, because it is
directed purely towards the cancellation [Aufhebung] of a determin-
acy. It cancels not just one side of this determinacy, but cancels it
both in so far as it is posited positively and in so far as it is posited
negatively, subjectively as well as objectively; consequently this
freedom, considered in itself, remains purely negative in character.
Or, since the cancellation [Aufheben] itself can also be understood
and expressed in positive terms by reﬂection, the cancellation of
both sides of the determinacy will then appear as the wholly equal
positing of both sides of whatever is determined.
If this is applied to punishment, for example, it follows that its
only rational aspect is retribution; for it is by retribution that the
crime is subjected to constraint [bezwungen]. A determinacy +A,
which was posited by the crime, is complemented by the positing
of −A, so that both are nulliﬁed; or viewed in positive terms, the
determinacy +A is coupled for the criminal with determinacy −A
and both are posited equally, whereas the crime posited only one of
them. Thus, the punishment is the restoration of freedom; and not
only has the criminal remained (or rather been made) free, but the
administrator of the punishment has acted rationally or freely. In
this, its [proper] determination, the punishment is accordingly
something in itself, genuinely inﬁnite and absolute, which therefore
carries its own respect and fear within it; it derives from freedom,
and even as a constraint [als bezwingend], it remains in freedom. But
conversely, if punishment is understood [vorgestellt] as coercion, it
is posited merely as a determinacy and as something wholly ﬁnite
which embodies no rationality. It falls entirely under the common
concept of one speciﬁc thing as against another, or of a piece of
merchandise with which another commodity, namely the crime, can
be bought. The state, as a judicial authority, runs a market in deter-
minacies known as crimes, which it can buy in exchange for other
determinacies [known as punishments], and the legal code is the list
of current prices.
[III]
But however vacuous these abstractions and the relation of exter-
nality to which they give rise may be, the moment of the negatively
absolute or inﬁnity (which was noted in this example as determining


Political writings
the relation between crime and punishment) is a moment of the
absolute itself which must be identiﬁed in absolute ethical life. We
shall point out the versatility of absolute form (or inﬁnity) in its
necessary moments, and show how they determine the shape of
absolute ethical life; from this, the true concept and relation of the
practical sciences will in turn emerge. Since our primary concern
here is to deﬁne the relations which all this involves, and hence to
emphasise the aspect of inﬁnity, we shall make the positive presup-
position that the absolute ethical totality is nothing other than a
people;56 this will also become evident from the following moments
of the negative aspect which we are considering here.
In absolute ethical life, inﬁnity – or form as the absolutely nega-
tive – is nothing other than constraint itself, as interpreted above,
elevated to its absolute concept. As such, it does not relate to indi-
vidual determinacies, but to their entire actuality and possibility,
namely life itself. Hence matter is equal to inﬁnite form, but in such
a way that its positive aspect is the absolutely ethical, namely [the
quality of] belonging to a people; the individual proves his oneness
with the people in a negative sense – and in an unambiguous
manner – only by [incurring] the danger of death. Through the
absolute identity of the inﬁnite, or the aspect of relation with the
positive, ethical totalities such as peoples take shape and constitute
themselves as individuals, thereby adopting an individual stance in
relation to [other] individual peoples. This stance and this individu-
ality are the aspect of reality, and if we think of these as absent,
they [i.e. the ethical totalities in question] are [mere] creations of
thought; this would be the abstraction of essence without absolute
form, and the essence in question would consequently be devoid of
essence. This connection [Beziehung] of individuality with individu-
ality is a relation, and is accordingly twofold: ﬁrstly, it is the positive
connection of tranquil and equable co-existence of the two [ethical
totalities or peoples] in peace, and secondly, it is the negative con-
nection of the exclusion of one by the other – and both connections
are absolutely necessary. With regard to the second, we have already
interpreted the rational relation as a constraint elevated to its con-
cept, or as the absolute formal virtue which is courage. It is this
second aspect of the connection which posits the necessity of war
for the shape and individuality of the ethical totality. In war, there
is the free possibility that not only individual determinacies, but the


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
sum total of these, will be destroyed as life, whether for the absolute
itself or for the people. Thus, war preserves the ethical health of
peoples in their indifference to determinate things [Bestimmtheiten];
it prevents the latter from hardening, and the people from becoming
habituated to them, just as the movement of the winds preserves
the seas from that stagnation which a permanent calm would pro-
duce, and which a permanent (or indeed ‘perpetual’) peace would
produce among peoples.57
Since the shape of the ethical totality and its individuality are
deﬁned as outward-directed individuality and its movement is
deﬁned as courage, the negative aspect of inﬁnity which we have
just been considering is directly linked with its other aspect, namely
the [continued] existence [Bestehen] of opposition. The one aspect
is inﬁnity, and like the others, it is negative; the ﬁrst is the negation
of the negation, opposition to opposition, and the second is negation
and opposition itself in its [continued] existence [Bestehen] as deter-
minacies or manifold reality. In the practical realm, these realities
in their pure inner formlessness and simplicity – i.e. the feelings –
are feelings which reconstruct themselves out of difference [Differ-
enz], and which proceed from the supersession [Aufgehobensein] of
undifferentiated self-awareness to restore themselves through a nul-
liﬁcation of the intuitions. They are physical needs and pleasures
which, in turn posited for themselves in their totality, obey one
single necessity in their inﬁnite complications, and form the system
of universal mutual dependence with regard to physical needs and
the labour and accumulation [of resources] which these require; as
a science, this system is what is known as political economy.58 Since
this system of reality is [rooted] entirely in negativity and inﬁnity,
it follows that, in its relation to the positive totality, it must be
treated wholly negatively by the latter and must remain subject to
the dominance of this relation;59 whatever is by nature negative
must remain negative and may not become a ﬁxture. In order to
prevent it from constituting itself on its own account [fu¨r sich] and
becoming an independent power, it is not enough to put forward
the propositions that everyone has the right to live, and that the
universal [interest] within a people must ensure that every citizen
has a livelihood and that complete security and ease of acquisition
prevails. The latter proposition, if taken as an absolute principle,
would indeed rule out a negative treatment of the system of pos-


Political writings
session, and would give it complete latitude to become absolutely
ﬁrmly established. Instead, the ethical whole must ensure that this
system remains aware of its inner nullity, and prevent it from grow-
ing excessively in terms of quantity and from developing ever
greater difference and inequality in keeping with its natural tend-
ency.60 This does indeed take place in every state, largely uncon-
sciously and in the shape of an external natural necessity which it
might well wish to be spared, as a result of ever-increasing expendi-
ture on the part of the state itself; this increases with the growth of
the system of possession, and leads to corresponding rises in tax-
ation, thereby reducing possession and making acquisition more dif-
ﬁcult. War does most to accelerate this tendency by bringing mul-
tiple confusion into the process of acquisition, but also by
[encouraging] jealousy on the part of other classes [Sta¨nde] and
placing restrictions on trade, some of them voluntary, others invol-
untary and the result of incomprehension, etc. This can go to such
lengths that the positive ethical life of the state itself allows [people]
independence from the purely real [economic] system, and allows
the negative and restrictive attitude to be asserted.
In that context [Beziehung] in which it has just been considered –
and of which physical need, enjoyment, possession, and the objects
of possession and enjoyment are various aspects – reality is pure
reality; it merely expresses the extremes of that relation. But the
relation also contains an ideality, a relative identity of the opposing
determinacies; this identity cannot therefore be positively absolute,
but only formal. Through that identity which the real element in
the nexus [Beziehung] of relations attains, possession becomes prop-
erty, and particularity in general – including living particularity –
is simultaneously determined as a universal; by this means, the
sphere of right is constituted.61
As for the reﬂection of the absolute in this relation, it has already
been deﬁned above in its negative aspect, as a constraint on the
subsistence of the real and the determinate. In its positive aspect
with regard to the subsistence of the real, indifference can express
itself in this determinate material only as an external and formal
equality; and the science which deals with this matter can aim only
to deﬁne the gradations of inequality on the one hand, and – in
order to make this possible – to deﬁne on the other hand the way
in which something living and internal can be posited sufﬁciently


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
objectively and externally to be capable of such deﬁnition and calcu-
lation. The absolute reality of ethical life at this level [in dieser
Potenz] is conﬁned to this superﬁcial appearance by the subsistence
of the reality which is present within the opposition.62 Not only does
the equating and calculating of inequality have its limits (because of
the ﬁxed determinacy which contains an absolute opposition) and,
like geometry, come up against incommensurability; it also neces-
sarily [schlechthin] encounters endless contradictions, because it
remains wholly within [the sphere of] determinacy and yet cannot
abstract as geometry does, but – since it is dealing with living
relationships – is necessarily [schlechthin] always faced with whole
bundles of such determinacies. In the case of intuition, however,
this [mutual] contradiction of determinacies can of course be rem-
edied and removed by specifying [Festsetzen] and adhering to indi-
vidual determinacies, which allows a decision to be made – and this
is always better than reaching no decision at all. For since there is
nothing absolute in the material [Sache] itself, the essential factor is
actually the formal requirement that some decision and deﬁnition
or other should be arrived at. But it is quite a different matter for
a decision reached in this way to be in accordance with genuine and
complete justice and morality [Sittlichkeit]. For this very speciﬁca-
tion of, and absolute adherence to, determinacies makes such justice
impossible; it is possible only when these determinacies are con-
fused, and it becomes actual only through immediate ethical
intuition, which subjugates the determinacies which were posited
as absolute and adheres only to the whole. – When Plato, in his
simple language, discusses the two aspects of [ﬁrstly,] the endless
deﬁnition of the inﬁnite incorporation [Aufnahme] of qualities into
the concept and [secondly,] the contradiction of their individuality
in relation to intuition, he says:63
It is clear that lawmaking belongs to the science of kingship;
but the best thing is not that the laws be in power, but that the
man who is wise and of kingly nature be ruler [. . .] Because
law could never, by determining exactly what is noblest and
most just for one and all, enjoin upon them that which is best;
for the differences of men and of actions and the fact that
nothing, I may say, in human life is ever at rest, forbid any
science whatsoever to promulgate any simple rule for every-
thing and for all time [. . .] But we see that law aims at pretty


Political writings
nearly this very thing, like a stubborn and ignorant man who
allows no one to do anything contrary to his command, or even
to ask a question, not even if something new occurs to some
one, which is better than the rule he has himself ordained [. . .]
So that which is persistently simple is inapplicable to things
which are never simple.
The fact that there is still support for the belief [Gedanke] that
absolute and determinate right and duty with being in themselves
[an sich seiend] are possible in this sphere of human affairs is a
consequence of that formal indifference or negative absolute which
has its place only in the ﬁxed reality of this sphere, and which does
indeed have being in itself; but in so far as it has such being, it is
empty – or [to put it differently,] there is nothing absolute about it
except pure abstraction itself, the completely vacuous thought of
unity. It is not, for example, a conclusion derived from prior experi-
ence, nor should it be regarded as a fortuitous incompleteness in
the concrete [sphere] or in the implementation of an idea that is
true a priori. On the contrary, it should be recognised [ﬁrstly,] that
what is here described as an ‘idea’, and the hope for a better future
derived from it, are inherently null and void, and [secondly,] that a
perfect legislation, together with true justice in accordance with the
determinacy of the laws, is inherently impossible in the concrete
realm of judicial authority. As for the ﬁrst of these impossibilities,
since the absolute is supposed to be present in the determinacies as
such, it is merely the inﬁnite; and the same empirical inﬁnity and
inherently endless determinability is posited here as would be pos-
ited if we thought of comparing a determinate measure with an
absolutely indeterminate line, or a determinate line with an absol-
utely indeterminate measure, or of measuring an inﬁnite line or
dividing a determinate line absolutely. As for the second impossi-
bility, each of the views [Anschauungen] which are the object of
jurisdiction – and which are likewise inﬁnite in number and in their
variety of forms – is deﬁned in ever more various ways as the mass
of deﬁnitions increases. This development [Bildung] of distinctions
through legislation makes each individual view [Anschauung] more
distinguishable and further developed, and the expansion of legis-
lation is not an advance towards the goal of positive perfection
(which, as already shown, has no truth in this context), but only
the formal process of increasing development.64 And in order that


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
the unity [das Eins] of the judicial view [Anschauung] of right and
judgement may become organised as a genuine unity [Eins] and
whole within this multiplicity, it is absolutely necessary that each
individual determinacy should be modiﬁed – i.e. partly superseded
as an absolute determinacy with being for itself, which is precisely
what it professes to be as a law – so that its absoluteness is not
respected; and there can be no question of a pure application, for a
pure application would involve positing some individual determin-
acies to the exclusion of others. But by their existence [Sein], these
others also demand to be taken into account, so that the interaction
[of them all], determined not by parts but by the whole, may itself
be a whole. The empty hope and formal conception [Gedanke] both
of an absolute legislation and of a jurisdiction unconnected with the
inner disposition [dem Innern] of the judge must give way to this
clear and deﬁnite knowledge.
This examination of the system of reality has shown that absolute
ethical life must adopt a negative attitude towards this system.65
The absolute, as it appears in the ﬁxed determinacy of this system,
is posited as a negative absolute, as inﬁnity, which presents itself as
a formal, relative, and abstract unity in relation to the opposition. In
the former, negative attitude, the absolute is hostile to the system; in
the latter, it is itself under its dominion; in neither case is it indiffer-
ent to it. But the unity which is the indifference of opposites, and
which nulliﬁes and comprehends them within itself, and that unity
which is only formal indifference or the identity of the relation
between existing [bestehender] realities, must themselves be wholly
at one as a result of the complete incorporation [Aufnahme] of the
relation into indifference itself; that is, the absolute ethical realm
must take on a perfectly organised shape [Gestalt], for relation is
the abstraction of the aspect of shape. Although relation becomes
wholly undifferentiated as shape, it does not cease to possess the
nature of relation: it remains a relation of organic to inorganic
nature.66 But as has already been shown, relation as an aspect of
inﬁnity is itself twofold in character: in one case, unity or the ideal
comes ﬁrst and predominates, and in the other, it is the many or
the real which does so. In the ﬁrst case, the relation is properly [to
be found] in shape and indifference, and the eternal restlessness of
the concept, or inﬁnity, lies in part in the organisation itself as it
consumes itself and relinquishes the appearance of life, the purely


Political writings
quantitative, in order to rise up eternally out of its ashes, as its
own seed-corn, to renewed youth. And it lies in part in its eternal
nulliﬁcation of its outward difference as it feeds on and produces
the inorganic, calling forth from indifference a difference [Differenz]
or a relation to inorganic nature, then in turn cancelling [aufhebend]
this relation and consuming both this nature and itself. We shall
shortly see what this inorganic nature of the ethical is.67 But sec-
ondly, the [continued] existence [Bestehen] of what was nulliﬁed is
also posited in this aspect of relation or inﬁnity, for precisely
because the absolute concept is its own opposite, the being [Sein]
of difference is also posited along with its pure unity and negativity.
Or [to put it differently,] nulliﬁcation posits something which it
nulliﬁes, i.e. the real, so that there must be an actuality and differ-
ence which cannot be overcome by ethical life. Since inﬁnity has
established itself here in the whole strength of its opposition (not
just potentially but in fact), individuality is actually in opposition,
and it would not be possible for it to purge itself of difference
and be taken up into absolute indifference. If both [aspects], the
supersession [Aufgehobensein] of the opposition and its subsistence,
are to be not just ideal but also real, we must at all events posit a
separation and selection whereby reality, in which ethical life is
objective, is divided into one part which is taken up absolutely into
indifference, and another part in which the real as such is subsistent
(and hence relatively identical), and embodies only the reﬂection of
absolute ethical life. What is posited here is a relation between
absolute ethical life, as the essence of individuals and wholly imma-
nent within them, and relative ethical life, which is no less real
within them.68 Ethical organisation cannot preserve its purity in
reality unless the universal spread of negativity within it is curbed
and set aside.69 We have shown above how indifference appears in
existing [bestehenden] reality as formal ethical life. The concept of
this sphere is the real and the practical, in subjective terms with
reference to feeling or physical needs and enjoyment, and in objec-
tive terms with reference to work and possession; and if this practi-
cal realm is taken up into indifference – as can happen in accordance
with its concept – it is formal unity, or that right which is possible
within this realm. Above these two [realms] is a third, the absolute
or the ethical. But the reality of the sphere of relative unity (or of


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
the practical and legal [des Rechtlichen]) is constituted, in the system
of this sphere in its totality, as a distinct class [eigener Stand].
Thus, two classes [Sta¨nde] are formed in accordance with the
absolute necessity of the ethical. One of these is the class of the
free, the individual of absolute ethical life; its organs are the single
individuals. From the point of view of its indifference, it is the
absolute living spirit, and from the point of view of its objectivity,
it is the living movement and divine self-enjoyment of this whole
in the totality of the individuals who constitute its organs and mem-
bers. But its formal or negative side must also be absolute – namely
work, which is directed not towards the nulliﬁcation of individual
determinacies, but towards death, and whose product is again not
something individual, but the being and preservation of the whole
of the ethical organisation. Aristotle deﬁnes the proper business of
this class as what the Greeks called πολιτευ´ειν, which means living
in and with and for one’s people, leading a universal life wholly
dedicated to the public interest, or philosophising, while Plato, with
his superior vitality, does not wish to regardb these two activities as
separate but as indissolubly linked.70 – Then there is the class
[Stand] of those who are not free, and which has its being [ist] in
the differentiation [Differenz] of need and work and in the right and
justice of possession and property; its work deals with matters of
detail and consequently does not entail the danger of death. To
these must be added the third class which, in the crudity of its
non-educative work, is solely concerned with the earth as an
element; its work confronts it with the whole [sphere] of need as its
direct object, with no intermediate links, and it is consequently itself
an unalloyed totality and indifference, like an element. Lacking the
differentiated understanding of the second class, it accordingly
maintains its capacity, in body and spirit, for formal and absolute
ethical life and for courage and a violent death, and is consequently
able to reinforce the ﬁrst class with its numbers and elemental
being. – These two classes relieve the ﬁrst class of a situation [Ver-
ha¨ltnis] in which reality, partly in its passive and partly in its active
aspect [Beziehung], is ﬁxed either as possession and property or as
b Translator’s note: Reading sehen (with Werke, vol. , p. ) for the sein of the ﬁrst
edition.


Political writings
work, in the same way as, among modern nations, the earning class
[Klasse] has conﬁned itself to this function [of earning its living]
and has gradually ceased to do military service, while valour has
become more puriﬁed and developed into a particular class [Stand]
released by the former from the need to earn its living, and for
which possession and property, at least, are a contingent matter.
The constitution of this second class, in its material aspect, is
deﬁned by Plato as follows.71 The art of kingship removes
those men who have no capacity for courage and self-restraint
and the other qualities which tend towards virtue, but by the
force of an evil nature are carried away into godlessness, viol-
ence, and injustice [. . .] by inﬂicting upon them the punish-
ments of death and exile and deprivation of the most important
civic rights [. . .] And those in turn who wallow in ignorance
and craven humility it places under the yoke of slavery.
And Aristotle places in the same category anyone who is by nature
not his own but someone else’s, and who is like a body in relation
to spirit.72
But the relation of one who is by nature someone else’s, and who
does not have his spirit within himself, to absolutely independent
individuality may, in formal terms, be of two kinds – either a
relation of the individuals of this class [Stand] as particulars to the
individuals of the ﬁrst class as particulars, or a relation of universal
to universal. The former relation (of slavery) vanished of its own
accord in the empirical phenomenon [Erscheinung] of the univer-
sality of the Roman Empire: with the loss of absolute ethical life
and the debasement of the nobility, the two previously distinct
classes became equal, and with the demise of freedom, slavery
necessarily came to an end. When the principle of formal unity and
equality was enforced, it completely cancelled [hat . . . aufgehoben]
the true inner difference between the classes, and did not at ﬁrst
bring about that separation between them which was posited above.
Still less did it bring about that form of separation whereby their
relation to one another, under the form of universality, is one of
domination and dependence, and purely that of one whole class to
another, so that, even within this relation, the two associated classes
remain universal. (In the relation of slavery, on the other hand, the
form of particularity is the determining factor; it is not a case of
one class against the other – on the contrary, the unity of each


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
group [Teil] is dissolved in their real association [Beziehung], and
individuals are dependent on individuals.) The principle of univer-
sality and equality ﬁrst had to take possession of the whole in such
a way as to mix the two classes together instead of separating them.
In this mixture, under the law of formal unity, the ﬁrst class is in
fact completely annulled [aufgehoben],73 and the second alone
becomes the people.74 Gibbon portrays this change in the following
terms:75
This long peace, and the uniform government of the Romans,
introduced a slow and secret poison into the vitals of the
empire. The minds of men were gradually reduced to the same
level, the ﬁre of genius was extinguished, and even the military
spirit evaporated [. . .] Their personal valour remained, but
they no longer possessed that public courage which is nourished
by the love of independence, the sense of national honour, the
presence of danger, and the habit of command. They received
laws and governors from the will of their sovereign [. . .] The
posterity of their boldest leaders was contented with the rank
of citizens and subjects. The most aspiring spirits resorted to
[. . .] the standard of the emperors; and the deserted provinces,
deprived of political strength or union, insensibly sunk into the
languid indifference of private life.c
– This universal private life, and a state of affairs in which the
people consists solely of a second class, immediately introduces the
formal legal relationship [Rechtsverha¨ltnis] which ﬁxes individual
being and posits it absolutely; and it was indeed out of such corrup-
tion and universal debasement that the most comprehensive devel-
opment of legislation relevant to this relationship grew and
evolved.76 This system of property and right which, because of the
ﬁxation of individuality already referred to, does not consist in any-
thing absolute and eternal but wholly in the ﬁnite and formal, must
constitute itself as a distinct [eigenen] class, really detached and set
apart from the nobility, and then be able to expand throughout its
entire length and breadth. To this system belong the inherently [fu¨r
sich] subordinate and purely formal questions concerning the right-
ful basis of property, contract, etc., but also the whole endless
expansion of legislation at large on matters which Plato categorises
as follows:77
c Translator’s note: The italics in this quotation are Hegel’s.


Political writings
These legal issues in contracts made by individuals with other
individuals concerning goods or services, as well as [actions] for
injury and assault, rulings on the competence and appointment
of judges, or on the need to collect or impose tariffs in markets
or ports, are matters on which it is unworthy to lay down rules
for good and admirable men. For they will easily ﬁnd out for
themselves the many points which have to be settled in this
regard, provided that God grants them the blessing of a truly
ethical constitution. But if this is not the case, it follows that
they will spend their lives regulating and amending many such
things, in the belief that they will ﬁnally reach the best result;
they will live like invalids who, out of intemperance, will not
abandon their unhealthy diet, and achieve nothing by their
remedies other than producing more varied and more serious
illnesses, while constantly hoping to be cured by whatever
means they are prescribed. Equally amusing are those who
make laws on the matters in question, and constantly amend
them in the belief that they will reach a conclusive result –
unaware of the fact that they are, so to speak, cutting off a
Hydra’s head.
It is true that, as licentiousness and disease increase among
a people, many lawcourts are opened, and no clearer sign of bad
and shameful comportment can be found than that excellent
physicians and judges are required not only by bad men and
artisans, but also by those who pride themselves on having
enjoyed a liberal education, and who are compelled to accept a
justice imposed on them by others as their masters and judges
and spend much time in courts of law with actions and
defences.
This system must simultaneously develop as a universal con-
dition, and must destroy free ethical life whenever it is combined
with such circumstances and not separated from them and their
consequences from the outset.78 Thus it is necessary that this system
should be consciously adopted, recognised in its [own] right, kept
apart from the nobility, and given a class [Stand] of its own as its
realm in which it can establish itself and develop its full activity by
way of its own confusion and the superseding of one confusion by
another. The status [Potenz] of this class is accordingly determined
by the fact that its province is possession in general and the justice
which is possible in this context, that it at the same time constitutes
a coherent system, and that, as a direct consequence of the elevation


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
of the relation of possession to formal unity, each individual who is
inherently [an sich] capable of possession is related to all the others
as a universal entity, or as a citizen in the sense of a bourgeois. For
the political nullity which results from the fact that the members of
this class are private individuals, these citizens ﬁnd compensation
in the fruits of peace and of gainful employment [des Erwerbes], and
in the perfect security, both as individuals and as a whole, in which
they enjoy them.79 But the security of each individual is related to
the whole, inasmuch as he is released from [the need for] courage
and from the necessity (to which the ﬁrst class is subject) of expos-
ing himself to the danger of violent death, a danger which entails
for the individual absolute insecurity in every enjoyment, pos-
session, and right. Through the superseding of this mixture of prin-
ciples and their constitutional and conscious separation, each of
these principles receives its due [sein Recht], and only what ought
to be is put into effect, namely the reality of ethical life as absolute
indifference, and at the same time as the real relation within the
opposition which is still present [im bestehenden Gegensatze], so that
the latter is overcome [bezwungen] by the former and this constraint
[Bezwingen] is itself rendered indifferent and reconciled. This rec-
onciliation consists precisely in the recognition of necessity, and in
the right which ethical life accords to its own inorganic nature –
and to the chthonic powers – by giving up and sacriﬁcing part of
itself to them. For the potency of the sacriﬁce consists in facing up
to [in dem Anschauen] and objectifying this involvement with the
inorganic, and it is by facing up to it that it is dissolved. By this
means, the inorganic is separated out and recognised as such, and
thereby itself taken up into indifference, while the living, by relegat-
ing what it knows as part of itself to the inorganic [realm] and
consigning it to death, simultaneously acknowledges the right of the
inorganic and purges itself of it.80
This is nothing other than the enactment, in the ethical realm,
of the tragedy which the absolute eternally plays out within itself –
by eternally giving birth to itself into objectivity, thereby surren-
dering itself in this shape to suffering and death, and rising up to
glory from its ashes.81 The divine in its [visible] shape and objec-
tivity immediately possesses a dual nature, and its life is the absolute
oneness of its two natures. But the movement of the absolute antag-
onism between these two natures presents itself in the divine nature,


Political writings
which has thereby comprehended itself, as the courage with which
this nature liberates itself from the death of the other, conﬂicting
nature. Through this liberation, however, it gives up its own life,
because this life exists [ist] only in its association with the other life,
but is just as absolutely resurrected from it; for in this death, as the
sacriﬁce of the second nature, death is overcome [bezwungen]. But
appearing in its second nature, the divine movement presents itself
in such a way that the pure abstraction of this nature (which would
be a merely chthonic and purely negative power) is superseded by
its living union with the divine nature. This union is such that the
divine illuminates this second nature and, by this ideal spiritual
oneness, makes it into its reconciled living body which, as body,
simultaneously remains in difference [Differenz] and transience and,
through the spirit, perceives the divine as something alien to itself. –
The image of this tragedy, in its more speciﬁcally ethical determi-
nation, is the outcome of that legal process between the Eumenides
(as the powers of the right which resides in difference) and Apollo
(the god of undifferentiated light) over Orestes, played out before
the organised ethical entity of the Athenian people.82 In a [very]
human way, the latter, as the Areopagus of Athens, puts equal votes
in the urn for each of the two powers, and so acknowledges their
co-existence. This does not, however, resolve the conﬂict or deﬁne
the connection and relationship between them. But in a divine way,
the Athenian people, as the goddess Athena, wholly restores to the
god the man [i.e. Orestes] whom the god himself had involved in
difference; and by separating those powers, both of which had had
an interest in the criminal, it also effects a reconciliation in such a
way that the Eumenides would [thereafter] be honoured by this
people as divine powers and have their abode in the city, so that
their savage nature might enjoy and be paciﬁed by the sight of
Athena enthroned high above on the Acropolis, opposite the altar
erected to them in the city below.
Tragedy arises when ethical nature cuts its inorganic nature off
from itself as a fate – in order not to become embroiled in it – and
treats it as an opposite; and by acknowledging this fate in the [ensu-
ing] struggle, it is reconciled with the divine being as the unity of
both. Comedy, on the other hand (to develop this image further),
will generally come down on the side of fatelessness.83 Either it falls
under [the heading of] absolute vitality, and consequently presents


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
only shadows of antagonisms or mock battles with an invented fate
and ﬁctitious enemy; or it falls under [the heading of] non-vitality,
and consequently presents only shadows of independence and absol-
uteness. The former is the old (or Divine) comedy, the latter is
modern comedy. The Divine Comedy [of Dante] is without fate or
genuine struggle, because absolute conﬁdence and certainty con-
cerning the reality of the absolute are present in it without oppo-
sition, and whatever opposition does bring movement into this per-
fect security and peace is only an opposition without seriousness or
inner truth.84 This opposition may present itself – in contrast to the
divinity which appears as alien and external, though rooted in absol-
ute certainty – as the remnant or dream of a consciousness of iso-
lated self-sufﬁciency, or as a consciousness of individuality [Ei-
genheit] which, though ﬁxed and ﬁrmly held on to, is completely
impotent and powerless. Alternatively, the opposition may present
itself in a divinity, sensible of itself and inherently conscious, which
consciously generates antagonisms and forms of play [Spiele] in
which, with absolute frivolity, it sets some of its members to com-
pete for a speciﬁc prize and gestates its manifold aspects and
moments until they are born into perfect individuality and develop
organisations of their own. And even as a whole, it cannot treat its
own movements as movements in response to fate, but as contingent
happenings, and it regards itself as invincible, counts loss as
nothing, is certain of its absolute control over every idiosyncrasy
and eccentricity, and is aware of what Plato said in another context,
namely that a cityd is remarkably strong by nature.85 Thus, an ethi-
cal organisation such as this will, for example, without risk or fear
or envy, drive individual members to extremes of accomplishment
in every art and science and skill, and make them special in their
ﬁeld, conﬁdent within itself that such divine monstrosities of beauty
do not disﬁgure its shape, but are comic traits which enhance a
[particular] moment within it. To cite one speciﬁc people, we may
regard Homer, Pindar, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Plato, Aristophanes,
etc. as such serene enhancements of individual traits. But both in
the serious reaction to the increasingly serious nonconformity
[Besonderung] of Socrates (not to mention the [subsequent] remorse
this aroused), and in the teeming profusion and high energy of the
d Translator’s note: Hegel uses the Greek term polis.


Political writings
individualisations which were simultaneously emerging, we must
not fail to recognise that the inner vitality [of the city] had thereby
reached its extreme limits, and that it proclaimed, in the ripening
of these seeds, not only its own strength but also the imminent
death of the body which bore them.86 It [i.e. the city] thus had to
accept the antagonisms which it had itself provoked (and which it
could formerly stir up and pursue as fortuitous events and with
corresponding frivolity, even in their more serious and far-reaching
manifestations such as wars) no longer as shadows, but as an
increasingly overwhelming fate.87
But that other comedy whose complications are devoid of fate and
genuine struggle (because ethical nature is itself caught up in that
fate) is of a different class. Its plots are woven in conﬂicts which are
not playful, but of serious signiﬁcance for this ethical drive (though
nevertheless comical for the spectator); and deliverance from these
conﬂicts is sought in an affectation of character and absoluteness
which constantly ﬁnds itself disappointed and deﬂated. The ethical
drive (for it is not conscious and absolute ethical nature which fea-
tures in this comedy) must, in short, transform the status quo [das
Bestehende] into the formal and negative absoluteness of right, and
thereby relieve its anxiety over the security of its possessions. It
must raise its belongings to a position of security and certainty by
means of agreements and contracts with all imaginable clauses and
safeguards, deducing the requisite systems from experience and
reason as [equivalent to] certainty and necessity itself, and backing
them up with the most profound ratiocinations. But just as, accord-
ing to the poet,88 the spirits of the underworld saw the plantations
they had established in the wilderness of hell swept away by the
next tempest, so must the ethical drive observe how the next change
of course (or indeed resurgence) of the earth-spirit washes away
half, or even the whole, of sciences which were proved by experi-
ence and reason, how one legal system is supplanted by another,
how on the one hand humanity takes the place of severity, while on
the other the will to power takes the place of contractual security,
and how in the world of science and in actuality alike, the most
well-earned and assured possessions of rights and principles are
utterly destroyed. It [i.e. the ethical drive] must then either con-
clude that it is its own endeavours, hovering above fate with reason
and will, which wear themselves out in such matters and have pro-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
duced the changes in question, or grow incensed at their unexpected
and gratuitous intervention, and ﬁrst invoke all the gods in face of
this necessity, and then resign itself to it. In both cases, the ethical
drive, which looks for absolute inﬁnity in these ﬁnite things, merely
enacts the farce of its own faith and undying illusion which – at its
darkest when it burns brightest – is already forlorn and mistaken
[im Unrecht] when it believes that it rests in the arms of justice,
stability, and enjoyment.
Comedy separates the two zones of the ethical in such a way as
to allow each full play in its own right, so that in the one, oppo-
sitions and the ﬁnite are insubstantial shadows, whereas in the other,
the absolute is an illusion. But the true and absolute relation is that
the one does in all seriousness illuminate the other, each is tangibly
[leibhaft] connected with the other, and each is the other’s serious
fate. The absolute relation is accordingly presented in tragedy.
For although, in the living shape or organic totality of ethical life,
what constitutes the real aspect of that life is [to be found] in the
ﬁnite, and therefore cannot in and for itself fully incorporate [auf-
nehmen] its own bodily essence into the divinity of that life, it never-
theless already expresses the absolute Idea of ethical life, albeit in a
distorted form. Admittedly, ethical life does not inwardly unite into
absolute inﬁnity within itself those moments of the Idea which are
of necessity kept apart; on the contrary, it has this unity only as a
simulated negative independence, namely as freedom of the individ-
ual. But this real essence is nevertheless completely bound up with
the absolute indifferent nature and shape of ethical life; and if it
must perceive this nature only as something alien, it does neverthe-
less perceive it and is at one with it in spirit. Even for this real
essence, it is of primary importance that the completely pure and
indifferent shape and the absolute ethical consciousness should be,
and it is a secondary and immaterial consideration that this essence,
as the real, should relate to it [i.e. the absolute consciousness] only
as its empirical consciousness – just as it is of primary importance
that an absolute work of art should be, and only of secondary
importance whether this speciﬁc individual is its author, or merely
someone who contemplates and enjoys it. However necessary this
existence of the absolute may be, it is equally necessary that there
should be a division whereby there is on the one hand the living
spirit, the absolute consciousness, and the absolute indifference of


Political writings
the ideal and real aspects of ethical life itself, and on the other, that
spirit’s corporeal and mortal soul and its empirical consciousness,
which cannot completely unite its absolute form and its inner
essence (although it enjoys its perception of the absolute as some-
thing alien, as it were, to itself). In its real consciousness, this spirit
is at one with the absolute through fear and trust, as well as obedi-
ence; but in its ideal consciousness, it is wholly united with it in
religion and the worship of a universal [gemeinschaftlichen] God.89
But what we [earlier] put on one side in connection with the
external form of the ﬁrst class [Stand] is the real absolute conscious-
ness of ethical life. It is consciousness and, as such, in its negative
aspect pure inﬁnity and the highest abstraction of freedom – i.e. the
relation of constraint [Bezwingen] pushed to the point of its own
cancellation [Aufhebung], or freely chosen violent death; but in its
positive aspect, this consciousness is the singularity and particu-
larity of the individual. But this inherent negativity – namely con-
sciousness in general – of which the distinctions just indicated are
merely the two aspects, is absolutely incorporated [aufgenommen]
into the positive, while its particularity and inﬁnity or ideality are
absolutely incorporated, in a perfect manner, into the universal and
real; this oneness [of universal and particular] is the Idea of the
absolute life of the ethical. In this oneness of inﬁnity and reality in
the ethical organisation, the divine nature (of which Plato says that
it is an immortal animal, but one whose soul and body are eternally
born together) seems at the same time to display its rich multiplicity
in the highest energy of inﬁnity and in that unity which becomes
the wholly simple nature of the ideal element.90 For although the
most perfect mineral displays the nature of the whole in every part
which is broken off from its mass, its ideal form is that of mutual
externality, whether as the inner form of fragmentation or as the
outer form of crystallisation, in contrast to the elements of water,
ﬁre, and air, in which each separate part is the perfect nature and
representative of the whole, both in its essence and in its form (or
inﬁnity). Nor is the real form of such a mineral permeated by the
true identity of inﬁnity, for its senses are devoid of consciousness.
Its light is a single colour, and it does not see; or it is indifferent to
colour, and offers no point of resistance to the passage of colour
through it. Its sound is heard when it is struck by an external body,
but it does not sound of itself; its taste does not taste, its smell does


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
not smell, and its weight and hardness have no feeling. If it does
not share in the individual determinations of sense, but unites them
in indifference, it is undeveloped and closed undifferentiatedness
rather than that internally self-dividing unity which subordinates
its own divisions. In the same way, those elements whose parts are
all identical have within them only the possibility, but not the actu-
ality, of difference [Differenzen], and have indifference only in the
form of quantity, not qualitatively posited indifference. But the
earth, as the organic and individual element, extends throughout
the system of that element’s shapes, from its primal inﬂexibility and
individuality to qualitative characteristics and differentiation. Only
in the absolute indifference of ethical nature does it reach its sum-
mation, attaining perfect equality of all its parts, and the absolute
and real oneness of the individual with the absolute – in that primal
aether91 which, from its self-identical, ﬂuid, and ﬂexible form, dis-
seminates its pure quality through individual formations into singu-
larity [Einzelheit] and number, and completely dominates [bezwingt]
this absolutely unyielding and rebellious system by reﬁning number
to pure unity and inﬁnity, so that it becomes intelligence. Thus, the
negative can become completely one with the positive by becoming
absolutely negative; for the absolute concept is its own absolute and
immediate opposite and, as one of the ancients puts it, ‘the nothing
is not less than the something’.92 And in intelligence, the form or
the ideal is absolute form and, as such, real; and in absolute ethical
life, absolute form is combined with absolute substance in the most
authentic manner [auf das wahrhafteste]. Of those individualised for-
mations which lie between simple substance in reality as pure
aether, and substance in its marriage with absolute inﬁnity, none
can bring form and qualitative unity to absolute indifference with
the essence and substance that are found in ethical life (whether
through the quantitative and elemental equality of the whole and
the parts, or, in higher formations, through the individualisation
which extends to more detailed aspects of the parts themselves),
and at the same time bring about the formal uniﬁcation of the parts
into the whole (through the social bond among leaves in plants, in
sexual union, or in the gregarious life and collective labour of
animals). This is because it is in intelligence alone that individualis-
ation is taken to its absolute extreme – namely to the absolute con-
cept – and that the negative is taken to the absolute negativity of


Political writings
becoming its own unmediated opposite. Thus, intelligence is alone
capable of being absolute universality (inasmuch as it is absolute
individuality), absolute position [Position] and objectivity (inasmuch
as it is absolute negation and subjectivity), and the highest identity
of reality and ideality (inasmuch as it is absolute difference and
inﬁnity, absolute indifference, and totality – actually, in the devel-
opment [Entfaltung] of all oppositions, and potentially, in their
absolute nulliﬁcation and unity).
The aether has disseminated its absolute indifference among the
indifferences of light to [create] a multiplicity, and in the ﬂowering
of solar systems, it has given birth to its inner reason and totality
in expansive form. But whereas these individualisations of light [i.e.
the stars] are scattered in multiplicity, those which form their orbit-
ing petals [i.e. the planets] must adopt a posture of rigid individu-
ality towards them, so that the unity of the former lacks the form
of universality, while the unity of the latter lacks pure unity, and
neither of them embodies the absolute concept as such. In the
system of ethical life, on the other hand, the unfurled ﬂower of the
heavenly system has closed up again, and the absolute individuals
are completely united into universality. Reality – or the body – is
in the highest degree at one with the soul, because the real multi-
plicity of the body is itself nothing other than abstract ideality, and
the absolute concepts are pure individuals, so that the latter can
themselves be the absolute system. Consequently, if the absolute is
that which intuits [anschaut] itself as itself, and that absolute
intuition and this self-cognition, that inﬁnite expansion and this
inﬁnite withdrawal into itself, are completely one – and if both
[processes], as attributes, are real – then spirit is higher than
nature.93 For if nature is absolute self-intuition and the actuality of
the inﬁnitely differentiated mediation and development [Entfal-
tung], then spirit, which is the intuition of itself as itself – or absol-
ute cognition – is, in the withdrawal of the universe into itself, both
the scattered totality of this multiplicity which it [i.e. the spirit]
encompasses, and the absolute ideality of this same multiplicity, in
which it nulliﬁes this separateness and reﬂects it into itself as the
unmediated point of unity of the inﬁnite concept.94
Now from this idea of the nature of absolute ethical life, a relation
arises which has still to be discussed, namely the relation of the
individual’s ethical life to the real absolute ethical life, as well as the


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
relationship between the corresponding sciences, namely morality
[Moral] and natural law.95 For since real absolute ethical life com-
prehends and unites within itself inﬁnity (or the absolute concept)
and pure individuality in general and in its highest abstraction, it is
immediately the ethical life of the individual; and conversely, the
essence of the ethical life of the individual is quite simply the real
(and hence universal) absolute ethical life – the ethical life of the
individual is one pulse-beat of the whole system, and is itself the
whole system. We also note in this connection a linguistic indicator
which, though dismissed in the past, is completely vindicated by
the foregoing – namely that it is in the nature of absolute ethical
life [Sittlichkeit] to be a universal or an ethos [Sitten]. Thus, both
the Greek word for ethical life and the German word express its
nature admirably,96 whereas the newer systems of ethics, which
make a principle out of individuality and being-for-itself, cannot fail
to reveal their allegiance [Beziehung] in [their use of] these words.97
Indeed, this internal indicator proves so powerful that, in order to
deﬁne their own enterprise [Sache], these systems were unable to
misuse the words in question and adopted the word ‘morality’
[Moralita¨t] instead; and although the latter’s derivation points in
the same direction, it is more of an artiﬁcial coinage and conse-
quently does not so immediately resist its debased meaning.
It follows from what has been said, however, that absolute ethical
life is so essentially the ethical life of everyone that one cannot
describe it as reﬂected, as such, in the individual; for it is as much
the essence of the individual as the aether which permeates nature
is the inseparable essence of natural forms [Gestalten], and as space,
the ideality of nature’s appearances, is in no way particular to any
of them. On the contrary, just as those lines and angles of the crystal
in which it expresses the external form of its nature are negations,
so likewise is ethical life, in so far as it expresses itself in the individ-
ual as such, negative in character [ein Negatives]. For ﬁrst of all, it
cannot express itself in the individual unless it is his soul, and it is
his soul only in so far as it is a universal, and the pure spirit of a
people.98 The positive is by nature prior to the negative; or, as
Aristotle puts it:99
The state [Volk] is more in accord with nature than is the indi-
vidual; for if the individual, in isolation, is not self-sufﬁcient,
he must – like all [other] parts – constitute a single unit with


Political writings
the whole. But anyone who cannot belong to a community [wer
. . . nicht gemeinschaftlich sein kann], or who requires nothing
since he is self-sufﬁcient, is not part of the state [Volk] and is
therefore either an animal or a god.
And secondly, in so far as ethical life expresses itself in the individ-
ual as such, it is posited in the form of negation: that is, it is the
possibility of the universal spirit, and the ethical qualities which
pertain to the individual, such as courage or moderation or thrift or
generosity, etc., are negative ethical life (for in the particular sphere
of the individual, no individual characteristic is truly ﬁxed, and no
real abstraction is truly made), and possibilities or capabilities of
partaking in universal ethical life. These virtues, which in them-
selves are potentialities and have a negative signiﬁcance, are the
object of morality [Moral]; and it can be seen that the relation
between natural law and morality has in this way been inverted,
because only the sphere of the inherently negative properly belongs
to morality, whereas the truly positive belongs to natural law (as its
name suggests).100 [The task of] natural law is to construct the way
in which ethical nature arrives at its true right. Conversely, if the
negative – both in itself and as the abstraction of externality, of the
formal moral law [Sittengesetz], of the pure will and the will of the
individual – along with the syntheses of these abstractions (such as
coercion, the limitation of individual freedom by the concept of
universal freedom, etc.), were deﬁning properties of natural law,e it
would then be natural wrong [Naturunrecht], for if such negations
are treated as basic realities, ethical nature is plunged into the
utmost corruption and misfortune.
But given that these qualities are the reﬂection of absolute ethical
life in the individual as the negative (but the individual who is in
absolute indifference towards the universal and the whole), and are
consequently the reﬂection of that life in its pure consciousness,
they must also be reﬂected in its empirical consciousness, thereby
constituting the ethical nature of that second class [Stand] which is
rooted in ﬁrmly established reality – in possession and property as
distinct from courage. Now it is this reﬂection of ethical life which
corresponds, more or less, to morality [Moralita¨t] in the usual
e Translator’s note: Literally, ‘natural right’, which makes possible the subsequent
contrast with ‘natural wrong’.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
sense – the formal positing of the determinacies of the relation as
indifferent, as in the ethical life of the bourgeois or private person,
in which the difference [Differenz] of relations is ﬁxed, and which
depends on them and is in them.101 A science of this morality is
consequently in the ﬁrst place a knowledge [Kenntnis] of these
relations themselves, so that, in so far as they are considered with
reference to the ethical realm (a reference which, given the absolute
ﬁxity [of these relations], can only be formal), that tautological for-
mulation which was referred to above now comes into its own: this
relation is only this relation; and if you are in this relation, then be
in it with reference to the same; for if, in actions which have refer-
ence to this relation, you do not act with reference to it, you will
nullify and cancel [aufheben] this relation. The true sense of this
tautology likewise directly presupposes that this relation itself is not
absolute, and consequently that the morality [Moralita¨t] which is
based on it is also relative [etwas Abha¨ngiges] and not truly ethical.
In the light of what was said above, this true sense emerges from
the fact that only the form of the concept – i.e. its analytic unity –
is the absolute, and hence the negatively absolute, because its con-
tent, which is determinate, contradicts the form.
But if those qualities which are truly ethical (inasmuch as the
particular or negative appears within them) are wholly taken up into
indifference, they can indeed be called ethical qualities; but they
can be called virtues only if they are individualised once again with
enhanced energy, and if they become – albeit within absolute ethical
life – so to speak distinctive living shapes, like the virtues of Epami-
nondas, Hannibal, Caesar, and a few others. As energies of this
kind, they are [particular] shapes, and are therefore not absolute in
themselves, no more than are the shapes of other organic products
[Bildungen]. They are rather a more powerful manifestation of one
aspect of the Idea of the whole, and the morality [Moral] of virtues,
or ethics [Ethik] (if we wish to deﬁne the morals of morality [die
Moral der Moralita¨t] in general and use the term ‘ethics’ [Ethik] as
a description of virtue), must therefore consist only of a natural
description of the virtues.
Now given that ethics is associated with the subjective or the
negative, a distinction must be made, within the negative at large,
between the negative as the subsistence of difference [Differenz] and
the negative as the absence of difference.102 We have already


Political writings
discussed the ﬁrst of these negatives; but the second, i.e. the absence
of difference, presents the totality as something enclosed and unde-
veloped [unentfaltet], in which movement and inﬁnity are not pre-
sent in their reality. In this negative form, the living principle [das
Lebendige] is the development [das Werden] of ethical life, and edu-
cation [Erziehung] is by deﬁnition the emergent and progressive can-
cellation [Aufheben] of the negative or subjective. For the child, as
the potential form of an ethical individual, is a subjective or negative
being whose growth to maturity marks the end of this form, and
whose education [Erziehung] is the correction or suppression
[Bezwingen] of it. But the positive and essential aspect of the child
is that it is nourished at the breast of universal ethical life, lives at
ﬁrst in the absolute intuition of that life as an alien being, increas-
ingly comprehends it, and so becomes part of the universal spirit.
It follows automatically that neither the above-mentioned virtues
nor absolute ethical life – nor the development of these through
education [Erziehung] – is an attempt to attain a distinct and separ-
ate ethical life, and that it is futile and inherently impossible to
strive for an ethical life of a distinct and positive kind. As far as
ethical life is concerned, the words of the wisest men of antiquity
are alone true: the ethical consists in living in accordance with the
ethics [Sitten] of one’s country; or (with reference to education), as
a Pythagorean replied when someone asked him how best to educate
his son: ‘make him the citizen of a well-managed nation [Volk]’.103
Thus, the absolutely ethical has its proper organic body in indi-
viduals; and its movement and life [Lebendigkeit] in the common
being and activity of everyone is absolutely identical in its universal
and particular forms.104 We have just considered it in its particu-
larity – though in such a way that its essence is the absolutely ident-
ical; but at all events, we have considered it in that identity. Thus,
in the form of universality and cognition, it must also present itself
as a system of legislation – so that this system perfectly expresses
reality, or the living customs [Sitten] of the present. This will ensure
that a situation does not arise – as often happens – in which it is
impossible to recognise what is right and what has actuality within
a people by looking at its laws. Such ineptitude in expressing [a
nation’s] genuine customs in the form of laws, and the fear of think-
ingf these customs, of regarding and acknowledging them as one’s
f Translator’s note: Translator’s italics.


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
own, is the mark of barbarism.105 But this ideality of customs and
their form of universality in the laws must also – in so far as it
subsists as ideality – in turn be perfectly united with the form of
particularity, so that the ideality as such may take on a pure and
absolute shape, and thus be perceived and worshipped as the god
of the people; and this perception itself must in turn have its active
expression [Regsamkeit] and joyful movement in a cult.106
[IV]
We have so far presented absolute ethical life in the moments of
its totality, and constructed its Idea. We have also demolished the
distinction which is commonly made in this connection between
legality and morality [Moralita¨t], along with the related abstractions
concerning the universal freedom of formal practical reason, and
shown them to be groundless intellectual constructions [Gedanken-
dinge]. And we have deﬁned the differences between the sciences of
natural law and morality [Moral] in accordance with the absolute
Idea – not, as it happens, by combining the principles of both, but
by cancelling [Aufhebung] them and constituting the absolute ethical
identity.107 We have thereby demonstrated that the essence of these
sciences is not an abstraction, but the living principle [Lebendigkeit]
of the ethical, and that the difference between them concerns only
their external and negative aspects. We have also shown that this
difference is the complete opposite of the other distinction [referred
to above], according to which the essence of natural law resides in
its formal and negative quality, and that of morality in its absolute
and positive quality, but in such a way that even this absolute qual-
ity is in truth no less formal and negative [than its opposite]; and
what is here described as formal and negative is in fact nothing
at all.
Now in order to specify the relation of natural law to the positive
sciences of right, we need only pick up its threads at the point where
we ceased to follow them, and indicate where this relation ends.
From the outset, we should note in general that philosophy arbi-
trarily deﬁnes its own limits in relation to a speciﬁc science by
means of the universality of the concept of a determinacy or poten-
tiality [Potenz]. The speciﬁc science is nothing other than the pro-
gressive presentation and analysis (in the higher sense of that word)
of how that which philosophy leaves undeveloped – as a simple


Political writings
determinacy – in turn branches out and is itself a totality. But the
possibility of such a development lies formally in the fact that the
law of absolute form and totality whereby a determinacy can be
further recognised and developed is immediately present in the
Idea. But the real possibility is present because such a determinacy
or potentiality [Potenz] which philosophy has not developed is not
an abstraction or genuinely simple atom, but – like everything in
philosophy – a reality, and a reality is a reality because it is a totality,
and itself a system of potentialities [Potenzen]; to present the poten-
tiality as such is the development appropriate to the science in
question.108
It follows from this that we can declare in advance that a con-
siderable part, if not all, of what are known as the positive sciences
of right will fall within a fully developed and comprehensively for-
mulated philosophy, and that they are neither excluded from, nor
set at odds with, philosophy by the fact that they constitute sciences
in their own right; no true distinction between this body of sciences
and philosophy is posited by their having being for themselves [Fu¨r-
sichsein] and being empirically distinct. The fact that they call them-
selves empirical sciences, some of which have their application in
the actual world and attempt to make their laws and procedures
acceptable even to ordinary ways of thinking, while others refer to
the individual systems of existing constitutions and legislations and
belong to a speciﬁc people and a speciﬁc age, does not create any
distinction which necessarily excludes them from philosophy. For
nothing needs to be more applicable to actuality than the products
of philosophy, or to be more fully justiﬁed in relation to the univer-
sal way of thinking (that is, the truly universal way, for there are
common ways of thinking which are also highly particular); nor
does anything have to be so highly individual, alive, and enduring
as they do. But before we can discuss the relationship of these
sciences to philosophy, we must ﬁrst establish and deﬁne a distinc-
tion by virtue of which they are positive sciences.
First of all, the positive sciences include in that actuality to which
they claim to refer not only historical material, but also concepts,
principles, relations, and in general much that in itself pertains to
reason and is supposed to express an inner truth and necessity. Now
to appeal to actuality and experience in this context and to defend
them against philosophy as positive factors must be recognised as


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
wholly [an und fu¨r sich] inadmissible. It is impossible that anything
which is proved by philosophy not to be real should genuinely occur
in experience; and if positive science appeals to reality and experi-
ence, philosophy can enunciate its proof of the non-reality – even
in an empirical context [Beziehung] – of the concept asserted by
positive science, and deny that what the latter professes to ﬁnd in
experience and actuality can in fact be found there. Philosophy will
of course acknowledge the belief that something of the sort is
experienced – [though only as] a random and subjective view. But
when positive science professes to discover and identify its ideas
[Vorstellungen] and basic concepts in experience, it claims to assert
something real, necessary, and objective, and not just a subjective
view. Philosophy alone can establish whether something is a subjec-
tive view or an objective idea [Vorstellung], an opinion or a truth. It
can allow positive science its own procedure ad hominem, and in
addition to denying the fact that an idea of that science occurs in
experience, it can assert the contrary view that only a philosophical
idea can be found there. The reason why philosophy can point to
its ideas in experience is directly attributable to the ambiguous
nature of what is known as experience. For it is not immediate
intuition itself, but intuition raised to an intellectual level, conceived
by thought [gedacht] and explained, divested of its singularity [Ein-
zelheit], and expressed as a necessity, which counts as experience.109
Thus, the most important aspect of what is singled out in and as
experience is not what we may call actuality (with reference to that
division which thought introduces into intuition). But once
intuition is drawn into the ﬁeld of thought, opinion must yield to
the truth of philosophy. That distinction between what positive sci-
ence believes it has derived directly from intuition (but by means
of which it has itself determined the latter, applying a relation and
concept to it), and what does not belong to thinking, is in any case
very easy to demonstrate – as is philosophy’s complete competence
to regulate such matters. Furthermore, this kind of thinking, with
its appeals to actuality, tends to be truly positive in its opinions
because it is [at home] in opposition and clings to determinacies,
and consequently treats products of thought or of the imagination
as absolute and derives its principles from them. Thus it always
runs the risk that every determinacy [to which it clings] may be
proved to it to be the opposite determinacy, and that the opposite


Political writings
conclusions may be drawn from what it itself assumes. Similarly, if
the increased density or speciﬁc weight of a body is explained by
an increase in the force of attraction, it can equally well be explained
by an increase in the force of repulsion, for there can only be as
much attraction as there is repulsion. The one has signiﬁcance only
with reference to the other, and the extent to which the one
exceeded the other would be the extent to which it did not exist at
all; consequently, what is supposed to be seen as an increase in the
one can be seen precisely as an increase in the other.
For example, in natural law in general or the theory of punish-
ment in particular, a relation may be deﬁned as coercion, while
philosophy proves the nullity of this concept and positive science
invokes experience and actuality to show that the coercion actually
is real and actually does take place. The non-reality of this concept,
as proved by philosophy, can, however, be expressed with equal
justice and with reference to experience and actuality, so as to argue
that there is no such thing as coercion, and that no human being
ever is or ever has been coerced. For everything here depends
exclusively on the way in which the phenomenon is explained, and
on whether, for the purposes of the idea [Vorstellung] of coercion,
something is regarded as merely external or as internal. Thus, if it
is intended to demonstrate the existence of coercion in a given
instance, the very opposite can be shown to be true of one and the
same phenomenon – namely that it is not a [case of] coercion, but
rather an expression of freedom; for the very fact that the phenom-
enon is elevated to the form of an idea [Vorstellung] and thereby
determined by internal or ideal factors means that the subject is free
in relation to it. And if, in order to eliminate the opposition of
internal factors or of freedom, what was supposed to be seen as
external coercion is itself internalised and a psychological coercion
is accordingly postulated, this internalisation of the external is of
equally little help. For thought remains completely free, and
psychological or intellectual coercion [Gedankenzwang] cannot tie it
down. The possibility of cancelling [aufzuheben] the determinacy
which is contemplated [vorgestellt], and which is supposed to serve
as coercion, is absolute; if punishment threatens the loss of a
[speciﬁc] determinacy, it is entirely possible to accept this loss and
to give up [freely] what the law proposes to take away by way of
punishment. Thus if it is argued, in explanation of a given phenom-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
enon, that the idea [Vorstellung] of a [speciﬁc] determinacy func-
tions, or has functioned, as coercion, the opposite explanation – i.e.
that the phenomenon is an expression of freedom – is likewise
entirely possible. The fact that the sensuous incentive – either that
which supposedly prompts the action or the legal means which is
supposed to deter it – is psychological (i.e. internal) in character,
immediately places it in [the realm of] freedom, which can either
abstract from it or not; and in either case, freedom of the will is
involved. But if it is objected that people believe there is coercion
(including psychological coercion), and that this is a universal atti-
tude, this is ﬁrstly untrue, for it is equally well (and doubtless more
universally) believed that an action, or non-action, is the product of
free will. Besides, there is no more need to worry about opinion in
setting up principles and deﬁning laws than there is for astronomers
to be held up in their understanding of the laws of the universe by
the opinion that the sun, the planets, and all the stars revolve round
the earth, or are no bigger than they seem, etc. – as little as the
owner of a ship worries about the opinion that the ship is stationary
and the shore is moving past. If each of these were to be guided by
opinion, the former would ﬁnd it impossible to comprehend the
solar system, and the latter would tell the oarsmen to stop work or
lower the sails. Both would instantly ﬁnd it impossible to achieve
their ends, and immediately become aware of the non-reality of the
opinion in question as soon as they tried to concede its reality –
just as it was shown above that, if coercion is taken to be a reality
(i.e. conceived of [vorgestellt] as part of a system within a totality),
it immediately cancels [aufhebt] itself and the whole.
Given that a determinacy of this kind, upheld by positive scien-
tiﬁc opinion, is its own direct opposite, it is equally possible for
each of two parties who attach themselves to opposite determinacies
to refute the other. This possibility of refutation consists in showing
that any [speciﬁc] determinacy is completely unthinkable, and that
it is nothing at all without reference to its opposite. But because it
has being and signiﬁcance only with reference to this opposite, the
latter likewise can and must immediately be present and demon-
strated. From the fact that +A is meaningless without reference to
−A, it can be proved that −A is immediately present with +A, which
one’s opponent will take to mean that −A rather than +A is present;
but the same can be said in reply to his −A. Often, however, we do


Political writings
not even trouble to do so; and with regard to that freedom, for
example, which is opposed to sensuous motives and which, because
of this opposition, is no more truly free than they are, we omit to
point out that everything which purports to be an expression of this
freedom must in fact be explained as an effect of the sensuous
motives. This can be done very easily; but it is just as easy to show
conversely that what is supposed to be experienced as the effect of
a sensuous motive should in fact be experienced as an effect of
freedom. Instead, we simply abstract from freedom and assert that
it has no place here, because it is internal – or rather moral or even
metaphysical – in character. But what is overlooked in this case is
that the other determinacy with which we are left (namely coercion,
and the sensuous motive whereby this coercion is posited as
external) has no signiﬁcance without the opposite, internal factor
(i.e. freedom), and that freedom simply cannot be separated from
coercion. If we consider a criminal act from the point of view that
it has a determinate aim which runs counter to the threatened pun-
ishment, and to the sensuous motive which the law introduces by
means of this threat, then this determinate aim is described as sen-
suous, and it will be said that the source of the crime is a sensuous
stimulus. But if we adopt the point of view that the act is a [product
of] volition, with the possibility of abstracting from the sensuous
motive speciﬁed by the law, it will appear to be free. Neither view –
neither the former determinacy nor the latter possibility – can be
ruled out, for the one is absolutely tied to the other, so that each
can be directly deduced from its opposite. But the logic of opinion
maintains that if a determinacy, or an opposite, is posited, one can
then actually abstract from the other, opposite determinacy and
eliminate it. Because of the nature of its principle of contradiction,
this logic is likewise quite unable to grasp that, in the case of such
determinacies, the opposite of each is completely irrelevant in
deﬁning one’s perception [Anschauung], and that in this abstraction
and negative being [Wesen], one opposite is exactly the same as the
other. Nor is it able to grasp that the two together, e.g. freedom
contrasted with sensuousness, like sensuousness and coercion, are
simply not real, but merely products of thought and ﬁgments of the
imagination.
Thus, in so far as a science of right is positive (in that it clings
to opinions and insubstantial abstractions), its invocation of experi-


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
ence, or of its applicability, by deﬁnition, to actuality, or of sound
common sense and universal attitudes, or even of philosophy, makes
no sense whatsoever.
Now if we look more closely at the basis on which science
becomes positive in the manner indicated above, and if we consider
in general the basis of appearance [Schein] and opinion, we discover
that it lies in form – in so far as what is ideally opposite and one-
sided, and has reality only in absolute identity with its own opposite,
is isolated, posited as existing independently [fu¨r sich seiend], and
declared to be real. It is by this form that intuition is immediately
cancelled [aufgehoben], and the whole is dissolved and ceases to be
a whole and a real entity; consequently, this distinction between the
positive and the non-positive has nothing to do with content.
Through this form, it is possible not only for a purely formal
abstraction to be ﬁxed and falsely described as a truth and reality
(as indicated above), but also for a true idea and genuine principle
to be misunderstood with regard to its limit, and posited outside
that area [Potenz] in which it has its truth, thereby forfeiting its
truth altogether. That a principle belongs to a [speciﬁc] area is an
aspect of its determinacy; but within that area itself, this determin-
acy is both present [in] undifferentiated [form] and really permeated
by the Idea, which makes it a true principle. It is then recognised
as the Idea, appearing in these determinacies as their shape [Ges-
talt], but only as the principle of this [speciﬁc] area, so that its limits
and conditionality are also thereby recognised. But it is completely
divorced from its truth if it is absolutised in its conditionality, or
even applied more widely to the nature of other areas [Potenzen].
The absolutely clear unity of ethical life is absolute and living, to
the extent that neither an individual area nor the subsistence of
such areas in general can be ﬁxed. On the contrary, just as ethical
life eternally expands them, it just as absolutely breaks them down
and annuls [aufhebt] them and enjoys itself in undeveloped unity
and clarity; and as far as the [speciﬁc] areas [Potenzen] are con-
cerned, secure in its own inner life and indivisible, it now dimin-
ishes one by means of the other, now passes over entirely into one
and destroys the others, and in turn withdraws altogether from this
movement into absolute rest, in which all are annulled [aufgehoben].
Conversely, sickness and the seeds of death are present if one part
organises itself and escapes from the authority of the whole; for by


Political writings
isolating itself in this way, it affects the whole negatively, or even
forces it to organise itself solely for [the beneﬁt of] this area; it is
as if the vitality of the intestines, which serves the whole [organism],
were to form itself into separate animals, or the liver were to make
itself the dominant organ and compel the entire organism to per-
form its function. Thus it can happen in the universal system of
ethical life that the principle and system of civil right, for example,
which concerns property and possession, becomes totally immersed
in itself and, losing itself in discursiveness, regards itself as a totality
which has being in itself and is unconditional and absolute. The
inner negativity of this area [Potenz], even in respect of its content
(which is the ﬁnite in its subsistence), has already been deﬁned
above, and it is even more difﬁcult to regard the reﬂection of the
indifference which is possible within this content as absolute. It is
equally impossible for the system of acquisition and possession
itself, the wealth of a people – or again an individual area [Potenz]
within this system (whether agriculture, manufactures and factory
production, or commerce) – to be transformed into something
unconditional.
But an individual area [Potenz] becomes even more positive if it
and its principle forget their conditionality to such an extent that
they encroach upon others and subordinate them to themselves.110
Just as the principle of mechanics has intruded into chemistry and
natural science, and that of chemistry has in turn forced its way into
the latter in particular, the same has happened to the philosophy of
ethics at various times and with various principles. But in recent
times, in the internal economy of natural law, that external justice –
or inﬁnity reﬂected in the subsistence of the ﬁnite, and hence formal
inﬁnity – which constitutes the principle of civil law [bu¨rgerliches
Recht] has gained a special predominance over constitutional and
international law. The form of a relationship as subordinate as that
of contract has intruded upon the absolute majesty of the ethical
totality. In the case of monarchy, for example, the absolute univer-
sality of the central point and the unitary being of its particular
occupant are at one moment interpreted (in the manner of a con-
tract of authorisation) as a relation between a top civil servant and
the abstraction of the state, and at the next (in the manner of ordi-
nary contractual relationships in general) as a transaction [Sache]
between two speciﬁc parties, each of whom has need of the other,


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
and hence as an exchange of services; and by relations such as these,
which are wholly within the ﬁnite realm, the Idea and the absolute
majesty [of the ethical totality] are immediately nulliﬁed. It is like-
wise inherently contradictory if, in international law, the relations
between absolutely independent and free nations [Vo¨lker], which
are ethical totalities, are deﬁned in the manner of a civil contract,
which directly involves the individuality and dependence of the
subjects [Subjekte] concerned. Thus constitutional law as such could
also seek to apply itself entirely to individual matters and, as a per-
fect police-force, to permeate the being of each individual com-
pletely, thereby destroying civic freedom – and this would be the
harshest despotism; in this way, Fichte wishes to see the entire
activity and being of the individual as such supervised, known, and
determined by the universal and the abstraction to which he stands
opposed.111 The moral principle could also seek to intrude into the
system of absolute ethical life and to take over public and civil law,
and international law as well. This would be the greatest weakness
and equally the basest despotism, as well as the complete loss of the
Idea of an ethical organisation; for the moral principle – like the
principle of civil law – exists only in the ﬁnite and individual realm.
In science, such consolidation and isolation of individual prin-
ciples and their systems, and their encroachment on others, is pre-
vented only by philosophy.112 For the part does not recognise its
limits, but must rather tend to constitute itself as a whole and as an
absolute, while philosophy stands above the parts in the Idea of the
whole, and thereby keeps each part within its limits; and by the
loftiness of the Idea itself, it prevents the parts, in their further
subdivision, from proliferating into endless minutiae. In the same
way, this limitation and idealisation of the [speciﬁc] areas [Potenzen]
presents itself in reality as the history of the ethical totality, in which
the latter ﬂuctuates between the opposites with the passage of time,
steadfast in its absolute equilibrium. It sometimes reminds consti-
tutional law of its own determinacy by giving somewhat greater
weight to civil law, and at other times creates cracks and ﬁssures in
the latter by giving greater weight to the former, thus in general
revitalising each system for a time by strengthening its presence
within it, and reminding all, in their separate existence, of their
temporality
and
dependence.
It
also
destroys
their
proliﬁc
expansion and self-organisation by suddenly confounding them all


Political writings
on particular occasions, presenting them in their self-absorption and
then releasing them, reborn from unity, with a memory of this
dependence and an awareness of their own weakness whenever they
try to exist on their own [fu¨r sich].
This character of the positivity of the legal sciences relates to the
form in which one area [Potenz] isolates itself and posits itself as
absolute; and in this respect, not only religion and whatever else
[one cares to name], but also every philosophical science can be
distorted and contaminated. But we must also consider positivity in
its material aspect. For although both what we earlier described as
positive and what we are now considering as material belong to
the particular realm, what we considered earlier was the external
connection of the form of universality with particularity and deter-
minacy, whereas we are now considering the particular as such.
And in this regard, we must above all defend against formalism
everything which, in material terms, can be posited as positive. For
formalism breaks up intuition and its identity of the universal and
the particular, and treats the abstractions of the universal and the
particular as opposites; and whatever it can exclude from this empti-
ness and yet subsume under the abstraction of particularity, it
regards as positive. It overlooks the fact that, through this oppo-
sition, the universal becomes no less positive than the particular;
for as was shown above, it becomes positive through the form of
opposition in which it is present in that abstraction. But the real is
purely and simply an identity of the universal and the particular,
and consequently that abstraction, and the positing of one of the
opposites which arise from that abstraction – i.e. of the universal as
something which has being in itself – cannot take place. If formal
thinking is at all consistent, it must have no content whatsoever if
it regards the particular as positive. In the pure reason of formal
thinking, all multiplicity and all possibility of discrimination must
disappear, and it is impossible to imagine how such thinking could
ever arrive at even a minimal number of rubrics and chapter-
headings; just as those who view the organism essentially in terms
of the abstraction of a vital force ought in fact to regard the limbs
and brain and heart and all the abdominal organs as particular, con-
tingent, and positive, and to ignore them altogether.
Ethical life, like all living things, is simply an identity of universal
and particular, and it is therefore an individuality and a shape. It


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
embodies particularity, necessity, and relation (i.e. relative identity),
but since these are undifferentiated and assimilated to it, it is free
in this identity. And although reﬂection may regard it as particular,
it is not something positive or opposed to the living individual,
which is consequently associated with contingency and necessity,
but is [itself] alive. This aspect is its inorganic nature, but it has
organised it as part of itself in its shape and individuality.113 Thus –
to name the most general factors – the speciﬁc climate of a nation
[Volk], and its chronological position in the development of the race
in general, belong to necessity, and only one link in the far-reaching
chain of necessity relates to its present condition. This link should
be understood, with reference to the former aspect, in terms of
geography, and with reference to the latter, in terms of history. But
ethical individuality [Individualita¨t] has made itself an organic part
of this link, and the determinate character [Bestimmtheit] of this link
has nothing to do with this individuality, but with necessity; for the
ethical vitality of the people consists precisely in the fact that the
people has a shape in which its determinate character [Bestimmtheit]
is present, though not as something positive (in the sense in which
we have hitherto used this word), but absolutely united with univer-
sality and animated by it. And this aspect is also very important
both as a means of recognising how philosophy teaches us to honour
necessity, and because this aspect is a whole, and only a limited
view conﬁnes itself to individual characteristics [die Einzelheit] and
despises them as contingent; but it is also important because this
aspect supersedes the view of individuality [Einzelheit] and contin-
gency by showing how these do not hinder life in itself, but that
life, by allowing individuality and contingency to [continue to] exist
[bestehen] as they are of necessity, simultaneously rescues them from
necessity, and permeates and animates them.114 Just because the
elements of water and air, to which different parts of the animal
kingdom are organically adapted, are individual elements, they are
not something positive or dead for the ﬁsh and the birds respect-
ively. Equally, this [particular] form in which ethical life is organised
in this [particular] climate and this [particular] period of a particular
culture (or of culture in general) is not [merely] positive in this
context. Just as the totality of life is no less present in the nature of
the polyp than in the nature of the nightingale or the lion, so has
the world spirit enjoyed its weaker or more developed – but none


Political writings
the less absolute – [modes of] self-awareness in each of its shapes;
and it has enjoyed itself and its own being in every people and in
every ethical and legal whole.115
Each stage [in the process] is also externally justiﬁed; and this
external aspect belongs to necessity as such, for even in this abstrac-
tion of necessity, individuality [die Einzelheit] is in turn completely
cancelled [aufgehoben] by the Idea. This individuality of the stage
of the polyp and the nightingale and the lion is a potentiality
[Potenz] within a whole, and it is honoured within this context.
Above the individual stages, there hovers the Idea of the totality,
but it is reﬂected back from its whole scattered image in which it
perceives and recognises itself; and this totality of the extended
image is the justiﬁcation of the individual [des Einzelnen] as subsist-
ent. It is therefore the formal viewpoint which confers the form of
particularity
on
an
individuality
[Individualita¨t]
and
cancels
[aufhebt] that vitality in which particularity is real; but where the
reality of a particular stage is posited, it is the empirical viewpoint
which demands a higher stage. That higher stage is equally present,
both empirically and even in its developed reality: the higher devel-
opment of plant life is present in the polyp, the higher development
of the polyp in the insect, etc. Only empirical unreason claims to
discern in the polyp the empirical expression of the higher stage of
the insect. A polyp which is not a polyp remains only a speciﬁc piece
of dead matter to which I have an empirical relation [Beziehung]; it
is dead matter because I posit it as an empty possibility of being
something else, and this emptiness is death. But if our concern is
with the expression of something higher [die ho¨here Darstellung]
without an empirical relation, this can indeed be found, for it must
be present in keeping with absolute necessity. – Thus the feudal
system, for example, may well appear as something wholly positive.
But in the ﬁrst place, as far as necessity is concerned, it is not an
absolute individual [entity], but exists entirely within the totality of
necessity. Internally, however, in relation to life itself, the question
of whether it is positive depends on whether the nation [Volk] con-
cerned has genuinely organised itself as an individuality within it,
whether it completely ﬁlls the shape of that system and permeates
it with its life, and whether the law of these relations is [based on]
custom [Sitte]. Thus, if it happens that the genius of a nation is
weaker and altogether of a lower order (and the weakness of ethical


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
life is at its most acute in barbarism or in a formal culture); if the
nation has let itself be conquered by another nation and has had to
forfeit its independence (and has consequently preferred misfortune
and the shame of lost independence to conﬂict and death);116 if it
has sunk so crudely into the reality of animal life that it cannot even
rise to formal ideality and the abstraction of a universal (so that, in
determining relations for its physical needs, it cannot support the
relation of right, but only that of personality); or similarly, if the
reality of the universal and of right has lost all credence and truth
and the nation cannot feel or enjoy the image of divinity within
itself, but must place it outside itself and make do with a vague
feeling towards it, or with the highly painful feeling of great dis-
tance and sublimity – under circumstances such as these, the feudal
system and servitude have absolute truth, and this relationship is
the only possible form of ethical life, and hence the necessary, just,
and ethical form.
It is this individuality of the whole, and the speciﬁc character of
a nation [Volk], which also enable us to recognise the whole system
into which the absolute totality is organised. We can thereby recog-
nise how all the parts of the constitution and legislation and all
determinations of ethical relations are completely determined by the
whole, and form a structure in which no link or ornament was
present a priori in its own right [fu¨r sich], but all came about
through the whole to which they are subject. In this sense, Montes-
quieu based his immortal work on his perception of the individu-
ality and character of nations [Vo¨lker], and even if he did not ascend
to [the height of] the most vital Idea, he certainly did not deduce
the individual institutions and laws from so-called reason, nor did
he abstract them from experience and then elevate them to universal
status. Instead, he understood both the higher relations in the
sphere of constitutional law, and the lower determinations of civil
relations down to wills, laws concerning marriage, etc., solely in the
light of the character of the whole and its individuality. As for those
empirical theorists who imagine that their knowledge of the contin-
gent elements in their political and legal systems is based on reason,
or derived from common sense itself or even from universal experi-
ence, he showed them, in a way which they could understand, that
the reason, common sense, and experience from which speciﬁc laws
are derived are not reason and common sense a priori, let alone


Political writings
experience a priori (which would be absolutely universal), but quite
simply the living individuality of a nation [Volk]117 – an individu-
ality whose most prominent characteristics [ho¨chste Bestimmtheiten]
should in turn be understood in terms of a more general necessity.
It was shown above, with reference to science, that each individ-
ual area [Potenz] can become ﬁxed, with the result that the science
[in question] becomes positive; exactly the same must be said of the
ethical individual or nation [Volk]. For the totality must of necessity
present itself within the latter as the subsistence of its scattered
determinacies, and that individual link in the chain which the indi-
vidual or nation occupies in the present must pass on and be
replaced by another. As the individual grows in this way, and one
area [Potenz] becomes more prominent while a second recedes, it
can happen that the parts which were organised in the second area
ﬁnd themselves discarded and defunct. This division, in which
some parts mature towards a new life while others, which have
become ﬁrmly established at the stage of one [particular] determin-
acy, remain behind and see their life ﬂee away, is possible only
because the determinacy of one [particular] stage has become ﬁxed
and been made formally absolute. The form of the law which was
conferred on a speciﬁc custom [Sitte], and which is the universality
or the negative absolute of identity, gives that custom the appear-
ance of having being in itself; and if the mass of a nation [Volk] is
large, so also is that part of it which has organised itself in that
determinacy [referred to above], and the law’s consciousness of the
latter will predominate over its unconsciousness of the newly
emergent life. When custom and law were one, the determinacy was
not something positive; but if the whole does not keep pace with
the growth of the individual, law and custom become separate, the
living unity which binds the members together grows weak, and
there is no longer any absolute coherence or necessity in the present
state of the whole. In these circumstances, therefore, the individual
cannot be understood on its own terms, for its determinacy lacks
the life which explains it and makes it comprehensible; and as the
new custom likewise begins to express itself in laws, an internal
contradiction between the various laws must inevitably arise.
Whereas in our earlier discussion, history was only one aspect of
the picture and what was necessary was at the same time free,
necessity no longer coincides with freedom in the present case, and


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
to that extent, it belongs entirely to history proper. Whatever has
no true living ground in the present has its ground in the past –
that is, we must look for a time when that determinacy which is
ﬁxed in the law but is now defunct was a living custom which
harmonised with the rest of the legislation. But the effect of a purely
historical explanation of laws and institutions does not extend
beyond this speciﬁc end of [attaining] knowledge [Erkenntnis]; it
will go beyond its function [Bestimmung] and truth if it is supposed
to justify in the present a law which had truth only in a life that is
past. On the contrary, this historical knowledge of the law, which
can discover the basis of the law only in bygone customs and in a
now departed life, proves precisely that, in the living present, the
law lacks any sense or signiﬁcance (even if it still has power and
authority because of its legal form, and because some parts of the
whole are still in its interest and their existence is tied to it).118
But in order to distinguish correctly between what is dead and
devoid of truth and what is still alive, we should recall a distinction
which a formal approach may overlook, and which will prevent us
from mistaking what is inherently negative for the living law, and
hence from mistaking the rule of inherently negative laws for the
living existence of the organisation. For laws which exempt individ-
ual parts and determinacies from the dominion of the whole, which
withdraw its authority from them, and which constitute individual
exceptions to the universal [rule], are inherently negative, and they
are signs of approaching death. This threat to life becomes ever
more serious as such negative factors and exceptions multiply, and
as those laws which promote this dissolution gain the ascendancy
over the true laws which constitute the unity of the whole. Thus, we
must count as positive and defunct not only what belongs entirely
to a past age and no longer has any living presence but only an
uncomprehending and (since it lacks all inner signiﬁcance) shame-
less power; on the contrary, whatever consolidates the negative –
namely dissolution and separation from the ethical totality – is also
devoid of genuinely positive truth. The former is the history of
a life in the past, but the latter is the determinate representation
[Vorstellung] of death in the present. Thus, in a nation [Volk] which
has experienced dissolution (and Germany is certainly an example),
the laws may appear to have truth if we fail to distinguish whether
they are laws of negativity and division, or laws of the genuinely


Political writings
positive and of unity.119 If laws which organise a whole have signiﬁ-
cance only for a past age, and refer to a shape and individuality
which were cast off long ago as a withered husk; if their interest
extends only to [individual] parts and they consequently have no
living relation [Beziehung] to the whole, but constitute an authority
and rule which are alien to it; if all that embodies a living bond and
an inner unity is no longer in the least appropriate as a means to
their ends, so that this means is neither true nor comprehensible
(for the truth of a means consists in its adequacy to the end), and
this fundamental untruth of the whole ensures that there can be
little truth left in the science of philosophy in general, in ethical
life, and likewise in religion – if all of this is the case, the dissolution
[of the whole] is immediately determined and consolidated, and it
sets itself up in a negative system and thereby gives itself a formal
semblance of knowledge [Erkenntnis], and of laws whose inner
essence is nothingness. If the knowledge and science of such a
nation [Volk] expresses the view that reason knows and understands
nothing, and that it is [to be found] only in empty freedom as an
escape, and in nothingness and its semblance, then the content and
essence of the negative legislation is that there is no law, no unity,
and no whole.120 The former untruth is therefore one which is
unconsciously and unintentionally untrue, whereas this second
untruth is one which has formal pretensions and so becomes ﬁrmly
established.
Thus, philosophy does not take the particular as positive just
because it is particular; on the contrary, it does so only in so far as
the particular has attained independence as a separate part outside
the absolute context of the whole. The absolute totality, as a necess-
ity, conﬁnes itself within each of its potentialities [Potenzen], and
produces itself as a totality on this basis. It there recapitulates the
[development of the] preceding potentialities, as well as anticipating
[that of] those still to follow; but one of these is the most powerful
among them, and in its complexion and determinacy, the totality
appears – though without imposing any more restrictions on life
than water does on the ﬁsh, or air on the bird. It is at the same
time necessary that individuality should advance through metamor-
phoses, and that everything that belongs to the dominant poten-
tiality should grow weaker and die, in order that all stages of necess-
ity may appear as such within it. But it is in the misfortune of


On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law
the transitional period (inasmuch as this strengthening of the new
development [Bildung] has not purged itself absolutely of the past)
that the positive lies. And although nature, within a speciﬁc shape,
proceeds with a constant movement (not mechanically uniform, but
uniformly accelerated), it nevertheless also enjoys whatever new
shape it has attained. Though it springs into this shape, it also
lingers in it, just as a [mortar-] bomb rushes towards the culmi-
nation [of its trajectory] and pauses there for a moment, or as heated
metal does not soften like wax, but suddenly goes into ﬂux and
remains in this state – for this phenomenon [Erscheinung] is a tran-
sition to the absolute opposite and is consequently inﬁnite, and this
emergence of the opposite from inﬁnity, or from its [own] nullity,
involves a leap. The existence [Dasein] of a shape in its new-born
vigour is initially an existence for itself, before it becomes conscious
of its relationship to anything alien to it. So likewise does a growing
individuality have both the delight of that leap into a new form and
lasting enjoyment within it, until it gradually becomes open to the
negative, and its downfall also constitutes a sudden break.
Now the philosophy of ethical life teaches us to understand this
necessity, and to recognise the structure [Zusammenhang] and deter-
minacy of its content as absolutely conjoined with the spirit, and as
its living body; and it is opposed to that formalism which regards
as contingent and dead whatever it can subsume under the concept
of particularity. But this philosophy at the same time recognises
that this vitality of individuality in general, whatever its shape, is a
formal vitality; for the limited nature [Beschra¨nktheit] of all that
belongs to necessity, even if it is absolutely taken up into indiffer-
ence, is only a part of necessity, not absolute and total necessity
itself, so that there is still a disparity between the absolute spirit
and its shape. But it [i.e. this philosophy] cannot discover this absol-
ute shape by resorting to the shapelessness of cosmopolitanism, or
to the vacuity of the rights of man or the equal vacuity of an inter-
national state or a world republic;121 for these abstractions and
formal constructions [Formalita¨ten] contain the precise opposite of
ethical vitality, and are essentially protestant and revolutionary in
relation to individuality.122 On the contrary, it must discover [er-
kennen] the most beautiful shape to match the high Idea of absolute
ethical life. Since the absolute Idea is in itself absolute intuition, its
construction [Konstruktion] also directly determines the purest and


Political writings
freest individuality in which the spirit intuits itself with complete
objectivity in its shape; and without returning into itself out of
intuition, the spirit recognises [erkennt] this same intuition, wholly
and immediately, as itself, and by this very means, it is absolute
spirit and perfect ethical life. At the same time, this ethical life
resists any involvement with the negative in the manner outlined
above (for it has become self-evident that what we have hitherto
described as positive, if considered in itself, is in fact the negative).
It confronts the negative as an objective fate, and by consciously
granting it an authority and realm of its own through sacriﬁcing
part of itself, it purges its own life of the negative and [thereby]
preserves it.


Inaugural Address, Delivered at the
University of Berlin (October )1
Gentlemen,
Since today marks my ﬁrsta appearance at this university in that
ofﬁcial capacity as a teacher of philosophy to which I was graciously
appointed by His Majesty the King,2 permit me to say by way of
introduction that I considered it particularly desirable and gratifying
to take up a position of wider academic inﬂuence both at this particu-
lar moment and in this particular place.3
As far as the particular moment is concerned, those circumstances
appear to have arisen in which philosophy may once again expect to
receive attention and love, and in which this science, which had
almost fallen silent,4 may once more lift up its voice. For not long
ago, the urgency of the times on the one hand conferred such great
importance on the petty interests of everyday life, and on the other
hand, the high interests of actuality, the interest and conﬂicts involved
simply in restoring and salvaging the political totality of national life
and of the state, placed such great demands on all [our] mental facul-
ties and on the powers of all [social] classes [Sta¨nde] – as well as on
a Translator’s note: The frequent use of italics in this text is based on Hegel’s manu-
script, and was no doubt designed to highlight those words and phrases which he
wished to emphasise in delivering his address. In translating the address, I have,
as usual, followed Werke (vol. , pp. –) in the ﬁrst instance; but in marking
Hegel’s emphasis, I have been guided rather by the deﬁnitive GW, and have indi-
cated in the following notes those instances where the wording of the text in the
latter edition differs signiﬁcantly from that of the former.


Political writings
external resources – that the inner life of the spirit could not attain
peace and leisure; and the world spirit was so bound up with actuality
and forced to turn outwards that it was prevented from turning
inwards upon itself and enjoying and indulging itself in its proper
home.5 Now once this stream of actuality had been checked, and the
German nation at large had salvaged its nationality, the basis of all
vitality and life, the time came when, in addition to the empire of
the actual world, the free realm of thought might also ﬂourish inde-
pendently within the state. And at all events, the power of the spirit
has asserted itself to such an extent in the [present] age that only
Ideas, and what is in keeping with Ideas, can now survive, and
nothing can be recognised unless it justiﬁes itself before insight and
thought.6 And it is this state in particular,7 the state which has taken
me into its midst, which, by virtue of its spiritual supremacy [U¨ ber-
gewicht], has raised itself to its [present] importance [Gewicht] in
actuality and in the political realm, and has made itself the equal, in
power and independence, of those states which may surpass it in exter-
nal resources. Here, the cultivation and ﬂowering of the sciences is
one of the most essential moments – even of political life. In this
university – as the central university – the centre of all spiritual
culture [Geistesbildung] and of all science and truth, namely philos-
ophy, must also ﬁnd its place and be treated with special care.
But it is not just spiritual life in general which constitutes a basic
moment in the existence of this state; more particularly, that great
struggle of the people, together with its ruler, for independence, for
the destruction of soulless foreign tyranny, and for freedom, had its
higher source in the soul [Gemu¨t];8 it is the ethical power of the spirit
which felt its own energy, raised its banner, and expressed this feeling
as a force and power in [the realm of] actuality. We must regard it
as commendable that our generation has lived, acted, and worked in
this feeling, a feeling in which all that is rightful, moral, and religious
was concentrated. – In such profound and all-embracing activity,
the spirit rises within itself to its [proper] dignity; the banality of
life and the vacuity of its interests are confounded, and the super-
ﬁciality of its attitudes and opinions is unmasked and dispelled. Now
this deeper seriousness which has pervaded the soul [Gemu¨t] in general
is also the true ground of philosophy. What is opposed to philosophy
is, on the one hand, the spirit’s immersion in the interest of necessity
[Not] and of everyday life, but on the other, the vanity of opinions;


Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of Berlin
if the soul [Gemu¨t] is ﬁlled with the latter, it has no room left for
reason – which does not, as such, pursue its own [interest]. This
vanity must evaporate in its own nullity once it has become a
necessity for people to work for a substantial content, and once the
stage has been reached when only a content of this kind can achieve
recognition. But we have seen this age in [possession of] just such
a substantial content, and we have seen that nucleus once more take
shape with whose further development, in all its aspects (i.e. politi-
cal, ethical, religious, and scientiﬁc), our age is entrusted.9
Our vocation and business is to nurture the development of philos-
ophy as the substantial basis which has now been rejuvenated and
conﬁrmed. Its rejuvenation, whose initial impact and expression were
felt in political actuality, makes its further appearance in that greater
ethical and religious seriousness, that demand for solidity [Gedie-
genheit] and thoroughness in general, which has gone out to [people
in] all walks of life; the most solid [gediegenste] [kind of] seriousness is
essentially [an und fu¨r sich selbst] the seriousness of truth.b This need,
by which spiritual nature is distinguished from that nature which
merely feels and enjoys, is for that very reason the deepest need of
the spirit;10 – it is an inherently universal need, and on the one hand,
it has been stirred more profoundly by the seriousness of our times,
and on the other, it is a characteristic property of the German spirit.
As for the distinction of the Germans in philosophical culture, the state
of philosophical studies among other nations and the meaning which
they attach to the term ‘philosophy’ show that, while they have
retained the name, its sense has changed and the thing itself has been
debased and dissipated to such an extent that scarcely a memory or
inkling of it has remained. This science has sought refuge among the
Germans and survived only among them; we have been given custody
of this sacred light, and it is our vocation to tend and nurture it, and
to ensure that the highest [thing] which man can possess, namely the
self-consciousness of his essential being, is not extinguished and lost.11
But even in Germany, the banality of that earlier time before the
country’s rebirth had gone so far as to believe and assert that it had
discovered and proved that there is no cognition of truth, and that God
and the essential being of the world and the spirit are incomprehensible
b Translator’s note: Werke adds the words zu erkennen (‘and of cognition’) at the end
of this sentence.


Political writings
and unintelligible. Spirit [, it was alleged,] should stick to religion,
and religion to faith, feeling, and intuition [Ahnen] without rational
knowledge.12 Cognition [, it was said,] has nothing to do with the
nature of the absolute (i.e. of God, and what is true and absolute in
nature and spirit), but only, on the one hand, with the negative
[conclusion] that nothing true can be recognised, and that only the
untrue, the temporal, and the transient enjoy the privilege, so to speak,
of recognition – and on the other hand, with its proper object, the
external (namely the historical, i.e. the contingent circumstances in
which the alleged or supposed cognition made its appearance); and
this same cognition should be taken as [merely] historical, and exam-
ined in those external aspects [referred to above] in a critical and
learned manner, whereas its content cannot be taken seriously.13 They
[i.e. the philosophers in question] got no further than Pilate, the
Roman proconsul; for when he heard Christ utter the word ‘truth’,
he replied with the question ‘what is truth?’ in the manner of one
who had had enough of such words and knew that there is no cog-
nition of truth. Thus, what has been considered since time immem-
orial as utterly contemptible and unworthy – i.e. to renounce the knowl-
edge of truth – was gloriﬁed beforec our time as the supreme triumph
of the spirit. Before it reached this point, this despair in reason had
still been accompanied by pain and melancholy; but religious and
ethical frivolity, along with that dull and superﬁcial view of knowledge
which described itself as Enlightenment, soon confessed its impotence
frankly and openly, and arrogantly set about forgetting higher interests
completely; and ﬁnally, the so-called critical philosophy provided this
ignorance of the eternal and divine with a good conscience, by
declaring that it [i.e. the critical philosophy] had proved that nothing
can be known of the eternal and the divine, or of truth. This sup-
posed cognition has even usurped the name of philosophy, and
nothing was more welcome to superﬁcial knowledge and to [those
of] superﬁcial character, and nothing was so eagerly seized upon by
them, than this doctrine, which described this very ignorance, this
superﬁciality and vapidity, as excellent and as the goal and result of
all intellectual endeavour. Ignorance of truth, and knowledge only
of appearances, of temporality and contingency, of vanity alone –
this vanity has enlarged its inﬂuence in philosophy, and it continues
c Translator’s note: GW reads vor (‘before’); Werke reads von (‘by’).


Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of Berlin
to do so and still holds the ﬂoor today.14 It can indeed be said
that, ever since philosophy ﬁrst began to emerge in Germany, the
condition of this science has never looked so bad, nor has such a
view as this, such renunciation of rational cognition, attained such
[a degree of] presumption and inﬂuence. This view has dragged on
[into the present] from the period before our own, and it stands in
stark contradiction to that worthier [gediegenern]d feeling and new,
substantial spirit [of today]. I salute and invoke this dawn of a worth-
ier spirit, and I address myself to it alone when I declare that philosophy
must have a content [Gehalt] and when I proceed to expound this
content to you. But in doing so, I appeal to the spirit of youth in
general, for youth is that ﬁne time of life when one is not yet caught
up in the system of the limited ends of necessity [Not] and is inherently
[fu¨r sich] capable of the freedom of disinterested scientiﬁc activity; nor
is it yet affected by the negative spirit of vanity, by purely critical
drudgery with no content. A heart which is still in good health still
has the courage to demand truth, and it is in the realm of truth that
philosophy is at home, which it [itself] constructs, and which we
share in by studying it. Whatever is true, great, and divine in life is
so by virtue of the Idea; the goal of philosophy is to grasp the Idea
in
its
true
shape
and
universality.
Nature
is
conﬁned
to
implementing reason only by necessity; but the realm of spirit is the
realm of freedom. All that holds human life together, all that has
value and validity, is spiritual in nature; and this realm of the spirit
exists solely through the consciousness of truth and right, through
the comprehension of Ideas.15
May I express the wish and hope that I shall manage to gain and
merit your conﬁdence on the path which we are about to take. But
ﬁrst of all, the one thing I shall venture to ask of you is this: that
you bring with you a trust in science, faith in reason, and trust and
faith in yourselves. The courage of truth and faith in the power of the
spirit is the primary condition of philosophical study;16 man should
honour himself and consider himself worthy of the highest [things]. He
cannot overestimate the greatness and power of the spirit; the closed
essence of the universe contains no force which could withstand the
courage of cognition; it must open up before it, and afford it the
spectacle and enjoyment of its riches and its depths.
d Translator’s note: Werke reads gediegenen, but GW has the comparative gediegenern.


Address on the Tercentenary of the
Submission of the Augsburg Confession (
June )1
Most excellent, illustrious, reverend men, most learned and con-
genial colleagues, most honourable companions in study, most
esteemed listeners of every rank!
The most venerable Senate has instructed me to comment on
the occasion and cause of the celebration with which the King has
authorised this university to mark today’s festival. Since that
immortal act which we now commemorate concerned the profession
and establishment of religious doctrine, it appears ﬁtting that our
admirable Theological Faculty should play the leading part in this
festivity. Its estimable Dean will accordingly give us a ﬁtting and
learned account of the event in question and profoundly impress its
signiﬁcance upon us. But what happened at Augsburg was not
enacted by an assembly of Doctors of Theology and leaders of the
Church; nor did they embark on a learned disputation in order to
determine the truth and to require the lay community to accept it
as certain and observe it with dutiful obedience.2 On the contrary,
the main signiﬁcance of that day was that the princes of the
[German] states and the burgomasters of the Imperial Cities pub-
licly declared that the Protestant [evangelicam] doctrine,3 freed at
last from a mass of superstitions, errors, lies, and all kinds of injus-
tices and abuses, was now ﬁnally perfected and elevated above the
uncertain outcome of disputations, above the arbitrary will, and
above all worldly authority, and that they [i.e. the princes and


On the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession
burgomasters] had now taken up the cause of religion.4 They
thereby let it be known that those who had formerly been [classed
as] laymen were now permitted to express opinions on religion, and
they claimed this inestimable freedom on our behalf. Thus, if I am
to say a few words on this matter by way of introduction to our
festivity, I must [on the one hand] apologise for my lack of skill as
a speaker5 and crave the indulgence of my esteemed audience; but
[on the other hand,] I would betray the cause of that liberty which
was secured for us on the day which we now celebrate if I were
consequently to apologise for speaking as a so-called layman on
religious matters. It would rather appear that I was entrusted with
this aspect of the celebration – and I gladly accepted the task – so
that we might make use of the opportunity we had been given and
publicly declare and testify that we possess it. And for this reason
I have considered it my duty to say something about that freedom
which those of us who are not theologians acquired [as a result of
the Augsburg Confession].6
For before that time, the state of Christendom was such that it
was divided into two classes, one of which had appropriated the
rights and administration of that freedom which was conferred on
us all by Christ, while the other, reduced to servitude, was the
property of [those who enjoyed] this same freedom. But we under-
stand Christian freedom to imply that everyone is declared worthy
of it who turns to God as the object of his knowledge, prayers, and
worship, that everyone determines his own relationship with God
and that of God with man, and that God himself consummates this
relationship within the human mind.7 We are not dealing here with
a God who is subject to the inﬂuences of nature,8 but with one who
is the truth, eternal reason, and the mind and consciousness of this
reason. But it was the will of God that man should be endowed
with this same rational consciousness, and that he should therefore
be distinct from the unthinking animals; it was likewise his will that
man should be in God’s own image, and that the human mind,
which is surely a spark of the eternal light, should be accessible to
this light. Furthermore, since man is made in the image of God,
God thereby revealed to the human race that the archetype [idea]
of human nature is truly to be found in God himself; he also willed
and permitted that human beings should love him, and he granted
them the inﬁnite capacity and conﬁdence to approach him.


Political writings
Subsequently, this highest good which God was able to give to man
was again taken away from him, for the innermost sanctuary of the
soul, the only possible basis and channel for that holy communion
[with God], was polluted by terrors and ﬁctions and obscured by
foul superstitions, and human contact with God was cut off as if by
a wall of brass. These obstacles, interposed between God and the
[human] soul which burned with desire to approach him,9 were the
source and origin of servitude; for divine love is a free and inﬁnite
relationship [commercium], and if limits are imposed on it, it is
reduced to the kind of relationship [consortio] which is customary
between mortals. Thus, sacred things are reduced to the condition
of common objects which can be physically possessed, controlled
by force of arms, or even bought and sold.10 In an association of
this kind, domination and arbitrariness have their place; it produces
all those qualities which we encounter in souls which are alienated
from divine freedom, such as ambition, lust for power, avarice,
hatred, and every kind of tyranny and stupidity. Thus, in the very
lap of freedom, the Christian community was split up into masters
and slaves,11 an arrangement which seemed to have rendered the
rule of impiety permanent and utterly invincible.
But the true consciousness of God and his inﬁnite love broke
these fetters asunder, and free access to God was restored to man.
Indeed, what the leaders of Germany proclaimed at the Diet of
Augsburg, in their own name and in that of the people, was that
they disowned servitude and renounced their status as laymen, just
as the theologians had renounced their clerical status, so that [both]
these orders were completely abolished.12 Thus, that unseemly div-
ision was removed [sublatum] which, since it was not [just] a conﬂict
over the fortuitous authority of particular individuals, had disrupted
and even subverted not only the Church, but religion itself. Admit-
tedly, [secular] princes had also been present at [ecclesiastical] coun-
cils before that time, as at the famous Council of Constance. But
they were not there to express, as it were, their own opinions, but
in an administrative capacity in order to sign the decrees of the
doctors [of the Church], and they subsequently served as
executioners to translate the bloody signiﬁcance of these decrees
into reality by killing [those whom the Church had condemned].
But the Emperor who presided at the Diet of Augsburg did not act
with equal right or equal freedom, i.e. he did not act with divine
authority. Charles V, whose realms were so extensive that it was


On the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession
said that the sun never set on them, that same Emperor who, a few
years earlier, had delivered up the city of Rome and the Papal See
to his army to conquer, pillage, put to the torch, and destroy, with
all manner of outrage and mockery directed at the Pope himself,
now presented himself at Augsburg as a protector and patron of the
Church – i.e. as a guardian of the Pope – and declared that his
intention was to restore peace to the Church, and with it the threat
of servitude as before. He was content with the spoils which
ambition, bloodthirstiness, and licentiousness had brought back to
him from the world at large, from Rome, and even from the captive
Pope. But he left to others the immortal glory of defeating that
tyranny which had usurped control of religion; and in his deafness,
he was unable to perceive that God had risen up, and that it was his
trumpet which now proclaimed the wondrous sound of Christian
freedom.13 He was not equal to the sacred inspiration [ingenium] of
his age.
But those who did hear that sound and who now considered
themselves emancipated were only freedmen [liberi] and not genu-
inely free [liberti], and the reason for this appears to be that the
territorial princes and the burgomasters of the Imperial Cities had
taken control of affairs.14 For it is impossible for minds which have
only just escaped from the shackles of superstition not to remain
tied to those legal and political principles [ratio] which correspond
to the precepts of the old religion. For religion cannot be shut away
in the recesses of the mind and cut off from the principles of action
or the organisation of life.15 So great is its power and authority that
all that pertains to human life is embraced and governed by it.16 It
is therefore essential that, if religion is reformed, the political, legal,
and ethical system [ratio civitatis et legum morumque] should also be
reformed. Thus, the things which our Luther set in motion were
truly new. But since it was the princes and civil magistrates who
solemnly concluded the business at Augsburg, they thereby testiﬁed
that this was accomplished by public debate and volition, not
through the pressure of the multitude, and that the majesty and
authority of the laws and of the princes had not been contravened,
but rather that the latter held sway over law-governed states [civit-
ates] and obedient peoples.17
It is true that some are more critical in this respect, arguing that
one must distinguish between the way in which something begins
and the shape which it ﬁnally assumes; for even if the outcome and


Political writings
end [of the Reformation] gave it legitimacy, these critics maintain
that it was none the less culpable [in its initial phase]; indeed, they
deny that Luther’s enterprise was concerned solely with doctrine,
claiming rather that it was directed against the laws which had hith-
erto been in force. Indeed, they declare that it is close to sedition if
we try to excuse such conduct and feign an appearance of justice
by deferring judgement until the ﬁnal outcome, treating the losing
party as guilty and the victor as justiﬁed. Thus, even if the cause
which triumphed was pleasing to God, it will plainly be displeasing
to such Catos as this, because the defeated cause had once been
legitimate. The doctrine they here put forward undoubtedly carries
much weight – namely that nothing should be more sacred to the
citizens than the obedience which they must show towards the laws,
and the respect and ﬁdelity which they owe to their ruler. May I
nevertheless be allowed in this context to quote what Cicero said of
Socrates and Aristippus: ‘By no means’, he says, ‘should any indi-
vidual fall into the error of supposing that, if these men acted and
spoke against custom [morem] and civil convention, he may do the
same himself; for they acquired the right to do so by virtue of their
great and divine gifts’.18 But how much greater and more divine are
those beneﬁts in whose acquisition we here rejoice than those gifts
which Cicero describes as great and divine! And consequently, how
much juster and more legitimate was that licence with which Luther
and his friends – and not only they, but with them the princes and
magistrates – transformed and renewed many things which were
formerly considered just and legitimate in civil law! Those who
condemn the Reformation of the evangelical religion in the manner
described above should take heed lest, in denouncing Luther’s
sedition, they glory in their own obedience and zeal towards the
laws and civil authorities merely because they deny divine truth
altogether and ascribe all religious doctrine to human invention and
opinion.
For the same reason, the same people deplore the fact that a
profession of faith was drawn up at the Diet of Augsburg; for they
maintain that those who declared themselves free were merely
changing their fetters. They accordingly consider that there are no
true [general] principles – unless one chooses to regard one’s own
opinions as certain – and that freedom consists essentially in dis-
senting from whatever doctrine is generally accepted.19 But anyone


On the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession
who accuses those who introduced that Magna Charta by which the
Evangelical Church proclaimed its foundation and constitution of
thereby imposing fetters on it overlooks the fact that it was the very
community which this charter established that gave birth to that
tireless endeavour,20 by physical and intellectual means, to explore
the nature of all things divine and human as thoroughly as possible;
and that, as a result of this endeavour, nothing was left untried or
untouched by the human understanding [ingenium], and all areas of
learning, of liberal arts and letters, were restored to humanity – and
not merely restored, but strengthened and augmented by a new and
inﬁnite ardour. Day by day, they grow and expand with constant
vigour; and at the same time, they are freely accessible to all, and
everyone is necessarily invited, urged, and encouraged from all
quarters to investigate for himself what is just, true, and divine. –
But I shall say no more of those fetters which allegedly attach to all
public doctrines, both because the difﬁculty of this topic would
distract me for too long from my theme and because, in view of the
multiple suspicions and odium already referred to, it would be too
melancholy a subject, inappropriate to today’s joyful occasion. It
may sufﬁce to point out that so superabundant a harvest could in
no wise have arisen from servile origins. But already at the time
when this process began, and certainly in our own day, it became
obvious how great a potential the restored doctrines of religion pos-
sess for improving civil laws and institutions. Let us now look more
closely at the nature of that evangelical doctrine which relates to
the theme I was asked to discuss.
First of all, we note that the schism which brought discord into
the innermost sanctuary of the soul and split the commonwealth
[respublica] into two civil powers was abolished; we now understand
that the commonwealth, by divine authority,21 should be internally
one, and that the laws [iura] pertaining to the state [civitas] and
citizens and the precepts of virtue are divinely sanctioned. Princely
power has been reconciled with the Church, and while the former
is now at one with the divine will, the latter renounces all unjust
authority. What strikes me as most noteworthy here is the fact that
this was not some fortuitous and external agreement between
princes and theologians; on the contrary, the precepts of religion
and of the state [civitas] itself and the most fundamental principles
[rationes] of truth came together in a genuine peace. The foundation


Political writings
which was then laid down developed more fully over the course of
time until ﬁnally – for this can happen only very slowly – it pen-
etrated and informed every area of human life and the rules which
govern all human duties [omnium ofﬁciorum].
May I therefore invite my esteemed audience to recall what the
duties of human life are, and how they were attacked and indeed
corrupted by the doctrine of the older Church.22 The duties in ques-
tion are familiar to everyone: ﬁrstly, there are those which relate to
the family, such as conjugal love and the mutual love of parents
and children, then justice, equity, and benevolence towards others,
diligence and honesty in administering property, and ﬁnally the love
of one’s country and its rulers, which even requires us to lay down
our lives in their defence. The immortal examples of these virtues
which the Greeks and Romans left behind for us to admire and
imitate were described by the Church Fathers as ‘splendid vices’.
The Roman Church accordingly set up another principle [ratio] of
living, in opposition and preference to these virtues and rules of
justice and honesty – namely sanctity. And we must surely concede
from the outset that Christian virtue, if it is based on the love of
God, is far more excellent and holier than anything which does not
come from this source. But we maintain and believe that those
duties which relate to the family, to the commerce between human
beings, and to one’s country and its ruler are indeed based on the
will of God, and that the corresponding virtues are certainly con-
ﬁrmed by Christian piety, i.e. by love of the divine will, and should
in no way be looked down on, despised or dismissed by it. But these
duties and virtues are weakened and destroyed by those which the
Roman Church set up as rules of sanctity and imposed on its mem-
bers; and in case these should appear vague and empty words, we
shall now describe the rules in question speciﬁcally.
The [Roman] Church accordingly claimed that the unmarried state
and childlessness are holier in terms of love and piety than matrimony
itself.23 We are indeed impelled to this [matrimonial] union by
nature, but only mindless animals cling to what they are drawn to
by nature, whereas it is characteristic of human beings to transform
this impulse into a bond of love and piety. Surely the ancients, in
supposing that Vesta or the Lares and Penates presided over the
family, had a truer sense that there was something divine in it than
did the Church, which discerned a special sanctity in contempt for


On the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession
marriage. We need not mention what moral abuses this rule of celi-
bacy gave rise to, for it is well enough known that most of those
clerics who were committed to sanctity of this kind, including those
of the highest rank and authority, were the most licentious and
openly dissolute of men. It is admittedly argued that such vices
cannot be attributed to the law itself, but should be ascribed to
human lust and depravity. But those duties which God imposed on
men and wished them to regard as sacred apply to everyone, and
he wishes to reveal himself in equal measure to those of every class
[ordo] who love him. But if it follows from that law of righteous-
ness – and this is surely absurd – that the entire human race could
be forbidden to marry, the basis of all honesty and moral discipline
would certainly be destroyed, for this is plainly to be found in
family piety.
Then the [Roman] Church has taught that poverty is a sacred
virtue. It consequently has a low opinion of industriousness and
probity in the care and administration of property, and of diligence
in the acquisition of [material] goods, which are not only necessary
to sustain life but also serve to help others; it thereby rates idleness
above work, stupidity above ingenuity, and carelessness above fore-
sight and probity. As a result of the vow (or rather pretence) of
poverty, the clergy was given leave to indulge in avarice and luxury;
for it is plain that the possession and acquisition of wealth were
condemned in order that the clergy alone might be rich and owners
of all the wealth which others had acquired through folly or even
wickedness.
To these two precepts, the [Roman] Church added a third to
crown them all, namely blind obedience and mental servitude. This
ensures that the love of God will not lead us into liberty, but will
thrust us down into servitude, both in minor things which are sub-
ject to contingency and to the arbitrary will of the individual, and
in major things, i.e. in the knowledge of what is just, honourable,
and righteous and in the arrangement and conduct of our lives –
plainly in order that those who present themselves as servants (or
even as servants of servants)a may rule over private life and domestic
affairs and be masters of the commonwealth [respublica] and its
rulers.
a Translator’s note: servus servorum Dei (‘servant of the servants of God’) was a title
adopted by the Popes.


Political writings
No one who is mildly and benevolently disposed towards those
of differing religious views, and who wishes that the religious hatred
which agitated the nations [populos] so long and so violently should
ﬁnally be laid to rest and never again awakened, will deny that those
rules which, as I said, are taught by the Roman Church embrace
the entire basis [ratio] of human life, and that they confuse and
confound all justice and honour within it. Consequently, the declar-
ation of the German rulers [civitatum rectores] at Augsburg abolished
not only that Holiness from which the Roman Pope borrowed his
title, but also the much more oppressive, indeed pernicious rules of
sanctity; it thereby proclaimed that the state [civitas] was reconciled
with God, and God with the state.24 Only then was the contradic-
tion [dissidium] resolved whereby just and honest laws were sup-
posed to be pleasing to human beings and something else to be
pleasing to God, and only then was that ambiguity and duplicity
removed [sublata] whereby the wicked could ask for indulgences for
their crimes and offences, whereas the upright might either be led
into revolt against authority and other misdeeds, or into folly and
inactivity; only then did consciousness of the divine will cease to be
different from consciousness of truth and justice.
Human beings can have no ﬁrm trust in the laws unless they are
persuaded not only that the latter are not at variance with religion,
but also that they have their source in it. There are indeed many
highly placed and talented individuals in our time who believe that
true wisdom consists in the separation of religion and the state [civ-
itas]; but they are gravely mistaken.25 For it is manifest that the
supreme and most ﬁrmly based principle in our minds and the sole
source of all our duties is the notion [notio] of God. Consequently,
whatever does not depend on this and is not sanctioned by the idea
[species] of the divine will can be regarded as contingent, as a prod-
uct of the arbitrary will or of coercion, and no one can be truly
bound or obligated by it. Thus, one cannot sufﬁciently censure the
foolishness of those who believe that the institutions and laws of
the state can be reformed without restoring the true religion to
which the former correspond. The fruit of regained divine liberty,
and of it alone, is civil liberty and justice. We may recall how the
error of those who failed to comprehend the nature of this matter
was forcibly refuted by that terrible teacher, the course of events
[eventus rerum]. For in all those Catholic dominions in which those
of higher station [nobiliores cives] had gained a truer knowledge of


On the Tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession
what is just and honourable, attempts were made to reform the
laws and customs [mores] of society [civitatis]; but while some rulers
assented to this and others dissented, religion remained opposed,
so that all such attempts were vitiated from the start. They were
subsequently overwhelmed by every kind of crime and evil, until
they ﬁnally came to grief, to the most acute but ineffectual shame
of their instigators.26
In our case, however, divine providence ensured that the precepts
of the religion we profess are in accord with what the state regards
as just.27 This was accomplished three hundred years ago by the
princes and peoples of Germany. But both they themselves and
their successors then had to expiate the immense and ancient guilt
of the perversion of Christianity by suffering the prolonged misfor-
tunes and miseries of war, until they could at last secure what they
passed on to us as our most precious heritage – namely the free
concord of the state and religion, and particularly that evangelical
religion of which, as already mentioned, this concord is character-
istic. This concord gave rise to what we rejoice in as the main con-
tribution to the common welfare of our times, so that all those
propitious and useful steps could be taken which human ingenuity
devised and inherent necessity required in order to increase free-
dom, to improve the laws, and to develop the institutions of the
state in a more fruitful and liberal manner. All these things were
accomplished peacefully, without internal convulsions and crimes,
through the discernment and goodwill of those in whom supreme
power is invested.28 Most important of all, let me add that, if our
princes are pious, we need not fear their piety like that ill-starred
and terrible piety of the French kings, which drove them to frenzied
action – even with their own hands – against their Protestant sub-
jects, nobility and commoners alike, with carnage, plunder, and
every kind of atrocity. They deﬁled the name of piety by such
infamy, which was sanctioned by the religion of those who commit-
ted it. Thus the Protestant [evangelici] princes know that they are
acting piously if they shape and administer the commonwealth
[respublica] in accordance with the eternal rule of justice, and
guarantee the security of the people; and they neither know nor
recognise any kind of sanctity but this.
Thus, the piety of our princes ﬁlls us with conﬁdence and secur-
ity and assures them of our love. And whereas on the birthday of
our most gracious King Frederick William,29 we turn our eyes every


Political writings
year to the image of his virtues and remind ourselves of the beneﬁts
which he so richly bestows on this his university, let us today joy-
fully praise his exceptional piety, which is the source of all his vir-
tues.30 And since this directly concerns his subjects, let us cherish
it, venerate it, and rejoice in it. Our joy and reverence gain consider-
able extra signiﬁcance from the fact that the whole Protestant [evan-
gelicus] world, both within Germany and beyond its frontiers, knows
that our cause is an important one, and the admiration, trust, and
pious wishes of all those good people who rejoice in this freedom
join with us in turning to that person whom they recognise as the
sure defender of the evangelical doctrine and of the freedom which
goes with it. We have prayed, pray now, and shall not cease to pray
to almighty God that he may favour our most gracious King and
his whole illustrious [Augustae]b house by preserving and increasing
those blessings with which he eternally rewards piety, justice, and
mercy.
b Translator’s note: Hegel seems to be playing here on the similarity between the
Latin name for Augsburg (Augusta Vindelicorum, usually shortened to Augusta) and
the adjective augusta (‘illustrious’) to emphasise, at the conclusion of his address,
the close relationship between the Prussian monarchy and the Protestant cause
which he sees embodied in the Augsburg Confession. (The Prussian monarchs
were in fact not themselves Lutherans, but Calvinists.)


Lectures on the Philosophy of History1
(–), Part IV, Section : The New
Age
[Editorial note: The following excerpt is from Part IV of
Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of History, which is entitled
‘The Germanic2 World’. Parts I to III deal with the Oriental
World, the Greek World, and the Roman World respectively.
In his brief introduction to Part IV, Hegel argues that the Ger-
manic people are the carriers of the Christian principle in West-
ern civilisation, and that the Christian principle is constitutive
of freedom in the ‘new age’. This principle develops in the
Germanic world in three distinct stages, the ﬁrst of which
stretches from the fall of Rome to the time of Charlemagne,
and the second (i.e. the Middle Ages) from Charlemagne to the
Reformation. The latter stage, Hegel argues, was characterised
by Catholic corruption and by the Church’s denial of the right
of conscience, and a rigid separation was introduced between
priesthood and laity and between spiritual and secular worlds.
Most important of all, however, he contends that the ideals of
Catholicism, and in particular those of celibacy, poverty, and
obedience, rendered religion incompatible with Sittlichkeit,
especially in its three essential moments of family, civil society,
and the state.
In the extract translated here, Hegel discusses the third stage
in the development of the Christian principle among the Ger-
manic peoples. He attempts to show how the Reformation
inaugurated a movement that led to the recovery of the realm
of Sittlichkeit for Christianity. In his view, this recovery was


Political writings
initiated by Luther, but Luther’s Reformation – the ‘ﬁrst’
Reformation – failed to complete the process. As a philosopher
of Sittlichkeit and of Protestantism, Hegel wishes to suggest
how the process which Luther began might be completed in
the present. The argument he advances in the following extract
leaves no doubt that he pursued this end consciously and
deliberately.]
We now come to the third period of the Germanic realm, and so
enter the period in which the spirit knows itself as free inasmuch
as it wills the true [das Wahrhafte], the eternal, and the universal in
and for itself.
In this third period, three phases should again be distinguished.
Firstly, we must consider the Reformation as such, the all-
illuminating sun which followed the dawn at the end of the Middle
Ages;3 then the development of the situation after the Reformation;
and ﬁnally, recent times from the end of the last century onwards.4
Chapter : The Reformation
The Reformation arose out of the corruption of the Church.5 The
corruption of the Church was not fortuitous, not just an abuse of
power and authority [Herrschaft]. ‘Abuse’ is a term very commonly
used to describe a corrupt condition; it is assumed that the foun-
dation was good and that the thing itself was faultless, but that the
passions, subjective interests, and contingent will of human beings
in general made use of that good [foundation] as a means for their
own ends [fu¨r sich], and that all that is necessary is to remove these
contingent factors. On this view [Vorstellung], the thing itself is
rescued and the evil is eliminated as a purely external element. But
if something is abused in a contingent manner, only individual
aspects are affected, whereas a great and universal evil in so great
and universal a thing as a Church is a completely different matter. –
The corruption of the Church developed out of the Church itself;
its principle consists precisely in the fact that the This [das Dieses]
is present in it in sensuous form [als ein Sinnliches], that the external
is present as such within it. (The transﬁguration of this element by
art is [still] not sufﬁcient.) The higher spirit, the world spirit has
already excluded the spiritual from it; the Church does not share in


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
it or occupy itself with it; it thus retains the This within it, as sensu-
ous subjectivity or immediate subjectivity which it has not trans-
ﬁgured into spiritual subjectivity.6 – From now on, it falls behind the
world spirit, which has already moved beyond it; for it [the world
spirit] has come to know [wissen] the sensuous as sensuous, the
external as external, to be active in the ﬁnite [realm] in a ﬁnite
manner and to be with itself [bei sich] in this activity as an indiffer-
ent and justiﬁed subjectivity.
This destiny, which is intrinsic to the Church, necessarily reveals
itself as inner corruption as soon as it no longer encounters resist-
ance and has become ﬁrmly established. Then the elements are
released and fulﬁl their destiny. It is this externality within the
Church itself which accordingly becomes evil and corruption, and
develops as the negative within it. – The forms of this corruption
are the manifold relations in which the Church itself stands, and
into which this moment consequently introduces itself.
There is superstition throughout this [form of] piety, which
remains tied to a sensuous object, a common thing. It assumes the
most varied shapes: slavery to authority (for the spirit, as inwardly
outside itself, is unfree and externally constrained); a belief in mir-
acles of the most absurd and foolish kind (for the divine is thought
to exist [dazusein] in a completely sporadic [vereinzelt] and ﬁnite
way and for wholly ﬁnite and particular ends); and ﬁnally, lust for
power, self-indulgence and all the corruptness of barbarism and
vulgarity, hypocrisy and deceit. All of this opens up within the
Church; for sensuousness in general is not restrained and cultivated
in it by the understanding; it has become free, but only in a crude
and savage manner. – On the other hand, the virtue of the Church,
in negating sensuousness, is only abstractly negative; it does not
know how to be ethical in this [sensuous] context, and therefore
simply ﬂees, renounces, and lacks vitality in the actual world [in der
Wirklichkeit].7
These contrasts within the Church – crude vice and lust, and an
all-sacriﬁcing sublimity of soul – become even stronger through the
energy which human beings now feel in their subjective strength in
relation to external things, and in nature, in which they know they
are free and hence acquire an absolute right for themselves. – The
Church, which is supposed to save souls from corruption, makes
this very salvation into an external instrument [Mittel] and is now


Political writings
reduced to performing this function in an external fashion.8 The
remission of sins, the highest satisfaction which the soul seeks in
order to be certain of its unity with God, this profoundest and
innermost [aspiration], is offered to human beings in the most exter-
nal and frivolous manner – namely as something to be bought with
mere money; and at the same time, this is done for the most external
ends of self-indulgence. It is also true that one of these ends was
the construction of St Peter’s, the magniﬁcent Christian ediﬁce in
the heart of the residence of that religion. But just as the supreme
example of all works of art, Athene and her temple stronghold in
Athens, was built with the money of that city’s allies and yet
deprived the city both of its allies and of its power, so did the
completion of this Church of St Peter, and of Michelangelo’s ‘Last
Judgement’ in the Sistine Chapel, mark the Last Judgement and
downfall of this proud ediﬁce.
The old and well-tried inwardness [Innigkeit] of the German people
had to produce this revolution out of its own simple heart. While
the rest of the world made off to the East Indies or America – to
amass riches or to build a secular empire whose territory was to
encircle the globe and on which the sun would never set – it was a
simple monk who discovered that the This [das Dieses] which
Christendom had previously sought in an earthly sepulchre of stone
lay rather in the deeper sepulchre of the absolute ideality of all
sensuous and external things; that is, he found it in the spirit and
showed it in the heart – the heart which, inﬁnitely offended by
this offer of the most external satisfaction for its innermost needs,
recognises, pursues, and destroys this distortion of the absolute
relation of truth in all its individual guises [Zu¨gen]. Luther’s simple
doctrine is that the This, inﬁnite subjectivity – i.e. true spirituality
or Christ – is in no way present and actual in an external fashion;
on the contrary, as something wholly spiritual, it is attained only
through reconciliation with God – in faith and in enjoyment.9 These
two words express it all. It is not a consciousness of a sensuous
object as God, nor even of something merely represented [vorge-
stellt] which is not actual and present, but of something actual which
is not sensuous. This elimination of externality reconstructs all doc-
trines and reforms all the superstition into which the Church had
consistently dissolved.10 It concerns above all the doctrine of works;
for works are what is somehow accomplished not in faith, in one’s


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
own spirit, but externally, on [the direction of] authority, etc.11 But
neither is faith just a certainty with regard to purely ﬁnite things –
a certainty belonging only to the ﬁnite subject, as, for example, the
faith that this or that person existed and said this or that, that the
children of Israel passed dry-footed through the Red Sea, or that
the trumpets had an effect as powerful as that of our cannons before
the walls of Jericho; for even if none of this had been reported, our
knowledge [Kenntnis] of God would be no less complete.12 Faith is
certainly not a belief in something absent and over and done with,
but a subjective certainty of the eternal, of truth which has being
in and for itself, of the truth of God. The Lutheran Church says
of this certainty that only the Holy Spirit produces it – i.e. that it
is a certainty which pertains to the individual not by virtue of his
particular individuality, but by virtue of his essential being.13 – The
Lutheran doctrine is therefore wholly [identical with] the Catholic,
with the exception of all that follows from that relation of exter-
nality already referred to (in so far as the Catholic Church afﬁrms
this externality). Luther could therefore do no other than make no
concessions on that doctrine of the Eucharist in which everything
is concentrated. Nor could he concede to the Reformed [Calvinistic]
Church that Christ is a mere memory or recollection; on the con-
trary, he agreed on this question with the Catholic Church that
Christ is a [real] presence, but in faith and spirit [alone]. He taught
that the spirit of Christ does actually ﬁll the human heart, and that
Christ should not be regarded merely as a historical personage – on
the contrary, human beings have an immediate relation to him in
spirit.14
Now inasmuch as the individual knows that he is ﬁlled with the
divine spirit, all relations of externality are abolished: there is no
longer any distinction between priests and laymen, and no one class
[Klasse] has exclusive possession of the content of truth and of all
the spiritual and temporal treasures of the Church. It is instead the
heart, the feeling spirituality of human beings, which can and
should come into possession of the truth, and this subjectivity is
that of all human beings.15 Each must accomplish the work of rec-
onciliation within himself. – The subjective spirit must take the
spirit of truth up into itself and let it dwell within it. That absolute
inwardness of soul which pertains to religion itself is thereby
attained, as is freedom within the Church. Subjectivity now makes


Political writings
the objective content – i.e. the doctrine of the Church – its own. In
the Lutheran Church, the subjectivity and certainty of the individ-
ual are just as necessary as the objectivity of truth.16 For Lutherans,
truth is not a ready-made object [Gegenstand]; on the contrary, the
subject itself must become a true subject [ein wahrhaftes] by giving
up its particular content in exchange for substantial truth and
making this truth its own. Thus, the subjective spirit becomes free
in truth, negates its particularity, and comes to itself in its truth.
Thus Christian freedom is actualised. If we identify subjectivity
solely with feeling, without this content, we remain at the [level of
the] purely natural will.
At this point, the new and ultimate standard round which the
peoples gather is unfurled, the banner of the free spirit which is with
itself [bei sich selbst], and with itself in truth and truth alone. This
is the banner under which we serve and which we bear aloft. The
age from that time until our own has had no other work to do or
yet to be done than to cultivate this principle and bring it into the
world, so that reconciliation in itself [an sich] is achieved and truth
also becomes formally objective.17 Form pertains to culture
[Bildung] in general; culture is the activation of the form of the
universal, which is thought in general. Right, property, ethical life,
government, the constitution, etc. must now be determined in a
universal way so that they may accord with the concept of the free
will and [so] be rational. Only in this way can the spirit of truth
appear within the subjective will, in the will’s particular activity;
and as the intensity of free subjective spirit resolves to assume the
form of universality, the objective spirit can [in turn] appear. It is
in this sense that we should understand that the state is based on
religion. States and laws are nothing other than religion as it appears
in the relations of actuality.18
This is the essential content of the Reformation; human beings
are by nature [durch sich selbst] destined to be free.19
. . .20
The relation between the new Church and the secular realm has already
been discussed, and only the details have still to be speciﬁed. The
development [Entwicklung] and progress of the spirit from the
Reformation onwards consists in the fact that, by virtue of that
mediation which takes place between man and God, the spirit, now
conscious of its freedom and certain that the objective process is


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
[part of] the divine essence itself, duly comes to grips with this
process and follows it through in the further development [Bildung]
of secularity.21 The reconciliation which is thereby achieved gives
rise to the consciousness that the secular is capable of embodying
the truth, whereas it had formerly been regarded as merely evil and
incapable of goodness, which remained a realm beyond [ein Jen-
seits].a It is now known that what is ethical and right within the
state is also divine and commanded by God, and that, in terms of
content, nothing is higher or more sacred. It follows from this that
marriage is no longer inferior to celibacy. Luther took a wife to show
that he respected marriage, without fearing the calumnies which he
would thereby incur. It was his duty to do so, as it was to eat
meat on Fridays, in order to prove that such things are right and
permissible in contrast to the supposedly higher merit of abstinence.
It is through the family that human beings enter into the com-
munity and into the relation of mutual dependence within society,
and this union is an ethical one, whereas the monks, segregated
from ethical society, formed as it were the Pope’s standing army,
just as the janissaries formed the basis of Turkish power. As soon
as priests can marry, the external difference between laity and clergy
also disappears. – Nor was [the state of] unemployment any longer
regarded as sacred; on the contrary, it was rated more highly if
human beings in a state of dependence made themselves indepen-
dent through activity, through intelligence [Verstand] and industry.
It is more meritorious [rechtschaffener] that someone who has money
should spend it, even on superﬂuous needs, than give it away to
idlers and beggars; for he gives it to an equal number of people,
and there is at least the condition that they should have actively
worked for it. Trade and industry have now become ethical, and
the obstacles which the Church put in their way have disappeared.22
For the Church had declared it sinful to lend money for interest;
but the necessity of doing so led to precisely the opposite result.
The Lombards (from whom the French expression lombard for ‘loan
ofﬁce’ is derived), and especially the Medicis advanced money to
princes throughout Europe. – The third moment of sanctity in the
Catholic Church, namely blind obedience, was likewise abolished
a Translator’s note: The sense in which Hegel employs this adverbial noun becomes
clearer when he introduces it again on p. below.


Political writings
[aufgehoben]. Obedience to the laws of the state, as the rational basis
[Vernunft] of volition and action, was now made into a principle. In
this obedience, human beings are free, for the particular [now]
obeys the general. They themselves have a conscience, and should
therefore obey freely. The possibility of reason and freedom
developing and being introduced [into human affairs] is thereby
posited, and reason and the divine commandments are now synony-
mous. The rational is no longer contradicted by the religious con-
science; it can develop peacefully on its own ground, with no need
to react forcibly to its opposite. But in the Catholic Church, this
opposite has absolute authority [Berechtigung]. Princes may indeed
still be bad, but they are no longer authorised and encouraged to
be so by their religious conscience. On the other hand, the con-
science may very well be opposed, in the Catholic Church, to the
laws of the state. Regicides, political conspiracies, and the like have
often been supported and carried out by the priests.
This reconciliation of Church and state has arisen immediately
and of its own accord [fu¨r sich]. There is as yet no reconstruction
of the state, the system of right, etc., for thought still has to discover
what is right in itself. The laws of freedom ﬁrst had to develop into
a system of what is right in and for itself.23 After the Reformation,
the spirit does not appear at once in this complete state [Vollen-
dung], for the Reformation is initially conﬁned to immediate
changes, as, for example, the dissolution of monasteries, bishoprics,
etc. God’s reconciliation with the world was initially still in abstract
form, and had not yet developed into a system of the ethical world.
This reconciliation should ﬁrst take place within the subject as
such, in its conscious sensibility [Empﬁndung]; the subject should
assure itself that the spirit resides within it, that – in the language
of the Church – its heart has been broken and divine grace has
become manifest within it. Human beings are by nature not what
they ought to be; they arrive at truth only by a process of transform-
ation.24 The universal and speculative [element] consists precisely
in the fact that the human heart is not what it ought to be. It was
now required of the subject that it should become conscious of what
it is in itself – that is, dogmatics wished human beings to know that
they are evil. But the individual is evil only when the natural comes
into existence in sensual desire and the will of the unjust [person]
does so in an unrestrained, undisciplined, and violent manner; and


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
yet the individual is supposed to know that he is evil, and that
the good spirit resides within him; he should accordingly have and
experience in an immediate sense [Weise] what in a speculative sense
has being in itself. Once the reconciliation had assumed this abstract
form, human beings were subjected to the torment of forcing the
consciousness of their sinfulness upon themselves and knowing
themselves as evil. The most ingenuous souls [Gemu¨ter] and most
innocent natures brooded over and explored the most secret stir-
rings of their hearts in order to observe them minutely. But this
duty was also combined with an opposite duty whereby human
beings were also supposed to know that the good spirit resided in
them and that divine grace had become manifest within them. This
in fact took no account of the great difference between knowing
what has being in itself, and knowing what is [present] in existence
[Existenz]. The torment of uncertainty arose as to whether the good
spirit did reside in human beings, and the whole process of trans-
formation was supposed to be known within the subject itself. We
can still hear an echo of this torment in many religious poems of
that era; the Psalms of David, which display a similar character,
were also introduced as hymns at that time. Protestantism accord-
ingly took this course of small-minded brooding over the soul’s
subjective condition and treated this preoccupation as important, so
that it was long characterised by inner torment and wretchedness.
In our own time, this has induced many people to convert to Cath-
olicism in order to exchange this inner uncertainty for a broad
formal certainty based on the imposing totality of the Church.25 But
cultivated reﬂection on [human] actions also found its way into the
Catholic Church. The Jesuits brooded no less deeply over the ulti-
mate sources of volition (velleitas); but they possessed a casuistry
which could ﬁnd a good reason for everything and so eliminate
evil.26
This is connected with a further remarkable phenomenon
common to both Catholic and Protestant worlds. Human beings
were driven to inwardness and abstraction, and the spiritual was
regarded as distinct from the secular.27 The dawning consciousness
of human subjectivity, of the inwardness of human volition, brought
with it a belief in evil as a vast power in the secular realm. This
belief is parallel to [that in] indulgences: just as one could buy eter-
nal salvation for a sum of money, so was it now believed that one


Political writings
could exchange one’s salvation for worldly riches and the power to
gratify one’s desires and passions by means of a pact with the devil.
Thus arose the famous story of Faust who, dissatisﬁed with theor-
etical knowledge [Wissenschaft], plunged into the world and forfeited
his own salvation in exchange for all its glory. According to the
poet, Faust did enjoy the world’s glory as his payment; but those
poor women who were described as witches are supposed to have
had only the satisfaction of petty revenge on their neighbour by
stopping her cow’s milk or making her child fall ill. But no account
was taken of the extent of the damage through loss of milk or the
child’s sickness etc. in proceedings against them; on the contrary,
the power of evil within them was pursued in the abstract. The
belief in this separate and speciﬁc power of secularity, in the devil
and his deceptions, led to an inﬁnite number of trials for witchcraft
in both Catholic and Protestant countries. The guilt of the accused
could not be proved – it was merely suspected; it was therefore only
on unmediated knowledge [unmittelbares Wissen] that this rage against
evil was based. It was nevertheless considered necessary to proceed
to evidence; but the basis of these trials was simply the belief that
[certain] persons possess the power of evil. This was like a mon-
strous plague which ravaged the nations [Vo¨lker] in the sixteenth
century in particular. The main incentive was suspicion. This prin-
ciple of suspicion appears in just as terrible a form under the Roman
Empire and under Robespierre’s Reign of Terror, when dispositions
[die Gesinnung] as such were punished.28 Among the Catholics, it
was the Dominicans to whom – along with the Inquisition in gen-
eral – the trials for witchcraft were entrusted. Father Spee, a noble
Jesuit (who also wrote a collection of splendid poems entitled
Trutznachtigall), attacked them in a work which fully acquaints us
with the terrible character of criminal justice in cases of this kind.29
Torture, which was supposed to be administered only once, was
continued until a confession was obtained. If the accused persons
fainted through weakness under torture, it was said that the devil
gave them sleep; if they went into convulsions, it was said that the
devil laughed within them; if they held out steadfastly, it was said
that the devil gave them strength. These persecutions spread like an
epidemic through Italy, France, Spain, and Germany. The earnest
objections of enlightened men like Spee and others already had a
considerable effect. But the ﬁrst to oppose this pervasive super-


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
stition with major success was Thomasius, a professor at [the Uni-
versity of] Halle.30 The whole phenomenon is inherently [an und fu¨r
sich] quite remarkable when we consider that we escaped from this
fearful barbarity by no means long ago (as late as , a witch was
burned at Glarus in Switzerland). Among the Catholics, persecution
was directed against heretics as well as witches; both were placed
in roughly the same category, and the unbelief of the heretics was
likewise regarded as evil pure and simple.
Leaving this abstract form of inwardness behind us, we now have
to consider the secular aspect – the formation of the state [Staatsbil-
dung] and the rise of the universal, the growing consciousness of
universal laws of freedom. This is the second and essential
moment.31
. . .32
Chapter : The Enlightenment and Revolution
In the Protestant religion, the principle of inwardness had arisen in
conjunction with religious liberation and [the principle of] satisfac-
tion within the self; this also led to the belief that inwardness is
evil, and to the belief in the power of secularity. In the Catholic
Church, the casuistry of the Jesuits also gave rise to endless investi-
gations, as long-winded and hair-splitting as those of scholastic the-
ology in earlier times, concerning the inner nature and motives of
the will. In this dialectic, which rendered all particulars uncertain
by turning evil into good and good into evil, nothing was ﬁnally left
but the pure activity of inwardness itself, the abstract [aspect] of
spirit, namely thought. Thought considers everything in the form of
universality and is consequently the activity and production of the
universal. In the scholastic theology of former times, the proper
content of this theology – i.e. the doctrine of the Church – remained
a realm beyond [ein Jenseits]. In Protestant theology, the spirit like-
wise retained its reference to a realm beyond; for on the one hand,
the individual [eigene] will, the human spirit, the ‘I’ itself remains,
and on the other, there is the grace of God, the Holy Spirit, and
hence, in [the context of] evil, the devil. But in thought, the self is
present to itself, and its content and objects are likewise absolutely
[schlechthin] present to it; for when I think, I must raise the object
[of my thought] to universality.33 This is utter and absolute


Political writings
freedom, for the pure ‘I’, like pure light, is absolutely with itself
[schlechthin bei sich]; thus diversity, whether sensuous or spiritual,
no longer holds any terrors for it, for it is inwardly free and freely
confronts it. A practical interest makes use of objects and consumes
them; a theoretical interest contemplates them in the assurance that
they are not in themselves different. – Consequently, the culminat-
ing point of inwardness is thought. Human beings are not free if
they do not think, for their relation is then to an Other. This com-
prehending and grasping of the Other, [coupled] with an innermost
self-certainty, contains the reconciliation in immediate form [unmit-
telbar]: the unity of thought with the Other is present in itself, for
reason is the substantial basis both of consciousness and of the
external and natural. Thus, what thought confronts [das Gegenu¨ber]
is likewise no longer a realm beyond, nor is it of another substantial
nature.
Thought is the stage at which the spirit has now arrived. It [i.e.
thought] contains reconciliation in its purest essentiality, because it
approaches the external [world] in the expectation that this will
embody the same reason as the subject does. The spirit recognises
that nature and the world must also have an inherent reason, for
God created them in a rational manner. A universal interest in con-
templating and getting to know the present world has now arisen.34
The universal aspect of nature is the species, genera, force, and
gravity reduced to their phenomena, etc. Thus experienceb has
become the science of the world, for experience is on the one hand
perception, but on the other hand, it is also the discovery of the
law, the internal [dimension], the [underlying] force, inasmuch as
it reduces what is given to its simple rudiments. – It was Descartes
who ﬁrst extracted the consciousness of thought from that sophistry
of thought which renders everything uncertain.35 Just as it was in
the purely Germanic nations that the principle of spirit emerged,
so were the Romance nations the ﬁrst to grasp abstraction, which is
connected with their character of inner division as described
above.36 Empirical science [Erfahrungswissenschaft] was therefore
quickly accepted by them, in common with the Protestant English
and the Italians in particular. It seemed to human beings as if God
had only now created the sun, moon, stars, plants, and animals, as
b Translator’s note: Erfahrung, which also carries associations of ‘experiment’.


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
if the laws [of nature] had only now been determined; for only now
did people become interested in these when they recognised their
own reason in the reason inherent in them. The human eye became
clear, the senses aroused, and thought went to work and explained.
The laws of nature were used to confront the monstrous super-
stition of the age, as well as all notions of mighty alien powers which
could be conquered only by magic. People everywhere – Catholics
no less than Protestants – declared that those externals [das A¨ ußere]
to which the Church wished to attach a higher signiﬁcance [das
Ho¨here] are no more than externals: the Host is merely dough, the
relic merely bones. Belief based on authority was countered by the
autonomous rule of the subject, and the laws of nature were recog-
nised as the only link between one external [thing] and another.
Thus, all miracles were rejected; for nature was now a system of
known and recognised laws, human beings were at home in it, and
only what they were at home with was accepted as valid – they
were free through their cognition of nature. Then thought was also
directed to spiritual matters: right and ethical life were regarded as
based on the present ground of human will, whereas they had for-
merly been present only as divine commandments imposed from
without, as written in the Old and New Testaments, or in ancient
parchments in the form of particular rights or privileges, or in
[legal] treatises. It was known from empirical observation (as in the
work of Grotius)37 what nations acknowledge as right in their
mutual relations; then those drives which nature has implanted in
the human heart were regarded, in Cicero’s manner,38 as the source
of existing civil and political right [Staatsrecht] – for example, the
social instinct, and likewise the principle of personal security and
security of citizens’ property, along with the principle of the general
good [des allgemeinen Besten] or reason of state. On the basis of
these principles, private rights were on the one hand despotically
disregarded, but on the other hand, universal political ends were
enforced in opposition to the [merely] positive. Frederick II [of
Prussia] may be named as the ruler under whom the new era
attained actuality, the era in which the actual political interest
acquired its universality and supreme justiﬁcation.39 He deserves
particular emphasis because he grasped the universal end of the
state by means of thought, and because he was the ﬁrst ruler to
hold ﬁrmly to the state’s universal aspect and to take no further


Political writings
account of particulars if they were at variance with the end of the
state. His immortal work is a domestic code of laws, the [Prussian]
Common Law [Landrecht]. He furnished a unique example of how
the father of a family energetically provides for and regulates the
welfare of his household and dependants.
These universal determinations – i.e. the laws of nature and the
content of what is right and good – based as they were on the
present consciousness, were given the name of reason. The recog-
nition [das Gelten] of these laws was known as Enlightenment.40 It
came over to Germany from France, and a new world of ideas [Vor-
stellungen] arose out of it. The absolute criterion which was applied
to all authority of religious belief and positive laws of right
(especially political right) was that their content should be under-
stood by the freely present spirit itself. Luther had achieved spiri-
tual freedom and a concrete reconciliation [of subject and object];
he triumphantly established that what is the eternal destiny of
human beings should be enacted within themselves. But the content
of what was to be enacted and what truth should come to life within
them was taken by Luther as already given, as revealed by religion.
The principle was now set up [by the Enlightenment] that this
content should be a present one, of which I can become inwardly
convinced, and that everything must be reduced to this inner
ground.41
This principle of thought ﬁrst emerges in its universal form; it is
still abstract, and is based on the maxim [Grundsatz] of contradic-
tion and identity. The content [Inhalt] is accordingly posited as
ﬁnite, and the Enlightenment outlawed and eradicated all speculat-
ive elements [alles Spekulative] from things human and divine. But
even if it is inﬁnitely important that a manifold content [Gehalt]
should be reduced to its simple determination in the form of univer-
sality, this as yet abstract principle still fails to satisfy the living
spirit and concrete mind [Gemu¨t].
With this formally abstract principle, we come to the ﬁnal stage
of history, to our world and our own times.
Secularity is the spiritual realm in [determinate] being [im
Dasein], the realm of the will as it comes into existence [Existenz].
Feeling [Empﬁndung], sensation [Sinnlichkeit], and drives are also
modes of realisation of inwardness, but they are individually transi-
ent; for they are the variable content of the will. But what is just


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
and ethical belongs to the essential and inherently universal will
which has being in itself, and if we wish to know what is truly right,
we must abstract from inclinations, drives, and desires as particular
[things]; we must consequently know what the will is in itself. For
drivesc of benevolence, helpfulness, and sociability remain drives,
and various other drives are hostile to them. What the will is in
itself must rise above these particulars and opposites. But when it
does so, the will, as will, remains abstract. The will is free only in
so far as it does not will anything other, external, or alien (in which
case it would be dependent), but wills only itself as will.42 The
absolute will is the will to be free. The will which wills itself is the
basis of all right and all obligation, and hence of all laws of right,
prescribed duties, and imposed obligations. The freedom of the will
itself is, as such, the principle and substantial foundation of all right;
it is itself absolute right, eternal in and for itself, and the highest of
all rights (in so far as it is compared with other, particular rights).
It is even that [quality] by which the human being becomes a human
being, and is consequently the fundamental principle of spirit. –
But the next question to arise is this: how does the will become
determinate?43 For when it wills itself, it is merely identical self-
reference. But it also wills particular things: there are, as we know,
distinct duties and rights. We expect the will to have a content and
determinacy; for the pure will is its own object and content, which
is no object or content at all. As such, it is nothing more than a
formal will. But this is not the place to discuss the speculative pro-
cess which leads on from this simple will to the determination of
freedom, and hence to rights and duties. It may simply be noted
here that, in Germany, the same principle was established theoreti-
cally by the Kantian philosophy. For according to the latter, the
simple unity of self-consciousness, the ‘I’, is inviolable and utterly
independent freedom and the source of all universal determinations
(i.e. determinations of thought), namely theoretical reason, and like-
wise the highest of all practical determinations, namely practical
reason as free and pure will; and the rationality [Vernunft] of will
consists simply in maintaining itself in pure freedom, in willing only
c Translator’s note: Werke has Dem Triebe (‘To the drive’), which is incoherent in
grammar and sense. I follow Glockner’s edition (vol. , p. ), which has Denn
Triebe (‘For drives’); Lasson’s edition has Die Triebe (‘The drives’), which also
gives a coherent sense.


Political writings
the latter in all particular instances, in willing right purely for the
sake of right, and duty purely for the sake of duty. With the Germ-
ans, [all] this remained tranquil theory; but the French wished to
put it into practice. – Two questions now arise: why did this prin-
ciple of freedom remain merely formal? and why did only the
French, and not the Germans, set out to realise it?44
The formal principle was certainly supplemented [in France] by
categories of weightier content – above all that of society and what
is useful to it; but the aim of society is itself political, the aim of
the state (see the Droits de l’homme et du citoyen of ), which is
to uphold natural rights; but natural right is freedom, whose further
determination is equality of rights before the law. The two are
directly linked, for parity is [achieved] through the comparisond of
many, but the many in question are human beings, whose basic
determination is the same, namely freedom. This principle remains
formal,
because
it
arose
out
of
abstract
thought
(i.e.
the
understanding), which is primarily the self-consciousness of pure
reason and, being immediate, is abstract.45 It does not yet develop
anything further out of itself, for it still remains opposed to religion
in general as the concrete absolute content.46
As for the second question (i.e. why did the French proceed at
once from the theoretical to the practical, while the Germans went
no further than theoretical abstraction?), one might say that the
French are hotheads (‘ils ont la teˆte pre`s du bonnet’); but the reason
lies deeper than this.47 For in Germany, the formal principle of
philosophy is faced with a concrete world and actuality in which
the need of the spirit ﬁnds inner satisfaction and the conscience is
at peace. For on the one hand, it was the Protestant world itself
which had advanced so far in thought as to become conscious of
the absolute apex of self-consciousness; and on the other hand,
Protestantism is reassured, with regard to ethical and legal
[rechtliche] actuality, by the disposition48 [of its adherents], which is
at one with religion and is itself the source of all the legal content
of civil law and the political constitution. In Germany, the Enlight-
enment was on the side of theology; in France, it was at once
directed against the Church. As far as secular life was concerned,
d Translator’s note: Hegel underlines his point by exploiting the etymological afﬁnity
between Gleichheit (‘equality’) and Vergleichung (‘comparison’); a similar afﬁnity
exists between the words ‘parity’ and ‘comparison’ in English.


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
everything had already improved in Germany as a result of the
Reformation.49 Those pernicious institutions of celibacy, poverty,
and idleness had already been done away with; there was no dead
wealth tied up in the Church, and no constraint on ethical life – a
constraint which is the source and occasion of vices; there was not
that unspeakable injustice which arises from the interference of
ecclesiastical authority in secular right, nor that other injustice of
the anointed legitimacy of kings (i.e. the doctrine that princely arbi-
trariness as such is divine and holy because it is the arbitrariness of
the Lord’s anointed) – on the contrary, their will is treated with
respect only in so far as it wisely afﬁrms right, justice, and the
welfare of the whole. To this extent, the principle of thought was
already reconciled; besides, the Protestant world was conscious
within itself that, in the reconciliation which had previously been
expounded [in theological terms], the principle was already present
for the further development [Ausbildung] of right.
The abstractly developed consciousness of the understanding can
leave religion on one side; but religion is the universal form in
which truth exists [ist] for the non-abstract consciousness. Now the
Protestant religion does not permit two kinds of conscience;50 but
in the Catholic world, there is the sacred on one side, and on the
other, abstraction opposed to religion – i.e. to its superstition and
its truth. This formal, individual [eigene] will is now treated as fun-
damental: right in society is what the law wills, and the will is
individual in character. Consequently, the state, as an aggregate of
numerous individuals, is not a substantial unity in and for itself or
the truth of right in and for itself to which the will of individuals
must adapt itself in order to be a genuine free will; on the contrary,
the atomic wills are the point of departure, and every will is
immediately represented as absolute.51
In this way, a principle of thought was discovered for the state –
no longer just some principle based on opinion, such as the social
impulse, the need for security of property, etc., nor on piety, like
the divine appointment of authority, but the principle of certainty,
which is identity with my self-consciousness. (It is not yet, however,
the principle of truth, which must be clearly distinguished from it.)
This is an immense discovery with regard to our innermost nature
[das Innerste] and to freedom. The consciousness of the spiritual
realm [des Geistigen] is now essentially fundamental, and sovereignty


Political writings
has now passed to philosophy. It has been said that the French Revol-
ution arose out of philosophy,52 and it is not without reason that
philosophy was [once] called ‘worldly wisdom’ [Weltweisheit];e for it
is not only truth in and for itself, as pure essentiality, but also truth
in so far as it comes to life in the secular world. We should not
therefore take issue with the assertion that the Revolution received
its ﬁrst impulse from philosophy. But this philosophy is at ﬁrst only
abstract thought, not concrete comprehension of absolute truth,
which is immeasurably different.
Thus, the principle of freedom of the will asserted itself against
existing right. It is true that, before the French Revolution, the
great noblesf had already been suppressed by Richelieu and had
their privileges removed; but like the clergy, they retained all their
rights in relation to the lower class. The whole condition of France
in those days was a chaotic aggregate of privileges contrary to all
thought and reason, a senseless state of affairs which was at the
same time associated with extreme ethical and spiritual corruption –
an empire of injustice which, when consciousness begins to register
it, becomes shameless injustice. The grinding oppression which
weighed down on the people, and the government’s embarrassment
as it struggled to ﬁnance the luxury and extravagance of the court,
were the prime causes of discontent. The new spirit became active;
oppression provided a stimulus to investigation. It was noted that
the sums extorted from the toiling people were not applied to the
ends of the state, but squandered in the most senseless manner.
The whole political system seemed one [great] injustice. The change
was necessarily violent, because the transformation was not initiated
by the government. But the government did not initiate it because
the court, the clergy, the nobility, and even the parliaments were
unwilling to give up their privileges either on grounds of necessity
or for the sake of that right which has being in and for itself; also
because the government, as the concrete centre of political power,
could not make a principle out of the abstract wills of individuals
and reconstruct the state on that basis; and ﬁnally because it was a
Catholic government, so that the concept of freedom and rational
laws was not recognised as ultimately and absolutely binding, for
e Translator’s note: See note a to The Relationship of Religion to the State on p. 
below.
f Translator’s note: Compare p. above.


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
the sacred and the religious conscience are divorced from it. The
thought and concept of right asserted its claims all at once, and
the old framework of injustice could offer no resistance to it.53 A
constitution was accordingly established on the basis of the idea
[Gedanke] of right, and everything was supposed to be based on this
foundation from now on.54 As long as the sun has stood in the
ﬁrmament and the planets have revolved around it, it had never
been observed that man stands on his head – i.e. [that his existence
is based] on thought – and that he constructs actuality in accordance
with it. Anaxagoras was the ﬁrst to say that the world is governed
by νου˜σ;55 but only now did people come to recognise that thought
ought to govern spiritual reality. This was accordingly a glorious
dawn. All thinking beings shared in celebrating this epoch. A sub-
lime emotion prevailed in those days; an enthusiasm of the spirit
swept through the world as if the actual reconciliation of the divine
with the world had only now been accomplished.56
The following two aspects [Momente] must now engage our atten-
tion: () the course of the Revolution in France; and () how the
Revolution became world-historical.
. Freedom embodies a twofold determination. The ﬁrst concerns
the content of freedom, its objectivity – i.e. the thing itself; the
second concerns the form of freedom, in which the subject knows
itself as active; for the requirement of freedom is that the subject
should know that it possesses it and is playing its part, for it is in
the subject’s own interest that the thing itself should be realised
[daß die Sache werde]. Then the three elements and powers of the
living state must be considered (although detailed consideration will
be deferred until the Lectures on the Philosophy of Right).57
(a) The laws of rationality, of right in itself; objective or real
freedom (including freedom of property and personal freedom): all
lack of freedom resulting from feudal ties hereby comes to an end,
and all provisions [Bestimmungen] derived from feudal law, such as
tithes and tributes, are hereby abolished. Real freedom further
includes freedom of trade or profession [Freiheit der Gewerbe],
whereby people are allowed to use their abilities as they wish, and
free access to all ofﬁces of state. These are the moments of real
freedom, which are not based on feeling (for feeling allows even
serfdom and slavery to remain in being), but on thought and on the
self-consciousness of human beings of their spiritual essence.


Political writings
(b) But the agency which actualises the laws is government in
general. Government is primarily the formal exercise of the laws
and the upholding of their authority; in foreign relations, it pursues
the end of the state, which is the independence of the nation as one
individuality in relation to others; and ﬁnally, in internal affairs, it
has to look after the welfare of the state and all its classes [Klassen],
which is administration.58 For it is not just a matter of the citizen
being able to practise a trade – the citizen must also proﬁt from it;
it is not enough that people should be able to use their abilities –
they must also ﬁnd an opportunity to apply them. The state accord-
ingly incorporates a universal [element] and an application of the
latter. This application depends on a subjective will, a will which
resolves and decides. Even the making of laws – ﬁnding the deter-
minations in question and giving them positive expression – is an
application. Then the next stage is that of resolution and execution.
Here, the question arises of whose will should make the decisions.
The ﬁnal decision rests with the monarch; but if the state is based
on freedom, the many wills of individuals also wish to share in the
resolutions. But the many are everyone, and it seems an empty
expedient and a monstrous inconsistency to allow only a few to take
part in these resolutions, since each wishes his will to participate in
what is to be a law for him. The few are supposed to represent the
many, but they often merely trample them underfoot.g Nor is the rule
of the majority over the minority any less glaring an inconsistency.
(c) This collision of subjective wills leads us next to a third aspect
[Moment], namely that of disposition.59 This is the inner afﬁrmation
[Wollen] of the laws – not just custom [Sitte], but a disposition to
regard the laws and constitution in general as ﬁrmly ﬁxed, and to
see it as the highest duty of individuals to subject their particular
wills to them. There may be many different opinions and views
concerning laws, constitution, and government, but there must be
a disposition to regard all these opinions as subordinate to the sub-
stantial interest of the state and to abandon them in its favour; there
must also be a disposition [to believe] that nothing is higher and
more sacred than the disposition of the state itself – or that, even
if religion is higher and more sacred, it contains nothing distinct
g Translator’s note: It is impossible to reproduce in English Hegel’s play on the
morphological similarity between vertreten (‘to represent’) and zertreten (‘to stamp
on’ or ‘to trample underfoot’).


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
from or opposed to the constitution. It is admittedly accepted as a
basic article of wisdom that the laws and constitution of the state
should be kept quite separate from religion, for fear that a state
religion may lead to bigotry and hypocrisy; but even if religion and
the state are different in content, they share the same root, and the
laws receive their highest endorsement from religion.
Now it must be stated categorically [schlechthin] here that no
rational constitution is possible under the Catholic religion.60 For
government and people must have this ultimate mutual guarantee
of disposition, and they can have it only in a religion that is not
opposed to a rational political constitution.
Plato, in his Republic, makes everything dependent on the
government, and makes disposition into a principle, which is why
he places the main emphasis on education. This is completely at
variance with the modern theory, which leaves everything to the
individual will. But this gives no guarantee that the will in question
will also have the right disposition compatible with the state’s con-
tinued existence.61
After these basic deﬁnitions we must now trace the course of the
French Revolution and the transformation of the state in accordance
with the concept of right. At ﬁrst, only the wholly abstract philo-
sophical principles were laid down, and no account was taken of
disposition and religion. The ﬁrst constitution in France was that
of the kingdom: the monarch was to be head of state, and the execu-
tive power was to reside with him and his ministers; but the legis-
lative body was to make the laws. This constitution, however, was
from the outset internally contradictory, for the whole power of
administration was invested in the legislature: the budget, war and
peace, and the recruitment of the armed forces were the responsi-
bility of the legislative Chamber. Everything was regulated by law.
But the budget is by deﬁnition not a law, for it is an annual occur-
rence, and the power which has to present it is the power of govern-
ment. (This is further connected with the indirect appointment of
ministers and ofﬁcials, etc.) The government was accordingly trans-
ferred to the Chambers, as in England to Parliament. – This consti-
tution was also beset by absolute distrust: the dynasty was suspect,
because it had lost the power which it formerly possessed, and
the priests refused to take the oath. The government and consti-
tution could not continue in this way, and they were overthrown.


Political writings
Nevertheless, a government was still present. We must accordingly
ask where it went to. In theory, it passed to the people, but in actual
fact it passed to the National Convention and its committees. The
abstract principles of freedom and (as it exists in the subjective will)
virtue were now dominant.62 Virtue now had to govern in opposition
to the many who, in their corruption and attachment to old inter-
ests – or even through excesses of freedom and the passions – did
not keep faith with virtue. Here, virtue is a simple principle which
merely distinguishes between those who are virtuously disposed and
those who are not. But disposition can only be recognised and
judged by disposition. Consequently, suspicion prevails; but as soon
as virtue comes under suspicion, it is already condemned. Suspicion
acquired terrible power and brought the monarch, whose subjective
will was in fact the religious conscience of Catholicism, to the scaf-
fold. The principle of virtue was set up as supreme by Robespierre,
and it can certainly be said that this man took virtue seriously. Now
virtue and terror prevailed; for subjective virtue, whose rule is based
purely on disposition, brings the most terrible tyranny in its train.
It exercises its power without legal forms, and the penalty it imposes
is equally simple, namely death. This tyranny had to perish; for all
inclinations and interests, and rationality itself, were opposed to this
terrible and consistent freedom which, in its concentrated form,
behaved with such fanaticism. An organised government emerged
once more, just like the previous one except that the head [of state]
and monarch was now a variable Directorate with ﬁve members,
who may have formed a moral unit but not an individual one. Sus-
picion prevailed among them too, and the government was in the
hands of the legislative assemblies; it was therefore destined to col-
lapse like its predecessor, for the absolute need for a governing
power had been demonstrated. Napoleon established the latter as a
military power, and in turn placed himself as an individual will at
the head of the state;63 he knew how to rule, and soon had internal
affairs under control. He drove out the remaining lawyers, ideol-
ogists, and sticklers for principle, and distrust no longer prevailed
but gave way to respect and fear. With his enormous strength of
character he then looked outwards, subjugated the whole of Europe
and spread his liberal institutions everywhere. No greater victories
were ever won, and no campaigns of greater genius were ever con-
ducted; but never did the powerlessness of victory appear in a
clearer light than it did then. The disposition of the peoples – i.e. their


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
religious disposition and that of their nationality – ﬁnally overthrew
this colossus, and a constitutional monarchy, with the charte consti-
tutionelle as its foundation, was in turn established in France.64 But
here again, the antithesis between disposition and distrust made its
appearance. The French were lying to each other when they issued
addresses full of devotion and love towards the monarchy and full
of the blessings it bestowed. A farce was played out for ﬁfteen years;
for even if the charte was the universal banner on which both sides
had sworn an oath, one side was of a Catholic disposition, which
made it a matter of conscience to destroy the existing institutions.65
Thus another breach occurred, and the government was over-
thrown. After forty years of wars and immeasurable confusion, older
people [ein altes Herz] might well rejoice at last to see all this come
to an end and satisfaction restored. But although one main point
has now been settled, there is still a breach within the Catholic
principle on the one hand and among the subjective wills on the
other. In the latter case, a major one-sidedness remains inasmuch
as the universal will is also supposed to be the empirically universal
will – i.e. individuals as such are supposed to govern or to have a
share in government. Not content with the fact that rational rights
and freedom of person and property are recognised, that there is an
organised state encompassing spheres of civil life which have their
own functions to perform, or that men of insight have inﬂuence
among the people and the latter are ﬁlled with conﬁdence, liberalism
counters all this with the atomistic principle of individual wills,
according to which everything should be governed by the latter’s
express power and with their express consent. With this formalistic
view of freedom, with this abstraction, they [i.e. the liberals] do not
allow any ﬁrmly based organisation to emerge. Particular rulings of
the government are at once opposed by [appeals to] freedom, on
the grounds that they are [expressions of] a particular will and
consequently arbitrary. The will of the many overthrows the admin-
istration, and the erstwhile opposition now takes ofﬁce; but inas-
much as this opposition is now the government, it is in turn
opposed by the many. So the movement and unrest continue. This
collision, this crux, this problem is what history now faces, and it
must solve it at some time in the future.
. We now have to consider the French Revolution as a world-
historical event, for it is world-historical in content [Gehalt], and the
conﬂict of formalism [which has just been discussed] must be clearly


Political writings
distinguished from it. As far as its outward expansion is concerned,
almost all modern states have been exposed to its principle through
conquest, or this principle has been expressly introduced within
them; liberalism has prevailed in all the Romance nations in particu-
lar, i.e. in the Roman Catholic world (France, Italy, and Spain).66
But it became bankrupt everywhere: ﬁrst the parent company in
France, then in Spain and Italy – twice, in fact, in those states
where it had been introduced. It was ﬁrst introduced in Spain by
the Napoleonic constitution, and then by that of the Cortes; in Pied-
mont when that country was incorporated into the French Empire,
and then through internal insurrection; and in Rome and Naples,
this also happened twice. Thus the abstraction of liberalism spread
from France throughout the Romance world, but religious servitude
kept that world in fetters of political unfreedom. For it is a false
principle that the fetters which bind right and freedom can be cast
off without the emancipation of conscience – i.e. that there can be
a revolution without a Reformation.67 – These countries accordingly
relapsed into their old condition, with some modiﬁcations to the
external political condition in Italy. Venice and Genoa, those
ancient aristocracies – which, to be sure, were at least legitimate –
vanished as rotten despotisms. External domination can accomplish
nothing in the long run: Napoleon could no more coerce Spain into
freedom than Philip II could coerce Holland into servitude.
These Romance nations stand in contrast to other nations, the
Protestant ones in particular. Austria and England have remained
outside the sphere of internal unrest and shown great, indeed enor-
mous, evidence of their inner stability. Austria is not a kingdom but
an empire, i.e. an aggregate of many political organisations. Its main
territories are not Germanic in character and have remained
untouched by Ideas. Unimproved by education or religion, the sub-
jects have in some parts remained serfs and the nobles have
remained in a state of repression, as in Bohemia; in other areas,
while the condition of the subjects has remained the same, the
barons have asserted their freedom in order to maintain their tyr-
anny, as in Hungary. Austria has given up that closer association
with Germany which went with the Imperial title and has divested
itself of its numerous possessions and rights in Germany and the
Netherlands. It now exists as a political power in its own right in
Europe.


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
England, by great exertions, has also stood ﬁrm on its old foun-
dations; the English constitution held its own amidst the general
upheaval, although it was all the more susceptible to the latter inas-
much as its public Parliament, its custom of public gatherings for
all social orders [Sta¨nde], and its free press made it easy for the
French principles of liberty and equality to gain access to all classes
[Klassen] of the people. Was the English nation culturally too obtuse
to grasp these general principles?68 But there is no country where
freedom has been the subject of more reﬂection and public dis-
cussion. Or did the English constitution already allow such com-
plete freedom, and were the above principles already realised in it
to such an extent that they could no longer arouse any opposition
or even interest? The English nation no doubt approved of France’s
liberation; but it was proudly conﬁdent in its own constitution and
its own freedom, and instead of imitating the foreign [country], it
reacted with its usual hostile attitude and was soon embroiled in a
popular war with France.69
England’s constitution is entirely composed of particular rights
and special privileges. The government is essentially administrat-
ive – i.e. it looks after the interests of all particular estates [Sta¨nde]
and classes; and these particular churches, parishes, counties, and
societies look after themselves, so that there is in fact nowhere
where the government has less to do than in England.70 This is the
main feature of what the English call their freedom, and the
opposite of such centralised administration as is found in France
where, down to the smallest village, the mayor is appointed by the
ministry or its lesser ofﬁcials. Nowhere are people less tolerant of
other people’s initiatives than in France: the ministry there incor-
porates all administrative authority, to which the Chamber of Depu-
ties in turn lays claim. Conversely in England, every parish, every
subordinate sphere and association has its own function to perform.
In this way, the universal interest is concrete, and the particular
interest is known and willed within it. These institutions based on
particular interests completely rule out any universal system. This
is also why abstract and universal principles mean nothing to the
English and sound hollow to them. – These particular interests have
their positive rights, which date from the old days of feudal law and
have been more fully preserved in England than in any other
country. With the utmost inconsistency, they are at the same time


Political writings
the height of injustice, and the institutions of real freedom are
nowhere less in evidence than in England. They are incredibly far
behind in civil law and freedom of ownership: we need only think
of primogeniture, which means that military commissions or
ecclesiastical appointments have to be purchased or arranged for
younger sons.
Parliament rules, even if the English are reluctant to acknowledge
the fact. We should note that what has always been regarded as the
corrupt phase of a republican nation [Volk] is in evidence here, for
parliamentary elections are decided by bribery. But even the fact
that they can sell their votes or purchase a seat in Parliament is
described by the English as freedom. – This utterly inconsistent
and corrupt state of affairs does, however, have the advantage of
making a government possible – i.e. a majority of men in Parliament
who are statesmen, and who have devoted themselves since their
youth to affairs of state and have worked and lived amidst them.
And the nation has the right sense and insight to recognise that
there must be a government, and hence to place its trust in a body
of men who have experience of governing; for the sense of particu-
larity also recognises that universal particularity of knowledge
[Kenntnis], experience, and training which the aristocracy, who
devote themselves exclusively to such interests, possess. This is the
complete opposite of that sense of principles and abstraction which
anyone can instantly acquire – principles which are in any case
enshrined in all constitutions and charters. – What is in question
is the extent to which the reform now proposed, if consistently
implemented, will still allow for the possibility of a government.
England’s material existence is based on trade and industry, and
the English have taken on the major vocation of acting as missionar-
ies of civilisation throughout the world; for their commercial spirit
impels them to explore every ocean and country, to establish links
with barbarous peoples, to stimulate needs and industry among
them, and above all to create for them the conditions required for
commerce – namely abstention from acts of violence, respect for
property, and hospitality [towards strangers].
Germany was traversed by the victorious French armies, but the
German nationality cast off this yoke. An important factor in Germ-
any are the laws of right, even if these were the product of French
oppression which clearly showed up the deﬁciencies of the previous


Lectures on the Philosophy of History
institutions. The pretence [Lu¨ge] of an Empire has completely van-
ished. It has broken up into sovereign states. Feudal obligations
have been abolished, and freedom of property and personal freedom
have been made basic principles. Every citizen is eligible to hold
ofﬁces
of
state
(although
skill
and
aptitude
are
necessary
qualiﬁcations). Government is in the hands of ofﬁcialdom, and the
monarch’s personal decision stands supreme – for a ﬁnal decision,
as already remarked, is absolutely [schlechthin] necessary. But with
ﬁrmly established laws and a speciﬁc political organisation, what is
left for the monarch alone to decide is inconsiderable in point of
substance.71 It must nevertheless be regarded as highly fortunate if
a people happens to acquire a noble monarch; but even this is less
important in a large state, whose strength lies in its rationality [Ver-
nunft]. The existence and security of small states is more or less
guaranteed by the other states; they are therefore not truly indepen-
dent, and they do not have to undergo the ﬁery ordeal of war. – As
already mentioned, everyone with the required knowledge, training,
and moral will can participate in government, which should be in
the hands of well-informed people – ο ι` α ριστοι72 – not of the
ignorant or of presumptuous know-alls. – Finally, as far as dispo-
sition is concerned, it has already been pointed out that the re-
conciliation of religion and right was achieved by the Protestant
Church. There is no sacred or religious conscience divorced from –
let alone opposed to – secular right.
This is the point which consciousness has now reached, and these
are the chief formal moments in which the principle of freedom has
been actualised; for world history is nothing but the development
of the concept of freedom. But objective freedom, the laws of real
freedom, require the subjugation of the contingent will, for this will
is completely formal.73 If the objective is implicitly [an sich] rational,
our insight must accord with this rationality [Vernunft], in which
case the essential moment of subjective freedom is likewise present.
We have considered only the progress of this concept, and have had
to deny ourselves the pleasure of depicting in detail the fortunes of
peoples, their greatest periods, the beauty and greatness of individ-
uals, and the interest of their fates in joy and sorrow. Philosophy is
solely concerned with the splendour of the Idea which is reﬂected
in world history. It escapes from the tedium of the immediate pas-
sions and their movements in the actual world; its interest is to


Political writings
recognise the course of development of the Idea as it actualises
itself – the Idea of freedom which exists [ist] only as the conscious-
ness of freedom.
That world history, with its changing spectacle of [individual]
histories, is this course of development and the actual coming into
being of the spirit – this is the true theodicy, the justiﬁcation of God
in history.74 Only this insight can reconcile the spirit with world
history and with actuality – the insight that God is not only present
in what has happened and what happens every day, but that all this
is essentially his own work.


The Relationship of Religion to the State
()1
[Editorial note: The following excerpt is from the lectures on
the philosophy of religion which Hegel delivered in the summer
of , only a few months before he died. He had, of course,
been concerned for some time with the way in which Cath-
olicism and Protestantism functioned as political ideologies in
the modern world – for example, in AC and PH, and in the
additions he made to the third edition of his Encyclopedia of the
Philosophical Sciences. But although he had delivered his lec-
tures on the philosophy of religion on several previous
occasions, it was not until the series that he included the
topic covered in this extract, namely ‘The Relationship of
Religion to the State’. For a full discussion of the place of this
topic in the series as a whole, see Hodgson’s remarks in Hodg-
son : vol. , pp. –.]
. The state is the true mode [wahrhafte Weise] of actuality; in it,
the true ethical will attains actuality and the spirit lives in its true
form [Wahrhaftigkeit].2 Religion is divine knowledge, the knowledge
which human beings have of God and of themselves in God. This
is divine wisdom and the ﬁeld of absolute truth. But there is a
second wisdom, the wisdom of the world, and the question arises
as to its relationship to the former, divine wisdom.3
In general, religion and the foundation of the state are one and
the same thing – they are identical in and for themselves. In the
patriarchal condition and the Jewish theocracy, the two are not yet
distinct and are still outwardly identical. Nevertheless, the two are


Political writings
also different, and in due course, they become strictly separated
from one another; but then they are once more posited as genuinely
identical.4 [That the two have then attained] that unity which has
being in and for itself follows from what has been said; religion is
knowledge of the highest truth, and this truth, deﬁned more pre-
cisely, is free spirit. In religion, human beings are free before God. In
making their will conform to the divine will, they are not opposed to
the divine will but have themselves within it; they are free inasmuch
as they have succeeded, in the [religious] cult, in overcoming the
division [die Entzweiung aufzuheben]. The state is merely freedom in
the world, in actuality. The essential factor here is that concept of
freedom which a people carries in its self-consciousness, for the
concept of freedom is realised in the state, and an essential aspect
of this realisation is the consciousness of freedom with being in and
for itself. Peoples who do not know that human beings are free in
and for themselves live in a benighted state both with regard to
their constitution and to their religion.5 – There is one concept of
freedom in [both] religion and the state. This one concept is the
highest thing which human beings have, and it is realised by them.
A people which has a bad concept of God also has a bad state, a
bad government, and bad laws.6
To consider this connection between the state and religion at
length and in its fully developed form is properly the business of
the philosophy of world history.7 Here, we need only consider it in
the speciﬁc form in which it appears to representational thought,
how it becomes involved there in contradictions, and how that
opposition between the two [i.e. the state and religion] ﬁnally arises
which constitutes the interest of the modern age. We shall therefore
consider this connection ﬁrst of all
. as it is represented. Human beings have a consciousness of it,
but not yet as that absolute connection as known in philosophy; they
know it rather in general, and represent it to themselves. Now the
representation of this connection expresses itself [in the assertion]
that the laws, governmental authority [Obrigkeit], and political con-
stitution are derived from God: this is their authorisation, which
comes from the highest authority [Autorita¨t] available to represen-
tation. The laws are the development of the concept of freedom,
and this concept, which thereby reﬂects itself in existence [Dasein],
has as its foundation and truth the concept of freedom as under-


The Relationship of Religion to the State
stood in religion.8 What is expressed here is that these laws of ethi-
cal life and of right are eternal and immutable rules for human
conduct, that they are not arbitrary, but endure [bestehen] as long
as religion itself. We ﬁnd the representation of this connection
among all peoples. This can also be expressed in the form that one
obeys God by following the laws and governmental authority as the
powers which hold the state together.9 This proposition is correct
in one respect, but it also runs the risk of being taken wholly
abstractly, inasmuch as it is not speciﬁed how the laws are expli-
cated and what laws are appropriate to the basic constitution.
Expressed formally, the proposition thus runs as follows: one ought
to obey the laws, whatever they may be. In this way, governing and
legislating are left to the arbitrary will of the government. This
situation has arisen in Protestant states, and it is only in such states
that it can occur, for in them that unity of religion and the state
[already referred to] is present. The laws of the state are recognised
[gelten] as rational and as divine on account of this presumed original
harmony, and religion does not have its own principles which con-
tradict those which apply within the state. But if we go no further
than the formal proposition, the way is left open for arbitrariness,
tyranny, and oppression.10 This became particularly apparent in
England (under the last kings of the House of Stuart),11 in that
passive obedience was demanded and the proposition was accepted
that the ruler is answerable only to God for his actions. This pre-
supposed that the ruler alone also deﬁnitely knows [wisse] what is
essential and necessary for the state; for in him and in his will is
contained the more precise determination [Bestimmung] that his will
is an immediate revelation of God. But in its further consequences,
this principle was developed to the point where it turned into its
opposite. For the distinction between priests and laity is not present
in Protestantism, and the priests do not have privileged possession
of divine revelation; still less does such a privilege belong exclusively
to a single layman. The principle of the divine authorisation of the
ruler is therefore opposed by the principle that the laity in general
is similarly authorised.12 Thus, a Protestant sect arose in England
which maintained that revelation had informed it how the govern-
ment should be conducted; and in consequence of such divine inspi-
ration, they initiated a revolution and beheaded their king.13 – Thus,
even if it is generally accepted that the laws are willed by God, it


Political writings
is no less important to know [erkennen] this divine will, and this is
not a particular prerogative [nichts Partikulares] but something open
to everyone.14 To know [erkennen] what is rational is a matter for
cultivated thought and particularly for philosophy, which in this
sense may well be described as ‘worldly wisdom’.a It is quite
immaterial what external appearance the laws have assumed in
asserting their validity (e.g. whether they were forcibly extracted
from the ruler or not); the progressive development [Fortbildung] of
the concept of freedom, right, and humanity among human beings
is necessary in itself [fu¨r sich]. – Thus, in considering that truth
that the laws are the will of God,15 it is particularly important to
determine what these laws are: principles as such are merely abstract
thoughts which acquire their truth only in their development
[Entwicklung]; if they remain tied to their abstract form, they are
completely devoid of truth [das ganz Unwahre].
. Finally, the state and religion can also be divorced from one
another and have different laws. The secular and the religious spheres
are distinct, and a difference of principle may also arise. Religion
does not simply remain in its own distinct sphere, but also affects
the subject, issuing precepts with regard to the subject’s religiosity
and hence also to its activity. These precepts which religion issues
to the individual may be distinct from the principles of right and
ethical life which obtain within the state. This opposition can be
expressed in the following form: the requirement of religion relates
to sanctity, and that of the state to right and ethical life;16 the one
determination concerns eternity, the other temporality and temporal
well-being, which must be sacriﬁced for eternal salvation. Thus, a
religious ideal is set up, a heaven on earth, i.e. the abstraction of spirit
as against the substantial realm of actuality; renunciation of actuality
is the basic determination which emerges, and with it conﬂict and
ﬂight.
To
the
substantial
foundation,
the
true
basis
[dem
Wahrhaften], something else is opposed which is supposedly higher.
The ﬁrst [mode of] ethical life in substantial actuality is marriage.
In [the realm of] actuality, love (which is God) is conjugal love. As
the initial appearance of the substantial will in existent [daseienden]
actuality, this love has a natural aspect, but it is also an ethical
a Translator’s note: Weltweisheit, the older German term for ‘philosophy’ which was
in use for most of the eighteenth century until around the time of Kant, when it
was gradually supplanted by the modern term Philosophie.


The Relationship of Religion to the State
duty. In opposition to this duty, renunciation or celibacy is set up
as something sacred.
Secondly, human beings as individuals have to contend with natu-
ral necessity; it is an ethical law for them to make themselves inde-
pendent [of it] by their activity and understanding, for they are by
nature in many respects dependent. They are obliged to earn their
sustenance by their mind [Geist] and their integrity [Rechtlichkeit]
and so to liberate themselves from that natural necessity; that is [the
nature of] human rectitude [Rechtschaffenheit]. A religious duty set
up in opposition to this secular duty requires that human beings
should not be active in this way and should not trouble themselves
with such cares. The whole sphere of commerce and all activity
relating to acquisition, industry, etc. is thereby repudiated, for
human beings ought not to concern themselves with ends such as
these; but in this case, necessity is more rational than such religious
views. On the one hand, human activity is represented as unholy,
and on the other hand, it is even required of people that, if they
have possessions, they should not only refrain from increasing these
by their activity, but should give them to the poor, and especially
to the Church – i.e. to those who do nothing and do not work.
Thus, what is held up as rectitude in life is thereby rejected as
unholy.
Thirdly, the highest ethical life within the state depends on the
activation of the rational universal will; [for] in the state, the subject
has its freedom, which is actualised within it. In opposition to this,
a religious duty is set up, according to which freedom may not be
the ultimate end for human beings, who should submit instead to
strict obedience and remain thenceforth without a will of their own;
furthermore, they should be selﬂess even in their conscience and
faith, and renounce themselves and practise self-denial even in their
innermost being.
If religion claims exclusive control of human activity in this way,
it can impose on us distinct precepts which are opposed to worldly
rationality. These have been challenged by that worldly wisdomb
which recognises the true [das Wahrhafte] in actuality; within the
spirit’s consciousness, the principles of its freedom have awoken,
and the claims of freedom have duly come into conﬂict with the
b Translator’s note: See note a above.


Political writings
religious principles which demanded that renunciation [referred to
above]. In the Catholic states, religion and the state thus stand in
mutual opposition when subjective freedom makes its appearance
in human beings.
In this opposition, religion expresses itself only in a negative
manner and demands of human beings that they renounce all free-
dom; more precisely, this opposition means that, in their actual
consciousness, they are in themselves generally without rights, and
that, in the sphere of actual ethical life, religion recognises no absol-
ute rights. This is the monstrous distinction which has arisen in the
modern world through the very fact that the question is raised as
to whether human freedom should be recognised as something true
[etwas Wahrhaftes] in and for itself, or whether it can be rejected by
religion.
It has already been mentioned that harmony can exist between
religion and the state. In Protestant states, this is generally the case
in principle, but [only] in an abstract way; for Protestantism
demands that human beings should believe only what they know
[wissen], and that their conscience, as something sacred, should
[also] be inviolable. Human beings are not passive in [relation to]
divine grace; they are essentially involved in it with their subjective
freedom, and the moment of subjective freedom is expressly
required in their knowledge [Wissen], volition, and faith. In states
of a different religion it may conversely happen that the two sides
are not in harmony, and that religion is distinct from the principle
of the state. A broad range can be detected here – on the one hand
a religion which does not recognise the principle of freedom,17 and
on the other, a political constitution which makes this principle its
foundation. When we say that human beings are by nature free, this
is a principle of inﬁnite worth. But if we stick to this abstraction, it
prevents the emergence of an organic constitution, for the latter
requires an articulated structure [Gliederung] in which duties and
rights are limited. The abstraction precludes that inequality which
must arise if an organism – and hence true vitality – is to come into
being.18
Principles of this kind are true, but should not be taken in the
abstract. The knowledge that human beings are free by nature (i.e.
in terms of the concept) belongs to the modern age.19 But whether
or not we stick to abstraction, it may happen that these principles


The Relationship of Religion to the State
are opposed by a religion which does not recognise them but regards
them as devoid of right and sees only arbitrariness as rightful. Thus,
a conﬂict necessarily arises which cannot be settled in any true way.
Religion demands the suspension [Aufheben] of the will, whereas
the secular principle treats the will as fundamental; if such religious
principles come into play, the only possible course is for the govern-
ment to resort to force and suppress the opposing religion or treat
its adherents as a [political] party. As a church, religion may well
be circumspect and outwardly compliant, but then an inconsistency
arises in the minds [of its adherents]. The world remains attached
to a speciﬁc religion and simultaneously adheres to principles which
are opposed to it.20 In so far as those concerned apply these prin-
ciples while still claiming to belong to the religion in question, there
is a major inconsistency. Thus the French, for example, who adhere
to the principle of secular freedom, have in fact ceased to belong to
the Catholic religion, for this religion can make no concessions but
consistently demands unconditional submission to the Church in all
matters. In this way, religion and the state are in mutual contradic-
tion. So religion is left on one side to cope as best it can; it is treated
as a purely individual matter with which the state need not concern
itself, and it is further argued that religion should not become
involved in the political constitution. To posit those principles of
freedom [referred to above] is to assert that they are true because
they are connected with the innermost self-consciousness of human
beings. But if it is in fact reason which discovers these principles,
the only way in which it can verify them (in so far as they are true
and do not simply remain formal) is by tracing them back to the
cognition of absolute truth, and this is the object of philosophy
alone. But this cognition must be complete, and must go all the way
back to the ﬁnal [stage of its] analysis. For if it is not internally
complete, it is exposed to the one-sidedness of formalism; but if it
does proceed to the ultimate ground, it arrives at what is recognised
as highest of all, namely God. So it is all very well to say that the
political constitution should remain on one side and religion on the
other; but there is then a risk that the above principles will continue
to suffer from one-sidedness. Thus, we see that the world is at
present full of the principle of freedom, and that this principle
applies in particular to the political constitution. These principles
are correct, but if they are afﬂicted with formalism, they are


Political writings
prejudices, because cognition has not proceeded to the ultimate
ground; only there do we ﬁnd their reconciliation with the wholly
[schlechthin] substantial. –
Now the other point which arises in connection with this separ-
ation is this: if the principles of actual freedom are made basic and
develop into a system of right, they give rise to enacted positive
laws, and these assume the form of juridical laws in general with
regard to individuals. The courts are entrusted with upholding the
legislation. Whoever violates the law is brought before the courts,
and the existence [Existenz] of the whole is vested [gesetzt] in this
juridical form in general. Then opposed to this there is that convic-
tion [Gesinnung] or inwardness which is the very basis of religion.21
There are accordingly two opposing aspects, both of which belong
to actuality – the positive legislation and the conviction in relation
to it.
As far as the constitution is concerned, two systems are involved
here. On the one hand, there is the modern system in which the
determinations of freedom and its entire structure are upheld in a
formal sense, with no regard for [individual] conviction. On the
other, there is the system of conviction – the Greek principle in
general, which we ﬁnd developed in Plato’s Republic in particular.22
A few [social] classes [Sta¨nde] constitute the basis of this system,
and the whole depends in other respects on education and culture
[Bildung], which are supposed to proceed to science and philosophy.
Philosophy is supposed to be the ruling principle by which human
beings are led towards ethical life; all classes are to share in
σωφροσυ´νη.23
These two aspects, conviction and the formal constitution, are
inseparable and cannot do without one another. But modern times
have seen the emergence of that one-sidedness whereby the consti-
tution is supposed to be self-supporting on the one hand, while on
the other, conviction, religion, and conscience are to be set aside
as irrelevant on the grounds that whatever conviction and religion
individuals may subscribe to have nothing to do with the political
constitution. But just how one-sided this [view] is can be seen from
the fact that the laws are administered by judges on whose rectitude
and insight everything depends; for it is not the law which rules,
but human beings who have to make it rule.24 This activity is a
concrete one, and human will as well as human insight must play


The Relationship of Religion to the State
their part in it. Consequently, the subject’s intelligence must often
make the decisions, for while the civil laws go a long way in their
speciﬁcations [das Bestimmen], they still cannot touch on every par-
ticular. But conviction on its own is likewise one-sided, and Plato’s
republic suffers from this deﬁciency. Nowadays, we do not wish to
place any reliance on insight, but prefer to see everything regulated
by positive laws. We have witnessed a major example of this one-
sidedness in recent current affairs.25 We saw religious conviction at
the highest level of the French government, a conviction of a kind
which considered the state in general to have no rights at all and
which adopted a hostile attitude towards actuality, towards right
and ethical life. The latest revolution was accordingly the result of
a religious conscience which contradicted the principles of the pol-
itical constitution – although according to that same constitution, it
is not supposed to make any difference what religion the individual
belongs to. This clash is still very far from being resolved.26
Conviction does not necessarily take the form of religion; it may
also remain in a more indeterminate condition. But among what is
known as ‘the people’, ultimate truth does not take the form of
thoughts and principles; on the contrary, what is supposed to count
as right in the eyes of the people can do so only in so far as it is
determinate and particular. Now this determinate quality of right
and ethical life has its ultimate guarantee for the people only in the
form of an existing religion;27 and if the latter has no connection with
the principles of freedom, a split and an unresolved division con-
tinue to be present, a hostile relationship which ought not to occur
in the state especially. Under Robespierre, there was a Reign of
Terror in France, speciﬁcally directed against those who did not
share the conviction [Gesinnung] of freedom, because they were sus-
pect (i.e. because of their conviction). Thus, the ministry of Charles
X was also suspect. In formal constitutional terms, the monarch was
not answerable to anyone; but these formal provisions did not stand
up [to the challenge], and the dynasty was deposed. It is accordingly
evident that, in a formally developed constitution, conviction is once
again the ultimate safeguard which, though ignored by the consti-
tution itself, subsequently reasserts itself with contempt for all [con-
siderations of] form.28 It is from this contradiction and the prevail-
ing lack of awareness of it that our age is suffering. –


On the English Reform Bill1
The primary intention of the Reform Bill now before the English
Parliament2 is to bring justice and fairness into the way in which
the various classes [Klassen] and sections of the populace are allowed
to participate in the election of Members of Parliament.3 This is to
be achieved by introducing a greater degree of symmetry in place
of the most bizarre and informala irregularity and inequality which
prevail at present.4 It is numbers, localities, and private interests
which are to be rearranged; but in fact, the change in question also
impinges on the noble internal organs of Great Britain, on the vital
principles of its constitution and condition. It is this aspect of the
present Bill which merits particular attention, and the aim of this
essay will be to bring together those higher points of view which
have hitherto come up for discussion in the parliamentary debates.
It is not surprising that so many voices were raised in opposition to
the Bill in the Lower House, and that it gained its second reading
only by the accident of a single vote; for it is precisely those interests
of the aristocracy which are powerful even in the Lower House that
are to be challenged and reformed. If the Bill were opposed by all
those who stand to lose (or whose sponsors stand to lose) their
former privileges and inﬂuence, it would most decidedly have the
majority against it at once. Those who promoted the Bill could rely
only on the fact that a sense of justice had now prevailed over
entrenched privileges even in those whose advantage lay in these
a Translator’s note: The words ‘most bizarre and informal’ occur in Hegel’s manu-
script, but not in the published text of .


On the English Reform Bill
very prerogatives – a sense which was greatly reinforced by the
disquieting impression produced among interested Members of
Parliament by the example of neighbouring France;5 and the almost
universally expressed view in England concerning the need for
reform is regularly invoked in Parliament as a motive of the highest
importance.6 But even if public opinion in Great Britain were quite
unanimously in favour of reform to the extent, or within the limits,
proposed by the Bill, there would still have to be an opportunity to
examine the substance of what this opinion demands – especially
since we have not infrequently discovered, in recent times, that such
demands have turned out to be either impossible to implement or
disastrous in practice, and that this universal opinion has meanwhile
turned vehemently against what it seemed to demand and approve
with equal vehemence a short time before.7 Those ancients who, as
members of democracies since their youth, had accumulated long
experience and reﬂected profoundly about it, held different views
on popular opinion from those more a priori views which are preva-
lent today.8
The projected reform begins with the indisputable fact that the
grounds on which the share of the various counties and communi-
ties in parliamentary representation was [originally] determined had
completely changed over the course of time, with the result that
their ‘rights to this share’ were now completely at odds with the
principles underlying those grounds themselves, and in contradic-
tion to everything which, in this part of a constitution, strikes [even]
the plainest common sense as just and reasonable. One of the most
prominent opponents of the Bill, Robert Peel,9 admits that it may
well be easy to hold forth on the anomalies and absurdity of the
English constitution; and its incongruities have indeed been fully
and circumstantially described in the proceedings of Parliament and
in the national press. It may therefore be sufﬁcient here to recall
the main points: towns with a small population, or indeed their
councillors (who in fact appoint one another and act without refer-
ence to the citizens), and even boroughs which have declined to two
or three inhabitants (themselves leaseholders), have retained the
right to ﬁll seats in Parliament, while many ﬂourishing cities of
more recent origin with ,inhabitants or more are denied the
right to elect candidates; and between these extremes, the greatest
variety of other inequalities is also to be found. An immediate


Political writings
consequence of this is that the ﬁlling of a large number of parlia-
mentary seats is in the hands of a small number of individuals. (It
has been calculated that the majority of the House is controlled by
persons of eminence.) A further consequence is that an even
more signiﬁcant number of seats can be purchased, and are in some
cases a recognised market commodity, so that possession of such a
seat can be gained by bribery or by the formal payment of a certain
sum to the electors, or is in general reduced, with numerous other
variations, to a purely ﬁnancial matter.
It would be difﬁcult to discover a comparable symptom of politi-
cal corruption in any other people. Montesquieu declared that
virtue, the unselﬁsh sense of duty towards the state, is the principle
of the democratic constitution;10 and in the English constitution,
the democratic element has signiﬁcant scope in the participation of
the people in electing members of the Lower House (i.e. those poli-
ticians who have a major share of power in deciding matters of
universal concern). It is probably a fairly unanimous view among
pragmatic historians11 that, if private interest and squalid ﬁnancial
advantage become the predominant factor in the election of heads
of government within a given nation [Volk], this condition can be
regarded as a prelude to the inevitable loss of that nation’s political
freedom,12 the downfall of its constitution and of the state itself. In
response to the pride of the English in their freedom,13 we Germans
may well point out that, even if the old constitution of the German
Empire was likewise an amorphous aggregate of particular rights, it
was only the external bond of the German territories, and political
life within these, as far as the ﬁlling of seats in the surviving provin-
cial assembliesb and rights to elect to them were concerned, did
not display such anomaliesc as those just mentioned, let alone that
selﬁshnessd which permeates all classes [Klassen] of the [English]
people. Now even if, in addition to the democratic element, the
aristocratic element is an extremely important power in England;
even if purely aristocratic governments like those of Venice, Genoa,
Berne,14 etc. have been accused of maintaining their security and
stability by submerging the people they govern in base sensuality
and moral corruption;15 and even if the ability to cast one’s vote
b Translator’s note: Reading Landsta¨nden (‘provincial assemblies’) for Hegel’s La¨ndern
(‘territories’).
c Translator’s note: The manuscript version has ‘absurdity’.
d Translator’s note: The manuscript reads ‘corruption’.


On the English Reform Bill
entirely as one pleases, irrespective of what motive determines the
will, is counted as freedom – we must nevertheless acknowledge
that it is a fair indication of the reawakening of the moral sense
among the English people that one of the feelings which the need
for reform has evoked is repugnance at the corruptione just referred
to. It will also be acknowledged that the right way to seek improve-
ment is no longer to rely simply on such moral means as represen-
tations, admonitions, or associations of isolated individuals designed
to counteract the system of corruption and to avoid becoming
indebted to it, but to change the institutions [themselves]. The
common prejudice of inertia, which clings on to the old faith in the
value of an institution even if the condition to which the latter gives
rise is totally corrupt, has thus ﬁnally given way. The demand for
a more thoroughgoing reform was all the greater, given that the
proposals for improvement which were put forward in response to
speciﬁc accusations of bribery at the opening of each new Parlia-
ment had produced no signiﬁcant results. Even so commendable a
proposal as the recent attempt to transfer to the city of Birmingham
the franchise from a small community in which bribery had been
proved, and thus to show a just inclination to remedy a glaring
inequality – if only to a modest extent – was outmanoeuvred by
ministerial tactics in Parliament, especially by those of Peel, a Min-
ister otherwise acclaimed for his liberal sentiments. Thus, a great
initiative which was taken at the opening session of the current
Parliament was subsequently reduced to prohibiting candidates
from distributing any further badges to their supporters among the
electorate. Since the great majority of members of both Houses,
who are the judges in criminal cases of this kind, are themselves
involved in the system of corruption, and since most members of
the Lower House owe their seats to this very system, accusations of
bribery directed at a place entitled to elect [a Member of Parlia-
ment], and the ensuing investigations and trials, have been too
openly and loudly denounced as pure farce, and indeed as shameless
procedures, for anyone to expect even isolated remedies to emerge
from this source.
The usual argument advanced on other occasions in Parliament
against attacks on positive rights is based on the wisdom of our ances-
tors;16 but it was not employed in this instance. For this wisdom,
e Translator’s note: The manuscript reads ‘depravity’.


Political writings
which presumably distributed parliamentary constituencies in
accordance with the then existing population of counties, cities, and
boroughs or with their importance in other respects, contrasts too
glaringly with the way in which the population, wealth, and import-
ance of the different regions and interests have developed in more
recent times. Another consideration which has not been mentioned
is the fact that many individuals would suffer a loss of capital, while
an even greater number would suffer a loss of income; for ﬁnancial
gain derived from direct bribery is illegal, although all classes
[Klassen] are implicated in it either as givers or takers. The capital
value lost to boroughs which are to be disenfranchised is based on
the transformation, over the course of time, of a political right into
a monetary value. And although the acquisition [of a seat in Parlia-
ment] at a price which is now falling was no less bona ﬁde a trans-
action than the purchase of slaves, and although the English Parlia-
ment, when new laws are passed, usually pays particular attention
to the preservation of real assets in such cases and, if these assets
should suffer a loss, to [the need for] compensation, no claims of
this kind have been made in the present instance, nor have any
difﬁculties been raised in this connection, however strong a motive
against the Bill this circumstance may furnish for a number of
Members of Parliament.
On the other hand, another legal principle peculiarly character-
istic of England is indeed attacked by the Bill, namely that positive
character which predominates in English institutions concerned
with constitutional and civil law [Staatsrecht und Privatrecht]. It is
true that, in formal terms, every right and its [corresponding] law
is positive, [that is,] decreed and laid down by the supreme political
authority, and requiring obedience because it is a law. But at no
time more than today has the understanding of people at large [der
allgemeine Verstand] been led to distinguish between whether rights
are merely positive in their material content, and whether they are
also right and rational in and for themselves; and in no constitution
is the judgement so strongly impelled to observe this distinction as
in that of England, given that the peoples of the Continent have
allowed themselves to be impressed for so long by declamations
about English freedom and by that nation’s pride in its own legis-
lation.17 It is common knowledge that the latter is comprehensively
based on particular rights, freedoms, and privileges which have been


On the English Reform Bill
granted, sold, or bestowed by kings or parliaments – or wrested
from them – on particular occasions. The Magna Charta and Bill
of Rights, which are the principal foundations of the English consti-
tution as further deﬁned by subsequent Acts of Parliament, are forc-
ibly exacted concessions or favours granted, agreements, etc., and
constitutional rights [Staatsrechte] have retained that form of private
rights [Privatrechte] which they originally possessed, and hence also
the contingent nature of their content. This inherently incoherent
aggregate of positive determinations has not yet undergone the
development and transformation which has been accomplished in
the civilised states of the Continent, and which the German territor-
ies, for example, have enjoyed for a longer or shorter period of
time.18
England has hitherto lacked those elements which have played
the greatest part in these glorious and auspicious advances.19
Foremost among these elements is the scientiﬁc treatment of law
[Recht], which on the one hand has applied general principles to
the
particular
varieties
of
law
and
their
complexities
and
implemented them throughout, and on the other hand has
reduced concrete and special instances to more simple determi-
nations. This made possible the [compendia of] common law and
constitutional arrangements of the more recent continental states,
which are for the most part based on general principles, while
common sense and sound reasoning have also been allowed their
proper share in determining the content of justice. For another
even more important element in the transformation of law [Recht]
must be mentioned, namely the broad vision of princes in making
such principles as the welfare of the state, the happiness of their
subjects, and general prosperity – but above all the sense of a
justice which has being in and for itself – into the guiding light
of their legislative activity, in association with the due power of
the monarch, so as to gain acceptance for these principles and to
endow them with reality in the face of merely positive privileges,
long-standing private interest, and the incomprehension of the
masses.20 England has lagged so conspicuously behind the other
civilised states of Europe in institutions based on genuine right,
for the simple reason that the power of government lies in the
hands of those who possess so many privileges which contradict
a rational constitutional law and a genuine legislation.


Political writings
It is on this state of affairs that the proposed Reform Bill is
supposed to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence – but not, for example, by
increasing the power of the monarchic element of the constitution.21
On the contrary, if the Bill is not at once to encounter universal
disapproval, jealousy of the power of the throne – perhaps the most
intractable of English prejudices – must be treated with indulgence;
and the proposed measure does indeed owe some of its popularity
to the fact that the inﬂuence of the monarchy is perceived to be
further weakened by it. What arouses the greatest interest is the
fear felt by some, and the hope felt by others, that the reform of
electoral law will bring other material reforms in its wake.22 The
English principle of positivity (on which, as already mentioned, the
general legal arrangements of that country are based) is in fact
undermined by the Bill in a way which is quite new and unpre-
cedented in England, and there is an instinctive suspicion that more
far-reaching changes will follow from this subversion of the formal
basis of the established order.
In the course of the parliamentary debates, some mention has
been made of these views (if only in passing). The proponents and
friends of the Bill may either sincerely believe that it will have no
further consequences beyond its own provisions, or they may keep
their hopes to themselves in order not to provoke more violent reac-
tions among their opponents – just as the latter will not hold up
the object of their concern as a prize of victory; and since they own
a great deal, they do indeed have much to lose. But the fact that no
more has been said in Parliament about this more substantial aspect
of the reform is due in large measure to the convention that, when
important matters come up before that assembly, most of the time is
invariably taken up by members’ own expositions of their personal
position; they present their views not as men of affairs, but as privi-
leged individuals and orators.23 There is wide scope for reform in
England, encompassing the most important objectives of civil and
political society. Its necessity is beginning to be felt, and some of
the matters which have been raised on various occasions may serve
to illustrate how much of the work which has been accomplished
elsewhere still remains to be done in England.
Among the prospects for material improvements, hopes are pri-
marily directed towards economies in administration [Verwaltung].
But however often the opposition urges that such economies are


On the English Reform Bill
absolutely necessary in order to relieve the pressure and general
misery suffered by the populace, it is also repeated on every
occasion that all such endeavours have hitherto been futile, and that
the popular hopes aroused by [successive] administrations [Minis-
terien], and even in the speech from the throne, have invariably
been dashed. These declamations have been repeated in the same
way every time taxes have been reduced over the last ﬁfteen years.
Better prospects are held out for the eventual fulﬁlment of such
hopes in a reformed Parliament where a greater number of its mem-
bers would be independent of the administration [Ministerium],
whose weakness, hardheartedness towards the people, [self-]
interest, etc., have been blamed for chronic overspending. But if we
consider the chief categories of public expenditure in England, there
appears to be no great scope for economy. On the one hand, pay-
ments of interest on the enormous national debt cannot be reduced.
On the other, the costs of the army and navy, including pensions,
are intimately connected not only with political factors (particularly
with the interest of trade as the basis of English existence, and
with the risk of insurrection at home), but also with the habits and
expectations of individuals who enter the armed forces that they
will not be at a disadvantage in relation to other classes [Sta¨nden]
as far as luxury and afﬂuence are concerned; consequently, there
can be no savings in this area without risk. The ﬁgures brought to
light by the outcry over the notorious sinecures have shown that
even the complete abolition [Aufhebung] of these, which could not
be effected without great injustice, would be of little signiﬁcance.
But we need not go into these material aspects; we need only note
that the tireless efforts of Hume,24 who scrutinised the ﬁnances in
minute detail, have been almost uniformly unsuccessful. This
cannot be ascribed solely to the corruption of the parliamentary
aristocracy, which allegedly procures all kinds of advantages for
itself and its relatives through sinecures (as well as generally lucra-
tive positions in administration [Verwaltung], the armed forces, the
Church, and at court), or to the indulgence with which this aristoc-
racy is treated by the administration [Ministerium], which is in need
of its support. The relatively very small number of votes which
such proposals for reducing expenditure normally attract suggests
that there is little faith in the possibility of (or scant interest in) such
relief of the allegedly universal pressure, against which Members of


Political writings
Parliament are in any case protected by their wealth. That section
of them which is nominally independent tends to be on the side of
the administration, and this independence sometimes seems
inclined to go further than this section’s usual attitude or the accu-
sations of the opposition might lead one to expect, as on those
occasions when the administration shows an express interest in
approving a ﬁnancial payment. Thus a few years ago, when the
administration took great interest in its proposal that a supplemen-
tary payment of £,be made to the highly respected Huskis-
son,25 who resigned from a lucrative post because his salaried duties
at the Board of Trade had become too onerous, the proposal was
defeated by a large majority; and the same has not infrequently
happened with proposals to raise the maintenance allowances of
royal princes, which are not exactly generous by English standards.
In these cases involving a personality and feelings of propriety, pas-
sion has overcome that lukewarm attitude which Parliament has
normally displayed towards economies. – This much is certainly
plain, that no Reform Bill can directly remove the causes of high
taxation in England. Indeed, the examples of England and France
might lead to the induction that countries in which the political
administration [Staatsverwaltung] relies on the approval of assem-
blies elected by the people bear the heaviest burden of taxes. In
France, where the aim of the English Reform Bill to extend the
franchise to a greater number of citizens has been in large measure
accomplished, the national budget has just been likened in the
French press to a promising child which makes signiﬁcant advances
from day to day. To adopt radical measures to reduce the oppressive
quality of the political administration [Staatsverwaltung] in England
would require excessive interference with the internal constitution
of particular rights. No power is available to take serious steps
towards a substantial reduction of the huge national debt, despite
the enormous wealth of private individuals. The exorbitant cost of
the tortuous administration of justice, which allows only the rich to
take cases to court, the poor-rate which no administration could
introduce in Ireland, where necessity no less than justice demands
it, the use of ecclesiastical assets (which will be further mentioned
below), and many other major branches of the social union, presup-
pose that further conditions should be fulﬁlled by the political auth-
ority beyond those contained in the Reform Bill before any change


On the English Reform Bill
can be made. – Passing reference has been made in Parliament to
the abolition of church tithes and manorial hunting rights in France;
all this, it was pointed out, occurred under the auspices of a patriotic
king and a reformed Parliament. The implication of such remarks
seems to be that the curtailment [Aufhebung] of rights of this kind
is in itself a lamentable subversion of the whole constitution, quite
apart from the fact that it has resulted in dreadful anarchy in
France. But it is common knowledge not only that such rights have
disappeared in other states without any such consequences, but also
that their abolition has been regarded as an important foundation
of increased prosperity and essential freedom.26 Something more
may accordingly be said about them here.
Firstly, as far as tithes are concerned, the oppressive nature of
this tax has long been commented on in England. Apart from the
particular odium which invariably attaches to this kind of tax, the
feeling against it in England is not at all surprising, given that there
are parts of that country where the clergyman has every tenth meas-
ure of milk collected daily from the cowsheds, a tenth of the eggs
laid each day, etc. There have also been criticisms of the unfairness
inherent in this tax, for the more the yield of the soil is increased
by industry, time, and expenditure, the higher the tax becomes, so
that instead of encouraging the improvement of agriculture [Kultur],
in which England has invested large amounts of capital, it has
imposed a tax on it. Tithes belong to the Church in England; in
other countries, especially Protestant ones, they were abolished or
made redeemable, without pomp and circumstance and without
exploitation or injustice, either long ago (over a century ago in the
Prussian territories) or in recent times, and church revenues were
duly deprived of their oppressive character and collected in a more
appropriate and decorous manner. In England, however, the nature
of the original justiﬁcation of the tithes has been essentially dimin-
ished and perverted in other respects too. Their function as a means
of support for teachers of religion and for the construction and
maintenance of the churches has largely changed into that of a divi-
dend accruing from private property: the ofﬁce of the clergyman
has [taken on] the character of a beneﬁce, and its duties have been
transformed into rights to an income.27 Disregarding the fact that a
host of lucrative ecclesiastical positions, [such as] canonries, carry
no ofﬁcial duties whatsoever, it is all too common knowledge how


Political writings
often it happens that English clergymen occupy themselves with
anything but the functions of their ofﬁce (with hunting, etc. and
other kinds of idleness), consume the rich proceeds of their position
in foreign countries, and transfer their ofﬁcial functions to a poor
curate who receives a pittance which barely preserves him from
starvation. A comprehensive impression of the relationship between
holding an ecclesiastical ofﬁce and drawing the income from it on
the one hand, and fulﬁlling its duties and leading a moral [sittlichen]
existence on the other, can be gained from an example which came
before the courts some years ago. A suit was brought against a
clergyman by the name of Frank to have him declared incapable of
administering his estate because of insanity, and to have his estate
placed under the guardianship of the court. He had a living of £
[per annum], and other beneﬁces of around £(i.e. somewhat
less than ,Reichstalers). But the lawsuit was brought by his
son, on his coming of age, in the interests of the family. The evi-
dence given in public over a number of days concerning this vicar’s
alleged madness, including numerous statements by witnesses,
brought to light acts which he had committed, unchecked by any
ecclesiastical authority, in the course of several years. For example,
he had on one occasion, in broad daylight, made his way through
the streets and across the bridge of his home town, in highly dis-
reputable company,f followed by a crowd of jeering street urchins.
Even more scandalous were the man’s own domestic circumstances,g
which were likewise conﬁrmed by witnesses. This shameless behav-
iour on the part of a minister of the Church of England had caused
him no difﬁculties in the tenure of his ofﬁce or in the enjoyment of
the income from his beneﬁces. The Church is brought into con-
tempt by such cases, most of all because, in spite of the institution
of an episcopal hierarchy, it fails to take action to prevent such
corruption and the scandal to which it gives rise. This contempt,
like the greed of other clergymen in collecting their tithes, also plays
its part in diminishing that respect which the English people are
required to show for the Church’s property rights. Because it is
f Translator’s note: Instead of the preceding four words, Hegel’s manuscript has ‘on
each arm a dissolute female from a house of ill repute’.
g Translator’s note: Instead of the preceding ﬁve words, Hegel’s manuscript has ‘anec-
dotes of his relations with his own wife and a lover of hers who resided in his
house’.


On the English Reform Bill
designated for a religious purpose, such property is wholly different
in character from private property, which can be freely disposed of
by the arbitrary will of its owners; this difference is the basis of a
difference in legal status [ein verschiedenes Recht], and the enjoyment
of such assets is conditional on the performance of associated duties;
and in Protestant states, the [religious] purpose already referred to
gives the political authority its justiﬁcation for jointly ensuring that
this purpose, and the duties for which payment is received, are
fulﬁlled: principles such as these still appear to be completely alien
and unknown in England. But it is too much to the advantage of
that class [Klasse] which has the dominant inﬂuence in Parliament
to stick to the abstract perspective of civil law [Privatrecht] in this
context; for through its inﬂuence, it has links with the adminis-
tration [Ministerium], which has the senior and most lucrative
ecclesiastical posts in its gift, and the class in question has an inter-
est in providing such beneﬁces for those younger sons or brothers
who are left without means, since landed property in England is
generally inherited only by the eldest son. This same class is also
likely to retain, or even to extend, its position in Parliament even
after the Reform Bill [is passed], and it is consequently very doubt-
ful whether it has any need to fear for its interest as far as the
wealth of the Church and its patronage are concerned.
There is every reason why fears regarding a reform of such con-
ditions in the Church of England should extend especially to its
Irish establishment,28 which has been so vigorously attacked for sev-
eral years, chieﬂy in the cause of [Catholic] emancipation (which is
itself concerned only with the political aspect).29 It is well known
that the majority of the Irish populace are members of the Catholic
Church. The assets which formerly belonged to the latter in Ireland,
the churches themselves, the tithes, the obligation of the parishes
to maintain the church buildings in good repair, to supply liturgical
accessories and pay the wages of vergers, etc. – all this was taken
away from the Catholic Church by the right of conquest and trans-
ferred to the Anglican Church. In Germany, as a result of the
Thirty Years War more than years ago and of the growth of
rationality in more recent times, each territory, province, town, or
village has either been allowed to retain the assets belonging to the
church of its inhabitants, or the needs of worship have been pro-
vided for in other ways; the religion of the prince and government


Political writings
has not requisitioned church assets belonging to another denomi-
nation within its territory. Even the Turks have in most cases
allowed the Christians, Armenians, and Jews under their dominion
to retain their churches; and even where they were forbidden to
repair such churches when they became dilapidated, they were still
given leave to buy permits to do so. But the English conﬁscated all
the churches of the conquered Catholic population. The Irish,
whose poverty, misery, and consequent degeneracy and demoralis-
ation are a standing topic in Parliament which all administrations
have acknowledged, are obliged to pay their own clergy out of the
few pence they may possess, and to provide premises for their ser-
vices. Conversely, they have to pay tithes on all their produce to
Anglican clergymen, in whose extensive incumbencies, which may
encompass two, three, six, or more parish villages, there are often
very few Protestants (sometimes only the verger); and they are even
obliged to pay for repairs to the churches which are now Anglican,
and for the provision of liturgical accessories, etc. The enemies of
emancipation have also made a point of holding up, as a means of
intimidation, the prospect of a reform of such crying injustice as a
likely consequence of this measure. But its friends, on the other
hand, have in essence reassured themselves and their followers [with
the reﬂection] that emancipation will both satisfy the demands of
the Catholics and make the establishment of the Anglican Church
in Ireland all the more secure. This situation, which is unparalleled
in any civilised Protestant Christian nation, and the positive legal
title [which upholds it], are sustained by self-interest,h and they
have so far held their own against the presumable religious dispo-
sition of the Anglican clergy and the good sense [Vernunft] of the
English people and their representatives. Admittedly, the Reform
Bill does add a few more Irish members to the Lower House, and
these may include Catholics; but this circumstance may be more
than outweighed by the same Bill’s provision whereby the represen-
tation of that class [Klasse] whose interest is linked with the present
condition of the Church [in Ireland] will be increased.
Similar anxiety is felt that the reform will eventually extend to
manorial rights. These have long ceased to include serfdom among
the agricultural class [Klasse], but they weigh just as oppressively
h Translator’s note: Hegel’s manuscript has ‘acquisitiveness’.


On the English Reform Bill
on the mass of such people as serfdom did, and indeed force them
to endure even greater deprivation than that of serfs. In England
itself, though disqualiﬁed from ownership of land and reduced to
the status of leaseholders or day-labourers, they do ﬁnd some work
as a result of the wealth of England in general, or in its huge manu-
facturing industry in times of prosperity; but it is to a greater extent
the poor law, by which every parish is obliged to look after its
own poor, that preserves them from the consequences of extreme
deprivation. In Ireland, on the other hand, the class which lives by
agriculture is in general propertyless and does not have this protec-
tion. Both the descriptions of travellers and data supplied in parlia-
mentary documents depict the general condition of the Irish peasan-
try as so wretched that it is hard to ﬁnd comparable examples even
in small and poor districts of civilised continental countries, or
indeed in those where civilisation is less advanced. The prop-
ertylessness of the agricultural class has its origin in the laws and
relationships of the old feudal system, which nevertheless, in the
form in which it still survives in several states, does guarantee the
peasant who is tied to the land a subsistence on the land he culti-
vates.30 But while the serfs of Ireland do on the one hand have
personal freedom, the landlords have on the other hand taken such
complete control of property that they have disclaimed all obligation
to provide for the subsistence of the populace which tills the land
they own. This is the justiﬁcation with which the landlords, if they
happened to ﬁnd more advantage in a mode of agriculture which
requires fewer workers, drove out hundreds, indeed thousands, of
those who had formerly cultivated the land, who were tied to it for
their subsistence no less than the serfs had been, and whose families
had lived there for centuries in cottages which they did not them-
selves own.31 They thus deprived those who were already without
possessions of their homes and of their inherited means of subsist-
ence as well – all in due legal form. And it was again with the
backing of the law that, in order to make sure that the peasants
were well and truly evicted from their cottages (and to rule out any
delay in their departure or any furtive return to such shelter), the
landlords had the cottages burnt down.32
This cancerous afﬂiction of England is brought to the attention
of Parliament year in, year out. How many speeches have been made
on it, how many committees have sat, how many witnesses have


Political writings
been questioned, how many circumstantial reports have been sub-
mitted, and how many measures have been proposed which have
proved either wholly inadequate or wholly impracticable! The pro-
posal to reduce the surplus numbers of poor by establishing colonies
would have to remove at least one million inhabitants to have any
chance of success. But how could this be effected? – not to mention
the fact that the empty space thereby created would soon be ﬁlled
in the same way as before if laws and circumstances remained other-
wise unchanged. An Act of Parliament (the Sub-letting Act)33
designed to restrict the division [of land] into small tenancies (the
means whereby the fertile class of beggars is accommodated in Ire-
land, and the main cause of its multiplication) proved so inadequate
a remedy for this evil that it recently had to be repealed after a few
years of experiment. The moment of transition from feudal tenure
to property has passed by without the opportunity being taken to
give the agricultural class [Klasse] the right to own land; some scope
for this might be achieved by changing the rights of inheritance,
introducing equal distribution of parental assets among children,
allowing property to be requisitioned and sold in settlement of
debts, and in general by changing that legal status of landed prop-
erty which involves indescribable formalities and costs in the event
of sale, etc. But the English law of property, in these and many
other respects, is too far removed from the freedom enjoyed in this
area by the continental countries,34 and all private relationships are
too securely enmeshed in such fetters. Indeed, it would have only
a very insigniﬁcant effect in relation to the whole if these laws were
changed so as to make it possible for the agricultural class to acquire
landed property. The power of the monarchy was too weak to over-
see the transition [from feudal tenure to property] already referred
to; and even after the Reform Bill, parliamentary legislation will
remain in the hands of that class [Klasse] whose interests – and in
even greater measure its ingrained habits – are bound up with the
existing system of property rights. Hitherto, such legislation has
always been designed merely to remedy the consequences of the
system by direct means when need and misery became too crying,
resorting to palliatives like the Sub-letting Act or to pious hopes
that the Irish landlords might take up residence in Ireland, etc.
Mention has also been made of hunting rights as an area which
could well be reformed – an issue close to the hearts of so many


On the English Reform Bill
English Members of Parliament and their circles; but the mischief
and abuses have become so great that moves to change the relevant
laws were inevitable. In particular, attention has universally been
drawn to the increased number of assaults and murders committed
by poachers on the person of gamekeepers, to the increasing loss of
game suffered on the estates of landowners, and especially to the
increasing number of poaching offences coming before the courts
(although these are only a small proportion of those actually
committed). Attention has also been drawn to the harsh and dispro-
portionate penalties laid down for infringements of hunting rights
and inﬂicted on those found guilty of them – for it was the same
aristocrats who enjoy these rights who made the laws in question,
and who in turn sit in court in their capacity as magistrates and
jurors. The interest of hunting enthusiasts is also engaged by the
extension of hunting rights in unenclosed [offenen] areas; a squire’s
son is entitled to hunt, and every parson counts as a squire, so that
the son may enjoy this privilege even if the father does not himself
possess it (unless he is himself the son of a squire), etc. A Bill to
amend these laws has been brought before Parliament annually for
several years past, but no such Bill has yet had the good fortune to
prevail in face of the privileged hunting interests; the present Parlia-
ment also has a Bill of this kind before it. The extent to which the
projected parliamentary Reform might have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on this legislation must still be regarded as problematic – [for
example,] in reducing penalties, in limiting personal hunting rights,
and in particular also – in the interest of the agricultural class – in
modifying the right to pursue stags, hares, and foxes with a pack of
hounds and twenty, thirty, or more horses and even more huntsmen
on foot across sown ﬁelds and all cultivated unenclosed land. In
many German territories, the damage done by game, the devastation
of ﬁelds by hunting, and the consumption of crops and fruit by
game used to be a standing article in the complaints discussed by
the Estates. So far, however, English freedom has not yet imposed
any restriction on these rights, which the German princes have long
since relinquished for the beneﬁt of their subjects.
The rambling confusion of English civil law, which even the
English, proud though they are of their freedom, can bring them-
selves to call an Augean stable, might encourage the hope that it will
eventually be sorted out. The little that Robert Peel accomplished a


Political writings
few years ago was deemed highly commendable and met with uni-
versal praise.35 More far-reaching proposals for judicial reform
which the present Lord Chancellor, Brougham,36 subsequently put
forward in a seven-hour speech, and which were received with
much approval, did result in the appointment of committees, but
have so far had no further consequences. The English nation has
not yet achieved through popular representation what several cen-
turies of quiet work in the cultivation of science [der wissen-
schaftlichen Bildung], and of princely wisdom and love of justice
have accomplished in Germany; and the new Bill is in fact devoid
of those particular elements which might allow well-founded insight
and genuine knowledge to prevail over the crass ignorance of the
fox-hunters and rural gentry, over an education acquired merely
through social contacts, newspapers, and parliamentary debates, and
over the skills of lawyers, which are mostly acquired by mere rou-
tine. The preconditions which must be fulﬁlled in Germany even
by those of noble birth, wealth, and landed property, etc. before
they can take part in the affairs of government and the state
(whether in general or more specialised areas) – namely theoretical
study, scientiﬁc education, practical training and experience – are
as little to be found in the new Bill as they were imposed, under
the previous dispensation, on members of an assembly in whose
hands the most extensive powers of government and administration
are vested.37 Nowhere but in England is the prejudice so entrenched
and sincerely accepted that if birth and wealth give someone an
ofﬁce, they also give him the intelligence [Verstand] to go with it.
Even the new Bill contains no such conditions; it also sanctions the
principle that a free income of £derived from landed property
fully qualiﬁes an individual for the task of judging and deciding on
[a person’s] capacity for the business of government and political
administration with which Parliament is concerned. But the idea
[Vorstellung] of boards of scrutiny composed of sensible and experi-
enced men with ofﬁcial duties of their own (as distinct from a mass
of individuals qualiﬁed only by an income of £), like the idea of
demanding evidence of competence from candidates for the legis-
lature and political administration [Staatsverwalten], is too much at
variance with the unconditional sovereignty of those who are
entitled to take such decisions.


On the English Reform Bill
The need to secure those material interests of rational law [Recht]
referred to above, as well as others which have already been secured
in many civilised continental states (especially in the German
territories), seems to be almost dormant in England. The need for
reform has therefore not been brought to light by the experience
that little or nothing has been done in this respect by [successive]
Parliaments with rights of patronage in their existing form; England
will endorse what the Duke of Wellington said recently in the
House of Lords,38 that ‘from the year ’ (i.e. the year of the
Revolution which deposed the House of Stuart with its Catholic
sympathies) ‘to the present, the country’s affairs have been conduc-
ted in the best and most illustrious manner through that union of
wealth, talents, and manifold knowledge which represented the
major interests of the kingdom’. National pride in general prevents
the English from studying and acquainting themselves with the
advances made by other nations in developing their legal insti-
tutions.39 The pomp and circumstance surrounding the formal free-
dom to debate the affairs of state in Parliament and other assemblies
of all classes and estates [Klassen und Sta¨nde] and to resolve such
issues in Parliament, together with the unqualiﬁed right to exercise
this freedom, prevent the English from grasping the essence of
legislation and government through quiet reﬂection – or give them
no incentive to do so. (Few European nations display so fully devel-
oped a capacity for reasoning [Ra¨sonnement] to suit their prejudices
and so little depth of principle.)i Fame and wealth make it
superﬂuous to go back to the foundations of existing rights, whereas
peoples who feel such rights oppressive have been driven to do
so by external necessity and by the need of reason which this has
awakened.40
We return [now] to the more formal aspects more immediately
connected with the present Reform Bill. One aspect of great import-
ance, which is also emphasised by opponents of the Bill, is the need
for the various major interests of the nation to be represented in
Parliament, and the changes which this representation would suffer
as a result of the present Bill.
i Translator’s note: Hegel’s manuscript reads ‘such shallowness in relation to
principle’.


Political writings
Views on this question appear to differ.41 On the one hand, the
Duke of Wellington maintains that, as a consequence of the Bill in
question, the majority of voters would consist of shopkeepers, which
would seem to confer an advantage on commercial interests.42 On
the other hand, there is a general view, which is strongly urged in
the Bill’s favour, that landed property and agricultural interests will
not only lose none of their inﬂuence, but will rather undergo a
relative expansion; for the projected cancellation of existing electoral
rights will allot only twenty-ﬁve members to the major cities or
commercial interests, while the remaining eighty-one will go to the
counties and landed property, including smaller towns in which
the inﬂuence of the landowner is also generally paramount. In this
connection, it is particularly noteworthy that a number of traders,
namely the leading London bankers who have connections with the
East India Company and the Bank of England, have declared them-
selves against the Bill. Their reason for doing so is that, while this
measure seeks to base the representation of the kingdom on the
broad foundation of property and to extend this foundation further,
it would have the practical effect of closing the main avenues
through which ﬁnancial, commercial, shipping and colonial inter-
ests, together with all other interests throughout the country and in
all its foreign possessions down to their remotest regions, have hith-
erto been represented in Parliament.
These main avenues are the small towns and minor boroughs in
which a seat in Parliament can be bought directly. It has hitherto
been possible, by way of the usual trade in parliamentary seats, to
ensure that bank directors, like directors of the East India Company,
had seats in Parliament. The great plantation owners of the West
Indies and other traders who dominate such great areas of com-
merce have likewise secured such positions in order to look after
their interests and those of their association (which are admittedly
also of great importance for the interest of England as a whole).
The bank director Manning,43 who had held a seat for many years,
was excluded from the last Parliament because his opponent proved
that he had employed bribery in his election. The view that the
various major interests of the nation should be represented in its
main deliberative body is characteristic of England, and in different
ways, it has also been a fundamental part of the constitution of the
older Imperial Estates and provincial assemblies in all the European


On the English Reform Bill
monarchies, just as it still provides the basis on which parliamentary
delegates are appointed under the Swedish constitution, for
example. But it runs counter to the modern principle according
to which only the abstract will of individuals as such should be
represented.44 It is also true that the subjective and arbitrary will of
the nobility [der Barone] and others with electoral privileges fur-
nishes the basis on which such appointments are made in England,
so that the representation of [particular] interests is itself left to
chance. Nevertheless, this procedure is regarded as so important an
element that the most respected bankers are not ashamed to indulge
in the corruption surrounding the sale of parliamentary seats, and
to complain in a public declaration to Parliament that the Bill would
deprive those major interests of their route to parliamentary rep-
resentation, a route which was not exposed to accident since it was
governed by bribery. Moral considerations give way before so
weighty a point of view as this, but it is a defect in the constitution
that it leaves a necessary measure to chance, and compels people to
secure it by corrupt means which morality condemns. It is true
that, if the interests are organically divided into estates [Sta¨nde] (for
example, into nobility, clergy, citizens of towns, and peasants in the
case of Sweden as mentioned above), they are no longer fully in
keeping with the present situation in most states in which those
other interests already referred to have become powerful, as in Eng-
land. But this defect could easily be removed if the earlier basis of
constitutional law [des inneren Staatsrechts] were once again under-
stood – that is, if the real foundations of political life, which are
genuinely distinct and whose distinct content45 must be given essen-
tial consideration by the government and administration [Verwal-
tung], were also consciously and expressly highlighted and recog-
nised, and, whenever they were discussed or made the object of
decisions, permitted to speak for themselves without this being left
to chance. In a constitution which Napoleon gave to the kingdom
of Italy, he had this consideration in mind when he distributed the
right to representation among the classes [Klassen] of possidenti,
dotti, and merchanti.46
In the earlier parliamentary debates on proposals for very incom-
plete reforms, one of the chief grounds which was always cited
against them (and which is again stressed in the present debate) was
that all major interests were [allegedly] represented in Parliament


Political writings
as presently composed, and that issues rather than individuals as
such should have an opportunity to be voiced and given a hearing.
This argument seems to touch on a matter – though without enlarg-
ing on it – which the Duke of Wellington brought to the attention
of the Upper House in his last speech as something which both
Upper and Lower Houses had hitherto overlooked, namely that
what had to be created was a legislative assembly, not a corporation
of electors, a Lower House and not a new system for the constitu-
ents.47 If it were not a question of voting rights and of who the
constituents should be, but of the [end] result – namely the consti-
tution of a legislative assembly and a Lower House – it might well
be said that such a Lower House was already constituted in accord-
ance with the existing right of representation. In the course of his
speech, the Duke actually cites the testimony of a supporter48 of the
Reform Bill to the effect that the present Lower House is so consti-
tuted that no better one could be elected. And in fact, the Reform
Bill itself contains no further guarantee that a House elected under
its provisions and in violation of the existing positive rights would
be any more excellent.
In his speech, the Duke likens these rights to the right whereby
he could as little be deprived of his seat in the Upper House as the
Prime Minister, Earl Grey, could be divested of his properties in
Yorkshire.49 The Bill does, however, contain the new principle
whereby the electoral prerogative is no longer placed in the same
category as actual property rights. In this respect we must acknowl-
edge as correct the charge brought by the Bill’s opponents, namely
that, precisely because of this new principle, the Bill is internally
utterly inconsistent. A personally more offensive charge lies in the
allegation that the line of demarcation whereby privileged smaller
towns will retain their electoral rights was deliberately drawn by the
Bill in such a way that the boroughs belonging to the Duke of
Bedford (whose brother, Lord John Russell, introduced the Bill in
the Lower House) were left unscathed. The Bill is in fact a mixture
of ancient privileges and the universal principle that all citizens –
provided they meet the external condition of [drawing] a ground
rent of £[annually] – are equally entitled to vote for those who
are to represent them.50 Since the Bill accordingly contains a contra-
diction between positive rights and a universalj principle of thought,
j Translator’s note: Hegel’s manuscript reads ‘abstract’.


On the English Reform Bill
it brings the inconsistency of everything derived merely from old
feudal law into much sharper focus than if all entitlements
were collectively placed on one and the same footing as positive
rights.
It is true that, in itself, this principle [of equal rights for all]
opens the way for an inﬁnite number of claims, on which the power
of Parliament can certainly impose limits for the time being –
although it would amount to a revolution rather than a mere reform
if it were followed through consistently. But it seems unlikely that
such further claims will be pursued with particular energy in the
near future, given that the middle and lower classes in the three
kingdoms appear to be very generally satisﬁed with the Bill. The
so-called practical sense of the British nation (i.e. its preoccupation
with earnings, subsistence, and wealth) seems so far to have been
little affected by any need for the material rights just referred to.51
It is even less likely to be inﬂuenced by purely formal principles of
abstract equality, for the fanaticism associated with such principles
is even more alien to it. It is true that this same practical sense
stands to lose directly, in that a great mass of people will cease to
proﬁt from bribes if the electoral qualiﬁcation is increased from
forty shillings to ﬁve times that amount. [But] if this higher class*
has hitherto reaped a material [reellen] beneﬁt from its votes, it is
not about to lose it. A Member of Parliament elected by Liverpool
has just been excluded from the House because it was proved that
the voters had taken bribes. The voters of this city are very numer-
ous, and since the city is very rich, it may be supposed that those
who did so also included many well-off people. Besides, just as
surely as the big estate-owners managed to pass off hundreds and
thousands of their propertyless tenants as owners of forty-shilling
freeholds, so also will this peculiar method of acquiring votes be
incorporated in the new [electoral] census and the same dependent
people will appear in the guise of freeholders with an income of ten
pounds. And despite the increased electoral qualiﬁcation, it is also
unlikely that the English rabble52 will readily give up those weeks
of feasting and inebriation in which it was encouraged and paid to
indulge its unchecked savagery.k In the election before last, it was
* Hegel’s note: This higher class, with its £rent, has recently been given the name
of ‘paupers’ in the Upper House.
k Translator’s note: Hegel’s manuscript reads ‘bestiality’.


Political writings
stated that £,sterling (i.e. nearly ,Reichstalers) was
spent in the populous county of York to elect a local landowner by
the name of Beaumont.† But if it has been suggested in parliamen-
tary debates that the costs of elections have become altogether
excessive, the question arises of how the people will regard the fact
that the rich wish to make economies at their expense. It is still
uncertain how this aspect of material beneﬁt will develop, and what
new combinations will be devised by the tireless speculation of
dealers in parliamentary seats; it would be premature to build con-
jectures on the change which this interest is undergoing. But the
right to vote itself seems to afford a higher interest, for it automati-
cally arouses the expectation and demand that it should be more
widely distributed. Experience suggests, however, that the exercise
of the right to vote is not attractive enough to generate powerful
claims or the movements to which these give rise. On the contrary,
a great indifference seems to prevail in this respect among the elec-
tors, despite the interest in bribes which goes along with it. No
petitions against a Bill so disadvantageous to them have so far
emerged from the numerous class of those who will lose their right
to vote speciﬁcally because of the raised electoral qualiﬁcation
[Wahlzensus], or whose right is considerably weakened because their
votes are lumped together with the general mass of voters in the
county. The protests raised against it have come from those whose
certainty or likelihood of gaining a seat in Parliament has been
reduced or lost entirely. When the income required to qualify as an
elector in Ireland was raised by Act of Parliament a year ago, a total
of ,individuals lost their right to vote without complaining
about this loss of their entitlement to participate in the affairs of
state and government. To all appearances, the electors regard their
right [to vote] as a property which is chieﬂy of beneﬁt to those
who seek election to Parliament, and to whose personal discretion,
arbitrary will, and interest all that this right contains by way of
participation in government and legislation must be sacriﬁced. –
The main electoral business on which the candidates employ agents
conversant with the [relevant] localities and personalities and with
how to deal with them is that of canvassing and mobilising electors,
† Hegel’s note: In one of the last sessions of Parliament, the cost of the Liverpool
election referred to above was given as £,(i.e. over ,Reichstalers).


On the English Reform Bill
and equally of inducing them – especially through bribery – to vote
for their patrons. The owners of great estates have hosts of their
tenants rounded up, with some of them (as already mentioned)
newly dressed up for the occasion as owners of the necessary free-
hold. At a previous election, Brougham wittily described a scene
where such people were made to camp in the courtyards with ﬁres,
pudding, and porter and – to isolate them from the inﬂuence of the
opposition – locked up there until the moment when they were
required to cast their obedient vote. This indifference to the right
to vote and to its exercise stands in stark contrast to the fact that it
embodies the people’s right to participate in public affairs and in
the highest interests of the state and government. The exercise of
this right should be a supreme duty, because the constitution of
an essential part of the state’s authority, namely the representative
assembly, depends on it, and because this right and its exercise (as
in France) are in fact an enactment of the sovereignty of the people,
indeed its sole enactment. Such indifference towards this right can
easily invite accusations that a people is politically obtuse or corrupt,
as can its addiction to bribery in exercising this right. This harsh
view must, however, be moderated if one considers what must help
to produce such lukewarmness, and the obvious factor is the feeling
that the individual vote is really of no consequence among the many
thousands which contribute to an election. Of the approximately
members who are currently elected to the Lower House in
England, or the elected to the Chamber [of Deputies] in France
(and the changes shortly to be made to these ﬁgures are of no conse-
quence here), only one member is to be appointed [by a given con-
stituency], which is a very inconsiderable fraction of this total; but
the individual vote is an even more negligible fraction of the or
,votes which contribute to that member’s election. If the total
number of voters to be registered under the new electoral law in
France is assessed at ,, while the number of members to be
elected by them is taken in round ﬁgures as , it follows that
the individual vote is one two-hundred-thousandth part of the total
electorate, and one ninety-millionth of one of the three branches of
the power which makes the laws.
In these ﬁgures, the individual can scarcely conceive of how neg-
ligible his own inﬂuence is. Nevertheless, he has a deﬁnite sense of
this quantitative insigniﬁcance of his vote, and the quantitative


Political writings
aspect, the number of votes, is in practice the only decisive factor
here. The qualitatively important considerations of freedom, of the
duty to exercise the right of sovereignty, and of participation in the
general affairs of state may certainly be held up [as arguments]
against apathy. But sound common sense likes to stick to what is
effective; and if the individual is confronted with the usual argu-
ment that, if everyone took so apathetic a view, the state’s continued
existence would be put at risk, and freedom even more so, he is
bound to be no less mindful of the principle on which his duty and
his whole right of freedom is based, namely that he should not let
himself be determined by any consideration of what others are
doing, but only by his own will, and that his arbitrary will as an
individual is the ultimate and sovereign principle which beﬁts him
and to which he is entitled. – In any case, this [electoral] inﬂuence,
so negligible in itself, is limited to [the choice of] personalities, and
it becomes inﬁnitely more negligible because it has no reference to
the thing, which is in fact expressly excluded. Only in the demo-
cratic constitution of the Year III in France under Robespierre,53
which was adopted by the entire people (although it proved corre-
spondingly ineffectual in practice), was it decreed that laws on
public matters should also be submitted to the individual citizens
for ﬁnal decision. – Furthermore, the voters are not even mandators
[Kommittenten] with powers to instruct their delegates. The pro-
grammes [cahiers] which the members of the National Assembly
took with them on their [parliamentary] mission were at once set
aside and forgotten by both parties, and it is recognised as one of
the most essential constitutional principles in England and France
that the elected members are just as sovereign in casting their votes
as their electors were in casting theirs. In neither country do mem-
bers have the character of ofﬁcials in their deliberations and resol-
utions on public matters, and they share with the King what is
sanctioned for him, namely that they are answerable to no one for
the performance of their duties.
In keeping with the feeling that the inﬂuence of the individual is
in fact negligible, and with the sovereign arbitrary will associated
with this right [to vote], experience conﬁrms that electoral meetings
are not at all well attended. The numbers (as occasionally listed in
the press) of those entitled to vote and of those who actually cast
their votes at a given election are usually widely divergent, as hap-


On the English Reform Bill
pened even in the turbulent ﬁnal years of Charles X’s reign in
France;54 and in the most recent election held in Paris, the centre
of political interest, in which the parties appear to have shown no
lack of zeal in summoning the electors to cast their votes, it was
reported that out of roughly ,constituents some did not
put in an appearance. It might also be interesting in this regard to
discover the average ratio of constituents to actual voters in other
areas where all citizens have the right to vote and where this affects
an interest much closer to them – for example, in meetings to elect
town councillors in the state of Prussia. – In the earlier stages of the
French Revolution, the zeal and conduct of the Jacobins at electoral
meetings put peaceable and honest citizens off exercising their right
to vote, or even made it dangerous for them to do so, and faction
alone held the ﬁeld. – While those great political bodies which are
currently making decisions on the franchise believe they are fulﬁl-
ling a duty of supreme justice by relaxing the external qualiﬁcations
for this entitlement and granting it to a larger number of people, it
may well escape their notice that they are thereby reducing the
inﬂuence of the individual, weakening his impression of its import-
ance and hence also his interest in exercising this right – not to
mention the question of how any political authority comes in the
ﬁrst place to dispose of this right of the citizens, to take a sum of
ﬁfty or one hundred francs or so many pounds sterling into account,
and to vary this right in accordance with such sums. The right in
question was accepted as by deﬁnition sovereign, primary, inalien-
able, and generally the opposite of all that can be conferred or taken
away.
Just as that sound common sense for which the English people
are so renowned makes individuals realise how insigniﬁcant the
inﬂuence of their single vote is on affairs of state, it also gives them
a proper sense of their general ignorance and limited ability to judge
the talents, business experience, skill, and education required for
high ofﬁces of state. Is it then likely that they will regard a freehold
of forty shillings or ten pounds, or [payment of] two hundred francs
in direct taxes (with or without the additional centimes) as guaran-
teeing so great an enhancement of this ability? The rigour with
which the French Chambers refuse to consider any ability apart
from that which is supposed to reside in the two hundred francs
(with or without the additional centimes), and ascribe it only to


Political writings
members of the Institute, is characteristic enough. Formalistic
respect for the two hundred francs has prevailed over respect for
the ability and good will of prefects, magistrates, doctors, lawyers,
etc. who do not pay so much in taxes. – Besides, the voters know
that their sovereign right exempts them from having to undertake
a preliminary judgement, let alone examination, of the candidates
as they present themselves, and that they have to reach their
decision without any such preliminaries. It is therefore no wonder
that a large number of individuals in England – and it still remains
to be seen whether they are not the majority – need to be prompted
by the candidates to make the undemanding effort of casting their
votes, and have to be rewarded with badges, roasts, beer, and a few
guineas by the candidates who thereby beneﬁt. The French, who
are newer in these political ways, have not yet resorted to this kind
of compensation on a similar scale, no doubt also because of press-
ure from the central interests of their [political] situation, which has
not yet been fully consolidated but is in fact exposed to the most
fundamental danger. But inasmuch as they have been encouraged
to take [political] matters and their share in them more seriously,
they have secured their right and compensated themselves for the
negligible share which their individual sovereignty has in public
affairs by themselves participating in such matters through insur-
rections, clubs, associations, etc.55
The peculiarity – already touched upon – of [there being] a
power in England which is supposedly subordinate and whose
members at the same time make decisions on the entire business of
the state without instruction, without accountability, and without
being ofﬁcials, is the basis of a relationship with the monarchical
part of the constitution. The inﬂuence which the Reform Bill may
have on this relationship, and on the executive power in general,
calls for mention here. Before considering this matter, we must ﬁrst
recall the immediate result of the peculiarity in question, namely
that it gives rise to a great difference in England between the power
of the Crown and that of the executive. The power of the Crown
controls the main branches of supreme authority within the state,
particularly those which concern relations with other states, the
authority to make war and peace, direction of the army, the appoint-
ment of ministers (though it has become etiquette for the monarch
to appoint only the Prime Minister directly, and for the latter to


On the English Reform Bill
put together the rest of the Cabinet), the appointment of army com-
manders and ofﬁcers, of ambassadors, etc. Now Parliament is
responsible for the sovereign decision on the budget (even including
the sum provided for the support of the King and his family), i.e.
for the whole range of means for making war and peace and main-
taining an army, ambassadors, etc., so that a ministry can only
govern – i.e. exist – in so far as it afﬁrms the views and will of
Parliament. Consequently, the monarch’s share in the executive
power is more illusory than real, and its substance lies with Parlia-
ment. Sie´ye`s56 had a great reputation for profound insight into the
organisation of free constitutions, and when the constitution of the
Directorate was replaced by that of the Consulate, he was at last able
to extract from his portfolio his plan which would enable France to
enjoy the beneﬁt of his experience and profound reﬂection. As
everyone knows, he placed at the head of the state a leader [Chef]
who would be charged with the pomp of representation abroad, and
with nominating the supreme Council of State and the responsible
ministers, along with the other subordinate ofﬁcials.57 Thus, the
supreme executive power was to be vested in the aforementioned
Council of State, whereas the proclamateur-e´lecteur was to have no
share in it. We all know the soldierly verdict which Napoleon, who
felt he was made to be master and ruler, passed on this project for
a leader [chef] of this kind, in whom he saw only the role of a cochon
a` l’engrais de quelques millions which no man of any talent and a
modicum of honour would ever be inclined to undertake. What this
project overlooked (in this case no doubt in good faith, though in
others with full awareness and complete deliberation) was that the
nomination of members of the Ministry and other ofﬁcials of the
executive is in itself a powerless formality, and that the substance
is to be found wherever the power of government effectively lies. In
England, we see this power in Parliament. In the various monarchic
constitutions whose creation we have witnessed, the formal separ-
ation of the power of government, as the executive, from a ‘merely’
legislative and judicial power is made explicit, and the former is
even invested with pomp and distinction. But ministerial appoint-
ments are always the focus of controversy and strife (even if the
right to make such appointments is ascribed exclusively to the
Crown), and what is described as the ‘merely’ legislative power is
[in fact] triumphant. Thus, even under the latest constitution in


Political writings
France, amidst the daily questions and controversies, both political
and non-political, there is an unmistakable tendency to compel the
Ministry to move the government’s headquartersl to the Chamber
of Deputies, where it has itself been reduced to engaging in public
controversies with its subordinate ofﬁcials.
The fact that the executive power lies with Parliament has a
direct bearing on an argument adduced by the opponents of the
Reform Bill in support of those boroughs through possession of
which many parliamentary seats are dependent on single individuals
or families – namely that it was through this circumstance that the
most distinguished English statesmen found their way to Parliament
and thence to the Ministry.58 It may indeed often happen that an
outstanding and profound talent is recognised primarily as a result
of private friendship, and is in a position to ﬁnd its proper place
only through individual generosity – a place which it might other-
wise fail to attain in view of the inadequate resources and family
connections of the mass of citizens in a [given] town or county. But
such examples may be ascribed to the realm of chance, where one
probability can easily be set against another, or a possible advantage
against a possible disadvantage. – Related to this is another alleged
consequence of greater importance, to which the Duke of Welling-
ton drew attention.59 (It is true that he is not renowned as an orator,
since he lacks that ﬂuent volubility, sustained for hours at a time
and full of self-advertisement, through which many Members of
Parliament have gained so great a reputation for eloquence. But
despite those disjointed sentences for which he has been criticised,
his speeches are not lacking in substance or in perceptions which
go to the heart of the matter.) He expresses a fear that those men
who are at present charged with looking after the public interest in
Parliament will be replaced by very different men, and he asks on
another occasion whether shopkeepers,60 of whom in his view (as
already mentioned) the great majority of electors will consist as a
result of the new Bill, are the people who ought to elect the mem-
bers of that great national assembly which has to make decisions
on domestic and foreign affairs and on agricultural, colonial, and
industrial interests. – The Duke speaks from his [own] observation
l Translator’s note: Instead of ‘amidst the daily . . . headquarters’ Hegel’s manuscript
reads simply ‘the government soon found itself compelled to move its
headquarters’.


On the English Reform Bill
of the English Parliament, in which, above the mass of incompetent
and ignorant Members with a veneer of the usual prejudices and a
culture [Bildung] derived from conversation (and often less than
that), there stands a number of talented men who are wholly
devoted to political activity and to the interest of the state. The
majority of these are also guaranteed a seat in Parliament partly
through their own wealth and the inﬂuence which they themselves
or their family possess in a borough, city, or county, and partly
through the inﬂuence of the Ministry as well as their friends within
the party.
Associated with this class [Klasse] is a large number of men who
make political activity their life’s work, whether out of personal
interest and because they have independent means, or because they
hold public positions which they have obtained through their con-
nection with parliamentary inﬂuence. But even if they have obtained
these positions in other ways, their ofﬁcial standing and general
inner vocation are such that they cannot refrain from joining the
class of politicians and one of its parties. If service to the state is
not tied to other preconditions (for example, a course of specialised
[wissenschaftlicher] study, state-approved examinations, preliminary
practical training, etc.), the individual must be incorporated into
this class.61 He must gain some importance within it and he is sup-
ported by its inﬂuence, just as his own inﬂuence helps to support
it in turn. Individuals isolated from such connections – for example,
Hunt62 – are rare anomalies; they may enter Parliament, but they
do not cease to cut a strange ﬁgure in it.
The other commitments of [members of] this circle – their family
connections, their political discussions and speeches at dinners, etc.,
their endless and worldwide political correspondence, as well as the
social round of country houses, horse-races, fox-hunting, etc. – will
certainly suffer no disruption. It is true that a major element of
their power – namely their control of a large number of parliamen-
tary seats – will undergo a signiﬁcant modiﬁcation as a result of the
Reform Bill, and this may well have the effect which the Duke
mentions, in that many other individuals will take the place of those
who belong to the present circle of those who devote themselves
to the government interest; but this is likely to have the further
consequence of upsetting the uniformity of those maxims and atti-
tudes which are prevalent in that class, and which constitute


Political writings
parliamentary wisdom. Admittedly, it does not appear that Hunt,
for example, goes beyond the usual categories with regard to
oppression of the people by taxes, sinecures, etc. But the reform
may provide access to Parliament for ideas which run counter to
the interests of the class in question, and which have therefore not
yet entered the heads of its members – ideas which form the foun-
dations of real freedom,63 and which relate to those circumstances
already mentioned concerning ecclesiastical property, the organis-
ation of the Church, and the duties of the clergy, along with man-
orial and other bizarre rights and property restrictions derived from
feudal relationships, and other areas within the chaos of English
laws. In France, such ideas have become mixed with many further
abstractions and associated with those outbreaks of violence with
which we are all familiar, whereas in Germany, in less adulterated
form, they have long since become ﬁrm principles of inner convic-
tion and public opinion, and have produced an actual transform-
ation – peaceful, gradual, and lawful – of the old legal relationships.
Thus, we have already made great progress here with the insti-
tutions of real freedom; we have now ﬁnished work on the most
essential of them and enjoy their fruits, while the executive power
of Parliament [in England] has as yet scarcely been seriously
reminded of them. In fact, England may well have cause to fear the
greatest disruption of its social and political fabric from the pressing
demands of those principles and the call for their rapid implemen-
tation. However enormous the contrast is within England between
immense wealth and utterly abject poverty,64 there is an equally
great – or perhaps even greater – contrast between, on the one hand,
the privileges of its aristocracy and the institutions of its positive
right in general, and on the other, legal relationships and laws as
reshaped in the more civilised states on the Continent and prin-
ciples which, inasmuch as they are based on universal reason, cannot
always remain so alien even to the English mentality [Verstand] as
they have done hitherto. – Those novi homines who, as the Duke of
Wellington fears, will supplant the present statesmen may likewise
ﬁnd in these principles the strongest support for their ambition and
popular appeal. Since there can be no question in England of these
principles being adopted and implemented by the executive power,
which has hitherto been in the hands of the privileged class, mem-
bers of this class would have to feature only as an opposition to the


On the English Reform Bill
government and to the existing order of things;65 and the principles
themselves would have to feature not in their concrete and practical
truth and application, as in Germany, but in the dangerous shape
of French abstractions. That antithesis between hommes d’e´tat and
hommes a` principes which at once emerged quite starkly in France at
the beginning of the Revolution and which has not yet gained a
foothold in England, may well be introduced when a broader route
to seats in Parliament is opened. The new class [Klasse] can gain a
foothold all the more easily because the principles themselves are,
as such, simple in character, so that they can be grasped quickly
even by the ignorant; and since these principles can in any case
claim, by virtue of their universality, to be adequate for all [pur-
poses], they are sufﬁcient to enable anyone with some facility of
talent and some energy of character and ambition to attain that
aggressive eloquence which he requires, and to produce a dazzling
effect on the reason of the masses (who are equally inexperienced
in such matters). Conversely, it is not so easy to acquire the knowl-
edge, experience, and business routine of the hommes d’e´tat,
although these qualities are equally necessary for applying rational
principles and introducing them to actual life.
But the introduction of a new element such as this would disturb
not only the class whose members have the business of state in their
hands; on the contrary, the power of government [itself] might be
thrown off course. This power, as already mentioned, lies with Par-
liament; and however much the latter is divided into parties and
however violently these oppose one another, they are in no sense
factions. They remain within the same general interest, and a
change of administration [Ministerwechsel] has hitherto had more
signiﬁcant consequences in foreign affairs, in relation to war and
peace, than in domestic affairs. The monarchic principle, on the
other hand, no longer has much to lose in England. We know that
the resignation of Wellington’s administration came about when it
found itself in a minority on a motion to regulate the King’s Civil
List66 – an occasion of particular interest, since it concerned one of
the few remaining elements of the monarchic principle in England.
What was left of the Crown Estate (which in fact had as much the
character of a family estate, of the royal family’s private property,
as did the family estates of dukes, earls, barons, etc. in England)
was made over to the Exchequer in the previous century, and in


Political writings
compensation, a speciﬁc sum corresponding to its revenue was set
aside within the overall budget which the Lower House had to
approve each year. This Crown Estate, the meagre remnant of the
Crown’s formerly vast resources which had been so greatly reduced
by extravagance (and especially by the need to purchase troops and
baronial support during civil wars), had not yet been split up into
what was to remain family property and what was to be devoted to
the general purposes of the state. Now that character of family
property or private property which belonged to one part of this
remaining wealth had already been altered, at least in form, when
it was converted from landed property into an indemnity included
in the annual parliamentary budget. Nevertheless, a form of mon-
archic inﬂuence on this minor part of Great Britain’s annual expen-
diture still remained, even if it was subject to [the approval of]
Cabinet. But even this remnant of royal or monarchic control has
been abolished by Parliament’s recent decision to set aside one por-
tion [of the Crown revenues] for the King to spend on himself and
his family, and to place the rest (which has already been used in
the past for the state’s own purposes) at the disposal of Parliament.
One cannot fail to notice in this context that, while the majority [of
votes cast] against an interest involving the monarchy [ein
monarchisches Element] was large enough to cause Wellington’s
administration to resign, the second reading of the Reform Bill,
which is directed against the prerogatives of the aristocracy, was
passed, as everyone knows, by a majority of only one.67
It can be seen as typical of the monarchic element’s status that,
both on the occasion of the Catholic Emancipation Bill and during
the debates on the Reform Bill, the administration was reproached
for having allowed the King’s consent to these measures to become
public. There is no question here of the monarch having exercised
his absolute power, or of a so-called coup d’e´tat; what was considered
improper was merely the authority or inﬂuence which the King’s
personal opinion might exercise. On the one hand, this measure was
certainly adopted out of delicacy, in order to avoid the embarrass-
ment of going against the will of the monarch during debates on
the Bill. But it is equally the case that, even with reference to that
initiative which properly belongs to the monarchic element (i.e. the
Crown), Parliament wishes to deal only with an administration
[Ministerium] dependent on and incorporated in [Parliament] itself,


On the English Reform Bill
and indeed only with its own members, for it is only in the latter
capacity that Ministers can bring a Bill forward. In the same way,
the right which belongs to the King, as the third branch of the
legislative power, of approving or rejecting a Bill which both Houses
have adopted now becomes purely illusory, inasmuch as the Cabinet
is once again that same administration [Ministerium] incorporated
in Parliament. Earl Grey has declared,68 in response to the above
reproach, that the royal consent was already implicit in the fact that
the Bill was introduced by the administration; but he rejected the
blame for having expressly announced that the Bill had the King’s
approval simply by saying that this report did not come from Minis-
ters but from other sources.
The peculiar discord which the new men might introduce into
Parliament would therefore not be [the same as] that conﬂict which
invariably arose with each of the various French constitutions over
whether the executive power should actually belong to the King
and his Ministers as the party [Seite] to which it was expressly
assigned. In the English political administration as it stands at pre-
sent, the decision has long since been taken on what in France has
always ﬁrst required a decisive and authentic interpretation through
insurrection and acts of violence by an insurgent populace. The
innovation contained in the Reform Bill can therefore impinge only
upon the effective power of government as established in Parlia-
ment. Under present conditions, however, this power suffers only
superﬁcial variations in the form of changes of administration, but
no genuine conﬂict of principles, for a new administration belongs
to the same class [Klasse] of interests and of statesmen as its prede-
cessor did. It gains the necessary predominance which it requires
as a party to some extent from that group of members who count
as independent, but who on the whole side with the current admin-
istration out of a feeling that a government must be present; but it
also gains it in part through the inﬂuence which it is able to exercise
on the ﬁlling of a number of parliamentary seats. Now even if the
so-called agricultural interest appears to have declared that it will
receive its due under the new mode of election which is about to
be introduced, and even if a large part of the existing patronage of
parliamentary seats and of the combinations [of factors] involved in
their purchase remains in place, it is inevitable that the class which
has hitherto been dominant in Parliament, and which furnishes each


Political writings
administration with ready material for [perpetuating] the existing
system of social conditions, will undergo modiﬁcation when new
people and heterogeneous principles are introduced.69 The Reform
Bill in itself undermines the present basis of this system, namely
the principle of purely positive right which secures the continued
possession of privileges, whatever relation these privileges may have
to the rights of real freedom. Once claims of a new kind, which
until now have barely found involuntary and incoherent expression
(and rather as indeﬁnite fears than as actual demands) come up for
discussion in Parliament, the opposition will change its character;
the parties will have another object than that of merely taking over
the administration.70
If we take an example of an opposition of different character as
it appears in its extreme form in France, this character ﬁnds its
most revealing embodiment in the surprise which has been
expressed there after every change of administration in recent times
over the fact that those individuals who come out of opposition into
government subsequently follow much the same maxims as their
ousted predecessors did. In the newspapers of the French oppo-
sition, we read naive complaints that so many excellent individuals
change course as they progress through government ofﬁce,
betraying the left wing to which they formerly belonged – i.e. that,
while they may have previously conceded in abstracto that a govern-
ment existed, they have now learned what government actually is,
and that it involves something more than principles alone. The
latter, as we know, consist in France of general notions [Vorstel-
lungen] concerning freedom, equality, the people, popular sover-
eignty, etc. National legislation, for men of principle, essentially
extends no further than those droits de l’homme et du citoyen which
were preﬁxed to the earlier French constitutions. They do, of
course, concede that further speciﬁc legislation is necessary, as well
as an organisation of the powers of the state and of administrative
agencies, and that the people must be subordinate to these public
authorities, and this is duly put into effect. But that institutional
activity which constitutes public order and genuine freedom is
opposed by renewed reference to those generalities whose very
demands for freedom render the basic law contradictory within
itself. It is conceded that obedience to the law is necessary; but
when this is demanded by the authorities (i.e. by [speciﬁc]


On the English Reform Bill
individuals), it seems to go against freedom. The authority to issue
commands, and the difference to which this authority – like com-
manding and obeying in general – gives rise is incompatible with
equality. A mass of human beings can call itself ‘the people’ – and
rightly so, for the people is this indeterminate mass; but the auth-
orities and ofﬁcials, and in general the members of the organised
power of the state, are distinct from the people, and they therefore
appear to be in the wrong [in dem Unrecht] for having rejected
equality and taken a stance opposed to the people, which has the
inﬁnite advantage of being recognised as the sovereign will. This is
the extreme contradiction within whose circle a nation revolves as
soon as these formal categories have come to dominate it.71 The
members of the English Parliament under the present system, and
the English in general, have a more practical approach to politics,
and they do have a conception [Vorstellung] of what government
and governing are; and at the same time, it is in the nature of
their constitution that the government virtually refrains from all
interference in the particular circles of social life, in the adminis-
tration of counties, cities, etc., in ecclesiastical and educational mat-
ters, and in other matters of common concern such as the construc-
tion of roads. This freer and more concrete quality of civil life may
increase the probability that formal principles of freedom will not
ﬁnd ready acceptance by the class [Klasse] above the lower one
(although the latter is extremely numerous in England, and most
receptive to such formalism), an acceptance which the opponents of
the Reform Bill portray as an immediate threat.
But if the Bill, by its principle rather than by its provisions,
should open the way into Parliament – and hence into the centre of
political power – for principles opposed to the existing system, thus
enabling them to assume greater importance in that institution
[daselbst] than radical reformers have been able to attain in the past,
the conﬂict would threaten to become increasingly dangerous. For
no superior intermediate power would stand between the interests
of positive privilege and the demands for more real freedom in
order to restrain and mediate between them, because the monarchic
element in England lacks that power which, in other states, has
facilitated the transition, without convulsions, violence, and rob-
bery, from an earlier legislation based solely on positive right to one
based on principles of real freedom.72 The other power would [in


Political writings
this case] be the people; and if an opposition were established on a
basis hitherto alien to Parliament as at present constituted, and if
this opposition felt unable to stand up to the opposing party in
Parliament, it might well be misguided enough to look to the people
for its strength, and so to inaugurate not a reform but a revolution.


Editorial notes
The Magistrates should be Elected by the People
This is the original title of the pamphlet to which this fragment
belongs. Hegel later changed the phrase ‘by the people’ to ‘by the
citizens’ for stylistic reasons.
Harris (: pp. n , ) explains how this title, which was
not Hegel’s, became the accepted title among Hegel scholars.
The political situation in Wu¨rttemberg at the time Hegel wrote
this essay is ably discussed by Harris (: pp. ff). The Duke
of Wu¨rttemberg, Friedrich Eugen, had been forced for ﬁnancial
reasons to call the Estates into session in early – something
that had not happened since . In those circumstances, oppor-
tunities for political reform abounded. This, Harris argues,
prompted Hegel to become a ‘political pamphleteer’.
This sentence expresses concisely Hegel’s life-long rhetorical strat-
egy for urging change upon his audience. Something within man
(e.g. his soul or heart or spirit) will ‘come to life’ or ‘awaken’ and
move him towards a ‘destiny’ which also involves a reconciliation
with a ‘reality’ that itself has been changed to accommodate that
destiny.
The phrase ‘still robust’ signals Hegel’s intention to work for
change within existing institutions once they have been purged of
their corruptions.
In GC (see pp. –), Hegel uses similar language to explain the
lack of legitimacy in the German Empire.
Harris (: p. ) sees Hegel using the ‘bogy’ of Jacobinism in
this paragraph to promote reform from above in lieu of revolution
from below.
A famous German and Wu¨rttemberg patriot, Friedrich Karl von


Notes to pages –
Moser (–), had used the building metaphor in in one
of his ‘patriotic’ writings (Gooch : pp. –). Moser’s inﬂu-
ence on Hegel needs to be examined by Hegel scholars.
The translation of the fragment in Hegel () ends here. What
follows in our edition are substantial quotations from Hegel that
Rudolf Haym (: pp. –and –) included in his account
of the original manuscript which he apparently had before him.
Rosenkranz did not include this material among the excerpts in
his biography of Hegel.
For a discussion of the political culture and political institutions
of Wu¨rttemberg in so far as they relate to Hegel’s life, see Dickey
(, chapter ).
While living in Berne, Switzerland, Hegel saw and reported upon
the devious ways in which oligarchies manipulate representative
institutions by co-opting government ofﬁcials. In this fragment,
Hegel makes a similar observation about Wu¨rttemberg. In this
respect, the anonymous translation he published in of J. J.
Cart’s Conﬁdential Letters, the contents of which deal with the
corruption of the oligarchy in Berne, addressed affairs in Wu¨rt-
temberg as much as in Berne. On the Cart translation, see Harris
(: pp. –and ff) and S. Avineri (: pp. –).
The reference to ‘priest’ here is typical of Hegel. Throughout his
life he used the label to delegitimise authorities – religious and
political – who wished to conduct their business in secret, free
from public scrutiny. Against this, he proposed a policy of ‘pub-
licity’. Not coincidentally, F. K. von Moser (cf. note above) had
published a short essay on ‘publicity’ in . Echoes of it can be
found in this essay.
It is probable that J. J. Moser, Friedrich Karl’s father (note 
above), was the ‘right-minded’ person whom Hegel had in mind.
In his account of the content of Hegel’s original manuscript, Haym
(: p. ) indicates that Hegel referred to a speech of Charles
James Fox, the English parliamentarian. Harris (: p. ) has
traced the reference to a speech of May , in which Fox
expresses concern about the possible adverse effects of expanding
voting rights in England. Hegel articulates a similar concern here.
And with his remark about ‘active and passive’ citizenship, he also
alludes to French debates about citizenship.
Harris (: p. n ) speculates about the institutional ‘body’
Hegel may have had in mind here. Was it, Harris asks, the Coun-
cil, the Assembly, or a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie? At one point
(p. ) Harris thinks this body denotes an ‘enlightened bour-


Notes to page 
geoisie’ who will represent the Gemeingeist of the community.
Given what J. G. Fichte and F. Schlegel were saying at this time
about constituting intellectuals as an ephorate, Hegel may have
had something like that in mind too. But in NL (pp. and 
n ) he is critical of Fichte’s idea of an ephorate. Since F. K. von
Moser and any number of other German thinkers had been urging
German citizens and intellectuals to join together in ‘patriotic soci-
eties’ for several decades, Hegel could have been thinking along
those lines as well. On Moser and the association movement, see
Ulrich Hof ().
The German Constitution
According to Harris (), Hegel wrote various drafts for this
essay between late and late . Although the essay was not
published in Hegel’s lifetime, Rosenkranz included signiﬁcant
parts of it in his various works on Hegel in the mid-nineteenth
century. Harris suggests that Rosenkranz had available to him
more of the manuscript than we have at present. The version
translated here was ﬁrst published in by George Mollat who
also gave the work its title. For the dating of the different drafts
and for a helpful commentary see Harris (: pp. ff).
Harris notes that the phrase ‘no longer a state’ began to appear in
the margins of Hegel’s revision of his manuscript in . The
matter of whether or not Germany was a state had been a concern
to Germans since the s. Just as important, Adam Ferguson
had offered observations similar to Hegel’s about the Empire in
his famous Essay on the History of Civil Society (), a book
Hegel had studied as a youth. Ferguson had referred there to the
circumstances that had reduced the Empire to the status of ‘a mere
title’ (Ferguson : p. ). On the importance of Ferguson for
the Germans, and especially on how he inﬂuenced F. H. Jacobi’s
thinking on the Empire in Woldemar, a philosophical novel pub-
lished and revised between and , see Fania Oz-
Salzberger (: pp. ff) and N. Waszek (: pp. –).
Hegel had read this novel, in which Ferguson’s political views are
discussed, by .
In an early draft of GC Hegel names Voltaire; see note below.
Hegel liked to begin his criticism of social and political institutions
by pointing out how such institutions, while having the ‘semblance
of unity’, were in fact so constituted as to militate against true
unity. He does so here. Later (p. ), when he distinguishes


Notes to pages –
between a ‘people’ and a ‘mass’, he is making the same point. In
his early theological writings (Hegel : p. ) he makes a simi-
lar distinction, contrasting a mere ‘collection’ (Versammlung) of
human beings and a ‘communion’ (Gemeine) of multi-sided beings
who share a similar spirit.
The references to war in this passage need to be read in the context
of similar remarks about war in Ferguson rather than as antici-
pations of military developments in twentieth-century Europe.
Indeed, the martial focus in both Ferguson and Hegel probably
owes more to their interest in certain aspects of ancient liberty –
in the idea of citizen-soldiers – than to any authoritarian political
inclination on the part of either thinker.
Hegel frequently uses the word Gemu¨t (soul) to identify a dispo-
sition within individuals that can be realised only in a community
of fellowship (see, e.g., BIA pp. –). Very often, he links the
word to an inward religious disposition (Gesinnung) that can be
guided by philosophy towards a communal end in which individ-
uals share a common ethical life. See glossary entry Gemu¨t.
The ‘is’ versus ‘ought’ formulation here anticipates Hegel’s later
famous/notorious rendering of the opposition between what is
‘real’ and what is ‘rational’ in PR. It seems clear that he is pushing
here – in the drafts from on – for a political reform pro-
gramme grounded in realism. In –, Harris argues, Hegel was
more optimistic about the possibility of ‘radical’ political change
in central Europe.
Discussion of the interplay between ‘culture’ and ‘destiny’ is
Hegel’s way of drawing attention to the tension between ‘is’ and
‘ought’ in history. Indeed, the point of the whole essay is to per-
suade Germans to draw on resources in their character that will
translate into real political activity. Ferguson pursued a similar line
of argument in his Essay.
The paragraph’s reference to ‘the [Germans’] . . . drive for free-
dom’ is Tacitean in origin. In its original form, Hegel says (p.
), Germanic freedom emerged from ‘the forests of Germania’.
Subsequently, it played a signiﬁcant role throughout Europe in
establishing feudalism as a ‘system’ (p. ) of social organisation.
Later in this essay (pp. , ), Hegel explains how German free-
dom evolved in many European countries into a political system of
‘limited monarchy’ in which aspects of monarchical and aristo-
cratic (i.e. representative) government were politically balanced. In
seventeenth-century England, this system was associated with
what Montesquieu, following English usage, called ‘Gothic’ liberty


Notes to pages –
(SL, Book , ch. ). Among seventeenth-century English thinkers,
especially among the ‘ancient constitutionalists’, Tacitus was
viewed as a key spokesman for this kind of liberty. Hegel says,
however, that neither France nor the German states in the Holy
Roman Empire evolved in this way. Feudalism in the former, he
claims, degenerated (p. ) into absolutism; in the latter, feudalism
remained mired in particularism because Germany failed politi-
cally to make the transition to limited monarchy and a more rep-
resentative government. According to Hegel, the obstinacy (or
stubbornness) of the Germans ensured that they would cling to
their original ‘freedom’ in circumstances where it was imperative
for them to give their freedom a political (i.e. a ‘Gothic’ and
constitutional) face. Having failed to make the transition, the
German Empire became ‘a collection [of states] without a [unify-
ing] principle’. In the Preface to PR, Hegel invokes the obstinacy
argument again in order to criticise the anti-political aspects of
Lutheran inwardness.
M. Westphal (: pp. f) discusses how the term ‘obstinate’
(eigensinnig) ﬁgures in Hegel’s later account of the Protestant prin-
ciple of freedom.
Hegel means, of course, to set civil liberty off against political
liberty. In fact, the strength with which private rights were
adhered to by the Germans was why Germany had encountered
difﬁculty becoming a state. Privatisation and depoliticisation are
connected in Hegel’s mind. He draws the same connection in NL
(pp. –), but shifts the focus backwards in time to Roman
history.
See glossary Reichstag.
Roman Months: a term used since medieval times to refer to pay-
ments made by the members of the Imperial Diet to the Holy
Roman Emperor. These payments were used by the Emperor to
cover expenses which he incurred while travelling to Rome to meet
with the Pope.
The Latin translates: ‘Let justice prevail, even if Germany should
perish’.
The phrase ‘legal anarchy’ relates back to the second paragraph of
the essay. Cf. note above. Although Hegel has Voltaire in mind,
many Germans held that view too (e.g. Samuel Pufendorf).
Hegel’s discussion of the opposition between Staatsrecht and Staat
indicates that he wishes to assign a value to the state that is dis-
tinctly political. For this reason, this essay strikes Carl Schmitt
(: p. ) as a ﬁne example of the decisively ‘political’ character
of Hegel’s thinking.


Notes to pages –
In some of his other political writings, Hegel will argue, for
example, that ‘a people’ is not ‘a mass’. Here he wishes a ‘mass’
to become ‘a people’ in a strictly political rather than a cultural or
social sense. In Fichte’s SR (p. ), a book that greatly stimulated
Hegel in the late s, there is a passage in which Fichte claims
that, with the establishment of government, ‘the people are no
longer a people, a whole, but an aggregate of individuals’. Hegel
wishes to reverse that argument. He engages Fichte more directly
in several writings in –.
This paragraph illustrates how Hegel tries to limit the scope of the
state’s authority in order to ensure the integrity of what is political
about it. Otherwise, the state would be either totalitarian or a tool
of special interests in society. The ﬁnal sentence may refer to
events in France in the s.
Hegel seems here to be addressing the matter of passive and active
citizenship, a major focus of the political debate in France during
the Revolution. He makes a more explicit reference to this in M,
p. above.
While Hegel recognises diversity here, he seems in the next two
paragraphs to have done so in order to emphasise the importance
of religion for human identity formation in the modern world.
When he mentions ‘religious unity’ as a ‘prerequisite of a state’ he
anticipates the references later in this essay to Theseus and to
his own later arguments in his Berlin years about religion ﬁnding
fulﬁlment in the state. He also referred to Theseus as an agent of
unity in the early theological writings. See Hegel (), p. .
Until the end of his life, Hegel allowed for the interplay between
religion (i.e. a ‘holy community of Christians’) and politics (i.e.
‘secular power’) in his thinking about the modern state. His con-
cept of Sittlichkeit represents the intersection of the two.
Knox (in Hegel : p. n ) detects a reference to Fichte’s
police state here as well as to the despotism of the French Revol-
ution. For more on Fichte’s police state, see note below and
notes , , and to NL.
Again, Hegel’s disdain for totalitarian politics (as practised in
France? in Prussia? or both at once?) is evident. Yet he is also
against equating the ‘political’ with popular sovereignty. A few
paragraphs later, he will imply that the French are ‘illiberal’
(unfreie: p. ) because they are enthusiasts of centralisation. As
he goes on to show, the ideological danger is that French illib-
eralism, while representing itself in theory as the champion of
‘rational principles’, in practice ‘extends no trust whatsoever


Notes to pages –
towards its citizens’. Hence, in the following paragraphs Hegel
calls France a ‘hierarchical state’ and its current political system
‘mechanistic’ (pp. –). Beginning in the early s, he associ-
ates Fichte’s political thinking with the idea of the machine state
(GW, vol. , p. ). Fichte discusses the state in ‘mechanical’
terms in SR, pp. –.
Here the machine reference is to Prussia. But a few paragraphs
later Hegel argues that France as well as Prussia is such a state.
See GG, the entry on ‘Staat und Souveranita¨t’ (pp. , –), for
the emergence of the idea of the machine state among German
thinkers in the later eighteenth century.
We translate Staatsbu¨rger as ‘citizens’ here. The German word
began to acquire special political meaning from the s on. See
Vierhaus (: pp. –) for a discussion of the evolution of the
term. Very often it was used to call for more middle-class involve-
ment in the exercise of rulership.
Hegel’s doubts about the French Revolution are unmistakable here
and elsewhere in this essay. As Wood and Nisbet have observed
(PR: p. n ), Hegel continued to interpret the French Revol-
ution in this way in PR. Since he reiterates this line of criticism
throughout the s, it must be viewed as characteristic of rather
than as an exception to his attitude towards .
At this point in his life, Hegel is quite hostile to Prussia and its
former commanding ‘genius’, Frederick the Great. Unlike certain
supporters of enlightened absolutism, Hegel did not accept the
argument that Prussia was a ‘free monarchy’ (Vierhaus : p.
). In Berlin, between and , he changes the way in
which he talks about Prussia and Frederick. But in doing so he
does not embrace the Prussia that ‘is’ so much as the Prussia that
‘ought’ to be. For more on this theme, see the introduction to this
volume.
Harris (: pp. –) discusses the lacuna at this point in the
manuscript.
Imperial Register (Matrikel): a list prepared in at the Diet of
Worms which enumerated the ﬁnancial contribution each member
of the Imperial Diet had to make to the Emperor to cover his
military expenses.
In the early modern period of Europe history, the idea that money
was the ‘sinews’ of war shaped much of the debate about the doc-
trine of ‘reason of state’. In his own way, Hegel is taking up that
issue here. He is especially concerned to explain why political
unity is essential for the self-determination (as distinct from the
independence) of a people.


Notes to pages –
See glossary.
See glossary.
See glossary.
This refers to the second Congress of Rastatt, held between 
and , for negotiations between the Empire and France.
The catch was, however, that the real bear had still to be captured.
For an overview of the organisational structure and politics of the
German Empire in the eighteenth century, see Klaus Epstein
(: chapter ). For how the Empire operated in the eyes of a
Wu¨rttemberger, see Mack Walker ().
Ferguson (: p. ) says something quite similar.
Throughout this essay, the Peace of Westphalia is presented as a
deﬁning moment of German history. It is when German ‘state-
lessness became organised’ in an institutional sense (p. ).
The Peace of Nijmegen (or Nimwegen) was concluded in –.
.
.
.
.
By ‘partial’ associations Hegel has in mind short-term contractual
relationships that independent states form to ensure their ‘separ-
ateness’ rather than their togetherness. The fact that such contracts
never require states to become ‘interlocking’ prompts him to deny
political status to such partial associations. His distinction between
contractual and ‘interlocking’ relations is relevant to his later con-
ception of civil society and the state as aggregation and association,
respectively.
Here Hegel’s argument seems to recognise the German propensity
for oscillating between extreme forms of collectivism and
individualism.
Throughout this essay, Hegel uses the term ‘formality’ to explain
a mind-set that results in people mistaking ‘aggregations’ for
associations (cf. also PWE, pp. –, –, and –, where
he uses the term ‘aggregate’ to illustrate why an atomistic society
of privatised individuals is not really a society). Here, the German
concept of the state is ‘empty’ because it is formal. Nonetheless,
Germans have convinced themselves that what is merely formal is
real rather than empty. On these grounds, it was impossible for
them to think about forming a truly political association, still less
for them actually to take the initiative for forming such an associ-
ation. Hegel develops the idea of the Gedankenstaat to express the
illusory quality of this kind of thinking. Harris (: p. n )


Notes to pages –
is excellent on how all this relates to Hegel’s concept of ‘fate’, a
concept he had developed in his early theological writings.
This entire paragraph contains key elements of what will later
become associated with Hegel’s critique of liberalism. For him,
liberalism articulates a theory of the state that, in essence, is unpol-
itical because it denies the state real political (i.e. independent)
authority. It is worth observing that repoliticisation is Hegel’s
answer in both situations.
In this paragraph, the line between the idealisation of political
association and idolisation of the state’s political authority is thin
indeed. For more on this theme, see the general introduction to
this volume.
Later (pp. –) Hegel will discuss the transition that is being
impeded here in terms of the failure of the ‘feudal constitution’
to develop ‘into a political power’. Given all that he says, it is
surely an English-style ‘limited monarchy’ that he has in mind
here. For this reason, he can declare that it is not ‘feudalism
[per se] which has cut off the possibility of Germany becoming
a state’ (p. ).
Reichshofrat: see glossary.
See glossary.
This should in fact read ‘Ju¨lich-Cleve’, as Hegel himself correctly
describes it later: see p. .
A measure introduced in by the Emperor Maximilian I,
which ﬁnally took effect in the early sixteenth century.
There is a difference, then, between ‘politics’ and the ‘political’ in
Hegel’s thinking. That ‘politics’ exists in the Empire does not
mean that the Empire is actually a state in Hegel’s sense of the
term. Nor, he adds later, does the existence of ‘politics’ mean that
a transition has been made from feudal anarchy to the give-and-
take of constitutionalism.
Napoleon, in .
Here is where German freedom failed to become politically insti-
tutionalised in the Empire in the form of limited monarchy. Com-
pare Ferguson (: p. ).
The opening three paragraphs of this section appear to describe
the course of the Reformation in Germany. It is interesting that
Hegel co-ordinates, somewhat as had the Scottish historians W.
Robertson and J. Millar before him, the religious breakthrough of
Protestantism with economic and cultural developments. In each
case, the result is a kind of individualism that privileges parts
before wholes. Bu¨rgergeist suggests, in this context, a more private


Notes to pages –
than public focus for middle-class activity. Hegel here anticipates
his own argument in NL, in which he uses the French term bour-
geois to draw attention to privatising tendencies in the ancient and
modern world.
In Greek, the idea of being ‘untamed’ is the opposite of being
civilised. Here, Hegel uses the term as a synonym for barbarian.
On these grounds, Hegel sees Lutheranism as a depoliticising
agent. He hints at this in his early theological writings of the s,
and he is explicit about the connection in FK (). He continues
to hold this view until later in his life, when he begins to argue
that Lutheran subjectivism is an immature form of Protestantism.
Distinctions similar to the one Hegel draws between ‘community
of religion’ and ‘community of physical needs’ can be found
throughout Ferguson’s Essay (: e.g., pp. –).
Hegel’s concern with Protestantism’s fear of Catholicism has to be
interpreted as part of his disappointment with orthodox Lutheran-
ism’s failure to carry the Reformation far enough – into the world,
as it were. This failure, he reasons, gave rise to a stultifying alliance
between throne and altar in German history. For more on this
theme, see our discussion of the idea of a ‘second Reformation’ in
the general introduction.
Echoes of Locke’s view of the –upheaval in England can be
heard here. Indeed, it is the fact that society does not dissolve
when the state does that prompts Hegel to begin to allot concep-
tual space to civil society in his thinking.
This sentence anticipates Hegel’s attempt in Berlin to ﬁnd a place
for religious and political values in his concept of Sittlichkeit.
Namely Catholicism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism.
This happened in Wu¨rttemberg, Hegel’s homeland, in the eight-
eenth century.
The sequence discussed here is consistent with Hegel’s view of
how German freedom evolved into ‘representative’ governments
from the ‘old feudal constitutions’ of Europe, all of which were
founded on German freedom.
See note above.
Hegel describes Prussia as a ‘foreign power’ because the Prussian
dukedom was formerly not an estate of the Empire but a hereditary
ﬁefdom of Poland, which did not recognise Prussia’s independent
sovereignty until .
The context here shows that the relationship between wholes and
parts in Hegel’s political thinking is not simply a matter of his
being an anti-individual collectivist.


Notes to pages –
Here and at several places later in the essay (pp. –, –, ,
–) Hegel discusses the cosmopolitan/nationalism problem as
he understood it. His argument is that rights-based individualism
and cosmopolitanism are two sides of the same utopian political
coin. Like some twentieth-century critics of the Enlightenment,
he sees a dangerous ‘indeterminacy of rights’ (p. ) arising from
the interplay between the abstractionism of cosmopolitanism and
the subjectivism of individualism.
As King George I.
Prussia.
In the next six paragraphs Hegel outlines the process by which
German freedom became institutionalised in certain countries in
western Europe. Sadly, Hegel says, Germany never made the tran-
sition from the one form of German freedom to the other.
Obviously, Hegel means here to use ‘representative’ government
as the standard with which to measure the evolution of German
liberty.
The separation of the ‘individual’ from the ‘universal’ is an
important motif in NL (see pp. –). However, it is developed
there in a very different conceptual framework, one that has
aspects of Hegel’s later separation of civil society and the state
about it.
Private right in its ‘full force’ is licence, not liberty. Later Hegel
says that this is a lesson Europeans have learned from the French
Revolution.
Among the ancients, there was a close connection between phil-
anthropy and cosmopolitan thinking. As the next paragraph shows,
reason/interest of state is very much on Hegel’s mind here.
Cf. note above.
‘Blessed are the possessors!’
A league of Protestant states set up in the early sixteenth century.
The so-called Fu¨rstenbund, set up under Prussian auspices in ,
to oppose further extension of the Emperor Joseph II’s Austrian
power in German territories.
The reference is to Johannes von Mu¨ller, Darstellung des Fu¨rsten-
bundes (Leipzig, ).
In the next four paragraphs, Hegel uses the Peace of Westphalia
as a negative ideological backdrop against which he will develop
an argument about the wisdom inherent in Machiavelli’s theory of
‘reason of state’.
Pseudonym of Bogislaus Philipp von Chemnitz, author of De
ratione status in imperio nostro Romano-Germanico (Stettin, ).


Notes to pages –
The Emperor Ferdinand II.
Earlier (p. ) Hegel spoke of the degeneration of feudalism into
absolutism in France and particularism in Germany. He is re-
working that point here, implicitly contrasting the two extremes
with England’s more moderately middling course of constitutional
development.
Later in his life, Hegel will interpret Louis XIV’s move against
the Huguenots (i.e. French Calvinists) in as decisive for the
outbreak of revolution in France in .
Machiavelli is the statesman. Hegel will proceed to argue that
Machiavelli is not advocating tyranny so much as advancing a set
of ‘idealistic’ prescriptions (p. ) for how a prince might politi-
cally unite a people into a state.
The following translation of Hegel’s extract is taken from Machia-
velli, The Prince, ed. Quentin Skinner and Russell Price
(Cambridge, ), pp. –. Hegel himself cites a French trans-
lation of The Prince.
Theseus is discussed again at the end of the essay. The role
religion played in Theseus’ political achievement, testiﬁed to by
any number of ancient sources (e.g. Euripides, Supplices –),
was not lost on Hegel.
The Latin translates as: ‘necessary wars are just wars, and when
there is no other hope except in arms, they are holy’ (Livy, Book
, ).
The reference is to Frederick the Great and his treatise Anti-
Machiavel ().
Harris (: p. n ) and Oz-Salzberger (: p. ) discuss
the Cato reference.
I.e. Caesar.
I.e. Cesare Borgia (–), son of Pope Alexander VI, here
euphemistically described as his ‘uncle’, whose pontiﬁcate lasted
from to .
Pope from to .
Another reference to Frederick the Great.
The reference once more is to Frederick the Great and his treatise
Anti-Machiavel.
The Emperor Frederick I (Barbarossa; c. –).
In .
I.e. Bressanone, just over the Italian frontier south of Innsbruck.
Hegel is referring here to the status of the Free (or Imperial)
Knights as subject only to the Emperor; see also the glossary entry
Reichsunmittelbarkeit.


Notes to pages –
A body set up to demarcate the boundaries of French and Prussian
inﬂuence.
The date simply indicates that this is a later draft of the essay.
I.e. Prussia.
The word ευ χετο means ‘it boasted’.
There is a sense here that, as machine states, France and Prussia
make life comfortable for the middle class but demand quietism
from it.
The corpus evangelicorum was a Protestant organisation within the
Imperial Diet that regulated relations between princes and subjects
on religio-political matters.
Such Reversalien – religious guarantees usually arranged by the
corpus evangelicorum – would have been familiar to Hegel from a
famous episode in in Wu¨rttemberg.
The paragraph refers to the religious situation in Prussia in the
s. See H. B. Nisbet () for a discussion of the context.
Hegel will endeavour for the rest of his life to bring a ‘third pos-
sibility’ of freedom into existence.
Hegel’s use of the phrase ‘general will’ in the context of an argu-
ment about participation in government through representative
political institutions is revealing when read in the light of Rous-
seau’s understanding of the general will, one of his most famous
political concepts. Hegel appears to want, so to speak, to harness
some of Rousseau’s political radicalism here.
The paragraph should be read in the light of Hegel’s pre-
vious discussion (p. ) and subsequent discussion (p. ) of
the right of citizens to ‘share’ in government through represent-
ation.
Given what Hegel had said earlier in the essay about the dissol-
ution of the state not entailing a corresponding dissolution of
society, this statement should not be interpreted as referring so
much to German society as to the German empire qua political
institution.
This paragraph is interesting because of the way Hegel locates the
impulse towards patriotism in ‘human nature’. Throughout his
life, he insisted on grounding political matters in human nature in
order to be able to derive the ‘real’ from the ‘rational’ side of
human nature as it develops in individuals, societies, and history.
The active principle arises here, Hegel says, from a will that seeks
fulﬁlment in co-operation and sharing. This is parallel to the
ancient Greek view of man as zoon koinonikon – of man as a shar-
ing/co-operating/communicating/communal being. In NL (pp.


Notes to pages –
–and n ), written about the same time, Hegel favour-
ably quotes a passage from Aristotle in which the concept of the
zoon koinonikon is the measure of man and of community.
Regarding Hegel’s commitment to the idea that citizens should be
allowed to share in government, see notes and above. It is
not an accident that, among Greek thinkers, the gathering of scat-
tered groups into co-operative associations, in which human beings
shared a life in common, constituted a key moment in the civilising
process.
That is, cities which withdrew from the Imperial union could no
longer be required to pay compensation to the latter for failure to
fulﬁl their obligations to it.
Hegel’s reservations in the s about liberal efforts radically to
decentralise political authority in Germany also follow from this.
The differences in early nineteenth-century Germany between
centralising and de-centralising liberals likewise come into play
here.
As to who this conqueror might be see Harris (: pp. –)
and Knox (KP: p. n ). As both note, the reference is probably
not to Napoleon.
On Theseus, who gathered the scattered Greeks together, see
notes , , and above.
Echoes of the Greek antithesis between koinonia (here ‘common
social intercourse’) and idiota (here the madness of individuals
living in ‘isolation’ from their fellows) pervade this paragraph. (In
FK (p. ), written about the time that GC was composed, Hegel
actually uses the Greek word idiota to express a similar idea.) The
idea of murderous madness, moreover, recalls the kind of mania
that the Greeks thought led to hubris or to acts of criminal trans-
gression that destroy community in a nation. The antithesis
between koinonia and idiota parallels the one Hegel will later draw
between Sittlichkeit and atomism.
In the early theological writings (Hegel : pp. ff), Hegel
discusses the theme of Jewish particularity at great length.
This sentence would seem to refer to the French Revolution.
On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law, on its Place in
Practical Philosophy, and its Relation to the Positive Sciences of
Right
NL was published in Hegel’s and Schelling’s Critical Journal of
Philosophy (henceforth CJ) in two parts between December 


Notes to pages –
and May . At the time, Hegel was an unknown thinker who,
before assuming a teaching position at the University of Jena in
, had not actually written, let alone published, anything philo-
sophical. By contrast, Schelling, Hegel’s old friend from his uni-
versity days at Tu¨bingen, had already won acclaim as a philos-
opher. Given their respective reputations, Hegel was perceived as
the junior editor of CJ. Despite the difference in their achieve-
ments, they shared a common religious vision at this time. In fact,
as H. S. Harris has observed (: pp. –), CJ was established
to disseminate that vision. For both thinkers, the vision included
developing a new religio-philosophical theory of Sittlichkeit. For a
detailed account of CJ as a philosophical enterprise, see Harris
().
The opening sentence is really a declaration. As will become evi-
dent in the essay, Hegel wishes to keep natural law within the
domain of philosophy while, at the same time, giving philosophy
a method that separates it from methodologies used in the natural
sciences. Overall, his intention is to develop a philosophical frame-
work for natural law in which the natural rights of individuals
are de-emphasised in favour of the universal interest of society.
Hyppolite (: p. ) calls this an ‘organic’ conception of rights
and (mistakenly, in our opinion) traces it to Romanticism.
Since at least , Hegel had viewed the concept of ‘understand-
ing’ with suspicion. Shortly before publishing NL, he conﬁrmed
that suspicion again in FK, which was also published in CJ in
. In both of the essays, his point is that a philosophical science
founded on understanding will never yield more than subjective
ways of thinking.
Hegel’s note refers to J. G. Fichte’s Grundlage des Naturrechts nach
Prinzipien des Wissenschaftslehre (/), which can be found in
Fichte’s Werke, vol. /(Stuttgart, ). For our purposes, the
most relevant sections are –, pp. –. This work has been
translated into English as The Science of Rights (henceforth SR).
In FK it is made clear that ‘critical philosophy’ signiﬁes a philos-
ophy of understanding which is Kantian in nature.
It is, of course, Hegel’s task to restore ‘these sciences to philos-
ophy’. This will eventually involve moving the science of natural
law from its Kantian base in Moralita¨t to Hegelian Sittlichkeit.
The point of this complicated passage is to establish two successive
foci for the study of natural law. Although both approaches to
natural law are grounded in necessity, each operates in its own
realm – in the empirical and the universal, respectively. The key,


Notes to pages –
however, is to realise that the two realms derive from the same
subject – from the particular and universal aspects of human
nature. Hegel’s challenge in this essay is to redeﬁne natural law so
that the focus of natural-law thinking shifts from particularity to
universality.
The reference to ‘relations’, and in the preceding sentence to the
‘science’ of such relations, allows Hegel to locate self-regarding
and other-regarding drives in one and the same individual. As a
result, love of self and love of others need not be formulated in
terms of an opposition between the individual and society. A spec-
tacular discussion of this theme can be found in Georg Simmel
(: pp. –).
Implicit in this paragraph is Hegel’s life-long commitment to the
separation of Moralita¨t and Sittlichkeit as philosophical ways of
viewing man’s relationship to the world, and especially to his fel-
lows. He associates the former with the ‘science of right’ and faults
it for its inability to establish a ‘positive’ basis for the organisation
of communal life. The word ‘positive’ here should not, however,
be confused with the critique of ‘positivity’ that Hegel develops in
many of his other writings.
The section numbers follow those in Werke. They are not in the
original text.
Throughout this essay, Hegel associates the ‘ﬁxing of determina-
cies’ with a science of society that organises social wholes around
aggregations of individual entities (e.g. atoms or individuals).
Against those who claim that such aggregations constitute unity in
multiplicity, Hegel contends that the unity achieved by aggre-
gation is a ﬁction. Later in this paragraph, when he says ‘the
organic is broken up by empirical or imperfectly reﬂected
intuition’, he is reiterating a point he had made in FK about how
Lockean empiricism and Kantian philosophy have contributed
equally to the ascendancy of subjectivism in modern culture.
Here and later in the essay, Hegel implies that, despite its declared
hostility to empiricism, critical philosophy develops a view of
knowledge that in the ﬁnal analysis is quite similar to what it
condemns.
Empirical knowledge is inadequate here because it operates with
a false concept of inﬁnity. That is, it cannot unite ‘unconnected
determinacies’ because it privileges each determinacy itself rather
than the ‘original unity’ to which each determinacy belonged
before it was analytically separated from the whole. This gives rise
to what Hegel, perhaps following Schelling (: pp. –), calls


Notes to pages –
an ‘atomistic’ social system (FK, p. ). As early as (GW,
vol. , p. ), Hegel depicts Fichte as a philosopher of atomism.
Compare Hegel’s discussion here of formalism in philosophy with
the way in which he discusses formalism in political thinking in
GC (p. above).
Just as atomism cannot explain the power of gravity in the physical
world, so empiricism and critical philosophy cannot explain the
need for community in the ethical world. If we substitute the word
‘anarchy’ for ‘chaos’ in this passage, it is easy to predict what
social and political consequences will follow. Hegel deﬁnes these
consequences in the next paragraph. In his Berlin period, atomism
in fact becomes for him a deﬁning feature of civil society.
The ‘chaotic image of the necessary’, which can only ‘contain’
multiplicity but not transform it, becomes the organisational prin-
ciple of civil society in Hegel’s later writings.
This marks the point at which Hegel makes metaphysics essential
to his emerging conception of the state.
An example of what Hegel is referring to here would be the
relation between private property on the one hand and the right
to private property guaranteed by law on the other. Both recognise
what is empirical, but each does so from its own separate sphere –
respectively, from the political domain of the law and the economic
domain of property. Later in the essay, Hegel will organise his
discussion of the bourgeoisie as a social class around this
intersection.
‘Inner necessity for one another’ is what Hegel ﬁnds lacking in
civil society as a form of human association. It yields only ‘negative
unity’. Sittlichkeit, by contrast, is a form of association that recog-
nises and subsequently grows out of that inner necessity. It is not
just something that is ‘added on’ to multiplicity, as he points out
later in the paragraph.
Hobbes is no doubt alluded to here.
Some scholars detect a reference to Napoleon here.
When ‘ﬁxed as particular essences’, the ‘fragmented moments of
organic ethical life’ correspond to what Hegel will later deﬁne as
the essence of civil society.
The relation Hegel sketches here between ‘ethical life’ (Sittlichkeit)
and ‘ethical nature’ (sittliche Natur) reveals how he grounded
Sittlichkeit in the idea of a subject who has other-regarding as well
as self-regarding dispositions. Similarly, in the next sentence, he
separates ‘the natural’ from the ethical in order to avoid having to
argue that human beings are ‘by nature’ what they ought to be.


Notes to pages –
For elaboration of the latter point, see note to PH (p. 
below).
The phrase ‘non-subjugated oneness’ clearly shows that Hegel is
not an anti-individual collectivist.
What is ‘nulliﬁed’ (vernichtet) is not so much intuition per se as the
intuition human beings have of their need to belong to a whole in
order to be truly human. That becomes clear in the next few sen-
tences, when Hegel derives the ethical architectonic from ‘intuition
[which] remains true to itself ’.
Understanding confuses intuition by orienting individuals to Mo-
ralita¨t rather than Sittlichkeit.
Hegel seems to be equating intuition with ‘rational spirit’ here.
The fact that he also says that this spirit is ‘invisible’ (i.e. latent)
may relate to what Schiller (: p. ) says about ‘invisible
Sittlichkeit’. Later (p. ), Hegel will identify intuition with ‘ethi-
cal reason’ (sittliche Vernunft) – which is why his concept of
Sittlichkeit is sometimes referred to as ‘social Geist’.
In the remainder of this paragraph, Hegel not only develops the
opposition in philosophy between empiricism and formalism but
also relates the latter to political tendencies which grew out of the
French Revolution.
In the last two sentences, Hegel’s criticism of metaphysical politics
aims less at demystifying metaphysics than at ensuring that philos-
ophy applies the right kind of metaphysics to politics.
In some sense, Hegel means to use the idea of the becoming of the
individual to get beyond ‘the being of the individual’, whether that
individual
is
conceptualised
in
terms
of
happiness
(Glu¨ckseligkeitslehre) or Kant’s more high-minded conception of
Moralita¨t. (For more on Hegel’s view of happiness, see note 
below.) Obviously, in this paragraph, Hegel means to associate the
natural self with being and the spiritual self with becoming.
The reference to an ‘absolute point of indifference’ needs to be
read in terms of Schiller’s and Schelling’s earlier discussions of
this matter. On this theme, see Dickey (: pp. –).
The last few sentences seek to say that multiplicity is primary to
physical nature and unity primary to ethical nature. This allows
Hegel to oppose the two aspects of nature to each other in the
same way as he would later oppose atomism to Sittlichkeit and civil
society to the state.
Later in the essay (pp. –), Hegel will advance his famous
distinction between Moralita¨t and Sittlichkeit. This paragraph
needs to be read in anticipation of that distinction. It is also


Notes to pages –
important to realise that in this paragraph, Hegel does not use the
term Moralita¨t, but he does identify a certain kind of Sittlichkeit
as Unsittlichkeit. Translating Unsittlichkeit as ‘immorality’ captures
very well what Hegel means when he later substitutes Moralita¨t
for what is here identiﬁed as Unsittlichkeit.
See Kant, CPR, pp. –(A –). (Our translation differs
slightly from the Norman Kemp Smith translation.)
In writings from the years –, Hegel will use this line of
argument to explain why France had been prone to political revol-
utions since .
See Kant, CPrR, p. (Book I, Chapter I, section ). (Our trans-
lation differs slightly from Lewis White Beck’s translation.)
What results for Hegel from this privileging of the private is what
Friedrich Schlegel (: p. ) called a ‘polemical totality’ in
which everyone talks but no one listens.
See Kant, CPrR, pp. –(Book I, Chapter I, section and
Remark).
Hyppolite (: p. ) discusses the Kantian background of the
‘deposit’ argument. Kant puts forward the argument in the mater-
ial cited in note above.
‘Eudaemonism’ translates the German Glu¨ckseligkeitslehre, i.e. that
system of ethics which makes happiness the criterion of rectitude.
It is not insigniﬁcant that in , J. H. G. von Justi suggested
that the machine state would maximise the happiness of citizens.
See GG, entry on ‘Staat’, p. , for particular details. Parry ()
also discusses this theme.
Accordingly, as Hegel will later argue in PR, the law of property
serves the particular interests of civil society rather than the uni-
versal interest of the state. As such, law and property work
together to preserve and sanction an ‘empirical multiplicity’ – an
aggregation – that cannot transform itself into unity.
Again, as in notes to above, Hegel derives the principle of
Sittlichkeit from the disposition towards unity in intuition.
In this sentence, we see Hegel discussing subjectivity in terms of
self-regarding and other-regarding tendencies.
One of the most important statements in PR is that in which Hegel
refuses to allow political participation to be ‘optional’ (Hegel
a: p. ). This sentence in NL goes far to explain both why
he said this and why he is not a political pluralist.
In other words, Hegel wishes to separate the disposition towards
rights-based individualism from the science of ethics and, by so
doing, to make Sittlichkeit the measure of natural law.


Notes to pages –
Here, Hegel re-afﬁrms the link between Moralita¨t and subjectivity
that he had discussed in such detail in FK.
The reference is to the opening sentence of section of Fichte’s
SR, p. (German edn as in note above). Fichte develops the
idea of a machine state in this section. H. B. Acton (: pp. –
) provides a good discussion of Hegel’s view of Fichte as it
emerges in NL.
There are hints in some of Hegel’s early political writings (e.g.
GC, pp. , , –, , –above) that he is trying to explain
the violence of the French Revolution by means of the argument
on ‘coercion’ which he is developing here. In the next two para-
graphs, in which he discusses Fichte, he runs together the argu-
ments concerning ‘coercion’ and ‘mechanical’ systems of govern-
ment, just as he had in GC. As in note above, he has Fichte in
mind – speciﬁcally the latter’s so-called ‘law of compulsion’.
Implicit in what follows is a critique of mixed government. Com-
pare this with the positive things Hegel had said in GC about the
Gothic polity as a mixed form of government.
A formula similar to this can be found in Schiller (: p. ).
In GC, Hegel represents the general will as a power in need of
representation rather than as a power with absolute authority.
The reference is to Fichte’s discussion of the ephorate in SR,
section , pp. –, esp. pp. ff. Also compare Hegel’s last
sentence with two statements of Friedrich Schlegel around 
(: pp. –): () ‘Without opinion publique, no volonte´ ge´ne´r-
ale; and no opinion publique without the ephorate of intellectuals
and propaganda of reason’; and () ‘There is no republic without
an ephorate and only the spiritual class can execute this.’ That
Fichte’s ephorate may be an agent of public opinion has been
noted by scholars. For a nuanced discussion of Fichte and the
ephorate, see A. La Vopa (), especially p. .
Hegel’s critique of Fichte here is parallel to his critique of the
French Revolution.
With the phrase ‘remote from public life’, Hegel may be thinking
of the Greek deﬁnition of the demagogue. For what the Greeks
said about the latter, Hegel says about public opinion as an ‘irres-
ponsible’ political power.
The last two sentences disprove the charge (e.g. in Barker :
p. xvii) that Hegel’s political philosophy aims to engulf individuals.
Hyppolite (: pp. –, ) regards this as a decisive point in
this text, the point where Hegel begins to ground the absolute in
the ethical life of a people. At this time, Hyppolite also notes (pp.


Notes to pages –
, n ), Hegel had not yet distinguished absolute spirit from
‘ethical totality’.
As he had done in GC, Hegel criticises cosmopolitanism here. The
reference to perpetual peace may indicate that he has Kant, and
his essay Perpetual Peace (), in mind.
As scholars now fully appreciate, Hegel’s willingness to consider
the interplay between ethical and economic tendencies in the
modern world sets him off from other German thinkers of his age.
In what follows, he begins to allow political economy to shape the
discussion of Sittlichkeit. One of the results of this will be his
recognition and construction of a ‘system of reality’ (i.e. a ‘system
of needs’) that is organised in terms of negative unity. He will later
assimilate this system to his conception of civil society.
Hegel later uses his understanding of this ‘system of universal
mutual dependence’ to express the ‘semblance’ of social unity that
liberals see in civil society. In his opinion, this semblance simply
masks the atomism of a market society, and the blindness of lib-
erals to this circumstance is one reason why he is himself
anti-liberal.
The last three sentences contain Hegel’s critique of civil society,
in so far as civil society is understood as a realm of civil liberty
and socio-economic inequality.
What Hegel means by the formally absolute becoming a ‘living
particularity’ is what Habermas (: p. ) seeks to evoke
through his idea of ‘civil privatism’.
This sentence shows that, for Hegel, political economy, after con-
stituting itself as a system of social reality, inhibits the develop-
ment of Sittlichkeit by conﬁning ethics to a sphere of life domi-
nated by economics.
Hegel appeals to Plato here (Statesman, a–c) in order to under-
pin his own criticism of formalism. Plato’s original Greek is to be
found in GW, vol. , p. ; the translation is by H. N. Fowler
in Plato, The Statesman, Loeb Classical Library (London, ),
pp. –.
A critique of what, in the twentieth century, becomes modern
pluralism is evident in this sentence.
This recalls Hegel’s contention on p. above that political econ-
omy forms a system of reality which operates independently of the
state and which is opposed to ‘the goal of ethical perfection’.
As Hegel proceeds to argue, organic stands to inorganic as Sittlich-
keit stands to Moralita¨t.
Ultimately, civil society will constitute the ‘inorganic nature of the
ethical’.


Notes to pages –
An excellent example of Hegel’s conception of subjectivity as both
other-regarding and self-regarding.
In other words, self-regarding subjectivity must be contained. Pol-
itical economy, however, naturally increases subjectivity. Thus, its
expansive powers must be contained too.
The passages referred to in Aristotle (Politics, b –) and
Plato (Republic, b and a–a) discuss qualities of political
leadership that lead to justice and promotion of the common good.
GW, vol. , p. reproduces the Greek originals.
Plato (Statesman, e–a); again, the topic is political leader-
ship. The translation is by Fowler (see note above), p. .
Aristotle (Politics, a, ff); the theme discussed by Aristotle is
the implication for political leadership of relations between masters
and slaves.
At this point, Hegel begins a criticism of Rome that focuses on
the depoliticisation of Roman public life. This marks a decisive
moment in his development as a political thinker, because he also
begins here to discuss the decline of the public life of the polis in
terms of the emergence of a form of individualism that he relates
to issues of economic enjoyment and personal security. As will
become obvious later in the essay, Gibbon’s notion of the increas-
ingly ‘privatised’ life of Roman citizens helped him to make this
initial connection. But it is crucial to realise that, when he intro-
duces the word bourgeois (p. ) to characterise this privatised
type of life, he is adding an economic dimension to the argument
concerning privatisation, one that dovetailed with the view of
Christianity as a ‘private religion’ which he had developed in his
early theological writings. (In addition to Gibbon, Hegel’s reading
of Scottish works on political economy is also relevant here.) The
point to grasp, then, is that, here and in the following pages, Hegel
posits a connection between two long-term processes of historical
development: () the depoliticisation of the idea of citizenship in
the ancient world; and () the privatisation of life that Hegel (and
Gibbon, according to J. Pocock ()) sees as anticipating devel-
opments in the modern world. In other words, Hegel here begins
to address on a philosophical level the famous argument about
ancient and modern liberty.
It is important to remember that, when the ‘second’ class becomes
‘the people’, the people in question are constituted more by their
economic than by their political interests. That is why Hegel
quotes Gibbon on private life, and why he later uses the French
term bourgeois (p. ) to express what he is talking about.


Notes to pages –
Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ed. J. B.
Bury (London ), vol. , pp. –. Gibbon is discussing what
he calls (just before the passage which Hegel quotes) ‘the latent
causes of [Roman] decline and corruption’.
In this sentence, we see Hegel identifying Roman law as the
source of the kind of rights-based individualism he associates
with self-regarding subjectivity and social and political atomism.
In his later discussions of the French Revolution (e.g. in PH,
pp. ), he projects the abstractionism inherent in Roman law
forward in time and uses it to explain tendencies in French
thinking (i.e. Natural Law theory during the Enlightenment)
and French politics (i.e. the French Revolution). In the s,
he will also associate these tendencies with Catholic philosophi-
cal and political thinking.
The quotations from Plato are from his Republic, c–e and
e–b. Hegel’s rendering of the Greek into German is rather
free: for example, he slips the word sittlich (‘ethical’) in (‘provided
that God grants them the blessing of a truly ethical constitution’)
where there is no linguistic justiﬁcation for it (the Greek refers to
the preservative – perhaps redemptive – character of law or nomos).
Our English translation is accordingly based directly on Hegel’s
German, not on Plato’s Greek. For comparison, the following is a
modern English translation of the phrase in question by a classical
scholar (B. Jowett, The Dialogues of Plato (New York, ), vol.
, p. ): ‘if God will only preserve to them the laws which we
have given them’.
In this sentence, Hegel means to contrast private life and public
life. But, because private life has a semblance of universality about
it, it appears to be ‘social’ too. Again, Habermas’s idea of ‘civil
privatism’ is relevant here (cf. note above). In the next two
sentences, Hegel will identify this system of privatised life as
bourgeois.
Hegel had discussed the idea of ‘political nullity’ in GC (pp. –
above). There and here, his concern is that privatisation entails
depoliticisation. Obviously, he wishes to reverse that process, or at
least to contain it. During the rest of his life, he will suggest a
number of ways of repoliticising citizens – that is, of turning the
burgher as bourgeois into the burgher as citoyen.
Facing up to the ‘right of the inorganic’ – say, to the necessity of
political economy – consequently does not entail eliminating it.
The relationship between Hegel’s conception of tragedy and his
view of Sittlichkeit has often been discussed by scholars (e.g. by


Notes to pages –
A. C. Bradley (: pp. ff). In what follows, he moves from
language associated with Greek tragedy to language associated with
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Aeschylus was the author of The Eumenides, the third play in the
trilogy known as the Oresteia. C. Meier (: pp. ff) has ably
discussed the political dimensions of this tragedy. Harris (: p.
) relates the political meaning of the Oresteia directly to Aris-
totle. Hyppolite (: pp. –) and Cassirer (: p. ) relate
the tragic motif directly to Hegel’s political thinking. Hyppolite
correctly argues that much of what passes for ‘dialectic’ in Hegel’s
thought is a reﬂection of his ‘pantragic’ vision of world history.
Hyppolite (: p. n ) argues that comedy represents de-
politicised Greek thinking. In the next paragraph, Hegel hints at
something similar. Harris (: p. ) relates the comedy motif
to depoliticised Protestantism.
Hegel discusses Dante in GW, vol. , pp. ff. See Harris (:
pp. ff) for comments on his view of Dante.
A reference to Plato (Statesman, a). Plato is discussing the fail-
ure of political leaders to grasp the science of politics.
Hegel seems to be arguing here that a proliferation of cultural
forms at one historical moment signals an impending dissolution
of the political order.
Throughout the s, Hegel had developed the idea of ‘fate’ as a
way of explaining continuity and change in history.
According to the editors of GW, vol. , p. , the passage in
question is to be found in the second canto of Klopstock’s Messiah;
in our opinion, the resemblance is not sufﬁciently close to warrant
the attribution to Klopstock.
Clearly, in this sentence, Hegel links different kinds of conscious-
ness with different types of character.
Plato, Phaedrus, c–d. Plato is discussing the mortal and immor-
tal aspects of the soul. The reference to a gemeinschaftlichen God
at the end of the preceding paragraph should be read in conjunc-
tion with the information in note below.
According to Knox (: p. n), Hegel derives the aether
reference from Schelling’s philosophy of nature.
Knox (: p. n) sees a possible allusion here to either Aris-
totle or Plato.
The idea that spirit is higher than nature is a main theme of the
lectures on the philosophy of history which Hegel delivered in
Berlin between and .
The ﬁrst instalment of NL ends here. The remainder of the essay
appeared in the next issue of CJ (vols. , , ).


Notes to page 
The opening sentence sets up the distinction, soon to be discussed
more fully, between Moralita¨t and Sittlichkeit.
A cautionary note is needed here, because Hegel does not reduce
Sittlichkeit to the simple matter of abiding by laws that are tra-
ditional and/or in accordance with custom (Sitte). In this respect,
his view seems to be similar to that of Aristotle. See, for example,
E. R. Goodenough (: p. ) and Leo Strauss (: p. ).
By ‘allegiance’, Hegel simply means that placing the private advan-
tage of the individual before the common good will make it difﬁ-
cult for philosophers of Moralita¨t ever to talk coherently about the
‘ethical life of everyone’.
As was noted above (note ), Hyppolite makes much of Hegel’s
grounding of Sittlichkeit in ‘the spirit of a people’.
Aristotle (Politics, a –). Hegel’s rendering into German of
Aristotle’s Greek raises fundamental questions about how we
should interpret his own social and political theory. To begin with,
he uses the German Volk for the Greek polis. That in itself could
be interpreted as a depoliticisation of Aristotle’s language, for Aris-
totle (Politics b) is clearly discussing the polis as the ‘ﬁnal
and perfect’ partnership/association (koinonia) in which citizens
pursue the ‘good life’ as distinct from ‘mere life’. At a ,
Aristotle links pursuit of the good life both to ‘political partner-
ship/association’ (politike koinonia) and to a disposition within
individuals that requires membership in such an association. Hegel
also uses the German phrase wer . . . nicht gemeinschaftlich sein kann
(literally ‘who cannot belong to a community’) to translate a phrase
in which koinonein (to share) is the key word. Modern translations
of Aristotle’s Greek differ signiﬁcantly here: ‘unable to share in
the blessings of political association’ (Barker); unable to ‘enter into
partnership’ (Rackham); or ‘unable to live in society’ (Jowett).
With regard to Hegel’s translation, the problem is twofold: ()
does gemeinschaftlich refer to a political partnership/association, or
to a social and/or communal partnership/association that lacks
a political dimension but in any case fulﬁls the human need for
association; or () does it refer to a communal ideal whose political
and/or social content Hegel deliberately leaves open? And how do
we ourselves translate Aristotle’s koinonia and (in its verb form)
koinonein? For example, we confuse social and political spheres if
we render koinonia at a as ‘social’ (as Jowett does), because
that translation tends to make the political just one form of associ-
ation among many equal forms of non-political partnership/associ-
ation. This results in a depoliticisation of Hegel’s language and


Notes to pages –
makes it seem as if he were a pluralist – which he is not. Similarly,
to read political content into koinonein where Aristotle’s Greek is
indeterminate obscures the fact that Aristotle often (e.g. Ethics
b –) used koinonein to express the idea of spiritual com-
munion among human beings. Obviously, no single translation of
Hegel’s rendering of Aristotle can fully capture all the possible
meanings. In the passage which Hegel quotes, however, Aristotle is
clearly discussing membership in the polis and trying to distinguish
political membership from membership of other kinds of associ-
ation. There is, therefore, a political dimension in this passage.
Barker’s translation captures it, whereas the other two do not.
Hegel’s German needs to be read in this light. In view of these
translation problems, the English version supplied in the text is
based directly on his German version.
The last two sentences make it perfectly clear that Hegel thinks
the doctrine of Moralita¨t stands the ethical world upside down.
Conversely, Sittlichkeit stands the world rightside up. Accordingly,
Hegel associates Sittlichkeit with his reﬁgured conception of natu-
ral law. This allows him to reserve the term Moralita¨t for the kind
of rights-based individualism that had begun to emerge in Germ-
any in the late eighteenth century (see Klippel ).
Because Moralita¨t is the Sittlichkeit of the bourgeoisie, it is an agent
of depoliticisation, too. As such, it cannot be ‘truly ethical’ in
Hegel’s judgement.
In this paragraph, Hegel begins to alter his perspective on the
relationship between citizen and bourgeois. Previously, the latter
had arisen as the privatisation process undermined the ‘ethical life’
of the polis. Here, however, Hegel begins to view the private life
of the bourgeoisie as simply lacking in Sittlichkeit rather than as
something unalterably opposed to Sittlichkeit. In this respect, the
bourgeois qua ‘child’ is potentially an ‘ethical individual’. It follows
that the mark of a mature individual is ultimately the ability to
share in the ethical life of the community.
The reference to ‘a Pythagorean’ is to Diogenes Laertius, Book
VIII, I. . See GW, vol. , p. n.
This sentence is a good example of Hegel’s commitment to ethical
holism. ‘Common being’ here translates the German gemeinsamen
Sein.
In the opening sentences of the paragraph, Hegel seems to draw
a distinction between, on the one hand, custom qua unreﬂective
obedience to what has been, and, on the other hand, living custom
which is brought into line with an ever-changing reality through
thinking. Cf. note above.


Notes to pages –
It is noteworthy that, in the s, Hegel went on to present
Sittlichkeit as the active expression of a religious cultus.
So, instead of a struggle for hegemony between self- and other-
regarding tendencies in natural law, Hegel separates the former, in
the form of Moralita¨t, from the science of natural law altogether.
In this formulation, natural law becomes an agent of the other-
regarding disposition in human nature.
In other words, while Hegel does not deny that natural law derives
from subjectivity, he does derive what he means by natural law
from a potential within subjectivity that points towards ethical life
rather than towards atomism.
Here Hegel dissolves intuition into self- and other-regarding tend-
encies. In several of the texts translated below (e.g. PH), ‘immedi-
ate intuition’ will take the form of feeling and ‘intuition raised to
an intellectual level’ will take the form of thinking. Both forms of
intuition are rooted in subjectivity, but the latter has an other- as
well as a self-regarding orientation.
The encroachment argument anticipates Hegel’s growing concern
with the possibility and political consequences of civil society
invading the state. Especially worrisome to him is what conse-
quences an economic encroachment upon ethics will have for
communal life.
What Hegel says here about Fichte parallels the argument in GC
(pp. and –notes –above) about the despotic tendencies
in the ‘machine state’. The mention of a ‘perfect police-force’ indi-
cates that Hegel may be referring to Fichte’s SR (section , pp.
–), where Fichte proposes to use the law to police the ‘inten-
tions’ as well as the actions of citizens.
If there is any basis for what scholars call ‘middle Hegelianism’
(Ottmann ), it is enunciated here, for Hegel clearly aims to
situate his philosophy of Sittlichkeit between despotism on the one
hand and the anarchy of moral subjectivism on the other. In this
respect, his earlier reference to The Eumenides (p. above) might
be read in the light of Aeschylus’s statement (lines –):
Neither a life of anarchy nor a life under a despot should you
praise. To all that lies in the middle has a god given excellence.
We follow Hugh Lloyd-Jones’s translation of the Oresteia
(Berkeley, CA, ), p. . In Isocrates (Panegyricus ), Athens
is the earthly embodiment of this middle way. Theseus, the Greek
leader invoked at the end of GC, also ﬁgures in Isocrates’ account.
Hegel’s holism is again evident, as is the outline of the future
distinction between civil society and the state. As he says later in


Notes to pages –
the paragraph, philosophy must ‘honour [the] necessity’ of par-
ticularity as well as striving for universality.
In the last two sentences, Hegel explains how individuality qua
Einzelheit is transformed into ‘ethical individuality’ (sittliche
Individualita¨t). Both are subjective conditions, but the latter is ani-
mated by what he variously calls ‘ethical intuition’, ‘ethical con-
sciousness’, ‘ethical nature’, and ‘ethical reason’.
The reference to the ‘world spirit’ (Weltgeist) moving through
history needs to be read in anticipation of arguments which
Hegel later makes about Germany becoming the custodian of
philosophy and the agent of Sittlichkeit in Europe (See BIA,
pp. –).
There is an anticipation of Hegel’s discussion of the master–slave
relationship in the Phenomenology here (Hegel : pp. ff).
‘Living individuality’, which is not the same as ‘living particu-
larity’ (p. above), recognises the embeddedness of individuals
in society and of nations in history. It is not an accident that Hegel
cites Montesquieu in this paragraph, for it was Montesquieu –
followed by Herder – who popularised the idea of historical
embeddedness in eighteenth-century Germany.
The foregoing paragraph elaborates themes alluded to in note 
above. For Hegel, it comes down to a question of how to decide
between what is living and what is dead in the customs of a
culture.
That the ‘dissolution’ of Germany should be on Hegel’s mind at
this time is not surprising, for he was working on GC as late as
, the year in which NL began to appear in CJ.
As in all of his political writings of –, Hegel condemns
empty (i.e. abstract) freedom as political escapism.
As in GC (p. n above), Hegel is critical here of cosmopoli-
tanism and rights-based individualism.
Hegel’s language here is revealing. For by identifying the ‘abstrac-
tions and formal constructions’ as ‘protestant and revolutionary’,
and by opposing ‘ethical vitality’ (sittliche Lebendigkeit) to both, he
indicates that, for him, Sittlichkeit is an alternative to religious as
well as political forms of abstract subjectivism. In FK, he had
posited a similar connection between ‘reﬂective philosophy’ (i.e.
Kantianism) and Protestant subjectivism. In that essay, he also
associated reﬂective philosophy with the atomistic organisation of
society. Here, he begins to absorb the French Revolution into his
emerging understanding of how atomism unfolded as a historical
force in European history. By the time he published the Phenomen-


Notes to pages –
ology in , an ideological connection existed in his mind
between Protestantism (religion), the Enlightenment (philosophy),
and the French Revolution (politics). Between and ,
these three historical moments become the basis of his philosophy
of modern history (see pp. –).
Inaugural Address, Delivered at the University of Berlin
As was customary for new faculty members, Hegel delivered an
inaugural address upon arriving in Berlin in . By many
accounts, this speech reveals on a micro-historical level a philo-
sophical attempt to fuse universalistic German cultural values with
the Prussian state (see Meinecke : pp. –, –, and
ff; cf. Haym : pp. –).
See W. Jaeschke and K. Meist (: pp. –) on the political
tensions surrounding Hegel’s appointment.
For many years, Hegel had sought a ‘wider’ audience for his phil-
osophy. In , before his return to university teaching at Heidel-
berg, he remarked upon this in a letter to a friend (Hegel b:
p. ). In , in HIA, he publicly announced his commitment
to help extend ‘the higher interest of science’ to a wider audience.
Freiherr K. S. von Altenstein, who oversaw (but did not initiate)
the hiring of Hegel for the University of Berlin, saw Hegel’s task
in identical terms (see Altenstein in Hegel b: pp. , ,
). Just as publicly, Hegel’s PWE commends Germany’s young
people for the public spirit they had shown in the recent Wars of
Liberation (Hegel : pp. –). Hegel insists in PWE that
the ‘independence’ which German youth had helped Germany to
win during the war of –entitled it to participate ‘in the
political life of the state’. He also says there that a ‘rational’ politi-
cal system requires the participation of the citizens, but he is care-
ful to distinguish his own view of ‘rationality’ from the atomistic
one that allegedly governed political behaviour in France.
The reference to the dismal status of philosophy in the rest of
Europe as well as in Germany echoes HIA. Prior to arriving in
Berlin, Hegel consistently pointed to the popularity of Fries’s shal-
low philosophising as proof of the precarious condition of German
philosophy.
In this sentence, Hegel refers to the upheavals of the wars that
had disrupted Europe since . It is important to note that
his remark about ‘the inner life of spirit’ is not meant to counten-
ance, as Arnold Ruge (–) insinuated in the early s, a


Notes to pages –
Protestant retreat from political life into Mandarinism (Ruge :
pp. and ff). Rather, Hegel recommends ‘turning inwards’
so that mature (i.e. ‘free’) reﬂection on how to bring ‘actuality’
into line with rationality (i.e. ‘insight and thought’) can begin.
Insight is not, as Ruge mistakenly insinuates, a substitute for pol-
itical action for Hegel (: p. ). Rather, insight is the point
of departure for instilling rationality into the political process. The
phrase which Hegel uses to describe this process in HIA is more
apt: spirit turns inward in order to ‘collect itself ’ before moving
outwards again.
Hegel means to set ‘insight and thought’ off against ‘feeling’ here.
For years, this had been his position and he always associated
feeling with subjectivism both in philosophy (e.g. with Fries) and
in religion (with Schleiermacher).
The state in question, obviously, is Prussia. The reference to its
‘spiritual supremacy’ acknowledges Prussia’s commitment to the
expansion of higher education throughout its university system.
The next sentence indicates that Prussia’s creation of the Univer-
sity of Berlin in is clearly in Hegel’s mind. Altenstein was
involved in that effort, and it had all along been his plan to put
Hegel in the vanguard of a movement to cultivate ‘the sciences’ at
the new university. This agenda suited the King of Prussia
because, as early as , just after Napoleon’s defeat of Prussia at
Jena in , he realised that Prussia had to ‘establish through
spiritual power [geistige Krafte] what it . . . lost in physical power’
(see GW, vol. , p. ).
In designating the soul (Gemu¨t) as the ground of philosophy, Hegel
makes the formation of ‘spiritual culture’ (Geistesbildung) the goal
of his philosophy as a means of Bildung. In turn, the point of
spiritual culture is to translate Geist into Sittlichkeit (or social
Geist). The references in the remainder of the paragraph to the
need for people to strive for ‘substantial content’ is Hegel’s way
of saying that only Sittlichkeit can meet the standard of political
rationality set by the spirit of the age.
The second half of the paragraph identiﬁes ‘necessity’ and ‘the
vanity of opinions’ as obstacles to spirit’s realisation of its proper
(i.e. historically appropriate) form. In both instances, the obstacles
arise because of ‘spirit’s immersion’ in self-regarding subjectivity.
Large parts of PR describe how self-regarding subjectivism mani-
fests itself institutionally in the form of civil society.
Like Plato and Cicero before him, Hegel plays with the idea of
‘need’ here. The deepest needs are spiritual and communal, not


Notes to pages –
biological and personal. For that reason, Hegel sets philosophy the
task of directing thinking towards the satisfaction of spiritual
needs. But those needs cannot be met through either feeling or
enjoyment, the two most prevalent forms of subjectivity in the
modern world. Again, the outline of Hegel’s theory of civil society
is visible here.
Hegel is alluding here to the cultural mission of philosophy in
Germany. In the s, that mission had expressed itself in cosmo-
politan terms among a variety of German thinkers (see Meinecke
: pp. –and –). As we saw earlier, Hegel had already
shown little patience with cosmopolitan thinking in GC. But in his
writings after , there is evidence that he thought circum-
stances in Europe after Napoleon’s fall had become propitious for
what the Germans had long awaited: a translatio, a shift of leader-
ship within Europe towards Germany and, in this case, away from
France (see Voegelin ; Butler in Hegel b: pp. , –
, , and ). In HIA, Hegel had alluded to a series of trans-
lationes by which the ‘sacred ﬁre’ of religious insight had passed
from one religious people to another. He mentions the Jewish con-
tribution in particular here (perhaps as a rebuff to the rabid anti-
semitism of Fries and his followers in the Burschenschaften). But
he is also interested in using the idea of translatio to explain the
shift of the ‘world spirit’ from Catholic France to Protestant Ger-
many. From this time on, Prussia and Protestantism are intimately
connected in his thinking by way of the translatio of the ‘world
spirit’ from France to Germany.
Hegel is drawing attention to the subjectivist tendency in critical
philosophy, especially as developed by the self-declared Kantian,
Fries. As early as FK (), Hegel had denounced critical philos-
ophy for its subjectivism.
This long sentence might have provoked the anger of Schleier-
macher and/or Savigny, the two champions of historical thinking
at Berlin. There is evidence that Altenstein planned to use Hegel
to contest the hold which these two thinkers had on the university
(see, for example, Toews : p. ).
Throughout the s, Hegel discussed the difference between
feeling and cognition. With Fries’s subjectivist philosophy in
mind, he here suggests that Fries collapses cognition into feeling.
Hegel wishes to separate the two without making his own concep-
tion of cognition excessively rational.
The last three sentences measure the evolution of human con-
sciousness in terms of reason’s movement from necessity to


Notes to pages –
freedom. As consciousness evolves, it shifts its focus towards spiri-
tual (i.e. ethical and divine) ends. While in Berlin, Hegel devoted
much lecture time to ﬂeshing out what such a progression entails.
Earlier in the address, Hegel had referred to ‘the ethical power of
the spirit’ (die sittliche Macht des Geistes). Here and elsewhere in
the address he simply alludes to the ‘power of the spirit’.
Throughout the Berlin years, the aim of his philosophy is to
ground spirit in ethical life (Sittlichkeit). This demands an ethical
turn outwards after spirit has ‘collected itself ’ inwardly.
Address on the Tercentenary of the Submission of the Augsburg
Confession
Hegel had been elected Rector of the University of Berlin in
October . He also held the position of ‘State Plenipotentiary
for the Control of the University’. This combination of ofﬁcial
posts has prompted comments from scholars about how Hegel
‘personiﬁed a veritable synthesis’ of culture and politics in Prus-
sian-German history (Safranski : pp. –). As Rector, he
was invited by Altenstein to speak on the occasion of the tercen-
tenary of the Augsburg Confession. On this august occasion, the
oration was delivered in Latin. Although a German translation of
Hegel’s Latin has been available for some time, the address has
never until now been translated into English.
Hegel always opposed ‘lay’ communities to communities con-
trolled by ‘priests’. As already noted in our comments on BIA, he
associated the former with Protestant openness (i.e. publicity) and
the latter with Catholic closedness (i.e. secrecy). In some of his
letters of the s, he indicates that his philosophy is meant for
the ‘laity’ rather than for the ‘monks’ (Hegel b: pp. –).
His understanding of the laity is important because, throughout
this address, it has a bearing not only on the secular implications
of Reformation theology but also on the evolution of religious con-
sciousness among Protestants. His conception of modern freedom
is organised around this interplay.
The use of the term evangelicam here, and later in the address, is
interesting for two reasons. First, it was a term used by Lutherans
to describe themselves before, but not after, . And, as it
turned out, the Augsburg Confession later proved decisive in
dividing Protestantism into Lutheran and Calvinist branches.
Second, in Hegel’s day, the term was associated with the King of
Prussia’s (often heavy-handed) attempts to create a uniﬁed Prot-


Notes to pages –
estant (i.e. evangelica) Church in Prussia. That effort was central
to the project of the ‘Restoration’ in Prussia.
In many interpretations of German history, the taking up of the
religious ‘cause’ by secular authorities marks the point at which
Lutheranism and Calvinism go their separate ways as political
ideologies. The latter develops ‘against’ the state; the former
develops ‘through’ the state.
Largely because of his Swabian accent, Hegel had a reputation as
a poor public speaker.
As is evident in our extract from PH (see pp. –), Hegel
believed that modern freedom began with the religious sanction
which Luther won for subjectivity (i.e. the rights of private
conscience) in the course of the Reformation. But speaking three
hundred years later, he also believed that Luther’s subjective free-
dom had to be extended from matters of religious ‘doctrine’
(Lehre) to all areas of ‘life’ (Leben) – to all of ‘lay’ culture, as it
were. For further comments on the distinction between doctrine
and life see the introduction (p. xxv above) and note below.
Later in the address, Hegel links the idea of God’s presence
‘within the human mind’ to the collateral idea that ‘man is made
in the image of God’. In the history of Christian thinking, the
latter reference is generally to Genesis .. This passage, in turn,
provides biblical support for a doctrine of Christian perfectibility
(i.e. the doctrine of homoiosis) that humanists and reformers
periodically invoked to make Christianity a socially more respon-
sible religion in an ethical sense. In this context, it is important to
remember that Hegel had been talking in this way about religion
since the s, and that in doing so on this public occasion, he
was committing himself to religious views which were not popular
either in the Prussian court or in orthodox Lutheran and neo-
Pietist religious circles.
Hegel’s reference to God’s relationship to nature is consistent with
the negative views he held on pantheism throughout the s.
Catholicism, in other words, put ‘obstacles’ in the way of religious
perfectibility (i.e. homoiosis) and hence in the way of further devel-
opment of human freedom, especially among the laity.
Hegel surely has Luther’s objections to the Catholic policy of
indulgences in mind here. He is explicit on this point later in the
address.
The reference to ‘masters and slaves’ echoes the famous section
on that subject in the Phenomenology. In this context, however, the
Catholic-versus-Protestant dimension of the relationship becomes
fully evident.


Notes to pages –
In abolishing the status of priests, Christianity becomes for Hegel
a lay religion.
Luther, of course, is the ‘trumpet’.
The distinction between liberi and liberti is all-important. In note
above, we noted how freedom was realised through the state.
Hegel here addresses that point more fully and from a more critical
political perspective. He is arguing that an alliance between throne
and altar had formed in Germany in the sixteenth century.
Although essential to the survival of Protestantism, the alliance
proved to be detrimental in the long run to the development of
human freedom among Protestants. As J. Ritter (: p. ) has
observed, the Reformation in Hegel’s thinking is a ‘moment’ in
the evolution of human freedom. What Ritter does not stress –
although W. Jaeschke does (: pp. –) – is that, for Hegel,
Luther’s is the ﬁrst of two Reformations, the second of which
Hegel was calling for in his own day. On these grounds, the term
liberi stands to the ﬁrst Reformation as liberti stands to the second.
For Hegel’s views on the need for a second Reformation, see the
extract from PH (pp. –).
We have here an absolutely clear statement of Hegel’s commitment
to social religiosity, to making religion more worldly.
Hegel means that the ‘power and authority’ of religion should
extend from ‘doctrine’ (Lehre) to ‘life’ (Leben). This was a move
which he had called for as early as (Hegel a: p. ).
Even before that time, the terms ‘doctrine’ and ‘life’ had long been
associated with Protestant calls for a second Reformation: see the
discussions of this topic especially by P. Munsch and W. Neuser,
in H. Schilling (), and Martin Schmidt (: pp. –).
Hegel’s apology here for Lutheranism as a political ideology is
carefully constructed, for it is limited to the events surrounding
the ﬁrst Reformation. He signals this by contesting the claim that
Luther’s enterprise initially involved more than ‘doctrine’. Hegel’s
strategy, however, had the consequence of de-politicising the ﬁrst
Reformation, making it only a Reformation of doctrine, of abstract
or theoretical freedom. Accordingly, it remained for a second
Reformation to translate doctrine into life, into the actual practice
of piety in the world. From this paragraph, it is difﬁcult to tell
just whom Hegel means to confront with the argument that
Lutheranism was not a doctrine of political sedition.
The reference is to Cicero, De Ofﬁciis, . .
In the s, Hegel had implied that, with the emergence of Prot-
estant orthodoxy in the sixteenth century, Protestants had


Notes to pages –
exchanged Catholic fetters for ones of their own making. The ref-
erence to ‘dissenting’ suggests that he has Dissenters in mind. But
the opening sentence of the paragraph indicates that these are ‘the
same people’ whom he had been talking about in the previous
paragraph. Can this be squared with the argument about ‘obedi-
ence’ in that paragraph?
As the rest of the paragraph shows, the ‘tireless endeavour’ refers
to developments in the realms of learning and culture. At the same
time, Hegel relates these developments to the secular ‘potential’
inherent in Protestantism’s willingness to allow for free inquiry by
individuals into the truths of the Christian religion. By proceeding
in this way, Hegel becomes part of an old tradition of Protestant
thinking which sees the Reformation as much as an event in the
history of knowledge as in the history of religion. The tradition
begins in the seventeenth century with Thomas Sprat’s History of
the Royal Society (: Part III, esp. p. ), and then runs
through English Latitudinarianism (e.g. Edmund Law : pp.
–), to Charles Villers’ famous book of on how Luther’s
liberation of private judgement in religion eventually carried over
into critical thinking in science and the arts throughout Europe
(Villers : esp. pp. –). Hegel draws upon that argument
here and, in so doing, also expands its scope to include advances
in key institutions of civil society. Throughout the Berlin period,
he tries to explain how the need for the development of Sittlichkeit
in civil society entails fulﬁlling the ‘doctrine’ of the Reformation
in actual ‘life’ (i.e. in the social and political institutions of the
world).
When Hegel says that ‘the commonwealth, by divine authority,
should be internally one’, he is referring back to the ‘potential’
Protestantism has for social religiosity. That is what is being sanc-
tioned here, not the authority of the state itself. To underscore the
point, he makes it clear that this argument is not meant to sanction
the exercise of ‘unjust authority’.
The ‘older Church’ is the Catholic Church. The charges Hegel
levels against it in this paragraph allow us to see quite clearly the
connection that existed in his mind between, on the one hand, the
argument he had developed in PR about family, civil society, and
the state, and, on the other hand, the Protestant principles for
political life that he develops here. (The connection is most clearly
developed in changes he made in the and editions of the
Encyclopedia: see, for example, Hegel (: no. , pp. ff).)
Whereas Catholicism separates God from civil institutions – from


Notes to pages –
what Hegel calls Sittlichkeit in PR – he wants Protestantism, in
the re-ﬁgured form he was now giving it, to embrace Sittlichkeit,
because the perfection of those institutions is consistent with his
understanding of God’s plan for the redemption of human beings
in history. In this respect, the pursuit of Sittlichkeit and the prac-
tice of ‘Christian piety’ are for him one and the same thing.
In this paragraph, Hegel begins to historicise the institutional
themes he associates with Sittlichkeit. He starts by setting Cath-
olicism and Protestantism off against each other. In subsequent
paragraphs, he contrasts celibacy and the family, idleness and
industriousness (i.e. he picks up the theme of civil society here),
and political slavery with the liberty of ‘the commonwealth’.
Given the context, the reconciliation of ‘God with the state’
reaches well beyond simply giving the state a religious sanction.
The mistake, of course, is not to realise that the ‘true wisdom’ of
Christian piety leads to Sittlichkeit.
In this sentence, we learn much about Hegel’s view of the French
Revolution. He is arguing, as he does elsewhere (see the excerpt
from PH, pp. –below), that the French Revolution went
off course because of a mind-set peculiar to the religious circum-
stances in Catholic France. Throughout the s, he increasingly
discusses politics in terms of a Catholic-versus-Protestant oppo-
sition (see Jaeschke : p. ).
What the state regards as just is not, however, a decision left to
the state alone. It is a decision that follows from the initiative of
‘divine providence’ on the one hand, and from that of a Protestant
people in their capacity as free human beings on the other. This
is consistent with Hegel’s view of God’s covenant with Protestant
peoples, for the covenant runs from God, through them, to their
rulers, and not – as in the doctrine of the divine right of kings –
the other way round.
Since Hegel’s address was delivered before the outbreak of revol-
ution in France in , he is referring here to the events leading
up to , not to .
The King’s birthday would be celebrated a few weeks later. Toews
(: p. ) describes the political tone of the celebration as it
was shaped by German perceptions of the revolution that had
occurred in July in France.
The King, Frederick William III, was by most accounts a pious
prince. His piety, however, was governed by considerations very
different from those that informed Hegel’s thinking. Thus, two
sentences later, when Hegel reminds the King of the Protestant


Notes to pages –
‘cause’, he is asking the King to live up to his (i.e. Hegel’s) stan-
dard of Christian piety – not to the orthodox one championed
by leaders of the Restoration in Prussia. There are, in short, two
Protestant agendas here, not one. Jaeschke () has appreciated
this well.
Lectures on the Philosophy of History
We still await a critical edition of the lectures on the philosophy
of history that will allow us to see how Hegel’s thinking developed
as he delivered them, with respect to revisions, in Berlin in –
, –, –, –, and –. Such an edition now
exists for his lectures on the philosophy of religion, and a similar
edition of the lectures on the history of philosophy is in the process
of being published. A glimpse of what a critical edition of the
philosophy of history might look like can be found in the Nisbet–
Forbes (Hegel ) edition of the Introduction to his lectures on
that topic. For the history of the various versions of the lectures
on the philosophy of history, see the statements by J. Hoffmeister
and G. Lasson in Nisbet–Forbes (Hegel : pp. –and –
). The selection from the lectures that is translated here follows
the text in vol. of Werke. That edition is itself based largely on
the edition published by Karl Hegel in .
Sibree’s unfortunate translation (Hegel ) of germanische as
‘German’ rather than ‘Germanic’ helped to create the impression
that Hegel approached European history from the narrow vantage
point of German nationalism. It is clear from his argument here,
as well as in GC, that this is by no means the case. Indeed, the
term ‘Germanic’ in Hegel’s usage encompasses many of the
nations of western Europe.
As the end of Part IV, Section , makes clear, ‘the dawn at the
end of the Middle Ages’ refers to the Renaissance.
As becomes clear at the end of this section, Hegel includes the
French Revolution of in his time-frame.
Hegel provides a more detailed account of Catholic corruption in
Part IV, Section .
As pointed out on various previous occasions, the two aspects of
subjectivity are crucial to Hegel’s political thinking during his
Berlin years.
The escape into monasticism is what Hegel has in mind. Sittlich-
keit is the Protestant corrective to that ﬂight from the world.
In this and the next sentence, Catholicism stands to Protestantism


Notes to pages –
as external stands to internal. Later, however, Hegel’s conception
of Sittlichkeit will stand to orthodox Protestantism as external
stands to internal.
Although Hegel praises Luther’s ‘doctrine’ (Lehre) here, he will
begin to criticise that doctrine later in the lectures for its excess-
ively inward and abstract rendering of subjective freedom.
The ‘elimination of externality’ is historically necessary but, Hegel
proceeds to argue, the development of spirit will soon require
Protestantism itself to embrace externality in the form of
Sittlichkeit.
Among German Protestants in the late nineteenth century, there
was a dispute (e.g. between A. Ritschl and E. Troeltsch) over
whether Luther’s position on ‘works’ made him a ‘modern’ or
‘anti-modern’ ﬁgure in religious history. Ritschl argued that
Luther supported works; Troeltsch denied this claim. Hegel seems
to anticipate Troeltsch’s view.
Throughout the eighteenth century, Protestants in Germany (e.g.
H. S. Reimarus) and England (e.g. C. Middleton) tried to demys-
tify Christianity. Liberal Protestants did this in order to accommo-
date Christianity to the modern world (e.g. to advances in scientiﬁc
knowledge). Others did so as part of a Socinian effort to present
Jesus as merely human. The last sentence of this paragraph places
Hegel among the former.
Hegel’s aim here is to link ‘spiritual’ subjectivity with man’s
‘essential being’ and then to derive Sittlichkeit from that being. In
NL (pp. –above), he explains how spiritual subjectivity dif-
fers from empirical subjectivity.
In his early theological writings, Hegel (: pp. –) depicts
Jesus as the constitutive agent of subjectivity in religious thinking.
In the last two sentences, Hegel democratises spirit as part of his
effort to erase the distinction between ‘priests and laymen’. But he
will quickly distance himself from the doctrine that measures spirit
in terms of ‘feeling’. (He had indeed already declared in the Intro-
duction to these lectures that he would do so (Hegel : pp. –
).)
In the remainder of the paragraph, Hegel refers again to the two
subjectivities (cf. note above), but in this instance, the negation
of the ‘particular’ entails negation of ‘feeling’, of the ‘natural’
rather than the spiritual will. In this respect, Hegel moves beyond
‘the feeling spirituality’ of Lutheranism and toward a view of spiri-
tuality in which the substance of Sittlichkeit ﬁgures prominently.
It is easy to misunderstand this paragraph. Hegel is no longer


Notes to pages –
thinking here about Lutheran inwardness or subjective feeling. He
is discussing thinking spirit that has worked, and is still working,
to ground religion in right, property, ethical life, government, the
constitution, and the state. All this follows, in his view, when sub-
jective will directs itself outwards – in the direction of the univer-
sal principles he associates with Sittlichkeit.
It is interesting and ironic that, while turning Hegel on his head,
Arnold Ruge (: p. ) will use an almost identical sentence
to criticise Hegel for the supposedly apolitical character of his
Protestant inwardness.
This is a tricky sentence. In the Introduction to these lectures
(Hegel : p. ), Hegel had indicated that, while the ideal of
freedom is ‘original and natural’ to man, freedom does not exist
‘as original and natural’ in man’s mode of everyday existence. The
ideal, he says, must be ‘sought out and won’. His philosophy aims
at reminding people what they are destined to be ‘by nature’, and
what they should accordingly seek to be in actuality.
The ﬁve pages of Werke that have been omitted here discuss par-
ticular aspects of Luther’s criticism of Catholicism. Hegel also
explains how Luther’s translation of the Bible made it a ‘People’s
Book’, accessible to all. He then contrasts Protestant openness to
the Bible with the closed nature of Catholicism. On the basis of
this contrast, he draws a distinction between the character and
values of Romance and Germanic nations in order to demonstrate
() that ‘disharmony’ (Entzweiung) pervades the ‘spiritual con-
sciousness’ of Catholic nations; and () that disharmony explains
why the French Revolution proceeded in the unseemly way that it
did.
As will soon become evident – and as others of Hegel’s political
writings show – the objective process to which he is here alluding
encompasses the three essential moments of Sittlichkeit.
Though the sense of this sentence is clear, its meaning is not, for
what trade and industry bring into existence is a civil society which
is ‘ethical’ in the limited sense of Moralita¨t. As such, it does not
meet Hegel’s standard of Sittlichkeit, of what is truly ethical. Or
to put it another way, the former is the ethic of an aggregation,
not an association (cf. his fuller explanation in the Encyclopedia
(Hegel : no. , p. ), distinguishing between vulgus and
populus).
Few Hegel scholars have appreciated what is implied by this para-
graph. What Hegel is doing is establishing a framework for
explaining the ‘laws of freedom’ in terms of a movement from


Notes to pages –
Lehre to Leben – that is, from the ‘ﬁrst’ Reformation to the ‘second’
(see the introduction, pp. xxv, xxvii f. above, for discussion of
this theme). That same movement not only underlies much of his
political thinking (especially with regard to Sittlichkeit), but has
roots deep in Protestant traditions that date from at least the late
sixteenth century. His contention that spirit achieves its ‘complete
state’ in Sittlichkeit simply underscores the deeply Protestant
character of his thinking on civil society and the state.
Up to this point in the paragraph, Hegel has expanded upon the
theme discussed in note above. In declaring that human beings
‘are by nature not what they ought to be’, he postulates a conﬂict
between sin and perfectionism in Protestantism. In his opinion,
orthodox Lutheranism becomes preoccupied with the former and,
for that very reason, is incapable of moving Protestantism forward
to a more mature (i.e. perfect) form of religious thinking and
acting. His own version of how subjectivism operates requires a
shift away from the ‘wretchedness’ of sin. As already demon-
strated, the motive for the shift lies for him in the notion that God
created human beings in his own image and likeness.
Hegel is referring here to the conversion of some prominent ﬁg-
ures among the German Romantics (e.g. F. Schlegel).
Pascal became famous in the seventeenth century for indicting the
Jesuits for their casuistry.
It is signiﬁcant that orthodox Protestants and Catholics are now
grouped together. Hegel’s doctrine of Sittlichkeit is offered as a
corrective to the religious views of both.
With this sentence, Hegel tars Jacobinism with the same brush he
had used to condemn the religious views of Catholics and orthodox
Lutherans. Blurring the lines between religious and political
modes of discourse had been a typical strategy of de-legitimisation
among opponents of the French Revolution (e.g. Burke, the theo-
crats, and Novalis). But whereas the counter-revolutionaries used
this language to bring out the Protestant character of the Revol-
ution, Hegel uses it to draw attention to the Revolution’s Catholic
character.
Friedrich Spee von Langenfeld (–), in his Cautia crimi-
nalis ().
Christian Thomasius (–), rationalist philosopher and pro-
genitor of the German Enlightenment.
The ‘second and essential moment’ that Hegel says leads towards
the state is that of Sittlichkeit.
Chapter , Section of Part IV, which is not translated here, is


Notes to pages –
around twelve pages long. It is entitled ‘Inﬂuence of the Refor-
mation on the Formation of the State’. Much of the chapter
rehearses arguments Hegel had already advanced in GC about the
evolution of feudalism among the Germanic nations. At the same
time, he elaborates on the ‘secular complications’ (weltliche
Verwicklungen) that followed from the alliance of throne and altar
that characterised the Protestant states in Germany in the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries. Like Edmund Burke, he traces
several of the major political upheavals of the early modern period
to ‘enthusiasts’ (Fanatiker) among various Protestant sects. He
carefully separates this group of political Protestants from the pol-
itically more moderate ones who emerged in England in and
. Most revealing of all, however, is the effort he makes at the
end of Chapter to designate Prussia and its famous eighteenth-
century leader, Frederick the Great, as agents of the Protestant
principle in modern history. This appreciation of Frederick stands
in marked contrast to the view which he had articulated in GC. In
the late s, several years after Hegel’s death, liberal Protestants
still appealed to Frederick’s legacy while criticising the reactionary
political and religious policies of the current regime in Prussia.
The point, again, is to move from feeling to thinking by identifying
universality as the proper object of subjectivity.
With this statement, we arrive at a turning point in Hegel’s think-
ing. In the closing sentence of Part IV, Section , he had noted
how, towards the end of the Middle Ages, science (Wissenschaft)
had helped orient thought towards universality. He reiterates that
point here, alluding later in the paragraph to developments in the
physical sciences (e.g. the theory of gravity). But he also includes
‘spiritual matters’ in what he calls ‘the science of the world’. This
allows him to shift the focus from how attraction works in nature
to how it works where matters of spirit are concerned – for
example, in the study of human relations in society and the state.
Sittlichkeit is the term he uses to explain attraction in the two
spheres. Social Newtonians in eighteenth-century Britain (e.g.
George Turnbull and Thomas Pownall) had pursued a similar line
of argument with respect to the physical and spiritual aspects of
attraction.
Rene´ Descartes (–), French rationalist philosopher. The
reference is to his Discourse on Method (), which contains the
outlines of his system.
Hegel alludes to a section of PH which is not translated here. For
the content of the missing section, see note above.


Notes to pages –
Hugo Grotius (–), Dutch publicist and statesman. The
reference is to his main work, the De iure belli et pacis ().
Marcus Tullius Cicero (–), Roman orator and politician.
The reference is to his political treatises De republica and De
legibus.
See note above on how Hegel prepared the way for this cel-
ebration of Frederick’s achievement.
Hegel is one of the ﬁrst to apply this term (German Aufkla¨rung)
to the entire phase of European thought and culture which now
goes by that name.
The last two sentences suggest a connection between the Refor-
mation and the Enlightenment: to wit, the spiritual form of the
former ﬁnds philosophical expression in the latter’s theorising as
to what the content of spirit should consist in. But as the next
paragraph makes clear, Hegel does not assign positive roles to the
Reformation and the Enlightenment in the development of spirit,
for in his view, both represent spirit in terms of abstract subjec-
tivity rather than as something that must realise itself concretely
and collectively. In this respect, both have contributed to that pro-
cess of atomisation that Hegel talks so much about during his
Berlin period.
The notion that, when the will wills itself, it wills something uni-
versal rather than particular is Hegel’s means of deriving Sittlich-
keit from subjectivity.
In the remainder of the paragraph, Hegel explains how the Kan-
tian doctrine of Moralita¨t results from the will willing ‘particular
things’. Since the early s, he had aligned his criticism of Kant
with a criticism of civil society as the sphere of Moralita¨t and
particularity.
After , alleged parallels – inverted political ones – between
developments in German philosophy and French politics became
an important theme in critiques of Hegelianism in the s – e.g.
in in the work of Heinrich Heine (Heine : pp. –).
The connection Hegel draws between understanding (Verstand)
and pure reason continues his critique of Kantianism.
The fact that Luther, the Enlightenment, and Kantianism each
failed to ‘develop anything further out of itself ’ means that their
doctrines did not evolve in a worldly direction.
As the next paragraph shows, the deeper reason for French revol-
utionary activism in lies, according to Hegel, in a dialectic of
power that is unique to Catholic France.
The disposition (Gesinnung) is ‘at one with religion’ because both
are oriented towards Sittlichkeit.


Notes to pages –
The problem here is obvious, for Hegel has already argued that
improving ‘secular life’ was the religious challenge facing Prot-
estantism in modern times. In his view, the challenge had persisted
down to his own day because Protestant progress towards worldly
engagement had stalled under the leadership of orthodox Luther-
anism. This was a common view among liberal Protestants.
In fact, however, Hegel’s life-long struggle against Protestantism
in its mode of self-regarding subjectivity meant that Protestantism
did permit ‘two kinds of conscience’. One remains for ever inward;
the other – the other-regarding form of subjectivism that Hegel
promoted – eventually turns outwards.
Although Hegel directs his criticism of atomism at Catholicism
here, his earlier criticism in FK of Protestantism as atomistic is
relevant here too.
Hegel is relating the Enlightenment to the French Revolution
here. As friends and foes of the French Revolution had observed
in the s, translated the philosophical principles of the
Enlightenment into political action. Hegel’s view of this develop-
ment, however, is quite negative. In this respect, his view is similar
to that of Burke.
Hegel’s conception of the power struggle in France between two
forms of absolutist political thinking is illuminated by his dis-
cussion in the early theological writings of Jesus’ relationship to
Judaism (Hegel : pp. –). In both instances, what is at
issue is the absence of what he calls a ‘middle course’.
If there is any truth to the student report (of ) that Hegel
commemorated the French Revolution each year by raising a toast
to it, it is surely this aspect of the Revolution that he toasted.
Greek nous = mind or sense.
As will become evident in what follows, the course of the French
Revolution did not, in Hegel’s opinion, reconcile ‘the divine with
the world’. That is, it did not permit ‘thought’ to ‘govern spiritual
reality’. For that to have happened, he argues here, French
thought would have had to abandon atomism for Sittlichkeit.
In , after the revolution in France, Hegel extensively re-wrote
sections of these lectures. He indicates here his intention of further
co-ordinating the substance of these lectures with those on the
philosophy of right which he began to deliver again in after
a hiatus of a few years. See Nisbet–Forbes (Hegel ) for infor-
mation on the extent of the revision.
The connection between ‘administration’ and ‘welfare’ fulﬁls what
Hegel calls the ‘police’ function of government. Throughout the


Notes to pages –
s, he recognised that inequalities of wealth and opportunity
in civil society had to be addressed through the ‘police’ function
of government. In his view, however, this function of government
was relatively narrow compared to the government’s responsibility
for preparing citizens for participation in the political life of the
nation. It is crucial, therefore, to keep the two functions separate
when discussing his theory of the modern state. This distinction,
moreover, lies at the centre of his critique of the English govern-
ment in ERB.
As was the case above (note ), the disposition referred to here is
one that has become oriented towards Sittlichkeit. In Hegel’s mind,
this orientation is new – it is not just what Germans have tra-
ditionally accepted as part of their duty to the state. As he proceeds
to explain, the state derives its legitimacy and its sanction from
religion. But the state that he is talking about here is not yet in
existence – and it is certainly not the Prussian state, whose
religious orientation was anathema to him.
That is why Hegel tended to view the French Revolution more as
a religious than as a political event. Beyond that, he could also
claim, in opposition to Novalis (: p. ), that the French Rev-
olution was not a ‘second Reformation’. Indeed, France had never
had a ﬁrst Reformation, still less a second one – an observation
that had gained currency among Protestants in the s (see
Saine : pp. –and –; and E. D. Junkin : p. ).
In this respect, Hegel could declare the second Reformation an
alternative to , as well as a fulﬁlment of the ﬁrst Reformation.
A paragraph similar to this one can be found in RRS (see p. ).
What comes out more clearly here is the way in which Hegel
proposes to use Plato’s emphasis on education to shape the orien-
tation of ‘the individual will’ so that it will have the ‘right [i.e.
other-regarding] disposition’. Without cultivation of such a dispo-
sition, modern society will remain atomised.
With the reference to ‘virtue’ (Tugend), Hegel begins to criticise
the French Revolution for its anti-individual collectivism. In the
s, Benjamin Constant (: pp. ff) had made this point
about the Revolution, arguing that the revolutionaries’ embrace of
virtue grounded their politics more in an ancient than a modern
conception of liberty. Hegel agrees; but, in an astonishing twist,
he derives the impulse towards collectivism from modern subjec-
tivism rather than from a longing for ancient virtue.
There is a sense in which Hegel sees Napoleon as part of an on-
going process of atomisation. See his remark on Napoleon as a
‘thinking’ atom in Nisbet–Forbes (Hegel : pp. and ).


Notes to pages –
Hegel is referring to the French Charter of .
The tension Hegel sets up between the ‘Catholic disposition’ and
‘conscience’ illuminates his view of the larger issue raised by the
revolution in France. As he explains, individuals qua subjec-
tive wills are now charged in France with governing the nation.
The problem is that these wills operate in accordance with the
‘atomistic principle’. As such, they can neither form themselves
into a truly political association nor tolerate the organisation of
freedom by anyone else. For this reason, Hegel argues, revolutions
will continue to characterise French politics in the nineteenth cen-
tury. In ERB, he fears that this manner of thinking will enter
British politics.
Just as Hegel had earlier discussed Romance and Germanic nations
in terms of the religious values of Catholicism and Protestantism
respectively, so does he here discuss these nations in terms of the
‘unfreedom’ of ‘liberalism’ and the political freedom of Protestant
peoples. In this sense, he is anti-liberal because of the social orien-
tation of his religious thinking.
Hegel makes this point in several other contexts during his Berlin
years.
Compare Hegel’s view of England here with the more positive one
he advanced in GC.
Hegel might have Burke in mind here.
The comparison of the French and English regimes allows Hegel
to position himself, respectively, between the political extremes of
too much centralisation and too much decentralisation of govern-
ment. The following critique of England carries over into ERB.
These last two sentences hardly constitute a ringing endorsement
either of absolutism or of the Restoration.
Greek oi aristoi = the best.
The ‘contingent’ will is at once formal, abstract, self-regarding in
a subjective sense, merely natural, oriented towards the particular,
and atomistic. Conversely, the ‘essential’ will is other-regarding in
a subjective sense.
In the Introduction to these lectures (Hegel : pp. and ),
Hegel refers to the idea of theodicy. He traces the idea to Leibniz’s
efforts to develop a ‘harmonising’ metaphysic. But what allows for
the development of that metaphysic, Hegel says, is the ‘insight’
(Einsicht) we possess (as a gift from God) into God’s plan for
human redemption in history. Hegel claims that his own philos-
ophy simply puts that religious conviction into the form of rational
thought. Critics of Hegel (e.g. E. Voegelin : pp. –) point


Notes to pages –
to this way of thinking as typical of those ‘speculative gnostics’
who deﬁle science and philosophy by claiming to know the direc-
tion of history. Hegel, however, never claimed to have knowledge
of the future, and for this he was severely criticised in the s.
The Relationship of Religion to the State
During the last thirty years, our understanding of Hegel’s philos-
ophy of religion has beneﬁted greatly from the collaborative work
of American and German scholars associated with the Hegel
Archive in Bochum, Germany. Together, they have given us
English and German editions of the lectures on the philosophy of
religion that Hegel delivered in Berlin between and . By
publishing the lectures of , , , and as indepen-
dent units, these editions allow us to see Hegel’s thoughts on
religion developing over time.
Spirit (Geist) realises itself in the state (Staat) through the agency
of ethical will (sittliche Wille).
As AC stresses, Hegel wishes to allocate space in the Protestant
religious outlook for the three key worldly institutions, each of
which constitutes a moment of Sittlichkeit: the family, civil society,
and the state.
The ﬁrst two sentences of this paragraph discuss the relationship
of religion to the state in terms of a dynamic (i.e. unity, disunity,
unity) that also characterises Hegel’s philosophy of history.
Jaeschke () explains how the interplay between ‘conviction’
and ‘constitution’ works in Hegel’s thinking during his last years
in Berlin.
The reference to ‘a bad concept of God’ is aimed at Catholic
France. In the last two paragraphs of this extract, Hegel raises
questions about the revolution of in France which follow
from views he had held on French politics before that event.
Hegel’s strategy here is to use the philosophy of history to explain
how Protestantism developed from an immature (i.e. wholly
subjective) to a mature (i.e. substantive) religion.
It is important to realise that, in the last three sentences, Hegel is
not providing the state – ‘laws, government authority, and political
constitution’ – with a religious sanction derived directly from God.
Rather, these state institutions develop from a concept of freedom
derived from a covenant which, in Hegel’s view, God made with
the people rather than with the head of the state (on covenant
theology, see note below). That is why he devotes so much time


Notes to pages –
in his theory of Sittlichkeit to explaining how subjectivity becomes
substantive (which would hardly be necessary were the state or its
ruler to receive a religious sanction directly from God).
The formulation ‘one obeys God by following the laws and
governmental authority’ suggests that Hegel might be ‘idolising’
the state here. But what he says in the next few sentences discounts
that possibility. On the idolisation theme, see also note below.
In Hegel’s mind, orthodox Lutheranism often supported arbitrary
government. Although throughout the s he proclaimed him-
self a Lutheran, he criticises orthodox Lutheranism for not having
moved Protestantism beyond the restrictive and repressive frame-
work of the alliance of throne and altar.
The Stuart kings ruled England for most of the seventeenth
century.
In the last few sentences, in which he discusses the religio-political
situation in seventeenth-century England, Hegel shows that he has
knowledge of the political implications of what scholars call
‘covenant theology’ – the theology, that is, that is often associated
with Calvinist resistance theory in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Clearly, Hegel wants the covenant to run from God
through the laity to the King, and not through the King to the
laity. The covenant theme also ﬁgures prominently in AC.
The tension between the laity’s authorisation of its political actions
through an appeal to ‘revelation’, and what happened to the King
as a result of the laity’s political action is palpable. As the next
sentence shows, Hegel accepts the former but not the latter. This
explains, in part, why he should not be considered a ‘speculative
gnostic’.
The phrase ‘open to everyone’ is meant to check the action of the
‘sect’ referred to in the previous sentence. This is underscored in
what follows, when Hegel introduces ‘what is rational’ as a check
on what some will surely perceive as having been ‘willed by God’
through ‘revelation’.
The laws Hegel has in mind derive from the ethical will as it
gradually attains actuality in the state. That will, in turn, is ‘ration-
al’ for two reasons: () it knows that Sittlichkeit is the substance of
the laws willed by God; and () it has been shaped by Bildung (i.e.
educational and cultural values) to that end. In the Encyclopedia
(Hegel : no. , pp. –), Hegel equates this maturation
process with what he calls ‘self-realising subjectivity’. He then
explains how this process links religious values to the state. In the
Foreword to the third edition of the Encyclopedia (), he also


Notes to pages –
shows how the laws which govern the ethical will unfold in terms
of ‘an order of salvation’ (Heilsordnung) that is fulﬁlled in Sittlich-
keit (Hegel b: p. ).
The opposition between ‘sanctity’ and ‘ethical life’ that Hegel
examines in this paragraph addresses Protestant extremists as well
as Catholics. Both exclude Sittlichkeit as the substantial reality of
actuality from their religious ideal. In the following paragraphs,
Hegel reiterates why the rationality of Sittlichkeit should become
part of a mature Protestant outlook.
The remark on religion not recognising ‘the principle of freedom’
alludes to Catholicism and its sowing of the political seeds that
provoked the French Revolution. The second part of the sentence
criticises the political illiberalism of the French revolutionaries.
As Hegel says in PH (p. above), atomism follows from abstract
formalism. By contrast, Sittlichkeit gives rise to an ‘organic consti-
tution’ that balances rights and duties. Hodgson (: vol. , p.
n ) reads this paragraph in the same way as we do.
As pointed out in the introduction to this volume, Hegel exploits
the ambiguity inherent in the phrase ‘by nature’ to move freedom
away from ‘arbitrariness’ and towards more organised forms of
liberty.
Beginning with this sentence, Hegel posits a contradiction between
‘secular freedom’ and the ‘Catholic religion’ in France. He then
uses that tension to frame his critique of political developments in
France from the Enlightenment through to the revol-
ution. The contradiction in question, Hegel suggests, is a legacy
both of Catholicism and of the abstract political response which
Catholicism provoked among the philosophes.
See note above.
This passage is ﬁlled with important themes. But the distinction
Hegel tries to draw between Greek and modern conceptions of
constitutions is difﬁcult to follow in the terms employed here.
Scholars have long known that, while Hegel was attracted to the
political character of Plato’s thinking, he also criticised him for his
inability to make room for subjectivity in his political philosophy
(see, for example, Inwood ). Christianity as well as develop-
ments within its history (i.e. the emergence of Protestantism),
Hegel contended, requires political as well as religious accommo-
dation to the principle of subjective freedom. In this scheme, Plato
is the one who has ‘no regard for [individual] conviction’. Here,
however, things seem to be turned around, for it is the ‘modern
system’ that exhibits such intolerance. For clariﬁcation, Hodgson


Notes to pages –
(: vol. , p. ) has inserted ‘of the people’ after ‘conviction’,
whereas we have inserted ‘[individual]’ before it instead. This
choice follows from our sense that Hegel’s use of ‘formal’ in the
sentence requires an insertion consistent with his understanding
of modern freedom as being formal because it only pays lip service
to individual conviction. If we are right about Hegel’s meaning
here, then it would appear that he is trying to Protestantise Plato
by turning him into a philosopher of Sittlichkeit who uses Bildung
to direct conviction towards communal ends.
The Greek word is sophrosyne, which means ‘moderation’, most
often in the form of prudent self-control. For a discussion of the
word’s meaning among the Greeks, see Helen North (). Plato
frequently uses the term in the context of how an individual or a
city becomes master of itself. (Sophrosyne does not mean, as it did
in the Spartan polis, unreﬂective adherence to customary law or
nomos.)
This comment speaks powerfully to the point raised in the intro-
duction to this volume as to whether Hegel’s political philosophy
idealises or idolises the state.
In the remainder of the paragraph, Hegel is discussing political
developments in France in the late s.
The thrust of the last three sentences can hardly be interpreted as
hostile to the French Revolution of per se. Indeed, the pos-
ition which Hegel takes on the revolution is consistent with views
he had articulated in Berlin lectures well before . In the next
paragraph, the reference to ‘indeterminate’ conviction signals what
he thought was wrong with the revolution: namely, that it pursued
abstract and formal political freedom rather than a more organised
form of liberty. In the early s, he had said similar things about
the formalism inherent in the French Revolution of .
In other words, if the ‘existing religion’ privileges ‘conviction’ and
‘inwardness’ in a Protestant sense, then freedom in the modern
world will become ‘determinate’ in the form of Sittlichkeit.
While discussing the chronic instability of French politics from
through to the revolution of , Hegel uses the phrase
‘reasserts itself with contempt for all form’ in a way that reminds
us of his earlier argument about the political action of ‘a Protestant
sect’ in seventeenth-century England. In both instances, the ‘con-
viction’ that leads to revolution is characterised as a ‘safeguard’
against a tyrannical and catholicising government which ignored
the rights of individuals. But in France in , Hegel argues, the
safeguard exercised by the sect expressed itself only negatively.


Notes to pages –
For without respect for constitutional ‘form’, conviction remains
hopelessly indeterminate and a constant source of further political
instability.
On the English Reform Bill
ERB appeared in the Allgemeine Preussische Staatszeitung (Prussian
State Journal) in April . Already in the early s, Arnold
Ruge (: pp. –) interpreted the text as anti-democratic.
He was followed in this by Rudolf Haym (: pp. –), who
popularised the notion that the essay was consistent with Hegel’s
reactionary (i.e. pro-Prussian) political views. Recent scholarship,
however, has convincingly shown that Hegel’s views on the
Reform Bill closely follow lines of argument derived from his read-
ing of liberal English and Scottish newspapers and periodicals
during the s and s: see, for example, Petry () and N.
Waszek (). The text published in was censored by Prus-
sian authorities. See note below for particulars of the
censorship.
Although there was much public debate about reform in the s,
the Reform Bill did not come before Parliament until early .
It was introduced in the House of Commons on March .
Two other versions of the Reform Bill were introduced later that
year.
Throughout ERB, Hegel develops the idea of ‘class’ interest, using
it to explain the positions taken by socio-economic groups on pol-
itical issues connected with the Reform Bill.
Petry (: pp. –) produces evidence that Hegel drew some of
his ideas about the irregularities of English law from the Morning
Chronicle, a liberal English newspaper. This evidence takes the
form of excerpts which Hegel copied from the Morning Chronicle
during the s. The date of the issue in question is February
. Waszek () shows that Hegel followed the English debate
on constitutional reform through his reading of the Edinburgh
Review in and .
Hegel is referring to the revolution of in France.
Petry () argues that James Mill and James Mackintosh are two
of the reformers whose views are parallel to those of Hegel.
This observation is consistent with Hegel’s overall view of the
instability of French politics since . See, for example, his com-
ments in AC and RRS (pp. –and –above, respectively).
The phrase ‘a priori views’ refers, pejoratively, to the abstract


Notes to pages –
approach of French thinkers to the role of will in modern politics.
See also note below.
Robert Peel (–): Prime Minister of England in the s.
Appointed Home Secretary in Liverpool’s ‘liberal’ government in
, Peel occupied the same position in Wellington’s government
of –. In the late s, he worked with Wellington to pass
the Catholic Emancipation Bill, an Act that split the Tory party.
An excerpt which Hegel made from the Morning Chronicle (
March ) refers to Peel’s attitude towards the irregularities of
the English constitution. See Petry (: p. ).
The reference is to SL: Part I, Book III. Hegel discusses Montes-
quieu’s view on this issue more fully in PR, pp. –.
Hegel develops the idea of ‘pragmatic’ history in PR, p. .
Here Hegel recalls arguments from the early theological writings
and from NL about the loss of Sittlichkeit in the ancient world.
Later in the essay, Hegel suggests that this pride turns into obsti-
nacy (see note below). He had said the same of German pride
in GC. In both instances, pride supports private interest.
The reference to Berne recalls both Hegel’s experience of oligarchy
in Switzerland in the mid-s and his translation of, and com-
mentary on, Cart’s Conﬁdential Letters.
Hegel uses moralische here and in the sentence that follows. The
context suggests that he is using the term to denote a privatised
outlook which will impede efforts to organise individuals for politi-
cal action.
Hegel’s disdain for unreﬂective traditionalism is apparent here.
Perhaps Hegel is alluding to the anglophile argument in his own
earlier GC here.
Hegel’s praise of the continental states has been cited by Haym
(note above) as proof both of his disdain for democracy and of
his commitment to rule by government bureaucracy.
Hegel begins here to advance the case for England’s ‘political back-
wardness’ relative to the continental states.
Hegel may be interpreted as developing two different arguments
here. On the one hand, he was proud of the reforms that had been
initiated throughout Germany by various groups of bureaucrats
after . In this, he is an advocate of what students of German
history have long called ‘revolution from above’. (In Britain, J. R.
McCulloch, the great populariser of Adam Smith’s views on politi-
cal economy, published in a review essay on Prussia in the
Edinburgh Review in which he praises Prussian bureaucrats for
their role in advancing ‘liberal’ reforms.) On the other hand, it is


Notes to pages –
hard to believe that he was unaware of the connection between the
agrarian component of these reforms and the deteriorating con-
dition of agricultural workers in Prussia, especially eastern Prussia.
If he were so aware, then this argument about agricultural con-
ditions in Britain could be viewed as an indirect criticism of the
Prussian government as well. See Beck (: pp. –) on the
‘pauperisation’ of agricultural workers in Prussia after . (In
Britain, William Spence drew attention to the ‘universal poverty
and misery’ in England in the Preface to his Tracts on Political
Economy, .)
The regret which Hegel seems to express here about the weakness
of the English monarchy has prompted scholars to believe he was
a dogmatic monarchist, clinging tenaciously and unreﬂectively to
a pre-industrial political order. In fact, the role Hegel assigns the
monarch is quite circumscribed (see, for example, the concluding
paragraph of ERB). Petry () detects parallels between James
Mill’s and Hegel’s views on the reforming role of the monarchy
in modern political life.
All his life, Hegel insisted that the material circumstances of citi-
zens had to be attended to before citizens could be expected to
cast informed votes. Jaeschke (: p. ) and Petry (: p. )
draw the correct inferences from this.
In other words, members of Parliament were not properly ‘politi-
cal’ in Hegel’s sense of the term.
Joseph Hume (–): friend and associate of James Mill, and
a leader among radical reformers in Parliament during the s.
Hume was known for his expertise on how to wring economies
from government budgets.
William Huskisson (–) became President of the Board of
Trade in Liverpool’s ‘liberal’ government in . He had long
been a champion of liberal economic reform.
Hegel seems to connect economic growth with the liberation of
industry from feudal shackles. This is a typical liberal view. But
he also traces much of the social distress of propertyless agricul-
tural workers to the legislation that accompanied the transition
from feudalism to property. Among Germans, the latter view was
popularised by two different groups: () by liberal-minded civil
servants; and () by social conservatives. According to Beck (:
pp. ff), much of the so-called Pauperismusliteratur, which
appeared after , was written by the former. Beck (p. ) places
Hegel in this group rather than among the social conservatives.
Although Hegel does not develop the point further in ERB, he


Notes to pages –
implicates the economic concerns of the English clergy in the
decline of community in English life. As he suggests in the next
paragraph, a socially more engaged clergy would help to assuage
some
of
the
hardships
experienced
by
England’s
rural
communities.
As several scholars have critically noted, Hegel seems, selectively,
to generalise Irish conditions – religious and otherwise – to all of
England. Either this is the case, or he has confused – as Knox
suggests (Hegel : p. n ) – the Irish Reform Bill with the
Reform Bill itself.
Throughout the s, a series of Catholic Emancipation Bills
were proposed in the Commons. These initiatives culminated in a
Bill that was ﬁnally carried in when Wellington and Peel
threw their support behind it. The King signed it and made it law
on April .
Read in the light of Prussian history, Hegel may be alluding to
legal protections (Bauernschutz) which Frederick the Great had
insisted on preserving in order to ensure a steady ﬂow of able-
bodied recruits for his army. In Prussia, the protections were
removed by liberal bureaucratic reformers in , with the result
that a pauper class – propertyless agricultural workers – emerged
as a socio-economic problem in Prussia. The literature which
addressed this problem often referred to the Entsittlichung of rural
communities in Germany. See Beck (: pp. , –).
Beck (: p. ) notes similar conditions in Prussia.
Hegel condemns the use of ‘due legal form’ to legitimise social
injustice. His views reﬂect those expressed in an excerpt he made
from the Morning Chronicle (November ); see Petry (:
pp. –).
The Act was passed in . In , attempts were made in the
House of Lords to change aspects of the original Act.
Hegel means to suggest that human beings have material rights
which may, under certain circumstances, override individual prop-
erty rights. This was the sense of the excerpt referred to in note
above.
Hegel appears here to follow another of his excerpts from the
Morning Chronicle (February ) that refers to Peel’s role in
legal reform. See Petry (: pp. –).
Henry Brougham (–) was, among other things, a legal
and educational reformer and something of an economist who had
close ties with James Mill and Jeremy Bentham. He became Lord
Chancellor in the government which Grey formed in . Hegel’s


Notes to pages –
information again seems to come from an except from the Morning
Chronicle (February ). See Petry (: pp. –).
Z. A. Pelczynski, KP, p. , is excellent on the deep roots of this
argument in Hegel’s earlier writings, esp. in PWE.
The Duke of Wellington (–), who was a living symbol of
Toryism during these years, became Prime Minister in . One
of Hegel’s excerpts from the Morning Chronicle (March )
contains information on the speech which the Duke had delivered
the day before. See Petry (: pp. –).
These remarks echo a comment of Hegel’s on one of his excerpts
from the Morning Chronicle (February ). See Petry (:
pp. –) and note above.
That reason should recognise material rights is a consideration that
Hegel uses to explain why rationality in government requires an
ameliorative response to the social question.
In the next paragraph, Hegel notes converging and diverging tend-
encies in groups comprising England’s propertied class.
Hegel excerpted a piece from the Morning Chronicle (February
) in which a reference to shopkeepers occurs. See Petry (:
p. ). Knox (Hegel : p. n ) has traced Hegel’s remarks
about Wellington to a speech of the latter (March ) which
includes another reference to shopkeepers; one of Hegel’s excerpts
from the Morning Chronicle (March ) includes an account
of this speech: see Petry (: p. ). (Among the English, a
pejorative sense had been attached to the idea of ‘shopkeepers’
since at least the s when remarks about the ‘Shopkeeper’s
Age’ implied a decline in learning, taste, and morality. Although
Josiah Tucker had often written about England’s shopkeeper men-
tality, the idea of Britain as a ‘nation of shopkeepers’ became
famous through Adam Smith’s use of the phrase in in The
Wealth of Nations: see Smith (, vol. , p. ).)
Hegel draws his information on William Manning (–)
from an excerpt he made from the Morning Chronicle (March
). Petry (: p. ) provides more pertinent information on
Manning and the matter of corrupt elections in England.
The reference to the ‘abstract will’ as ‘modern’ relates back to the
comment on ‘a priori’ views discussed in note above.
The notion of genuinely political ideas can also be found in GC.
This probably refers to the moment – in April – when Napo-
leon declared himself ruler of the newly created political entity
which he called the Kingdom of Italy.
Hegel excerpted information on this speech from the Morning
Chronicle: see Petry (: pp. –).


Notes to pages –
The supporter, according to Knox, was Lord Lansdowne.
Knox (Hegel : p. n ) notes Hegel’s confusion of Grey
with Brougham here.
Knox (Hegel : p. n ) corrects Hegel here: ‘The basis of
borough franchise laid down in the Bill was occupation, whether
as owner or tenant, of property of £annual value.’
Between the excessively narrow British and the excessively broad
French political attitudes, the Germans were supposed to occupy
the moderate middle position.
Hegel develops the idea of the ‘rabble’ and its relationship to pov-
erty as early as , in his Heidelberg lectures on the philosophy
of right: see Hegel (: p. ).
The date referred to is June .
Hegel refers to the rule of Charles X in France from to .
The remainder of ERB was suppressed as politically controversial
by the Prussian censor and did not appear in the Allgemeine Preu-
ssische Staatszeitung (cf. note above).
Emanuel Joseph Count Sie´ye`s (–) was instrumental in
the French Revolution and in the rise of Napoleon to power in
France. His manoeuvring went far to pave the way for the 
Brumaire – the date on which Napoleon gained control of the
French government.
This occurred on November (Brumaire, by the French
calendar).
Later in the paragraph, Hegel will use his discussion of Wellington
to introduce a political distinction between statesmen and ‘new
men’ in the English Parliament.
On Wellington, see note above.
On the shopkeeper reference, see note above.
As Hegel has already noted throughout ERB.
Henry (the Orator) Hunt (–) had long been a leading
radical in the reform movement. In the late s, he aggressively
called for universal suffrage.
It is not obvious what the political content of these new ideas is
before their assimilation to French and German circumstances.
It is tempting to connect Hegel’s concern with poverty here with
his long-standing awareness that the division of labour can lead to
the brutalisation of workers in industrial society. But in ERB, he
seems deliberately to avoid discussion of industrial work, suggest-
ing that he intended to focus here on the plight of paupers rather
than the proletariat. While this might make him seem less
modern, it has the advantage of making his critique of propertyless


Notes to pages –
agricultural workers in Britain more relevant to pre-industrial con-
ditions in Prussia. Beck () is helpful on the emergence of
the pauper/proletariat distinction in German thought during the
Restoration.
In other words, political activism will begin to be marked by nega-
tivism, the kind of negativism that Hegel associated with French
political instability.
Wellington’s Ministry resigned on November .
The vote of for, against, occurred on March .
Earl Grey (–) formed a Whig government after Welling-
ton’s resignation.
Hegel applies lessons drawn from his observations of the political
situation in France between and to England.
The reference to ‘indeﬁnite fears’ alludes to the radical ideas of
.
Hegel’s fear is that, before Parliament accepts responsibility for
tending to the material needs of the poor, the a priori/abstract/
formalist principles of will gain a hold on public opinion,
further complicating the shift which he thinks England must make
in order to achieve the level of civilisation – and the ‘police’ func-
tion of government (see note to PH on pp. –above) –
already achieved by the continental states.
This conﬁrms the view of monarchy which we discussed in note
above.


Glossary
Most of the words listed below are ones which present problems for the
translator, including those which are liable to be confused, in English
translation, with one or more near-synonyms, those which have techni-
cal or specialised meanings, and those for which, as used by Hegel,
conventional English renderings are not always adequate. An asterisk
denotes those English terms which, for one of the above reasons, are
normally followed in the text by the original German term in square
brackets. (Where the English term in question occurs more than once
in the same paragraph, the German original is normally supplied only
on the ﬁrst occurrence, unless confusion with related terms is likely or
the interval between occurrences is so great as to justify its repetition.)
The second main category of words listed is that of names of insti-
tutions, events, or practices associated with the Holy Roman Empire
which call for some historical elucidation.
Ahnen, Ahnung
inkling; idea* [cf. Gedanke, Idee,
Vorstellung]; intuition* [cf. Anschauung]
Anordnung
ordinance [cf. Ordnung]
anschauen
to look at; to contemplate; to intuit*
Anschauen
intuition
Anschauung
intuition; perception; view* [cf. Vorstellung]
an sich
in itself; implicitly*
Ansichsein
being-in-itself
Armee
army [cf. Heer]
Aufgehobensein
supersededness; supersession [cf. Aufheben]
aufheben
to supersede; to overcome; to cancel*; to
annul*; to nullify* [cf. vernichten]; to
suspend*; to abolish* [This is, notoriously,


Glossary
one of the most difﬁcult of all Hegel’s
terms to translate. In the systematic works
of his maturity, aufheben (in such cases
normally translated as ‘to supersede’)
encompasses the meanings ‘to remove (or
cancel)’, ‘to raise up’, and ‘to preserve’.]
Aufheben, Aufhebung
supersession [cf. Aufgehobensein]
Aufnahme
[literally, ‘taking up’] elevation;
incorporation*
aufnehmen
to take up; to elevate; to incorporate*
Autorita¨t
authority [in the most general sense; cf. the
more concrete and particular Gewalt,
Herrschaft, and Obrigkeit; also Berechtigung
in the sense of ‘authorisation’]
Bedu¨rfnis
need [cf. Forderung]
Begriff
concept
bei sich
with itself
Berechtigung
justiﬁcation; authority* [in the sense of
‘legitimacy’ or ‘authorisation’; cf. Autorita¨t]
beschließen
to resolve
Beschluß
resolution
Besitz
possession; property* [cf. Eigentum];
ownership* [cf. Eigentum]
besonder
particular; special
Besonderheit
particularity
bestanden
surviving
bestehen
to subsist; to endure; to (continue to) exist*
Bestehen
subsistence; [continued] existence* [cf.
Dasein, Existenz]
bestimmen
to determine; to deﬁne
bestimmt
determinate; deﬁnite; speciﬁc
Bestimmtheit
[a term much used by Hegel in the essay on
Natural Law, often in a sense close to that
of Bestimmung (q.v.), which is commoner in
his later works] determinacy; determinate
character, element, or thing*
Bestimmung
determination; deﬁnition; role*; function*;
provision*
Beziehung
reference; connection; association*;
relation(ship)* [cf. Verha¨ltnis]; context* [cf.
Zusammenhang]; aspect*
bezwingen
[a term used by Hegel on various occasions


Glossary
in the essay on Natural Law, usually in
contrast with zwingen (‘to coerce’), in order
to denote that kind of constraint (e.g. as
employed by a legally constituted authority)
which, unlike simple coercion or Zwang, is
compatible with the free will of those to
whom it is applied] to constrain*; to
overcome*; to suppress*; to dominate*
Bezwingen
constraint
Bildung
education [in the widest sense, as the
development and formation of the whole
personality; cf. the narrower term
Erziehung]; formation; development* [cf.
Entwicklung]; culture* [as the end result of
the educative or formative process; cf.
Kultur]
Bu¨rger
citizen
bu¨rgerlich
civil; civic
bu¨rgerliches Recht
civil right
Bu¨rgerlichkeit
middle class* [cf. Bu¨rgerstand]
Bu¨rgerschaft
citizenry; citizens’ assembly*
Bu¨rgerstand
middle class* [cf. Bu¨rgerlichkeit]
Burgﬂecken
borough
corpus evangelicorum
[literally ‘the body of Protestants’, i.e. the
body representing the Protestant
territories or ‘estates’ (Sta¨nde; q.v.) within
the Holy Roman Empire; or the estates
themselves as a collective unit. Its Catholic
counterpart was the corpus catholicorum]
darstellen
to present; to represent [in the sense of
‘depict’ or ‘portray’; cf. vorstellen]
Dasein
[a near-synonym of Existenz, rendered by
some translators as ‘determinate being’]
existence* [cf. Bestehen]; being* [cf. Sein,
Wesen]
different
different* [cf. Differenz]
Differenz
difference*; differentiation* [a technical
term used by Hegel in the essay on Natural
Law to denote a state of internal division or
differentiation, in contrast to the unity and


Glossary
identity of Indifferenz; cf. Unterschied, the
normal, non-technical word for ‘difference’
or ‘distinction’ in German]
eigen
[adjective] own; individual*; distinct(ive)*
[cf. eigentu¨mlich]
eigentlich
[adjective] actual [in the sense of ‘proper’;
cf. wirklich]; [adverb] actually; in fact
Eigentum
property [cf. Besitz]; ownership
eigentu¨mlich
distinct(ive) [cf. eigen]; proper [as used
before noun in English]; peculiar
Einrichtung
institution; arrangement
Einssein
oneness; identity* [in the sense of
‘oneness’]
Einzelheit
individuality; individual characteristic,
quality, or unit; detail [usually in plural];
singularity*
einzeln
individual
Empﬁndsamkeit
sensibility* [also the eighteenth-century
literary tendency of that name; cf.
Empﬁndung]
Empﬁndung
sensation; sensibility* [cf. Empﬁndsamkeit];
feeling* [cf. Gefu¨hl]
Entfaltung
unfolding; development* [as a synonym of
Entwicklung]
entwickeln
to develop
Entwicklung
development [cf. Entfaltung]
erkennen
to recognise; to know* [through an act
of cognition; cf. kennen, wissen]; to
discover*
Erkennen, Erkenntnis
cognition; recognition; knowledge* [as an
act of cognition; cf. Kenntnis, Wissen,
Wissenschaft]
erscheinen
to appear
Erscheinung
appearance; phenomenon* [as a synonym of
Pha¨nomen]; manifestation*
Erwerb
earning; livelihood; acquisition; gainful
employment*
Erziehung
education [in the sense of ‘upbringing’ and/
or ‘training’; cf. the more comprehensive
term Bildung]
Ethik
ethics [cf. Sittlichkeit]
Existenz
existence [cf. Bestehen, Dasein]


Glossary
Faustrecht
right of private warfare* [literally ‘right of
the ﬁst’, enshrined in the constitution of the
Holy Roman Empire in medieval times; cf.
Landfrieden]
Flecken
borough [cf. Burgﬂecken]; community
fordern
to demand; to require
Forderung
demand; requirement; need* [cf. Bedu¨rfnis]
fu¨r sich
for itself; inherently*; independently*
Fu¨rsichsein
being-for-itself
Fu¨rst
prince; ruler
Fu¨rstentum
principality
Gedanke
thought; idea* [cf. Ahnung, Idee,
Vorstellung]
Gedankending
work [i.e. product] of thought*
Gedankenstaat
state in thought* [i.e. a state which exists
only in theory]
gediegen
sterling; solid*; worthy*
Gediegenheit
solidity*
Gefu¨hl
feeling [cf. Empﬁndung]
Gegensatz
opposite [noun]; antagonism; conﬂict
Gegenstand
object; objective
Gehalt
content [in the sense of essential or
substantial content, unlike the more neutral
Inhalt, which can often be translated as
‘contents’]
Geist
spirit; mind* [cf. Gemu¨t]
Gemu¨t
[a difﬁcult term to translate, because its
wide and variable meaning cannot be
rendered by any single English word; it
denotes in particular the emotional aspects
of mind, in contrast to Geist, which is both
more comprehensive and more rational]
mind; state of mind; disposition* [cf.
Gesinnung]; inclination*; soul* [cf. Seele]
gesetzma¨ßig
lawful; statutory
Gesinnung
disposition [cf. Gemu¨t]; conviction*
Gestalt
shape; form*
Gewalt
force; power; authority* [cf. Autorita¨t,
Berechtigung, Herrschaft, Obrigkeit]
Glu¨ckseligkeitslehre
theory of happiness; eudaemonism
Grund
ground; reason [in the sense of (rational)
ground]; basis


Glossary
Grundsatz
principle [cf. Prinzip]; precept; maxim*
Heer
army; regiment* [to distinguish it when
used in conjunction with its virtual
synonym Armee]
Herrschaft
rule; authority* [cf. Autorita¨t, Gewalt,
Obrigkeit]
Ich
(the) ‘I’
Idee
Idea [in its technical sense within Hegel’s
system]; idea [cf. Ahnung, Gedanke,
Vorstellung]
Inhalt
content(s) [cf. Gehalt]
inneres Staatsrecht
constitutional law* [cf. Staatsrecht]
itio in partes
[Latin] literally ‘going to the parties’ [in a
dispute concerning religion]: i.e. the right
of any party involved in a religious dispute
within the Holy Roman Empire not to be
bound by a majority vote, but to have the
matter settled by negotiation
(das) Jenseits
realm beyond [in the sense of a
transcendental world or afterlife]
Kammergericht
see Reichskammergericht
Kammersteuer
cameral tax(es) [i.e. taxes paid by the
constituent states (or ‘estates’) of the Holy
Roman Empire to support the
Kammergericht and Reichshofrat]
Kammerzieler
see Kammersteuer
kennen
to be familiar with; to know* [through an
act of cognition; cf. erkennen, wissen]
Kenntnis, Kenntnisse
knowledge* [cf. Erkennen, Wissen,
Wissenschaft]
Klasse
[socio-economic] class* [this more modern
term was in Hegel’s day increasingly
displacing the older Stand (q.v.), which
denoted a state or condition within the
social hierarchy determined primarily by
non-economic factors]
Kultur
culture [cf. Bildung]; civilisation*;
agriculture*


Glossary
Landfrieden
prohibition on private warfare* [literally
‘territorial peace’; the prohibition ﬁnally
took effect in the sixteenth century (cf.
Faustrecht)]
Landrecht
law of the land; Common Law
Landschaft
landscape; provincial assembly* [cf.
Landtag]
Landsta¨nde
Provincial Diet* [i.e. an assembly of Estates
or Sta¨nde in a particular territory within the
Holy Roman Empire]
Landtag
Provincial Diet [cf. Landsta¨nde and
Reichstag]
mannigfaltig
manifold
Mannigfaltigkeit
multiplicity [cf. Vielheit]
Meinen, Meinung
opinion; supposition*
(der) Mensch
human being(s); man(kind) [of the human
species as a collective unit]
Menschenverstand
common sense
Ministerium
Ministry, ministers [of government];
administration* [in the sense of
‘government currently in ofﬁce’; cf.
Verwaltung]
Mittel
means; instrument*
Moment
moment [in the sense of ‘essential
component’]; element; aspect*
Moral, Moralita¨t
morality [used by Hegel of moral
philosophies (e.g. that of Kant) which are
less comprehensive than his own ethics of
Sittlichkeit (q.v.)]
Nation
nation [cf. Volk]
Naturrecht
natural law
Nicht-Ich
(the) not-‘I’
nichtig
null and void; insigniﬁcant*
Nichtigkeit
nullity [cf. Nichts]
Nichts
nothing(ness); nullity [cf. Nichtigkeit]
Not
privation; urgency; needs; necessity* [cf.
Notwendigkeit]
Notwendigkeit
necessity [cf. Not]
Obrigkeit
authority [as a publicly constituted body


Glossary
within the state; cf. Autorita¨t, Berechtigung,
Gewalt, Herrschaft]
Ordnung
order; arrangement* [cf. Anordnung]
Pha¨nomen
phenomenon [cf. Erscheinung]
Phantasie
imagination
Potenz
[literally ‘potential’ or ‘power’; a term with
scientiﬁc associations, used by Hegel in his
essay on Natural Law to denote a stage,
level, or area, with potential for further
development, within a larger whole or
system] level*; status*; area*; potentiality*
Prinzip
principle [cf. Grundsatz]
Privatrecht
civil law
Ra¨sonnement
ratiocination; reasoning
Realita¨t
reality
Recht
right; law* [as in Privatrecht, Staatsrecht,
etc.]
rechtlich
legal*; in accordance with right
Rechtlichkeit
integrity*
rechtlos
lawless*
rechtschaffen
honest; meritorious*
Rechtschaffenheit
rectitude*
Rechtsgrund
legal title*; legality*
Rechtspﬂege
administration of justice; judicial
procedure*
Rechtssache
legal case
Rechtswissenschaft
science of right
Rechtszustand
state of law*
reell
real; material*
Reellsein
real existence* [cf. Existenz]
Regierungsgewalt
executive power; power of government
Reichshofrat
Aulic Council [one of the two Supreme
Courts of the Holy Roman Empire; the
Aulic Council, which was based in Vienna,
dealt with cases involving member states
(i.e. ‘estates’) of the Empire, whereas the
Reichskammergericht (q.v.), based in
Wetzlar, dealt with cases involving
individuals]


Glossary
Reichskammergericht (or
Supreme Court* (of the Holy Roman
Kammergericht)
Empire) [in fact one of two Supreme
Courts, the other being the Reichshofrat or
Aulic Council (see preceding entry)]
Reichsoberhaupt
Imperial head; head of the [Holy Roman]
Empire [i.e. the Emperor himself]
Reichstag
Imperial Diet [Estates Assembly (or
Parliament) of the Holy Roman Empire,
which met in Regensburg]
reichsunmittelbar
directly subordinate to the Emperor [as
applied to heads of territorial governments
within the Holy Roman Empire and to
other individuals (such as the Free Knights)
who owed allegiance to the Emperor alone]
Reichsunmittelbarkeit
direct dependence on the Empire (or
Emperor) [see preceding entry]
Reichsverband
Imperial union [i.e. the Holy Roman
Empire itself, as a federation of member
states (or ‘estates’)]
Reversalien
undertakings [on the part of princes of the
Holy Roman Empire] to protect the rights
of subjects*
Sache
thing; cause [as a principle espoused];
substance* [cf. Substanz]; (plural) issues*
Schein
semblance; appearance* [cf. Erscheinung]
Schicksal
fate; destiny
schlechthin
purely (and simply); utterly; without
qualiﬁcation; absolutely*
Seele
soul [cf. Gemu¨t]
Sein
being [cf. Dasein, Wesen]
selbsta¨ndig
self-sufﬁcient; independent
Selbstgefu¨hl
self-conﬁdence
setzen
to posit
Sitte
custom; (plural) customs; manners; ethics*
[cf. Ethik, Sittlichkeit]
Sittengesetz
moral law*
sittlich
ethical; moral* [when applied to narrower
(e.g. Kantian) conceptions of ethics than
Hegel’s own theory of Sittlichkeit as ethical
life in general]
Sittlichkeit
ethical life; ethics [cf. Ethik, Sitten];
morality* [see previous entry]


Glossary
Staat
state [as a political unit; cf. Zustand]
Staatsgewalt
political authority; authority of the state [cf.
Autorita¨t, Gewalt, Staatsmacht]
Staatsko¨rper
body politic
Staatsmacht
political power; power of the state; political
authority* [cf. Staatsgewalt]
Staatsrecht
constitutional law; political right*; (plural)
constitutional rights [cf. inneres Staatsrecht]
Staatsverfassung
(political) constitution
Stand
estate [(i) as a social ‘class’ in the older
sense of a state or condition, not primarily
determined by economic factors, within the
social hierarchy (cf. Klasse); (ii) the
traditional designation for a member state
or constituent territory, with rights of
representation, within the Holy Roman
Empire]; class* [cf. Klasse]
Sta¨nde
[plural of Stand (q.v.)] Estates [as a
parliamentary assembly]; estates [in one of
the two senses speciﬁed under Stand
above]; classes* [cf. Klasse]
Standpunkt
viewpoint; point of view
Substanz
substance [cf. Sache]
tapfer
valiant
Tapferkeit
valour; courage
Trieb
drive; initiative*
unsittlich
immoral* [see comment under sittlich
above]
Unsittlichkeit
immorality* [see comment under sittlich
above]
Unterschied
difference [cf. Differenz]; distinction
Verha¨ltnis
relation(ship) [cf. Beziehung]; (plural
Verha¨ltnisse) relations(hips); circumstances
verkehrt
distorted
vernichten
to destroy; to nullify or annul [cf. aufheben]
Vernichtetsein
nulliﬁcation; annulment
Vernichtung
destruction; nulliﬁcation; annulment
Vernunft
reason [i.e. rationality in a universal sense;
cf. Grund]


Glossary
vernu¨nftig
rational
Verstand
understanding; intelligence; ingenuity*;
mentality*
Verwaltung
administration [i.e. the act of administering,
or the body responsible for it; cf.
Ministerium]
Vielheit
plurality; multiplicity* [cf. Mannigfaltigkeit]
Volk
people; nation* [cf. Nation]; state* [cf.
Staat]
Vo¨lkerrecht
international law
vollendet
complete
Vollendung
completion; complete state*
vollkommen
perfect
vorstellen
[reﬂexive verb] to represent (to oneself)
[cf. darstellen]; to conceive of*; to
contemplate*
Vorstellung
representational thought; representation*;
view [cf. Anschauung]; notion*; conception*;
idea* [cf. Ahnung, Gedanke, Idee]; model*
Wahlkapitulation
electoral contract*
wahr
true [cf. wahrhaft]
wahrhaft
true [cf. wahr]; genuine
Wahrheit
truth
Weltweisheit
literally ‘worldly wisdom’ [the usual
German term for ‘philosophy’ during the
eighteenth century until it was displaced by
Philosophie]
Wesen
essence; essential being (or nature); being
[in the sense of ‘creature’ or ‘living entity’];
being* [cf. Sein]; character*
wesenlos
insubstantial
Willku¨r
arbitrariness; arbitrary will
willku¨rlich
arbitrary
wirklich
actual [in the Hegelian sense of ‘fully
realised’; cf. eigentlich]
Wirklichkeit
actuality
wissen
to know [in a passive sense, as with factual
knowledge; cf. kennen, erkennen]
Wissen
knowledge [as deﬁned in the previous entry;
cf. Erkennen, Kenntnis, Wissenschaft]
Wissenschaft
science [i.e. systematic knowledge of every
kind, including not only natural science, but


Glossary
all academic disciplines]; knowledge* [cf.
Kenntnis, Erkenntnis]
wissenschaftlich
scientiﬁc [see the previous entry]
Wollen
volition; willing
Zufall
contingency; accident; chance
zufa¨llig
contingent; accidental; fortuitous
Zusammenhang
context; framework; connection
Zustand
condition; state* [cf. Staat]
Zwang
coercion
Zweck
end; aim; purpose
zwingen
to coerce [cf. bezwingen]


Bibliography of works cited in this edition
Acton, H. B. (), ‘Introduction’ to Hegel’s Natural Law, tr. T. M.
Knox (Philadelphia, PA)
Avineri,
Shlomo
(),
Hegel’s
Theory
of
the
Modern
State
(Cambridge)
(), ‘Feature Book Review: The Discovery of Hegel’s Early Lec-
tures on the Philosophy of Right’, The Owl of Minerva, vol. ,
pp. –
Barker, Ernst (), ‘Introduction’ to Otto Gierke’s Natural Law and
the Theory of Society to , tr. E. Barker (Boston, MA)
Beck, Hermann (), The Origins of the Authoritarian Welfare State
in Prussia (Ann Arbor, MI)
Beiser, Frederick (), Enlightenment, Revolution, and Romanticism
(Cambridge, MA)
Berdahl, Robert (), The Politics of the Prussian Nobility (Princeton,
NJ)
Bigler, Robert (), The Politics of German Protestantism (Berkeley,
CA)
Bradley, A. C. (), ‘Hegel’s Theory of Tragedy’, in Oxford Lectures
on Poetry (New York), pp. –
Brandes, Ernst (), Betrachtungen u¨ber den Zeitgeist in Deutschland
(Hannover)
Cassirer, Ernst (), The Myth of the State (New Haven, CT)
Constant, Benjamin (), Political Writings, tr. and ed. Bianca-Maria
Fontana (Cambridge)
Crouter, Richard (), ‘Hegel and Schleiermacher at Berlin: A
Many-Sided Debate’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion,
vol. , pp. –
Dahrendorf, Ralf (), Society and Democracy in Germany (Garden
City, NY)


Bibliography
de Maistre, Joseph (), ‘Re´ﬂexion sur le Protestantisme’, in Oeuvres
Comple`tes, vol. (Lyons), pp. –
Dickey, Laurence (), Hegel: Religion, Economics, and the Politics of
Spirit, –(Cambridge)
(), ‘Hegel on Religion and Philosophy’, in The Cambridge Com-
panion to Hegel, ed. Frederick Beiser (Cambridge), pp. –
Epstein, Klaus (), The Genesis of German Conservatism (Princeton,
NJ)
Ferguson, Adam (), An Essay on the History of Civil Society, ed.
Fania Oz-Salzberger (Cambridge)
Gooch, G. P. (), Germany and the French Revolution (New York)
Goodenough, E. R. (), ‘The Political Philosophy of Hellenistic
Kingship’, Yale Classical Studies, vol. , pp. –
Habermas, Ju¨rgen (), Legitimation Crisis, tr. T. McCarthy (Boston,
MA)
Harris, H. S. (), Hegel’s Development, vol. : Toward the Sunlight
(Oxford)
(), Hegel’s Development, vol. : Night Thoughts (Oxford)
(), Between Kant and Hegel, tr. G. di Vioganni (Albany, NY)
(), ‘Hegel’s Intellectual Development to ’, in Cambridge
Companion to Hegel, ed. Frederick Beiser (Cambridge), pp. –
Haym, Rudolf (), Hegel und seine Zeit (Darmstadt)
Hegel, G. W. F. (), The Phenomenology of Mind, tr. J. B. Baillie
(New York)
(), On Christianity: The Early Theological Writings, tr. T. M.
Knox (Chicago, IL)
(), The Philosophy of History, tr. J. Sibree (New York)
(), Hegel’s Political Writings, tr. T. M. Knox (Oxford)
(), Philosophy of Mind, Being Part Three of the Encyclopaedia of
the Philosophy of Sciences, tr. W. Wallace (Oxford)
(), Lectures on the Philosophy of World History. Introduction, tr.
H.
B.
Nisbet,
with
an
introduction
by
Duncan
Forbes
(Cambridge)
(), ‘System of Ethical Life’ and ‘First Philosophy of Spirit’, tr. and
ed. T. M. Knox and H. S. Harris (Albany, NY)
(a), Three Essays, –, tr. and ed. P. Fuss and J. Dobbins
(Notre Dame, IN)
(b), Hegel: The Letters, tr. C. Butler and C. Seiler (Bloomington,
IN)
(a), Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen W. Wood, tr.
H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge)
(b), The Encyclopedia Logic, tr. T. Geraets, W. Suchting, and
H. S. Harris (Indianapolis, IN)


Bibliography
(), Lectures on Natural Law and Political Science, tr. J. Stewart
and P. Hodgson (Berkeley, CA)
Heine, Heinrich (), The Romantic School and Other Essays, ed. Jost
Hermand (New York)
Hellmuth, Eckhart (ed.) (), The Transformation of Political Culture
(New York)
Hodgson, Peter (), Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion,
vol. , tr. R. Brown, P. Hodgson, and J. Stewart, ed. P. Hodgson
(Berkeley, CA)
Hof, Ulrich (), ‘German Associations and Politics in the Second
Half of the Eighteenth Century’, in The Transformation of Political
Culture, ed. E. Hellmuth (New York), pp. –
Hoover, Jeffrey (), ‘The Origin of the Conﬂict Between Hegel and
Schleiermacher at Berlin’, The Owl of Minerva, vol. , pp. –
Hyppolite, Jean (), Hegel’s Philosophy of History, tr. B. Harris and
J. Spurlock (Gainsville, FL)
Inwood, M. J. (), ‘Hegel, Plato and Greek ‘‘Sittlichkeit’’ ’, in The
State and Civil Society, ed. Z. A. Pelczynski (Cambridge)
Jaeger, Werner (), Early Christianity and Greek Paidei (Cambridge,
MA)
Jaeschke, Walter (), ‘Hegel’s Last Year in Berlin’, in Hegel’s Philos-
ophy of Action, ed. L. Stepelevich and D. Lamb (Atlantic High-
lands, NJ), pp. –
Jaeschke, Walter and Meist, Kurt (), Hegel in Berlin (Bonn)
Junkin, E. D. (), Religion versus Revolution (Austin, TX)
Kaufmann, Walter (ed.) (), Hegel’s Political Philosophy (New York)
Klippel, Diethelm (), ‘The True Concept of Liberty’, in The
Transformation of Political Culture, ed. E. Hellmuth (New York),
pp. –
Knox, T. M. (), Hegel’s Natural Law, tr. T. M. Knox
(Philadelphia, PA)
Knudsen, Jonathan (), ‘The Limits of Liberal Politics in Berlin,
–’, in In Search of a Liberal Germany, ed. L. Jones and K.
Jarausch (New York), pp. –
La Vopa, Anthony (), ‘The Revelatory Moment: Fichte and the
French Revolution’, Central European History, vol. , pp. –
Law, Edmund (), Considerations on the State of the World with
Regard to the Theory of Religion (Cambridge)
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (), Lessing’s Theological Writings, tr.
Henry Chadwick (Stanford, CA)
McClelland, Charles (), The German Historians and England
(Cambridge)


Bibliography
Macpherson, C. B. (), The Political Theory of Possessive Individual-
ism (Oxford)
Meier, Christian (), The Greek Discovery of Politics tr. David
McClintock (Cambridge, MA)
Meinecke, Friedrich (), Cosmopolitanism and the National State, tr.
R. B. Kimber (Princeton, NJ)
Nicolin, Gu¨nther (ed.) (), Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen
(Hamburg)
Nisbet, H. B. () ‘ ‘‘Was ist Aufkla¨rung?’’: The Concept of Enlight-
enment in Eighteenth-Century Germany’, Journal of European
Studies, vol. , pp. –
North, Helen (), Sophrosyne (Ithaca, NY)
Novalis (), extracts in The Early Writings of the German Romantics,
ed. Frederick Beiser (Cambridge)
O’Regan, Cyril (), ‘Hegelian Philosophy of Religion and Eckhar-
tian Mysticism’, in New Perspectives on Hegel’s Philosophy of
Religion, ed. D. Kolb (Albany, NY), pp. –
Ottmann, Henning (), ‘Hegel and Political Trends: A Criticism of
the Political Hegel Legends’, in The Hegel Myths and Legends, ed.
Jon Stewart (Evanston, IL), pp. –
Ozment, Steven (), Homo Spiritualis (Leiden)
Oz-Salzberger, Fania (), Translating the Enlightenment (Oxford)
Parry, G. (), ‘Enlightened Government and Its Critics in Eight-
eenth-Century Germany’, The Historical Journal, vol. , pp. –

Petry, M. J. (), ‘Hegel and the ‘‘Morning Chronicle’’ ’, Hegel-
Studien, vol. , pp. –
Pocock, J. G. A. (), ‘Between Machiavelli and Hume: Gibbon as
Civic Humanist and Philosophical Historian’, in Edward Gibbon
and the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ed. G. Bowerstock
and J. Clive (Cambridge, MA), pp. –
Riedel, Manfred (), Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian
Transformation of Political Philosophy, tr. W. Wright (Cambridge)
Ritter, Joachim (), Hegel and the French Revolution, tr. R. Winﬁeld
(Cambridge, MA)
Rosenberg, Hans (), Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy
(Boston, MA)
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (), On the Social Contract, tr. J. Masters,
ed. R. Masters (New York)
Royce, Josiah (), Lectures on Modern Idealism (New Haven, CT)
Ruge, Arnold (), ‘Hegel’s ‘‘Philosophy of Right’’ and the Politics
of Our Times’, in The Young Hegelians, ed. L. Stepelevich
(Cambridge), pp. –


Bibliography
Safranski, Ru¨diger (), Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philos-
ophy, tr. E. Osers (Cambridge, MA)
Saine, Thomas (), ‘A Peculiar German View of the French Revol-
ution: The Revolution as German Reformation’, in Aufnahme–
Weitergabe, ed. John McCarthy and Albert Kipa (Hamburg), pp.
–
Santayana, George (), The German Mind: A Philosophical Diagnosis
(New York)
Schelling, F. W. J. (), On University Studies, tr. E. S. Morgan, ed.
N. Guterman (Athens, OH)
(),
System
of
Transcendental
Idealism,
tr.
Peter
Heath
(Charlottesville, VA)
Schiller, Friedrich (), On the Aesthetic Education of Man, tr. and
ed. E. M. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby (Oxford)
Schilling, Heinz (ed.) (), Die reformierte Konfessionalisierung in
Deutschland: Das Problem der ‘Zweiten Reformation’, (Gu¨tersloh)
(), Religion, Political Culture, and the Emergence of Early Modern
Society (New York)
Schlegel, Friedrich (), Philosophical Fragments, tr. P. Firchow
(Minneapolis, MN)
(), extracts in The Early Political Writings of the German Roman-
tics, ed. Frederick Beiser (Cambridge)
Schmidt, James (ed.) (), What is Enlightenment? (Berkeley, CA)
Schmidt, Martin (), ‘Pietism’, in The Encyclopedia of the Lutheran
Church, vol. (Minneapolis, MN)
Schmitt, Carl (), The Concept of the Political, tr. G. Schwab
(Chicago, IL)
Schopenhauer, Arthur (), Parerga and Paralipomena, vol. , tr.
E. F. J. Payne (Oxford)
(), On the Basis of Morality, tr. E. F. J. Payne (Oxford)
Sheehan, James (), ‘Liberalism and Society in Germany, –’,
Journal of Modern History, vol. , pp. –
(), German History –(Oxford)
Simmel, Georg (), The Sociology of Georg Simmel, tr. K. H. Wolff
(Glencoe, IL)
Smith, Adam (), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations, vols., ed. R. H. Campbell and A. S. Skinner
(Indianapolis, IN)
Smith, R. J. (), The Gothic Bequest (London)
Sprat, Thomas (), History of the Royal Society (St Louis, MO)
Stewart, Jon (ed.) (), The Hegel Myths and Legends (Evanston, IL)
Strauss, Leo (), The City and Man (Chicago, IL)


Bibliography
Toews, John (), Hegelianism (Cambridge)
Turgot, A. R. J. (), The Economics of A. R. J. Turgot, tr. and ed.
P. D. Groenewegen (The Hague)
Vierhaus, Rudolf (), Deutschland im . Jahrhundert (Go¨ttingen)
Villers, Charles (), An Essay on the Spirit and Inﬂuence of the Refor-
mation by Luther, nd edn, tr. B. Lambert (Dover, NH)
Voegelin, Eric (), Science, Politics and Gnosticism (Chicago, IL)
(), ‘On Hegel – A Study in Sorcery’, Studium Generale, vol. ,
pp. –
Walker, Mack (), Johann Jakob Moser and the Holy Roman Empire
of the German Nation (Chapel Hill, NC)
Waszek, Norbert (), ‘Hegels Exzerpte aus der ‘‘Edinburgh
Review’’ –’, Hegel-Studien, vol. , pp. –
(), The Scottish Enlightenment and Hegel’s Account of ‘Civil
Society’ (Dordrecht)
Westphal, Merold (), ‘Hegel and the Reformation’, in History and
System: Hegel’s Philosophy of History, ed. R. L. Perkins (Albany,
NY), pp. –
Wolin, Sheldon (), Politics and Vision (Boston, MA)


Index of names
Acropolis, 
Acton, H. B., 
Aeschylus, , , 
Alexander VI, Pope, , 
Alsace, –
Altenstein, K. S. F., Freiherr von, –

America, , , 
Anaxagoras, 
Anspach, 
Apollo, 
Areopagus, 
Arezzo, , 
Aristippus, 
Aristophanes, 
Aristotle, xxxii–xxxiii, xli, , , ,
–
Armenians, 
Athena, , 
Athens, Athenians, , , , , 
Augsburg, League of, 
Augsburg Confession, xxiv, xlvi–xlix,
–, 
Aulic Council, –, , 
Austria, xiv, , –, , , , –,
, –, –, –, , , 
Austrian Succession, war of, 
Avineri, Shlomo, xxxv, xxxviii, 
Baden, 
Baden, Peace of, –
Bamberg, xliii
Bank of England, 
Barker, Ernst, xxxi, xli, 

Barker, E., –
Batavia, 
Bavaria, , , , , , , 
Bayreuth, 
Beck, Hermann, –, 
Beck, Lewis White, 
Bedford, Duke of, 
Beiser, Frederick, xxxv
Bentham, Jeremy, xxxvi, 
Bentivoglia, 
Berdahl, Robert, xxxiv, xxxix
Berlin, viii, xxii–xxiv, xxvi–xxviii, xxx,
xxxv, xliii, xlv, xlvii, xlix, , ,
–, , , , –, ,
, –, 
Berne, xlii, , , 
Besanc¸on, 
Bible, 
Bigler, Robert, xxxiv
Bill of Rights, 
Birmingham, 
Bochum, 
Bohemia, , , , 
Bologna, 
Bonaparte, see Napoleon
Borgia, Cesare, , 
Bradley, A. C., 
Brandenburg, , , , , , , ,
–, 
Brandes, Ernst, xiv, xxxv
Breisach, 
Bremen, , 
Bressanone, see Brixen
Britain (see also England), xiii–v, xvii–
viii, xxxiv, –, , , 

Index of names
Brixen, Bishop of, 
Brougham, Henry, , , , 
Brown, R. F., xlvii
Brunner, Otto, xlix
Brunswick, 
Buchner, Otto, xlix
Burgundy, , 
Burke, Edmund, –, , 
Burschenschaften, xliii, 
Bury, J. B., 
Butler, Clark, xxxviii, 
Caesar, Julius, , , 
Calvinism, xxxix, , , , –,

Cambrai, League of, 
Cart, J. J., , 
Cartwright, Major John, xxxvi
Cassirer, Ernst, xxxii, xli, 
Catholics, Catholicism, xxiv–vi, xxx, xl,
–, , , , –, –, ,
, –, , –, –,
, –, –, , , ,
, –, –, –, –,
–, , , 
Cato the Younger, –, , 
Cerf, W., xlix
Charlemagne, , 
Charles V (Emperor), , –
Charles X (of France), , , 
Charles XII (of Sweden), , , 
charte constitutionelle , 
Chatham, Earl of, 
Chemnitz, Bogislaus Philipp von (pseud.
Hippolytus a Lapide), , 
Christ, see Jesus
Christians, Christianity, xix–xx, xxv–vi,
xxxvii, , –, , , ,
, , , , , –, ,

Church Fathers, 
Church of England, –
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, xlvi, , ,
, , 
Cisalpine Republic, 
Coburg-Eisenberg, 
Coburg-Ro¨mhild, 
Cohler, Anne M., l
Colonna, Duke of, 
Compact of Election, 
Constance, Council of, 
Constant, Benjamin, 

Consulate (of France), 
Conze, Werner, xlix
corpus evangelicorum , 
Count Palatine, 
Crouter, Richard, xxxviii–ix
Cyrus, 
Dahrendorf, Ralf, xxxi, xxxiv, xli
Dante Alighieri, , 
David, Psalms of, 
de Maistre, Joseph, xl
Demarcation Commission, 
Denmark, , –, 
Descartes, Rene´, , 
Dickey, Laurence, xxxviii–ix, xlviii, ,

Diogenes Laertius, 
Directorate (of France), , 
Dissenters, 
Dominicans, 
Donauwo¨rth, 
Droysen, J. G., xl
East India Company, 
Edinburgh Review, –
Egypt, 
Emperor, Holy Roman, , –, , ,
, –, –, –, , –, ,
–, , , , 
Empress [Maria Theresa], 
England (see also Britain), x–xi, xiii–xviii,
xxxv–vi, , –, –, , , ,
, , –, , –, ,
–, , , –, , –

Enlightenment, xii, xxvii, , , ,
, , , , , –, 
Epaminondas, 
Epstein, Klaus, 
Estates [parliament] (see also ‘assembly,
provincial’ in Index of subjects)
xxxiv, , , , , 
Estates General (of France), –
Eucharist, 
Eumenides, 
Euripedes, 
Europe, x–xi, xiii–xv, xxii–iii, xxvi–viii,
xxxiv, xxxix, xliii, , –, –,
–, , , , , , , –,
–, , , , , –,
, , –, –, , ,


Index of names
Faust, 
Faustrecht, , 
Ferdinand II (Emperor), , , 
Ferguson, Adam, –, 
Ferrara, 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, xxxv, xliii, l,
, , –, , , , –
, , , , 
Forbes, Duncan, , –
Fowler, H. N., –
Fox, Charles James, xxxiv, 
France, French, x–xi, xiii–iv, xviii, xxvi–
vii, xxx, xlvii, , , , , –,
, , –, –, , –, –,
–, –, , , , ,
, –, , , , –,
–, , –, –, , –
, –, , , , , –
, –, –, –
Franconia, xlvi, , –
Frankfurt, xliii
Frederick I (Barbarossa), , 
Frederick II (the Great), , , –,
, , , –, 
Frederick Eugene, Duke of
Wu¨rttemberg, 
Frederick William III (of Prussia), ,
, –, –
Freemasonry, 
Freiburg, 
Fries, Jakob Friedrich, xxiii, xliii, ,

French Revolution (; see also July
Revolution, ), xiv, xvii–viii,
xxvii, xxxiii, xxxv, xl, , –,
, , , , –, –,
, , , , –, , –
, –, –, –
Fu¨rstenbund, see League of Princes
Geneva, 
Genoa, , , 
George I (of England), 
Germanic world, , , , , 
Germans, Germany, x, xi–xiv, xvi–ii,
xxii, xxiii–iv, xxx, xxxi–ii, xxxiv,
xxxvi, xxxix, xli, xliii, , –, –
, , , –, –, –, –
, –, –, –, –,
, –, , –, , ,
–, , –, , , ,
–, –, –, –, –

, , –, –, , ,
–, –
Ghibellines, 
Gibbon, Edward, , –
Glarus, 
Glockner, Hermann, xlviii, 
God, xix–xx, xxv–vii, –, , ,
, –, –, –, ,
–, –, –, , , ,
–, , –
Gonzaga, 
Gooch, G. P., 
Goodenough, E. R., 
Greece, Greeks, xix, , , , ,
, –, , , 
Grey, Earl, , , , –
Grotius, Hugo, 
Guelphs, 
Gustavus Adolphus, , 
Habermas, Ju¨rgen, , 
Habsburgs, 
Halberstadt, , 
Halle, 
Hamburg, 
Hannibal, 
Hanover, Hanoverians, xiii–xiv, xxxv, ,
, –, 
Harris, H. S., xxxv, xxxviii, xl, xlix,
–, –, , –, 
Haym, Rudolf, xxxiii, xxxviii, , ,
–
Hebrews, 
Hegel Archive, 
Hegel, G. W. F., vii–l, –, , –

Hegel, Karl, 
Heidelberg, xxxviii, xliii, xlix, , 
Heine, Heinrich, 
Hellmuth, Eckhart, xxxiv
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 
Hesse, , , , 
Hippolytus a Lapide (pseud.; see
Chemnitz)
Hobbes, Thomas, 
Hodgson, Peter C., xlvii, , 
Hof, Ulrich, 
Hoffmeister, Johannes, xlvii–viii, 
Ho¨lderlin, Friedrich, xlii
Holland, , 

Index of names
Holy Roman Empire, xi–xiii, xlii, , –
, –, –, –, –, , ,
, –, –, , , , –, ,
, –, , , , , ,
–, 
Holy Spirit, , 
Homer, 
Hook, Sidney, xxxiii
Hoover, Jeffrey, xxxviii–ix
Huguenots, –, 
Hume, Joseph, , 
Hungary, , , , 
Hunt, Henry (Orator), , 
Huskisson, William, , 
Hyppolite, Jean, xxxvii, , –,
–
Imperial Diet, –, , , , –,
, , , –, –, , , 
India, 
Innsbruck, 
Inquisition, 
Inwood, M. J., 
Ireland, , –, , 
Isocrates, 
Israelites (see also Jews), , 
Italy, , , , –, , , ,
, , , 
itio in partes, –, , 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 
Jacobins, , , 
Jaeger, Werner, xxxvii
Jaeschke, Walter, xxxviii–ix, xl, , ,
–, , 
Jena, xix, xxi, xliii, , 
Jericho, 
Jesuits, –, , –, 
Jesus, xix, , , –, , , 
Jews (see also Israelites), xix, xxxix, ,
, , , , 
Joseph II (Emperor), , , , , ,

Jowett, Benjamin, , 
Judaism, 
Ju¨lich-Berg, 
Ju¨lich-Cleve, , 
Julius II, Pope, 
July Revolution (), xxvi, xl, ,
–, , –, –
Junkin, E. D., 
Justi, J. H. G. von, 

Kammerzieler, , , 
Kammin, , 
Kant, Immanuel, xxi, xlii, xlix, , –
, , , , –, –, ,
, , 
Kaufmann, Walter, xxxiii
Kehl, 
Kemp Smith, Norman, 
Klippel, Diethelm, xxxiv, 
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlob, 
Knox, T. M., vii–ix, xxxiii, xlvi, l, ,
, , –
Knudsen, Jonathan, xl
Koselleck, Reinhart, xlix
Kroeger, A.E., l
Landfrieden, –, –
Lansdowne, Henry, third Marquis of,

Lares and Penates, 
Lasson, Georg, xlvii, , , 
La Vopa, Anthony, 
Law, Edmund, 
League of Princes (Fu¨rstenbund), –,

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 
Leopold I (Emperor), 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, xxxvii
Lie`ge, 
Liguria, 
Liverpool, –
Liverpool, Robert, second Earl of, –
Livy (Titus Livius), 
Lloyd-Jones, Hugh, 
Lombards, 
Lombardy, , 
Lorraine, 
Louis XIV, , 
Lucca, 
Lune´ville, Peace of, 
Luther, Martin, xxiv–v, xxvii, –,
, –, , , –, –,

Lutherans, Lutheranism, xxiv–vi, –,
, , –, –, , 
Machiavelli, Niccolo, –, –
Mackintosh, James, xxxvi, 
Macpherson, C. B., xxix, xl
McClelland, Charles, xxxv
McCulloch, J. R., 
Magdeburg, , 

Index of names
Magna Charta, , 
Maistre, see de Maistre
Manning, William, , 
Maximilian I (Emperor), 
Mazarin, Cardinal Jules, 
Medes, 
Medici family, 
Meier, Christian, 
Meinecke, Friedrich, , 
Meist, Kurt, xxxviii–xxxix, 
Metz, 
Michel, Karl Markus, xlvii, l
Michelangelo, 
Middle Ages, xxxvi, , –, , 
Middleton, Conyers, 
Milan, , 
Mill, John Stuart, xxxvi
Mill, James, xxxvi–vii, , –
Millar, John, 
Miller, Basia Carolyn, l
Minden, , 
Moldenhauer, Eva, xlvii, l
Mollet, George, 
Montesquieu, Charles–Louis de
Secondat, Baron de, xiii, xxxiv–v, l,
, , , , 
Morning Chronicle, –, –
Moser, Friedrich Karl von, –
Moser, Johann Jakob, 
Moses, 
Mu¨ller, Johannes von, , 
Munsch, P., 
Munson, P., xxxix
Naples, , , , 
Napoleon, xliii, , , , , ,
, , –, , –
National Assembly (France), 
National Convention (France), 
Netherlands, , , 
Neuburg Palatine, 
Neuser, W., xxxix, 
New Testament, 
Newtonians, 
Nicolin, Gu¨nther, xl
Nijmegen, Treaty of, , 
Nisbet, H. B., l, , , , –
North, Helen, 
Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg),
xxvii, xl, , 
Nuremberg (Nu¨rnberg), xliii, –
Old Testament, 

O’Regan, Cyril, xxxvii
Orestes, 
Ottmann, Henning, 
Ozment, Steven, xxxvii
Oz-Salzberger, Fania, , 
Palatinate, , , 
Papal See, 
Paris, , 
Parliament (British), xv–xviii, , ,
–, –, , –, ,
, –
Parry, G., xxxv, 
Pascal, Blaise, 
Peel, Sir Robert, , , , , 
Pelczynski, Z.A., vii–ix, xxxiii, xl, xlvi–
vii, l, 
Persians, , 
Petry, M. J., xxxvi, , –
Philip II (of Spain), 
Pico, 
Piedmont, 
Pietism, xxiv, 
Pilate, see Pontius Pilate
Pindar, 
Pisa, , 
Pitt, William (the Younger), , 
Plato, xxxii, , –, , , ,
, –, , , –
Pocock, J. G. A., 
Po¨ggeler, Otto, xlix
Poland, , , , , , 
Pomerania, , –
Pompey (Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus), 
Pontius Pilate, 
Pownall, Thomas, 
Prague, Treaty of, 
Price, Russell, 
Protestantism, Protestants, viii, xxi–ii,
xxiv–viii, xxx, xxxiii, xxxviii–xl, ,
–, , , , –, , –,
, –, –, , , ,
, , , –, , –,
, –, –
Prussia, viii–ix, xiv, xxii–vi, xxx, xxxiii,
xxxvi, xxxviii–ix, xliii, , –, ,
, , , –, , , , –,
–, , , , –, –,
, –, , , , –
, –
Pufendorf, Samuel von, 
Rackham, H., 

Index of names
Rastatt, Congress of, , 
Ratzeburg, 
Red Sea, 
Reform Bill (British), x–xi, xiv–vii,
xxxvi, xlviii–ix, –, , ,

Reformation, xxv–viii, xxx, xl, , –
, , , , , –, –
, , –, 
Reign of Terror, , 
Reimarus, Hermann Samuel, 
Renaissance, 
Restoration, ix, xxiv, xl, , , 
Rhine, , , , 
Rhineland, 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis,
Cardinal, Duc de, –, , 
Riedel, Manfred, xl
Ritschl, Albrecht, 
Ritter, Joachim, ix, xxxiii, xl, 
Robertson, William, 
Robespierre, Maximilien, , , ,

Roman law, see law (Index of Subjects)
Roman Months, , , 
Romanticism, , 
Rome, Romans, xix, xxix, –, , –
, –, –, , , , ,
, , –
Rosenberg, Hans, xxxviii
Rosenkranz, Karl, xxxiii, , –
Rousseau, Jean–Jacques, xl, 
Royce, Josiah, xli
Ruge, Arnold, –, , 
Russell, Lord John, 
Russia, , , , 
Ryswick, Peace of, 
Safranski, Ru¨diger, 
Saine, Thomas P., 
St Peters (Rome), 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy,
Comte de, xxxvi
San Marino, 
Santayana, George, xxxix, xli
Savigny, Friedrich Karl von, 
Saxony, , , , , , 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von,
xxxviii, xlii–iii, –, , 
Schiller, Friedrich, xiv, xxxv, , 
Schilling, Heinz, xxxix, 
Schlegel, Friedrich, , –, 

Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst Daniel,
–
Schmidt, James, xxxiv
Schmidt, Martin, 
Schmitt, Carl, xxix, xxxii, xl–xli, 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, xxxi, xxxiii,
xxxix, xli
Schwerin, 
Seven Years War, , , , , , 
Sforza, 
Sheehan, James, xxxvi, xxxviii
Sibree, J., xlvii
Sicily, 
Sickingen, Franz von, 
Siena, , 
Sie´ye`s, Emanuel Joseph, Comte de, ,

Silesia, , 
Silesian War, First (War of the Austrian
Succession), 
Simmel, Georg, 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Leonard
Simonde de, xxxv
Sistine Chapel, 
Skinner, Quentin, 
Smalkaldic League, 
Smith, Adam, , 
Smith, R. J., xxxiv
Socinians, 
Socrates, , 
Sophocles, 
Spain, Spanish, , , , , , ,
, 
Sparta, 
Spee von Langenfeld, Friedrich, ,

Spence, William, 
Sprat, Thomas, 
Stewart, J. M., xlvii
Stewart, Jon, xxxiii–iv
Stone, Harold Samuel, l
Strauss, Leo, 
Stuart, House of, , , 
Sub-letting Act, 
Supreme Court (Reichskammergericht; see
also Aulic Council), , –, 
Sweden, , , , –, , , , ,

Switzerland, Swiss, , , , , ,
, , 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius, –

Index of names
Tauler, Johann, xxxvii
Theseus, , –, , , , 
Thirty Years War, , , –, , ,

Thomasius, Christian, , 
Toews, John, xxxviii, , 
Tory Party, , 
Toul, 
Troeltsch, Ernst, 
Tu¨bingen, xlii, 
Tucker, Josiah, 
Tunis, 
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, Baron
d’Aulne, xxxvi
Turkey, Turks, , , , , 
Turnbull, George, 
Tuscany, , 
Urbino, , 
Ursino, Duke of, 
Valentinois, Duke of, see Borgia, Cesare
Venice, , , , , , 
Verden, , 
Verdun, 
Verona, 
Vesta, 

Vicenza, 
Vienna, Peace of, 
Vierhaus, Rudolf, xii, xxxiv, 
Villers, Charles, 
Voegelin, Eric, , 
Voltaire , 
Walker, Mack, 
Waszek, Norbert, xxxv–vi, , 
Wellington, Duke of, –, , –,
, –
West Indies, 
Westphalia, Peace of, –, –, , ,
–, , , –, , 
Whigs, 
William of Orange, 
Wismar, , 
Wolin, Sheldon, xxxii–iii, xli
Wood, Allen, l, 
Worms, Diet of, 
Wu¨rttemberg, x–xi, xxxiv, xlii, –, ,
, , , 
Yorkshire, , 
Young Hegelians, xxxix
Zion, 

Index of subjects
absolute, the, –, –, , ,
–, , –, –, ,
–, –, , , –
absolutism, vii, xiv, , , , ,

actuality (Wirklichkeit), , , , ,
–, , , , , , –
, , –, , , , ,
–, –, –, , –
aether, –, 
agriculture, xiv–vii, xxxv, , , –
, , , –, 
anarchy, xiii, xxvii–viii, , , , , ,
, , , , , , 
antiquity, xxviii, xxxix, xlii, , ,
, 
antisemitism, 
aristocracy (see also nobility), , , ,
, , , , , , ,

armed forces, army, –, , –,
, , , , , , , ,
–, 
art, arts, xliii, , , , , ,

assembly, provincial (Landsta¨nde,
Landschaft), , , , –, ,

atheism, xxxviii
atomism (political), xiv, xxii–iii, xxvii–
xxx, xxxviii, , , , ,
–, , –, –, 
autocracy, vii
balance of power, 

beauty, , 
being (Sein), xx, , , , , –
, , , , , –, ,
, , , , , , ,

bourgeois, bourgeoisie, xxix–xxx, xxxiii,
xl, , , , , , –,

bribery, –, –, –
bureaucracy, xxiii, xliii, –, , ,

Burschenschaften, see Index of names
casuistry, , , 
causality, 
celibacy, , , , , , 
censorship, , 
chance, , , –, , , , 
chaos, –, 
chthonic powers, –
church, , –, , , , , –,
–, –, –, , ,
, , , 
citizens, citizenship, xii–xiv, xvi, xviii,
xxvi, xxviii–xxxiv, xl, –, –,
, , , , , , , , ,
–, , , , , –,
–, , , –, , –,
, , , , 
civilisation, , , , –, 
civil servants, xvi–xvii, xxxvi, , 
civil society, xxix–xxx, xxxii, xxxvi,
xxxviii, , , , –, –,

Index of subjects
, , –, –, –,
, , 
class (social), xv, xvi, , –, , , ,
, , –, , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
–, , , –, –, ,
, , 
clergy, , , , , , –,
, , , 
coercion, –, , , –, ,

collectivism, xxxiii, xxxviii, , ,
, 
comedy, –, 
commerce, xxxv, , , , 
community, xx–xxi, xxv, xxviii–xxix,
xxxii–iii, , , , , , ,
, , –, , , , –
, 
conscience, xxv, , –, , –, ,
, , , , –, , –
, , –, –, , 
constitution(s), xiii, xv, –, –, –,
–, , , , , –, , ,
–, , , –, –, , ,
, , , , , , –,
–, –, –, –, –
, –, , –, –, –
, , , , , , 
constraint (Bezwingung), –, ,

cosmopolitanism, xii, , , , ,

culture, , –, , , –, , ,
, , , , , –, ,
, , , , , , 
custom (Sitte), , , , –, , ,
, , –, , , , –
, 
death, –, , –, , , ,
–, 
democracy, xiv, xviii, , , , –,
, 
despotism (see also tyranny), xiii, , –
, , –, , , , 
dialectic, dialectics, xxx–xxxi, xli, ,
, , 
economics, economy, xiii, xv–xviii, xxix–
xxx, xxxv–vi, –, , –,
, –

education, xxxiii–iv, xxxviii, , –,
, , , , , , ,
, , , , 
elections, see suffrage
empiricism, , –, , –
Enlightenment, see Index of names
ephors, ephorate, , , 
equality, xviii, , , –, , ,
, , –
essence (Wesen), xx, xxvi, , –,
–, , , , , –,
, , –, , , , ,
, 
ethical life (see also Sittlichkeit), , ,
, , , , –, –,
–, –, –, –,
, , , –, –, ,
, –, , , 
ethics, , , , , 
eudaemonism, xii, , 
evil, –
existence, xx, , , , , ,
, 
experience, , , , , , –
, –, –, , , , ,
, , , 
faith, xxiv, –, , , , , –,
, –, –
family, –, , , –, 
fate, , , , –, –, –, –,
, , –, , , , 
Faustrecht, see Index of names
feeling, xxiii–iv, xxxviii, , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
, –, –, 
feudalism, feudal system, x, xiii–vi,
xxxiv, xxxvi, , –, , –,
–, , , –, , , ,
–, , , –, –,
, , 
ﬁnance, –, , –, 
formalism, , , , , , ,
, –, , –
freedom (see also liberty), xiv, xxii, xxv–
vii, xxxi–ii, xl, –, , –, ,
–, –, –, –, , –,
, , , , –, –,
, –, , , –, ,
, , , –, –, –
, , , , –, –,
, –, –, , –,

Index of subjects
freedom (cont.)
, , , –, –, –,
, , –, –, –,
–
French Revolution, see Index of names
geography, 
government, xii–xiv, xvi–xvii, xxxvi–vii,
xlii, , ––, , , –,
, , –, –, –,
, , , , , –, ,
–, , , , –, ,
–, –, –, , –,
–, –
grace (Gnade), –, , –, , 
happiness, xii, , , –
history (see also world history), x–xi, xiii,
xviii–xix, xxii–iii, xxv–viii, xxxi,
xxxiv, xxxix, xli–xlv, , , , ,
, , , , , –, ,
, , , , , , ,
, –, –, –, , –
, , , 
holism, –
hunting, –, –, 
Idea(s), , –, , –, –,
–, , –, , , –,
, , , , –
imagination, , , , 
immorality (Unsittlichkeit), , –,
–, 
individualism, xxvii, xxix, xxxiii, ,
, , , 
indulgences, , 
inﬁnity, –, , , , –,
–, , , –, –,
–, , , , , 
intelligence, –
intuition (Anschauung), , , ,
–, –, , , , ,
, , , –, , ,
–, –
itio in partes, see Index of names
justice, xvii–xviii, xxxi, –, , –,
–, –, , –, , , ,
, , –, , , , ,
, –, , , , , ,
, , , 

Landfrieden, see Index of names
landowners, xiv
language, –, , , 
latitudinarianism, 
law (Recht), , , , –, , , ,
, , –, , , , ,
, –, , , –, ,
–, –, , , , ,
, , , ; civil, , ,
–, , , , , , ;
constitutional, , –, , , –
, , –, , , , , ,
–, , –, ; criminal,
; English, ; Imperial, , ;
international, –; moral, –,
, ; natural, , , –,
, , , –, , ,
, –, , , –; public,
; Roman, , 
laws, , , –, –, , , , ,
–, –, , , , , , ,
, , –, –, –, –
, , , , –, –,
–, , , , –, –
, , –, –, , –,
, , , , , –
legislation, 
liberalism, vii–ix, xvi–xviii, xxvi, xxx,
xxxiii–iv, xxxvi, xxxix, xliii, –
, , , , , , ,
, –
liberty (see also freedom), xii–xiii, xv,
xviii, xxviii–ix, xxxi, xxxiv, , ,
, –, , –, , –,
, , –
machine state, xiv, xxxv, –, , ,
–, 
magic, 
marriage, –, , 
metaphysics, vii–x, xxxi, , , –
, 
Middle Ages, see Index of names
middle class, xvii, , –, , , ,

miracles, , 
monarch, xvi, , , , , , , ,
, , , , –, , ,
, –, , 
monarchy, xiii, xv, xvii, xxxv, , , ,
–, , , –, –, , ,

Index of subjects
, , , , –, , –
, , , , 
morality (Moral, Moralita¨t), xix, xxi,
xxviii–xxxii, , , , , ,
–, , , –, –,
–, , 
morality (Sittlichkeit: cf. Glossary sittlich;
see also ethical life), , –, 
mystics, mysticism, xxxvii
nation(s), –, , , , , , , ,
, –, –, , , , ,
, –, –, , , ,
, , –, , , ,
–
nationalism, , 
natural law, see law, natural
nature, xx–xxi, xxviii, , , , , ,
–, , –, –, ,
–, , , , , , ,
–, , , , –, ,
, 
necessity, –, , , , , , ,
, –, , –, , –
, , –, –, , ,
–, –, , –, –,
, , , , , , ,
, –
neutrality, , , , , –, 
nobility (see also aristocracy), xxxv, –
, , , –, , –, , ,
, –, , , 
obedience, , , –, , ,
, , , 
ochlocracy, 
oligarchy, , , 
ontology, xx
optimism, xix–xx, xxxvi
orthodoxy, xxv–vi, , 
pantheism, 
Parliament (British), see Index of names
particularism, 
patrimonialism, xxiv
patriotism, xii, , , –
pauperism, paupers (see also poverty),
xv–xvii, xxxv, , , , –,
–, –
peace, , , , , , –, , , ,
–, –, , , –, –,

, , , , , , ,
–, 
people, , , , , –, –, , –
, , –, , , , , , ,
–, –, –, , , –
, –, , , , –, ,
, , , –, , ,
, –, –, –, –,
–, , , , , ,
, , 
perfectibility, , 
philosophy, viii–ix, xix–xxiii, xxvi–vii,
xxx, xxxii, xxxvii–viii, xlii–xliv, ,
, –, –, –, , ,
, –, –, , –,
–, , , , , , ,
–, , , , , , –
, , , , –, –
Pietism, see Index of names
piety, xxv–vi, xxx, xxxix, –, –,
, , , –
pluralism, , 
police (Polizei), xvi, xxxvi, , ,
–, 
police state, xviii, xxxvi, 
polis, , , –, 
politics, vii–xix, xxi–xxxvi, xl–xliii, , ,
–, , , , –, , –,
, , –, , , , , –,
, , , –, –, ,
–, –, , , , ,
, 
poverty (see also pauperism), , ,
, , , , , 
power, xxxi–ii, , –, , , , ,
, –, , , –, –, –,
–, –, –, –, –, ,
–, , , , , , ,
, , , , –, ,
, , –, , –, ,
, , , , –, –,
, , , , , 
primogeniture, , 
probability, 
property, xiii–xviii, xxviii–xxx, xxxiv,
xxxvi, –, , –, , , ,
, , , , , , –, ,
, –, , , –, ,
, , , , –, –,
–, , , , , –,
, , , 

Index of subjects
Protestantism, Protestants, see Index of
names
providence, , , 
provincial assembly, see assembly
psychology, , 
public, xi–xii, xxiii–iv, xxviii–xxx, xxxii,
xxxiv, , , , , , , ,
–, , , , , , 
publicity (Publizita¨t), xi, , 
punishment, , , –, , 
rabble, xxxv, , , 
reason (Vernunft), xxi, , , –,
, , , , –, , ,
–, , , –, , ,
, –, , , , , 
rebellion, right of, 
reﬂection, , , , , 
reform, xi–xiii, xviii, xxxvi–vii, –, ,
, , –, , –, ,

Reform Bill, see Index of names
Reformation, see Index of names
religion, viii–ix, xix–xxviii, xxx, xxxiv,
xxxvii–xl, xlii–iii, xlv, , –, ,
, , –, –, , , , ,
, –, , , , , ,
, –, –, , , –
, –, , , –, ,
, , , , , , –
, –, , , , , ,
–
Renaissance, see Index of names
representation, representational thought
(Vorstellung), , , , 
republicanism, republics, xii, xxxvi, ,
, , , , , 
Restoration, see Index of names
revelation, , 
revolution (see also Index of names:
French Revolution, July
Revolution), xii, xiv, xvi, xviii,
xxxvi, , , , , , ,
–, , , 
right, rights (Recht), ix, xv–xvii, xix,
xxxi, xxxv, xxxvii, xliii, , –, –
, , –, , , , –, –
, , , –, , –, –,
, , , , –, –, ,
–, , , –, , ,
, –, –, –, –,
, , –, , , , ,

, –, , , , –,
, –, –, –, –,
–, , –, –, ,
–, , , –, , ,
, , , , , –,
–
science, xxxix, , , –, , –,
, –, –, –, , ,
, –, –, –, , ,
–, , , , , –,
, , , –, , ,
, 
senses, –, 
sin, xix, 
Sittlichkeit (see also ethical life), viii–x,
xvi–xxiii, xxv–xxxiii, xxxix–xli, –
, , –, , , –, ,
–, –, –, –, 
slavery, , , , 
society (see also civil society), xxvi, xxx–
xxxii, , –, , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
, , , 
sovereignty, xxxii, , –, , , –
, , , , , , –, ,
, , 
spirit (Geist; see also world spirit), xx–
xxi, xxiii, xxviii, , , –, , ,
, –, , , –, , , ,
, , , –, –, –,
, –, –, –, –
, , –, –, –, –
, , , , –, –,
, –, 
state (see also machine state, police state),
viii–ix, xi, xvi–xvii, xxiii–iv, xxvi,
xxx–xxxiii, xxxvi, xxxix, xli, –, –
, , –, –, –, –,
–, , –, , , ,
, , –, , , –,
, , , –, , –,
, –, –, , –,
, , , , –, , –
, –, –, , –, –
, , , –, –, –
, , –, 
subject, subjectivity, xx, xxxi, xxxiii,
xxxviii, –, –, , ,
, –, –, , , ,
–, , , –, , –
, –, –

Index of subjects
subjectivism, xxi–iv, xxvii, xxx, xxxviii,
–, , –, –, , –

substance, xx, xxiii, , 
suffrage, xii, xxxvi, –, 
tautology, , –, , 
tax, taxation, , –, –, , , ,
–, , –, –, 
theocracy, 
theodicy, , 
theology, xxiv, xxxvii, xlii, , , ,
, –
tithes, , , –
tolerance, toleration, , , 
torture, 
totalitarianism, xxxii–iii, 
tragedy, –, , –
truth, , , , –, , , –
, , , –, –, –,
, –, , –, –,
, , , 
tyranny (see also despotism), xiv, , ,
, , –, , , , 
understanding, , , , , –
, , , –, , , ,


university, xxiii, xxxviii, xlii–iii, –,
, –
virtue, –, –, , , , ,

volition, , 
war, , , , –, –, –, –,
–, , –, , –, , –,
–, –, , –, –, –,
, –, , , , , ,
, –, –, , , ,

welfare, xvi, xxxvi, , , , , 
will, xxxii, xli, , –, , , , ,
, –, , –, –, , ,
–, , –, , , ,
–, –, , , , –
, –, , –, –, ,
, , , , , , ,
, , –, , 
witchcraft, –
work, –, 
world history, , –, , 
world spirit, xxiii, , , –, ,


