
HEGEL'S 
PHE NOME NOLOGY OF SPIRI T 


PHENOMENOLOGY 
OF SPIRIT 
BY 
G. W. F. HEGEL 
Translated by A. V. Miller 
with Analysis of the Text 
and Fore word by 
J. N. Findlay, F.B.A., F.A.A.A.S. 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

This book has been printed digitally and produced in a standard specification 
in order to ensure its continuing availability 
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 
Auckland 
Cape Town Dar es Salaam 
Hong Kong Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
With offices in 
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan South Korea Poland Portugal 
Singapore Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 
Published in the United States 
by Inc., New York 
©Oxford University Press 1977 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 
Reprinted 2004 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above 
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
And you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
ISBN 978-0-19-824597-1 

FOREWORD 
J. N. FINDLAY 
T HE Phenomenology of Spirit, first published in 1807, is a work 
seen by Hegel as a necessary forepiece to his philosophical sys­
tem (as later set forth in the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences in Outline of r8r7, 1827, and 1830), but it is meant to 
be a forepiece that can be dropped and discarded once the 
student, through deep immersion in its contents, has advanced 
through confusions and misunderstanding to the properly 
philosophical point of view. Its task is to run through, in a scien­
tifically purged order, the stages in the mind's necessary pro­
gress from immediate sense-consciousness to the position of a 
scientific philosophy, showing thereby that this position is the 
only one that the mind can take, when it comes to the end of 
the intellectual and spiritual adventures described in the book. 
But this sort ofhistory, he tells us in Encyclopaedia §25, necessarily 
had to drag in, more or less out of place and inadequately 
characterized, much that would afterwards be adequately set 
forth in the system, and it also had to bring in many motivating 
connections of which the adventuring mind was unaware, 
which explained why it passed from one phase of experience 
or action to another, and yet could not be set forth in the full 
manner which alone would render them intelligible. 
Hegel also, in preparing for republication of the work before 
his death in 183 1 ,  wrote a note which throws great light on 
his ultimate conception of it. It was, he writes, a peculiar earlier 
work (eigentumlichefriihere Arbeit) which ought not to be revised, 
since it related to the time at which it was written, a time 
at which an abstract Absolute dominated philosophy. (See the 
final paragraph of the first section of Hoffmeister's Appendix 
Zur Feststellung des Textes in the r 952 edition.) This note indi­
cates that, while Hegel undoubtedly thought that the sequence 
of thought-phases described in the Phenomenology-phases ex­
perienced by humanity in the past and recapitulated by Hegel 
in his own thought-adventures up to and including his own ad­
vance to the position of Science in about 1805-was a necessary 

vi 
F O R EW O R D  
sequence, he still did not think it the only possible necessary 
sequence or pathway to Science, and certainly not the pathway 
to Science that would be taken by men in the future, or that 
might have been taken in other cultural and historical settings. 
For Hegel makes plain by his practice, as well as in some of 
his utterances, that he does not confuse the necessary with the 
unique, that he does not identify a necessary sequence of phases 
with the only possible sequence that can be taken. Hegel was 
obviously familiar with the branching variety of alternative 
proofs, all involving strictly necessary steps, that are possible 
in mathematics, and it is plain that he did not think that a 
similar branching of proofs was impossible in his dialectical 
reasoning. Dialectic is, in fact, a richer and more supple form 
of thought-advance than mathematical inference, for ·while the 
latter proceeds on lines of strict identity, educing only what is 
explicit or almost explicit in some thought-position's content, 
dialectic always makes higher-order comments upon its various 
thought-positions, stating relations that carry us far beyond 
their obvious content. What is obvious, for example, ih Being 
is not its identity with Nothing, and what is obvious in Sense­
certainty is not its total lack of determinateness. If mathemati­
cal identities can thus follow different routes to the same or to 
different goals, dialectical commentaries can even more obvi­
ously do the same, and Hegel in his varying treatment of the 
same material in the two Logics and in the Phenomenology shows 
plain recognition of this fact. A necessary connection, whether 
mathematical or dialectical, is not psychologically compulsive : 
it represents a track that the mind may or may not take, or 
that it may or may not prefer to other tracks, on its journey 
to a given conclusion. There is no reason then to think that Hegel 
thought that the path traced in the Phenomenology, though con­
sisting throughout of necessary steps, was the only path that 
the conscious spirit could have taken in rising from sensuous 
immediacy to absolute knowledge. It was the path that had been 
taken by the World Spirit in past history, and that had been 
rehearsed in the consciousness of Hegel, in whom the notion 
of Science first became actual. But this involved no pronounce­
ment as to what pathway to Science would be taken by men 
in the future, nor as to what pathway would have been taken 
in other thinkable world-situations. For Hegel admits an ele-

F O R E W O R D  
VII 
ment of the sheerly contingent, and therefore also of the sheerly 
possible, in nature and history. 
The sequence of phases to be studied in the Phenomenology 
therefore involves a fine blend of the contingently historical and 
the logically necessary. Its successive phases bring out what is 
logically implicit in its earlier phases, in the Hegelian sense of 
representing throughout an insightful, higher-order comment 
on previous contents, but they also only bring out a series of 
implications actually embodied in past history and in Hegel's 
own thought-history. Hegel, we know, did not desire to step 
out of his own time and his own thought-situation : the philos­
opher, as he was later to say on page 35 of the Preface to the 
Philosophy if Right, is necessarily a son of his own time, and his 
philosophy is that time comprehended in thought. To seek to 
transcend one's time is only, he says, to venture into the 'soft 
element' of fancy and opinion. The pathway to Science taken 
in the future may therefore differ profoundly from the one 
studied in the Phenomenology : it may involve many abbreviations 
and alternative routings. It is not, however, profitable to con­
sider such for us empty possibilities. The path to be considered 
is the one actually taken in the past and terminating in the 
present. It is, however, for all that, a path involving necessary 
implications and developments which will be preserved in all 
paths taken in the future and in the terminus to which these 
lead. For, on Hegel's view, all dialectical thought-paths lead 
to the Absolute Idea and to the knowledge of it which is itself. 
It is necessary, in considering the Phenomenology, as in con­
sidering all Hegel's other writings, to stress this initial point 
that, though Hegel may mention much that is contingent and 
historical, and may refuse to break wholly loose from this, his 
concern is always with the Begri.fe or universal notional shapes 
that are evinced in fact and history, and with the ways in which 
these align themselves and lead on to one another, and can in 
fact ultimately be regarded as distinguishable facets of a single 
all-inclusive universal or concept. (See, for example, Phenom­
enology, §§6, 1 2  (pp. 12, 16)1; Encyclopaedia §§163-4.) For Hegel 
1 Page references to Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit given within parentheses in the Fore­
word are to the German edition edited by J. Hoffmeister (F. Meiner, Hamburg, 1952). 
The paragraph numbers are those used in A. V. Miller's translation published in this 
volume. 

viii 
F O R E W O R D  
the uni versa! is no strength less, arbitrary distillation of the com­
mon features of what is individual and empirical ; it is rather 
what must be conceived as realizing itself in what is individual 
and empirical, and as responsible both for the being and intelli­
gibility of the latter. But what is thus universal will not neces­
sarily align together what are contiguous in space and history, 
and hence in the Phenomenology the conceptual treatment can 
jump wildly from one factual, empirical scene to the other, 
from, for example, the scientific universals behind phenomena 
to the fellow minds which discover them in phenomena, from 
the antique Stoics and Sceptics, who entrenched themselves in 
cogitative abstraction from contingent content, to the medieval 
devotees who located their explanatory abstractions beyond all 
such content, from the compassion which enables the man of 
conscience to forgive the sin-soiled man of action to the religious 
spirit which can see the divine in all men, and so on. 
It is also necessary to stress here that the dialectical develop­
ment which Hegel sees as connecting his phenomenological 
phases is a logical growth of notions out of notions, given to 
us who consider the cultural past of humanity as resumed in 
ourselves, but not given as a logical growth to those who, includ­
ing ourselves, went through the actual cases of such notions, 
and not even exactly following the order of the corresponding 
particularizations. The mind of humanity in the past did not, 
for example, see the necessary logical step from the kingdom 
of laws behind nature to the kingdom of subjects who consider 
nature, nor did they in fact historically pass from the one to 
the other. It is we, the phenomenological students of the shapes 
of Spirit, who see the logical connections between them, and 
therefore also for phenomenological purposes the order in 
which they must be arranged. It is important, therefore, that 
from tbe very beginning we frame viable conceptions of the logi­
cal 'movements' our notional shapes of Spirit must undergo, 
movements of which temporal sequences are often only inade­
quately and misplaced reflections. (See, for example, Phenom­
enology, §8or) (p. 558) ; Encyclopaedia §258.) Subjectively, of 
course, as we have said, all these movements involve a species 
of reflection, a retreat to the vantage-point of a higher-order 
and, as we might now say, metalogical examination, and the 
consequent bringing into view of what can be truly predicateq 

F O R E W O R D  
ix 
of a thought-phase, though not necessarily what is 'meant' or 
intended in its explicit content. But objectively what are thus 
brought into view are other thought-phases, thought-phases 
which in a very wide sense negate it or go beyond it, and which 
involve relations as various to the thought-phase in question 
as being its necessary correlate or complement or opposite, or 
as being what is true of it though not at all part of its content 
and perhaps contradicting the latter, or as being a more explicit 
and perfect form of what some phase obscurely prefigures, or 
as being some inclusive whole or unity of which the phase in 
question can only be an excerpt. The logical 'movement' which 
the Phenomenology, like the rest of the system, exhibits, is 
throughout the logic of the 'side' or 'aspect' or 'moment', of 
that which, while it can be legitimately distinguished in some 
unity, and must in fact be so distinguished, nevertheless 
represents something basically incapable of self-sufficiency and 
independence, properties which can only be attributed to the 
whole into which sides, aspects, or moments enter, and a 
reference to which is accordingly 'built into' each such side. 
On Hegel's basic assumptions negation, in a wide sense that 
covers difference, opposition, and reflection or relation, is essen­
tial to conception and being : we can conceive nothing and have 
nothing if we attempt to dispense with it. But negation in this 
wide sense always operates within a unity, which is not as such 
divisible into self-sufficient elements, but is totally present in 
each and all of its aspects, and we conceive nothing and have 
nothing if we attempt to dispense with this unity. This unity 
in a sense negates the former or primary negation : it changes 
what in a sense tried to be an independent element into a mere 
aspect or moment. This second sort of negation is not, however, 
comparable with the first : it involves a reversal of direction, 
which does not, however, annul the primary direction that it 
reverses. The distinctions are still there, but only as 'moments' 
and no longer as independent elements. 
It is, further, in retrospect, the unity which reverses the first 
negation which also made that first negation possible. It is 
because a unity indivisibly underlies distinct sides, that each 
such side can acquire a certain relative self-sufficiency and inde­
pendence, can after a fashion assert itself in opposition to the 
whole. But it is this unity also which forces the mind (and also 

X 
F O R E W O R D  
the thing) onward from one of its one-sided aspects to another 
aspect necessary to its completion, and which ultimately builds 
all sides into a single integrated or reasonable totality. From 
the point of view of the phenomenological student, we have here 
a dialectical process or sequence. This is always initiated by 
the Understanding, that seemingly marvellous faculty (see 
Phenomenology §32, (pp. 29-30)) that is able, as it were, to segre­
gate aspects in an indivisible whole, and to endow the non-inde­
pendent with a certain quasi-independence. This segregation 
is carried on by a dialectical phase in which other aspects then 
either negate, oppose, supplement, or are put into necessary 
relation with the first segregated aspect, which then loses itself 
with the other aspects in a many-sided but truly indivisible 
whole. From the point of view of the notional phases here con­
cerned, they grow out of and into one another, not in the de­
rived temporal sense in which the parts of an organism grow 
out of one another, but rather in the primary sense in which, 
for example, the whole series of numbers grows out of certain 
basic arithmetical principles. The notional integration thus in­
dicated ends, according to Hegel, in Absolute Knowledge or 
the Absolute Idea, the test of whose absoluteness consists simply 
in the fact that nothing further remains to be taken care of. 
Even the contingencies and loosenesses of connection that 
obtain in the world are such as the sort of system we are con­
structing does and must involve. That Hegel does achieve this 
final integration is, of course, what many would dispute. 
There is, however, yet another sense in which the Phenomen­
ology is concerned only with notions or concepts, i.e. with the 
universal shapes of Spirit, and only indirectly with the indivi­
dual instances of such shapes. This depends on Hegel's view 
that conscious Spirit or subjectivity is itself exhaustively analys­
able in terms of the three conceptual moments of universality, 
specificity, and singularity, and that it represents, in fact, 
merely an extreme form of these three notional functions, a 
severance or an alienation of them from one another which is, 
of course, inseparable from their fruitful and necessary coming­
together. For Hegel does not believe in the subject as being some 
detached, substantival entity standing in varying relations to 
other substantival entities which are its objects. The subject is, 
as said in the Encyclopaedia, the active or self-active universal, 

F O R E W O R D  
XI 
the universal in a peculiar form in which it distinguishes itself 
from what is specific and individual, from what is perhaps given 
sensibly, and yet goes forth from itself and interprets and con­
trols what thus confronts it objectively. In so doing, moreover, 
it makes its objects its own, and is thereby enabled to return 
to self and to achieve consciousness of self. (See Phenomenology 
§I8 (p. 20), also Encyclopaedia §§20-3.) The thinking Ego is, 
further, in another place (Phenomenology §235 (pp. 
I 78"--9) )  
closely connected and i n  fact identified, much as by Kant in 
the Transcendental Deduction, with the category or categories 
used in the synthetic constitution of objects by the understand­
ing, and, at the end of the Phenomenology, the conceptualization 
of all objects, and their subjection to universals, is not seen as 
different from the imposition on them of the form rif self (Pheno­
menology §803 (p. s6o) ) .  The subject or Ego is thus for Hegel 
not what we ordinarily understand by a personal thinker, but 
the logical function of universality in a peculiar sort of 
detachment from its species and instances. The mind for Hegel, 
as for Aristotle, is thus the place of forms, a bustling Agora 
where such forms are involved in endless transactions and con­
versations, and though it is by the intermediation of such forms 
that there is a reaching-out to their individual instances, they 
none the less enjoy a relative independence there, a detachment 
in the thought-ether, that they never enjoy elsewhere. Uni­
versals, of course, on tlegel's view, enjoy a sunken, implicit ex­
istence in natural objects (see Encyclopaedia §24) , and they also 
enjoy some sort of being beneath the surface of natural objects, 
as the essences or forces which explain them (Phenomenology § r  52 
(p. I 17) ) .  They are also, in the Logic, given as having a status 
as 'pure essentialities' or as 'notional shadows' without sensuous 
concretion, in some sense prior to the existence of nature and 
finite spirit. But however much universals, and that Universal 
of all Universals, the Idea, may exist apart from subjects, in 
any ordinary sense of the latter, the fact remains that they 
achieve their full development and truth in the self-conscious­
ness of Spirit, in which all universal patterns of logical and 
natural being are reactivated and resumed. 
The life then of conscious Spirit, whether in the PhenQmenology 
of Spirit or the later Philosophy rif Spirit, is arguably only a series 
of phases in which one or other of the moments of the Notion 

Xll 
F O R E WORD 
is detached, as subjective, from the rest, which are thereby 
extruded into objectivity, and which are then again reinte­
grated with the moments remaining in the subject, again 
extruded and again reintegrated in an endlessly developing 
rhythm. Those who know Hegel well, and are aware of the pro­
found connections of the Phenomenology with the later system 
(which is in fact all there in the J en a writings) , will know how 
mistaken are all those who think of the Phenomenology as merely 
a contribution to existential phenomenology, to which the later 
system is largely irrelevant. From first to last Hegel conceived 
everything in terms of the self-active Begrijf and Idee, and his 
thought is as remote from the personally concerned thought of 
the existentialists as from that of the grandiose suprapersonal 
Ego of Fichte. These types of thought can, of course, be found 
encapsulated in Hegel if one likes to look for them, since he 
includes what he transcends and even includes what he will 
transcend once his epigoni have formulated it. (Compare, for 
example, his dialectical anticipations of Mill's views on induc­
tion and of the logical atomism of Wittgenstein and Russell.) 
But what Hegel brings in as a phase in an ongoing dialectic 
is not, of course, his last word on a subject. 
One more word before we begin our introductory survey of 
the actual content of the Phenomenology. Since the Phenomenology 
studies a particular path from immediate. sense-experience to 
all-grasping Wissenschaft which is also the path distilled in 
Hegel's experience from the previous experiences of the World 
Spirit, there will be much in that path that would be illumi­
nated by knowledge ofthe.personal history of Hegel : we ought 
to know why he was impressed by certain notional entailments 
and affinities and not by others. In part we do have considerable 
light on this topic. We understand, for example, how the love 
between him and his sister Christina caused him to stress the 
role of sisters in ethical life, we understand his interest in the 
Antigone from his schoolboy studies at Stuttgart, and we under­
stand his interest in the French Enlightenment and Revolution 
from the provincial position of continental Germany : both his­
torical phases counted for much less in Britain. There are also 
difficult allusions in his treatment of the Unhappy Conscious­
ness which Rosenkranz convincingly illuminated. But there 
remains much in the Phenomenology which is enigmatic, and one 

F O REWO R D  
xiii 
cannot always see why the route to Absolute Knowledge should 
wind through just these peculiar thickets. Hegel was in fact a 
writer ofli terary genius, and one swayed in his choice of words 
by a burgeoning unconscious. Once he departed from the dis­
piriting atmosphere ofBerne and Frankfurt, and ceased writing 
such relatively dull, much over-studied writing as he produced 
there, an afflatus seized him in the 'lena lecture-rooms, an 
afflatus perhaps unique in philosophical history, which affected 
not only his ideas but his style, and which makes one at times 
only sure that he is saying something immeasurably profound 
and important, but not exactly what it is. (I am in this position, 
despite help, regarding the two intelligible worlds in the section 
on Force and Understanding.) To comment on Hegel fully 
would therefore require the same sort of psychological and 
metapsychological treatment that has long been practised on 
an essentially rapt man like Shakespeare or on such a Gallic 
genius as Rimbaud or Mallarme. Despite the sensitive work of 
Jean Hyppolite, we are far from having anything like a really 
full commentary on the Phenomenology. The general remarks 
that I shall now make will therefore yield only a very in­
adequate prefatory illumination. 
We shall begin our treatment of the Phenomenology with the 
Introduction, ignoring the beautiful and famous Preface, which 
was in fact only added when the book was complete, and which 
was meant to introduce not only the Phenomenology, but the 
whole system. The point of the Introduction is simply to give 
a preliminary conception, justified only when the work would 
be complete, as to how a study of the shapes of mind leading 
one on from immediate experience to what claimed to be scien­
tific knowledge could succeed in dissipating doubt as to the real 
possibility of the whole venture. Might not the finally corrected 
shape which emerged from such a process be as remote from 
things 'as they in themselves are' as the first, uncorrected, im­
mediate shape? And how could the projected work abolish 
Kant's view that an examination of human knowledge only 
shows, not that such knowledge can really reach some stand­
pointwhere'theAbsolute' or' the Thing in I tself'will be accessible 
to it, but that this is for ever and in itself impossible, that there 
are and must be aspects of things that we can indeed conceive 
negatively, or perhaps have beliefs about, but ofwhic'h we can 

xiv 
F O R E W O R D  
never have knowledge? Hegel's criticism of this critical view 
ofknowledge is simply that it is self-refuting, that it pronounces, 
even if negatively, on the relation of conscious appearances to 
absolute reality, while claiming that the latter must for ever 
transcend knowledge. To this self-refuting view Hegel opposes 
the view that the distinction between what things in themselves 
are, and what things only are for consciousness or knowledge, 
must itselfbe a distinction drawn within consciousness, that the 
former can be only the corrected view of an object, while the 
latter is merely a view formerly entertained but now abandoned 
as incorrect. The progress of knowledge will then consist in the 
constant demotion of what appeared to be the absolute truth 
about the object to what now appears to be only the way that 
the object appeared to consciousness, a new appearance of abso­
lute truth taking the former's place. 
Hegel, however, assumes that this progress must have a final 
term, a state where knowledge need no longer transcend or cor­
rect itself, where it will discover itself in its object and its object 
in itself, where concept will correspond to object and object to 
consciousness (see §8o (p. 6g)) .  Such a conception might seem 
to go too far, for surely an endless inadequacy ofknowledge to its 
object would not destroy all meaning and validity in such know­
ledge, nor would this vanish were there to be aspects of things of 
which, as Kant held, we could only frame negative, regulative 
conceptions, but of which we could never have definite know­
ledge? Hegel will,however, marvellously includl! in his final notion 
of the final state of knowledge the notion of an endless progress 
that can have no final term. For he conceives that, precisely 
in seeing the object as an endless problem, we forthwith see it 
as not being a problem at all. For what the object in itself is, 
is simply to be the other, the stimulant of knowledge and prac­
tice, which in being for ever capable of being remoulded and 
reinterpreted, is also everlastingly pinned down and found out 
being just what it is. The implication of all this is that the teleo­
logical view of objectivity as being intrinsically destined to be 
interpreted and controlled by consciousness will prove, on a suf­
ficiently deep examination, to be so wholly appeasing and 
satisfying that no shadow of the hidden or inexplicable will 
remain to haunt us. We shall then be in a fit state to investigate 
the essentialities of being as set forth in the Logic, and the sub-

FO REWO R D  
XV 
sequent self-externalization of these essentialities in the philos­
ophies of Nature and Spirit. Whether this Hegelian view of the 
role of the object as a mere inspirer of spiritual effort is valid 
may of course be questioned : there would certainly seem to be 
obscurities, inconsequences, and dysteleologies in our world 
which demoralize, rather than stimulate, spiritual effort. We 
shall not, however, consider these contemporary depressants, 
which Hegel, as a German Romantic, could not have en­
visaged. 
The Introduction in its final paragraphs (§§8ଋ (pp. 7 1-5)) 
makes the further important point that the lessons that con­
sciousness learns in its continued experience of objects are not 
for it a continuous course of lessons : it conceives that it is con­
stantly passing to some new and unrelated object, when it is 
really only seeing its previous object in some novel, critical light. 
It is not, for example, aware, as previously said, that the con­
sciousness of an order of mutually conscious persons is what was 
implicit in the awareness oflaws, forces, and other essentialities 
behind the phenomena of nature : it is we, the phenomenologi­
cal students, who see the deep notional continuity in what is 
for it a kaleidoscope of objects. It is important, in what follows, 
that we should always distinguish between the actual transi­
tions occurring in conscious experience and the logical transi­
tions that the phenomenologist elicits from these latter. 
In Section A on Consciousness Hegel explores three relations 
of conscious subjectivity to its object : the Sense-certainty which 
merely confronts an object in what seems to be its rich individu­
ality without making anything definite of it, the Perception 
where it begins to distinguish properties or qualities in the im­
mediately given, but is unable to integrate them in the unity 
of the perceived thing, and finally the Understanding, where 
the natures of things are seen as fixed patterns of mutual inter­
ference and interaction behind their manifest, phenomenal 
surface. Sense-certainty is dialectically flawed by its claim to 
qualitative richness and individual immediacy, since it is impos­
sible to pin down the qualities which are thus felt to be rich 
and various or the individuality which is thus felt to be wholly 
unique. For in the flux of experience one quality is constantly 
yielding place to another, and it is impossible to seize what is in 
dividual by pointing gestures or by demonstrative words such 

xvi 
FOREW O R D  
as 'This', 'Here', 'Now', 'I', etc., which are all irremediably 
general in meaning. Perception, likewise, is dialectically flawed 
by its incapacity to integrate the separate characters it picks out 
with the unified individuality of the object to which it seeks 
to attribute them. Both lead on to Understanding, where the 
universal in terms of which immediacies are to be understood 
is both a complex pattern unifying a number of discriminable 
characters and also involves the distinction of the manifest and 
the dispositional, the latter being part and parcel of such 
notions as permanent nature, specific essence, force, and law. 
But the realm of the essential and dispositional is dialectically 
flawed by its inability to explain the comprehensive dovetailing 
of essential natures, forces, and laws into one another, so as to 
form only one system of interacting essentialities. It is by recog­
nizing something akin to the explanatory unity imparted by 
conscious mind to all that it considers, that this dialectical flaw 
is removed, and that the consciousness of objects is replaced 
by self-consciousness or by a consciousness of consciousness. It 
is important to realize that the sensing, perceiving, understand­
ing, and self-conscious mind does not perceive the logical con­
nections which lead from each of these stages to the next. It 
is we, the phenomenologists, who perceive them. To conscious­
ness itself there is simply a blurred, sensuous confrontation with 
unseizable, qualified particulars, which becomes clarified into 
a perception of things which in some manner mysteriously unite 
different aspects or characters, and which then becomes 
organized in the sense of a number of regularly recurrent 
'natures' making dynamic impacts upon us and upon one 
another. From this the glance simply switches to the rational 
creatures around oneself, who are all interpreting the same 
objects, without identifying their interpretative acts with the 
interpretations embedded in things. It is the watching pheno­
menologist who discerns all these transitions, and who above 
all performs the difficult, non-formal transition from 'Things 
are interacting in a manner X' to 'We all are understanding 
things as interacting in a manner X'. 
From Consciousness, A, we have therefore jumped to B, Self­
consciousness, where our object is now a conscious Ego, an ac­
tively functioning, categorically synthetic universal, looking 
about for fully specified and individualized contents to interpret 

F O R E W O R D  
xvii 
intellectually and to master practically (§I 77 (p. I 40)) .  Practical 
desire which transforms the object is at this stage more im­
portant than intellectual interpretation.) But the active uni­
versality of the subject Ego is at first unwilling to see in the 
active Universality of the object Ego a just reflection of itself. 
It at first tries to demote the object Ego to one that will indeed 
recognize it as subject Ego, but whom it in its turn will not fully 
recognize as an active subject (§I85 (p. I43) ) .  This demotion 
of object Egos by subject Egos then inevitably leads to what 
Hegel calls a Life-and-death struggle : each subject wishes to 
be the sole centre of active universality and to risk all in assert­
ing his claims. Such a policy, however, threatens to deprive 
each subject of the recognition he demands, and hence the 
struggle develops into one for a sovereign position among ac­
tively universal subjects, all others being wholly subordinated 
to this one (Lord and Bondsman) .  But this one-sided aspiration 
is also self-frustrating, since the recognition one receives from 
a pale reflex of oneself can be no true recognition, and will in 
fact impoverish the receiver, whereas the recognition the serf 
accords to his lord, and the work he does for him, will raise 
him to a far higher consciousness of active universality than the 
lord can ever enjoy. Obviously the flawed, imperfect uni­
versality where every subject desires sovereignty only for himself 
(the second occurrence of the variable not being independently 
quantified) necessarily corrects itself in the unflawed uni­
versality where every subject recognizes and promotes active 
universality in every subject, where all men equally recognize 
and co-operate with one another. 
This stage must, however, at first be present as an inner ideal 
to which the particularity of interpersonal existence will not 
as yet conform : the world is not as yet so arranged that aU can 
be servants and thus also lords to one another. The self-active 
universal therefore withdraws stoically into the emptily abstract 
fortress of reason and virtue, or, recognizing this emptiness, into 
a similar impractically sceptical fortress which commits itself to 
nothing whatever, whether theoretical or practical. Finally we 
have an extreme, pathological form of spiritual withdrawal in 
which consciousness, unable to disengage itself from irrational 
particularity, simply identifies itselfwith the latter, and is then 
led to extrude the rational universality which is its true self into 

xviii 
F O R E W O R D  
a mystical, unattainable Beyond. Consciousness in this last 
pathology makes itself the universal serf, while the lord in his 
perfection becomes no one and dwells nowhere. Such a strained 
separation of moments that necessarily belong together cannot 
but break down. Consciousness must pass from a wallowing self­
abasing mysticism to a reasonable frame of mind. It must see the 
world, in all its natural and social arrangements, as something 
to be known, enjoyed, and improved by all, since it embodies 
the same universality that is active in each subject. Here again 
we must stress that the logical sequence of phases from the Life­
and-death-struggle to Reason is not a logical sequence for those 
who live through it. They pass from Hobbesian egoism to vari­
ous forms of abstract intersubjectivity, then to a despair which 
locates all shared universality infinitely above and beyond 
themselves, and then on to a confidence born from the sheer 
absurdity of such despair, all without seeing the secret logical 
links which link one such attitude to another. 
The next section of the Phenomenology (§§23 I -437), devoted 
to various forms of Vernunft or Reasonableness, gets off, after 
a short discussion of the Hegelian meaning of'idealism' (§§23 I-
40 (pp. I 75-82) )-as a philosophy which discovers the same 
universality in the world as in subjective thought-to a con­
sideration of various forms of scientific empiricism and experi­
mentation. (This is not the same as the projections of the Under­
standing studied in §§I32-65 (pp. 102-29) , since the scientific 
understanding is now conscious and confident, even if 
obscurely, ofits own methodological procedures.) We start with 
the observational study of nature, in which the universal in the 
mind divines its own presence in the world, and is guided by 
an 'instinct of reason' to see what that presence may in detail 
involve. Hegel goes into a long discussion of various forms of 
observational description and classification, and the passage 
from these to the formulation oflaws which involve unmanifest 
and dispositional factors. The discovery of such laws is wholly 
successful in the inorganic realm, but can only be partially suc­
cessful in the organic realm, where all laws are laws of tendency, 
and involve contingencies introduced by that 'universal indivi­
dual', the Earth, as well as all the systematic indefinitenesses 
of teleology. The observational urge therefore directs itself in­
ward to the true home of self-determining universality, and in-

FOREW ORD 
XIX 
vestigates, first the principles of a logic conceived in purely psy­
chologistic terms, and then the wider psychologism which deals 
in contingent mental traits and faculties. This treatment of 
conscious inwardness as if it had the contingency and the 
singularity of external, natural being, leads, however, inevit­
ably to attempts to physicalize consciousness, to identify it with 
a thing, or a set of things, that we find out there in the natural 
world. Had Hegel lived in the present age we should now have 
had a long treatment of the behaviourisms of Watson and Tol­
man and Skinner : as it is, we are treated to a repulsively long 
discussion of the crude physiognomic speculations of Lavater 
and the phrenological fantasies of Gall. All that is important 
in Hegel's long attempt to make dialectical sense of these primi­
tive exercises is the final outcome : that if self-consciousness can 
be reduced to something like a bone or a bone-structure, then 
a bone or a bone-structure must be credited with all the in­
tentional negativity, and the negation of this negativity, in­
volved in self-consciousness. The manceuvres of reductionism 
are accordingly vain : if mind can be modelled by matter, mat­
ter must be possessed of every intricate modality of mind. Noth­
ing has been achieved by the 'reduction', and, since the pheno­
mena of self-consciousness are richer and more intrinsically in­
telligible than the limited repertoire that we ordinarily ascribe 
to matter, it is matter rather than mind that is thereby reduced. 
This conclusion is what Bertrand Russell would call 'malicious'. 
Hegel, however, is not ashamed of the vengeful ingratitude of 
consciousness and spirit : it overreaches its pitiable 'other', and 
reduces it to itself. 
Hegel now characteristically moves from a reasonableness 
concerned to discover itself in objects to a reasonableness con­
cerned to impose itself on objects through overt action. After a 
few initial moves (§§347-58 (pp. 254-6 r ) ) ,  which anticipate 
what will really only emerge at the stage of the Spiritual, Hegel 
begins by discussing the hedonistic approach to the world, the 
reasonableness which makes everything in the world, including 
the body and soul of another person, minister to one's own satis­
faction. This attitude breaks down in a manner analogous to 
the seeming fulness of sense-certainty : it condemns the hedonist 
to an endless, hollow search for new pleasures, which never pro­
vide a lasting content for self-consciousness. The hedonistic life 

XX 
F O R E W O R D  
therefore dissolves into the romantic life of the heart, the life 
which espouses grand projects, which in their extravagance 
measure up to the sweeping universality of self-consciousness, 
but which inevitably clash with the equally grand life-projects 
of others. The game ofthe heart then yields place to the greater 
game of virtue, of the keeping of oneself pure in quixotic scruple 
and total indifference to 'the way of the world'. This game, 
however, also interferes with the parallel quixotism of others, 
and with the sensible non-quixotism of the ordered social world, 
which is more truly universal than the cult of personal virtue. 
The dialectic then swings over from arbitrary subjectivity to 
the arbitrary objectivity of Sachlichkeit. A man identifies himself 
with a Sache, a thing or a task, which is his own, and which 
he pursues without regard to external success or approval. 
Everyone else is similarly supposed to be devoting himself to 
his own Sache. Such disinterested fulfilment of tasks rests, how­
ever, on self-deception. Its disinterestedness is always held up 
for the admiration of others, and is really a form of personal 
exhibitionism. When this is exposed, disinterestedness shifts to 
a moralistic form, setting up absolute prescriptions of various 
simple sorts (Tell the truth, Help others, etc.). These can, how­
ever, never achieve the complete exceptionlessness to which 
they aspire. Reasonableness then finally assumes the Kantian 
form ofidentifying the universal with the formally universaliz­
able or self-consistent. This, Hegel shows, is as vacuous as the 
universalism of the Stoics or Sceptics, since any way of life can 
be rendered formally self-consistent. We therefore move to a 
universalism which is substantial as well as subjective, the uni­
versalism of the ethical life of an actual community, whose laws 
and customs clothe the bare bones of ethical prescriptions with 
living flesh, and make the universalizing life genuinely possible. 
We pass from the merely Reasonable ( Vernunft) to the higher 
stage of the Spiritual (Geist) . 
Hegel finds the exemplary material for his first, rudimentary 
forr1 of spirituality in the ethical world of Greek tragedy, with 
which he had come into vivid contact in his Gymnasium studies 
at Stuttgart. Rudimentary spiritual life is not the life of an un­
divided community with which the individual subject iden­
tifies himself whole-heartedly : it is essentially bifocal, 
and centres as much in the family, with its unwritten prescrip-

F O R EW O RD 
xxi 
tions dimly backed by dead ancestors, as in the overt power 
of the State, with its openly proclaimed, 'daylight' laws. The 
law of the family is a divine law, a law stemming from the 
underworld of the unconscious, and interpreted by the intuitive 
females in the family : the state law is on the contrary human, 
and is proclaimed and enforced by mature males. Hegel makes 
plain that these two laws must at times clash-the theme of 
the Antigone and other tragedies : in the case of such clashes, 
the individual incurs guilt whatever he may do. Obviously 
Hegel has here seized on a very profound source of disunity 
in ethical spiritual life : the clash between a self-transcendence 
which is deep, but also tinged with contingent immediacy, and 
a self-transcendence which can be extended indefinitely, 
but in that very extensibility necessarily lacks depth. 
The truly moral life to which we must advance will be as deep 
in its care for individual problems and circumstances as 
it is wide in its concern for anyone and everyone. For the time 
being, however, the rent life of the primitive ethical commun­
ity must yield place to a spiritual life where all intimacy is 
dissolved. 
Hegel here chooses for his illustration the atomistic life oflm­
perial Rome (§§4 77-83 (pp. 342-6) ) ,  where every man counts 
as no more than a property-owner and the state laws merely 
concern the ownership and transmission of property. Such an 
atomistic community, to which all individual needs and charac­
ters are indifferent, necessarily culminates in a more or less arbi­
trarily selected lmperator or World-master, whose relation to 
the community is external, and quite void of anything like 
family depth and warmth. The removal of intimacy, of warmth 
or soul, from the mutual recognition of the community's 
members, must, however, necessarily give rise to a sense of dis­
tance, of estrangement or alienation from the community. The 
latter may represent the individual's true self, but he cannot 
find himself in it. If Hegel has chosen Imperial Rome as his 
first example of such alienation, he now leaps to seventeenth­
and eighteenth-century continental Europe, with its dazzling 
French centre, for one of his most fascinating and brilliant 
phenomenological studies. The jump here taken shows how 
little the Phenomenology is an eidetic-reconstitution of history, 
and how much it is concerned with spiritual stances that are 

xxii 
F O R EW O R D  
very widely scattered, for example in Hellenistic Greece, India 
in the time of Buddha, contemporary America, etc. 
In the immense central section of Spirit (§§488-595 (pp. 347-
422)) in which Hegel discusses alienated spirituality, there are 
two central focuses : the focus of Enlightenment ( Auft liirung) , 
representing the abstract communal life of a mutual recognition 
and shared use of facilities which never becomes intimate, and 
the focus of Faith or Belief (Glaube) , which in a dim and con­
fused way strives to overcome the abstraction which leads to 
alienation, and to return to the intimate concreteness of tribal 
and family life. It seems clear that in this section Hegel is really 
characterizing the spiritual life of Germany, that eternal servi­
tor among nations, condemned to admire and imitate the brilli­
ant, brittle universalism ofFrench life and culture, while always 
hankering after the integrity and concreteness of a simpler, 
sturdier, more peasant-like vision, the vision which expressed 
itself, for example, in the Rhineland masters or in countless reli­
gious sculptors and wood-carvers. The German eighteenth cen­
tury was one of the high-points of such alienation : if it was 
the age when Voltaire and Maupertuis plumed themselves at 
Frederick's court, it was also the age of the pietists, so strong 
an influence in the early life of Kant and Hegel, the simple, good 
people who scorned all but the precepts and transforming 
example of the 'Holy One of the Gospels'. The simple man of 
virtue and good sense, whom Hegel depicts as struck dumb by 
the ruthless wit of the French salons (§§523-4 (pp. 373-4) ) ,  is 
arguably the eternal German visitor, struggling to unify the cul­
tivated negations of a disintegrating society, which he admires 
but only half understands, with the simple standards and prin­
ciples that the 'folks at home' still rely on and live by. 
The spirituality of the Enlightenment is first sketched in a sec­
tion entitled Enlightenment and its Realm of Actuality (§§488-
526 (pp. 35o-76) ) .  This spirituality is characterized as being 
essentially one of Culture (Bildung) , by which nothing imme­
diate or natural is reckoned as of importance. Its universality 
is that of the open variable : one must always be ready to progress 
further, to develop talents and possibilities, to replace one's 
initial constants with others. This open variability reveals 
itself, on the one hand, in the infinitely ramifying structure 
of the state bureaucracy, culminating in the Monarch, and, on 

F O R E W O R D  
xxiii 
the other hand, in the endless open variability of economic life, 
in which enterprises always expand or decline, fortunes go up 
and down, and extreme wealth always goes flanked by ab­
ject penury. This spirituality is also always one of divided 
values : residues of feudal loyalty still attach to the bureaucracy 
and the monarch, while new values, whether favourable or 
unfavourable, circulate about money-making and money­
changers. In the inner life of those who live in this alienated 
regime the divided values appear in two new forms : in sophisti­
cated, Voltairian 'insight' on the one hand, and in the de­
liberate unsophistication of pious belief ( Glaube) on the other. 
These are discussed through §§527-8 1 (pp. 376-41 1 ) ,  and 
Hegel is mainly concerned to stress that the whole fight between 
these seemingly irreconcilable opponents is really a sham fight, 
since the generalized insights of Voltairianism mean nothing 
without their concrete implementation in such lives as those 
of good, God-fearing people, just as the 'simple' faith ofthe lat­
ter is really, in its indifference to anything merely outward or 
literal, as full of critical negativity as the enlightenment of Vol­
taire. The Voltairian thinks religious piety is intent on icons 
or wafers, or historical events which never happened, whereas 
religious piety is as critical of vain observances or of external 
signs as the Voltairian, and believes only in religious events that 
can be re-enacted in the believer's heart. And, if the Voltairian 
regards the God of pious worship as a mere projection of its 
thought, the pietist agrees with him in worshipping a God felt 
not to be alien to his own spirituality, but as being the uni­
versality of which he represents only the contraction (§549 
(pp. 390-1 ) ) .  The various abstractions posited by the enlight­
ened, whether going by the names of 'matter' or 'the supreme 
being', are likewise mere projections of the enlightened person's 
thought, only more empty and the same in their total emptiness. 
The alienated spirituality of the Enlightenment is not, how­
ever, able to achieve a true synthesis of abstractly universalistic 
insight and pious unsophistication : its most positive achieve­
ment in this direction is the thin notion of Nii tzlichkeit, Utility 
(§579 (pp. 41o-1 1 ) ) .  Everything in the world has then its sole 
justification in its usefulness towards human ends, which, like 
anything merely concrete, generate an endless series of perform­
ances and arrangements, each exciting purely for the sake of 

xxiv 
F O R E W O R D  
something else. But the two abstractions of individual subjec­
tivity on the one hand, with its intimately felt demands, and 
the indifferent, external, bureaucratic-economic machine on 
the other, have necessarily to come together, and this is at first 
brought about in an abstraction which liquidates both, much 
as emptily restless Becoming in the Logic is the joint outcome 
of emptily abstract Being and emptily abstract Nothingness. 
The pure self-assertion of the individual person, the element 
a! ways passed over by thew hole aliena ted society, storms the Bas­
tille and creates a society which will reflect and express his abso­
lute self alone. It does not, however, take Hegel long to exhibit 
the purely destructive and ultimately self-destructive profile of 
this spiritual stance (§§528-95) .  Spiritual sansculottism can 
have no programme but the downing and doing-away of every­
thing and everyone : it can generate no principle of self-dif­
ferentiation, it can throw up no genuine or permanent leader­
ship. It is a government by junta, by cabal and intrigue, and 
can achieve only the universal suppression and liquidation of 
individuality. It would have been interesting if, instead of this 
dialectical criticism of the relatively innocuous and transient 
synthesis of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, dismembered 
almost as soon as formed, we had had Hegel's criticisms of the 
far more adhesive pitch-like abstractions of the Communist Mani­
festo, in which the feet of humanity would seem as if for ever 
entangled. 
The third of Hegel's studies of Spirituality is entitled Spirit 
Sure of Itself or Morality (§§596-67 1 (pp. 424-72) ). Here we 
have a study of dutiful subjectivity, by which Hegel under­
stands neither the personal cult of Virtue, a superseded form 
of egoistic Reasonableness, nor the blind obedience to the day­
light or underground laws of the substantial ethical community, 
but rather a set of practically oriented attitudes representing 
the individual's own deep reflection on conduct, balanced by 
a deep respect for the parallel reflections of others. The moral 
view of the world sees the fulfilment of duty not only as the 
whole task of man, but also as the whole purpose of nature, 
and also of a continuation of life and consciousness beyond the 
limits of our present state. Such a view requires supplementa­
tion by theological postulates : we must posit a God who will 
guarantee the indefinite survival that will make endless moral 

FOREWORD 
XXV 
progress possible, and who will also complete the moral good 
of virtue with the natural good of happiness. Such a view is 
at once involved in peculiar contradictions, and in the bad faith 
and hypocrisy ( Verstellung) used to cover up such contradic­
tions. It must alternate like Sisyphus between seeming on the 
point of pushing the stone of its sensuousness on to the high 
plateau of perfect virtue, and then realizing that this would de­
stroy, rather than perfect, virtue, and so sinking back once 
more to the bottom ofthe hill. (See, for example, §623 (p. 439) .) 
These self-contradictory postulations, and these hypocritical 
self-deceptions, are then all cured in the spiritual stance of pure 
Conscientiousness, where the subject makes his goal the simple 
doing ofhis duty as he sees it, without worrying about its relations 
to the natural or supernatural order, or without raising the un­
real issue of what he should do once he has achieved perfection. 
Conscientiousness so defined has its standard of certainty in 
itself: it is undisturbed by the conflict ofprjma facie duties, since 
it is the sole arbiter as to which must override which (§635 (p. 
447) ). It is also undisturbed by the conflict between different 
men's consciences, since it is not part of the idea of conscience 
that it should pronounce identically to different men. The cult 
of conscience is a religion, a religion at once lonely, yet at a 
higher level communal. My conscience in its absolute majesty 
legislates for me and for me alone, but its legislation for me is 
recognized as valid by all conscientious persons, and so in a 
sense becomes a law for all (§§655-6 (pp. 46o-2)). 
Hegel's analysis is here very profound, and wholly true to 
what we actually think and say. It is superior to analyses which 
argue that where consciences differ, one or other must be mis­
taken, failing to see that they thereby remove the one solvent 
virtue of conscientiousness, that it can decide issues which are 
in the abstract undecidable. This solvent virtue of conscientious­
ness is, however, open to other difficulties: though inerrant in 
what it proclaims, it can at times be thought to be enunciating 
duties when it is not really pronouncing clearly on anything, 
or when its presumed voice is really that of some external auth­
ority, or of some private interest, or some intellectual confusion. 
And, while the communion of conscientious persons must 
always respect my conscience, they may at times doubt whether 
some pronouncement really springs from my conscience, 

xxvi 
F O REW O R D  
whether it is not the expression of some hypocritical personal 
interest (§66 r (pp. 464-5) ) .  Faced with this new fear of self­
deceit, conscience readily takes refuge in a passive concern with 
'problems' : it prefers to wring its hands in beautiful impotence, 
rather than do something that may be wrong, and so violate 
the law of conscience (§658 (p. 462 ) ) .  This impotent beauty 
of soul then confronts the other species of conscientiousness, 
which has dared to make difficult decisions, and perhaps goes 
on to condemn it, thereby, however, implicitly condemning 
itself. For the refusal to take a decision is itself a decision, even 
if of higher order. The confrontation may, however, lead on 
to a higher spiritual reconciliation, that of mutual understand­
ing and forgiveness among men, who have nevertheless decided 
differently. At this stage, Hegel tells us, morality becomes reli­
gious : we experience a spirit at once present in, yet transcend­
ing, the difference of conscientious agents, and which is rightly 
thought of as suprapersonal and divine (§67r (pp. 471-2) ) .  If 
the quarrel of consciences really ended, there would be no place 
for God : God exists and is active because He lives beyond any 
form of reasoned consensus. 
Hegel's phenomenology of Religion (§§672-787 (pp. 473-
520) ) runs through all the forms in which men have conceived, 
and must necessarily conceive, a spirituality which transcends 
their own, and which as much lies behind nature as behind the 
personal and social life of men. He writes beautifully of the 
Iranian religion of Light, of the Indian pan theisms which place 
the malign and sinister alongside the beautiful and good, of the 
Egyptian religion of the Understanding, with its passion for 
geometrical forms and for enigmatic sculptural combinations 
of human rationality with animality. From all these we pass 
on to the 'Art-Religion' of Greece, which, if tinged, in Hegel's 
account, with eighteenth-century German sensibility and 
romanticism, is still described with aptness and beauty. The 
sculptured god represents to Hegel a fine fusion of rational self­
consciousness with sensuous externality, and the same applies 
to the hymn and the rite, to the athlete with his glorious, public 
body, and to the semi-religious performances of tragedy and 
comedy. All forms of religion, which unite the self-consciously 
human with what transcends it, must, however, suffer decay 
and attrition in a period when man becomes alienated from 

F O R E W O R D  
xxvii 
his deeper self, a period such as that of Rome under the Caesars, 
or again of Europe in the eighteenth century, and so on. It was 
at such a point in time that Christianity, the absolute and 
revealed religion, first made its appearance, a religious stance 
in which human spirituality strives upwards towards and 
becomes one with a spirituality which transcends the human, 
while the latter likewise is seen as coming down into and trans­
figuring human spirituality. If this spiritual identification of 
two natures was conceived of as first occurring in the historic 
person of Jesus, it was also thought of as being capable of being 
shared by a whole society of believers, to whom the Divine 
Spirit at work in Jesus could be further communicated. Such 
a union of the individual and the specific with the transcen­
dently universal is of course for Hegel the sense and 'truth' of 
everything. It is not necessary nor pertinent for us here to enter 
into a long assessment of Hegel's merits or demerits as a 
Christian theologian. Plainly he saw as merely pictorial much 
that orthodox Christians would see as essential to their faith. 
But his philosophical reconstitution of Christianity strays no 
further from his original than, for example, the Aristotelian­
neo-Platonic reconstitution of Aquinas : in some respects it 
keeps closer to it. For the Christianity of Germany, as witnessed 
by countless, infinitely affecting altar-pieces, has always been 
one that could best distil beauty from agony, and which could 
see what was most divine in the lifting of the ordinary griefs, 
frustrations, and pathetic needs of men into a region that trans­
cends the human. The Christian God is essentially redemptive, 
and Hegel's philosophy is essentially a philosophy of redemp­
tion, of a self-alienation that returns to self in victory. If Hegel 
was nothing better, he was at least a great Christian theologian. 
The phenomenological drama now draws to its close. Con­
sciousness has confronted the world through the senses, de­
scribed it perceptually, and construed it quasi-scientifically. It 
has learnt, after some initial distortions, to put itself on a level 
with others, and has proceeded with their aid to classify and 
explain the phenomena of nature and mind. It has also tried 
to contribute distinctively to interpersonal life by various per­
sonal programmes of a hedonistic, sentimental, impmving, 
absorbedly practical, and analytically ethical sort. It has 
become aware of the community of conscious persons as united, 

xxviii 
F O R E W O R D  
and also dirempted, by the close bonds of common ancestry 
and family love, and also more loosely but widely held together 
by governmental and economic ties. It has experienced the ten­
sions of social positions where men are subjected to external 
legal and economic pressures, where their need for a more pro­
found communion has to be displaced to the higher plane of 
faith. It has worked through the various stages and syndromes 
of a conscientiousness that has learnt to cut Gordian knots in 
its practical decisions and to respect others whose decisions have 
cut these differently. It has risen to a religion for which the 
active universality, the Spirit which informs the teleology of 
nature and history, is also felt and pictured as a principle 
which achieves self-consciousness in a paradigmatic man, and, 
through the Spirit there present, in all men. What will now 
be achieved is das absolute Wissen, the perfect knowledge only 
consummated in philosophy, and here spoken of with a brevity 
and a modesty which accords with Hegel's simple sense of its 
all-importance. For absolute knowledge is simply the realiza­
tion that all forms of objectivity are identical with those essen­
tial to the thinking subject, so that in construing the world con­
ceptually it is seeing everything in the form of self, the self being 
simply the ever-active principle of conceptual universality, of 
categorial synthesis. In its conceptual grasp of objects it neces­
sarily grasps what it itselfis, and in grasping itself it necessarily 
grasps every phase of objectivity. These are the claims obscurely 
stated in Kant's transcendental deduction, but there given a 
one-sidedly subjective slant which is here for ever done away 
with. (See §§7g8-8oo (pp. 556--7).) 
Prior to this final conceptual grasp there has been a long pro­
cess in time during which the extruded concept, the self 
alienated from self, has been steadily enriched in its determina­
tions until, when the process was completed, the extruded con­
cept simply came into coincidence with the self which studies 
it, and Time, in which the process was completing itself, was 
abolished, made wholly irrelevant (§8or (pp. 557-8) ) .  The be­
ginnings of absolute knowledge occurred at a point in time 
when the religious view of the Middle Ages yielded to the first 
stirring of modern post-Renaissance thought, when Descartes 
made his celebrated connection of thinking with being. It con­
tinued through Spinoza's attribution of thought and extension 

F O R E W O R D  
XXIX 
to a single substance, and through Leibniz's further diremption 
of this substance into countless points of individual spirituality. 
Then followed the Enlightenment with its stress on utility­
the unmentioned empiricists are not here seen as helping on 
'conceptual grasp'-and this in its turn gave rise to the Kantian 
subordination of all practical ends to the demands of the 
rational will-the transcendental deduction here also goes un­
mentioned-and this to the philosophy of Fichte, where the 
pure self necessarily opposes itself to, yet also identifies itself 
with, the flux of time, and is further opposed to the frozen dif­
ferentiation of space. From this the thought of Schelling de­
veloped, where substantial being and subjective thought were 
alike thrown back into the abyss of the Absolute, and neither 
enjoyed an unquestioned prior.ity. Out of all these thought­
stances the final form of conceptual grasp emerged, where the 
self or subject saw itself as itself the Absolute, externalizing itself 
in substantial, objective nature, yet conscious of itself in this 
very act of self-externalization, and of itself, in fact, as simply 
being its own act of self-identification in and through such exter­
nalization. (The packed thought of §§803-4 (pp. s60-' I )  defies 
reproduction in terms other than its own, and one is quite un­
sure that one has got the full gist of it.) At this stage of grasp 
the whole distinction between objective truth and subjective 
certitude vanishes : the Notion or Concept unites both aspects 
in itself. We are therefore in a position to develop the scientific 
system which has been our goal from the first, where notions 
develop purely out of notions in virtue of their own inner 
oppositions and mediations. Obviously what Hegel is here an­
ticipating (§8os (p. 562)) is the Logic or Metaphysics which 
is the first part of his system. He tells us that this system must 
then go on to exhibit the self-externalization ofhis purely logical 
categories in the sensuous shows of nature and in the con­
tingencies which fill space and time (§§8o6-7 (p. 563) ) ,  and that 
it must then study itself returning to itself out of nature's exter­
nality, a return which will restate the content of the phenom­
enology in the form of a real history of spirit, i.e. in the Philos­
ophy ofSpirit which will form the third part of the system (§8o8 
(pp. 563-4) ) .  What has further happened at this point is that 
the phenomenological 'We' that has been examining and order­
ing the shapes of consciousness has itself become one of their 

XXX 
F O R E W O R D  
number, has revealed itself as being the final shape of conscious­
ness. As such it now appropriates and remembers the whole 
content of the development that it has been studying, and can 
go on to study alignments of shapes which are as much shapes 
of being as of its own conscious certitude. 
We might at this point go on to analyse the superb Vorrede 
or Preface, which Hegel wrote early in 1 8o7 as an Introduction, 
not only to the Phenomenology, but to the whole system. We shall, 
however, abstain from doing this, and shall leave the reader 
with a task which he should be able to perform with pleasure, 
provided he reads the rest of the book before the Preface. What 
we have said in this Foreword is only meant to be a sketch, 
a preliminary help, and the same applies to the analyses that 
have been added to the translated paragraphs of the text. They 
are meant to orient the reader in the thickets of the text, not 
to provide exhaustive or wholly reliable guidance. They have 
been found useful by my students, and may prove useful to 
others. Mr. Miller has further translated the text with great 
care and faithfulness, but no amount of either will achieve un­
ambiguous perspicuity where the text fails to provide it. 
At the end of these remarks it may be asked whether Hegel's 
self-justifying circular series of spiritual characterizations has 
done anything like show that the real must coincide with the 
intelligible, or that the 'truth' about anything will consist in 
its teleological relation to the emergence of spiritual self-con­
sciousness. He has certainly shown up the absurdity of believing 
in objective arrangements which are wholly out of gear with 
our categories and our thought-demands, and which are not 
at all accommodated to our theoretical requirements or to our 
practical approaches and endeavours. But has he exorcised the 
doubt that there may be sides of the world which will remain 
obstinately and depressingly unintelligible, and which are with­
out a significant teleological relation to our spiritual goals and 
endeavours, and which may in the end bring these all to 
nought? These doubts, to which the state of science and the 
state of the world lend some substance, are not, however, such 
as can be considered in this Foreword, nor is it clear by what 
process of reasoning, dialectical or other, they could be ade­
quately exorcised. 
Boston University 

TRA N S LATOR' S FOREWORD 
T H I s  translation of Hegel's Phenomenology rif Spirit has been 
made froଈ the fifth edition ( F. Meiner, Hamburg, I952) edited 
· by J. Hoffmeister. In attempting to convey Hegel's thought to 
the English reader who has no German, I have done my best 
to steer a course which, avoiding loose paraphrase, departs at 
times from a rigid consistency in rendering Hegelian locutions 
where this seemed to be more helpful to the reader. I have been 
sparing in the use of capitals and, in general, have only used 
them for terms which have a peculiarly Hegelian connotation. 
The German Vers tand I have translated by 'the Understanding'. 
Wher: the capital is omitted, the word has the usual English 
meamng. 
The translation was undertaken at the suggestion of Professor 
Findlay to whom I am greatly indebted for encouragement and 
advice. I also wish to thank Professor H. S. Harris of Glendon 
Co11ege, York U ni versi ty, To ron to, who saw parts of the trans­
lation and offered helpful criticism and suggestions. Responsi­
bility for the translation rests, of course, with me. Thanks are 
also due to my wife Frances who typed the final draft of my 
manuscript. 
'Rivendell' 
Whiteway, 
Glos. 
March 1976 
A. V. MILLER 


C O N TEN T S  
P R E F A C E : O N  S C I E N T I F I C  C O G N I TI O N 
The element of the True is the Notion and its true shape is scientific 
system (3) .  The state of spiritual culture at the present time (4) . The 
principle of Science is not the completion of Science : objections to for­
malism (7) .  The Absolute is Subject : the meaning of this ( 1 0) .  The 
element of knowledge ( I  4) . The elevation of consciousness into that ele­
ment is the Phenomenology of Spirit ( I 5) .  The transformation of 
picture-thoughts and familiar ideas into thoughts ( I 8) ; and these into 
Notions (20). To what extent is the Phenomenology of Spirit negative, 
or how is the false contained in it? (22). Historical and mathematical 
truth (23). The nature of philosophical truth and its method : objections 
to schematizing formalism (27) .  Requirement for the study of philo­
sophy (35) .  The negative attitude of ratiocinative thinking, its positive 
attitude, and its subject (36). Philosophizing by the light of nature : 
sound common sense (4I ) ;  the inspiration of genius (43 ) .  Conclusion : 
the relation of the author to his public (44) . 
I N T R O D U C T I O N  
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S 
I. 
S E N S E - C E R T A I N T Y : 
O R  T H E  ' T H I S ' 
A N D  ' M E A N I N G ' 
I I .  P E R C E P T I O N : 
O R  T H E  T H I N G  A N D  D E C E P T I O N  
III. 
F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S T A N D I N G : 
A P P E A R A N C E  A N D  
T H E  S U P E R S E N S I B L E  W O R L D  
B .  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
IV. 
T H E  T R U T H  O F  S E L F - C E R T A I N T Y  
A .  Independence and dependence o f  self-consciousness : Lord· 
ship and Bondage 
B. Freedom of self-consciousness : Stoicism, Scepticism, and the 
Unhappy Consciousness 
C. (AA.) R E A S O N  
V. 
T H E  C E R T A I N T Y  A N D  T R U T H  O F  R E A S O N  
A. Observing Reason 
a. <?bservation of Nature. Description in general. Descrip­
tive marks. Laws. Observation of the organic : relation of 
the organic to the inorganic. Teleology. Inner and outer. 
The inner : laws of the pure moments of the inner ; Sensi­
bility, Irritability, and Reproduction ; the inner and its 
page 
sa 
79 
I I I  
I39 
1 39 
I 45 

XXXIV 
C O N T E N T S  
outer aspect. The inner and the outer as a n  organic shape. 
The outer itself as inner and outer, or the organic Idea 
transposed into the inorganic. The organic from this point 
page 
of view : Genus, Species, and Individuality 
1 47 
b. Observation of self-consciousness in its purity and in its 
relation to external actuality. Logical and psychological 
laws 
1 8o 
c. Observation of self-consciousness in its relation to its 
immediate actuality. Physiognomy and Phrenology 
1 85 
B. The actualization of rational self-consciousness through its 
own activity 
2 1 1  
a. Pleasure and Necessity 
2 1 7 
b. The law of the heart and the frenzy of self-conceit 
2 2 1  
c. Virtue and the way o f  the world 
228 
C. Individuality which takes itself to be real in and for itself 
236 
a. The spiritual animal kingdom and deceit, or the ' matter 
in hand' itself 
237 
b. Reason as lawgiver 
252 
c. Reason as testing laws 
256 
( B B . )  S P I R I T 
263 
VI. 
S P I R I T  
A. The true Spirit. The ethical order 
266 
a. The ethical world. Human and Divine Law : Man and 
Woman 
267 
b. 
Ethical action. Human and Divine knowledge. Guilt and 
Destiny 
279 
c. Legal status 
290 
B. Self-alienated Spirit. Culture 
294 
I. The world of self-alienated Spirit 
296 
a. Culture and its realm of actuality 
297 
b. Faith and pure insight 
32 1  
II. The Enlightenment 
328 
a. The struggle of the Enlightenment with Superstition 
329 
b. The truth of Enlightenment 
349 
Ill. Absolute Freedom and Terror 
355 
c. Spirit that is certain of itself. Morality 
364 
a. The moral view of the world 
365 
b. Dissemblance or duplicity 
374 
c. Conscience. The 'beautiful soul', evil and its forgiveness 
383 

C O N T E NTS 
( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
VII. R E L I G I O N  
A .  Natural Religion 
a. God as Light 
b. Plant and animal 
c. The artificer 
B. Religion in the form of Art 
a. The abstract work of art 
b. The living work of art 
c. The spiritual work of art 
C. The revealed religion 
( D D . ) A B S O L U T E  K N O W I N G  
VIII. 
A B S O L U T E  K N O W I N G  
A N A L Y S I S  O F  T H E  T E X T  by J .  N .  Findlay 
I N D E X  
XXXV 
page 
4 I O  
4 I O  
424 
427 
435 
439 
453 
479 
479 
495 
593 


PREFA CE : O N  S C IEN T I FI C  
C O G N I T I O N  
I .  I t  is customary to preface a work with an explanation of 
the author's aim, why he wrote the book, and the relationship 
in which he believes it to stand to other earlier or contemporary 
treatises on the same subject. In the case of a philosophical 
work, however, such an explanation seems not only superfluous 
but, in view of the nature of the subject-matter, even inappro­
priate and misleading. For whatever might appropriately be 
said about philosophy in a preface-say a historical statement 
of the main drift and the point of view, the general content and 
results, a string of random assertions and assurances about 
truth-none of this can be accepted as the way in which to 
expound philosophical truth. Also, since philosophy moves 
essentially in the element of universality, which includଉs within 
itself the particular, it might seem that here more than in any 
of the other sciences the subject-matter itself, and even in its 
complete nature, were expressed in the aim and the final results, 
the execution being by contrast really the unessential factor. On 
the other hand, in the ordinary view of anatomy, for instance 
(say, the knowledge of the parts of the body regarded as inani­
mate), we are quite sure that we do not as yet possess the sub­
ject-matter itself, the content of this science, but must in addi­
tion exert ourselves to know the particulars. Further, in the case 
of such an aggregate of information, which has no right to bear 
the name of Science, an opening talk about aim and other such 
generalities is usually conducted in the same historical and un­
comprehending way in which the content itself (these nerves, 
muscles, etc.) is spoken of. In the case of philosophy, on the 
other hand, this would give rise to the incongruity that along 
with the employment of such a method its inability to grasp 
the truth would also be demonstrated. 
2. Furthermore, the very attempt to define how a philo­
sophical work is supposed to be connected with other efforts 
to deal with the same subject-matter drags in an extraneous 
concern, and what is really important for the cognition of the 

2 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S P I R I T 
truth is obscured. The more conventional opinion gets fixated 
on the antithesis of truth and falsity, the more it tends to expect 
a given philosophical system to be either accepted or con­
tradicted ; and hence it finds only acceptance or rejection. It 
does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as 
the progressive unfolding of truth, but rather sees in it simple 
disagreements. The bud disappears in the bursting-forth of the 
blossom, and one might say that the former is refuted by the 
latter ; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is shown 
up in its turn as a false manifestation of the plant, and the fruit 
now emerges as the truth ofit instead. These forms are not just 
distinguished from one another, they also supplant one another 
as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid 
nature makes them moments of an organic unity in which they 
not only do not conflict, but in which each is as necessary as 
the other ; and this mutual necessity alone constitutes the life 
of the whole. But he who rejects a philosophical system [i.e. 
the new philosopher] does not usually comprehend what he is 
doing in this way ; and he who grasps the contradiction between 
them [i.e. the historian of philosophy] does not, as a general 
rule, know how to free it from its one-sidedness, or maintain 
it in its freedom by recognizing the reciprocally necessary 
moments that take shape as a conflict and seeming incompati­
bility. 
3· Demanding and supplying these [superficial] explana­
tions passes readily enough as a concern with what is essential. 
Where could the inner meaning of a philosophical work find 
fuller expression than in its aims and results, and how could 
these be more exactly known than by distinguishing them from 
everything else the age brings forth in this sphere? Yet when 
this activity is taken for more than the mere beginnings of cogni­
tion, when it is allowed to pass for actual cognition, then it 
should be reckoned as no more than a device for evading the 
real issue [die Sache selbst] , a way of creating an impression of 
hard work and serious commitment to the problem, while actu­
ally sparing oneself both. For the real issue is not exhausted 
by stating it as an aim, but by carrying it out, nor is the result 
the actual whole, but rather the result together with the process 
through which it came about. The aim by itself is a lifeless uni­
versal, just as the guiding tendency is a mere drive that as yet 

P R E F A C E  
3 
lacks an actual existence ; and the bare result is the corpse which 
has left the guiding tendency behind it. Similarly, the specific 
difference of a thing is rather its limit ; it is where the thing 
stops, or it is what the thing is not. This concern with aim or 
results, with differentiating and passing judgement on various 
thinkers is therefore an easier task than it might seem. For in­
stead of getting involved in the real issue, this kind of activity 
is always away beyond it ; instead of tarrying with it, and losing 
itselfin it, this kind ofknowing is forever grasping at something 
new; it remains essentially preoccupied with itself instead of 
being preoccupied with the real issue and surrendering to it. 
To judge a thing that has substance and solid worth is quite 
easy, to comprehend it is much harder, and to blend judgement 
and comprehension in a definitive description is the hardest 
thing of all. 
4· Culture and its laborious emergence from the immediacy 
of substantial life must always begin by getting acquainted with 
general principles and points of view, so as at first to work up 
to a general conception [ Gedanke] of the real issue, as well as learn­
ing to support and refute the general conception with reasons ; 
then to apprehend the rich and concrete abundance [of life] 
by differential classification ; and finally to give accurate in­
struction and pass serious judgement upon it. From its very be­
ginning, culture must leave room for the earnestness of life in 
its concrete richness ; this leads the way to an experience of the 
real issue. And even when the real issue has been penetrated 
to its depths by serious speculative effort, this kind of knowing 
and judging will still retain its appropriate place in ordinary 
conversation. 
5· The true shape in which truth exists can only be the scien­
tific system of such truth. To help bring philosophy closer to 
the form of Science, to the goal where it can lay aside the title 
'love of knowing' and be actual knowing-that is what I have 
set myself to do. The inner necessity that knowing should be 
Science lies in its nature, and only the systematic exposition 
of philosophy itself provides it. But the external necessity, so far 
as it is grasped in a general way, setting aside accidental matters 
of person and motivation, is the same as the inner, or in other 
words it lies in the shape in which time sets forth the sequential 
existence ofits moments. To show that now is the time for philo-

4 
P H E N O M E N O L OGY O F  S P I R I T 
sophy to be raised to the status of a Science would therefore 
be the only true justification of any effort that has this aim, 
for to do so would demonstrate the necessity of the aim, would 
indeed at the same time be the accomplishing of it. 
6. To lay down that the true shape of truth is scientific­
or, what is the same thing, to maintain that truth has only the 
Notion as the element of its existence-seems, I know, to con­
tradict a view which is in our time as prevalent as it is preten­
tious, and to go against what that view implies. Some explana­
tion therefore seems called for, even though it must for the 
present be no more than a bare assertion, like the view that 
it contradicts. If, namely, the True exists only in what, or better 
as what, is sometimes called intuition, sometimes immediate 
knowledge of the Absolute, religion or being-not at the centre 
of divine love but the being ofthe divine love itself-then what 
is required in the exposition of philosophy is, from this view­
point, rather the opposite of the form of the Notion. For the 
Absolute is not supposed to be comprehended, it is to be felt 
and intuited ; not the Notion of the Absolute, but the feeling 
and intuition of it, must govern what is said, and must be 
expressed by it. 
7· If we apprehend a demand of this kind in its broader con­
text, and view it as it appears at the stage which self-conscious 
Spirit has presently reached, it is clear that Spirit has now got 
beyond the substantial life it formerly led in the element of 
thought, that it is beyond the immediacy of faith, beyond the 
satisfaction and security of the certainty that consciousness then 
had, of its reconciliation with the essential being, and of that 
being's universal presence both within and without. It has not 
only gone beyond all this into the other extreme of an insubstan­
tial reflection ofitselfinto itself, but beyond that too. Spirit has 
not only lost its essential life; it is also conscious of this loss, 
and of the finitude that is its own content. Turning away from 
the empty husks, and confessing that it lies in wickednesଊ, it 
reviles itself for so doing, and now demands from philosophy, 
not so much knowledge of what it is, as the recovery through 
its agency of that lost sense of solid and substantial being. Philo­
sophy is to meet this need, not by opening up the fast-locked 
nature of substance, and raising this to self-consciousness, not 
by bringing consciousness out of its chaos back to an order based 

P R E F A C E  
on thought, nor to the simplicity of the Notion, but rather by 
running together what thought has put asunder, by suppressing 
the differentiations of the Notion and restoring the feeling of 
essential being : in short, by providing edification rather than 
insight. The 'beautiful', the 'holy', the 'eternal', 'religion', and 
'love' are the bait required to arouse the desire to bite ; not the 
Notion, but ecstasy, not the cold march of necessity in the 
thing itself, but the ferment of enthusiasm, these are supposed 
to be what sustains and continually extends the wealth of sub­
stance. 
8. In keeping with this demand is the strenuous, almost 
over-zealous and frenzied effort to tear men away from their 
preoccupation with the sensuous, from their ordinary, private 
[ einzelne] affairs, and to direct their gaze to the stars ; as if they 
had forgotten all about the divine, and were ready like worms 
to content themselves with dirt and water. Formerly they had 
a heaven adorned with a vast wealth of thoughts and imagery. 
The meaning of all that is, hung on the thread oflight by which 
it was linked to that heaven. Instead of dwelling in this world's 
presence, men looked beyond it, following this thread to an 
other-worldly presence, so to speak. The eye of the Spirit had 
to be forcibly turned and held fast to the things of this world ; 
and it has taken a long time before the lucidity which only 
heavenly things used to have could penetrate the dullness and 
confusion in which the sense of worldly things was enveloped, 
and so make attention to the here and now as such, attention 
to what has been called 'experience', an interesting and valid 
enterprise. Now we seem to need just the opposite : sense is so 
fast rooted in earthly things that it requires just as much force 
to raise it. The Spirit shows itself as so impoverished that, like 
a wanderer in the desert craving for a mere mouthful of water, 
it seems to crave for its refreshment only the bare feeling of the 
divine in general. By the little which now satisfies Spirit, we 
can measure the extent of its loss. 
g. This modest complacency in receiving, or this sparingness 
in giving, does not, however, befit Science. Whoever seeks mere 
edification, and whoever wants to shroud in a mist the manifold 
variety of his earthly existence and of thought, in order to 
pursue the indeterminate enjoyment of this indeterminate 
divinity, may look where he likes to find all this. He will find 

6 
P H E N O M E N O L O GY O F  S P I R I T  
ample opportunity to dream up something for himself. But 
philosophy must beware of the wish to be edifying. 
1 0. Still less must this complacency which abjures Science 
claim that such rapturous haziness is superior to Science. This 
prophetic talk supposes that it is staying right in the centre and 
in the depths, looks disdainfully at determinateness (Horos), 
and deliberately holds aloof from Notion and Necessity as pro­
ducts of that reflection which is at home only in the finite. But 
just as there is an empty breadth, so too there is an empty depth ; 
and just as there is an extension of substance that pours forth 
as a finite multiplicity without the force to hold the multiplicity 
together, so there is an intensity without content, one that holds 
itselfin as a sheer force without spread, and this is in no way 
distinguishable from superficiality. The power of Spirit is only 
as great as its expression, its depth only as deep as it dares to 
spread out and lose itself in its exposition. Moreover, when this 
non-conceptual, substantial knowledge professes to have sunk 
the idiosyncrasy of the self in essential being, and to philoso­
phize in a true and holy manner, it hides the truth from itself: 
by spurning measure and definition, instead of being devoted 
to God, it merely gives free rein both to the contingency of the 
content within it, and to its own caprice. Such minds, when 
they give themselves up to the uncontrolled ferment of [the 
divine J substance, imagine that, by drawing a veil over self­
consciousness and surrendering understanding they become the 
beloved of God to whom He gives wisdom in sleep ; and hence 
what they in fact receive, and bring to birth in their sleep, is 
nothing but dreams. 
I I .  Besides, it is not difficult to see that ours is a birth-time 
and a period of transition to a new era. Spirit has broken with 
the world it has hitherto inhabited and imagined, and is of a 
mind to submerge it in the past, and in the labour of its own 
transformation. Spirit is indeed never at rest but always 
engaged in moving forward. But just as the first breath drawn 
by a child after its long, quiet nourishment breaks the gradual­
ness of merely quantitative growth-there is a qualitative leap, 
and the child is born-so likewise the Spirit in its formation 
matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving bit 
by bit the structure of its previous world, whose tottering state 
is only hinted at by isolated symptoms. The frivolity and bore-

P R E F A C E  
dom which unsettle the established order, the vague foreboding 
of something unknown, these are the heralds of approaching 
change. The gradual crumbling that left unaltered the face of 
the whole is cut short by a sunburst which, in one flash, illumi­
nates the features of the new world. 
1 2 .  But this new world is no more a complete actuality than 
is a new-born child ; it is essential to bear this in mind. It comes 
on the scene for the first time in its immediacy or its Notion. 
Just as little as a building is finished when its foundation has 
been laid, so little is the achieved Notion of the whole the whole 
itself. When we wish to see an oak with its massive trunk and 
spreading branches and foliage, we are not content to be shown 
an acorn instead. So too, Science, the crown ofa world of Spirit, 
is not complete in its beginnings. The onset of the new spirit 
is the product of a widespread upheaval in various forms of 
culture, the prize at the end of a complicated, tortuous path 
and of just as variegated and strenuous an effort. It is the whole 
which, having traversed its content in time and space, has 
returned into itself, and is the resultant simple Notion of the 
whole. But the actuality of this simple whole consists in those 
various shapes and forms which have become its moments, and 
which will now develop and take shape afresh, this time in their 
new element, in their newly acquired meaning. 
1 3· · While the initial appearance of the new world is, to begin 
with, only the whole veiled in its simplicity, or the general 
foundation of the whole, the wealth of previous existence is still 
present to consciousness in memory. Consciousness misses in the 
newly emerging shape its former range and specificity of con­
tent, and even more the articulation of form whereby dis­
tinctions are securely defined, and stand arrayed in their fixed 
relations. Without such articulation, Science lacks universal in­
telligibility, and gives the appearance of being the esoteric pos­
session of a few individuals : an esoteric possession, since it is 
as yet present only in its Notion or in its inwardness ; of a few 
individuals, since its undiffused manifestation makes its exist­
ence something singular. Only what is completely determined 
is at once exoteric, comprehensible, and capable of being 
learned and appropriated by all. The intelligible form of 
Science is the way open and equally accessible to everyone, and 
consciousness as it approaches Science justly demands that it 

8 
P H E N O M E N O L OGY OF S P I R I T  
be able to attain to rational knowledge by way of the ordinary 
understanding; fot the understanding is thought, the pure 'I' 
as such ; and what is intelligible is what is already familiar and 
common to Science and the unscientific consciousness alike, the 
latter through its having afforded direct access to the former. 
1 4. Science in its early stages, when it has attained neither 
to completeness of detail nor perfection of form, is vulnerable 
to criticism. But it would be as unjust for such criticism to strike 
at the very heart ofScience, as it is untenable to refuse to honour 
the demand for its further development. This polarization 
seems to be the Gordian knot with which scientific culture is 
at present struggling, and which it still does not properly under­
stand. One side boasts of its wealth of material and intelligi­
bility, the other side at least scorns this intelligibility, and 
flaunts its immediate rationality and divinity. Even if the 
former side is reduced to silence, whether by the force of truth 
alone or by the blustering of the other, and even if, in respect 
of fundamentals, it feels itself outmatched, it is by no means 
satisfied regarding the said demands ; for they are justified, but 
not fulfilled. Its silence stems only half from the triumph of its 
opponent, and half from the boredom and indifference which 
tend to result from the continual awakening of expectations 
through unfulfilled promises. 
1 5. As for content, the other side make it easy enough for 
themselves at times to display a great expanse of it. They appro­
priate a lot of already familiar and well-ordered material ; by 
focusing on rare and exotic instances they give the impression 
that they have hold of everything else which scientific know­
ledge had already embraced in its scope, and that they are also 
in command of such material as is as yet unordered. It thus 
appears that everything has been subjected to the absolute 
Idea, which therefore seems to be cognized in everything and 
to have matured into an expanded science. But a closer inspec­
tion shows that this expansion has not come about through one 
and the same principle having spontaneously assumed different 
shapes, but rather through the shapeless repetition of one and 
the same formula, only externally applied to diverse materials, 
thereby obtaining merely a boring show of diversity. The Idea, 
which is of course true enough on its own account, remains in 
effect always in its primitive condition, if its development in-

P R E F A C E  
9 
volves nothing more than this sort of repetition of the same for­
mula. When the knowing subject goes around applying this 
single inert form to whatever it encounters, and dipping the 
material into this placid element from outside, this is no more 
the fulfilment of what is needed, i.e. a self-originating, self­
differentiating wealth of shapes, than any arbitrary insights into 
the content. Rather it is a monochromatic formalism which 
only arrives at the differentiation of its material since this has 
been already provided and is by now familiar. 
r6. Yet this formalism maintains that such monotony and 
abstract universality are the Absolute, and we are assured that 
dissatisfaction with it indicates the inability to master the abso­
lute standpoint and to keep hold of it. Time was when the bare 
possibility of imagining something differently was sufficient to 
refute an idea, and this bare possibility, this general thought, 
also had the entire positive value of an actual cognition. Nowa­
days we see all value ascribed to the universal Idea in this non­
actual form, and the undoing of all distinct, determinate entities 
(or rather the hurling of them all into the abyss of vacuity with­
out further development or any justification) is allowed to pass 
muster as the speculative mode of treatment. Dealing with 
something from the perspective of the Absolute consists merely 
in declaring that, although one has been speaking ofitjust now 
as something definite, yet in the Absolute, the A=A, there is 
nothing of the kind, for there all is one. To pit this single insight, 
that in the Absolute everything is the same, against the full body 
of articulated cognition, which at least seeks and demands such 
fulfilment, to palm off its Absolute as the night in which, as 
the saying goes, all cows are black-this is cognition na·ively 
reduced to vacuity. The formalism which recent philosophy 
denounces and despises, only to see it reappear in its midst, will 
not vanish from Science, however much its inadequacy may 
be recognized and felt, till the cognizing of absolute actuality 
has become entirely clear as to its own nature. Since the pre­
sentation of a general idea in outline, before any attempt to 
follow it out in detail, makes the latter attempt easier to grasp, 
it may be useful at this point to give a rough idea of it, at the 
same time taking the opportunity to get rid of certain habits 
of thought which impede philosophical cognition. 
r 7· In my view, which can be justified only by the exposition 

1 0  
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S P I R I T  
of the system itself, everything turns on grasping and expressing 
the True, not only as Substance, but equally as Subject. At the 
same time, it is to be observed that substantiality embraces the 
universal, or the immediacy if knowledge itself, as well as that 
which is being or immediacy for knowledge. If the conception 
of God as the one Substance shocked the age in which it was 
proclaimed, the reason for this was on the one hand an in­
stinctive awareness that, in this definition, self-consciousness 
was only submerged and not preserved. On the other hand, 
the opposite view, which clings to thought as thought, to uni­
versality as such, is the very same simplicity, is undifferentiated, 
unmoved substantiality. And if, thirdly, thought does unite 
itself with the being of Substance, and apprehends immediacy 
or intuition as thinking, the question is still whether this in­
tellectual intuition does not again fall back into inert simplicity, 
and does not depict actuality itselfin a non-actual manner. 
r8. Further, the living Substance is being which is in truth 
Subject, or, what is the same, is in truth actual only in so far 
as it is the movement of positing itself, or is the mediation of 
its self-othering with itself. This Substance is, as Subject, pure, 
simple negativity, and is for this very reason the bifurcation of 
the simple ; it is the doubling which sets up opposition, and then 
again the negation of this indifferent diversity and of its anti­
thesis [the immediate simplicity]. Only this self-restoring same­
ness, or this reflection in otherness within itselfଃnot an original 
or immediate unity as such଄is the True. It is the procଅss of its 
own becoming, the circle that presupposes its end as its goal, 
having its end also as its beginning ; and only by being worked 
out to its end, is it actual. 
rg. Thus the life of God and divine cognition may well be 
spoken of as a disporting of Love with itself; but this idea sinks 
into mere edification, and even insipidity, if it lacks the serious­
ness, the suffering, the patience, and the labour of the negative. 
In itself, that life is indeed one of untroubled equality and unity 
with itself, for which otherness and alienation, and the over­
coming of alienation, are not serious matters. But this in-itself 
is abstract universality, in which the nature of the divine life 
to be for itself, and so too the self-movement of the form, are 
altogether left out of account. If the form is declared to be the 
same as the essence, then it is ipso facto a mistake to suppose 

P R E FA C E  
I I  
that cognition can be satisfied with the in-itself or the essence, 
but can get along without the form-that the absolute principle 
or absolute intuition makes the working-out of the former, or 
the development of the latter, superfluous. Just because the 
form is as essential to the essence as the essence is to itself, the 
divine essence is not to be conceived and expressed merely as 
essence, i.e. as immediate substance or pure self-contemplation 
of the divine, but likewise asform, and in the whole wealth of 
the developed form. Only then is it conceived and expressed 
as an actuality. 
. 
20. The True is the whole. But the whole is nothing other 
than the essence consummating itself through its development. 
Of the Absolute it must be said that it is essentially a result, that 
only in the end is it what it truly is ; and that precisely in this 
consists its nature, viz. to be actual, subject, the spontaneous 
becoming of itself. Though it may seem contradictory that the 
Absolute should be conceived essentially as a result, it needs 
little pondering to set this show of contradiction in its true light. 
The beginning, the principle, or the Absolute, as at first imme­
diately enunciated, is only the universal. Just as when I say 'all 
animals', this expression cannot pass for a zoology, so it is 
equally plain that the words, 'the Divine', 'the Absolute', 'the 
Eternal', etc., do not express what is contained in them ; and 
only such words, in fact, do express the intuition as something 
immediate. Whatever is more than such a word, even the transi­
tion to a mere proposition, contains a becoming-other that has 
to be taken back, or is a mediation. But it is just this that is 
rejected with horror, as if absolute cognition were being sur­
rendered when more is made of mediation than in simply saying 
that it is nothing absolute, and is completely absent in the 
Absolute. 
2 r .  But this abhorrence in fact stems from ignorance of the 
nature of mediation, and of absolute cognition itself. For media­
tion is nothing beyond self-moving selfsameness, or is reflection 
into self, the moment of the 'I' which is for itself pure negativity 
or, when reduced to its pure abstraction, simple becoming. The 
'I', or becoming in general, this mediation, on account of its 
simple nature, is just immediacy in the process of becoming, 
and is the immediate itself. Reason is, therefore, misunderstood 
when reflection is excluded from the True, and is not grasped 

! 2  
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S PI R I T  
as a positive moment of the Absolute. It is reflection that makes 
the True a resulJ:, but it is equally reflection that overcomes 
the antithesis between the process ofits becoming and the result, 
for this becoming is also simple, and therefore not different from 
the form of the True which shows itself as simple in its result ;  
the process ofbecoming is rather just this return into simplicity. 
Though the embryo is indeed in itself a human being, it is not 
so for itself; this it only is as cultivated Reason, which has made 
itself into what it is in itself And that is when it for the first 
time is actual. But this result is itself a simple immediacy, for 
it is self-conscious freedom at peace with itself, which has not 
set the antithesis on one side and left it lying there, but has been 
reconciled with it. 
2 2 .  What has just been said can also be expressed by saying 
that Reason is purposive activity. The exaltation of a supposed 
Nature over a misconceived thinking, and especially the rejec­
tion of external teleology, has brought the form of purpose in 
general into discredit. Still, in the sense in which Aristotle, too, 
defines Nature as purposive activity, purpose is what is imme­
diate and at rest, the unmoved which is also self-moving, and as 
such is Subject. Its power to move, taken abstractly, is being­
for-self or pure negativity. The result is the same as the begin­
ning, only because the beginning is the purpose ; in other words, 
the actual is the same as its Notion only because the immediate, 
as purpose, contains the self or pure actuality within itself. The 
realized purpose, or the existent actuality, is movement and un­
folded becoming ; but it is just this unrest that is the self; and 
the self is like that immediacy and simplicity of the beginning 
because it is the result, that which has returned into itself, the 
latter being similarly just the self. And the self is the sameness 
and simplicity that relates itself to itself. 
23. The need to represent the Absolute as Subject has found 
expression in the propositions : God is the eternal, the moral 
world-order, love, and so on. In such propositions the True is 
only posited immediately as Subject, but is not presented as the 
movement of reflecting itself iri to itself. In a proposition of this 
kind one begins with the word 'God'. This by itself is a meaning­
less sound, a mere name ; it is only the predicate that says what 
God is, gives Him content and meaning. Only in the end of the 
proposition does the empty beginning become actual know-

P R E F A C E  
ledge. This being so, it is not clear why one does not speak 
merely of the eternal, of the moral world-order, and so on, or, 
as the ancients did, of pure notions like 'being', 'the One', and 
so on, in short, of that which gives the meaning without adding 
the meaningless sound as well. But it is just this word that indi­
cates that what is posited is not a being [i.e. something that 
merely is] ,  or essence, or a universal in general, but rather some­
thing that is reflected into itself, a Subject. But at the same time 
this is only anticipated. The Subject is assumed as a fixed point 
to which, as their support, the predicates are affixed by a move­
ment belonging to the knower of this Subject, and which is not 
regarded as belonging to the fixed point itself; yet it is only 
through this movement that the content could be represented 
as Subject. The way in which this movement has been brought 
about is such that it cannot belong to the fixed point ;  yet, after 
this point has been presupposed, the nature of the movement 
cannot really be other than what it is, it can only be external. 
Hence, the mere anticipation that the Absolute is Subject is 
not only not the actuality of this Notion, but it even makes the 
actuality impossible ; for the anticipation posits the subject as 
an inert point, whereas the actuality is self-movement. 
24. Among the various consequences that follow from what 
has just been said, this one in particular can be stressed, that 
knowledge is only actual, and can only be expounded, as 
Science or as system ; and furthermore, that a so-called basic pro­
position or principle of philosophy, if true, is also false, just 
because it is only a principle. It is, therefore, easy to refute it. 
The refutation consists in pointing out its defect ; and it is defec­
tive because it is only the universal or principle, is only the be­
ginning. If the refutation is thorough, it is derived and de­
veloped from the principle itself, not accomplished by counter­
assertions and random thoughts from outside. The refutation 
would, therefore, properly consist in the further development 
of the principle, and in thus remedying the defectiveness, if it 
did not mistakenly pay attention solely to its negative action, 
without awareness of its progress and result on their positive side 
too-The genuinely positive exposition of the beginning is thus 
also, conversely, just as much a negative attitude towards it, 
viz. towards its initially one-sided form of being immediate or 
purpose. It can therefore be taken equally well as a refutation 

P H E N O M E N O LOGY O F  S P I R I T  
of the principle that constitutes the basis of the system, but it 
is more correct to regard it as a demonstration that the basis 
or principle of the system is, in fact, only its beginning. 
25. That the True is actual only as system, or that Substance 
is essentially Subject, is expressed in the representation of the 
Absolute as Spirit-the most sublime Notion and the one which 
belongs to the modern age and its religion. The spiritual alone 
is the actual ; it is essence, or that which has being in itself; it is 
that which relates itself to itself and is determinate, it is other-being 
and being-for-self, and in this determinateness, or in its self-exter­
nality, abides within itself; in other words, it is in and for itself­
But this being-in-and-for-itself is at first only for us, or in itself, 
it is spiritual Substance. It must also be thisfor itself, it must be 
the knowledge of the spiritual, and the knowledge of itself as 
Spirit, i.e. it must be an object to itself, but just as immediately 
a sublated object, reflected into itself. It is for itself only for us, 
in so far as its spiritual content is generated by itself. But in 
so far as it is also for itself for its own self, this self-generation, 
the pure Notion, is for it the objective element in which it has 
its existence, and it is in this way, in its existence for itself, an 
object reflected into itself. The Spirit that, so developed, knows 
itself as Spirit, is Science ; Science is its actuality and the realm 
which it builds for itself in its own element. 
26. Pure self-recognition in absolute otherness, this Aether as 
such, is the ground and soil of Science or knowledge in general. 
The beginning of philosophy presupposes or requires that con­
sciousness should dwell in this element. But this element itself 
achieves its own perfection and transparency only through the 
movement of its becoming. It is pure s piri tuali ty as the universal 
that has the form of simple immediacy. This simple being in 
its existential form is the soil [of Science], it is thinking which 
has its being in Spirit alone. Because this element, this imme­
diacy of Spirit, is the very substance of Spirit, it is the trans-
figured essence, reflection which is itself simple, and which is for 
itself immediacy as such, being that is reflected into itself. 
Science on its part requires that self-consciousness should have 
raised itself into this Aether in order to be able to live-and 
[actually] to live-with Science and in Science. Conversely, the 
individual has the right to demand that Science should at least 
provide him with the ladder to this standpoint, should show 

PREF A C E  
r s  
him this standpoint within himself. His right is based on his 
absolute independence, which he is conscious of possessing in 
every phase of his knowledge ; for in each one, whether recog­
nized by Science or not, and whatever the content may be, the 
individual is the absolute form, i.e. he is the immediate certainty 
of himself and, if this expression be preferred, he is therefore 
unconditioned being. The standpoint of consciousness which 
knows objects in their antithesis to itself, and itself in antithesis 
to them, is for Science the antithesis of its own standpoint. The 
situation in which consciousness knows itself to be at home is 
for Science one marked by the absence of Spirit. Conversely, 
the element of Science is for consciousness a remote beyond in 
which it no longer possesses itself. Each of these two aspects [of 
self-conscious Spirit J appears to the other as the inversion of 
truth. When natural consciousness entrusts itself straightway 
to Science, it makes an attempt, induced by it knows not what, 
to walk on its head too, just this once ; the compulsion to assume 
this unwonted posture and to go about in it is a violence it is 
expected to do to itself, all unprepared and seemingly without 
necessity. Let Science be in its own self what it may, relatively 
to immediate self-consciousness it presents itself in an inverted 
posture ; or, because this self-consciousness has the principle of 
its actual existence in the certainty of itself, Science appears 
to it not to be actual, since self-consciousness exists on its 
own account outside of Science. Science must therefore unite 
this element of self-certainty with itself, or rather show that and 
how this element belongs to it. So long as Science lacks this actual 
dimension, it is only the content as the in-itself, the purpose that 
is as yet still something inward, not yet Spirit, but only spirituai 
Substance. This in-itself has to express itself outwardly and 
become for itself, and this means simply that it has to posit self­
consciousness as one with itself. 
27. It is this coming-to-be of Science as such or of knowledge, 
ଆhat is described in this Phenomenology of Spirit. Knowledge in 
Its first phase, or immediate Spirit, is the non-spiritual, i.e. sense­
consciousness. In order to become genuine knowledge, to beget 
the element of Science which is the pure Notion of Science itself, 
it must travel a long way and work its passage. This process 
of coming-to-be (considering the content and patterns it will 
display therein) will not be what is commonly understood by 

P H E N O M E N O L O GY OF S P I R I T  
an initiation of the unscientific consciousness into Science ; it 
will also be quite different from the 'foundation' of Science ; 
least of all will it be like the rapturous enthusiasm which, like 
a shot from a pistol, begins straight away with absolute know­
ledge, and makes short work of other standpoints by declaring 
that it takes no notice of them. 
28. The task of leading the individual from his uneducated 
standpoint to knowledge had to be seen in its universal sense, 
just as it was the universal individual, self-conscious Spirit, 
whose formative education had to be studied. As regards the 
relation between them, every moment, as it gains concrete form 
and a shape of its own, displays itself in the universal individual. 
The single individual is incomplete Spiri.t, a concrete shape in 
whose whole existence one determinateness predominates, the 
others being present only in blurred outline. In a Spirit that 
is more advanced than another, the lower concrete existence 
has been reduced to an inconspicuous moment ;  what used to 
be the important thing is now but a trace ; its pattern is 
shrouded to become a mere shadowy outline. The individual 
whose substance is the more advanced Spirit runs through this 
past just as one who takes up a higher science goes through the 
preparatory studies he has long since absorbed, in order to bring 
their content to mind : he recalls them to the inward eye, but 
has no lasting interest in them. The single individual must also 
pass through the formative stages of universal Spirit so far as 
their content is concerned, bt,It as shapes which Spirit has 
already left behind, as stages on a way that has been made level 
with toil. Thus, as far as factual information is concerned, we 
find that what in former ages engaged the attention of men of 
mature mind, has been reduced to the level of facts, exercises, 
and even games for children ; and, in· the child's progress 
through school, we shall recognize the history of the cultural 
development of the world traced, as it were, in a silhouette. 
This past existence is the already acquired property of universal 
Spirit which constitutes the Substance of the individual, and 
hence appears externally to him as his inorganic nature. In this 
respect formative education, regarded from the side of the in­
dividual, consists in his acquiring what thus lies at hand, 
devouring his inorganic nature, and taking possession of it for 
himself. But, regarded from the side of universal Spirit as sub-

P R E F A C E  
' 7 
stance, this is nothing but its own acquisition of self-conscious­
ness, the bringing-about ofits own becoming and reflection into 
itself. 
29. Science sets forth this formative process in all its detail 
and necessity, exposing the mature configuration of everything 
which has already been reduced to a moment and property of 
Spirit. The goal is Spirit's insight into what knowing is. Im­
patience demands the impossible, to wit, the attainment of the 
end without the means. But the length of this path has to be 
endured, because, for one thing, each moment is necessary ; and 
further, each moment has to be lingered over, because each is 
itself a complete individual shape, and one is only viewed in 
absolute perspective when its determinateness is regarded as a 
concrete whole, or the whole is regarded as uniquely qualified 
by that determination. Since the Substance of the individual, 
the World-Spirit itself, has had the patience to pass through 
these shapes over the long passage of time, and to take upon 
itself the enormous labour of world-history, in which it 
embodied in each shape as much of its entire content as that 
shape was capable of holding, and since it could not have 
attained consciousness of itself by any lesser effort, the indivi­
dual certainly cannot by the nature of the case comprehend 
his own substance more easily. Yet, at the same time, he does 
have less trouble, since all this has already been implicitly 
accomplished ; the content is already the actuality reduced to 
a possibility, its immediacy overcome, and the embodied shape 
reduced to abbreviated, simple determinations of thought. It 
is no longer existence in the form of being-in-itself-neither still 
in the original form [of an abstract concept], nor submerged 
in existence-but is now the recollected in-itself, ready for con­
version into the form of being-for-self How this is done must now 
be described more precisely. 
30. We take up the movement of the whole from the point 
where the sublation of existence as such is no longer necessary ; 
what remains to be done, and what requires a higher level of 
cultural reorientation, is to represent and to get acquainted 
with these forms. The existence that has been taken back into 
the Substance has only been immediately transposed into the ele­
ment of the self through that first negation. Hence this acquired 
property still has the same character of uncomprehended 

1 8  
P H E N O M E N O LOGY O F  S P I R I T  
immediacy, of passive indifference, as existence itself; existence 
has thus merely passed over into figurative representation. At the 
same time it is thus something familiar, something which the 
existent Spirit is finished and done with, so that it is no longer 
active or really interested in it. Although the activity that has 
finished with existence is itself only the movement of the par­
ticular Spirit, the Spirit that does not comprehend itself, 
[genuine] knowing, on the other hand, is directed against the 
representation thus formed, against this [mere] familiarity ; 
knowing is the activity of the universal self, the concern of 
thinking. 
3 1 .  Quite generally, the familiar, just because it is familiar, 
is not cognitively understood. The commonest way in which 
we deceive either ourselves or others about understanding is 
by assuming something as familiar, and accepting it on that 
account ; with all its pros and cons, such knowing never gets 
anywhere, and it knows not why. Subject and object, God, 
Nature, Understanding, sensibility, and so on, are uncritically 
taken for granted as familiar, 1established as valid, and made 
into fixed points for starting and stopping. While these remain 
unmoved, the knowing activity goes back and forth between 
them, thus moving only on their surface. Apprehending and 
testing likewise consist in seeing whether everybody's impres­
sion of the matter coincides with what is· asserted about these 
fixed points, whether it seems that way to him or not. 
32. The analysis of an idea, as it used to be carried out, was, 
in fact, nothing else than ridding it of the form in which it had 
become familiar. To break an idea up into its original elements 
is to return to its moments, which at least do not have the form 
of the given idea, but rather constitute the immediate property 
of the self. This analysis, to be sure, only arrives at thoughts which 
are themselves familiar, fixed, and inert determinations. But 
what is thus separated and non-actual is an essential moment ;  
for i t  is only because the concrete does divide itself, and make 
itself into something non-actual, that it is self-moving. The 
activity of dissolution is the power and work of the Understand­
ing, the most astonishing and mightiest of powers, or rather the 
absolute power. The circle that remains self-enclosed and, like 
substance, holds its moments together, is an immediate rela­
tionship, one therefore which has nothing astonishing about it. 

P R E F A C E  
' 9  
But that an accident as such, detached from what circumscribes 
it, what is bound and is actual only in its context with others, 
should attain an existence of its own and a separate freedom­
this is the tremendous power of the negative; it is the energy 
of thought, of the pure 'I'. Death, if that is what we want to 
call this non-actuality, is of all things the most dreadful, and 
to hold fast what is dead requires the greatest strength. Lacking 
strength, Beauty hates the Understanding for asking of her what 
it cannot do. But the life of Spirit is not the life that shrinks 
from death and keeps itself untouched by devastation, but 
rather the life that endures it and maintains itself in it. It wins 
its truth only when, in utter dismemberment, it finds itself. It 
is this power, not as something positive, which closes its eyes 
to the negative, as when we say of something that it is nothing 
or is false, and then, having done with it, turn away and pass 
on to something else ; on the contrary, Spirit is this power only 
by looking the negative in the face, and tarrying with it. This 
tarrying with the negative is the magical power that converts 
it into being. This power is identical with what we earlier called 
the Subject, which by giving determinateness an existence in 
its own element supersedes abstract immediacy, i.e. the imme­
diacy which barely is, and thus is authentic substance : that 
being or immediacy whose mediation is not outside of it but 
which is this mediation itself. 
33· The fact that the object represented becomes the prop­
erty of pure self-consciousness, its elevation to universality in 
general, is only one aspect offormative education, not its fulfil­
ment-The manner of study in ancient times differed from that 
of the modern age in that the former was the proper and com­
plete formation of the natural consciousness. Putting itself to 
the test at every point of its existence, and philosophizing about 
everything it came across, it made itself into a universality that 
was active through and through. In modern times, however, 
the individual finds the abstract form ready-made ; the effort 
to grasp and appropriate it is more the direct driving-forth of 
what is within and the truncated generation of the universal 
than it is the emergence of the latter from the concrete variety 
of existence. Hence the task nowadays consists not so much in 
purging the individual of an immediate, sensuous mode of 
apprehension, and making him into a substance that is an 

20 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S PI R I T  
object of thought and that thinks, but rather in just the opposite, 
in freeing determinate thoughts from their fixity so as to give 
actuality to the universal, and impart to it spiritual life. But 
it is far harder to bring fixed thoughts into a fluid state than 
to do so with sensuous existence. The reason for this was given 
above : fixed thoughts have the 'I', the power of the negative, 
or pure actuality, for the substance and element of their exist­
ence, whereas sensuous determinations have only powerless, 
abstract immediacy, or being as such. Thoughts become fluid 
when pure thinking, this inner immediacy, recognizes itself as a 
moment, or when the pure certainty of self abstracts from 
itself-not by leaving itself out, or setting itself aside, but by 
giving up the fixity of its self-positing, by giving up not only 
the fixity of the pure concrete, which the 'I' itself is, in contrast 
with its differentiated content, but also the fixity of the dif­
ferentiated moments which, posited in the element of pure 
thinking, share the unconditioned nature of the 'I'. Through 
this movement the pure thoughts become Notions, and are only 
now what they are in truth, self-movements, circles, spiritual 
essences, which is what their substance is. 
34· This movement of pure essences constitutes the nature 
of scientific method in general. Regarded as the connectedness 
of their content it is the necessary expansion of that content 
into an organic whole. Through this movement the path by 
which the Notion of knowledge is reached becomes likewise a 
necessary and complete process of becoming ; so that this pre­
paratory path ceases to be a casual philosophizing that fastens 
on to this or that object, relationship, or thought that happens 
to pop up in the imperfect consciousness, or tries to base the 
truth on the pros and cons, the inferences and consequences, 
of rigidly defined thoughts. Instead, this pathway, through the 
movement of the Notion, will encompass the entire sphere of 
secular consciousness in its necessary development. 
35· Further, an exposition of this kind constitutes the first 
part of Science, because the existence of Spirit qua primary is 
nothing but the immediate or the beginning-but not yet its 
return into itself. The element of immediate existence is therefore 
what distinguishes this part of Science from the others. The 
statement of this distinction leads us into a discussion of some 
fixed ideas which usually crop up in this connection. 

PREFACE 
21 
36. The immediate existence of Spirit, consciousness, contains 
the two moments of knowing and the objectivity negative to 
knowing. Since it is in this element [of consciousness] that Spirit 
develops itself and explicates its moments, these moments con­
tain that antithesis, and they all appear as shapes of conscious­
ness. The Science of this pathway is the Science of the experience 
which consciousness goes through ; the substance and its move­
ment are viewed as the object of consciousness. Consciousness 
knows and comprehends only what falls within its experience; 
for what is contained in this is nothing but spiritual substance, 
and this, too, as object of the self. But Spirit becomes object 
because it is just this movement of becoming an other to itself, 
i.e. becoming an object to itself, and of suspending this otherness. 
And experience is the name we give to just this movement, in 
which the immediate, the unexperienced, i.e. the abstract, 
whether it be of sensuous [but still unsensed] being, or only 
thought of as simple, becomes alienated from itself and then 
returns to itself from this alienation, and is only then revealed 
for the first time in its actuality and truth, just as it then has 
become a property of consciousness also. 
37· The disparity which exists in consciousness between the 
'I' and the substance which is its object is the distinction 
between them, the negative in general. This can be regarded as 
the defect of both, though it is their soul, or that which moves 
them. That is why some of the ancients conceived the void as 
the principle of motion, for they rightly saw the moving prin­
ciple as the negative, though they did not as yet grasp that the 
negative is the self. Now, although this negative appears at first 
as a disparity between the 'I' and its object, it is just as much 
the disparity of the substance with itself. Thus what seems to 
happen outside of it, to be an activity directed against it, is 
really its own doing, and Substance shows itself to be essentially 
Subject. When it has shown this completely, Spirit has made 
its existence identical with its essence; it has itself for its object 
just as it is, and the abstract element of immediacy, and of the 
separation of knowing and truth, is overcome. Being is then 
absolutely mediated ; it is a substantial content which is just 
as immediately the property of the '1 ' ,  it is self-like or the 
Notion. 
With this, the Phenomenology of Spirit is concluded. What 

22 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S P I R I T 
Spirit prepares for itself in it, is the element of [true] knowing. 
In this element the moments of Spirit now spread themselves 
out in that form of simplicity which knows its object as its own 
self. They no longer fall apart into the antithesis of being and 
knowing, but remain in the simple oneness of knowing ; they 
are the True in the form of the True, and their difference is 
only the difference of content. Their movement, which organ­
izes itselfin this element into a whole, is Logic or speculative philo­
sophy. 
38. Now, because the system of the experience of Spirit em­
braces only the appearance ofSpirit, the advance from this system 
to the Science of the True in its true shape seems to be merely 
negative, and one might wish to be spared the negative as some­
thing false, and demand to be led to the truth without more 
ado. Why bother with the false?-The view already discussed, 
namely, that we should begin with Science straight away, is 
to be answered at this point by examining the nature of the 
negative in general regarded as what is false. This is a topic 
regarding which established ideas notably obstruct the 
approach to truth. It will give us occasion to speak of mathe­
matical cognition, which unphilosophical knowledge regards 
as the ideal that philosophy must strive to attain, though it has 
so far striven in vain. 
39· 'True' and 'false' belong among those determinate 
notions which are held to be inert and wholly separate essences, 
one here and one there, each standing fixed and isolated from 
the other, with which it has nothing in common. Against this 
view it must be maintained that truth is not a minted coin that 
can be given and pocketed ready-made. Nor is there such a 
thing as the false, any more than there is something evil. The 
evil and the false, to be sure, are not as bad as the devil, for 
in the devil they are even made into a particular subjective agent; 
as the false and the evil, they are mere universals, though each 
has its own essence as against the other. 
The false (for here it is only of this that we speak) would be 
the other, the negative of the substance, which as the content 
of knowledge is the True. But the substance is itself essentially 
the negative, partly as a distinction and determination of the 
content, and partly as a simple distinguishing, i.e. as self and 
knowledge in general. One can, of course, know something 

P R E F A C E  
falsely. To know something falsely means that there is a dis­
parity between knowledge and its Substance. But this very dis­
parity is the process of distinguishing in general, which is an 
essential moment [in knowing]. Out of this distinguishing, of 
course, comes their identity, and this resultant identity is the 
truth. But it is not truth as if the disparity had been thrown 
away, like dross from pure metal, not even like the tool which 
remains separate from the finished vessel ; disparity, rather, as 
the negative, the self, is itself still directly present in the True 
as such. Yet we cannot therefore say that the false is a moment 
of the True, let alone a component part of it. To say that in 
every falsehood there is a grain of truth is to treat the two like 
oil and water, which cannot be mixed and are only externally 
combined. It is precisely on account of the importance of desig­
nating the moment of complete otherness that the terms 'true' and 
'false' must no longer be used where such otherness has been 
annulled. Just as to talk of the unity of subject and object, of 
finite and infinite, of being and thought, etc. is inept, since 
object and subject, etc. signify what they are outside of their 
unity, and since in their unity they are not meant to be what 
their expression says they are, just so the false is no longer qua 
false, a moment of truth. 
40. Dogmatism as a way of thinking, whether in ordinary 
knowing or in the study of philosophy, is nothing else but the 
opinion that the True consists in a proposition which is a fixed 
result, or which is immediately known. To such questions as, 
When was Caesar born?, or How many feet were there in a 
stadium ?, etc. a clear-cut answer ought to be given, just as it 
is definitely true that the square on the hypotenuse is equal to 
the sum of the squares on the other two sides of a right-angled 
triangle. But the nature of a so-called truth of that kind is dif­
ferent from the nature of philosophical truths. 
4 1 . As regards historical truths-to mention these briefly­
it will be readily granted that so far as their purely historical 
aspect is considered, they are concerned with a particular exist­
ence, with the contingent and arbitrary aspects of a given con­
tent, which have no necessity. But even such plain truths as 
those just illustrated are not without the movement of self-con­
sciousness. To cognize one of them, a good deal of comparison 
is called for, books must be consulted, in some way or other 

PH E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S P IRIT 
inquiry has to be made. Even an immediate intuition is held 
to have genuine value only when it is cognized as a fact along 
with its reasons, although it is probably only the bare result 
that we are supposed to be concerned about. 
42 . As for mathematical truths, we should be even less inclined 
to regard anyone as a geometer who knew Euclid's theorems 
outwardly by rote, without knowing their proofs, without, as we 
might say, to point the contrast, knowing them inwardly. Simi­
larly, if someone became aware, through measuring a number 
of right-angled triangles, that their sides do, in fact, have the 
well-known relation to one another, we should consider his 
[mere] awareness of the fact unsatisfactory. Yet, even in mathe­
matical cognition, the essentiality of the proof does not have the 
significance and nature of being a moment of the result itself; 
when the latter is reached, the demonstration is over and has 
disappeared. It is, of course, as a result that the theorem is some­
thing seen to be true; but this added circumstance has no bearing 
on its content, but only on its relation to the knowing Subject. 
The movement of mathematical proof does not belong to the 
object, but rather is an activity external to the matter in hand. 
Thus the nature of the right-angled triangle does not divide itself 
into parts in just the way set forth in the construction necessary 
for the proof of the proposition that expresses its ratio. The way 
and the means by which the result is brought forth belong en­
tirely to the cognitive process. In philosophical cognition, too, 
the way in which the [outer] existence qua existence of a thing 
comes about, is distinct from the way in which its essence or inner 
nature comes to be. But, to begin with, philosophical cognition 
includes both [existence and essence], whereas mathematical 
cognition sets forth only the genesis of the existence, i.e. the being 
of the nature of the thing in cognition as such. What is more, 
philosophical cognition also unites these two distinct processes. 
The inner coming-to-be or genesis of substance is an unbroken 
transition into outer existence, into being-for-another, and con­
versely, the genesis of existence is how existence is by itself taken 
back into essence. The movement is the twofold process and 
the genesis of the whole, in such wise that each side simulta­
neously posits the other, and each therefore has both perspec­
tives within itself; together they thus constitute the whole by 

PREF A C E  
dissolving themselves, and by making themselves into its 
moments. 
43· In mathematical cognition, insight is an activity external 
to the thing ; it follows that the true thing is altered by it. The 
means employed, construction and proof, no doubt contain true 
propositions, but it must none the less be said that the content 
is false. In the above example the triangle is dismembered, and 
its parts consigned to other figures, whose origin is allowed by 
the construction upon the triangle. Only at the end is the 
triangle we are actually dealing with reinstated. During the 
procedure it was lost to view, appearing only in fragments 
belonging to other figures.-Here, then, we see the negativity 
of the content coming in as well ; this could just as much have 
been called a 'falsity' of the content as is the disappearance of 
supposedly fixed conceptions in the movement of the Notion. 
44· But what is really defective in this kind of cognition con­
cerns the cognitive process itself, as well as its material. As 
regards the former, we do not, in the first place, see any necessity 
in the construction. Such necessity does not arise from the notion 
of the theorem ; it is rather imposed, and the instruction to draw 
precisely these lines when infinitely many others could be 
drawn must be blindly obeyed without our knowing anything 
beyond except that we believe that this will be to the purpose 
in carrying out the proof. In retrospect, this expediency also 
becomes evident, but it is only an external expediency, because 
it becomes evident only after the proof. This proof, in addition, 
follows a path that begins somewhere or other without indicat­
ing as yet what relation such a beginning will have to the result 
that will emerge. In its progress it takes up these particular deter­
minations and relations, and lets others alone, without its being 
immediately clear what the controlling necessity is; an external 
purpose governs this procedure. 
45· The evident character of this defective cognition of which 
mathematics is proud, and on which it plumes itself before 
philosophy, rests solely on the poverty of its purpose and the 
defectiveness of its stuff, and is therefore of a kind that philo­
sophy must spurn. Its purpose or Notion is magnitude. It is just 
this relationship that is unessential, lacking the Notion. Accord­
ingly, this process of knowing proceeds on the surface, does not 
touch the thing itself, its essence or Notion, and therefore fails 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S P I R I T  
to comprehend it [i.e. in terms of its Notion] .-The material, 
regarding which mathematics provides such a gratifying trea­
sury of truths, is space and the numerical unit. Space is the exist­
ence in which the Notion inscribes its differences as in an empty 
lifeless element, in which they are just as inert and lifeless. The 
actual is not something spatial, as it is regarded in mathematics ; 
with non-actual things like the objects of mathematics, neither 
concrete sense-intuition nor philosophy has the least concern. 
In a non-actual element like this there is only a truth of the 
same sort, i.e. rigid, dead propositions. We can stop at any one 
of them ; the next one starts afresh on its own account, without 
the first having moved itself on to the next, and without any 
necessary connection arising through the nature of the thing 
itself.-Further, because of this principle and element-and 
herein consists the formalism of mathematical evidence-[ this 
kind of] knowing moves forward along the line of equality. For 
what is lifeless, since it does not move of itself, does not get as 
far as the distinctions of essence, as far as essential opposition 
or inequality, and therefore does not make the transition of one 
opposite into its opposite, does not attain to qualitative, 
immanent motion or self-movement. For it is only magnitude, 
the unessential distinction, that mathematics deals with. It 
abstracts from the fact that it is the Notion which divides space 
into its dimensions and determines the connections between 
and within them. It does not, for example, consider the relation­
ship of line to surface ; and, when it compares the diameter of 
a circle with its circumference, it runs up against their in­
commensurability, i.e. a relationship of the Notion, something 
infinite that eludes mathematical determination. 
46. Nor does the immanent, so-called pure mathematics set 
time qua time over against space, as the second material for its 
consideration. Applied mathematics does indeed deal with 
time, as well as with motion and other concrete things ; but the 
synthetic propositions, i.e. propositions regarding relationships 
determined by their Notion, it takes from experience and 
applies its formulae only on these presuppositions. The fact that 
the so-called proofs of propositions, such as those regarding the 
equilibrium of the lever, or the relation of space and time in 
the motion offalling, etc., are often given and accepted as proofs 
itself only proves how great is the need of proof for cognition, 

P R E F A C E  
27 
seeing that, where nothing better is to be had, cognition values 
even the hollow semblance of it, and obtains from it some 
measure of satisfaction. A critique of these proofs would be as 
noteworthy as it would be instructive,1 partly in order to strip 
mathematics of these fine feathers, partly in order to point out 
its limitations, and thus show the necessity for a different kind 
of knowledge. 
As for time, which it is to be presumed would constitute, as 
the counterpart of space, the material of the other part of pure 
mathematics, it is the existent Notion itself. The principle of 
magnitude, of difference not determined by the Notion, and the 
principle of equality, of abstract lifeless unity, cannot cope with 
that sheer unrest of life and its absolute distinction. It is there­
fore only in a paralysed form, viz. as the numerical unit, that this 
negativity becomes the second material of mathematical cogni­
tion, which, as an external activity, reduces what is self-moving 
to mere material, so as to possess in it an indifferent, external, 
lifeless content. 
47· Philosophy, on the other hand, has to do, not with un­
essential determinations, but with a determination in so far as 
it is essential ; its element and content is not the abstract or non­
actual, but the actual, that which posits itself and is alive within 
itself--existence within its own Notion. It is the process which 
begets and traverses its own moments, and this whole move­
ment constitutes what is positive [in it] and its truth. This truth 
therefore includes the negative also, what would be called the 
false, ifit could be regarded as something from which one might 
abstract. The evanescent itself must, on the contrary, be 
regarded as essential, not as something fixed, cut off from the 
True, and left lying who knows where outside it, any more than 
the True is to be regarded as something on the other side, posi­
tive and dead. Appearance is the arising and passing away that 
does not itself arise and pass away, but is 'in itself' [i.e. subsists 
intrinsically], and constitutes the actuality and the movement 
of the life of truth. The True is thus the Bacchanalian revel 
in which no member is not drunk; yet because each member 
collapses as soon as he drops out, the revel is just as much trans­
parent and simple repose. Judged in the court of this movement, 
1 Hoffmeister refers to Enc. §267 where Hegel discusses the laws of gravitation in this 
sense. 

28 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF S P I R I T  
the single shapes of Spirit do not persist any more than determi­
nate thoughts do, but they are as much positive and necessary 
moments, as they are negative and evanescent. In the whole of 
the movement, seen as a state of repose, what distinguishes itself 
therein, and gives itself particular existence, is preserved as 
something that recollects itself, whose existence is self-knowledge, 
and whose self-knowledge is just as immediately existence. 
48. It might seem necessary at the outset to say more about 
the method of this movement, i.e. of Science. But its Notion is 
already to be found in what has been said, and its proper exposi­
tion belongs to Logic, or rather it is Logic. For the method is 
nothing but the structure set forth in its pure essentiality. We 
should realize, however, that the system of ideas concerning 
philosophical method is yet another set of current beliefs that 
belongs to a bygone culture. If this comment sounds boastful 
or revolutionary-and I am far from adopting such a tone­
it should be noted that current opinion itself has already come 
to view the scientific regime bequeathed by mathematics as 
quite old-fashioned-with its explanations, divisions, axioms, sets 
oftheorems, its proofs, principles, deductions, and conclusions 
from them. Even if its unfitness is not clearly understood, little 
or no use is any longer made of it ; and though not actually 
condemned outright, no one likes it very much. And we should 
be sufficiently prejudiced in favour of what is excellent, to sup­
pose that it will be put to use, and will find acceptance. But 
it is not difficult to see that the way of asserting a proposition, 
adducing reasons for it, and in the same way refuting its oppo­
site by reasons, is not the form in which truth can appear. Truth 
is its own self-movement, whereas the method just described 
is the mode of cognition that remains external to its material. 
Hence it is peculiar to mathematics, and must be left to that 
science, which, as we have noted, has for its principle the rela­
tionship of magnitude, a relationship alien to the Notion, and 
for its material dead space and the equally lifeless numerical 
unit. This method, too, in a looser form, i.e. more blended with 
the arbitrary and the accidental, may retain its place, as in con­
versation, or in a piece of historical instruction designed rather 
to satisfy curiosity than to produce knowledge, which is about 
what a preface amounts to. In ordinary life, consciousness has 
for its content items of information, experiences, concrete 

P R E F A C E  
objects of sense, thoughts, basic principles,-anything will do 
as a content, as long as it is ready to hand, or is accepted as 
a fixed and stable being or essence. Sometimes consciousness 
follows where this leads, sometimes it breaks the chain, and 
deals arbitrarily with its content, behaving as if it were deter­
mining and manipulating it from outside. It refers the content 
back to some certainty or other, even if only to the sensation 
of the moment ; and conviction is satisfied when a familiar rest­
ing-place is reached. 
49· But we have already pointed out that, once the necessity 
of the Notion has banished the slipshod style of conversational 
discussion, and along with it the pedantry and pomposity of 
science, they are not to be replaced by the non-method of pre­
sentiment and inspiration, or by the arbitrariness of prophetic 
utterance, both of which despise not only scientific pomposity, 
but scientific procedure of all kinds. 
50. Of course, the triadic form must not be regarded as scien­
tific when it is reduced to a lifeless schema, a mere shadow, 
and when scientific organization is degraded into a table of 
terms. Kant rediscovered this triadic form by instinct, but in 
his work it was still lifeless and uncomprehended ; since then 
it has, however, been raised to its absolute significance, and 
with it the true form in its true content has been presented, 
so that the Notion of Science has emerged. This formalism, of 
which we have already spoken generally and whose style we 
wish here to describe in more detail, imagines that it has com­
prehended and expressed the nature and life of a form when 
it has endowed it with some determination of the schema as 
a predicate. The predicate may be subjectivity or objectivity, 
or, say, magnetism, electricity, etc., contraction or expansion, 
east or west, and the like. Such predicates can be multiplied 
to infinity, since in this way each determination or form can 
again be used as a form or moment in the case of an other, 
and each can gratefully perform the same service for an other. 
In this sort of circle of reciprocity one never learns what the 
thing itself is, nor what the one or the other is. In such a pro­
cedure, sometimes determinations of sense are picked up from 
everyday intuition, and they are supposed, of course, to mean 
something different from what they say; sometimes what is in 
itselfmeaningful, e.g. pure determinations of thought like sub-

P H E N O M E N OLOGY O F  S P I R I T  
ject, Object, Substance, Cause, Universal, etc.-these are used 
just as thoughtlessly and uncritically as we use them in everyday 
life, or as we use ideas like strength and weakness, expansion. 
and contraction ; the metaphysics is in the former case as un­
scientific as are our sensuous representations in the latter. 
5 1 .  Instead of the inner life and self-movement of its exist­
ence, this kind of simple determinateness of intuition-which 
means here sense-knowledge-is predicated in accordance with 
a superficial analogy, and this external, empty application of 
the formula is called a 'construction'. This formalism is just like 
any other. What a dullard a man must be who could not be 
taught in a quarter of an hour the theory that there are asthenic, 
sthenic, and indirectly asthenic diseases, and as many modes 
of treatment;1 and, since till quite recently such instruction 
sufficed, who could not hope to be transformed in this short 
space of time from an empirical into a theoretical physician? 
The formalism of such a 'Philosophy of Nature' teaches, say, 
that the Understanding is Electricity, or the Animal is Nitro­
gen, or that they are the equivalent of the South or North Pole, 
etc., or represent it-whether all this is expressed as baldly as 
here or even concocted with more terminology-and con­
fronted with such a power which brings together things that 
appear to lie far apart, and with the violence suffered by the 
passive things of sense through such association, and which im­
parts to them the N otion's semblance but saves itself the trouble 
of doing the main thing, viz. expressing the Notion itself or the 
meaning of the sensuous representation-confronted with all 
this, the untutored mind may be filled with admiration and 
astonishment, and may venerate in it the profound work of 
genius. It may be delighted, too, with the clarity of such charac­
terizations, since these replace the abstract Notion with some­
thing that can be intuitively apprehended, and so made more 
pleasing ; and it may congratulate itself on feeling a kinship of 
soul with such a splendid performance. The knack of this kind 
of wisdom is as quickly learned as it is easy to practise ; once 
familiar, the repetition of it becomes as insufferable as the 
repetition of a conjuring trick already seen through. The instru­
ment of this monotonous formalism is no more difficult to 
handle than a painter's palette ଇaving only two colours, say 
I So-called Brownianism :  John Brown, Elementa medicinae, 1 780. 

P R E F A C E  
red and green, the one for colouring the surface when a histori­
cal scene is wanted, the other for landscapes. It would be hard 
to decide which is greater in all this, the casual ease with which 
everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth is coated 
with this broth of colour, or the conceit regarding the excellence 
of this universal recipe : each supports the other. What results 
from this method of labelling all that is in heaven and earth 
with the few determinations ofthe general schema, and pigeon­
holing everything in this way, is nothing less than a 'report 
clear as noonday'1 on the universe as an organism, viz. a synop­
tic table like a skeleton with scraps of paper stuck all over it, 
or like the rows of closed and labelled boxes in a grocer's stall. 
It is as easy to read off as either of these ; and just as all the 
flesh and blood has been stripped from this skeleton, and the 
no longer living 'essence' [Sache] has been packed away in 
the boxes, so in the report the living essence of the matter [ Wesen 
der Sache] has been stripped away or boxed up dead. We have 
already remarked that this way of thinking at the same time 
culminates in a style of painting that is absolutely monochro­
matic ; for it is ashamed of its schematic distinctions, these pro­
ducts of reflection, and submerges them all in the void of the 
Absolute, from which pure identity, formless whiteness, is pro­
duced. This monochromatic character of the schema and its 
lifeless determinations, this absolute identity, and the transition 
from one to the other, are all equally products of the lifeless 
Understanding and external cognition. 
52. The excellent, however, not only cannot escape the fate 
of being thus deprived of life and Spirit, of being flayed and 
then seeing its skin wrapped around a lifeless knowledge and 
its conceit. Rather we recognize even in thi's fate the power that 
the excellent exercises over the hearts, if not over the minds, 
of men ; also the constructive unfolding into universality and 
determinateness of form in which its perfection consists, and 
which alone makes it possible for this universality to be used 
in a superficial way. 
53· Science dare only organize itselfby the life of the Notion 
itself. The determinateness, which is taken from the schema 
and externally attached to an existent thing, is, in Science, the 
1 An allusion to Fichte's Sun-clear Report to the Public about the True Essence of the Newest 
Philosophy ( 1801). 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF S P I R I T  
self-moving soul of the realized content. The movement of a 
being that immediately is, consists partly in becoming an other 
than itself, and thus becoming its own immanent content ;  
partly in taking back into itself this unfolding [of its content] 
or this existence of it, i.e. in making itself into a moment, and 
simplifying itself into something determinate. In the former 
movement, negativity is the differentiating and positing of exist­
ence ; in this return in to self, it is the becoming of the determinate 
simplicity. It is in this way that the content shows that its deter­
minateness is not received from something else, nor externally 
attached to it, but that it determines itself, and ranges itself as 
a moment having its own place in the whole. The Understand­
ing, in its pigeon-holing process, keeps the necessity and Notion 
of the content to itself-all that constitutes the concreteness, 
the actuality, the living movement of the reality which it 
arranges. Or rather, it does not keep this to itself, since it does 
not recognize it ; for, if it had this insight, it would surely give 
some sign of it. It does not even recognize the need for it, else 
it would drop its schematizing, or at least realize that it can 
never hope to learn more in this fashion than one can learn 
from a table of contents. A table of contents is all that it offers, 
the content itself it does not offer at all. 
Even when the specific determinateness-say one like Mag­
netism, for example,-is in itself concrete or real, the Under­
standing degrades it into something lifeless, merely predicating 
it of another existent thing, rather than cognizing it as the 
immanent life of the thing, or cognizing its native and unique 
way of generating and expressing itself in that thing. The formal 
Understanding leaves it to others to add this principal feature. 
Instead of entering into the immanent content of the thing, it 
is forever surveying the whole and standing above the particu­
lar existence of which it is speaking, i.e. it does not see it at 
all. Scientific cognition, on the contrary, demands surrender 
to the life of the object, or, what amounts to the same thing, 
confronting and expressing its inner necessity. Thus, absorbed 
in its object, scientific cognition forgets about that general sur­
vey, which is merely the reflection of the cognitive process away 
from the content and back into itself. Yet, immersed in the 
material, and advancing with its movement, scientific cognition 
does come back to itself, but not before its filling or content 

P R E F A C E  
3 3  
is taken back into itself, is simplified into a determinateness, 
and has reduced itself to one aspect of its own existence and 
passed over into its higher truth. Through this process the 
simple, self-surveying whole itself emerges from the wealth in 
which its reflection seemed to be lost. 
54· In general, because, as we put it above, substance is in 
itself or implicitly Subject, all content is its own reflection into 
itself. The subsistence or substance of anything that exists is 
its self-identity ; for a failure of self-identity would be its dissolu­
tion. Self-identity, however, is pure abstraction ; but this is think­
ing. When I say 'quality', I am saying simple determinateness ; 
it is by quality that one existence is distinguished from another, 
or is an existence ; it is for itself, or it subsists through this simple 
oneness with itself. But it is thereby essentially a thought. Com­
prehended in this is the fact that Being is Thought ; and this 
is the source of that insight which usually eludes the usual super­
ficial [begriflos] talk about the identity of Thought and 
Being.-N ow, since the subsistence of an existent thing is a self­
identity or pure abstraction, it is the abstraction of itself from 
itself, or it is itself its lack of self-identity and its dissolution­
its own inwardness and withdrawal into itself-its own becom­
ing. Because this is the nature of what is, and in so far as what 
is has this nature for [our] knowing, this knowing is not an 
activity that deals with the content as something alien, is not 
a reflection into itself away from the content. Science is not that 
idealism which replaced the dogmatism of assertion with a 
dogmatism of assurance, or a dogmatism of self-certainty. On 
the contrary, since [our] knowing sees the content return into 
its own inwardness, its activity is totally absorbed in the con­
tent, for it is the immanent self of the content ; yet it has at the 
same time returned into itself, for it is pure self-identity in other­
ness. Thus it is the cunning which, while seeming to abstain 
from activity, looks on and watches how determinateness, with 
its concrete life, just where it fancies it is pursuing its own self­
preservation and particular interest, is in fact doing the very 
opposite, is an activity that results in its own dissolution, and 
makes itself a moment of the whole. 
55· Above we indicated the significance of the Understanding 
in reference to the self-consciousness of substance ; we can now 
see clearly hom what has been said its significance in reference 

34 
P H E N O ME N O L O G Y  O F  S P I R I T  
to the determination of substance as being. Existence is 
Quality, self-identical determinateness, or determinate sim­
plicity, determinate thought ; this is the Understanding of exist­
ence [i.e. the nature of existence from the standpoint of the 
Understanding] . Hence, _it is Nous, as Anaxagoras first recog­
nized the essence of things to be. Those who came after him 
grasped the nature of existence more definitely as Eidos or Idea, 
determinate Universality, Species or Kind. It might seem as 
if the term Species or Kind is too commonplace, too inadequate, 
for Ideas such as the Beautiful, the Holy, and the Eternal that 
are currently in fashion. But as a matter of fact Idea expresses 
neither more nor less than Species or Kind. But nowadays an 
expression which exactly designates a Notion is often spurned 
in favour of one which, if only because it is of foreign extraction, 
shrouds the Notion in a fog, and hence sounds more edifying. 
Precisely because existence is defined as Species, it is a simple 
thought ; Nous, simplicity, is substance. On account of its sim­
plicity or self-identity it appears fixed and enduring. But this 
self-identity is no less negativity ; therefore its fixed existence 
passes over into its dissolution. The determinateness seems at 
first to be due entirely to the fact that it is related to an other, 
and its movement seems imposed on it by an alien power ; but 
having its otherness within itself, and being self-moving, is just 
what is involved in the simplicity of thinking itself; for this simple 
thinking is the self-moving and self-differentiating thought, it 
is its own inwardness, it is the pure Notion. Thus common 
understanding, too, is a becoming, and, as this becoming, it 
is reasonableness. 
56. It is in this nature of what is to be in its being its own 
Notion, that logical necessity in general consists. This alone is the 
rational element and the rhythm of the organic whole ; it is as 
much knowledge of the content, as the content is the Notion and 
essence-in other words, it alone is speculative philosophy. The 
self-moving concrete shape makes itself into a simple deter­
minateness ; in so doing it raises itself to logical form, and exists 
in its essentiality ; its concrete existence is just this movement, 
and is directly a logical existence. It is for this reason unneces­
sary to clothe the content in an external [logical] formalism ;  
the content is in its very nature the transition into such formal-

P R E F A C E  
35 
ism, but a formalism which ceases to be external, since the form 
is the innate development of the concrete content itself. 
57· This nature of scientific method, which consists partly 
iri not being separate from the content, and partly in spon­
taneously determining the rhythm of its movement, has, as 
already remarked, its proper exposition in speculative philo­
sophy. Of course, what has been said here does express the 
Notion, but cannot count for more than an anticipatory 
assurance. Its truth does not lie in this partly narrative exposi­
tion, and is therefore just as little refuted by asserting the con­
trary, by calling to mind and recounting conventional ideas, 
as if they were established and familiar truths, or by dishing 
up something new with the assurance that it comes from the 
shrine of inner divine intuition. A reception of this kind is usu­
ally the first reaction on the part of knowing to something un­
familiar; it resists it in order to save its own freedom and its 
own insight, its own authority, from the alien authority (for 
this is the guise in which what is newly encountered first 
appears), and to get rid of the appearance that something has 
been learned and of the sort of shame this is supposed to involve. 
Similarly, when the unfamiliar is greeted with applause, the 
reaction is of the same kind, and consists in what in another 
sphere would take the form of ultra-revolutionary speech and 
action. 
58. What, therefore, is important in the study of Science, is 
that one should take on oneself the strenuous effort of the 
Notion.1 This requires attention to the Notion as such, to the 
simple determinations, e.g. of Being-in-itself, Being-for-itself, 
Self-identity, etc. ; for these are pure self-movements such as 
could be called souls if their Notion did not designate something 
higher than soul. The habit of picture-thinking, when it is inter­
rupted by the Notion, finds itjust as irksome as does formalistic 
thinking that argues back and forth in thoughts that have no 
actuality. That habit should be called material thinking, a con­
tingent consciousness that is absorbed only in material stuff, 
and therefore finds it hard work to lift the [thinking] self clear 
of such matter, and to be with itself alone. At the opposite 
extreme, argumentation is freedom from all content, and a 
sense of vanity towards it. What is looked for here is the effort 
1 i.e. the strenuous effort required to think in terms of the Notion. 

P H E N O M E N O LOGY O F  S P I R I T  
to give up this freedom, and, instead of being the arbitrarily 
moving princi pie of the content, to sink this freedom in the con­
tent, letting it move spontaneously of its own nature, by the 
self as its own self, and then to contemplate this movement. This 
refusal to intrude into the immanent rhythm of the Notion, 
either arbitrarily or with wisdom obtained from elsewhere, con­
stitutes a restraint which is itself an essential moment of the 
Notion. 
59· There are two aspects of the procedure of argumentation 
to which speculative [ begreifende] thinking is opposed and 
which call for further notice. First, such reasoning adopts a nega­
tive attitude towards the content it apprehends ; it knows how 
to refute it and destroy it. That something is not the case, is 
a merely negative insight, a dead end which does not lead to 
a new content beyond itself. In order to have a content once 
again, something new must be taken over from elsewhere. 
Argumentation is reflection into the empty 'I', the vanity of 
its own knowing.-This vanity, however, expresses not only the 
vanity of this content, but also the futility of this insight itself; 
for this insight is the negative that fails to see the positive within 
itself. Because this reflection does not get its very negativity as 
its content, it is never at the heart of the matter, but always 
beyond it. For this reason it imagines that by establishing the 
void it is always ahead of any insight rich in content. On the 
other hand, in speculative [ begreifenden] thinking, as we have 
already shown, the negative belongs to the content itself, and 
is the positive, both as the immanent movement and determination 
of the content, and as the whole of this process. Looked at as 
a result, what emerges from this process is the determinate nega­
tive which is consequently a positive content as well. 
6o. But in view of the fact that such thinking has a content, 
whether of picture-thoughts or abstract thoughts or a mixture 
of both, argumentation has another side which makes compre­
hension difficult for it. The remarkable nature of this other side 
is closely linked with the above-mentioned essence of the Idea, 
or rather it expresses the Idea in the way that it appears as the 
movement which is thinking apprehension. For whereas, in its 
negative behaviour, which we have just discussed, ratiocinative 
thinking is itself the self into which the content returns, in its 
positive cognition, on the other hand, the self is a Subject to 

P R E FA C E  
3 7  
which the content is related as Accident and Predicate. This 
Subject constitutes the basis to which the content is attached, 
and upon which the movement runs back and forth. Specula­
tive [ begreifendes J thinking behaves in a different way. Since the 
Notion is the objects's own self, which presents itself as the com­
ing-to-be rif the object, it is not a passive Subject inertly supporting 
the Accidents ; it is, on the contrary, the self-moving Notion 
which takes its determinations back into itself. In this move­
ment the passive Subject itself perishes ; it enters into the dif­
ferences and the content, and constitutes the determinateness, 
i.e. the differentiated content and its movement, instead of 
remaining inertly over against it. The solid ground which argu­
mentation has in the passive Subject is therefore shaken, and 
only this movement itselfbecomes the object. The Subject that 
fills its content ceases to go beyond it, and cannot have any 
further Predicates or accidental properties. Conversely, the dis­
persion of the content is thereby bound together under the self; 
it is not the universal which, free from the Subject, could belong 
to several others. Thus the content is, in fact, no longer a Predi­
cate of the Subject, but is the Substance, the essence and the 
Notion of what is under discussion. Picture-thinking, whose 
nature it is to run through the Accidents or Predicates and 
which, because they are nothing more than Predicates and 
Accidents, rightly goes beyond them, is checked in its progress, 
since that which has the form of a Predicate in a proposition 
is . .the Substance itself. It suffers, as we might put it, a counter­
thrust. Starting from the Subject as though this were a per­
manent ground, it finds that, since the Predicate is really the 
Substance, the Subject has passed over into the Predicate, and, 
by this very fact, has been sublated ; and, since in this way what 
seems to be the Predicate has become the whole and the inde­
pendent mass, thinking cannot roam at will, but is impeded 
by this weight. 
Usually, the Subject is first made the basis, as the objective, 
fixed self; thence the necessary movement .to the multiplicity 
of determinations or Predicates proceeds. Here, that Subject 
is replaced by the knowing 'I' itself, which links the Predicates 
with the Subject holding them. But, since that first Subject 
enters into the determinations themselves and is their soul, the 
second Subject, viz. the knowing 'I', still finds in the Predicate 

P H E N O M E N OLOGY OF S P I R I T  
what it thought it had finished with and got away from, and 
from which it hoped to return into itself; and, instead of being 
able to function as the determining agent in the movement of 
predication, arguing back and forth whether to attach this or 
that Predicate, it is really still occupied with the self of the con­
tent, having to remain associated with it, instead of being for 
itself. 
6 r .  Formally, what has been said can be expressed thus : the 
general nature of the judgement or proposition, which involves 
the distinction ofSubject and Predicate, is destroyed by the spe­
culative proposition, and the proposition of identity which the 
former becomes contains the counter-thrust against that sub­
ject-predicate relationship.-This conflict between the general 
form of a proposition and the unity of the Notion which destroys 
it is similar to the conflict that occurs in rhythm between metre 
and accent. Rhythm results from the floating centre and the 
unification of the two. So, too, in the philosophical proposition 
the identification of Subject and Predicate is not meant to de­
stroy the difference between them, which the form of the pro­
position expresses ; their unity, rather, is meant to emerge as 
a harmony. The form of the proposition is the appearance of 
the determinate sense, or the accent that distinguishes its fulfil­
ment ; but that the predicate expresses the Substance, and that 
the Subject itselffalls into the universal, this is the unity in which 
the accent dies away. 
62. To illustrate what has been said : in the proposition 'God 
is being', the Predicate is 'being' ; it has the significance of some­
thing substantial in which the Subject is dissolved. 'Being' is 
here meant to be not a Predicate, but rather the essence ; it 
seems, consequently, that God ceases to be what he is from his 
position in the proposition, viz. a fixed Subject. Here thinking, 
instead of making progress in the transition from Subject to Pre­
dicate, in reality feels itself checked by the loss of the Subject, and, 
missing it, is thrown back on to the thought of the Subject. Or, 
since the Predicate itself has been expressed as a Subject, as 
the being or essence which exhausts the nature of the Subject, 
thinking finds the Subject immediately in the Predicate ; and 
now, having returned into itself in the Predicate, instead of 
being in a position where it has freedom for argument, it is still 
absorbed in the content, or at least is faced with the demand 

P R E F A C E  
39 
that it should be. Similarly, too, when one says : 'the actual is 
the univvrsal', the actual as subject disappears in its predicate. 
The J.miversal is not meant to have merely the significance of 
a predicate, as if the proposition asserted only that the actual 
is universal ; on the contrary, the universal is meant to express 
the essence of the actual.-Thinking therefore loses the firm 
.objective basis it had in the subject when, in the predicate, it 
is thrown back on to the subject, and when, in the predicate, 
it does not return into itself, but into the subject of the content. 
63. This abnormal inhibition of thought is in large measure 
the source of the complaints regarding the unintelligibility of 
philosophical writings from individuals who otherwise possess 
the educational requirements for understanding them. Here we 
see the reason behind one particuଁar complaint so often made 
against them : that so much has to be read over and over before 
it can be understood-a complaint whose burden is presumed 
to be quite outrageous, and, if justified, to admit of no defence. 
It is clear from the above what this amounts to. The philosophi­
cal proposition, since it is a proposition, leads one to believe 
that the usual subject-predicate relation obtains, as well as the 
usual attitude towards knowing. But the philosophical content 
destroys this attitude and this opinion. We learn by experience 
that we meant something other than we meant to mean ; and 
this correction of our meaning compels our knowing to go back 
to the proposition, and understand it in some other way. 
64. One difficulty which should be avoided comes from mix­
ing up the speculative with the ratiocinative methods, so that 
what is said of the Subject a:t one time signifies its Notion, at 
another time merely its Predicate or accidental property. The 
one method interferes with the other, and only a philosophical 
exposition that rigidly excludes the usual way of relating the 
parts of a proposition could achieve the goal of plasticity. 
65. As a matter offact, non-speculative thinking also has its 
valid rights which are disregarded in the speculative way of stat­
ing a proposition. The sublation of the form of the proposition 
must not happen only in an immediate manner, through the mere 
content of the proposition. On the contrary, this opposite move­
ment must find explicit expression ; it must not just be the in­
ward inhibition mentioned above. This return of the Notion 
into itself must be set forth. This movement which constitutes 

P H E N O M E N O LOGY O F  S P I R I T  
what formerly the proof was supposed to accomplish, is the dia­
lectical movement of the proposition itself. This alone is the spe­
culative in act, and only the expression of this movement is a 
speculative exposition. As a proposition, the speculative is only 
the internal inhibition and the non-existential return of the 
essence into itself. Hence we often find philosophical expositions 
referring us to this inner intuition ; and in this way they evade 
the systematic exposition of the dialectical movement of the 
proposition which we have demanded.-The proposition should 
express what the True is ; but essentially the True is Subject. 
As such it is merely the dialectical movement, this course that 
generates itself, going forth from, and returning to, itself. In 
non-speculative cognition proof constitutes this side of 
expressed inwardness. But once the dialectic has been separated 
from proof, the notion of philosophical demonstration has been 
lost. 
66. Here we should bear in mind that the dialectical move­
ment likewise has propositions for its parts or elements ; the diffi­
culty just indicated seems, therefore, to recur perpetually, and 
to be inherent in the very nature of philosophical exposition. 
This is like what happens in ordinary proof, where the reasons 
given are themselves in need of further reasons, and so on ad 
infinitum. This pattern of giving reasons and stating conditions 
belongs to that method of proof which differs from the dialecti­
cal movement, and belongs therefore to external cognition. As 
regards the dialectical movement itself, its element is the one 
Notion ; it thus has a content which is, in its own self, Subject 
through and through. Thus no content occurs which functions 
as an underlying subject, nor receives its meaning as a predi­
cate ; the proposition as it stands is merely an empty form. 
Apart from the self that is sensuously intuited or represented, 
it is above all the name as name that designates the pure Sub­
ject, the empty unit without thought-content. For this reason 
it may be expedient, e.g., to avoid the name 'God', since this 
word is not immediately also a Notion, but rather the proper 
name, the fixed point of rest of the underlying Subject ; whereas, 
on the other hand, e.g. 'Being' or 'the One', 'Singularity', 'the 
Subject', etc. themselves at once suggest concepts. Even if spe­
culative truths are affirmed of this subject, their content lacks 
the immanent Notion, because it is present merely in the form 

P R E F A C E  
of a passive subject, with the result that such truths readily 
assume the form of mere edification. From this side, too, the 
habit of expressing the speculative predicate in the form of a 
proposition, and not as Notion and essence, creates a difficulty 
that can be increased or diminished through the very way in 
which philosophy is expounded. In keeping with our insight 
into the nature of speculation, the exposition should preserve 
the dialectical form, and should admit nothing except in so far 
as it is comprehended [in terms of the Notion], and is the 
Notion. 
67. The study of philosophy is as much hindered by the con­
ceit that will not argue, as it is by the argumentative approach. 
This conceit relies on truths which are taken for granted and 
which it sees no need to re-examine ; it just lays them down, 
and believes it is entitled to assert them, as well as to judge and 
pass sentence by appealing to them. In view of this, it is especi­
ally necessary that philosophizing should again be made a 
serious business. In the case of all other sciences, arts, skills, and 
crafts, everyone is convinced that a complex and laborious pro­
gramme of learning and practice is necessary for competence. 
Yet when it comes to philosophy, there seems to be a currently 
prevailing prejudice to the effect that, although not everyone 
who has eyes and fingers, and is given leather and last, is at 
once in a position to make shoes, everyone nevertheless imme­
diately understands how to philosophize, and how to evaluate 
philosophy, since he possesses the criterion for doing so in his 
natural reason-as if he did not likewise possess the measure 
for a shoe in his own foot. It seems that philosophical com­
petence consists precisely in an absence of information and 
study, as though philosophy left off where they began. Philo­
sophy is frequently taken to be a purely formal kind of know­
ledge, void of content, and the insight is sadly lacking that, 
whatever truth there may be in the content of any discipline 
or science, it can only deserve the name if such truth has been 
engendered by philosophy. Let the other sciences try to argue 
as much as they like without philosophy-without it they can 
have in them neither life, Spirit, nor ti;uth. 
68. In place of the long process of culture towards genuine 
philosophy, a movement as rich as it is profound, through which 
Spirit achieves knowledge, we are offered as quite equivalent 

P H E N O M E N O L O GY O F  S P I R I T  
either direct revelations from heaven, or the sound common 
sense that has never laboured over, or informed itself regarding, 
other knowledge or genuine philosophy ; and we are assured 
that these are quite as good substitutes as some claim chicory 
is for coffee. It is not a pleasant experience to see ignorance, 
and a crudity without form or taste, which cannot focus its 
thought on a single abstract proposition, still less on a connected 
chain of them, claiming at one moment to be freedom of 
thought and toleration, and at the next to be even genius. 
Genius, we all know, was once all the rage in poetry, as it now 
is in philosophy ; but when its productions made sense at all, 
such genius begat only trite prose instead of poetry, or, getting 
beyond that, only crazy rhetoric. So, nowadays, philosophizing 
by the light of nature, which regards itself as too good for the 
Notion, and as being an intuitive and poetic thinking in virtue 
of this deficiency, brings to market the arbitrary combinations 
of an imagination that has only been disorganized by its 
thoughts, an imagery that is neither fish nor flesh, neither 
poetry nor philosophy. 
6g. On the other hand, when philosophizing by the light of 
nature flows along the more even course of sound common sense, 
it offers at its very best only a rhetoric of trivial truths. And, if 
reproached with the insignificance of these truths, it assures us 
in reply that their meaning and fulfilment reside in its heart, 
and must surely be present in the hearts of others too, since 
it reckons to have said the last word once the innocence of the 
heart, the purity of conscience, and such like have been 
mentioned. These are ultimate truths to which no exception 
can be taken, and beyond which nothing more can be 
demanded. It is just the point, however, that the best should 
not remain in the recesses of what is inner, but should be 
brought out of these depths into the light of day. But it would 
be better by far to spare oneself the effort of bringing forth ulti­
mate truths of that kind ; for they have long since been available 
in catechisms or in popular sayings, etc.-It is not difficult to 
grasp such vague and misleading truths, or even to show that 
the mind in believing them is also aware of their very opposite. 
When it labours to extricate itself from the bewilderment this 
sets up, it falls into fresh contradictions, and may very well burst 
out with the assertion that the question is settled, that so and 

P R E F A C E  
43 
so is the truth, and that the other views are sophistries. For 
'sophistry' is a slogan used by ordinary common sense against 
educated reason, just as the expression 'visionary dreaming' 
sums up, once and for all, what philosophy means to those who 
are ignorant ofit.-Since the man of common sense makes his 
appeal to feeling, to an oracle within his breast, he is finished 
and done with anyone who does not agree ; he only has to 
explain that he has nothing more to say to anyone who does 
not find and feel the same in himself. In other words, he 
tramples underfoot the roots of humanity. For it is the nature 
of humanity to press onward to agreement with others ; human 
nature only really exists in an achieved community of minds. 
The anti-human, the merely animal, consists in staying within 
the sphere of feeling, and being able to communicate only at 
that level. 
70. Should anyone ask for a royal road to Science, there is 
no more easy-going way than to rely on sound common sense ; 
and for the rest, in order to keep up with the times, and with 
advances in philosophy, to read reviews of philosophical works, 
perhaps even to read their prefaces and first paragraphs. For 
these preliminary pages give the general principles on which 
everything turns, and the reviews, as well as providing historical 
accounts, also provide the critical appraisal which, being a 
judgement, stands high al;>Ove the work judged. This common 
road can be taken in casual dress ; but the high sense for the 
Eternal, the Holy, the Infinite strides along in the robes of a 
high priest, on a road that is from the first no road, but has 
immediate being as its centre, the genius of profound original 
ideas and lofty flashes of inspiration. But just as profundity of 
this kind still does not reveal the source of essential being, so, 
too, these sky-rockets of inspiration are not yet the empyrean. 
True thoughts and scientific insight are only to be won through 
the labour of the Notion. Only the Notion can produce the uni­
versality ofknowledge which is neither common vagueness nor 
the inadequacy of ordinary common sense, but a fully de­
veloped, perfected cognition ; not the uncommon universality 
of a reason whose talents have been ruined by indolence and 
the conceit of genius, but a truth ripened to its prBperly 
matured form so as to be capable of being the property of all 
self-conscious Reason. 

44 
P H E N O M E N O L O GY OF S P I R I T  
7 1 .  Since I hold that Science exists solely in the self-move­
ment of the Notion, and since my view differs from, and is in 
fact wholly opposed to, current ideas regarding the nature and 
form of truth, both those referred to above and other peripheral 
aspects of them, it seems that any attempt to expound the sys­
tem of Science from this paint of view is unlike! y to be favour­
ably received. In the meantime, I can bear in mind that if at 
times the excellence of Plato's philosophy has been held to lie 
in his scientifically valueless myths, there have also been times, 
even called times of ecstatic dreaming, 1 when Aristotle's philo­
sophy was esteemed for its speculative depth, and Plato's Par­
menides (surely the greatest artistic achievement of the ancient 
dialectic) was regarded as the true disclosure and positive 
expression of the divine life, and times when, despite the 
obscurity generated by ecstasy, this misunderstood ecstasy was 
in fact supposed to be nothing else than the pure Notion. 
Furthermore, what really is excellent in the philosophy of our 
time takes its value to lie in its scientific quality, and even though 
others take a different view, it is in fact only in virtue of its 
scientific character that it exerts any influence. Hence, I may 
hope, too, that this attempt to vindicate Science for the N otion, 
and to expound it in this its proper element, will succeed in 
winning acceptance through the inner truth ofthe subject-mat­
ter. We must hold to the conviction that it is the nature of truth 
to prevail when its time has come, and that it appears only when 
this time has come, and therefore never appears prematurely, 
nor finds a public not ripe to receive it ; also we must accept 
that the individual needs that this should be so in order to verify 
what is as yet a matter for himself alone, and to experience the 
conviction, which in the first place belongs only to a particular 
individual, as something universally held. But in this con­
nection the public must often be distinguished from those who 
pose as its representatives and spokesmen. In many respects the 
attitude of the public is quite different from, even contrary to, 
that of these spokesmen. Whereas the public is inclined good­
naturedly to blame itself when a philosophical work makes no 
q_ppeal to it, these others, certain of their own competence, put 
all the blame on the author. The effect of such a work on the 
1 This was what the English Enlightment called 'enthusiasm', but the word has no reli­
gious overtones now. 

P R E F A C E  
45 
public is more noiseless than the action of these dead men when 
they bury their dead. The general level of insight now is alto­
gether more educated, its curiosity more awake, and its judge­
ment more swiftly reached, so that the feet of those who will 
carry you out are already at the door. But from this we must 
often distinguish the more gradual effect which corrects the 
attention extorted by imposing assurances and corrects, too, 
contemptuous censure, and gives some writers an audience only 
after a time, while others after a time have no audience left. 
72. For the rest, at a time when the universality of Spirit 
has gathered such strength, and the singular detail, as is fitting, 
has become correspondingly less important, when, too, that 
universal aspect claims and holds on to the whole range of the 
wealth it has developed, the share in the total work of Spirit 
which falls to the individual can only be very small. Because 
of this, the individual must all the more forget himself, as the 
nature ofScience implies and requires. Of course, he must make 
ofhimselfand achieve what he can ; but less must be demanded 
of him, just as he in turn can expect less of himself, and may 
demand less for himself. 

I N TRO D U C T I ON 
73· It is a natural assumption that in philosophy, before }Ve 
start to deal with its proper subject-matter, viz. the actual 
cognition of what truly is, one must first of all come to an under­
standing about cognition, which is regarded either as the instru­
ment to get hold of the Absolute, or as the medium through 
which one discovers it. A certain uneasiness seems justified, 
partly because there are different types of cognition, and one 
of them might be more appropriate than another for the 
attainment of th\s goal, so that we could make a bad choice 
of means ; and partly because cognition is a faculty of a definite 
kind and scope, and thus, without a more precise definition of 
its nature and limits, we might grasp clouds of error instead 
of the heaven of truth. This feeling of uneasiness is surely bound 
to be transformed into the conviction that the whole project 
of securing for consciousness through cognition what exists in 
itself is absurd, and that there is a boundary between cognition 
and the Absolute that completely separates them. For, if cogni­
tion is the instrument for getting hold of absolute being, it is 
obvious that the use of an instrument on a thing certainly does 
not let it be what it is for itself, but rather sets out to reshape 
and alter it. If, on the other hand, cognition is not an instrument 
of our activity but a more or less passive medium through which 
the light of truth reaches us, then again we do not receive the 
truth as it is in itself, but only as it exists through and in this 
medium. Either way we employ a means which immediately 
brings about the opposite of its own end ; or rather, what is 
really absurd is that we should make use of a means at all. 
It would seem, to be sure, that this evil could be remedied 
through an acquaintance with the way in which the instrument 
works ; for this would enable us to eliminate from the repre­
sentation of the Absolute which we have gained through it 
whatever is due to the instrument, and thus get the truth in 
its purity. But this 'improvement' would in fact only bring us 
back to where we were before. If we remove from a reshaped 
thing what the instrument has done to it, then the thing-here 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
47 
the Absolute-becomes for us exactly what it was before this 
[accordingly] superfluous effort. On the other hand, if the 
Absolute is supposed merely to be brought nearer to us through 
this instrument, without anything in it being altered, like a bird 
caught by a lime-twig, it would surely laugh our little ruse to 
scorn, if it were not with us, in and for itself, all along, and 
of its own volition. For a ruse is just what cognition would be 
in such a case, since it would, with its manifold exertions, be 
giving itself the air of doing something quite different from 
creating a merely immediate and therefore effortless relation­
ship. Or, if by testing cognition, which we conceiye of as a 
medium, we get to know the law of its refraction, it is again useless 
to subtract this from the end result. For it is not the refraction 
of the ray, but the ray itself whereby truth reaches us, that is 
cognition ; and if this were removed, all that would be indicated 
would be a pure direction or a blank space. 
· 
74· Meanwhile, if the fear offalling into error sets up a mis­
trust of Science, which in the absence of such scruples gets on 
with the work itself, and actually cognizes something, it is hard 
to see why we should not turn round and mistrust this very 
mistrust. Should we not be concerned as to whether thiଂ fear 
of error is not just the error itself? Indeed, this fear takes some­
thing-a great deal in fact-for granted as truth, supporting 
its scruples and inferences on what is itself in need of prior scru­
tiny to see if it is true. To be specific, it takes for granted certain 
ideas about cognition as an instrument and as a medium, and 
assumes that there is a difference between ourselves and this cognition. 
Above all, it presupposes that the Absolute stands on one side 
and cognition on the other, independent and separated from 
it, and yet is something real ; or in other words, it presupposes 
that cognition which, since it is excluded from the Absolute, 
is surely outside of the truth as well, is nevertheless true, an 
assumption whereby what calls itself fear of error reveals itself 
rather as fear of the truth. 
75· This conclusion stems from the fact that the Absolute 
alone is true, or the truth alone is absolute. One may set this 
aside on the grounds that there is a type of cognition which, 
though it does not cognize the Absolute as Science aims to, is 
still true, and that cognition in general, though it be incapable 
of grasping the Absolute, is still capable of grasping other kinds 

PH E N O M EN O L O G Y  OF S P I R I T  
of truth. But we gradually come to see that this kind of talk 
which goes back and forth only leads to a hazy distinction 
between an absolute truth and some other kind of truth, and 
that words like 'absolute', 'cognition', etc. presuppose a mean­
ing which has yet to be ascertained. 
76. Instead of troubling ourselves with such useless ideas and 
locutions about cognition as 'an instrument for getting hold of 
the Absolute', or as 'a medium through which we view the 
truth' (relationships which surely, in the end, are what all these 
ideas of a cognition cut off from the, Absolute, and an Absolute 
separated from cognition, amount to) ; instead of putting up 
with excuses which create the incapacity ofScience by assuming 
relationships of this kind in order to be exempt from the hard 
work of Science, while at the same time giving the impression 
of working seriously and zealously ; instead of bothering to 
refute all these ideas, we could reject them out ofhand as adven­
titious and arbitrary, and the words associated with them like 
'absolute', 'cognition', 'objective' and 'subjective', and count­
less others whose meaning is assumed to be generally familiar, 
could even be regarded as so much deception. For to give the 
impression that their meaning is generally well known, or that 
their Notion is comprehended, looks more like an attempt to 
avoid the main problem, which is precisely to provide this 
Notion. We could, with better justification, simply spare our­
selves the trouble of paying any attention whatever to such ideas 
and locutions ; for they are intended to ward off Science itself, 
and constitute merely an empty appearance ofknowing, which 
vanishes immediately as soon as Science comes on the scene. 
But Science, just because it comes on the scene, is itself an 
appearance : in coming on the scene it is not yet Science in its 
developed and unfolded truth. In this connection it makes no 
difference whether we think of Science as the appearance 
because it comes on the scene alongside another mode of know­
ledge, or whether we call that other untrue knowledge its mani­
festation. In any case Science must liberate itselffrom this sem­
blance, and it can do so only by turning against it. For, when 
confronted with a knowledge that is without truth, Science can 
neither merely reject it as an ordinary way oflooking at things, 
while assuring us that its Science is a quite different sort of 
cognition for which that ordinary knowledge is of no account 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
49 
whatever; nor can it appeal to the vulgar view for the intima­
tions it gives us of something better to come. By the former 
assurance, Science would be declaring its power to lie simply in 
its being ; but the untrue knowledge likewise appeals to the fact 
that it is, and assures us that for it Science is of no account. One 
bare assurance is worth just as much as another. Still less can 
Science appeal to whatever intimations of something better it 
may detect in the cognition that is without truth, to the signs 
which point in the direction of Science. For one thing, it would 
only be appealing again to what merely is; and for another, 
it would only be appealing to itself, and to itself in the mode 
in which it exists in the cognition that is without truth. In other 
words, it would be appealing to an inferior form of its being, 
to the way it appears, rather than to what it is in and for itself. 
It is for this reason that an exposition of how knowledge makes 
its appearance will here be undertaken. 
77· Now, because it has only phenomenal knowledge for its 
object, this exposition seems not to be Science, free and self­
moving in its own peculiar shape ; yet from this standpoint it can 
be regarded as the path of the natural consciousness which 
presses forward to true knowledge ; or as the way of the Soul 
which journeys through the series of its own configurations as 
though they were the stations appointed for it by its own 
nature, 1 so that it may purify itselffor the life of the Spirit, and 
achieve finally, through a completed experience of itself, the 
awareness of what it really is in itself. 
78. Natural consciousness will show itself to be only the 
Notion of knowledge, or in other words, not to be real know­
ledge. But since it directly takes itself to be real knowledge, this 
path has a negative significance for it, and what is in fact the 
realization of the Notion, counts for it rather as the loss of its 
own self; for it does lose its truth on this path. The road can 
therefore be regarded as the pathway of doubt, or mole precisely 
as the way of despair. For what happens on it is not what is 
ordinarily understood when the word 'doubt' is used : shilly­
shallying about this or that presumed truth, followed by a 
return to that truth again, after the doubt has been appro­
priately dispelled-so that at the end of the process the matter 
is taken to be what it was in the first place. On the contrary, 
1 An allusion perhaps to the Stations of the Cross. 

so 
P H E N O M E N O L O GY O F  S P I R I T 
this path is the conscious insight into the untruth of phenomenal 
knowledge, for which the supreme reality is what is in truth 
only the unrealized Notion. Therefore this thoroughgoing 
scepticism is also not the scepticism with which an earnest zeal 
for truth and Science fancies it has prepared and equipped itself 
in their service : the resolve, in Science, not to give oneself over 
to the thoughts of others, upon mere authority, but to examine 
everything for oneself and follow only one's own conviction, or 
better still, to produce everything oneself, and accept only one's 
own deed as what is true. 
The series of configurations which consciousness goes 
through along this road is, in reality, the detailed history of the 
education of consciousness itself to the standpoint of Science. 
That zealous resolve represents this education simplistically as 
something directly over and done with in the making of the 
resolution ; but the way of the Soul is the actual fulfilment of 
the resolution, in contrast to the untruth of that view. Now, 
following one's own conviction is, of course, more than giving 
oneself over to authority ; but changing an opinion accepted 
on authority into an opinion held out of personal conviction, 
does not necessarily alter the content of the opinion, or replace 
error with truth. The only difference between being caught up 
in a system of opinions and prejudices based on personal con­
viction, and being caught up in one based on the authority of 
others, lies in the added conceit that is innate in the former posi­
tion. The scepticism that is directed against the whole range 
of phenomenal consciousness, on the other hand, renders the 
Spirit for the first time competent to examine what truth is. 
For it brings about a state of despair about all the so-called 
natural ideas, thoughts, and opinions, regardless of whether 
they are called one's own or someone else's, ideas with which the 
consciousness that sets about the examination (of truth] straight 
away is still filled and hampered, so that it is, in fact, incapable 
of carrying out what it wants to undertake. 
79· The necessary progression and interconnection of the 
forms of the unreal consciousness will by itself bring to pass the 
completion of the series. To make this more intelligible, it may 
be remarked, in a preliminary and general way, that the exposi­
tion of the untrue consciousness in its untruth is not a merely 
negative procedure. The natural consciousness itself normally 

I N TR O D U C T I O N  
5' 
takes this one-sided view of it; and a knowledge which makes 
this one-sidedness its very essence is itself one of the patterns 
of incomplete consciousness which occurs on the road itself, and 
will manifest itself in due course. This is just the scepticism 
which only ever sees pure nothingness in its result and abstracts 
from the fact that this nothingness is specifically the nothingness 
of that from which it results. For it is only when it is taken as 
the result of that from which it emerges, that it is, in fact, the 
true result ; in that case it is itself a determinate nothingness, one 
which has a content. The scepticism that ends up with the bare 
abstraction of nothingness or emptiness cannot get any further 
from there, but must wait to see whether something new comes 
along and what it is, in order to throw it too into the same empty 
abyss. But when, on the other hand, the result is conceived as 
it is in truth, namely, as a determinate negation, a new form has 
thereby immediately arisen, and in the negation the transition 
is made through which the progress through the complete series 
of forms comes about of itself. 
8o. But the goal is as necessarily fixed for knowledge as the 
serial progression ; it is the point where knowledge no longer 
needs to go beyond itself, where knowledge finds itself, where 
Notion corresponds to object and object to Notion. Hence the 
progress towards this goal is also unhalting, and short of it no 
satisfaction is to be found at any of the stations on the way. 
Whatever is confined within the limits of a natural life cannot 
by its own effort'> go beyond its immediate existence ; but it is 
driven beyond it by something else, and this uprooting entails 
its death. Consciousness, however, is explicitly the Notion of 
itself. Hence it is something that goes beyond limits, and since 
these limits are its own, it is something that goes beyond itself. 
With the positing of a single particular the beyond is also estab­
lished for consciousness, even if it is only alongside the limited 
object as in the case of spatial intuition. Thus consciousness 
suffers this violence at its own hands : it spoils its own limited 
satisfaction. When consciousness feels this violence, its anxiety 
may well make it retreat from the truth, and strive to hold on 
to what it is in danger of losing. But it can find no peace. If 
it wishes to remain in a state of unthinking inertia, then thought 
troubles its thoughtlessness, and its own unrest disturbs its in­
ertia. Or, if it entrenches itself in sentimentality, which assures 

PH E N O M E N O L O G Y  O F  S PI R I T  
us that it finds everything to be good in its kind, then this 
assurance likewise suffers violence at the hands of Reason, for, 
precisely in so far as something is merely a kind, Reason finds 
it not to be good. Or, again, its fear of the truth may lead con­
sciousness to hide, from i tsclf and others, behind the pretension 
that its burning zeal for truth makes it difficult or even imposs­
ible to find any other truth but the unique truth of vanity­
that of being at any rate cleverer than any thoughts that one 
gets by oneself or from others. This conceit which understands 
how to belittle every truth, in order to turn back into itself and 
gloat over its own understanding, which knows how to dissolve 
every thought and always find the same barren Ego instead of 
any content-this is a satisfaction which we must leave to itself, 
for it flees from the universal, and seeks only to be for itself. 
81 . In addition to these preliminary general remarks about 
the manner and the necessity of the progression, it may be useful 
to say something about the method of carrying out the inquiry. If 
this exposition is viewed as a way of relating Science to phenomenal 
knowledge, and as an investigation and examination of the reality 
of cognition, it would seem that it cannot take place without some 
presupposition which can serve as its underlying criterion. For 
an examination consists in applying an accepted standard, and 
in determining whether something is right or wrong on the basis 
of the resulting agreement or disagreement of the thing exam­
ined ; thus the standard as such (and Science likewise if it were 
the criterion) is accepted as the essence or as the in-itself. But 
here, where Science has just begun to come on the scene, neither 
Science nor anything else has yet justified itself as the essence 
or the in-itself; and without something of the sort it seems that 
no examination can take place. 
82. This contradiction and its removal will become more 
definite ifwe call to mind the abstract determinations of truth 
and knowledge as they occur in consciousness. Consciousness 
simultaneously distinguishes itself from something, and at the 
same time relates itself to it, or, as it is said, this something exists 
for consciousness ; and the determinate aspect of this relating, 
or of the being of something for a consciousness, is knowing. 
But we distinguish this being-for-another from being-in-itself; 
whatever is related to knowledge or knowing is also distin­
guished from it, and posited as existing outside of this relation-

I N TRODU C T I O N  
53 
ship ; this being-in-itself is called truth. Just what might be in­
volved in these determinations is of no further concern to us 
here. Since our object is phenomenal knowledge, its determina­
tions too will at first be taken directly as they present them­
selves ; and they do present themselves very much as we have 
already apprehended them. 
83. Now, ifwe inquire into the truth of knowledge, it seems 
that we are asking what knowledge is in itself. Yet in this inquiry 
knowledge is our object, something that exists for us ; and the 
in-itself that would supposedly result from it would rather be 
the being ofknowledgefor us. What we asserted to be its essence 
would be not so much its truth but rather just our knowledge 
of it. The essence or criterion would lie within ourselves, and 
that which was to be compared with it and about which a de­
cision would be reached through this comparison would not 
necessarily have to recognize the validity of such a standard. 
84. But the dissociation, or this semblance of dissociation and 
presupposition, is overcome by the nature of the object we are 
investigating. Consciousness provides its own criterion from 
within itself, so that the investigation becomes a comparison 
of consciousness with itself; for the distinction made above falls 
within it. In consciousness one thing exists for another, i.e. con­
sciousness regularly contains the determinateness of the 
moment of knowledge ; at the same time, this other is to con­
sciousness not merely for it, but is also outside of this relation­
ship, or exists in itself: the moment of truth. Thus in what con­
sciousness affirms from within itself as being-in-itself or the True 
we have the standard which consciousness itself sets up by which 
to measure what it knows. If we designate knowledge as the 
Notion, but the essence or the True as what exists, or the obJect, 
then the examination consists in seeing whether the Notion cor­
responds to the object. But if we call the essence or in-itself of 
the obJect the Notion, and on the other hand understand by the 
obJect the Notion itself as obJect, viz. as it existsfor an other, then 
the examination consists in seeing whether the object corre­
sponds to its Notion. It is evident, of course, that the two pro­
cedures are the same. But the essential point to bear in mind 
throughout the whole investigation is that these two moments, 
'Notion' and 'object', 'being-for-another' and 'being-in-itself', 
both fall within that knowledge which we are investigating. 

54 
P H E N O M E N O LOGY O F  S P I R I T  
Consequently, we do not need to import criteria, or to make 
use of our own bright ideas and thoughts during the course 
ofthe inquiry ; it is precisely when we leave these aside that we 
succeed in contemplating the matter in hand as it is in and for 
itself 
85. But not only is a contribution by us superfluous, since 
Notion and object, the criterion and what is to be tested, are 
present in consciousness itself, but we are also spared the trouble 
of comparing the two and really testing them, so that, since what 
consciousness examines is its own self, all that is left for us to 
do is simply to look on. For consciousness is, on the one hand, 
consciousness of the object, and on the other, consciousness of 
itself; consciousness of what for it is the True, and consciousness 
ot its knowledge of the truth. Since both are for the same con­
sciousness, this consciousness is itself their comparison ; it is for 
this same consciousness to know whether its knowledge of the 
object corresponds to the object or not. The object, it is true, 
seems only to be for consciousness in the way that consciousness 
knows it ; it seems that consciousness cannot, as it were, get 
behind the object as it exists for consciousness so as to examine 
what the object is in itself, and hence, too, cannot test its own 
knowledge by that standard. But the distinction between the 
in-itself and knowledge is already present in the very fact that 
consciousness knows an object at all. Something is for it the in­
itself; and knowledge, or the being of the object for conscious­
ness, is, for it, another moment. Upon this distinction, which 
is present as a fact, the examination rests. If the comparison 
shows that these two moments do not correspond to one 
another, it would seem that consciousness must alter its know­
ledge to make it conform to the object. But, in fact, in the altera­
tion of the knowledge, the object itself alters for it too, for the 
knowledge that was present was essentially a knowledge of the 
object : as the knowledge changes, so too does the object, for 
it essentially belonged to this knowledge. Hence it comes to pass 
· for consciousness that what it previously took to be the in-itself 
is not an in-itself, or that it was only an in-itself for consciousness. 
Since consciousness thus finds that its knowledge does not corre­
spond to its object, the object itself does not stand the test ; in 
other words, the criterion for testing is altered when that for 
which it was to have been the criterion fails to pass the test ; 

I N TR O D U C T I O N  
55 
and the testing is not only a testing of what we know, but also 
a testing of the criterion of what knowing is. 
86. Inasmuch as the new true object issues from it, this dialectical 
movement which consciousness exercises on itself and which 
affects both its knowledge and its object, is precisely what is 
called experience [ Eifahrung]. In this connection there is a 
moment in the process just mentioned which must be brought 
out more clearly, for through it a new light will be thrown on 
the exposition which follows. Consciousness knows something; 
this object is the essence or the in-itself; but it is also for con­
sciousness the in-itself. This is where the ambiguity of this truth 
enters. We see that consciousness now has two objects : one is 
the first in-itself, the second is the being-for-consciousness of this in­
itself The latter appears at first sight to be merely the reflection 
of consciousness into itself, i.e. what consciousness has in mind 
is not an object, but only its knowledge of that first object. But, 
as was shown previously, the first object, in being known, is 
altered for consciousness ; it ceases to be the in-itself, and 
becomes something that is the in-itself only for consciousness. And 
this then is the True : the being-for-consciousness of this in-itself. 
Or, in other words, this is the essence, or the object of conscious­
ness. This new object contains the nothingness of the first, it 
is what experience has made of it. 
87. This exposition of the course of experience contains a 
moment in virtue of which it does not seem to agree with what 
is ordinarily understood by experience. This is the moment of 
transition from the first object and the knowledge of it, to the 
other object, which experience is said to be about. Our account 
implied that our knowledge of the first object, or the being­
for-consciousness of the first in-itself, itself becomes the second 
object. It usually seems to be the case, on the contrary, that 
our experience of the untruth of our first notion comes by way 
of a second object which we come upon by chance and extern­
ally, so that our part in all this is simply the pure apprehension 
of what is in and for itself. From the present viewpoint, however, 
the new object shows itself to have come about through a reversal 
of consciousness itself This way of looking at the matter is some­
thing contributed by us, by means of which the succession of 
experiences through which consciousness passes is raised into 
a scientific progression-but it is not known to the consciousness 

P H E N O M E NO L O GY O F  S P I R I T 
that we are observing. But, as a matter of fact, we have here 
the same situation as the one discussed in regard to the relation 
between our exposition and scepticism, viz. that in every case 
the result of an untrue mode ofknowledge must not be allowed 
to run away into an empty nothing, but must necessarily be 
grasped as the nothing ofthatfrom which it results-a result which 
contains what was true in the preceding knowledge. It shows 
up here like this : since what first appeared as the object sinks 
for consciousness to the level of its way of knowing it, and since 
the in-itself becomes a being-for-consciousness of the in-itself, the 
latter is now the new object. Herewith a new pattern of con­
sciousness comes on the scene as well, for which the essence 
is something different from what it was at the preceding stage. 
It is this fact that guides the entire series of the patterns of con­
sciousness in their necessary sequence. But it is just this neces­
sity itself, or the origination of the new object, that presents 
itself to consciousness without its understanding how this 
happens, which proceeds for us, as it were, behind the back 
of consciousness. Thus in the movement of consciousness there 
occurs a moment of being-in-itself or being-for-us which is not 
present to the consciousness comprehended in the experience 
itself. The content, however, of what presents itself to us does 
exist for it; we comprehend only the formal aspect of that con­
tent, or its pure origination. For it, what has thus arisen exists 
only as an object;for us, it appears at the same time as move­
ment and a process of becoming. 
88. Because of this necessity, the way to Science is itself 
already Science, and hence, in virtue of its content, is the Science 
of the experience if consciousness. 
8g. The experience of itself which consciousness goes 
through can, in accordance with its Notion, comprehend noth­
ing less than the entire system of consciousness, or the entire 
realm of the truth of Spirit. For this reason, the moments of 
this truth are exhibited in their own proper determinateness, 
viz. as being not abstract moments, but as they are for con­
sciousness, or as consciousness itself stands forth in its relation 
to them. Thus the moments of the whole are patterns of conscious­
ness. In pressing forward to its true existence, consciousness will 
arrive at a point at which it gets rid of its semblance of being 
burdened with something alien, with what is only for it, and 

I N TR O D U C T I O N  
57 
some sort of 'other', at a point where appearance becomes 
identical with essence, so that its exposition will coincide at just 
this point with the authentic Science of Spirit. And finally, 
when consciousness itself grasps this its own essence, it will 
signify the nature of absolute knowledge itself. 

A .  C O N S C I O U S NES S 
I .  S E N S E - C E RT A I N TY : O R  T H E  ' T H I S '  A N D  
' M E A N I N G ' [ MEINEN] 
go. The knowledge or knowing which is at the start or is im­
mediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate 
knowledge itself, a knowledge of the immediate or of what simply 
is. Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive; 
we must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself. In appre­
hending it, we must refrain from trying to comprehend it. 
g I .  Because of its concrete content, sense-certainty imme­
diately appears as the richest kind of knowledge, indeed a know­
ledge ofinfinite wealth for which no bounds can be found, either 
when we reach out into space and time in which it is dispersed, 
or ૷hen we take a bit of this wealth, and by division enter into 
it. Moreover, sense-certainty appears to be the truest know­
ledge ; for it has not as yet omitted anything from the object, 
but has the object before it in its perfect entirety. But, in the 
event, this very certainty proves itself to be the most abstract and 
poorest truth. All that it says about what it knows is just that 
it is ; and its truth contains nothing but the sheer being of the 
thing [ Sache ] .  Consciousness, for its part, is in this certainty only 
as a pure 'I' ; or I am in it only as a pure 'This', and the object 
similarly only as a pure 'This'. I, this particular I, am certain 
of this particular thing, not because I, qua consciousness, in 
knowing it have developed myself or thought about it in various 
ways ; and also not because the thing of which I am certain, in 
virtue of a host of distinct qualities, would be in its own self 
a rich complex of connections, or related in various ways to 
other things. Neither of these has anything to do with the truth 
of sense-certainty : here neither I nor the thing has the signifi­
cance of a complex process of mediation ; the 'I' does not have 
the significance of a manifold imagining or thinking ; nor does 
the 'thing' signify something that has a host of qualities. On 
the contrary, the thing is, and it is, merely because it is. It is; 
this is the essential point for sense-knowledge, and this pure 

S E N S E - C E R TA I N TY 
59 
being, or this simple immediacy, constitutes its truth. Similarly, 
certainty as a connection is an immediate pure connection : con­
sciousness is '/', nothing more, a pure 'This' ; the singular con­
sciousness knows a pure 'This', or the single item. 
92. But when we look carefully at this pure being which con­
stitutes the essence of this certainty, and which this certainty 
pronounces to be its truth, we see that much more is involved. 
An actual sense-certainty is not merely this pure immediacy, 
but an instance of it. Among the countless differences cropping 
up here we find in every case that the crucial one is that, in 
sense-certainty, pure being at once splits up into what we have 
called the two 'Thises', one 'This' as 'I', and the other 'This' 
as object. When we reflect on this difference, we find that 
neither one nor the other is only immediately present in sense­
certainty, but each is at the same time mediated: I have this cer­
tainty through something else, viz. the thing ; and it, similarly, 
is in sense-certainty through something else, viz. through the 'I'. 
93· It is not just we who make this distinction between 
essence and instance, between immediacy and mediation ; on 
the contrary, we find it within sense-certainty itself, and it is 
to be taken up in the form in which it is present there, not as 
we have just defined it. One of the terms is posited in sense­
certainty in the form of a simple, immediate being, or as the 
essence, the object; the other, however, is posited as what is un­
essential and mediated, something which in sense-certainty is 
not in itself but through [the mediation of] an other, the '1', 
a knowing which knows the object only because the object is, while 
the knowing may either be or not be. But the object is : it is 
what is true, or it is the essence. It is, regardless of whether it 
is known or not ; and it remains, even it it is not known, whereas 
there is no knowledge if the object is not there. 
94· The question must therefore be considered whether in 
sense-certainty itself the object is in fact the kind of essence that 
sense-certainty proclaims it to be ; whether this notion of it as 
the essence corresponds to the way it is present in sense-cer­
tainty. To this end, we have not to reflect on it and ponder 
what it might be in truth, but only to consider the way in which 
it is present in sense-certainty. 
95· It is, then, sense-certainty itself that must be asked : 
'What is the This?' If we take the 'This' in the twofold shape 

6o 
A. CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
of its being, as 'Now' and as 'Here', the dialectic it has in it 
will receive a form as intelligible as the 'This' itself is. To the 
question : 'What is Now ?', let us answer, e.g. 'Now is Nigh૸.' 
In order to test the truth of this sense-certainty a simple experi­
ment will suffice. We write down this truth ; a truth cannot lose 
anything by being written down, any more than it can lose any­
thing through our preserving it. If now, this noon, we look again 
at the written truth we shall have to say that it has become 
stale. 
g6. The Now that is Night is preserved, i.e. it is treated as what 
it professes to be, as something that is ; but it proves itself to 
be, on the contrary, something that is not. The Now does indeed 
preserve itself, but as something that is not Night ; equally, it 
preserves itself in face of the Day that it now is, as something 
that also is not Day, in other words, as a negative in general. 
This self-preserving Now is, therefore, not immediate but medi­
ated ; for it is determined as a permanent and self-preserving 
Now through the fact that something else, viz. Day and Night, 
is not. As so determined, it is still just as simply Now as before, 
and in this simplicity is indifferent to what happens in it ; just 
as little as Night and Day are its being, just as much also is 
it Day and Night; it is not in the least affected by this its other­
being. A simple thing of this kind which is through negation, 
which is neither This nor That, a not- This, and is wi:th equal 
indifference This as well as That-such a thing we call a uni­
versal. So it is in fact the universal that is the true [content] 
of sense-certainty. 
97· It is as a universal too that we utter what the sensuous 
[content] is. What we say is : 'This', i.e. the universal This ; or, 
'it is', i.e. Being in general. Of course, we do not envisage the uni­
versal This or Being in general, but we utter the universal ; in 
other words, we do not strictly say what in this sense-certainty 
we mean to say. But language, as we see, is the more truthful ; 
in it, we ourselves directly refute what we mean to say, and since 
the universal is the true [content] of sense-certainty and lan­
guage expresses this true [content] alone, it is just not possible 
for us ever to say, or express in words, a sensuous being that 
we mean. 
g8. The same will be the case with the other form of the 
'This', with 'Here'. 'Here' is, e.g., the tree. If I turn round, 

S E N S E - C E R TA I N TY 
61 
this truth has vanished and is converted into its opposite : 'No 
tree is here, but a house instead'. 'Here' itself does not vanish ; 
on the contrary, it abides constant in the vanishing of the house, 
the tree, etc., and is indifferently house or tree. Again, therefore, 
the 'This' shows itself to be a mediated simplicity, or a universality. 
99· Pure being remains, therefore, as the essence of this sense­
certainty, since sense-certainty has demonstrated in its own self 
that the truth of its object is the universal. But this pure being 
is not _an immediacy, but something to which negation and 
mediation are essential ; consequently, it is not what we mean 
by 'being', but is 'being' defined as an abstraction, or as the 
pure universal ; and our 'meaning', for which the true [content] 
of sense-certainty is not the universal, is all that is left over in 
face of this empty or indifferent Now and Here. 
1 oo. When we compare the relation in which knowing and 
the object first came on the scene, with the relation in which 
they now stand in this result, we find that it is reversed. The 
object, which was supposed to be the essential element in sense­
certainty, is now the unessential element ; for the universal 
which the object has come to be is no longer what the object 
was supposed essentially to be for sense-certainty. On the con­
trary, the certainty is now to be found in the opposite element, 
viz. in knowing, which previously was the unessential element. 
Its truth is in the object as my object, or in its being mine 
[Meinen] ; it is, because / know it. Sense-certainty, then, though 
indeed expelled from the object, is not yet thereby overcome, 
but only driven back into the '1'. We have now to see what 
experience shows us about its reality in the '1'. 
1 0.1 . The force of its truth thus lies now in the 'I', in the 
immediacy of my seeing, hearing, and so on ; the vanishing of the 
single Now and Here that we mean is prevented by the fact 
that I hold them fast. 'Now' is day because I see it ; 'Here' is 
a tree for the same reason. But in this relationship sense-cer­
tainty experiences the same dialectic acting upon itself as in 
the previous one. I, this 'I', see the tree and assert that 'Here' 
is a tree ; but another 'I' sees the house and maintains that 
'Here' is not a tree but a house instead. Both truths have the 
same authentication, viz. the immediacy of seeing, and the cer­
tainty and assurance that both have about their knowing ; but 
the one truth vanishes in the other. 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 02. What does not disappear in all this is the 'I' as universal, 
whose seeing is neither a seeing of the tree nor of this house, 
but is a simple seeing which, though mediated by the negation· 
of this house, etc., is all the same simple and indifferent to what­
ever happens in it, to the house, the tree, etc. The 'I' is merely 
universal like 'Now', 'Here', or 'This' in general ; I do indeed 
mean a single 'I', but I can no more say what I mean in the case 
of 'I' than I can in the case of 'Now' and 'Here'. When I say 
'this Here', 'this Now', or a 'single item', I am saying all Thises, 
Heres, Nows, all single items. Similarly, when I say '1', this 
singular '1', I say in general all 'Is' ; everyone is what I say, 
everyone is 'I', this singular 'I'. When Science is faced with the 
demand-as if it were an acid test it could not pass-that it 
should deduce, construct, find a priori, or however it is put, 
something called 'this thing' or 'this one man', it is reasonable 
that the demand should say which 'this thing', or which 'this 
particular man' is meant ; but it is impossible to say this. 
1 03. Sense-certainty thus comes to know by experience that 
its essence is neither in the object nor in the 'I', and that its imme­
diacy is neither an immediacy of the one nor of the other; for 
in both, what I mean is rather something unessential, and the 
object and the 'I' are universals in which that 'Now' and 'Here' 
and 'I' which I mean do not have a continuing being, or are 
not. Thus we reach the stage where we have to posit the whole 
of sense-certainty itself as its essence, and no longer only one of 
its moments, as happened in the two cases where first the object 
confronting the 'I', and then the 'I', were supposed to be its 
reality. Thus it is only sense-certainty as a whole which stands 
firm within itself as immediacy and by so doing excludes from 
itself all the opposition which has hitherto obtained. 
1 04. This pure immediacy, therefore, no longer has any 
concern with the otherness ofthe 'Here', as a tree which passes 
over into a 'Here' that is not a tree, or with the otherness of 
the 'Now' as day which changes into a 'Now' that is night, 
or with another 'I' for which something else is object. Its truth 
preserves itself as a relation that remains self-identical, and 
which makes no distinction of what is essential and what is un­
essential, between the 'I' and the object, a relation therefore into 
which also no distinction whatever can penetrate. I, this '1', 
assert then the 'Here' as a tree, and do not turn round so that 

S E N S E - C E R TA I N TY 
the Here would become for me not a tree ; also, I take no notice 
of the fact that another 'I' sees the Here as not a tree, or that 
I myself at another time take the Here as not-tree, the Now 
as not-day. On the contrary, I am a pure [act of] intuiting ; 
I, for my part, stick to the fact that the Now is day, or that 
the Here is a tree ; also I do not compare Here and Now them­
selves with one another, but stick firmly to one immediate rela­
tion : the Now is day. 
ros. Since, then, this certainty will no longer come forth to 
us when we direct its attention to a Now that is night, or to 
an 'I' to whom it is night, we will approach it and let ourselves 
point to the Now that is asserted. We must let ourselves point 
to it; for the truth of this immediate relation is the truth of this 
'I' which confines itself to one 'Now' or one 'Here'. Were we 
to examine this truth afterwards, or stand at a distance from it, 
it would lose its significance entirely ; for that would do away 
with the immediacy which is essential to it. We must therefore 
enter the same point of time or space, point them out to our­
selves, i.e. make ourselves into the same singular 'I' which is 
the one who knows with certainty. Let us, then, see how that 
immediate is constituted that is pointed out to us. 
ro6. The Now is pointed to, this Now. 'Now' ; it has already 
ceased to be in the act of pointing to it. The Now that is, is 
another Now than the one pointed to, and we see that the Now 
is just this : to be no more just when it ill. The Now, as it is 
pointed out to us, is Now that has been, and this is its truth ; 
it has not the truth of being. Yet this much is true, that it has 
been. But what essentially has been [gewesen ist] is, in fact, not 
an essence that is [ kein Wesen] ;  it is not, and it was with being 
that we were concerned. 
1 07. In this pointing-out, then, we see merely a movement 
which takes the following course : ( r )  I point out the 'Now', 
and it is asserted to be the truth. I point it out, however, as 
something that has been, or as something that has been super­
seded ; I set aside the first truth. ( 2) I now assert as the second 
truth that it has been, that it is superseded. (3) But what has 
been, is not; I set aside the second truth, its having been, its super­
session, and thereby negate the negation of the 'Now', and thus 
return to the first assertion, that the 'Now' is. The 'Now', and 
pointing out the 'Now', are thus so constituted that neither the 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
one nor the other is something immediate and simple, but a 
movement which contains various moments. A This is posited ; 
but it is rather an other that is posited, or the This is superseded : 
and this otherness, or the setting-aside of the first, is itself in turn 
set aside, and so has returned into the first. However, this first, 
thus reflected into itself, is not exactly the same as it was to 
begin with, viz. something immediate; on the contrary, it is some­
thing that is reflected into itself, or a simple entity which, in its other­
ness, remains what it is : a Now which is an absolute plurality 
of Nows. And this is the true, the genuine Now, the Now as 
asimpledaywhich contains within it many Nows-hours. A Now 
of this sort, an hour, similarly is many minutes, and this Now 
is likewise many Nows, and so on. The pointing-out of the Now 
is thus itself the movement which expresses what the Now is 
in truth, viz. a result, or a plurality ofNows all taken together ; 
and the pointing-out is the experience of learning that Now is 
a universal. 
1 o8. The Here pointed out, to which I hold fast, is similarly 
a this Here which, in fact, is not this Here, but a Before and 
Behind, an Above and Below, a Right and Left. The Above 
is itself similarly this manifold otherness of above, below, etc. 
The Here, which was supposed to have been pointed out, 
vanishes in other Heres, but these likewise vanish. What is 
pointed out, held fast, and abides, is a negative This, which is 
negative only when the Heres are taken as they should be, but, 
in being so taken, they supersede themselves ; what abides is 
a simple complex of many Heres. The Here that is meant would 
be the point ;  but it is not : on the contrary, when it is pointed 
out as something that is, the pointing-out shows itself to be not 
an immediate knowing [of the point], but a movement from 
the Here that is meant through many Heres into the universal 
Here which is a simple plurality of Heres, just as the day is a 
simple plurality of Nows. 
1 09. It is clear that the dialectic ofsense-certainty is nothing 
else but the simple history of its movement or of its experience, 
and sense-certainty itself is nothing else but just this history. 
That is why the natural consciousness, too, is always reaching 
this result, learning from experience what is true in it ; but 
equally it is always forgetting it and starting the movement all 
over again. It is therefore astonishing when, in face of this ex-

S E N S E- C E R TA I N TY 
perience, it is asserted as universal experience and put forward, 
too, as a philosophical proposition, even as the outcome of 
Scepticism, that the reality or being of external things taken 
as Thises or sense-objects has absolute truth for consciousness. 
To make such an assertion is not to know what one is saying, 
to be unaware that one is saying the opposite of what one wants 
to say. The truth for consciousness of a This of sense is supposed 
to be universal experience ; but the very opposite is universal 
experience. Every consciousness itself supersedes such a truth, 
as e.g. Here is a tree, or, Now is noon, and proclaims the oppo­
site : Here is not a tree, but a house ; and similarly, it immediately 
again supersedes the assertion which set aside the first so far 
as it is also just such an assertion of a sensuous This. And what 
consciousness will learn from experience in all sense-certainty 
is, in truth, only what we have seen viz. the This as a universal, 
the very opposite of what that assertion affirmed to be universal 
expenence. 
With this appeal to universal experience we may be per­
mitted to anticipate how the case stands in the practical sphere. 
In this respect we can tell those who assert the truth and cer­
tainty of the reality of sense-objects that they should go back 
to the most elementary school of wisdom, viz. the ancient Eleu­
sinian Mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus, and that they have sttJl to 
learn the secret meaning of the eating of bread and the drinking 
of wine. For he who is initiated into these Mysteries not only 
comes to doubt the being of sensuous things, but to despair of 
it ; in part he brings about the nothingness of such things himself 
in his dealings with them, and in part he sees them reduce them­
selves to nothingness. Eve'h the animals are not shut out from 
this wisdom but, on the contrary, show themselves to be most 
profoundly initiated into it ; for they do not just stand idly in 
front of sensuous things as if these possessed intrinsic being, but, 
despairing of their reality, and completely assured of their 
nothingness, they fall to without ceremony and eat them up. 
And all Nature, like the animals, celebrates these open Mys­
teries which teach the truth about sensuous things. 
I I o. But, just as our previous remarks would suggest, those 
who put forward such an assertion also themselves say the direct 
opposite of what they mean : a phenomenon which is perhaps 
best calculated to induce them to reflect on the nature of sense-

66 
A .  C ON S C I O U S N E S S  
certainty. They speak of the existence of external objects, which 
can be more precisely defined as ૹ actual, absolutely singular, 
wholly personal, individual things, each of them absolutely unlike 
anything else ; this existence, they say, has absolute certainty 
and truth. They mean 'this' bit ofpaperon which I am writing­
or rather have written-'this' ;  but what they mean is not what 
they say. If they actually wanted to say 'this' bit of paper which 
they mean, if they wanted to say it, then this is impossible, 
because the sensuous This that is meant cannot be reached by lan­
guage, which belongs to consciousness, i.e. to that which is in­
herently universal. In the actual attempt to say it, it would 
therefore crumble away ; those who started to describe it would 
not be able to complete the description, but would be compelled 
to leave it to others, who would themselves finally have .to admit 
to speaking about something which is not. They certainly mean, 
then, this bit of paper here which is quite different from the 
bit mentioned above ; but they say 'actual things', 'external or 
sensuow objects', 'absolutely singular entities' [ Wesen] and so on ; 
i.e. they say of them only what is universal. Consequently, what 
is called the unutterable is nothing else than the untrue, the 
irrational, what is merely meant [but is not actually expressed]. 
If nothing more is said of something than that it is 'an actual 
thing', an 'external object', its description is only the most 
abstract of generalities and in fact expresses its sameness with 
everything rather than its distinctiveness. When I say : 'a single 
thing', I am really saying what it is from a wholly universal 
point of view, for everything is a single thing ; and likewise 'this 
thing' is anything you like. If we describe it more exactly as 
'this bit of paper', then each and evૺry bit of paper is 'this bit 
of paper', and I have only uttered the universal all the time. 
But ifl want to help out language-which has the divine nature 
of directly reversing the meaning of what is said, of making it 
into something else, and thus not letting what is meant get into 
words at all-by pointing out this bit of paper, experience teaches 
me what the truth of sense-certainty in fact is : I point it out 
as a 'Here', which is a Here of other Heres, or is in its own 
self a 'simple togetherness of many Heres' ; i.e. it is a universal. 
I take it up then as it is in truth, and instead of knowing some­
thing immediate I take the truth of it, or perceive it.1 
1 The German for 'to perceive' is wahrnehmen which means literally 'to take truly'. 

P E R C E PT I O N  
I I .  PE R C E PT I O N : OR T H E  T H I N G  A N D  
D E C E PT I O N  
1 1 1 . Immediate certainty does not take over the truth, for 
its truth is the universal, whereas certainty wants to apprehend 
the This. Perception, on the other hand, takes what is present 
to it as a universal. Just as universality is its principle in general, 
the immediately self-differentiating moments within percep­
tion are universal : 'I' is a universal and the object is a universal. 
That principle has arisen for us, and therefore the way we take 
in perception is no longer something that just happens to us 
like sense-certainty ; on the contrary, it is logically necessitated. 
With the emergence of the principle, the two moments which 
in their appearing merely occur, also come into being : one being 
the movement of pointing-out or the act of perceiving, the other 
being the same movement as a simple event or the object perceived. 
In essence the object is the same as the movement : the move­
ment is the unfolding and differentiation of the two moments, 
and the object is the apprehended togetherness of the moments. 
For us, or in itself, the universal as principle is the essence of 
perception, and, in contrast to this abstraction, both the 
moments distinguished-that which perceives and that which 
is perceived-are the unessential. But, in fact, because both are 
themselves the universal or the essence, both are essential. Yet 
since they are related to each other as opposites, only one can 
be the essential moment in the relation, and the distinction of 
essential and unessential moment must be shared between 
them. One of them, the object, defined as the simple [entity], 
is the essence regardless of whether it is perceived or not ; but 
the act of perceiving, as a movement, is the unessential moment, 
the unstable factow which can as well be as not be. 
1 1 2. This object must now be defined more precisely, and the 
definition must be developed briefly from the result that has 
been reached ; the more detailed development does not belong 
here. Since the principle of the object, the universal, is in its 
simplicity a mediated universal, the object must express this its 
nature in its own self. This it does by showing itself to be the 
thing with many properties. The wealth of sense-knowledge belongs 
to perception, not to immediate certainty, for which it was only 
the source of instances ; for only perception contains negation, 
that is, difference or manifoldness, within its own essence. 

68 
A. C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 1 3. The This is, therefore, established as not This, or as some­
thing superseded ; and hence not as Nothing, but as a determi­
nate Nothing, the Nothing of a content, viz. of the This. Con­
sequently, the sense-element is still present, but not in the way 
it was supposed to be in [the position of] immediate certainty : 
not as the singular item that is 'meant', but as a universal, or 
as that which will be defined as a property. Supersession exhibits 
its true twofold meaning which we have seen in the negative : 
it is at once a negating and a preserving. Our Nothing, as the Noth­
ing of the This, preserves its immediacy and is itself sensuous, 
but it is a universal immediacy. Being, however, is a universal 
in virtue of its having mediation or the negative within it ; when 
it expresses this in its immediacy it is a di.ferentiated, determinate 
property. As a result many such properties are established simul­
taneously, one being the negative of another. Since they are 
expressed in the simplicity of the universal, these deter­
minacies-which are properties strictly speaking only through 
the addition of a further determination-are related [only] to 
themselves ; they are indifferent to one another, each is on its 
own and free from the others. But the simple, self-identical uni­
versality is itself in turn distinct and free from these determinate 
properties it has. It is pure relating of self to self, or the medium 
in which all these determinacies are, and in which as a simple 
unity they therefore interpenetrate, but without coming into con­
tact with one another ; for it is precisely through participating 
in this universality that they exist indifferently on their own 
account. 
This abstract universal medium, which can be called simply 
'thinghood' or 'pure essence', is nothing else than what Here 
and Now have proved themselvess to be, viz. a simple togetherness 
of a plurality ; but the many are, in their determinateness, simple 
universals themselves. This salt is a simple Here, and at the 
same time manifold ; it is white and also tart, also cubical in 
shape, of a specific gravity, etc. All these many properties are 
in a single simple 'Here', in which, therefore, they inter­
penetrate ; none has a different Here from the others, but each 
is everywhere, in the same Here in which the others are. And, 
at the same time, without being separated by different Heres, 
they do not affect each other in this interpenetration. The 
whiteness does not affect the cubical shape, and neither affects 

P E R C E PT I O N  
6g 
the tart taste, etc. ; on the contrary, since each is itself a simple 
relating of self to self it leaves the others alone, and is connected 
with them only by the indifferent Also. This Also is thus the 
pure universal itself, or the medium, the 'thinghood', which 
holds them together in this way. 
I I 4. In the relationship which has thus emerged it is only 
the character of positive universality that is at first observed 
and developed ; but a further side presents itself, which must 
also be taken into consideration. To wit, if the many determi­
nate properties were strictly indifferent to one another, if they 
were simply and solely self-related, they would not be determi­
nate ; for they are only determinate in so far as they differentiate 
themselves from one another, and relate themselves to others as 
to their opposites. Yet ; as thus opposed to one another they 
cannot be together in the simple unity of their medium, which 
is just as essential to them as negation ; the differentiation of 
the properties, in so far as it is not an indifferent differentiation 
but is exclusive, each property negating the others, thus falls 
outside of this simple medium ; and the medium, therefore, is 
not merely an Also, an indifferent unity, but a One as well, a 
unity which excludes an other. The One is the moment of negation ; 
it is itself quite simply a relation of self to self and it excludes 
an other ; and it is that by which 'thing hood' is determined as 
a Thing. Negation is inherent in a property as a determinateness 
which is immediately one with the immediacy of being, an 
immediacy which, through this unity with negation, is uni­
versality. As a One, however, the determinateness is set free 
from this unity with its opposite, and exists in and for itself. 
I I 5 .  In these moments, taken together, the Thing as the 
truth of perception is completed, so far as it is necessary to de­
velop it here. It is (a) an indifferent, passive universality, the 
Also of the many properties or rather 'matters' ; (b) negation, 
equally simply ; or the One, which excludes opposite properties ; 
and (c) the many properties themselves, the relation of the first 
two moments, or negation as it relates to the indifferent ele­
ment, and therein expands into a host of differences ; the point 
of singular individuality in the medium of subsistence radiating 
forth into plurality. In so far as these differences belong to the 
indifferent medium they are themselves universal, they are 
related only to themselves and do not affect one another. But 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
in so far as they belong to the negative unity they are at the 
same time exclusive [of other properties] ; but they necessarily 
have this relationship of opposition to properties remote from 
their Also. The sensuous universality, or the immediate unity of 
being and the negative, is thus a property only when the One 
and the pure universality are developed from it and differenti­
ated from each other, and when the sensuous universality unites 
them ; it is this relation of the universality to the pure essential 
moments which at last completes the Thing. 
I I 6. This, then, is how the Thing of perception is con­
stituted ; and consciousness is determined as percipient in so far 
as this Thing is its object. It has only to take it, to confine itself 
to a pure apprehension of it, and what is thus yielded is the 
True. If consciousness itself did anything ip taking what is 
given, it would by such adding or subtraction alter the truth. 
Since the object is the True and universal, the self-identical, 
while consciousness is alterable and unessential, it can happen 
that consciousness apprehends the object incorrectly and 
deceives itself. The percipient is aware of the possibility of de­
ception ; for in the universality which is the principle, otherness 
itself is immediately present for him, though present as what 
is null and superseded. His criterion of truth is therefore self­
identity, and his behaviour consists in apprehending the object 
as self-identical. Since at the same time diversity is explicitly 
there for him, it is a connection of the diverse moments of his 
apprehension to one another ; but if a dissimilarity makes itself 
felt in the course of this comparison, then this is not an untruth 
of the object-for this is the self-identical-but an untruth in 
perceiving it. 
I I 7· Let us see now what consciousness experiences in its 
actual perceiving. For us, this experience is already contained 
in the development of the object, and of the attitude of con­
sciousness towards it given just now. It is only a matter of de­
veloping the contradictions that are present therein. The object 
which I apprehend presents itself purely as a One; but I also 
perceive in it a property which is universal, and which thereby 
transcends the singularity [of the object]. The first being of the 
objective essence as a One was therefore not its true being. But 
since the object is what is true, the untruth falls in me ; my appre­
hension was not correct. On account of the universality of the 

P E R C E PT I O N  
7 1 
property, I must rather take the objective essence to be on the 
whole a community. I now further perceive the property to be 
determinate, opposed to another and excluding it. Thus I did not 
in fact apprehend the objective essence correctly when I defined 
it as a community with others, or as a continuity ; on account 
of the determinateness of the property, I must break up the 
continuity and posit the objective essence as a One that 
excludes. 
In the broken up One I find many such properties which 
do not affect one another but are mutually indifferent. There­
fore, I did not perceive the object correctly when I apprehended 
it as exclusive ; on the contrary, just as previouly it was only 
continuity in general, so now it is a universal common medium 
in which many properties are present as sensuous universalities, 
each existing on its own account and, as determinate, excluding 
the others. But this being so, what I perceive as the simple and 
the True is also not a universal medium, but the single property 
by itself which, however, as such, is neither a property nor a 
determinate being ; for now it is neither in a One nor connected 
with others. Only when it belongs to- a One is it a property, 
and only in relation to others is it determinate. As this pure 
relating of itself to itself, it remains merely sensuous being in 
general, since it no longer possesseૻ the character of negativity ; 
and the consciousness which takes its object to be a sensuous 
being is only 'my' meaning [ein Meinen] ,  i.e. it has ceased alto­
gether to perceive and has withdrawn into itself. But sensuous 
being and my meaning themselves pass over into perception : 
I am thrown back to the beginning and drawn once again into 
the same cycle which supersedes itself in each moment and as 
a whole. 
I I 8. Consciousness, therefore, necessarily runs through this 
cycle again, but this time not in the same way as it did the first 
time. For it has experienced in perception that the outcome 
and the truth of perception is its dissolution, or is reflection out 
of the True and into itself. Thus it becomes quite defin{te for 
consciousness how its perceiving is essentially constituted, 
viz. that it is not a simple pure apprehension, but in its apprehen­
sion is at the same time reflected out qf the True and into itself. This 
return of consciousness into itself which is directly mingled with 
the pure apprehension [of the object ]-for this return into itself 

72 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
has shown itself to be essential to perception-alters the truth. 
Consciousness at once recognizes this aspect as its own and takes 
responsibility for it ; by doing so it will obtain the true object 
in its purity. This being so, we have now in the case of percep­
tion the same as ha,rpened in the case of sense-certainty, the 
aspect of consciousness being driven back into itself; but not, 
in the first instance, in the sense in which this happened in 
sense-certainty, i.e. not as if the truth of perception fell in con­
sciousness. On the contrary, consciousness recognizes that it is 
the ·untruth occurring in perception that falls within it. But by 
this very recognition it is able at once to supersede this untruth ; 
it distinguishes its apprehension of the truth from the untruth 
of its perception, corrects this untruth, and since it undertakes 
to make this correction itself, the truth, qua truth of perception, 
falls of course within consciousness. The behaviour of conscious­
ness which we have now to consider is thus so constituted that 
consciousness no longer merely perceives, but is also conscious 
ofits reflection into itself, and separates this from simple appre­
hension proper. 
I I g. At first, then, I become aware of the Thing as a One, 
and have to hold fast to it in this its true character ; if, in the 
course of perceiving it, something turns up which contradicts 
it, this is to be recognized as a reflection of mine. Now, there 
also occur in the perception various properties which seem to 
be properties of the Thing ; but the Thing i"s a One, and we are 
conscious that this diversity by which it would cease to be a 
One falls in us. So in point of fact, the Thing is white only to 
our eyes, also tart to our tongue, also cubical to our touch, and 
so on. We get the entire diversity of these aspects, not from the 
Thing, but from ourselves ; and they fall asunder in this way 
for us, because the eye is quite distinct from the tongue, and 
so on. We are thus the universal medium in which such moments 
are kept apart and exist each on its own. Through the fact, then, 
that we regard the characteristic of being a universal medium 
as our reflection, we preserve the self-identity and truth of the 
Thing, its being a One. 
I 20. But, regarded as existing each for itself in the universal 
medium, these diverse aspects for which consciousness accepts re­
sponsibility are specifically determined. White is white only in 
opposition to black, and so on, and the Thing is a One precisely 

P E R C E PT I O N 
73 
by being opposed to others. But it is not as a One that it excludes 
others from itself, for to be a One is the universal relating of 
self to self, and the fact that it is a One rather makes it like 
all the others ; it is through its determinateness that the thing 
excludes others. Things are therefore in and for themselves 
determinate ; they have properties by which they distinguish 
themselves from others. Since the property [ Eigenschaft] is the 
Thing's own [eigene] property or a determinateness in the Thing 
itself, the Thing has a number of properties. For, in the first 
place, the Thing is what is true, i.e. it possesses intrinsie being ; 
and what is in it, is there as the Thing's essence, and not on 
account of other things. Secondly, therefore, the determinate 
properties do not only exist on account of other things and for 
other things, but in the Thing itself; yet they are determinate 
properties in it only because they are a plurality of reciprocally 
self-differentiating elements. And thirdly, since this is how they 
are in the 'thinghood' [i.e. the essence of the one thing of which 
they are properties], they exist in and for themselves, indifferent 
to one another. It is in truth, then, the Thing itself that is white, 
and also cubical, also tart, and so on. In other words, the Thing 
is the Also, or the universal medium in which the many properties 
subsist apart from one another, without touching or cancelling 
one another ; and when so taken, the Thing is perceived as what 
is true. 
1 2 1 .  Now, in perceiving in this way, consciousness is at the 
same time aware that it is also reflected into itself, and that, 
in perceiving, the opposite moment to the Also turns up. But 
this moment is the unity of the Thing with itself, a unity which 
excludes difference from itself. Accordingly, it is this unity 
which consciousness has to take upon itself; for the Thing itself 
is the subsistence of the many diverse and independent properties. Thus 
we say of the Thing : it is white, also cubical, and also tart, and 
so on. But in so jar as it is white, it is not cubical, and in so Jar 
as it is cubical and also white, it is not tart, and so on. Positing 
these properties as a oneness is the work of consciousness alone 
which, therefore, has to prevent them from collapsing· into one­
ness in the Thing. To this end it brings in the 'in so far', in 
this way preserving the properties as mutually external, and 
the Thing as the Also. Quite rightly, consciousness makes itself 
responsible for the oneness, at first in such a way that what was 

74 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
called a property is represented as 'free matter'. The Thing is 
in this way raised to the level of a genuine Also, since it becomes 
a collection of 'matters' and, instead of being a One, becomes 
merely an enclosing surface. 
I 22. If we look back on what consciousness previously took, 
and now takes, responsibility for, on what it previously 
ascribed, and now ascribes, to the Thing, we see that conscious­
ness alternately makes itself, as well as the Thing, into both a 
pure, many-less One, and into an Also that resolves itself into 
independent 'matters'. Consciousness thus finds through this 
comparison that not only its truthful perceiving [ Nehmen des 
Wahren], contains the distinct moments of apprehension and with­
drawal into itself, but rather that the truth itself, the Thing, 
reveals itself in this twofold way. Our experience, then, is this, 
that the Thing exhibits itself for the consciousness apprehending it, 
in a specific manner, but is at the same time reflected out of the 
way in which it presents itself to consciousness and back into 
itself; in other words, it contains in its own self an opposite truth 
[to that which it has for the apprehending consciousness) . 
I 23. Thus consciousness has got beyond this second type of 
attitude in perceiving, too, i.e. the one in which it takes the 
Thing as truly self-identical, and itselffor what is not self-iden ti­
cal but returns back into itself out of identity. The object is now 
for consciousness this whole movement which was previously 
shared between the object and consciousness. The Thing is a 
One, reflected into itself; it isfor itself, but it is also for an other; 
and, moreover, it is an other on its own account, just because it 
is for an other. Accordingly, the Thing is for itself and also for 
an other, a being that is doubly differentiated but also a One ; 
but the oneness contradicts this diversity. Hence consciousness 
would again have to assume responsibility for placing [the 
diversity] in the One and for keeping it away from the Thing. 
It would have'to say that in so far as it is for itself, the Thing 
is not for an other. But the oneness also belongs to the Thing 
itself as consciousness has found by experience : the Thing is 
essentially reflected into itself. The Also, or the indifferent dif­
ference, thus falls as much within the Thing as does the oneness ; 
but since the two are different they do not fall within the same 
Thing, but in diferent Things. The contradiction which is 
present in the objective essence as a whole is distributed 

P E R C E PT I O N  
75 
between two objects. In and for itself the Thing is self-identical, 
but this unity with itself is disturbed by other Things. Thus 
the unity of the Thing is preserved and at the same time the 
otherness is preserved outside of the Thing as well as outside 
of consciousness. 
I 24. Now, although it is true that the contradiction in the 
objective essence is in this way distributed among different 
Things, yet the difference will, for that reason, attach to the 
singular separated Thing itself. The different Things are thus 
established as existing on their own account ;  and the conflict 
between them is so' far reciprocal that each is different, not from 
itself, but only from the other. But each is thereby determined 
as being its,elfa different Thing, and it has its essential difference 
in its own self; but all the while not as if this difference were 
an opposition in the Thing itself On the contrary, for itself it 
is a simple determinateness which constitutes the Thing's essential 
character, and differentiates itfrom others. As a matter of fact, 
since differentness is present in it, it is of course necessarily 
present as an actual difference manfoldly constituted. But 
because the determinateness constitutes the essence of the 
Thing, by which it distinguishes itself from other Things and 
is for itself, this further manifold constitution is the unessential 
aspect. Consequently, the Thing does indeed have the twofold 
'in so far' within its unity, but the aspects are unequal in value. 
As a result, this state of opposition does not develop into an 
actual opposition in the Thing itself, but in so far as the Thing 
through its absolute difference comes into a state of opposition, 
it is opposed to another Thing outside of it. Of course, the 
further manifoldness is necessarily present in the Thing too, so 
that it cannot be left out ; but it is the unessential aspect of the 
Thing. 
I 25. This determinateness, which constitutes the essential 
character of the Thing and distinguishes it from all others, is 
now defined in such a way that the Thing is thereby in opposi­
tion to other Things, but is supposed to preserve its indepen­
dence in this opposition. But it is only a Thing, or a One that 
exists on its own account, in so far as it does not stand in this 
relation to others ; for this relation establishes rather its conti­
nuity with others, and for it to be connected with others is to 
cease to exist on its own account. It is just through the absolute 

A. C O N S C I O U SN E S S  
character of the Thing and its opposition that it relates itself to 
others, and is essentially only this relating. The relation, how­
ever, is the negation of its self-subsistence, and it is really the 
essential property of the Thing that is its undoing. 
I 26. The conceptual necessity of the experience through 
which consciousness discovers that the Thing is demolished by 
the very determinateness that constitutes its essence and its 
being-for-self, can be summarized as follows. The Thing is 
posited as beingfor itself, or as the absolute negation of all other­
ness, therefore as purely self-related negation ; but the negation 
that is self-related is the suspension of itself; in other words, the 
Thing has its essential being in another Thing. 
I 27. In fact, the definition of the object, as it has emerged, 
has shown itself to contain nothing else. The object"is defined 
as having within it an essential property which constitutes its 
simple being-for-self; but along with this simple nature the 
object is also to contain diversity which, though necessary, is not 
to constitute its essential determinateness. This, however, is a 
distinction that is still only nominal ; the unessential, which is 
none the less supposed to be necessary, cancels itself out. It is 
what has just been called the negation of itself. 
1 28. With this, the last 'in so far' that separated being-for­
self from being-for-another falls away ; on the contrary, the 
object is in one and the same respect the opposite of itself: it is for itself, 
so far as it is for another, and it is for another, so far as it is for itself. 
It is for itself, reflected into itself, a One ; but this 'for-itself, 
this reflection into itself, this being a One, is posited in a unity 
with its opposite, with its 'being-for-another', and hence only 
as cancelled ; in other words, this being-for-selfis just as unessen­
tial as the only aspect that was supposed to be unessential, viz. 
the relationship to another. 
I 29. Thus the object in its pure determinatenesses, or in the 
determinatenesses which were supposed to constitute its essen­
tial being, is overcome just as surely as it was in its sensuous 
being. From a sensuous being it turned into a universal ; but 
this universal, since it originates in the sensuous, is essentially con­
ditioned by it, and hence is not truly a self-identical universality 
at all, but one afflicted with an opposition ;  for this reason the uni­
versality splits into the extremes of singular individuality and 
universality, into the One ofthe properties, and the Also of the 

P E R C E PT I O N  
77 
'free matters'. These pure determinatenesses seem to express the 
essential nature itself, but they are only a 'being-for-self that 
is burdened with a 'being-for-another'. Since, however, both 
are essentially in a single unity, what we now have is unconditioned 
absolute universality, and consciousness here for the first time truly 
enters the realm of the Understanding. 
I 30. Thus the singular being of sense does indeed vanish in 
the dialectical movement of immediate certainty and becomes 
universality, but it is only a sensuous universality. My 'meaning' 
has vanished, and perception takes the object as it is in itself, 
or as a universal as such. Singular being therefore emerges in the 
object as true singleness, as the in-itself of the One, or as a reflec­
ted ness-into-self. But this is still a conditioned being-for-self along­
side which appears another being-for-self, the universality which 
is opposed to, and conditioned by singular being. But these two 
contradictory extremes are not merely alongside each other but 
in a single unity, or in other words, the defining characteristic 
common to both, viz. 'being-for-self, is burdened with opposi­
tion generally, i.e. it is at the same time not a 'being-for-self . 
The sophistry of perception seeks to save these moments from 
their contradiction, and it seeks to lay hold on the truth, by 
distinguishing between the aspects, by sticking to the 'Also' and 
to the 'in so far', and finally, by distinguishing the 'unessential' 
aspect from an 'essence' which is opposed to it. But these 
expedients, instead of warding off deception in the process of 
apprehension, prove themselves on the contrary to be quite 
empty ; and the truth which is supposed to be won by this logic 
of the perceptual process proves to be in one and the same re­
spect the opposite [of itself] and thus to have as its essence a 
universality which is devoid of distinctions and determinations. 
I 3 I .  These empty abstractions of a 'singleness' and a 'uni­
versality' opposed to it, and of an 'essence' that is linked with 
something unessential-a 'non-essential' aspect which is neces­
sary all the same-these are powers whose interplay is the per­
ceptual understanding, often called 'sound common sense'. 
This 'sound common sense' which takes itself to be a solid, real­
istic consciousness is, in the perceptual process, only the play 
of these abstractions; generally, it is always at its poorest where 
it fancies itself to be the richest. Bandied about by these vacuous 
'essences', thrown into the arms first of one and then of the 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
other, and striving by its sophistry to hold fast and affirm altern­
ately first one of the 'essences' and then the directly opposite 
one, it sets itself against the truth and holds the opinion that 
philosophy is concerned only with mental entities. As a matter 
of fact, philosophy does have to do with them too, recognizing 
them as the pure essences, the absolute elements and powers ; 
but in doing so, recognizes them in their specific determinateness 
as well, and is therefore master over them, whereas perceptual 
understanding [or 'sound common sense'] takes them for the 
truth and is led on by them from one error to another. It does 
not itself become conscious that it is simple essentialities of this 
kind that hold sway over it, but fancies that it has always to 
do with wholly substantial material and content ;  just as sense­
certainty is unaware that the empty abstraction of pure being 
is its essence. But it is, in fact, these essentialities within which 
perceptual understanding runs to and fro through every kind 
of material and content ;  they are the cohesive power and mas­
tery over that content and they alone are what the sensuous 
is as essence for consciousness, they are what determines the rela­
tions of the sensuous to it, and it is in them that the process 
of perception and of its truth runs its course. This course, a per­
petual alternation of determining what is true, and then setting 
aside this determining, constitutes, strictly speaking, the steady 
everyday life and activity of perceptual consciousness, a coo­
sciousness which fancies itself to be moving in the realm of truth. 
It advances uninterruptedly to the outcome in which all these 
essential essentialities or determinations are equally set 
aside ;  but in each single moment it is conscious only of this one 
determinateness as the truth, and then in turn of the opposite one. 
It does indeed suspect their unessentiality, and to save them 
from the danger threatening them it resorts to the sophistry of 
asserting to be true what it has itselfjust declared to be untrue. 
What the nature of these untrue essences is really trying to get 
[perceptual] underૼtanding to do is to bring together, and 
thereby supersede, the thoughts of those non-entities, the 
thoughts of that universality and singular being, of 'Also' and 
'One', of the essentiality that is necessarily linked to the unessen­
tial moment, and of an unessential moment that yet is neces­
sary. But the Understanding struggles to avoid doing this by 
resorting to 'in so far as' and to the various 'aspects', or by mak-

F O R C E  AND T H E  U N D E R S TA N D I N G  
79 
ing itself responsible for one thought in order to keep the other 
one isolated as the true one. But the very nature of these abstrac­
tions brings them together of their own accord. It is 'sound com­
mon sense' that is the prey of these abstractions, which spin 
it round and round in their whirling circle. When common 
sense tries to make them true by at one time making itself re­
sponsible for their untruth, while at another time it calls their 
deceptiveness a semblance of the unreliability of Things, and 
separates what is essential from what is necessary to them yet 
supposedly unessential, holding the former to be their truth as 
against the latter-when it does this, it does not secure them 
their truth, but convicts itself of untruth. 
I I I .  F O R C E  A N D  
T H E  
U N D E RSTAN D I N G :  
A P P E A RA N C E  
A N D  
T H E  
S U PE R S E N S I B L E  
W O R L D  
1 32. I n  the dialectic of sense-certainty, Seeing and Hearing 
have been lost to consciousness ; and, as perception, conscious­
ness has arrived at thoughts, whicp it brings together for the 
first time in the unconditioned universal. This, now, if it were 
taken as an inert simple essence, would itself in turn be nothing 
else than the one-sided extreme of being-for-self, for it would then 
be confronted by non-essence ; but, if it were related to this, 
it would itself be unessential, and consciousness would not have 
escaped from the deceptions of the perceptual process. How­
ever, this universal has proved to be one which has returned 
into itself out of such a conditioned being-for-self. This un­
conditioned universal, which is now the true object of con­
sciousness, is still just an object for it ; consciousness has not yet 
grasped the Notion of the unconditioned as Notion. It is essential 
to distinguish the two : for consciousness, the object has returned 
into itself from its relation to an other and has thus become 
Notion in principle ; but consciousness is not yet for itself the 
Notion, and consequently does not recognize itself in that re­
flected object. For us, this object has developed through the 
movement of consciousness in such a way that consciousness 
is involved in that development, and the reflection is the same 
on both sides, or, there is only one reflection. But since in this 

Bo 
A. CON S C I O U S N E S S  
movement consciousness has for its content merely the objective 
essence and not consciousness as such, the result must have an 
objective significance for consciousness ; consciousness still 
shrinks away from what has emerged, and takes it as the essence 
in the objective sense. 
I 33· With this, the Understanding has indeed superseded its 
own untruth and the untruth of the object. What has emerged 
for it as a result is the Notion of the True-but only as the implicit 
being of the True, which is not yet Notion, or which lacks the 
bring-for-self of consciousness, and which the Understanding, 
without knowing itself therein, lets go its own way. This truth 
follows out its own essence, so that consciousness plays no part 
in its free realization, but merely looks on and simply appre­
hends it. To begin with, therefore, we must step into its place 
and be the Notion which develops and fills out what is con­
tained in the result. It is through awareness of this completely 
developed object, which presents itself to consciousness as some­
thing that immediately is, that consciousness first becomes 
explicitly a consciousness that comprehends [its object]. 
I 34· The result was the unconditioned universal, initially, 
in the negative and abstract sense that consciousness negated 
its one-sided Notions and abstracted them : in other words, it 
gave them up. But the result has, implicitly, a positive signifi­
cance : in it, the unity of 'being-for-self' and 'being-for-another' 
is posited ; in other words, the absolute antithesis is posited as 
a self-identical essence. At first sight, this seems to concern only 
the form of the moments in reciprocal relation ; but 'being-for­
self' and 'being-for-another' are the content itself as well, since 
the antithesis in its truth can have no other nature than the 
one yielded in the result, viz. that the content taken in percep­
tion to be true, belongs in fact only to the form, in the unity 
of which it is dissolved. This content is likewise universal ; there 
can be no other content which by its particular constitution 
would fail to fall within this unconditioned universality. A con­
tent of this kind would be some particular way or other of being 
fm· itself and of being in relation to an other. But, in general, 
to be for itself and to be in relation to an other constitutes the 
nature and essence of the content, whose truth consists in its 
being unconditionally universal ; and the result is simply and 
solely universal. 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S TA N D I N G  
81 
I 35· But because this unconditioned universal is an object 
for consciousness, there emerges in it the distinction ofform and 
content ; and in the shape of content the moments look like 
they did when the-y first presented themselves : on one side, a 
universal medium of many subsistent 'matters', and on the 
other side, a One reflected into itself, in which their indepen­
dence is extinguished. The former is the dissolution of the 
Thing's independence, i.e. the passivity that is a being-for­
another; the latter is being-for-self. We have to see how these 
moments exhibit themselves in the unconditioned universality 
which is their essence. It is clear at the outset that, since they 
exist only in this universality, they are no longer separated from 
one another at all but are in themselves essentially self-supersed­
ing aspects, and what is posited is only their transition into one 
another. 
I 36. One moment, then, appears as the essence that has 
stepped to one side as a universal medium, or as the subsistence 
of independent 'matters'. But the independence of these 'mat­
ters' is nothing else than this medi urn ; in other words, the [ un­
conditioned] universal is simply and solely the plurality of the 
diverse universals of this kind. That within itself the universal 
is in undivided unity with this plurality means, however, that 
these 'matters' are each where the other is ; they mutually inter­
penetrate, but without coming into contact with one another 
because, conversely, the many diverse 'matter5' are equally in­
dependent. This also means that they are absolutely porous, 
or are sublated. This sublation in its turn, this reduction of the 
diversity to a pure being-for-self, is nothing other than the 
medium itself, and this is the independence of the different 'mat­
ters'. In oher words, the 'matters' posited as independent 
directly pass over into their unity, and their unity directly un­
folds its diversity, and this once again reduces itself to unity. 
But this movement is what is called Force. One of its moments, 
the dispersal of the independent 'matters' in their [immediate] 
being, is the expression ofForce ; but Force, taken as that in which 
they have disappeared, is Force proper, Force which has been 
driven back into itself from its expression. First, however, the 
Force which is driven back into itself must express itself; and, 
secondly, it is still Force remaining within itself in the expression, 
just as much as it is expression in this self-containedness. 

A. C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
When we thus preserve the two moments in their immediate 
unity, the Understanding, to which the Notion of Force 
belongs, is strictly speaking the Notion which sustains the dif­
ferent moments qua different ; for, in themselves, they are not sup­
posed to be different. Consequently, the difference exists only 
in thought. That is to say, what has been posited in the fore­
going is in the first instance only the Notion of Force, not its 
reality. In point of fact, however, Force is the unconditioned 
universal which is equally in its own self what it isfor an other; 
or which contains the difference in its own self-:-for difference 
is nothing else than being-for-another. In order, then, that Force 
may in truth be, it must be completely set free from thought, 
it must be posited as the substance of these differences, i.e . .first 
the substance, as this whole Force, remaining essentially in and 
for itself, and then its di.ferences as possessing substantial being, or 
as moments existing on their own account. Force as such, or 
as driven back into itself, thus exists on its own account as an 
exclusive One, for which the unfolding of the [different] 'matters' 
is another subsisting essence ; and thus two distinct independent 
aspects are set up. But Force is also the whole, i.e. it remains 
what it is according to its Notion ; that is to say, these di.ferences 
remain pure forms, superficial vanishing moments. At the same 
time there would be no difference at all between Force proper 
which has been driven back into itself, and Force unfolded into 
independent 'matters', if they had no enduring being, or, there 
would be no Force if it did not exist in these opposite ways. 
But that it does exist in these opposite ways simply means 
that the two moments are at the same time themselves in­
dependent. It is therefore this movement of the two moments 
in which they perpetually give themselves independence 
and then supersede themselves again which we are now to 
consider. 
In general, it is clear that this movement is nothing else than 
the movement of perceiving, in which the two sides, the per­
cipient and what is perceived, are indistinguishably one in the 
apprehension of the True, and yet each side is at the same time 
equally reflected into itself, or has a being of its own. Here, these 
two sides are moments of Force ; they are just as much in a unity, 
as this unity, which appears as the middle term over against 
the independent extremes, is a perpetual diremption of itself 

F O R C E  A N D  TH E U N D E R S TA N D I N G  
into just these extremes which exist only through this process. 
Thus the movement which previously displayed itself as the self­
destruction of contradictory Notions here has obJective form and 
is the movement of Force, the outcome of which is the un­
conditioned universal as something not objective, or as the inner 
being of Things. 
I 3 7. Force, as thus determined, since it is conceived as Force 
or as reflected into itself, is one side of its Notion, but posited as 
a substantial extreme and, moreover, with the express character 
of a One. The subsistence of the unfolded 'matters' outside of 
Force is thus precluded and is something other than Force. 
Since it is necessary that Force itself be this subsistence, or that 
it express itself, its expression presents itself in this wise, that the 
said 'other' approaches it and solicits it. But, as a matter of fact, 
since its expression is necessary, what is posited as another essence 
is in Force itself. We must retract the assertion that Force is 
posited as a One, and that its essence is to express itself as an 
'other' which approaches it externally. Force is rather itself this 
universal medium in which the moments subsist as 'matters' ; 
or, in other words, Force has expressed itself, and what was sup­
posed to be something else soliciting it is really Force itself. It 
exists, therefore, now as the medium of the unfolded 'matters'. 
But equally essentially it has the form of the supersession of the 
subsisting 'matters', or is essentially a One. Consequently, this 
oneness, since Force is posited as the medium of the 'matters', 
is now something other than Force, which has this its essence out­
side of it. But, since Force must of necessity be this oneness 
which it is not as yet posited as being, this 'other' approaches it, 
soliciting it to reflect itself into itself: in other words, Force 
supersedes its expression. But in fact Force is itself this reflected­
ness-into-self, or this supersession of the expression. The one­
ness, in the form in which it appeared, viz. as an 'other', 
vanishes ; Force is this 'other' itself, is Force that is driven back 
into itself. 
I 38. What appears as an 'other' and solicits Force, both to 
expression and to a return into itself, directly proves to be itself 
Force ; for the 'other' shows itself to be as much a universal 
medium as a One, and in such a way that each of these forms 
at the same time appears only as a vanishing moment. Con­
sequently, Force, in that there is an 'other' for it, and it is for 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N ES S  
an 'other', has not yet altogether emerged from its Notion. 
There are at the same time two Forces present ; the Notion of 
both is no doubt the same, but it has gone forth from its unity 
into a duality. Instead of the antithesis remaining entirely and 
essentially only a moment, it seems, by its self-diremption into 
two wholly independent forces, to have withdrawn from the con­
trolling unity. We have now to see more closely the implications 
of this independence. 
In the first place, the second Force appears as the one that 
solicits and, moreover, in accordance with its content, as the 
universal medium in relation to the Force characterized as the 
one solicited. But since the second Force is essentially an 
alternation of these two moments and is itselfForce, it is likewise 
the universal medium only through its being solicited to be such ; and 
similarly, too, it is a negative unity, i.e. it solicits the retraction 
of Force [into itself], only through its being solicited to do so. Con­
sequently, this distinction, too, which obtained between the two 
Forces, one of which was supposed to be the soliciting, the other 
the solicited, Force is transformed into the same reciprocal 
interchange of the determinatenesses. 
1 39. The interplay of the two Forces thus consists in their 
being determined as mutually opposed, in their being for one 
another in this determination, and in the absolute, immediate 
alternation of the determinations-consists, i.e. in a transition 
through which alone these determinations are in which the 
Forces seem to make an independent appearance. The soliciting 
Force, e.g., is posited as a universal medium, and the one soli­
cited, on the other hand, as Force driven back into itself; but 
the former is a universal medium only through the other being 
Force that is driven back into itself; or, it is really the latter that 
is the soliciting Force for the other and is what makes it a 
medium. The first Force has its determinateness only through 
the other, and solicits only in so far as the other solicits it to 
be a soliciting Force ; and, just as directly, it loses the deter­
minateness given to it, for this passes over-or rather has 
already passed over-to the other. The external, soliciting 
Force appears as a universal medium, but only through its hav­
ing been solicited by the other Force to do so ; but this means 
that the latter gives it that character and is really itself essentially 
a universal medium ; it gives the soliciting Force this character 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N DE R STAN D I N G  
just because this other determination is essential to it, 1.e. 
because this is really its own self. 
I 40. To complete our insight into the Notion of this move­
ment it may further be noticed that the differences themselves 
are exhibited in a twofold difference : once as a difference of 
content, one extreme being the Force reflected into itself, but the 
other the medium of the 'matters' ; and again as a difference 
ofform, since one solicits and the other is solicited, the former 
being active and the other passive. According to the difference 
of content they are distinguished [merely] in principle, or for 
us; but according to the difference ofform they are independent 
and in their relation keep themselves separate and opposed to 
one another. The fact that the extremes, from the standpoint 
ofboth these sides, are thus nothing in themselves, that these sides 
in which their different essences were supposed to consist are 
only vanishing moments, are an immediate transition of each 
into its opposite, this truth becomes apparent to consciousness 
in its perception of the movement of Force. But for us, as 
remarked above, something more was apparent, viz. that the 
differences, qua diferences of content and form, vanished in them­
selves ; and on the side of form, the essence of the active, soliciting 
or independent side, was the same as that which, on the side of 
content, presented itself as Force driven back into itself; the 
side which was passive, which was solicited or for an other, was, 
from the side of form, the same as that which, from the side 
of content, presented itself as the universal medium of the many 
'matters'. 
I 4 I. From this we see that the N otion of Force becomes actual 
through its duplication into two Forces, and how it comes to 
be so. These two Forces exist as independent essences ; but their 
existence is a movement of each towards the other, such that 
their being is rather a pure positedness or a being that is posited 
by an other, i.e. their being has really the significance of a sheer 
vanishing. They do not exist as extremes which retain for them­
selves something fixed and substantial, transmitting to one 
another in their middle term and in their contact a merely 
external property ; on the contrary, what they are, they are, 
only in this middle term and in this contact. In this, there is 
immediately present both the repression within itself of Force, 
or its being-for-self, as well as its expression : Force that solicits 

86 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
and Force that is solicited. Consequently, these moments are 
not divided into two independent extremes offering each other 
only an opposite extreme : their essence rather consists simply 
and solely in this, that each is solely through the other, and 
what each thus is it immediately no longer is, since it is the 
other. They have thus, in fact, no substances of their own which 
might support and maintain them. The Notion of Force rather 
preserves itself as the ::ssence in its very actuality ; Force, as actual, 
exists simply and solely in its expression, which at the same time 
is nothing else than a supersession of itself. This actual Force, 
when thought of as free from its expression and as being for 
itself, is Force driven back into itself; but in fact this deter­
minateness, as we have found, is itself only a moment of Force's 
expression. Thus the truth of Force remains only the thought of 
it ; the moments of its actuality, their substances and their move­
ment, collapse unresistingly into an undifferentiated unity, a 
unity which is not Force driven back into itself (for this is itself 
only such a moment) , but is its Notion qua Notion. Thus the real­
ization of Force is at the same time the loss of reality ; in that 
realization it has really become something quite different, viz. 
this universality, which the Understanding knows at the outset, 
or immediately, to be its essence and which also proves itself 
to be such in the supposed reality of Force, in the actual sub­
stances. 
I 42. In so far as we regard the first universal as the Under­
standing's Notion in which Force is not yetfor itself, the second 
is now Force's essence as it exhibits itself in and for itself. Or, 
conversely, if we regard the first universal as the Immediate, 
which was supposed to be an actual object for consciousness, then 
this second is determined as the negative of Force that is objective 
to sense ; it is Force in the form of its true essence in which it 
exists only as an object for the Understanding. The first universal 
would be Force driven back into itself, or Force as Substance ; 
the second, however, is the inner being of things qua inner, which 
is the same as the Notion of Force qua Notion. 
I 43· This true essence of Things has now the character of 
not being immediately for consciousness ; on the contrary, con­
sciousness has a mediated relation to the inner being and, as 
the Understanding, looks through this mediating play of Forces into 
the true background of Things. The middle term which unites the 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S TA N D I N G  
two extremes, the Understanding and the inner world, is the 
developed being of Force which, for the Understanding itself, 
is henceforth only a vanishing. This 'being' is therefore called 
appearance ; for we call being that is directly and in its own self 
a non-being a surface show. But it is not merely a surface show ; 
it is appearance, a totality of show. This totality, as totality or 
as a universal, is what constitutes the inner [of Things], the play 
of Forces as a reflection of the inner into itself. In it, the Things 
of perception are expressly present for consciousness as they are 
in themselves, viz. as moments which immediately and without 
rest or stay turn into their opposite, the One immediately into 
the universal, the essential immediately into the unessential, 
and vice versa. This play of Forces is consequently the de­
veloped negative ;  but its truth is the positive, viz. the universal, 
the object that, in itself, possesses being. The being of this object 
for consciousness is mediated by the movement of appearance, 
in which the being of perception and the sensuously objective in 
general has a merely negative significance. Consciousness, 
therefore, reflects itself out of this movement back into itself as 
the True ; but, qua consciousness, converts this truth again into 
an objective inner, and distinguishes this reflection of Things 
from its own reflection into itself: just as the movement of 
mediation is likewise still objective for it. This inner is, there­
fore, for consciousness an extreme over against it ; but it is for 
consciousness the True, since in the inner, as the in-itself, it pos­
sesses at the same time the certainty of itself, or the moment 
of its being-for-self. But it is not yet conscious of this ground 
or basis, for the being-for-self which the inner was supposed to 
possess in its own self would be nothing else but the negative 
movement. This, however, is for consciousness still the objective 
vanishing appearance, not yet its own being-for-self. Con­
sequently, the inner is for it certainly Notion, but it does not 
as yet know the nature of the Notion. 
I 44· Within this inner truth, as the absolute universal which has 
been purged of the antithesis between the universal and the in­
dividual and has become the object of the Understanding, there 
now opens up above the sensuous world, which is the world of 
appearance, a supersensible world which henceforth is the true 
world, above the vanishing present world there opens up a 
permanent beyond; an in-itself which is the first, and therefore 

88 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
imperfect, appearance of Reason, or only the pure element in 
which the truth has its essence. 
I 45· Our object is thus from now on the syllogism which has 
for its extremes the inner being of Things and the Understand­
ing, and for its middle term, appearance ; but the movement 
of this syllogism yields the further determination of what the 
Understanding descries in this inner world through the middle 
term, and the experience from which Understanding learns 
about the close-linked unity of these terms. 
I 46. The inner world is, for consciousness, still a pure beyond, 
because consciousness does not as yet find itself in it. It is empty, 
for it is merely the nothingness of appearance, and positively 
the simple or unitary universal. This "mode of the inner being 
[of Things] finds ready acceptance by those who say that the 
inner being of Things is unknowable ; but another reason for 
this would have to be given. Certainly, we have no knowledge 
of this inner world as it is here in its immediacy ; but not because 
Reason is too short-sighted or is limited, or however else one 
likes to call it--on this point, we know nothing as yet because 
we have not yet gone deep enough-but because of the simple 
nature of the matter in hand, that is to say, because in the void 
nothing is known, or, expressed from the other side, just because 
this inner world is determined as the beyond of consciousness. 
The result is, of course the same if a blind man is placed amid 
the wealth of the supersensible world (if it has such wealth, 
whether it be its own peculiar content, or whether consciousness 
itself be this content) , and if one with sight is placed in pure 
darkness, or if you like, in pure light, just supposing the super­
sensible world to be this. The man with sight sees as little in 
that pure light as in pure darkness, and just as much as the 
blind man, in the abundant wealth which lies before him. If 
no further significance attached to the inner world and to our 
close link with it through the world of appearance, then nothing 
would be left to us but to stop at the world of appearance, i.e. 
to perceive something as true which we know is not true. Or, 
in order that there may yet be something in the void-which, 
though it first came about as devoid of objective Things must, 
however, as empty in itself, be taken as also void of all spiritual 
relationships and distinctions of consciousness qua conscious­
ness-in order, then, that in this complete void, which is even 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S T A N D I N G  
8g 
called the holy of holies, there may yet be something, we must 
fill it up with reveries, appearances, produced by consciousness 
itself. It would have to be content with being treated so badly 
for it would not deserve anything better, since even reveries are 
better than its own emptiness. 
l 47· The inner world, or supersensible beyond, has, how­
ever, come into being: it comes from the world of appearance which 
has mediated it ; in other words, appearance is its essence and, 
in fact, its filling. The supersensible is the sensuous and the per­
ceived posited as it is in truth ; but the truth of the sensuous and 
the perceived is to be appearance. The supersensible is therefore 
appearance qua appearance. We completely misunderstand this if 
we think that the supersensible world is therefore the sensuous 
world, or the world as it exists for immediate sense-certainty 
and perception ; for the world of appearance is, on the contrary, 
not the world of sense-knowledge and perception as a world 
that positively is, but this world posited as superseded, or as 
in truth an inner world. It is often said that the supersensible 
world is not appearance ; but what is here understood by appear­
ance is not appearance, but rather the sensuous world as itself 
the really actual. 
1 48. The Understanding, which is our object, finds itself in 
just this position, that the inner world has come into being for 
it, to begin with, only as the universal, still unfilled, in-itself. 
The play ofForces has merely this negative significance of being 
in itself nothing, and its only positive significance that of being 
the mediating agency, but outside of the Understanding. The con­
nection of the Understanding with the inner world through the 
mediation is, however, its own movement through which the 
inner world will fill itself out for the Understanding. What is 
immediate for the Understanding is the play ofForces ; but what 
is the True for it, is the simple inner world. The movement of 
Force is therefore the True, likewise only as something alto­
gether simple. We have seen, however, that this play of Forces 
is so constituted that the Force which is solicited by another 
Force is equally the soliciting Force for that other, which only 
thereby becomes itself a soliciting Force. What is present in this 
interplay is likewise merely the immediate alternation, or the 
absolute interchange, of the determinateness which constitutes the 
sole content of what appears : to be either a universal medium, 

go 
A. C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
or a negative unity. It ceases immediately on its appearance 
in determinate form to be what it was on appearing ; by appear­
ing in determinate form, it solicits the other side to express itself, 
i.e. the latter is now immediately what the first was supposed 
to be. Each of these two sides, the relation of soliciting and the 
relation of the opposed determinate content, is on its own account 
an absolute reversal and interchange [of the determinateness]. 
But these two relations themselves are again one and the same ; 
and the difference ofform, of being the solicited and the solicit­
ing Force, is the same as the difference of content, of being the 
solicited Force as such, viz. the passive medium on the one 
hand, ૽nd the soliciting Force, the active, negative unity or the 
One, on the other. In this way there vanishes completely all 
distinction of separate, mutually contrasted Forces which were 
supposed to be present in this movement, for they rested solely 
on those distinctions ; and the distinction between the Forces, 
:1long with both those distinctions, likewise collapses into only 
one. Thus there is neither Force, nor the act of soliciting or 
being solicited, nor the determinateness of being a stable 
medium and a unity reflected into itself, there is neither some­
thing existing singly by itself, nor are there diverse antitheses ; 
on the contrary, what there is in this absolute flux is only dif­
ference as a universal difference, or as a difference into which the 
many antitheses have been resolved. This difference, as a uni-
versal difference, is consequently the simple element in the play of 
Force itself and what is true in it. It is the law of Force. 
r 49· The absolute flux of appearance becomes a simple dif­
ference through its relation to the simplicity of the inner world 
or ofthe Understanding. The inner being is, to begin with, only 
implicitly the universal ; but this implicit, simple universal is 
essentially no less absolutely universal diference, for it is the out­
come of the flux itself, or the flux is its essence ; but it is a flux 
that is posited in the inner world as it is in truth, and consequently 
it is received in that inner world as equally an absolute univer­
sal difference that is absolutely at rest and remains selfsame. In 
other words, negation is an essential moment of the universal, 
and negation, or mediation in the universal, is therefore a uni­
versal diference. This difference is expressed in the law, which 
is the stable image of unstable appearance. Consequently, the 
super sensible world is an inert realm of laws which, though beyond 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N DE RSTAN D I N G  
the perceived world-for this exhibits law only through incess­
ant change-is equally present in it and is its direct tranquil 
image. 
1 so. This realm of Ia ws is indeed the truth for the Under­
standing, and that truth has its content in the law. At the same 
time, however, this realm is only the initial truth for the Under­
standing and does not fill out the world of appearance. In this 
the law is present, but is not the entire presence of appearance ; 
with every change of circumstance the law has a different actu­
'ality. Thus appearance retainsfor itself an aspect which is not 
in the inner world ; i.e. appearance is not yet truly posited as 
appearance, as a superseded being-for-self. This defect in the law 
must equally be made manifest in the law itself. What seems 
to be defective in it is that while it does contain difference, the 
difference is universal, indeterminate. However, in so far as it 
is not law in general, but a law, it does contain determinateness ; 
consequently, there are indefinitely many laws. But this plurality 
is itself rather a defect; for it contradicts the principle of the 
Understanding for which, as consciousness of the simple inner 
world, the True is the implicitly universal unity. It must there­
fore let the many laws collapse into one law, just as, e.g., the 
law by which a stone falls, and the law by which the heavenly 
bodies move, have been grasped as one law. But when the laws 
thus coincide, they lose their specific character. The law 
becomes more and more superficial, and as a result what is 
found is, in fact, not the unity of these specific laws, but a law 
which leaves out their specific character ; just as the one law 
which combines in itself the laws offalling terrestrial bodies and 
of the motions of the heavenly bodies, in fact expresses neither 
law. The unification of all laws in universal attraction expresses 
no other content than just the mere Notion of law itself, which 
is posited in that law in the form of being. Universal attraction 
merely asserts that everything has a constant difference in relation to 
other things. The Understanding imagines that in this unifica­
tion it has found a universal law which expresses universal 
reality as such ; but in fact it has only found the Notion of law 
itself, although in such a way that what it is saying is that all 
reality is in its own self, conformable to law. The expression, uni­
versal attraction, is of great importance in so far as it is directed 
against the thoughtless way in which everything is pictured as 

A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
contingent, and for which determinateness has the form of sen­
suous independence. 
I 5 r .  Thus, in contrast to specific laws, we have universal 
attraction, or the pure Notion of law. In so far as this pure 
Notion is looked on as the essence, or the true inner being, the 
determinateness of the specific law itself still belongs to appear­
ance, or rather to sensuous being. But the pure Notion of law 
transcends not merely the law which, being itself a specific law, 
stands contrasted with other specific laws, but also transcends 
law as such. The determinateness of which we spoke is itself. 
really only a vanishing moment which can no longer occur here 
as something essential, for here it is only the law that is the True ; 
but the Notion oflaw is turned against law itself. That is to say, 
in the law the difference itself is grasped immediately and taken 
up into the universal, thereby, however, giving the moments 
whose relation is expressed by the law a subsistence in the form 
of indifferent and [merely] implicit essentialities. But these 
parts of the difference present in the law are at the same time 
themselves determinate sides ; the pure Notion of law as uni­
versal attraction must, to get its true meaning, be grasped in 
such a way that in it, as what is absolutely simple or unitary, 
the differences present in law as such themselves return again 
into the inner world as a simple unity. This unity is the inner necessity 
of the law. 
I 52. The law is thereby present in a twofold manner : once, as 
law in which the differences are expressed as independent mom­
ents ; and also in the form of a simple withdrawal into itself which 
again can be called Force, but in the sense not of a Force that is 
driven backintoitself, butForceassuch, or the Notion ofForce, an 
abstraction which absorbs the differences themselves of what 
attracts and what is attracted. In this sense, simple electricity, 
e.g., is Force ; but the expression of difference falls within the 
law ; this difference is positive and negative electricity. In the 
case of the motion of falling, Force is the simple factor, gravity, 
whose law is that the magnitudes of the different moments of 
the motion, the time elapsed and the space traversed, are related 
to one another as root and square. Electricity itself is not dif­
ference per se, or is not in its essence the dual essence of positive 
and negative electricity ; hence, it is usually said that it has the 
law of this mode of being, and, too, that it has the property of 

FO R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E RSTAN D I N G  
93 
expressing itself in this way. It is true that this property is the 
essential and sole property of this Force, or that it belongs to 
it necessarily. But necessity here is an empty word ; Force must, 
just because it must, duplicate itself in this way. Of course, given 
positive electricity, negative too is given in principle; for the posi­
tive is, only as related to a negative, or, the positive is in its 
own self the difference from itself; and similarly with the nega­
tive. But that electricity as such should divide itself in this way 
is not in itself a necessity. Electricity, as simple Force, is indifferent 
to its law-to be positive and negative ; and if we call the former 
its Notion but the latter its being, then its Notion is indifferent 
to its being. It merely has this property, which just means that 
this property is not in itself necessary to it. This indifference is 
given another form when it is said that to be positive and nega­
tive belongs to the definition of electricity, and that this is simply 
its Notion and essence. In that case, its being would simply mean 
its actual existence. But that definition does not contain the 
necessity of its existence; it exists, either because wefind it, i.e. its 
existence is not necessary at all, or else it exists through, or by 
means of, other Forces, i.e. its necessity is an external necessity. 
But, in basing this necessity on the determinateness of being 
through another, we relapse again into the plurality of specific laws 
which we have just left behind in order to consider law as law. 
It is only with law as law that we are to compare its Notion 
as Notion, or its necessity. But in all these forms, necessity has 
shown itself to be only an empty word. 
r 53· There is still another form than that just indicated in 
which the indifference oflaw and Force, or of Notion and being, 
is to be found. In the law of motion, e.g., it is necessary that 
motion be split up into time and space, or again, into distance 
and velocity. Thus, since motion is only the relation of these 
factors, it-the universal-is certainly divided in its own self. But 
now these parts, time and space, or distance and velocity, do 
not in themselves express this origin in a One ; they are in­
different to one another, space is thought of as able to be with­
out time, time without space, and distance at least without 
velocity-just as their magnitudes are indifferent to one 
another, since they are not related to one another as positive and 
negative, and thus are not related to one another through their 
own essential nature. The necessity of the division is thus certainly 

94 
A. C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
present here, but not the necessity of the parts as such for one 
another. But it is just for this reason that that first necessity, 
too, is itself only a sham, false necessity. For motion is not itself 
thought of as something simple, or as a pure essence, but as 
already divided ; time and space are in themselves its independent 
parts or essences, or, distance and veloci૾y are modes of being 
or ways of thinking, either of which can well be without the 
other; and motion is, therefore, only their superficial relation, 
not their essence. If it is thought of as a simple essence or as 
Force, motion is no doubt gravity, but this does not contain these 
differences at all. 
r 54· The difference, then, in both cases is not a difference 
in its own self: either the universal, Force, is indifferent to the 
division which is the law, or the differences, the parts, of the 
law are indifferent to one another. The Understanding, how­
ever, has the Notion of this implicit diference just because the law 
is, on the one hand, the inner, implicit being, but is, at the same 
time, inwardly differentiated. That this difference is thus an 
inner difference follows from the fact that the law is a simple Force 
or is the Notion of the difference, and is therefore a difference 
belonging to the Notion. But this inner difference still falls, to 
begin with, only within the Understanding, and is aot yet 
posited in the thing itself. It is, therefore, only its OWf! necessity 
that is asserted by the Understanding ; the difference, then, is 
posited by the Understanding in such a way that, at the same 
time, it is expressly stated that the difference is not a difference 
belonging to the thing itself. This necessity, which is merely verbal, 
is thus a recital of the moments constituting the cycle of the 
necessity. The moments are indeed distinguished, but, at the 
same time,_their d;fference is expressly said to be not a difference 
of the thing itself, and consequently is itself immediately can­
celled again. This process is called 'explanation'. A law is enunci­
ated ; from this, its implicitly universal element or ground is 
distinguished as Force; but it is said that this difference is no 
difference, rather that the ground is constituted exactly the 
same as the law. The single occurrence of lightning, e.g., is 
apprehended as a universal, and this universal is enunciated 
as the law of electricity; the 'explanation' then condenses the 
law into Force as the essence of the law. This Force, then, is so 
constituted that when it is expressed, opposite e૿ectricities appear, 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S TA N D I N G  
95 
which disappear again into one another ; that is, Force is con­
stituted exactly the same as law ; there is said to be no difference 
whatever between them. The differences are the pure, universal 
expression oflaw, and pure Force ; but both have the same con­
tent, the same constitution. Thus the difference qua difference 
of content, of the thing, is also again withdrawn. 
1 55. In this tautological movement, the Understanding, as 
we have seen, sticks to the inert unity of its object, and the move­
ment falls only within the Understanding itself଀ not within the 
object. It is an explanation that not only explains nothing, but 
is so plain that, while it pretends to say something different from 
what has already been said, really says nothing at all but only 
repeats the same thing. In the Thing itself this movement gives 
rise to nothing new ; it comes into consideration [only] as a 
movement of the Understanding. In it, however, we detect the 
very thing that was missing in the law, viz. the absolute flux 
itself; for this movement, when we look at it more closely, is 
directly the opposite ofitself. That is to say, it posits a difference 
which is not only not a difference for us, but one which the move­
ment itself cancels as a difference. This is the same flux which 
presented itself as the play of Forces. This contained the dis­
tinction of soliciting and solicited Force, or Force expressing 
itself and Force repressed into itself; but these were distinctions 
which in reality were no distinctions, and therefore were also 
immediately cancelled again. What is present here is not merely 
bare unity in which no diference would be posited, but rather a 
movement in which a distinction is certainly made but, because it is 
no distinction, is again cancelled. In the process, then, of explain­
ing, the to and fro of change which before was outside of 
the inner world and present only in the appearance, has pene­
trated into the supersensible world itself. Our consciousness, 
however, has passed over from the inner being as object to the 
other side, into the Understanding, and it experiences change 
there. 
I 56. Thus this change is not yet a change of the thing· itself, 
but rather presents itself as pure change by the very fact that 
the content of the moments of change remains the same. But since 
the Notion, qua Notion of the Understanding, is the same as the 
inner being of things, this change becomes for the Understanding 
the law of the inner world. The Understanding thus learns that 

g6 
A .  C ON S C I O U S N E S S  
it is a law of appearance itself, that differences arise which are 
no differences, or that what is selfsame repels itself from itself; 
and similarly, that the differences are only such as are in reality 
no differences and which cancel themselves ; in other words, 
what is not selfsame is self-attractive. And thus we have a second 
law whose content is the opposite of what was previously called 
law, viz. difference which remains constantly selfsame ; for this 
new law expresses rather that like becomes unlike and unlike 
becomes like. The Notion demands of the thoughtless thinker 
that he bring both laws together and become aware of their 
antithesis. The second is certainly also a law, an inner self­
identical being, but a selfsameness rather of the unlike, a per­
manence of impermanence. In the play of Forces this law 
showed itself to be precisely this absolute transition and pure 
change ; the selfsame, viz. Force, splits into an antithesis which 
at first appears to be an independent difference, but which in 
fact proves to be none; for it is the selfsame which repels itselffrom 
itself, and therefore what is repelled is essentially self-attractive, 
for it is the same ; the difference created, since it is no difference, 
therefore cancels itself again. Consequently, the difference 
exhibits itself as difference of the thing itself or as absolute dif­
ference, and this difference of the thing is thus nothing else but 
the selfsame that has repelled itself from itself, and therefore 
merely posits an antithesis which is none. 
1 57. Through this principle, the first supersensible world, 
the tranquil kingdom of laws, the immediate copy of the per­
ceived world, is changed into its opposite. The law was, in 
general, like its differences, that which remains selfsame ; now, 
however, it is posited that each of the two worlds is really the 
opposite of itself. The selfsame really repels itselffrom itself, and 
what is not selfsame really posits itself as selfsame. In point of 
fact, it is only when thus determined that the difference is inner 
difference, or the difference in its own self, the like being unlike 
itself, and the unlike, like itself. This second supersensible world is 
in this way the inverted world and, moreover, since one aspect 
is already present in the first supersensible world, the inversion 
of the first. With this, the inner world is completed as appear­
ance. For the first supersensible world was only the immediate 
raising of the perceived world into the universal element; it had 
its necessary counterpart in this perceived world which still 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  UN D E R S TA N D I N G  
97 
retained for itself the principle of change and alteration. The first 
kingdom of laws lacked that principle, but obtains it as an in­
verted world. 
I s8. According, then, to the law of this inverted world, what 
is like in the first world is unlike to itself, and what is unlike in 
the first world is equally unlike to itself, or it becomes like itself. 
Expressed in determinate moments, this means that what in 
the law of the first world is sweet, in this inverted in-itself is 
sour, what in the former is black is, in the other, white. What 
in the law of the first is the north pole of the magnet is, in its 
other, supersensible in-itself [ viz. in the earth), the south pole ; 
but what is there south pole is here north pole. Similarly, what 
in the first law is the oxygen pole of electricity becomes in its 
other, supersensible essence, hydrogen pole ; and conversely, 
what is there the hydrogen pole becomes here the oxygen pole. 
In another sphere, revenge on an enemy is, according to the 
immediate law, the supreme satisfaction of the injured individu­
ality. This law, however, which bids me confront him as him­
self a person who does not treat me as such, and in fact bids 
me destroy him as an individuality-this law is turned round by 
the principle of the other world into its opposite : the reinstate­
ment of myself as a person through the destruction of the alien 
individuality is turned in to self-destruction. If, now, this in­
version, which finds expression in the punishment of crime, is 
made into a law, it, too, again is only the law of one world which 
is confronted by an inverted supersensible world where what is 
despised in the former is honoured,. and what in the former is 
honoured, meets with contempt. The punishment which under 
the law of the first world disgraces and destroys a man, is trans­
formed in its inverted world into the pardon which preserves his 
essential being and brings him to honour. 
I 59· Looked at superficially, this inverted world is the oppo­
site of the first in the sense that it has the latter outside of it 
and repels that world from itself as an inverted actual world: that 
the one is appearance, but the other the in-itself; that the one 
is the world as it is for an other, whereas the other is the world 
as it is for itself. So that to use the previous examples, what 
tastes sweet is really, or inwardly in the thing, sour ; or what is 
north pole in the actual magnet in the world of appearance, 
would be south pole in the inner or essential being ; what presents 

gB 
A. C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
itself as oxygen pole in the phenomenon of electricity would 
be hydrogen pole in unmanifested electricity. Or, an action 
which in the world of appearance is a crime would, in the inner 
world, be capable of being really good (a bad action may be 
well-intentioned) ;  punishment is punishment only in the world 
of appearance; in itself, or in another world, it may be a benefit 
for the criminal. But such antitheses of inner and outer, of 
appearance and the supersensible, as of two different kinds of 
actuality, we no longer find here. The repelled differences are 
not shared afresh between two substances such as would support 
them and lend them a separate subsistence :  this would result 
in the Understanding withdrawing from the inner world and 
relapsing into its previous position. The one side, or substance, 
would be the world of perception again in which one of the 
two laws would be operative, and confronting it would be an 
inner world,just such a sense-world as the first, but in the imagina­
tion ; it could not be exhibited as a sense-world, could not be 
seen, heard, or tasted, and yet it would be thought of as such 
a sense-world. But, in fact, if the one posited world is a perceived 
world, and its in-itself, as its inversion, is equally thought of as 
sensuous, then sourness which would be the in-itself of the sweet 
thing is actually a thing just as much as the latter, viz. a sour 
thing; black, which would be the in-itself of white, is an actual 
black ; the north pole which is the in-itself of the south pole is 
the north pole actually present in the same magnet; the oxygen pole 
which is the in-itself of the hydrogen pole is actually present in 
the same voltaic pile. The actual crime, however, has its inversion 
and its in-itself as possibility, in the intention as such, but not in 
a good intention ; for the truth of intention is only the act itself. 
But the crime, as regards its content, has its reflection-into-self, 
or its inversion, in the actual punishment ;  this is the reconcilia­
tion of the law with the actuality opposed to it in the crime. 
Finally, the actual punishment has its inverted actuality present 
in it in such a way that the punishment is an actualization of 
the law, whereby the activity exercised by the law as punish­
ment suspends itself, and, from being active, the law becomes 
again quiescent and is vindicated, and the conflict of individu­
ality with it, and of it with individuality, is extinguished. 
1 60. From the idea, then, of inversion, which constitutes the 
essential nature of one aspect of the supersensible world, we 

FO R C E A N D  T H E  U N DE R S TA N D I N G  
99 
must eliminate the sensuous idea of fixing the differences in a 
different sustaining element ; and this absolute Notion of the dif­
ference must be represented and understood purely as inner dif­
ference, a repulsion of the selfsame, as selfsame, from itself: and 
likeness of the unlike as unlike. We have to think pure change, 
or think antithesis within the antithesis itself, or contradiction. For in 
the difference which is an inner difference, the opposite is not 
merely one of two-if it were, it would simply be, without being 
an opposite-but it is the opposite of an opposite, or the other 
is itselfimmedia tely present in it. Certainly, I put the 'opposite' 
here, and the 'other' of which it is the opposite, there ; the 'oppo­
site', then, is on one side, is in and for itselfwithout the 'other'. 
But just because I have the 'opposite' here in and for itself, it is the 
opposite of itself, or it has, in fact, the 'other' immediately 
present in it. Thus the supersensible world, which is the inverted 
world, has at the same time overarched the other world and 
has it within it ; it is for itself the inverted world, i.e. the inversion 
of itself; it is itself and its opposite in one unity. Only thus is 
it difference as inner difference, or difference in its own self, or 
difference as an infinity. 
1 6 1 .  We see that through infinity, law completes itself into 
an immanent necessity, and all the moments of [the world of] 
appearance are taken up into the inner world. That the simple 
character of law is infinity means, according to what we have 
found, (a) that it is self-identical, but is also in itself dijferent ;  or it 
is the selfsame which repels itselffrom itself or sunders itself into 
two. What was called simple Force duplicates itself and through 
its infinity is law. (b) What is thus dirempted, which constitutes 
the parts thought of as in the law, exhibits itself as a stable exist­
ence ; and ifthe parts are considered without the Notion of the 
inner difference, then space and time, or distance and velocity, 
which appear as moments of gravity, are just as indifferent and 
without a necessary relation to one another as to gravity itself, 
or, as this simple gravity is indifferent to them, or, again, as 
simple electricity is indifferent to positive and negative elec­
tricity. But (c) through the Notion of inner difference, these 
unlike and indifferent moments, space and time, etc. are a dif­
ference which is no diference, or only a difference of what is self­
same, and its essence is unity. As positive and negative they 
stimulate each other into activity, and their being is rather to 

100 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
posit themselves as not-being and to suspend themselves in the 
unity. The two distinguished moments both subsist; they are 
implicit and are opposites in themselves, i.e. each is the opposite 
of itself; each has its 'other' within it and they are only ohe 
unity. 
1 62. This simple infinity, or the absolute Notion, may be 
called the simple essence of life, the soul of the world, the uni­
versal blood, whose omnipresence is neither disturbed nor inter­
rupted by any difference, but rather is itself every difference, 
as also their supersession ; it pulsates within itself but does not 
move, inwardly vibrates, yet is at rest. It is self-identical, for the 
differences are tautological ; they are differences that are none. 
This self-identical essence is therefore related only to itself; 'to 
itself implies relationship to an 'other', and the relation-to-self 
is rather a self-sundering; or, in other words, that very self-identi­
calness is an inner difference. These sundered moments are thus 
in and for themselves each an opposite-of an other; thus in each 
moment the 'other' is at the same time expressed ; or each is 
not the opposite of an 'other' but only a pure opposite; and so 
each is therefore in its own self the opposite of itself. In other 
words, it is not an opposite at all, but is purely for itself, a pure, 
self-identical essence that has no difference in it. Accordingly, 
we do not need to ask the question, still less to think that fretting 
over such a question is philosophy, or even that it is a question 
philosophy cannot answer, the question, viz. 'How, from this 
pure essence, how does difference or otherness issue forth from 
it?' For the division into two moments has already taken place, 
difference is excluded from the self-identical and set apart from 
it. What was supposed to be the self-identical is thus already one 
of these two moments instead of being the absolute essence. 
That the self-identical divides itself into two means, therefore, 
just as well that it supersedes itself as already divided, supersedes 
itself as an otherness. The unity, of which it is usual to say that 
difference cannot issue from it, is in fact itself one of the two 
moments ; it is the abstraction of the simplicity or unitary nature 
, over against the difference. But in saying that the unity is an 
abstraction, that is, is only one of the opposed moments, it is 
already implied that it is the dividing of itself; for if the unity 
is a negative, is opposed to something, then it is eo ipso posited as 
that which has an antithesis within it. The different moments 

FORCE AND THE U NDERSTA N D I N G  
101 
of self-sundering and of becoming self-identical are therefore likewise 
only this movement of self-supersession ; for since the self-identi­
cal, which is supposed first to sunder itself or become its oppo­
site, is an abstraction or is already itself a sundered moment, its 
self-sundering is therefore a supersession of what it is, and there­
fore the supersession of its dividedness. Its becoming self-identical 
is equally a self-sundering; what becomes identical with itself 
thereby opposes itself to its self-sundering ; i.e. it thereby puts 
itself on one side, or rather it becomes a sundered moment. 
1 63. Infinity, or this absolute unrest of pure self-movement, 
in which whatever is determined in one way or another, e.g. 
as being, is rather the opposite of this determinateness, this no 
doubt has been from the start the soul of all that has gone 
before ; but it is in the inner world that it has first freely and 
clearly shown itself. Appearance, or the play of Forces, already 
displays it, but it is as 'explanation' that it first freely stands forth ; 
and in being finally an object for consciousness, as that which 
it is, consciousness is thus self-consciousness. The Understanding's 
'explanation' is primarily only the description of what self-con­
sciousness is. It supersedes the differences present in the law, 
differences which have already become pure differences but are 
still indifferent, and posits them in a single unity, in Force. But 
this unifying of them is equally and immediately a sundering, 
for it supersedes the differences and posits the oneness of Force 
only by creating a new difference, that of Law and Force, 
which, however, at the same time is no difference ; and, more­
over, from the fact that this difference is no difference, it goes 
on to supersede this difference again, since it lets Force be simi­
larly constituted to Law. But this movement, or necessity, is 
thus still a necessity and a movement of the Understanding, 
or, the movement as such is not the Understanding's object; on 
the contrary, in this movement the Understanding has as 
objects positive and negative electricity, distance, force of 
attraction, and a thousand other things which constitute the 
content of the moments of the movement. The reason why 
'explaining' affords so much self-satisfaction is just because in 
it consciousness is, so to speak, communing directly with itself, 
enjoying only itself; although it seems to be busy with some­
thing else, it is in fact occupied only with itself. 
1 64. In the contrary law, as the inversion of the first law, 

102 
A .  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
or in the inner difference, it is true that infinity itself becomes 
the oʣject of the Understanding ; but once again the Under­
standing falls short of infinity as such, since it again apportions 
to two worlds, or to two substantial elements, that which is a 
difference in itself-the self-repulsion of the selfsame and the 
self-attraction of the unlike. To the Understanding, the move­
ment, as it is found in experience, is here a [mere] happening, 
and the selfsame and the unlike are predicates, whose essence is 
an inert substrate. What is, for the Understanding, an object 
in a sensuous covering, is for us in its essential form as a pure 
Notion. This apprehension of the difference as it is in truth, or 
the apprehension of infinity as such, is for us, or in itself [i.e. is 
merely implicit]. The exposition of its Notion belongs to 
Science ; but consciousness, in the way that it immediately has 
this Notion, again comes on the scene as a form belonging to 
consciousness itself, or as a new shape of consciousness, which 
does not recognize in what has gone before its own essence, but 
looks on it as something quite different. Since this Notion of 
infinity is an object for consciousness, the latter is consciousness 
of a difference that is no less immediately cancelled ; consciousness 
is for its own self, it is a distinguishing of that which contains 
no difference, or self-consciousness. I distinguish myself from 
myself, and in doing so I am directly aware that what is distin­
guished from myself is not different [from me]. I, the selfsame 
being, repel myselffrom myself; but what is posited as distinct 
from me, or as unlike me, is immediately, in being so distin­
guished, not a distinction for me. It is true that consciousness 
of an 'other', of an object in general, is itself necessarily self­
consciousness, a reftectedness-into-self, consciousness of itself in 
its otherness. The necessary advance from the previous shapes of 
consciousness for which their truth was a Thing, an 'other' than 
themselves, expresses just this, that not only is consciousness of 
a thing possible only for a self-consciousness, but that self-con­
sciousness alone is the truth of those shapes. But it is only for 
us that this truth exists, not yet for consciousness. But self-con­
sciousness has at first become [simply ]for itself, not yet as a unity 
with consciousness in general. 
1 65. We see that in the inner world of appearance, the Under­
standing in truth comes to know nothing else but appearance, 
but not in the shape of a play of Forces, but rather that play 

F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E RSTAN D I N G  
103 
ofForces in its absolutely universal moments and in their move­
ment ; in fact, the Understanding experiences only itself. Raised 
above perception, consciousness exhibits itself closed in a unity 
with the supersensible world through the mediating term of 
appearance, through which it gazes into th.is background [lying 
behind appearance]. The two extremes [of this syllogism], the 
one, ofthe pure inner world, the other, that of the inner being 
gazing into this pure inner world, have now coincided, and just 
as they, qua extremes, have vanished, so too the middle term, 
as something other than these extremes, has also vanished. This 
curtain [of appearance] hanging before the inner world is there­
fore drawn away, and we have the inner being [the 'I'] gazing 
into the inner world-the vision of the undifferentiated selfsame 
being, which repels itself from itself, posits itself as an inner 
being containing different moments, but for which equally 
these moments are immediately not different-self-consciousness. 
It is manifest that behind the so-called curtain which is sup­
posed to conceal the inner world, there is nothing to be seen 
unless we go behind it ourselves, as much in order that we may 
see, as that there may be something behind there which can be 
seen. But at the same time it is evident that we cannot without 
more ado go straightway behind appearance. For this know­
ledge of what is the truth of appearance as ordinarily conceived, 
and of its inner being, is itself only a result of a complex move­
ment whereby the modes of consciousness 'meaning', perceiv­
ing, and the Understanding, vanish ; and it will be equally evi­
dent that the cognition of what consciousness knows in knowing itself, 
requires a still more complex movement, the exposition of 
which is contained in what follows. 

B .  SEL F- C ON S C I O U S NES S 
I V .  T H E  T R U TH O F  S E L F- C E R TA I N TY 
I 66. In the previous modes of certainty what is true for con­
sciousness is something other than itself. But the Notion of this 
truth vanishes in the experience of it. What the object imme­
diately was in itself-mere being in sense-certainty, the concrete 
thing of perception, and for the Understanding, a Force­
proves to be in truth, not this at all ; instead, this in-itself turns 
out to be a mode in which the object is only for an other. The 
Notion of the object is superseded in the actual object, or the 
first, immediate presentation of the object is superseded in ex­
perience : certainty gives place to truth. But now there has 
arisen what did not emerge in these previous relationships, viz. 
a certainty which is identical with its truth ; for the certainty 
is to itself its own object, and consciousness is to itself the truth. 
In this there is indeed an otherness ; that is to say, consciousness 
makes a distinction, but one which at the same time is for con­
sciousness not a distinction. If we give the name of Notion to the 
movement of knowing, and the name of object to knowing as 
a passive unity, or as the '1 ' ,  then we see that not only for us, 
but for knowing itself, the object corresponds to the Notion-. 
Or alternatively, if we call Notion what the object is in itself, 
but call the object what it is qua object or for an other, then it 
is clear that being-in-itself and being:for-an-other are one and the 
same. For the in-itself is consciousness ; but equally it is thatfor 
which an other (the in-itself) is ; and it is for consciousness that 
the in-itself of the object, and the being of the object for an 
other, are one and the same ; the 'I' is the content of the con­
nection and the connecting itself. Opposed to an other, the 'I' 
is its own self, and at the same time it overarches this other 
which, for the '1 ' ,  is equally only the 'I' itself. 
I 67. With self-consciousness, then, we have therefore 
entered the native realm of truth. We have now to see how the 
shape of self-consciousness first makes its appearance. If we con­
sider this new shape of knowing, the knowing of itself, in rela-

T H E  TR UTH O F  S E L F- C E R T A I N TY 
1 05 
tion to that which preceded, viz. the knowing of an other, then 
we see that though this other has indeed vanished, its moments 
have at the same time no less been preserved, and the loss con­
sists in this, that here they are present as they are in themselves. 
The f mere] being of what is merely 'meant', the singleness and 
the universality opposed to it of perception, as also the empty inner 
being of the Understanding, these are no longer essences, but 
are moments of self-consciousness, i.e. abstractions or dis­
tinctions which at the same time have no reality for conscious­
ness itself, and are purely vanishing essences. Thus it seems that 
only the principal moment itself has been lost, viz. the simple 
self-subsistent existence for consciousness. But in point of fact self­
consciousness is the reflection out of the being of the world of 
sense and perception, and is essentially the return from otherness. 
As self-consciousness, it is movement ; but since what it distin­
guishes from itself is only itself as itself, the difference, as an other­
ness, is immediately superseded for it ; the difference is not, and it 
[self-consciousness] is only the motionless tautology of: 'I am 
I' ; but since for it the difference does not have the form of being, 
it is not self-consciousness. Hence otherness is for it in the form 
of a being, or as a distinct moment; but there is also for conscious­
ness the unity of itself with this difference as a second distinct 
moment. With that first moment, self-consciousness is in the form 
of consciousness, and the whole expanse of the sensuous world 
is preserved for it, but at the same time only as connected with 
the second moment, the unity of self-consciousness with itself; 
and hence the sensuous world is for it an enduring existence 
which, however, is only appearance, or a difference which, in 
itself, is no difference. This antithesis of its appearance and its 
truth has, however, for its essence only the truth, viz. the unity 
of self-consciousness with itself; this unity must become essential 
to self-consciousness, i.e. self-consciousness is Desire in general. 
Consciousness, as self-consciousness, henceforth has a double 
object : one is the immediate object, that of sense-certainty and 
perception, which however for self-consciousness has the character 
of a negative; and the second, viz. itself, which is the true essence, 
and is present in the first instance only as opposed to the first 
object. In this sphere, self-consciousness exhibits itself as the 
movement in which this antithesis is removed, and the identity 
of itself with itself becomes explicit for it. 

106 
B. S EL F -C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
. I 68. But for us, or in itself, -the object which for self-conscious­
ness is the negative element has, on its side, returned into itself, 
just as on the other side consciousness has done. Through this 
reflection into itself the object has become Life. What self-con­
sciousness distinguishes from itself as having being, also has in 
it, in so far as it is posited as being, not merely the character 
of sense-certainty and perception, but it is being that is reflected 
into itself, and the object of immediate desire is a living thing. 
For the in-itself, or the universal result of the relation of the 
Understanding to the inwardness of things, is the distinguishing 
of what is not to be distinguished, or the unity of what is distin­
guished. But this unity is, as we have seen,just as much its repul­
sion from itself; and this Notion sunders itself into the antithesis 
of self-consciousness and life : the former is the unity for which 
the infinite unity of the differences is ; the latter, however, is 
only this unity itself, so that it is not at the same timefor itself. 
To the extent, then, that consciousness is independent, so too is 
its object, but only implicitly. Self-consciousness which is simply 
for itself and directly characterizes its object as a negative ele­
ment, or is primarily desire, will therefore, on the contrary, learn 
through experience that the object is independent. 
I 6g. The determination of Life as it has issued from the 
Notion, or the general result with which we enter this sphere, 
is sufficient to characterize it without having further to develop 
its nature. Its sphere is completely determined in the following 
moments. Essence is infinity as the supersession of all distinctions, 
the pure movement of axial rotation, its self-repose being an 
absolutely restless infinity ; independence itself, in which the dif­
ferences of the movement are resolved, the simple essence of 
Time which, in rhis equality with itself, has the stable shape 
of Space. The differences, however, are just as much present 
as diferences in this simple universal medium ; for this universal 
flux has its negative nature only in being the supersession of 
them ; but it cannot supersede the different moments if they 
do not have an enduring existence [ Bestehen ]. It is this very flux, 
as a self-identical independence which is itself an enduring exist­
ence, in which, therefore, they are present as distinct members 
and parts existing on their own account. Being no longer has 
the significance of abstract being, nor has their pure essentiality 
the significance of abstract universality ; on the contrary, their 

T H E  T R U T H  OF S E L F - C ER T A I N TY 
107 
being is precisely that simp!૪ fluid substance of pure movement 
within itself. The dijference, however, qua difference, of these 
members with respect to one another consists in general in no 
other determinateness than that of the moments of infinity or of 
the pure movement itself. 
1 70. The independent members are for themselvts; but this 
being-for-self is really no less immediately their reflection into 
the unity than this unity is the splitting-up into independent 
shapes. The unity is divided within itself because it is an abso­
lutely negative or infinite unity ; and because it is what subsists, 
the difference, too, has independence only in it. This indepen­
dence of the shape appears as something determinate,for an other, 
for the shape is divided within its'elf; and the supersession of 
this dividedness accordingly takes place through an other. But 
this supersession is just as much within the shape itself, for it 
is just that flux that is the substance of the independent shapes. 
This substance, however, is infinite, and hence the shape in its 
very subsistence is a dividedness within itself, or the supersession 
of its being-for-self. 
1 7 1 .  Ifwe distinguish more exactly the moments contained 
here, we see that we have, as the first moment, the subsistence 
ofthe independent shapes, or the suppression of what diremp­
tion is in itself, viz. that the shapes have no being in themselves, 
no enduring existence. The second moment, however is the sub­
jection of that existence to the infinity of the difference. In the 
first moment there is the existent shape ; as beingfor itself, or 
,being in its determinateness infinite substance, it comes forward 
in antithesis to the universal substance, disowns this fluent conti­
nuity with it and asserts that it is not dissolved in this universal 
element, but on the contrary preserves itselfby separating itself 
from this its inorganic nature, and by consuming it. Life in the 
universal fluid medium, a passive separating-out of the shapes 
becomes, just by so doing, a movement of those shapes or 
becomes Life as a process. The simple universal fluid medium 
is the in-itself, and the difference of the shapes is the other. But 
this fluid medium itself becomes the other through this dif­
ference ; for now it is for the dijference which exists in and for itself, 
and consequently is the ceaseless movement by which this pass­
ive medium is consumed : Life as a living thing. 
This inversion, however, is for that reason again an inverted-

108 
B. S E L F-C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
ness in its own self. What is consumed is the essence : the individu­
ality which maintains itself at the expense of the universal, and 
which gives itself the feeling of its unity with itself, just by so 
doing supersedes its antithesis to the other by means of which 
it exists for itself. Its self-given unity with itself is just that fluidity 
of the differences or their general dissolution. But, conversely, the 
supersession of individual existence is equally the production 
of it. For since the essence of the individual shape-universal 
Life-and what exists for itselfis in itself simple substance, when 
this substance places the other within itself it supersedes this its 
simplicity or its essence, i.e. it divides it, and this dividedness 
of the differenceless fluid medium is just what establishes indivi­
duality. Thus the simple substance of Life is the splitting-up 
ofitselfinto shapes and at the same time the dissolution of these 
existent differences ; and the dissolution of the splitting-up is 
just as much a splitting-up and a forming of members. With 
this, the two sides of the whole movement which before were 
distinguished, viz. the passive separatedness of the shapes in the 
general medium of independence, and the process of Life, col­
lapse into one another. The latter is just as much an imparting 
of shape as a supersession of it ; and the other, the imparting 
of shape, is just as much a supersession as an articulation of shape. 
The fluid element is itself only the abstraction of essence, or it is 
actual only as shape ; and its articulation of itself is again a split­
ting-up of what is articulated into form or a dissolution of it. 
It is the whole round of this activity that constitutes Life :  not 
what was expressed at the outset, the immediate continuity and 
compactness of its essence, nor the enduring form, the discrete 
moment existing for itself; nor the pure process of these ; nor 
yet the simple taking-together of these moments. Life consists 
rather in being the self-developing whole which dissolves its de­
velopment and in this movement simply preserves itself. 
I 72. Since we started from the first immediate unity and 
returned through the moments of formation and of process to 
the unity of both these moments, and thus back again to the 
original simple substance, this reflected unity is different from 
the first. Contrasted with that immediate unity, or that unity 
expressed as a (mere] being, this second is the universal unity 
which contains all these moments as superseded within itself. 
It is the simple genus which, in the movement of Life itself, 

T H E  TRU T H  O F  S E LF-C ERTA I N TY 
109 
does not exist for itself qua this simple determination ; on the con­
trary, in this result, Life points to something other than itself, 
viz. to consciousness, for which Life exists as this unity, or as 
genus. 
1 73. This other Life, however, for which the genus as such 
exists, and which is genus on its own account, viz. self-conscious­
ness, exists in the first instance for self-consciousness only as this 
simple essence, and has itself as pure 'I' for object. In the course 
of its experience which we are now to consider, this abstract 
object will enrich itself for the 'I' and undergo the unfolding 
which we have seen in the sphere of Life. 
1 74. The simple 'I' is this genus or the simple universal, for 
which the differences are not differences only by its being the 
negative essence of the shaped independent moments ; and self­
consciousness is thus certain of itself only by superseding this 
other that presents itself to self-consciousness as an independent 
life ;  self-consciousness is Desire. Certain of the nothingness of 
this other, it explicitly affirms that this nothingness isfor it the 
truth of the other; it destroys the independent object and 
thereby gives itself the certainty of itself as a true certainty, a 
certainty which has become explicit for self-consciousness itself 
in an objective manner. 
1 75. In this satisfaction, however, experience makes it aware 
that the object has its own independence. Desire and the self­
certainty obtained in its gratification, are conditioned by the 
object, for self-certainty comes from superseding this other : in 
order that this supersession can take place, there must be this 
other. Thus self-consciousness, by its negative relation to the 
object, is unable to supersede it ; it is really because of that rela­
tion that it produces the object again, and the desire as well. 
It is in fact something other than self-consciousness that is the 
essence of Desire ; and through this experience self-conscious­
ness has itself realized this truth. But at the same time it is no 
less absolutely for itself, and it is so only by superseding the 
object ; and it must experience its satisfaction, for it is the truth. 
On account of the independence of the object, therefore, it can 
achieve satisfaction only when the object itself effects the nega­
tion within itself; and it must carry out this negation of itself 
in itself, for it is in itself the negative, and must be for the other 
what it is. Since the object is in its own self negation, and in 

1 1 0 
B .  S E LF-CO N S C I O U S N ES S  
being so is at the same time independent, it is consciousness. 
In the sphere of Life, which is the object of Desire, negation is 
present either in an other, viz in Desire, or as a determinateness 
opposed to another indifferent form, or as the inorganic uni­
versal nature of Life. But this universal independent nature in 
which negation is present as absolute negation, is the genus as 
such, or the genus as seljʤconsciousness. Self-consciousness achieveJ 
its satisfaction only in another self-consciousness. 
I 76. The notion of self-consciousness is only completed in 
these three moments : (a) the pure undifferentiated 'I' is its first 
immediate object. (b) But this immediacy is itself an absolute 
mediation, it is only as a supersession of the independent object, 
in other words, it is Desire. The satisfaction of Desire is, it is 
true, the reflection of self-consciousness in to itself, or the cer­
tainty that has become truth. (c) But the truth of this certainty 
is really a double reflection, the duplication of self-conscious­
ness. Consciousness has for its object one which, of its own self, 
posits its otherness or difference as a nothingness, and in so 
doing is independent. The differ૫ntiated, merely living, shape 
does indeed also supersede its independence in the process of 
Life, but it ceases with its distinctive difference to be what it 
is. Th૬ object of self-consciousness, however, is equally indepen­
dent in this negativity of itself; and thus it is for itself a genus, 
a universal fluid element in the peculiarity of its own separate 
being ; it is a living self-consciousness. 
I 77· A self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only so 
is it in fact self-consciousness ; for only in this way does the unity 
of itself in its otherness become explicit for it. The 'I' which 
is the object of its Notion is in fact not 'object' ; the object of 
Desire, however, is only independent, for it is the univ(:rsal in­
destructible substance, the fluid self-identical essence. A self­
consciousness, in being an object, is just as much 'I' as 'object'. 
With this, we already have before us the Notion of Spirit. What 
still ties ahead for consciousness is the experience of what Spirit 
is-this absolute substance which is the unity of the different 
independent self-consciousnesses which, in their opposition, 
enjoy perfect freedom and independence૭ 'I' that is 'We' and 
'We' that is 'I'. It is in self-consciousness, in the Notion of Spirit, 
that consciousness first finds its turning-point, where it leaves 
behind it the colourful show of the sensuous here-and-now and 

L O R DS H I P  A N D  BONDAGE 
I l l  
the nightlike void of the supersensible beyond, and steps out 
into the spiritual daylight of the present. 
A .  I N D E P E N D E N C E  A N D  D E P E N D E N C E  OF S E L F ­
C O N S C I O U S N E S S : L O R D S H I P  A N D  B O N D A G E  
I 78. Self-consciousness exists in and for itself when, and by 
the fact that, it so exists for another ; that is, it exists only in 
being acknowledged. The Notion of this its unity in its duplica­
tion embraces many and varied meanings. Its moments, then, 
must on the one hand be held strictly apart, and on the other 
hand must in this differentiation at the same time also be taken 
and known as not distinct, or in their opposite significance. The 
twofold significance of the distinct moments has in the nature 
of self-consciousness to be infinite, or directly the opposite of 
the determinateness in which it is posited. The detailed exposi­
tion of the Notion of this spiritual unity in its duplication will 
present us with the process of Recognition. 
I 79· Self-consciousness is faced by another self-conscious­
ness ; it has come out of itself. This has a twofold significance : 
first, it has lost itself, for it finds itself as an other being ; secondly, 
in doing so it has superseded the other, for it does not see 
the other as an essential being, but in the other sees its own 
self. 
I 8o. It must supersede this otherness of itself. This is the 
supersession of the first ambiguity, and is therefore itself a 
second ambiguity. First, it must proceed to supersede the other 
independent being in order thereby to become certain of itself 
as the essential being ; secondly, in so doing it proceeds to super­
sede its own self, for this other is itself. 
I 8 I .  This ambiguous supersession of its ambiguous otherness 
is equally an ambiguous return into itself. For first, through the 
supersession, it receives back its own self, because, by supersed­
ing its otherness, it again becomes equal to itself; but secondly, 
the other self-consciousne૮s equally gives it back again to itself, 
for it saw itself in the other, but supersedes this being of itself 
in the other and thus lets the other again go free. 
I 82. Now, this movement of self-consciousness in relation to 
another self-consciousness has in this way been represented as 
the action of one self-consciousness, but this action of the one 

1 1 2 
B .  S E LF-CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
'has itself the double significance of being both its own action 
and the action of the other as well. For the other is equally inde­
pendent and self-contained, and there is nothing in it of which 
it is not itself the origin. The first does not have the object before 
it merely as it exists primarily for desire, but as something that 
has an independent existence of its own, which, therefore, it 
cannot utilize for its own purposes, if that object does not of 
its own accord do what the first does to it. Thus the movement 
is simply the double movement of the two self-consciousnesses. 
Each sees the other do the same as it does ; each does itself what 
it demands of the other, and therefore also does what it does 
only in so far as the other does the same. Action by one side 
only would be useless because what is to happen can only be 
brought about by both. 
1 83. Thus the action has a double significance not only 
because it is directed against itself as well as against the other, 
but also because it is indivisibly the action of one as well as 
of the other. 
184. In this movement we see repeated the process which 
presented itself as the play of Forces, but repeated now in con­
sciousness. What in that process was for us,is true here of the 
extremes themselves. The middle term is self-consciousness 
which splits into the extremes ; and each extreme is this 
exchanging of its own determinateness and an absolute transi­
tion into the opposite. Although, as consciousness, it does in­
deed come out if itself, yet, though out of itself, it is at the same 
time kept back within itself, is for itself, and the self outside it, 
is for it. It is aware that it at once is, and is not, another con­
sciousness, and equally that this other is for itself only when it 
supersedes itself as being for itself, and is for itself only in the 
being-for-selfofthe other. Each is for the other the middle term, 
through which each mediates itself with itself and unites with 
itself; and each is for itself, and for the other, an immediate 
being on its own account, which at the same time is such only 
through this mediation. They recognize themselves as mutually 
recognizing one another. 
185. We have now to see how the process of this pure Notion 
ofrecogni tion, of the duplicating of self-consciousness in its one­
ness, appears to self-consciousness. At first, it will exhibit 
the side of the inequality of the two, or the splitting-up of the 

L O R DS H I P  AND B O N DAGE 
1 1 3 
middle term into the extremes which, as extremes, are opposed 
to one another, one being only recognized, the other only 
recognzung. 
186. Self-consciousness is, to begin with, simple being-for­
self, self-equal through the exclusion from itself of everything 
else. For it, its essence and absolute object is 'I' ; and in this 
immediacy, or in this [mere] being, of its being-for-self, it is 
an individual. What is 'other' for it is an unessential, negatively 
characterized object. But the 'other' is also a self-consciousness ; · 
one individual is confronted by another individual. Appearing 
thus immediately on the scene, they are for one another like 
ordinary objects, independent shapes, individuals submerged in 
the being [or immediacy] of Life-for the object in its imme­
diacy is here determined as Life. They are, for each other, shapes 
of consciousness which have not yet accomplished the move­
ment of absolute abstraction, of rooting-out all immediate 
being, and of being merely the purely negative being of self­
identical consciousness ; in other words, they have not as yet 
exposed themselves to each other in the form of pure being­
for-self, or as self-consciousnesses. Each is indeed certain of its 
own self, but not of the other, and therefore its own self-cer­
tainty still has no truth. For it would have truth only if its own 
being-for-self had confronted it as an independent object, or, 
what is the same thing, if the object had presented itself as this 
pure self-certainty. But according to the Notion of recognition 
this is possible only when each is for the other what the other 
is for it, only when each in its own self through its own action, 
and again through the action of the other, achieves this pure 
abstraction of being-for-self. 
187. The presentation ofitself, however, as the pure abstrac­
tion of self-consciousness consists in showing itself as the pure 
negation of its objective mode, or in showing that it is not 
attached to any specific existence, not to the individuality com­
mon to existence as such, that it is not attached to life. This 
presentation is a twofold action : action on the part of the other, 
and action on its own part. In so far as it is the action of the 
other, each seeks the death of the other. But in doing so, the 
second kind of action, action on its own part, is also involved ; 
for the former involves the staking of its own life. Thus the rela­
tion of the two self-conscious individuals is such that they prove 

B. S E L F-CON S C I O U S N E S S  
themselves and each other through a life-and-death struggle. 
They must engage in this struggle, for they must raise their cer­
tainty of being for themselves to truth, both in the case of the 
other and in their own case. And it is only through staking one's 
life that freedom is won ; only thus is it proved that for self­
consciousness, its essential being is not [just] being, not the im­
mediate form in which it appears, not its submergence in the 
expanse of life, but rather that there is nothing present in it 
which could not be regarded as a vanishing moment, that it 
is only pure being-for-self. The individual who has not risked 
his life may well be recognized as a person, but he has not 
attained to the truth of this recognition as an independent self­
consciousness. Similarly,just as each stakes his own life, so each 
must seek the other's death, for it values the other no more than 
itself; its essential being is present to it in the form of an 'other', 
it is outside of itself and must rid itself of its self-externality. 
The other is an immediate consciousness entangled in a variety 
of relationships, and it must regard its otherness as a pure being­
for-self or as an absolute negation. 
r88. This trial by death, however, does away with the truth 
which was supposed to issue from it, and so, too, with the cer­
tainty of self generally. For just as life is the natural setting of 
consciousness, independence without absolute negativity, so 
death is the natural negation of consciousness, n૯gation without 
independence, which thus remains without the required signifi­
cance of recognition. Death certainly shows that each staked 
his life and held it of no account, both in himself and in the 
other ; but that is not for those who survived this struggle. They 
put an end to their consciousness in its alien setting of natural 
existence, that is to say, they put an end to themselves, and 
are done away with as extremes wanting to be for themselves, or 
to have an existence of their own. But with this there vanishes 
from their interplay the essential moment of splitting into 
extremes with opposite characteristics ; and the middle term 
collapses into a lifeless unity which is split into lifeless, merely 
immediate, unopposed extremes ; and the two do not reciproc­
ally give and receive one another back from each other cons­
ciously, but leave each other free only indifferently, like things. 
Their act is an abstract negation, not the negation coming from 
consciousness, which supersedes in such a way as to preserve 

L O R DS H I P  A N D  BONDAGE 
1 15 
and maintain what is superseded, and consequently survives 
its own supersession. 
I 8g. In this experience, self-consciousness learns that life is 
as essential to it as pure self-consciousness. In immediate self­
consciousness the simple 'I' is absolute mediation, and has as 
its essential moment lasting independence. The dissolution of 
that simple unity is the result of the first experience ; through 
this there is posited a pure self-consciousness, and a conscious­
ness which is not purely for itself but for another, i.e. is a merely 
immediate consciousness, or consciousness in the form of 
thinghood. Both moments are essential. Since to begin with they 
are unequal and opposed, and their reflection in to a unity has 
not yet been achieved, they exist as two opposed shapes of con­
sciousness ; one is the independent consciousness whose essential 
nature is to be for itself, the other is the dependent consciousness 
whose essential nature is simply to live or to be for another. 
The former is lord, the other is bondsman. 
1 90. The lord is the consciousness that exists for itself, but 
no longer merely the Notion of such a consciousness. Rather, 
it is a consciousness existing for itself which is mediated with 
itself through another consciousness, i.e. through a conscious­
ness whose nature it is to be bound up with an existence that 
is independent, or thinghood in general. The lord puts himself 
into relation with both of these moments, to a thing as such, 
the object of desire, and to the consciousness for which 
thinghood is the essential characteristic. And since he is (a) qua 
the Notion of self-consciousness an immediate relation of being­
for-self, but (b) is now at the same time mediation, or a being­
for-self which is for itself only through another, he is related 
(a) immediately to both, and (b) mediately to each through 
the other. The lord relates himself mediately to the bondsman 
through a being [a thing] that is independent, for it is just this 
which holds the bondsman in bondage ; it is his chain from 
which he could not break free in the struggle, thus proving him­
selfto be dependent, to possess his independence in thinghood. 
But the lord is the power over this thing, for he proved in the 
struggle that it is something merely negative ; since he is the 
power over this thing and this again is the power over the other 
[the bondsman] , it follows that he holds the other in subjection. 
Equally, the lord relates himself mediately to the thing through 

1 1 6 
B .  S E LF-CO N S C I O U S N ES S  
the bondsman ; the bondsman, qua self-consciousness in general, 
also relates himself negatively to the thing, and takes away its 
independence ; but at the same time the thing is independent 
vis-a-vis the bondsman, whose negating of it, therefore, cannot 
go the length of being altogether done with it to the point of 
annihilation ; in other words, he only works on it. For the lord, 
on the other hand, the immediate relation becomes through this 
mediation the sheer negation of the thing, or the enjoyment 
of it. What desire· failed to achieve, he succeeds in doing, viz. 
to have done with the thing altogether, and to achieve satisfac-­
tion in the enjoyment of it. Desire failed to do this because of 
the thing's independence ; but the lord, who has interposed the 
bondsman between it and himself, takes to himself only the de­
pendent aspect of the thing and has the pure enjoyment of it. 
The aspect of its independence he leaves to the bondsman, who 
works on it. 
1 9 1 .  In both of these moments the lord achieves his recogni­
tion through another consciousness ; for in them, that other con­
sciousness is expressly something unessential, both by its work­
ing on the thing, and by its dependence on a specific existence. 
In neither case can it be lord over the being of the thing and 
achieve absolute negation ofit. Here, therefore, is present this 
moment of recognition, viz. that the other consciousness sets 
aside its own being-for-self, and in so doing itself does what the 
first does to it. Similarly, the other moment too is present, that 
this action of the second is the first's own action ; for what the 
bondsman does is really the action of the lord. The latter's essen­
tial nature is to exist only for himself; he is the sheer negative 
power for whom the thing is nothing. Thus he is the pure, essen­
tial action in this relationship, while the action of the bondsman 
is impure and unessential. But for recognition proper the 
moment is lacking, that what the lord does to the other he also 
does to himself, and what the bondsman does to himself he 
should also do to the other. The outcome is a recognition that 
is one-sided and unequal. 
192. In this recognition the unessential consciousness is for 
the lord the object, which constitutes the truth of his certainty 
of himself. But it is clear that this object does not correspond 
to its Notion, but rather that the object in which the lord has 
achieved his lordship has in reality turned out to be something 

L O R DS H I P  A N D  BONDAGE 
' ' 7 
quite different from an independent consciousness. What now 
really confronts him is not an independent consciousness, but 
a dependent one. He is, therefore, not certain of being-for-self 
as the truth of himself. On the contrary, his truth is in reality 
the unessential consciousness and its unessential action. 
I 93· The truth of the independent consciousness is accord­
ingly the servile consciousness of the bondsman. This, it is true, 
appears at first outside of itself and not as the truth of self-con­
sciousness. But just as lordship showed that its essential nature 
is the reverse ofwhat it wants to be, so too servitude in its con­
summation will really turn into the opposite of what it imme­
diately is ; as a consciousness forced back into itself, it will with­
draw into itself and be transformed into a truly independent 
consciousness. 
1 94. We have seen what servitude is only in relation to lord­
ship. But it is a self-consciousness, and we have now to consider 
what as such it is in and for itself. To begin with, servitude has 
the lord for its essential reality; hence the truth for it is the inde­
pendent consciousness that is for itself However, servitude is 
not yet aware that this truth is implicit in it. But it does in fact 
contain within itself this truth of pure negativity and being­
for-self, for it has experienced this its own essential nature. For 
this consciousness has been fearful, not of this or that particular 
thing or just at odd moments, but its whole being has been 
seized with dread ; for it has experienced the fear of death, the 
absolute Lord. I n  that experience it has been quite un­
manned, has trembled in every fibre ofits being, and everything 
solid and stable has been shaken to its foundations. But this pure 
universal movement, the absolute melting-away of everything 
stable, is the simple, essential nature of self-consciousness, abso­
lute negativity, pure being-for-self, which consequently is implicit 
in this consciousness. This moment of pure being-for-self is also 
explicit for the bondsman, for in the lord it exists for him as his 
object. Furthermore, his consciousness is not this dissolution of 
everything stable merely in principle ; in his service he actually 
brings this about. Through his service he rids himself of his 
attachment to natural existence in every single detail ; and gets 
rid of it by working on it. 
1 95. However, the feeling ofabsolute power both in general, 
and in the particular form of service, is only implicitly this dis­
solution, and although the fear of the lord is indeed the begin-

1 1 8 
B. S E LF-CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
ning of wisdom, consciousness is not therein aware that it is a 
being-for-self. Through work, however, the bondsman becomes 
conscious of what he truly is. In the moment which corresponds 
to desire in the lord's consciousness, it did seem that the aspect 
of unessential relation to the thing fell to the lot of the bonds­
man, since in that relation the thing retained its independence. 
Desire has reserved to itself the pure negating of the object and 
thereby its unalloyed feeling of self. But that is the reason why 
this satisfaction is itself only a fleeting one, for it lacks the side 
of objectivity and permanence. Work, on the other hand, is 
desire held in check, fleetingness staved off; in other words, 
work forms and shapes the thing. The negative relation to the 
object becomes its form and something permanent, because it is 
precisely for the worker that the object has independence. This 
negative middle term or the formative activity is at the same time 
the individuality or pure being-for-self of consciousness which 
now, in the work outside of it, acquires an element of per­
manence. It is in this way, therefore, that consciousness, qua 
worker, comes to see in the independent being [of the object] 
its own independence. 
1 g6. But the formative activity has not only this positive sig­
nificance that in it the pure being-for-self of the servile con­
sciousness acquires an existence ; it also has, in contrast with 
its first moment, the negative significance offear. For, in fash­
ioning the thing, the bondsman's own negativity, his being­
for-self, becomes an object for him only through his setting at 
nought the existing shape confronting him. But this objective 
negative moment is none other than the alien being before which 
it has trembled. Now, however, he destroys this alien negative 
moment, posits himself as a negative in the permanent order 
of things, and thereby becomes for himself, someone existing on 
his own account. In the lord, the being-for-self is an 'other' for 
the bondsman, or is only for him [i.e. is not his own] ; in fear, 
the being-for-selfis present in the bondsman himself; in fashion­
ing the thing, he becomes aware that being-for-self belongs to 
him, that he himself exists essentially and actually in his own 
right. The shape does not become something other than himself 
through being made external to him ; for it is precisely this shape 
that is his pure being-for-self, which in this externality is seen 
by him to be the truth. Through this rediscovery of himself by 

FR E E D O M  O F  S E LF-C O N S C I O US N ES S  
"9 
himself, the bondsman realizes that it is precisely in his work 
wherein he seemed to have only an alienated existence that he 
acquires a mind ofhis own. For this reflection, the two moments 
of fear and service as such, as also that of formative activity, 
are necessary, both being at the same time in a universal mode. 
Without the discipline of service and obedience, fear remains 
at the formal stage, and does not extend to the known real world 
of existence. Without the formative activity, fear remains in­
ward and mute, and consciousness does not become explicitly 
for itself. If consciousness fashions the thing without that initial 
absolute fear, it is only an empty self-centred attitude; for its 
form or negativity is not negativity per se, and therefore its 
formative activity cannot give it a consciousness of itself as 
essential being. If it has not experienced absolute fear but only 
some lesser dread, the negative being has remained for it some­
thing external, its substance has not been infected by it through 
and through. Since the entire contents of its natural conscious­
ness have not been jeopardized, determinate being still in prin­
ciple attaches to it ; having a 'mind of one's own' is self-will, a 
freedom which is still enmeshed in servitude. Just as little as 
the pure form can become essential being for it, just as little 
is that form, regarded as extended to the particular, a universal 
formative activity, an absolute Notion ; rather it is a skill which 
is master over some things, but not over the universal power 
and the whole of objective being. 
F R E E D O M O F  S E L F- C O N S C I O U S N E S S : 
B .  S T O I C I S M ,  S C E P T I C I S M ,  A N D  T H E  U N H A P P Y  
C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 97. For the independent self-consciousness, it is only the 
pure abstraction of the 'I' that is its essential nature and when 
. 
' 
' 
It does develop its own differences, this differentiation does not 
become a nature that is objective and intrinsic to it. Thus this 
૰elf-consciousness does not become an 'I' that in its simplicity 
IS genuinely self-differentiating, or that in this absolute dif­
ferentiation remains identical with itself. On the other hand, 
the consciousness that is forced back into itself becomes, in its 

1 20 
B. S E LF-CON S C I O U SN E S S  
formative activity, its own object in the form of the thing it has 
fashioned, and at the same time sees in the lord a consciousness 
that exists as a being૱for-self. But for the subservient conscious­
ness as such, these two moments-itself as an independent 
object, and this object as a mode of consciousness, and hence 
its own essential nature-fall apart. Since, however, the form 
and the being-for-self are for us, or in themselves, the same, and 
since in the Notion of independent consciousness the intrinsic 
being is consciousness, the moment of intrinsic being or 
thinghood which received its form in being fashioned is no other 
substance than consciousness. We are in the presence of self­
consciousness in a new shape, a consciousness which, as the in­
finitude of consciousness or as its own pure movement, is aware 
of itself as essential being, a being which thinks or is a free self­
consciousness. For to think does not mean to be an abstract 'I', 
but an 'I' which has at the same time the significance of intrinsic 
being, of having itselffor object, or of relating itself to objective 
being in such a way that its significance is the being-for-self of 
the consciousness for which it is [an object). For in thinking, the 
object does not present itself in picture-thoughts but in Notions, 
i.e. in a distinct being-in-itself or intrinsic being, consciousness 
being immediately aware that this is not anything distinct from 
itself. What is pictured or figuratively conceived, what imme­
diately is, has, as such, the form of being something other than 
consciousness ; but a Notion is also something that immediately 
is, and this distinction, in so far as it is present in consciousness 
itself, is its determinate content ; but since this content is at the 
same time a content grasped in thought, consciousness remains 
immediately aware of its unity with this determinate and distinct 
being, not, as in the case of a picture-thought, where conscious­
ness still has specially to bear in mind that this is its picture­
thought; on the contrary, the Notion is for me straightway my 
Notion. In thinking, I am free, because I am not in an other, 
but remain simply and solely in communion with myself, and 
the object, which is for me the essential being, is in undivided 
unity my being-for-myself; and my activity in conceptual 
thinking is a movement within myself. It is essential, however, 
in thus characterizing this shape of self-consciousness to bear 
firmly in mind that it is thinking consciousness in general, that 
its object is an immediate unity of being-in-itself and being-for-itself. 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E LF - CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 :2 1  
The selfsame consciousness that repels itselffrom itself becomes 
aware of itself as the element of being-in-itself; but at first it 
knows itself to be this element only as a universal mode of being 
in general, not as it exists objectively in the development and 
process of its manifold being. 
1 98. This freedom of self-consciousness when it appeared as 
a conscious manifestation in the history of Spirit has, as we know, 
been called Stoicism. Its principle is that consciousness is a 
being that thinks, and that consciousness holds something to be 
essentially important, or true and good only in so far as it thinks 
it to be such. 
1 99. The manifold self-differentiating expanse of life, with 
all its detail and complexity, is the object on which desire and 
work operate. This manifold activity has now contracted into 
the simple positing of differences in the pure movement of 
thinking. Essential importance no longer attaches to the dif­
ference as a specific thing, or as consciousness of a specific natural 
existence, as a feeling, or as desire and its object, whether this 
is posited by myself or by an alien consciousness. What alone 
has importance is the difference posited by thought, or the dif­
ference which from the very first is not distinct from myself. 
This consciousness accordingly has a negative attitude towards 
the lord and bondsman relationship. As lord, it does not have 
its truth in the bondsman, nor as bondsman is its truth in the 
lord's will and in his service ; on the contrary, whether on the 
throne or in chains, in the utter dependence of its individual 
existence, its aim is to be free, and to maintain that lifeless in­
difference which steadfastly withdraws from the bustle of exist­
ence, alike from being active as passive, into the simple essenti­
ality of thought. Self-will is the freedom which entrenches itself 
in some particularity and is still in bondage, while Stoicism is 
the freedom which always comes directly out of bondage and 
returns into the pure universality of thought. As a universal 
form of the World-Spirit, Stoicism could only appear on the 
scene in a time of universal fear and bondage, but also a time 
of universal culture which had raised itself to the level of 
thought. 
200. Now, it is true that for this self-consciousness the essence 
is neither an other than itself, nor the pure abstraction of the 
'I', but an 'I' which has the otherness within itself, though in 

1 22 
B .  S E L F - CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
the form of thought, so that in its otherness it has directly 
returned into itself. Yet at the same time this its essence is only 
an abstract essence. The freedom of self-consciousness is in­
different to natural existence and has therefore let this equally go 
free: the reflection is a twofold one. Freedom in thought has only 
pure thought as its truth, a truth lacking the fullness oflife. Hence 
freedom in thought, too, is only the Notion of freedom, not the 
living reality of freedom itself. For the essence of that freedom 
is at first only thinking in general, the form as such [of thought], 
which has turned away from the independence of things and 
returned into itself. But since individuality in its activity should 
show itself to be alive, or in its thinking should grasp the living 
world as a system of thought, there would have to be present 
in thought itself a content for that individuality, in the one case 
a content of what is good, and in the other of what is true, in 
order that what is an object for consciousness should contain 
no other ingredient whatever except the Notion which is the 
essence. But here the Notion as an abstraction cuts itself off from 
the multiplicity of things, and thus has no content in its own 
selfbut one that is given to it. Consciousness does indeed destroy 
the content as an alien immediacy [Sein] when it thinks it; but 
the Notion is a determinate Notion, and this determinateness of 
the Notion is the alien element which it has within it. Stoicism, 
therefore, was perplexed when it was asked for what was called 
a 'criterion of truth as such', i.e. strictly speaking, for a content 
of thought itself. To the question, What is good and true, it again 
gave for answer the content less thought :  The True and the Good 
shall consist in reasonableness. But this self-identity of thought 
is again only the pure form in which nothing is determined. 
The True and the Good, wisdom and virtue, the general terms 
beyond which Stoicism cannot get, are therefore in a general 
way no doubt uplifting, but since they cannot in fact produce 
any expansion of the content, they soon become tedious. 
20 1 .  This thinking consciousness as determined in the form 
of abstract freedom is thus only the incomplete negation of 
otherness. Withdrawn from existence only into itself, it has not 
there achieved its consummation as absolute negation of that 
existence. The content, it is true, only counts as thought, but 
also as thought that is determinate and at the same time 
determinateness as such. 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 23 
202. Scepticism is the realization ofthat.,ofwhich Stoicism was 
only the Notion, and is the actual experience of what the free­
dom of thought is. This is in itself the negative and must exhibit 
itself as such. With the reflection of self-consciousness into the 
simple thought of itself, the independent existence or per­
manent determinateness that stood over against that reflection 
has, as a matter of fact, fallen outside of the infinitude of 
thought. In Scepticism, now, the wholly unessential and non­
independent charact૲r of this 'other' becomes explicit for con­
sciousness ; the [abstract] thought becomes the concrete thinking 
which annihilates the being of the world in all its manifold 
determinateness, and the negativity of free self-consciousness 
comes to know itself in the many and varied forms of life as 
a real negativity. 
It is clear that just as Stoicism corresponds to the Notion of 
the independent consciousness which appeared as the lord and 
bondsman relationship, so Scepticism corresponds to its realiza­
tion as a negative attitude towards otherness, to desire and work. 
But although desire and work were unable to effect the negation 
for self-consciousness, this polemical bearing towards the mani­
fold independence of things will, on the other hand, be success­
ful, because it turns against them as a free self-consciousness 
that is already complete in its own self; more specifically, 
because it is thinking, or is in its own self infinite, and in this 
infinitude the independent things in their differences from one 
another are for it only vanishing magnitudes. The differences, 
which in the pure thinking of self-consciousness are only the 
abstraction of differences, here become the entirety of the dif­
ferences, and the whole of differentiated being becomes a dif­
ference of self-consciousness. 
203. Thus the foregoing has defined the nature of the activity 
of scepticism as such, and the way in which it operates. It 
exhibits the dialectical movement which Sense-certainty, Percep­
tion, and the Understanding each is ; as also the unessential 
character of what, in the relationship of lord and bondsman, 
and for abstract thinking itself, is held to be a determinate ele­
ment. That relationship at the same time embraces a specific 
mode in which ethical laws, too, are present as sovereign com­
mands. The determinations in abstract thinking, however, are 
scientific Notions in which [formal] contentless thinking 

124 
B. S E LF-CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
spreads itself, attaching the Notion in fact in a merely external 
way to the being constituting its content, and which for it is 
independent, and holding as valid only determinate Notions, even 
though these are only pure abstractions. 
204. Dialectic as a negative movement, just as it imme­
diately is, at first appears to consciousness as something which 
has it at its mercy, and which does not have its source in con­
sciousness itself. As Scepticism, on the other hand, it is a 
moment of self-consciousness, to which it does not happen that 
its truth and reality vanish without its knowing how, but which, 
in the certainty of its freedom, makes this 'other' which claims 
to be real, vanish. What Scepticism causes to vanish is not only 
objective reality as such, but its own relationship to it, in which 
the 'other' is held to be objective and is established· as such, 
and hence, too, its perceiving, along with firmly securing what 
it is in danger of losing, viz. sophistry, and the truth it has itself 
determined and established. Through this self-conscious nega­
tion it procures for its own self the certainty of its freedom, 
generates the experience of that freedom, and thereby raises 
it to truth. What vanishes is the determinate element, or the 
moment of difference, which, whatever its mode of being and 
whatever its source, sets itself up as something fixed and immut­
able. It contains no permanent element, and must vanish before 
thought, because the 'different' is just this, not to be in posses­
sion of itself, but to have its essential being only in an other. 
Thinking, however, is the insight into this nature of the 'dif­
ferent', it is the negative essence, as simple. 
205. The sceptical self-consciousness thus experiences in the 
flux of all that would stand secure before it its own freedom 
as given and preserved by itself. It is aware of this stoical in­
difference of a thinking which thinks itself, the unchanging and 
genuine certainty of itself. This self-certainty does not issue from 
something alien, whose complex development was deposited 
within it, a result which would leave behind it the process of 
its coming to be. On the contrary, consciousness itself is the abso­
lute dialectical unrest, this medley of sensuous and intellectual 
representations whose differences coincide, and whose identity 
is equally again dissolved, for it is itself determinateness as con­
trasted with the non-identical. But it is just in this process that 
this consciousness, instead ofbeing self-identical, is in fact noth-

F R E ED O M  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N ES S  
1 25 
ing but a purely casual, confused medley, the dizziness of a per­
petually self-engendered disorder. It is itself aware of this ; for 
itself maintains and creates this restless confusion. Hence it also 
admits to it, it owns to being a wholly contingent, single, and 
separat૳ consciousness-a consciousness which is empirical, 
which takes its guidance from what has no reality for it, which 
obeys what is for i  t not an essential being, which does those things 
and brings to realization what it knows has no truth for it. But 
equally, while it takes itself in this way to be a single and separ­
ate, contingent and, in fact, animal life, and a lost self-con­
sciousness, it also, on the contrary, converts itself again into a 
consciousness that is universal and self-identical ; for it is the 
negativity of all singularity and all difference. From this self­
identity, or within its own self, it falls back again into the former 
contingency and confusion, for this same spontaneous nega­
tivity has to do solely with what is single and separate, and 
occupies itself with what is contingent. This consciousness is 
therefore the unconscious, thoughtless rambling which passes 
back and forth from the one extreme of self-identical self-con­
sciousness to the other extreme of the contingent consciousness 
that is both bewildered and bewildering. It does not itself bring 
these two thoughts of itself together. At one time it recognizes 
that its freedom lies in rising above all the confusion and contin­
gency of existence, and at another time equally admits to a 
relapse into occupying itself with what is unessential. It lets the 
unessential content in its thinking vanish ;  but just in doing so 
it is the consciousness of something unessential. It pronounces 
an absolute vanishing, but the pronouncement is, and this con­
sciousness is the vanishing that is pronounced. It affirms the 
nullity of seeing, hearing, etc., yet it is itself seeing, hearing, 
etc. It affirms the nullity of ethical principles, and lets its con­
duct be governed by these very principles. Its deeds and its 
words always belie one another and equally it has itself the 
doubly contradictory consciousness of unchangeableness and 
sameness, and of utter contingency and non-identity with itself. 
But it keeps the poles of this its self-contradiction apart, and 
adopts the same attitude to it as it does in its purely negative 
activity in general. Point out likeness or identity to it, and it 
will point out unlikeness or non-identity ; and when it is now 
confronted with what it has just asserted, it turns round and 

B .  S E L F-CON S C I O U S N E S S  
points out likeness or identity. Its talk is in fact like the squab­
bling of self-willed children, one of whom says A if the other 
says B, and in turn says B if the other says A, and who by con­
tradicting themselves buy for themselves the pleasure of continu­
ally contradicting one another. 
206. In Scepticism, consciousness truly experiences itself as 
internally contradictory. From this experience emerges a new 
form of consciousness which brings together the two thoughts 
which Scepticism holds apart. Scepticism's lack of thought 
about itself must vanish, because it is in fact one consciousness 
which contains within itself these two modes. This new form 
is, therefore, one which knows that it is the dual consciousness 
ofitself, as self-liberating, unchangeable, and self-identical, and 
as self-bewildering and self-perverting, and it is the awareness 
of this self-contradictory nature of itself. 
In Stoicism, self-consciousness is the simple freedom of itself. 
In Scepticism, this freedom becomes a reality, negates the other 
side of determinate existence, but really duplicates itself, and 
now knows itself to be a duality. Consequently, the duplication 
which formerly was divided between two individuals, the lord 
and the bondsman, is now lodged in one. The duplication of 
self-consciousness within itself, which is essential in the Notion 
of Spirit, is thus here before us, but not yet in its unity : the 
Unhappy Consciousness is the consciousness of self as a dual­
natured, merely contradictory being. 
207. This unhappy, inwardly disrupted consciousness, since its 
essentially contradictory nature is for it a single consciousness, 
must for ever have present in the one consciousness the other 
also ; and thus it is driven out of each in turn in the very moment 
when it imagines it has successfully attained to a peaceful unity 
with the other. Its true return into itself, or its reconciliation 
with itself will, however, display the Notion of Spirit that has 
become a living Spirit, and has achieved an actual existence, 
because it already possesses as a single undivided consciousness 
a dual nature. The Unhappy Consciousness itself is the gazing 
of one self-consciousness into another, and itself is both, and 
the unity of both is also its essential nature. But it is not as yet 
explicitly aware that this is its essential nature, or that it is the 
unity of both. 
208. Since it is, to begin with, only the immediate unity of the 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E LF-CON S C I O U S N E S S  
1 2 7 
two and so takes them to be, not the same, but opposites, one 
of them, viz. the simple Unchangeable, it takes to be the essential 
Being ; but the other, the protean Changeable, it takes to be 
the unessential. The two are, for the Unhappy Consciousness, 
alien to one another ; and because it is itself the consciousness 
of this contradiction, it identifies itself with the changeable con­
sciousness, and takes itself to be the unessential Being. But as 
consciousness of unchangeableness, or of simple essential Being, 
it must at the same time set about freeing itselffrom the unessen­
tial, i.e. from itself. For though it indeed takes itself to be merely 
the Changeable, and the Unchangeable is, for it, an alien Being, 
yet it is itself a simple, hence unchangeable, consciousness, and 
hence is aware that this consciousness is its own essence, 
although in such a way that again it does not itself take 
the essence to be its own. The attitude it assigns to both 
cannot therefore be one of mutual indifference, i.e. it cannot 
itself be indifferent towards the Unchangeable ; rather, it 
is itself directly both of them, and the relation of the two 
is for it a relation of essential being to the unessential, so that 
this latter has to be set aside ; but since for it both are 
equally essential and contradictory, it is merely the contradic­
tory movement in which one opposite does not come to rest 
in its opposite, but in it only produces itself afresh as an 
opposite. 
209. Here, then, we have a struggle against an enemy, to 
vanquish whom is really to suffer defeat, where victory in one 
consciousness is really lost in its opposite. Consciousness of life, 
of its existence and activity, is only an agonizing over this exist­
ence and activity, for therein it is conscious that its essence is 
only its opposite, is conscious only of its own nothingness. Rais­
ing itself out of this consciousness it goes over into the Un­
changeable ; but this elevation is itself this same consciousness. 
It is, therefore, directly consciousness of the opposite, viz. of 
itself as a particular individual. The Unchangeable that enters 
into consciousness is through this very fact at the same time 
affected by individuality, and is only present with the latter ; 
individuality, instead of having been extinguished in the con­
sciousness of the Unchangeable, only continues to arise' there­
from. 
2 1  o. In this movement, however, consciousness experiences 

128 
B. S E L F - C O N S C I O US N E S S  
just this emergence of individuality in the Unchangeable, and 
of the Unchangeable in individuality. Consciousness becomes 
aware of individuality in general in the Unchangeable, and at 
the same time of its own individuality in the latter. For the truth 
of this movement is just the oneness of this dual consciousness. 
This unity, however, in the first instance, becomes for it one 
in which the di.ference of both is still the dominant feature. Thus 
there exist for consciousness three different ways in which in­
dividuality is linked with the Unchangeable. Firstly, it again 
appears to itself as opposed to the Unchangeable, and is thrown 
back to the beginning of the struggle which is throughout the 
element in which the whole relationship subsists. Secondly, con­
sciousness learns that individuality belongs to the Unchange­
able itself, so that it assumes the form ofindividuality into which 
the entire mode of existence passes. Thirdly, it finds its own 
self as this particular individual in the Unchangeable. The first 
Unchangeable it knows only as the alien Being who passes 
judgement on the particular individual ; since, secondly, the 
Unchangeable is a form ofindividuality like itself, consciousness 
becomes, thirdly, Spirit, and experiences the joy of finding itself 
therein, and becomes aware of the reconciliation of its individu­
ality with the universal. 
2 I I .  What is set forth here as the mode and relationship of 
the Unchangeable has appeared as the experience through which 
the divided self-consciousness passes in its wretchedness. Now, 
this experience, it is true, is not its own one-sided movement, for 
it is itself the unchangeable consciousness, and this, con­
sequently, is at the same time a particular individual conscious­
ness too ; and the movement is just as much a movement of the 
unchangeable consciousness, which makes its appearance in 
that movement as much as the other. For the movement runs 
through these moments : first, the Unchangeable is opposed to 
individuality in general ; then, being itself an individual, it is 
opposed to another individual ; and finally, it is one with it. 
But this reflection, so far as it is made by us, is here premature, 
for what has come before for us so far is only unchangeableness 
as unchangeableness of consciousness, which for that reason is not 
genuine unchangeableness, but one still burdened with an anti­
thesis, not the Unchangeable in and for itself; we do not know, 
therefore, how the latter will behave. Here, we know only that 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
129 
fo૴ consciousness, which is our object here, the determinations 
indicated above appear in the Unchangeable. 
2 I 2. For this reason, therefore, the unchangeable conscious­
ness also retains in its very form the basic character of divided­
ness and being-for-self in contrast to the individual conscious­
ness. Consequently, for the latter, the fact that the Unchange­
able receives the form of individuality is only a contingent 
happening ;just as it also merely finds itself opposed to it, so that 
the relation seems to result from its own nature. That, finally, 
it does .find itselfin the Unchangeable, appears to it to be brought 
about partly, no doubt, by itself, or to take place because it 
is itself an individual ; but this unity, both as regards its origin 
and the fact that it is, appears partly due to the Unchangeable ; 
and the antithesis persists within this unity itself. In fact, 
through the Unchangeable's assuming a definite form, the 
moment of the beyond not only persists, but really is more 
firmly established ; for if the beyond seems to have been brought 
closer to the individual consciousness through the form of an 
actuality that is individual, it henceforth on the other hand con­
fronts him as an opaque sensuous unit with all the obstinacy 
of what is actual. The hope of becoming one with it must remain 
a hope, i.e. without fulfilment and present fruition, for between 
the hope and its fulfilment there stands precisely the absolute 
contingency or inflexible indifference which lies in the very 
assumption of definite form, which was the ground of hope. By 
the nature of this immediately present unit, through the actual 
existence in which it has clothed itself, it necessarily follows that 
in the world of time it has vanished, and that in space it had 
a remote existence and remains utterly remote. 
2 I 3 ·  If at first the mere Notion of the divided consciousness 
was characterized by the effort to set aside its particular indivi­
duality and to become the unchangeable consciousness, its 
efforts from now on are directed rather to setting aside its rela­
tion with the pureformless Unchangeable, and to coming into 
relation only with the Unchangeable in its embodied or in­
carnate form. For the oneness of the particular individual with 
the Unchangeable is henceforth the essence and the object for 
this consciousness, just as in the mere Notion of it the formless 
abstract Unchangeable was the essential object ; and the rela­
tion of this absolute dividedness of the Notion is now what it 

B .  S E LF - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
has to turn away from. The initially external relation to the 
incarnate Unchangeable as an alien reality has to be trans­
formed into a relation in which it becomes absolutely one with 
it. 
2 I 4· The movement in which the unessential consciousness 
strives to attain this oneness is itself threefold in accordance with 
the threefold relation this consciousness will have with its in­
carnate beyond : first, as pure consciousness ; second, as a par­
ticular individual who approaches the actual world in the forms 
of desire and work ; and third, as consciousness t-hat is aware 
of its own being-for-self. We have now to see how these three 
modes ofits being are present and determined in that general 
relationship. 
2 I 5· At first, then, this consciousness being taken as pure con­
sciousness, the incarnate Unchangeable when it is an object for 
pure consciousness seems to be present in its own proper nature. 
But this, its own proper nature, has not yet come into existence, 
as we have already remarked. In order that it should appear 
in consciousness in its own proper nature, this would certainly 
have to come about from its side, rather than from the side of 
consciousness. Thus its presence here is, at first, only one-sidedly 
due to consciousness, and just for that reason is not perfect and 
genuine, but remains burdened with imperfection or an anti­
thesis. 
2 I 6. But although the Unhappy Consciousness does not 
have the enjoyment of this presence, it has at the same time 
advanced beyond pure thinking in so far as this is the abstract 
thinking of Stoicism which turns its back on individuality alto­
gether, and beyond the merely unsettled thinking of Scepti­
cism-which is in fact only individuality in the form of an un­
conscious contradiction and ceaseless movement. It has 
advanced beyond both of these ; it brings and holds together 
pure thinking and particular individuality, but has not yet risen 
to that thinking where consciousness as a particular individu­
ality is reconciled with pure thought itself. It occupies rather 
this intermediate position where abstract thinking is in contact 
with the individuality of consciousness qua individuality. The 
Unhappy Consciousness is this contact ; it is the unity of pure 
thinking and individuality; also it knows itself to be this thinking 
individuality or pure thinking, and knows the Unchangeable 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E L F - C O NS C I O US N E S S  
itself essentially as an individuality. But what it does not know 
is that this its object, the Unchangeable, which it knows essent૵­
ally in the form of individuality, is its own self, is itself the indivi­
duality of consciousness. 
2 1 7 . In this first mode, therefore, where we consider it as 
pure consciousness, it does not relate itself as a thinking conscious­
ness to its object, but, though it is indeed in itself, or implicitly, 
a pure thinking individuality, and its object is just this pure 
thinking (although the relation of one to the other is not itself pure 
thinking), it is only a movement towards thinking, and so is devo­
tion. Its thinking as such is no more than the chaotic jingling 
ofbells, or a mist of warm incense, a musical thinking that does 
not get as far as the Notion, which would be the sole, immanent 
objective mode of thought. This infinite, pure inner feeling does 
indeed come into possession of its object ; but this does not make 
its appearance in conceptual form, not as something [specula­
tively] comprehended, and appears therefore as something 
alien. What we have here, then, is the inward movement of 
the pure heart whichfeels itself, but itself as agonizingly self­
divided, the movement of an infinite yearning which is certain 
that its essence is such a pure heart, a pure thinking which thinks 
of itself as a particular individuality, certain of being known and 
recognized by this object, precisely because the latter thinks of 
itself as an individuality. At the same time, however, this 
essence is the unattainable beyond which, in being laid hold of, 
flees, or rather has already flown. It has already flown ; for it 
is in part the Unchangeable which thinks ofitselfas an individu­
ality, and consciousness therefore directly attains in it its own 
self-its own self, but as the antithesis of the Unchangeable ; in­
stead oflaying hold of the essence, it only feels it and has fallen 
back into itself. Since, in attaining itself, consciousness is unable 
to get away from itself as this antithesis to the Unchangeable, it 
has, instead oflaying hold of the essence, only laid hold of what is 
unessential. Just as, on the one hand, when striving to find itself 
in the essence it takes hold only of its own separate existence, 
so on the other hand it cannot lay hold of the 'other' as an indivi­
dual or as an actual Being. Where that 'other' is sought, it cannot 
be found, for it is supposed to be just a beyond, something that 
can not be found. When sought as a particular individual, it 
is not a universal individuality in the form of thought, not a 

B. S E L F-CO N S C I O U S N ES S  
Notion, but an individual in the form of an object, or an actual 
individual ; an object ofimmediate sense-certainty, and for that 
very reason only something that has already vanished. Con­
sciousness, therefore, can only find as a present reality the gravt' 
of its life. But because this grave is itself an actual existence and 
it is contrary to the nature of what actually exists to afford a 
lasting possession, the presence of that grave, too, is merely the 
struggle of an enterprise doomed to failure. But having learned 
from experience that the grave of its actual unchangeable Being 
has no actuality, that the vanished individuality, because it has 
vanished, is not the true individuality, consciousness will aban­
don its quest for the unchangeable individuality as an actual 
existence, or will stop trying to hold on to what has vanished. 
Only then is it capable of finding individuality in its genuine 
or universal form. 
2 r 8. But, in the first instance, the return of the feeling heart into 
itself is to be taken to mean that it has an actual existence as 
an individual. It is the pure heart which for us or in itself has found 
itself and is inwardly satiated, for although for itself in its feeling 
the essential Being is separated from it, yet this feeling is, in 
itself, a feeling of self; it has felt the object of its pure feeling 
and this object is itself. Thus it comes forward here as self-feel­
ing, or as an actual consciousness existing on its own account. 
In this return into self there comes to view its second relation­
ship, that of desire and work in which consciousness finds con­
firmation of that inner certainty of itself which we know it has 
attained, by overcoming and enjoying the existence alien to it, 
viz. existence in the form of independent things. But the Un­
happy Consciousness merely finds itself desiring and working ; it 
is not aware that to find itself active in this way implies that 
it is in fact certain of itself, and that its feeling of the alien exist­
ence is this self-feeling. Since it is not explicitly aware of this 
certainty, its inner life really remains a still incomplete self-cer­
tainty ; that confirmation which it would receive through work 
and enjoyment is therefore equally incomplete ; in other words, 
it must itself set at nought this confirmation so that it may in­
deed find in it confirmation, but only confirmation of what it 
is for itself, viz. of its dividedness. 
2 1 9. The world of actuality to which desire and work are 
directed is no longer for this consciousness something intrinsically 

F R E E D O M  O F  S E LF-CON S C I O U S N E S S  
1 33 
null, something merely to be set aside and consumed, but some­
thing like that consciousness itself, an actuality broken in two, 
which is only from one aspect intrinsically null, but from 
another aspect is also a sanctified world; it is the form of the 
Unchangeable, for this has retained individuality, and because, 
as the Unchangeable, it is a Universal, its individuality has in 
general the significance of all actuality. 
220. If consciousness were aware of being an independent 
consciousness, and the world of actuality were for it an absolute 
nullity, then in work and enjoyment it would attain to a feeling 
of its independence, since the world of actuality would be nulli­
fied by itself. But since this actuality is for consciousness the 
form of the Unchangeable, it is unable of itself to nullify it. On 
the contrary, since it does succeed in setting it at nought and 
enjoying it, this comes about through the Unchangeable's itself 
having surrendered its embodied form, and having relinquished it 
for the enjoyment of consciousness. Consciousness, on its part, 
likewise makes its appearance as an actuality, but also as divided 
within itself, and in its work and enjoyment this dividedness 
displays itself as breaking up into a relation to the world of actu­
ality or a being which is for itself, and into a being that is in 
itself. That relation to actuality is the changing of it or working 
on it, the being-for-self which belongs to the individual conscious­
ness as such. But, in this relation, it is also in itself or has intrinsic 
being; this aspect belongs to the Unchangeable beyond and 
consists of faculties and powers, a gift from an alien source, 
which the Unchangeable makes over to consciousness to make 
use of. 
22 1 .  Accordingly, consciousness in its activity is, in the first 
instance, a relationship of two extremes. On one side it stands 
as actively present, while confronting it is a passive actuality : 
the two sides are in relation with one another, but both have 
also withdrawn into the Unchangeable and stand fast in them­
selves. It is, therefore, only a superficial element from each side 
that is involved in the moving interplay of their mutual opposi­
tion. The [passive] extreme of actuality is set aside by the active 
extreme ; but the actuality, on its side, can only be set aside 
because its own unchangeable essence sets it aside, repels itself 
from itself, and hands over what is repelled to the active 
extreme. The active force appears as the power in which actu-

1 34 
B. S E L F-CO N S C I O US N ES S  
ality is dissolved ; for this very reason, however, the conscious­
ness to which the intrinsic or essential Being is an 'other', regards 
this power which it displays in its activity to be the beyond of 
itself. Instead, therefore, of returning from its activity back into 
itself, and having obtained confirmation of its self-certainty, 
consciousness really reflects this activity back into the other 
extreme, which is thus exhibited as a pure universal, as the abso­
lute power from which the activity started in all directions, and 
which is the essence both of the self-dividing extremes as they 
at first appeared, and of their interchanging relationship itself. 
222. The fact that the unchangeable consciousness renounces 
and surrenders its embodied form, while, on the other hand, the 
particular individual consciousness gives thanks [for the gift], i.e. 
denies itself the satisfaction of being conscious of its independence, 
and assigns the essence of its action not to itself but to the 
beyond, through these two moments of reciprocal self-surrender 
of both parts, consciousness does, of course, gain a sense of its 
unity with the Unchangeable. But this unity is at the same time 
affected with division, is again broken within itself, and from 
it there emerges once more the antithesis of the universal and 
the individual. For though consciousness renounces the show of 
satisfying its feeling of self, it obtains the actual satisfaction of 
it ; for it has been desire, work, and enjoyment; as consciousness 
it has willed, acted, and enjoyed. Similarly, even its giving rif thanks, 
in which it acknowledges the other extreme as the essential 
Being and counts itself nothing, is its own act which counter­
balances the action of the other extreme, and meets the self­
sacrificing beneficence with a like action. If the other extreme 
delivers over to consciousness only the suiface of its being, yet 
consciousness also gives thanks ; and in surrendering its own 
action, i.e. its essential being, it really does more than the other 
which only sheds a superficial element of itself. Thus the entire 
movement is reflected not only in the actual desiring, working, 
and enjoyment, but even in the very giving of thanks where 
the reverse seems to take place, in the extreme rif individuality. 
Consciousness feels itself therein as this particular individual, 
and does not let itself be deceived by its own seeming renuncia­
tion, for the truth of the matter is that it has not renounced itself. 
What has been brought about is only the double reflection into 
the two extremes ; and the result is the renewed division into 

FR E E D O M  O F  S E L F - CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
the opposed consciousness of the Unchangeable, and the con­
sciousness of willing, performing, and enjoying, and self­
renunciation itself which confronts it ; in other words, the con­
sciousness of independent individuality in general. 
223. With this appears the third relationship of the process 
of this consciousness, which proceeds from the second as a con­
sciousness that has truly proved itself to be independent, by its 
will and its deed. In the first relationship it was merely the 
notion of an actual consciousness, or the inner feeling or heart 
which is not yet actual in action and enjoyment ; the second 
is this actualization as an external action and enjoyment. 
Returned from this external activity, however, consciousness 
has experienced itself as actual and effective, or knows that it is 
in truth in and for itself. But here, now, is where the enemy 
is met with in his most characteristic form. In the struggle of 
the heart and emotions the individual consciousness is only a 
musical abstract moment. In work and enjoyment which make 
this unsubstantial existence a reality, it can directly forget itselj; 
and the consciousness of its own particular role in this realization 
is cancelled out by the act of thankful acknowledgement. But 
this cancelling-out is in truth a return of consciousness into 
itself, and, moreover, into itself as the actuality which it knows 
to be true. 
224. This third relationship in which this true actuality is 
one of the terms is the relation of that actuality, as a nothingness, 
to the universal Being. The process of this relation we have yet 
to consider. 
225. To begin with, as regards the contradictory relation in 
which consciousness takes its own reality to be immediately a 
nothingness, its actual doing thus becomes a doing of nothing, 
its enjoyment a feeling ofits wretchedness. Work and enjoyment 
thus lose all universal content and significance, for if they had any, 
they would have an absolute being of their own. Both withdraw 
into their mere particularity, which consciousness is set upon 
reducing to nothingness. Consciousness is aware of itself as this 
actual individual in the animal functions. These are no longer 
performed naturally and without embarrassment, as matters 
trifling in themselves which cannot possess any importance or 
essential significance for Spirit; instead, since it is in them that 
the enemy reveals himself in his characteristic shape, they are 

B .  S E L F- C O N S C I O U SN E S S  
rather the object of serious endeavour, and become precisely 
matters of the utmost importance. This enemy, however, 
renews himself in his defeat, and consciousness, in fixing its 
attention on him, far from freeing itself from him, really remains 
for ever in contact with him, and for ever sees itself as defiled ; 
and, since at the same time this object of its efforts, instead of 
being something essential, is of the meanest character, instead 
ofbeing a universal, is the merest particular, we have here only 
a personality confined to its own self and its own petty actions, 
a personality brooding over itself, as wretched as it is impo­
verished. 
226. But to both ofthese moments, the feeling of its wretch­
edness and the poverty of its actions, is linked the conscious­
ness of its unity with the Unchangeable. For the attempted 
direct destruction of what it actually is is mediated by the thought 
of the Unchangeable, and takes place in this relation to it. The 
mediated relation constitutes the essence of the negative move­
ment in which consciousness turns against its particular indivi­
duality, but which, qua relation, is in itself positive, and will bring 
consciousness itself to an awareness of its unity with the Un­
changeable. 
227. This mediated relation is thus a syllogism in which the 
individuality, initially fixed in its antithesis to the in-itself, is 
united with this other extreme only thwugh a third term. 
Through this middle term the one extreme, the Unchangeable, 
is brought into relation with the unessential consciousness, 
which equally is brought into relation with the Unchangeable 
only through this middle term ; thus this middle term is one 
which presents the two extremes to one another, and ministers 
to each in its dealings with the other. This middle term is itself 
a conscious Being [the mediator], for it is an action which medi­
ates consciousness as such ; the content of this action is the 
extinction of its particular individuality which consciousness is 
undertaking. 
228. In the mediator, then, this consciousness frees itself from 
action and enjoyment so far as they are regarded as its own. 
As a separate, independent extreme, it rejects the essence of its 
will, and casts upon the mediator or minister [priest] its own 
freedom of decision, and herewith the responsibility for its own 
action. This mediator, having a direct relationship with the un-

F R E E D O M  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N ES S  
' 37 
changeable Being, ministers by giving advice on what is right. 
The action, since it follows upon the decision of someone else, 
ceases, as regards the doing or the willing of it, to be its own. 
But there is still left to the unessential consciousness the objective 
aspect, viz. the fruit of its labour, and its enjoyment. These, 
therefore, it rejects as well, and just as it renounces its will, so 
it renounces the actuality it received in work and enjoyment. 
It renounces them, partly as identified with the truth it has 
attained regarding its own self-conscious independence-in­
asmuch as what it does is foreign to it, a thinking and speaking 
of what is meaningless to it ; partly, as identified with external 
possessions-when it gives away part of what it has acquired 
through work ; and partly, also, as identified with the 
enjoyment it has had-when, in its fastings and mortifications, 
it once more completely denies itself that enjoyment. 
229. Through these moments of surrender, first of its right 
to decide for itself, then of its property and enjoyment, and fin­
ally through the positive moment of practising what it does not 
understand, it truly and completely deprives itself of the con­
sciousness of inner and outer freedom, of the actuality in which 
consciousness exists for itself. It has the certainty of having truly 
divested itself of its '/', and of having turned its immediate self­
consciousness into a Thing, into an objective existence. Only 
through this actual sacrifice could it demonstrate this self­
renunciation. For only therein does the deception vanish which 
lies in the inner acknowledgement of gratitude through heart, 
sentiment, and tongue, an acknowledgement which indeed dis­
claims all power pertaining to its own independent existence, 
ascribing it all to a gift from above, but which in this very dis­
claimer, holds on to its own particular existence, does so out­
wardly in the possessions it does not surrender, inwardly in the 
consciousness of the decision it has itself made, and in the con­
sciousness of its content which it has itself determined, which 
it has not exchanged for one coming from outside, which last 
would fill it up with what is meaningless for it. 
230. But in the sacrifice actually carried out, consciousness, 
having nullified the action as its own doing, has also in principle 
obtained relieffrom its misery. That this relief has been obtained 
in principle is, however, the action of the other extreme of the 
syllogism, which is the essence possessed of intrinsic being. But 

B. S E LF-CON S C I O U S N ES S  
that sacrifice made by the unessential extreme was at the same 
time not a one-sided action, but contained within itself the 
action of the other. For the surrender of one's own will is only 
from one aspect negative; in principle, however, or in itself, 
it is at the same time positive, viz. the positing of will as the 
will of an 'other', and specifically of will, not as a particular, 
but as a universal will. This positive meaning of the negatively 
posited particular will is taken by this consciousness to be the 
will of the other extreme, the will which, precisely because it 
is an 'other' for consciousness, becomes actual for it, not through 
the Unhappy Consciousness itself, but through a Third, the 
mediator as counsellor. Hence, for consciousness, its will does 
indeed become universal and essential will, but consciousness 
itself does not take itself to be this essential will. The surrender 
of its own will, as a particular will, is not taken by it to be in 
principle the positive aspect of universal will. Similarly, its giv­
ing up of possessions and enjoyment has only the same negative 
meaning, and the universal which thereby comes to be for it, 
is not regarded as its own doing. This unity of objectivity and 
being-for-self, which lies in the Notion of action, and which 
therefore becomes for consciousness essence and object-this 
unity is not the principle of its action, and so too it does not 
become an objectfor consciousness, directly and through itself. 
Rather, it lets the mediating minister express this certainty, a 
certainty which is itself still incomplete, that its misery is only 
in principle the reverse, i.e. that its action brings it only i1l principle 
self-satisfaction or blessed enjoyment ; that its pitiable action 
too is only in principle the reverse, viz. an absolute action ; that 
in principle, action is only really action when it is the action 
of a particular individual. Butforitse/j, action and its own actual 
doing remain pitiable, its enjoyment remains pain, and the 
overcoming of these in a positive sense remains a beyond. But 
in this object, in which it finds that its own action and being, 
as being that of this particular consciousness, are being and 
action in themselves, there has arisen for consciousness the idea 
of Reason, of the certainty that, in its particular individuality, 
it has being absolutely in itself, or is all reality. 

C .  ( AA. ) REA S O N  
V .  T H E  C E RT A I N T Y  A N D  T R U T H  O F  R E A S O N  
23 1 .  I n  grasping the thought that the single individual con­
sciousness is in itself Absolute Essence, consciousness has 
returned into itself. For the Unhappy Consciousness the in-itself 
is the beyond of itself. But its movement has resulted in positing 
the completely developed single individual, or the single indivi­
dual that is an actual consciousness, as the negative of itself, viz. 
as the objective extreme ; in other words, it has successfully 
struggled to divest itself of its being-for-self and has turned it 
into [mere] being. In this movement it has also become aware 
of its unity with this universal, a unity which, for us, no longer 
falls outside ofit since the superseded single individual is the 
universal, and which, since consciousness maintains itself in this 
its negativity, is present in consciousness as such as its essence. 
Its truth is that which appears in the syllogism whose extremes 
appeared as held absolutely asunder, as the middle term which 
proclaims to the unchangeable consciousness that the single in­
dividual has renounced itself, and, to the individual, that the 
Unchangeable is for it no longer an extreme, but is reconciled 
with it. This middle term is the unity directly aware of both 
and connecting them, and is the consciousness of t!leir unity, 
which it proclaims to consciousness and thereby to itself, the 
consciousness of the certainty of being all truth. 
232. Now that self-consciousness is Reason, its hitherto nega­
tive relation to otherness turns round into a positive relation. 
Up till now it has been concerned only with its independence 
and freedom, concerned to save and maintain itself for itself 
at the expense ofthe world, or of its own actuality, both of which 
appeared to it as the negative of its essence. But as Reason, 
assured ofitself, it is at peace with them, and can endure them ; 
for it is certain that it is itself reality, or that everything actual 
is none other than itself; its thinking is itself directly actuality, 
and thus its relationship to the latter is that of idealism. Appre­
hending itself in this way, it is as if the world had for it only 

C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
now come into being ; previously it did not understand the 
world ; it desired it and worked on it, withdrew from it into 
itself and abolished it as an existence on its own account, and 
its own self qua consciousness-both as consciousness of the 
world as essence and as consciousness of its nothingness. In thus 
apprehending itself, after losing the grave of its truth, after the 
abolition of its actuality is itself abolished, and after the single­
ness of consciousness is for it in itself Absolute Essence, it dis­
covers the world as its new real world, which in its permanence 
holds an interest for it which previously lay only in its trans­
iency; for the existence of the world becomes for self-conscious­
ness its own truth and presence; it is certain of experiencing only 
itself therein. 
233· Reason is the certainty of consciousness that it is all 
reality ; thus does idealism express its Notion. Just as conscious­
ness, that comes on the scene as Reason, possesses that certainty 
directly in itself, so too does idealism' give direct expression to 
that certainty : 'I am I', in the sense that the 'I' which is an 
object for me is the sole object, is all reality and all that is 
present. Here, the 'I' that is object for me, is not merely an 
empty object in general, as it is for self-consciousness as such, 
nor is it, as in free self-consciousness, merely an object that with­
draws itself from other objects which retain their worth alongside 
it ; on the contrary, it is for self-consciousness an object such 
that any other object whatever is a non-being. But self-conscious­
ness is all reality, not merely for itself but also in itself, only 
· through becoming this reality, or rather through demonstrating 
itself to be such. It demonstrates itself to be this along the path 
in which first, in the dialectic movement of'meaning', perceiv­
ing and understanding, otherness as an intrinsic being vanishes. 
Then, in the movement through the independence of conscious­
ness in lordship and bondage, through the conception of free­
dom, through the liberation that comes from Scepticism and 
the struggle for absolute liberation by the consciousness divided 
against itself, otherness, in so far as it is only for consciousness, 
vanishes for consciousness itself. There appeared two aspects, one 
after the other : one in which the essence or the True had for 
consciousness the determinateness of being, the other in which 
it had the determinateness of being only for consciousness. But 
the two reduced themselves to a single truth, viz. that what is, 

C E R T A I N TY A N D  T R U TH OF R E A S O N  
'4' 
or the in-itself, only is in so far as it is for consciousness, and 
what is for consciousness is also in itself or has intrinsic being. 
The consciousness which is this truth has this path behind it 
and has forgotten it, and comes on the scene immediately as 
Reason ; in other words, this Reason which comes immediately 
on the scene appears only as the certainty of that truth. Thus 
it merely asserts that it is all reality, but does not itself com­
prehend this ; for it is along that forgotten path that this 
immediately expressed assertion is comprehended. And 
equally, anyone who has not trodden this path finds this asser­
tion incomprehensible when he hears it in this pure form­
although he does as a matter of fact make the assertion him­
self in a concrete shape [i.e. the assertion is implicit in his 
behaviour]. 
. 234· The idealism that does not demonstrate that path but 
starts off with this assertion is therefore, too, a pure assertion 
which does not comprehend its own self, nor can it make itself 
comprehensible to others. It proclaims an immediate certainty 
which is confronted by other immediate certainties, which 
have, however, been lost on that same path. With equal right, 
therefore, the assertions of these other certainties, too, take their 
place alongside the assertion of that certainty. Reason appeals 
to the self-consciousness of each and every consciousness : '/ am 
I, my object and my essence is I' ; and no one will deny Reason 
this truth. But in basing itself on this appeal, Reason sanctions 
the truth of the other certainty, viz. that there is for me an 
'other' ; that an other than 'I' is object and essence for me, or, 
in that I am object and essence to myself, I am only so by draw­
ing back from the 'other' altogether, and taking my place as 
an actuality alongside it. Not until Reason comes on the scene 
as a reflection from this opposite certainty does its affirmation 
about itself present itself not merely as a certainty and an asser­
tion, but as truth ; and not merely alongside other truths but 
as the sole truth. Its immediate appearance on the scene is the 
abstraction of its actual presence, the essence and the in-itself of 
which is the absolute Notion, i.e. the movement which has brought 
it into being. Consciousness will determine its relationship to 
otherness or its object in various ways, according to the precise 
stage it has reached in the development of the World-Spirit into 
self-consciousness. How it immediately finds and determines itself 

C .  ( A A . )  REASON 
and its object at any time, or the way in which it is for itself, 
depends on what it has already become, or what it already is 
in itself 
235. Reason is the certainty of being all reality. This in-itself 
or this reality is, however, a universal pure and simple, the pure 
abstraction of reality. It is the first positivity in which self-con­
sciousness is in its own self explicitly for itself, and c /' is therefore 
only the pure essentiality of the existent, or is the simple category. 
The category, which formerly had the meaning of being the 
essentiality of the existent-and it was undetermined whether of 
the existent as such, or of the existent contrasted with conscious­
ness-is now the essentiality or simple unity of the existent only 
as a reality that thinks ; in other words, the category means 
this, that self-consciousness and being are the same essence, the 
same, not through comparison, but in and for themselves. It 
is only the one-sided, spurious idealism that lets this unity again 
come on the scene as consciousness, on one side, confronted by 
an in-itself, on the other. But now this category or simple unity 
of self-consciousness and being possesses difference in itself; for 
its essence is just this, to be immediately one and selfsame in 
otherness, or in absolute difference. The difference therefore is, 
but is perfectly transparent, and a difference that is at the same 
time none. It appears as a plurality of categories. Since idealism 
proclaims the simple unity of self-consciousness to be all reality૶ 
and immediately makes it the essence without having grasped it 
as the absolutely negative essence--only this has negation, 
determinateness, or difference within it-this second assertion 
is even more incomprehensible than the first, viz. that in the 
category there are diferences or species of categories. The asser­
tion as such, as also the assertion as to any specific number of 
species of categories, is a new assertion which, however, itself 
implies that we no longer have to accept it as an assertion. For 
since the difference originates in the pure 'I', in the pure Under­
standing itself, it is thereby made explicit that the immediacy, 
the making of assertions and [mere] finding of differences, is 
here given, and we begin to comprehend. But to pick up the 
plurality of categories again in some way or other as a welcome 
find, taking them, e.g., from the various judgements, and com­
placently accepting them so, is in fact to be regarded as an 
outrage on Science. Where else should the Understanding be 

C E R TA I N TY AND T R U T H  O F  R E ASON 
1 43 
able to demonstrate a necessity, if it is unable to do so in its 
own self, which is pure necessity ? 
236. Now, because, in this way, the pure essentiality of 
things, like their difference, belongs to Reason, we can, strictly 
speaking, no longer talk of things at all, i.e. of something which 
would be for consciousness merely the negative of itself. For to 
say that the many categories are species of the pure category 
means that this latter is still their genus or essence, and is not 
opposed to them. But ambiguity already attaches to them, since 
in their plurality they possess otherness in contrast to the pure 
category. In fact, they contradict the pure category by such 
plurality, and J:he pure unity must supersede them in itself, 
thereby constituting itself a negative unity of the differences. But, 
as negative unity, it excludes from itself both the differences as 
such, as well as that first immediate pure unity as such, and is 
a singular individual; a new category which is consciousness as 
exclusive, i.e. consciousness for which there is an 'other'. The 
singular individual is the transition of the category from its 
Notion to an external reality, the pure schema which is both con­
sciousness, and, since it is a singular individual and an exclusive 
unit, the pointing to an 'other'. But this 'other' of the category is 
merely the other first-mentioned categories, viz. pure essentiality 
and pure diference ; and in this category, i.e. just in the posited­
ness of the 'other' , or in this 'other' itself, consciousness is 
equally itself. Each of these different moments points or refers 
to another ; but at the same time they do not attain to otherness. 
The pure category points to the species, which pass over into 
the negative category or singular individual ; this latter, how­
ever, points back to them. It is itself pure consciousness which 
is aware in each of them of being always this clear unity with 
itself, but a unity which equally is referred to an 'other', which 
in being, has vanished, and in vanishing also comes into being 
again. 
237. Here we see pure consciousness posited in a twofold 
manner : once as the restless movement to and fro through all 
its moments, aware in them of an otherness which is superseded 
in the act of grasping it ; and again, rather as the tranquil unity 
certain of its [own] truth. For this unity that movement is the 
'other', while for this movement that tranquil unity is the 
'other' ; and consciousness and object alternate within these 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
reciprocal determinations. Thus on the one hand consciousness 
finds itself moving about searching here and there, its object 
being the pure in-itself and essence ; on the other hand, it knows 
itself to be the simple category, and the object is the movement 
of the different moments. Consciousness, however, as essence 
is this whole process itself, of passing out of itself as simple cate­
gory into a singular individual, into the object, and of con­
templating this process in the object, nullifying the object as 
distinct (from it] , appropriating it as its own, and proclaiming 
itself as this certainty of being all reality, of being both itself 
and its object. 
238. Its first declaration is only this abstract empty phrase 
that everything is its own. For the certainty of being all reality 
is at first [only] the pure category. This Reason which first 
recognizes itself in the object finds expression in the empty 
idealism which grasps Reason only as it first comes on the 
scene ; and fancies that by pointing out this pure 'mine' of con­
sciousness in all being, and by declaring all things to be sensa­
tions or ideas, it has demonstrated this 'mine' of consciousness 
to be complete reality. It is bound, therefore, to be at the same 
time absolute empiricism, for in order to give filling to the 
empty 'mine', i.e. to get hold of difference with all its developed 
formations, its Reason requires an extraneous impulse, in which 
first is to be found the multiplicity of sensations and ideas. This 
idealism therefore becomes the same kind of self-contradictory 
ambiguity as Scepticism, except that, while this expresses itself 
negatively, the former does so positively ; but it fails equally 
with Scepticism to bring together its contradictory thoughts of 
pure consciousness being all reality, while the extraneous 
impulse or sensations and ideas are equally reality. I nstead of 
bringing them together, it shifts from one to the other, and is 
caught up in the spurious, i.e. the sensuous, infinite. Since 
Reason is all reality in the sense of the abstract 'mine', and the 
'other' is f0r it something indifferent and extraneous, what is 
here made explicit is that kind of knowing of an 'other' by 
Reason, which we met with in the form of 'meaning', 'perceiv­
ing' and the 'Understanding', which apprehends what is 
'meant' and what is 'perceived' .  Such a knowing is at the same 
time pronounced by the very principle of this idealism not to 
be a true knowing, for only in the unity of apperception lies 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
the truth ofknowing. The pure Reason of this idealism, i n  order 
to reach this 'other' which is essential to it, and thus is the in­
itself, but which it does not have within it, is therefore thrown 
back by its own self on to that knowing which is not a knowing 
of what is true ; in this way, it condemns itself of its own know­
ledge and volition to being an untrue kind of knowing, and can­
not get away from 'meaning' and 'perceiving', which for it have 
no truth. I t  is involved in a direct contradiction ; it asserts 
essence to be a d  uali ty of opposed factors, the unity of apperception 
and equally a Thing ; whether the Thing is called an extraneous 
impulse, or an empirical or sensuous entity, or the Thing-in­
itself, it still remains in principle the same, i.e. extraneous to 
that unity. 
239. This idealism is involved in this contradiction because 
it asserts the abstract Notion of Reason to be the True; con­
sequently, reality directly comes to be for it a reality that is 
just as much not that of Reason, while Reason is at the same 
time supposed to be all reality. This Reason remains a restless 
searching and in its very searching declares that the satisfaction 
of finding is a sheer impossibility. Actual Reason, however, is 
not so inconsistent as that ; on the contrary, being at first only 
the certainty that it is all reality, it is aware in this Notion that 
qua certainty, qua 'I', it is not yet in truth reality, and it is 
impelled to raise its certainty to truth and to give filling to the 
empty 'mine'. 
A .  O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
240. I t  is true that we now see this consciousness, for which 
Being [ Sein] means what is its own [ Seinen ] ,  revert to the stand­
point of 'meaning' and 'perceiving' ; but not in the sense that 
it is certain of what is merely an 'other'. Previously, its percep­
tion and experience of various aspects of the Thing were some­
thing that only happened to consciousness ; but here, conscious­
ness makes its own observations and experiments. 'Meaning' and 
'perceiving', which previously were supersededfor us, are now 
superseded by and for consciousness itself. Reason sets to work 
to know the truth, to find in the form of a Notion that which, 
for ' meaning' and 'perceiving', is a Thing; i.e. it seeks to possess 
in thinghood the consciousness only of itself. Reason now has, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
therefore, a universal interest i n  the world, because i t  i s  certain 
of its presence in the world, or that the world present to it is 
rational. I t  seeks its 'other', knowing that therein it possesses 
nothing else but itself: it seeks only its own infinitude. 
24 1 .  While at first it is only dimly aware of its presence in 
the actual world, or only knows quite simply that this world 
is its own, it strides forward in this belief to a general appropria­
tion of its own assured possessions, and plants the symbol of 
its sovereignty on every height and in every depth. But this 
superficial ' [it is] mine', is not its ultimate interest ; the joy of 
this general appropriation finds still in its possessions the alien 
'other' which abstract Reason does not contain within itself. 
Reason is dimly aware of itself as a profounder essence than 
the pure 'I' is, and must demand that difference, that being, 
in its manifold variety, become its very own, that it behold itself 
as the actual world and find itself present as an [outer] shape 
and Thing. But even if Reason digs into the very entrails of 
things and opens every vein in them so that it may gush forth 
to meet itself, it will not attain this joy ; it must have completed 
itself inwardly before it can experience the consummation of 
itself. 
242. Consciousness observes; i.e. Reason wants to find and to 
have itself as existent object, as an object that is actually and 
sensuously present. The consciousness that observes in this way 
means, and indeed says, that it wants to learn, not about itself 
but, on the contrary, about the essence of things qua things. 
That this consciousness means and says this, is implied in the 
fact that it is Reason ; but Reason as such is not as yet object 
for this consciousness. If it knew that Reason is equally the 
essence of things and of consciousness itself, and that it is only 
in consciousness that Reason can be present in its own proper 
shape, it would go down into the depths of its own being, and 
seek Reason there rather than in things. If it did find it there, 
it would be directed to the actual world outside again, in order 
to behold therein Reason's sensuous expression, but at the same 
time to take it essentially as Notion. Reason, as it immediately 
comes before us as the certainty of consciousness that it is all 
reality, takes its reality in the sense of the immediacy of being, 
and similarly, the unity of the 'I' with this objective being in 
the sense of an immediate unity, in which it has not yet divided 

O B S E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
147 
and reunited the moments of being and the 'I', or which has 
not yet discerned them. Reason, therefore, in its observational 
activity, approaches things in the belief that it truly apprehends 
them as sensuous things opposite to the ' I' ; but what it actually 
does, contradicts this belief, for it apprehends them intellectually, 
it transforms their sensuous being into Notions, i.e. into just that 
kind of being which is at the same time 'I', hence transforms 
thought into the form of being, or being into the form of 
thought; it maintains, in fact, that it is only as Notions that 
things have truth. Consciousness, in this observational activity, 
comes to know what things are ; but we come to know what con­
sciousness itselfis. The outcome ofits movement will be that what 
consciousness is in itself will become explicit for it. 
243· This action of Reason in its observational role we have 
to consider in the moments of its movement : how it looks upon 
Nature and Spirit, and, lastly, upon the relationship of both 
in the form of sensuous being, and how it seeks itself as actuality 
in the form of immediate being. 
a. Observation cif Nature 
244· When the unthinking consciousness declares observa­
tion and experience to be the source of truth, what it says may 
well sound as if only tasting, smelling, feeling, hearing, and see­
ing were involved. It forgets, in the zeal with which it recom­
mends tasting, smelling, etc., to say that it has no less essentially 
determined the object of this sensuous apprehension, and this 
determination is at least as valid for the object as is the sensuous 
apprehension. It will also readily admit that its concern is not 
wholly and solely with perception, and will not let, e.g., the 
perception that this penknife lies alongside this snuff-box, pass 
for an observation. What is perceived should at least have the 
significance of a universal, not of a sensuous particular. 
245· This universal is thus, to begin with, only what remains 
identical with itself; its movement is only the uniform recurrence 
of the same action. Consciousness, which thus far finds in the 
object only universality, or the abstract 'it is mine', must take upon 
itself the movement proper to the object and, since it is not yet 
the understanding of the object, must at least be the remem­
brance of it, which expresses in a universal way what in actu­
ality is present only as a single item. This superficial raising 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
out of singularity, and the equally superficial form of uni­
versality into which the sensuous object is merely taken up, 
without becoming in its own self a universal, this activity of 
describing things, is not as yet a movement in the object itself; 
the movement is really only in the describing of the object. The 
object, as described, has lost its interest ; when one has been 
described, then another must be started on, and continually 
looked for, in order that the activity of describing shall not come 
to an end. If it is no longer easy to find new whole things, then 
we must go back to those already found, divide and analyse 
them further, and bring to light fresh aspects of thinghood in 
them. This restless, insatiable instinct can never run out of 
material ; to discover a new genus of major importance, or even 
a new planet which, although an individual, possesses the 
nature of a universal, can be the lot of only a lucky few. But 
the line of demarcation of what is distinctive of, say, elephant, 
oak, gold, of what is genus and what species, passes through many 
stages into the endless particularization of the chaos of animals 
and plants, of rocks, or the metals, earths, etc., that only force 
and skill can bring to view. I n  this realm where the universal 
is undetermined, where particularization approximates again 
to singleness, and again, here and there, descends to it entirely, 
there is opened up an inexhaustible supply of material for 
observation and description. But here, at the boundary-line of 
the universal where an immense field is opened up for that in­
stinct, it can have found not an immeasurable wealth, but in­
stead merely the bounds of Nature and of its own activity. It 
can no longer know whether what appears to possess intrinsic 
being is not really something contingent. What bears in itself 
the impress of a confused or immature feeble structure, barely 
developing out of rudimentary indeterminateness, cannot 
claim even to be described. 
246. While this searching and describing seems to be con­
cerned only with things, we see that in fact it does not run away 
into sense-perception. On the contrary, what enables things to 
be intelligently apprehended is more important to it than the 
rest of the complex of sensuous properties which, of course, the 
thing itself cannot dispense with, but which consciousness can 
do without. Through this distinction into what is essential and 
what is unessential, the Notion rises above the dispersion of the 

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
149 
sensuous, and cognition thus makes it clear that it is just as 
essentially concerned with its own self as with things. This 
duplication of what is essential gives rise to hesitation on the 
part of cognition as to whether what is essential and necessary 
for cognition is so also in respect of things. On the one hand, 
the diferentiae enable cognition to distinguish one thing from 
another ; but, on the other hand, it is not the unessential aspect 
of things that has to be known, but that characteristic whereby 
the things themselves break loose from the general continuity of 
being as such, separate themselves from others, and are explicitly 
for themselves. Diferentiae are supposed, not merely to have an 
essential connection with cognition, but also to accord with the 
essential characteristics of things, and our artificial system is 
supposed to accord with Nature's own system and to express 
only this. This follows necessarily from the Notion of Reason ; 
and the instinct of Reason-for, in this observational activity, 
Reason operates only instinctively-has also in its systems 
achieved this unity, viz. its objects are themselves so constituted 
that they contain in themselves an essentiality or a being-for­
self, and are not merely the accident of a particular moment 
or a particular place. The distinguishing marks of animals, e.g., 
are taken from their claws and teeth ; for in point of fact it is 
not only cognition that thereby distinguishes one animal from 
another, but each animal itself separates itself from others 
thereby; by means of these weapons it maintains itself in its 
independence and in its detachment from the generality. The 
plant, on the other hand, does not attain to a being-for-self but 
merely touches the boundary-line of individuality. It is at this 
boundary, therefore, where there is a show of division into sexes, 
that plants have been studied and distinguished from one 
another. What, however, stands on a still lower level cannot 
itself any longer distinguish itself from another, but in being 
contrasted with it gets lost. Being that is at rest, and being that 
is in a relation, come into conflict with each other; a Thing 
in the latter case is something different from what it is in the 
former state, whereas the single individual maintains itself in 
its relation to something else. What, however, is unable to do 
this and, qua chemical object, becomes something else than it is 
empirically, confuses cognition, and gives rise to the same con­
flicting views as to whether it ought to keep to one side or the 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
other, since the thing itself does not remain identical with itself, 
and in it the two sides fall apart. 
24 7. I n  those systems, therefore, which are characterized by 
a fixed, general selfsameness, this means that both the cognitive 
side and the things themselves remain selfsame. But this expan­
sion of the self-identical determinatenesses, each of which de­
scribes the course of its progress unhindered and with scope for 
free play, leads of necessity equally to its opposite, to the con­
fusion of these determinatenesses ; for the differentia, the general 
characteristic, is the unity of opposites, of what is determinate 
and what is in itself universal ; it must therefore split up into 
this antithesis. If, now, on the one side, the determinateness 
gains the ascendancy over the universal in which it has its 
essence, on the other side again, this universal equally main­
tains its control over that determinateness, pushes it to its boun­
dary and there mixes up its distinctions and essentialities. 
Observation, which kept them properly apart and believed that 
in them it had something firm and settled, sees principles over­
lapping one another, transitions and confusions developing ; 
what it at first took to be absolutely separate, it sees combined 
with something else, and what it reckoned to be in combination, 
it sees apart and separate. So it is that observation which clings 
to passive, unbroken selfsameness of being, inevitably sees itself 
tormented just in its most general determinations-e.g. of what 
are the differentiae of an animal or a plant-by instances which 
rob it of every determination, invalidate the universality to 
which it had risen, and reduce it to an observation and descrip­
tion which is devoid of thought. 
248. Observation which confines itself in this way to what 
is simple, or restrains the scattered sensuous elements by the 
universal, thus finds in its object the confusion of its principle, 
because what is determinate must, through its own nature, lose 
itself in its opposite. Reason must therefore move on from 
the inert determinateness which had a show of permanence, 
to observing it ilS it is in truth, viz. as relating itself to its oppo­
site. What are called differentiae are passive determinatenesses 
which, when expressed and apprehended as simple, do not 
represent their nature, which is to be vanishing moments of a 
movement which returns back into itself. Since Reason now 
reaches the stage of looking for the determinateness as some-

O BS E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
thing which essentially is not for itself, but which passes over 
into its opposite, it seeks for the law and the Notion of the deter­
minateness. True, it seeks for them equally as an actuality in 
the form of immediate being, but this will, in fact, vanish for it, 
and the aspects of the law become pure moments or abstrac­
tions, so that the law comes to light in the nature of the Notion, 
which has destroyed within itself the indifferent subsistence of 
sensuous reality. 
249. To the observing consciousness, the truth rif the law is 
found in experience, in the same way that sensuous being is [an 
object] for consciousness ; is not in and for itself. But if the law 
does not have its truth in the Notion, it is a contingency, not 
a necessity, not, in fact, a law. But the fact that it is essentially 
in the form of Notion, not only does not conflict with its being 
accessible to observation, but rather for that very reason gives 
it a necessary existence, and makes it [an object] for observation. 
The universal, in the sense of the universality rif Reason, is also uni­
versal in the sense implied in the above Notion, viz. that it is 
for consciousness, that it displays itself as something present and 
actual. In other words, the Notion displays itself in the form 
of thinghood and sensuous being ; but it does not on that 
account lose its nature, nor relapse into an inert subsistence or 
an indifferent succession. What is universally valid is also uni­
versally effective ; what ought to be, in fact also is, and what 
only ought to be without [actually] being, has no truth. The 
instinct of Reason, for its part, rightly holds firmly to this stand­
point, and refuses to be led astray by figments of thought which 
only ought to be and, as 'oughts', are credited with truth, 
although they are nowhere met with in experience ; or by hypo­
theses as little as by all the other invisible entities of a perennial 
'ought'. For Reason is just this certainty of possessing reality ; 
and what is not present for consciousness as something existing 
in its own right [Selbstwesen], i.e. what does not appear, is for 
consciousness nothing at all. 
250. That the truth of a law is essentially reality no doubt 
again becomes for that consciousness which remains at the level 
of observation an antithesis to the Notion and to what is in­
trinsically universal ; in other words, it does not regard an object 
such as its law, as having the nature of Reason, but fancies that 
it is something alien. But it contradicts its own belief in the fact 

1 52 
C. ( A A . )  R E ASON 
that it does not itself take its universality to mean that every single 
sensuous thing must have provided evidence of the law, in order 
to enable the truth of the law to be asserted. The assertion that 
stones fall when raised above the ground and dropped certainly 
does not require us to make this experiment with every stone ; 
it does perhaps mean that the experiment must have been made 
with at least a great number, and from this we can then by anal­
ogy draw an inference about the rest with the greatest prob­
ability or with perfect right. But analogy not only does not give 
a perfect right, but on account of its nature contradicts itself 
so often that the inference to be drawn from analogy itself is 
rather that analogy does not permit an inference to be made. 
Probability, which is what the result would amount to, loses, in 
face of truth, every distinction of lesser and greater probability ; 
let it be as great as it may, it is nothing as against truth. But 
the instinct ofReason does in fact take such laws for truth, and 
it is when it does not discern necessity in them that it comes 
to make this distinction, and reduces the truth of the matter 
itself to the level of probability, in order to indicate the imper­
fect way in which truth presents itself to the consciousness which 
has not yet attained to insight into the pure Notion ; for uni­
versality is present only as a simple immediate universality. But, 
at the same time, on account of this universality, the law has 
truth for consciousness. That a stone falls, is true for conscious­
ness because in its heaviness the stone has in and for itself 
that essential relation to the earth which is expressed in 
falling. Consciousness thus has in experience the being of the 
law, but it has, too, the law in the form of a Notion ; and it is 
only because of the two aspects together that the law is true 
for consciousness. The law is valid as a law because it is mani­
fested in the world of appearance, and is also in its own self a 
Notion. 
25 1 .  Because the law is at the same time in itself a Notion, 
the instinct of Reason in this consciousness proceeds to refine 
the law and its moments into a Notion ; it does this of necessity, 
but without knowing that this is what it aims to do. It puts 
the law to the test of experiment. The law as it first appears 
exhibits itself in an impure form, enveloped in single, sensuous 
forms of being, and the Notion constituting its nature i,s 
immersed in empirical material. In its experiments the instinct 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
1 53 
of Reason sets out to find what happens in such and such cir­
cumstances. The result is that the law seems only to be all the 
more immersed in sensuous being. The inner significance of this 
investigation is to find the pure conditions of the law ; and this 
means nothing else (even if the consciousness expressing its 
meaning in this way were to think it meant something different) 
than to raise the law into the form of Notion, and to free its 
moments completely from being tied to a specific being. For 
example, negative electricity, which at first comes to be known, 
say, as resin-electricity, and positive electricity as glass-elec­
tricity, these, as a result of experiments, lose altogether such 
a significance and become purely positive and negative elec­
tricity, neither of which is any longer attached to a particular 
kind of thing ; and we can no longer say that there are bodies 
which are positively electrical and others which are negatively 
electrical. I n  the same way, the relationship of acid and base 
and their reaction constitute a law in which these opposite sides 
appear as bodies. But these separated detached things have no 
actuality ; the power which forces them apart cannot prevent 
them from at once entering again into a process, for they are 
only this relation. They cannot, like a tooth or a claw, remain 
apart on their own and as such be pointed out. This essential 
nature of theirs, to pass over immediately into a neutral pro­
duct, makes their being into a being which is implicitly super­
seded or universal ; and acid and base have truth only as uni­
versals. Therefore, just as glass and resin can just as well be posi­
tively as negatively electrical, in the same way acid and base 
are not tied as properties to this or that actuality ; each thing 
is only relatively acid or base : what seems to be an absolute base 
or acid gets in the so-called synsomaties1 the opposite signifi­
cance in relation to something else.-The result of the experi­
ments is in this way to cancel the moments or activated sides 
as properties of specific things, and to free the predicates from 
their subjects. These predicates are found only as universals, 
as in truth they are ; because of this self-subsistence they get 
the name of 'matters', which are neither bodies nor properties ; 
1 A term coined by a chemist, Winter!, at the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
These synsomaties are combinations formed directly without any intermediary which 
would produce and itself undergo change; they are still, in consequence, not strictly 
chemical processes. 

C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
and certainly no one would call oxygen, positive and negative 
electricity, heat, etc. , bodies. 
252. Matter, on the contrary, is not an existent thing, but is 
being in the form of a universal, or in the form of a Notion. 
Reason which is still instinctive makes this correct distinction, 
without being aware that just by testing the law on all sensuous 
being, it gets rid of the merely sensuous being of the law, and 
when it interprets the moments of the law as ' matters', their 
essential nature has become for Reason a universal, and as such 
is expressed as a non-sensuous thing of sense, as an incorporeal 
and yet objective being. 
253· We have now to see what turn its result takes for it, 
and what new shape its observational activity assumes in con­
sequence. We find, as the truth of this experimenting conscious­
ness, pure law, which is freed from sensuous being ; we see it as 
a Notion which, while present in sensuous being, operates there 
independently and unrestrained, and, while immersed in it, is 
free of it, and a simple Notion. This which is in truth the result 
and essence [of its activity], is now present to this consciousness 
itself, but as an object; further, sincefor it the object is not a 
result, and is not connected with the preceding activity, it 
presents itself to consciousness as a particular kind of object, and 
the relation of consciousness to it appears as anoiher kind of 
observation. 
254· Such an object, in which the process is present in the 
simplicity ofthe Notion, is the organism. I t  is this absolute fluidity 
in which the determinateness, through which it would be only 
for an other, is dissolved. The inorganic thing has determinate­
ness for its essential nature, and for that reason constitutes the 
moments of the Notion in their completeness only together with 
another thing, and therefore is lost when it enters into the pro­
cess ; in the organic being, on the contrary, every determinate­
ness through which it is open to an other is controlled by the 
organic simple unity. None of them shows itself as essential, as 
free to enter into relation with an other, and consequently what 
is organic maintains itself in its relation. 
255· The aspects of law which the instinct of Reason here pro­
ceeds to observe are, as follows from the above characterization, 
in the first instance, organic Nature and inorganic Nature in their 
relation to one another. The latter is, for organic Nature, no 

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
155 
more than the freedom-a freedom opposed to the simple Notion 
of organic Nature--of the loosely connected d eterminatenesses in 
which the individual forms of Nature are dissolved and which, 
at the same time, breaking away from their continuity, exist 
on their own account. Air, water, earth, zones, and climate are 
universal elements of this sort, which constitute the indetermi­
nate simple essence of [natural] individualities, and in which 
these are at the same time reflected into themselves. Neither 
the individuality, nor the universal element, is absolutely in and 
for itself; on the contrary, though they appear to observation 
as free and independent, they behave at the same time as essenti­
ally connected, but in such a way that their independence and 
mutual indifference are the predominant feature, and only in 
part become abstractions. Here, then, we have law as the con­
nection of a [universal] element with the formative process of 
the organism which, on the one hand, has the elementary being 
over against it, and, on the other hand, exhibits it within its 
organic reflection. But laws of this kind : animals belonging to 
the air have the nature of birds, those belonging to water have 
the nature of fish, animals in northern latitudes ha.ve thick, 
hairy pelts, and so on-such laws are seen at a glance to display 
a poverty which does not do justice to the manifold variety of 
organic Nature. Besides the fact that organic Nature in its free­
dom can divest its forms of these characteristics, and of necessity 
everywhere presents exceptions to such laws, or rules as we 
might call them, the characterization of the creatures to which 
they do apply is so superficial that even the necessity of the laws 
cannot be other than superficial, and amounts to no more than 
the great influence of environment ; and this does not tell us what 
does and what does not strictly belong to this influence. Such 
relations of organisms to the elements [they live in] cannot 
therefore in fact be called laws. For, firstly, the content of such 
a relation, as we saw, does not exhaust the range of the organ­
isms concerned, and secondly, the sides of the relation itself are 
mutually indifferent, and express no necessity. In the Notion 
of acid lies the Notion ofbase,just as the Notion ofpositive elec­
tricity implies that of negative ; but often as we may find a thick, 
hairy pelt associated with northern latitudes, or the structure 
of a fish associated with water, or that of birds with air, the 
Notion of north does not imply the Notion of a thick, hairy pelt, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
the Notion of sea does not imply the Notion of the structure 
offish, or the Notion of air that of the structure of birds. Because 
of the freedom of the two sides in relation to each other, there 
are also land animals which have the essential characteristics 
of a bird, of a fish, and so on. The necessity, just because it 
cannot be grasped as an inner necessity of the creature, ceases 
to have a sensuous existence, and can no longer be observed 
in the world of reality, but has withdrawn from it. Finding thus 
no place in the actual creature, i t  is what is called a teleological 
relation, a relation which is external to the related terms, and 
therefore really the antithesis of a law. I t  is a conception com­
pletely freed from the necessity of Nature, a conception which 
leaves that necessity behind and operates spontaneously above 
it. 
256. If the relation, referred to above, of the organism to the 
natural elements does not express its essence, the notion of End, 
on the other hand, does contain it. It is true that, for the observ­
ing consciousness, this Notion is not the organism's own essence, 
but something falling outside of it, and is then only the above­
mentioned external teleological relation. Yet the organism, as it 
has been characterized above, is, in fact, the real End itself; 
for since it preserves itself in the relation to an other, it is just 
that kind of natural existence in which Nature reflects itself into 
the Notion, and the two moments of cause and effect, of active 
and passive moments, which were the result of a necessary 
separating-out, are brought together into a unity, so that here 
something does not appear merely as a result of necessity. But, 
because it has returned into itself, the last, or the result, is just 
as much thefirst which initiated the movement, and is to itself 
the realized End. The organism does not produce something 
but only preserves itself; or, what is produced, is as much 
already present as produced. 
257. We must examine more closely this determination of 
End, both as it is in itself, and as it is for the instinct of Reason, 
in order to see how the latter finds itself therein, but does not 
recognize itself in what it finds. The notion of End, then, to 
which Reason in its role of observer rises, is a Notion of which 
it is aware; but it is also no less present as something actual, and 
is not an external relation of the latter, but its essence. This actu­
ality, which is itself an End, is related purposively to an other : 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
I 57 
which means that its relation is a contingent one with respect 
to what both immediately are ; immediately, both are indepen 
dent and mutually indifferent. But the essence of their relation 
is something different from what they thus appear to be, and 
their action has a different meaning from the one sense-percep­
tion at first finds in it. The necessity in what takes place is 
hidden, and shows itself only in the End, but in such a way 
that this very End shows that the necessity has also been there 
from the beginning. The End, however, shows this priority of 
itself in the fact that nothing else issues from the alteration 
resulting from the action than what was already there. Or, if 
we start from what is first, then this in its End, or in the outcome 
of its action, returns only to itself; and through this very fact 
it demonstrates itself to be something that has its own self for 
its End, and thus, as a prius, has already returned to itself or 
is in andfor itself. Therefore, what it arrives at through the pro­
cess of its action is itself; and in arriving only at itself, it obtains 
its feeling of self. We have here, it is true, the distinction between 
what it is and what it seeks, but this is merely the show of a 
distinction, and consequently it is in its own self a Notion. 
258. But this is just how self-consciousness is constituted ; it like­
wise distinguishes itself from itself without producing any dis­
tinction. Hence it finds in the observation of organic Nature 
nothing else than a being of this kind ; it finds itself as a thing, 
as a life, but makes a distinction between what it is itself and 
what it has found ,  a distinction, however, which is none. Just 
as the instinct of the animal seeks and consumes food, but 
thereby brings forth nothing other than itself, so too the instinct 
of Reason in its quest finds only Reason itself. The animal 
finishes up with the feeling of self. The instinct of Reason, on 
the other hand, is at the same time self-consciousness ; but 
because it is only instinct it is put on one side over against con­
sciousness, in which it has its anti thesis. I ts satisfaction is, there­
fore, shattered by this antithesis ; it does indeed find itself, viz. 
the End, and likewise this End as a Thing. But firstly, the End 
is for that instinct outside of the thing presenting itself as End .  
Secondly, this End, qua End, i s  also objective, and therefore does 
not fall within the observing consciousness itself, but in another 
intelligence. 
259. Examined more closely, this determination of End lies 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
just as much i n  the Notion ofthe thing, that of being i n  its own 
self an End. That is to say, it preserves itself; i.e. it is at one 
and the same time its nature to conceal the necessity, and to 
exhibit it in the form of a contingent relation. For its freedom 
or its being:for-self is just this, to treat the necessity [of the rela­
tion] as of no importance. Thus it presents itself as something 
whose Notion falls outside of its being. Similarly, Reason has 
of necessity to look on its own Notion as falling outside of it, 
hence as a Thing, as something towards which it is indifferent 
and which is therefore reciprocally indiferent towards Reason 
and its Notion. As instinct, Reason also remains at the level 
of [ mere] being and a state of indifference, and the Thing express­
ing the Notion remains for it something other than this Notion, 
and the Notion other than the Thing. Thus, for Reason, the 
organic thing is in its own self an End only in the sense that 
the necessity which presents itself as hidden in the action of the 
thing-for this behaves as an indifferent being-for-self-falls 
outside of the organism itself. Since, however, the organism as 
an End in its own self cannot behave in any other way than 
as an organism, the fact that it is an End in itself is also manifest 
and present in sensuous fashion, and it is as such that it is 
observed. The organism shows itself to be a being that preserves 
itself, that returns and has returned into itself. But this observing 
consciousness does not recognize in this being the Notion of 
End, or that the Notion of End exists just here and in the form 
of a Thing, and not elsewhere in some other intelligence. It 
makes a distinction between the Notion of End and being-for­
self and self-preservation, a distinction which is none. That it 
is in fact no distinction is something of which this consciousness 
is not a ware ; on the contrary, the making of the distinction 
appears to it as a contingent act having no essential connection 
with what is brought about by that act ; and the unity which 
links the two together, viz. the said act and the End, falls 
asunder for this consciousness. 
260. On this view, what belongs to the organism itself is the 
action lying in the middle between its first and last stage, so 
far as this action bears within it the character of singleness. So 
far however as the action has the character of universality and 
, 
, 
the agent of the action is equated with the outcome of that 
action, purposive action as such would not belong to the organ-

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
159 
ism. That single action which is only a means comes through 
its singleness under the category of an altogether single or con­
tingent necessity. What an organism does to preserve itself as 
an individual or as a genus is, therefore, as regards this imme­
diate content, quite uncontrolled by any law, for the universal 
and the Notion fall outside of it. Accordingly, its activity would 
be an empty activity devoid of any content of its own ; it would 
not be even the activity of a machine, for this has a purpose, 
and its activity therefore a specific content. Deserted in this way 
by the universal, it would be the activity merely of something 
immediate qua immediate, i.e. an activity like that of an acid or 
base which is not at the same time reflected into itself; an 
activity which could not separate itselffrom its immediate exist­
ence, nor give up this existence (which gets lost in the relation 
to its opposite) , and still preserve itself. But the thing whose 
activity is under consideration here is posited as a thing that 
preserves itself in its relation to its opposite. The activity as such 
is nothing but the pure essenceless form of its being-for-self, and 
its substance, which is not merely a determinate being but the 
universal, or its End, does not fall outside of it. It is an activity 
which spontaneously returns into itself, and is not turned back 
into itself by anything alien to it. 
26 1 .  However, this unity of universality and the activity does 
not exist for this observing consciousness, because that unity is 
essentially the inner movement of the organism and can only 
be grasped as Notion ; but observation seeks the moments in 
the form of being, of enduring being ; and because the nature 
of what is organically a whole is such that the moments are 
not contained in it nor can be found in it in that form, conscious­
ness converts the antithesis into one that conforms to its point 
of view. 
262. In this way, the organism appears to the observing con­
sciousness as a relation of two .fixed moments in the form of imme­
diate being--of an antithesis whose two sides, on the one hand, 
appear to be given to it in observation, and on the other hand, 
as regards their content, express the antithesis of the organic 
Notion of End and actuality ; but because the Notion as such 
is effaced therein, the antithesis is expressed in an obscure and 
superficial way, in which thought has sunk to the level of 
picture-thinking. Thus we see the Notion taken to mean 

!60 
C. (A A . )  R E A S O N  
roughly the inner, and actuality the outer; and their relation pro­
duces the law that the outer is the expression of the inner. 
263. When we consider more closely this inner with its oppo­
site and their relation, we find that, in the first place, the sides 
of the law no longer have the same import as in the case of 
previous laws, in which they appeared as self-subsistent things, 
each as a particular body; nor˷ in the second place, do we find 
that the universal is supposed to have its existence elsewhere, 
outside of the two sides. On the contrary, the organic being in its 
absolute undividedness is made the foundation, as the content 
of inner and outer, and is the same for both. Consequently, the 
antithesis is still only a purely formal one, whose real sides have 
the same in-itselffor their essence ; but, at the same time, since 
inner and outer are opposite realities, and each is a distinct 
being for observation, they each seem to observation to have 
a peculiar content of their own. However, this peculiar content, 
since it is the same substance or organic unity, can in fact only 
be a different form of that substance, of that unity ; and this 
is implied by the observing consciousness when it says that 
the outer is merely the expression of the inner. We have seen in 
the Notion of End the same determinations of the relation, viz. 
the indifferent independence of the different sides and their 
unity in that independence, a unity in which they vanish. 
264. We have now to see what shape the being of inner and 
outer each has. The inner as such must have an outer being 
and a shape, just as much as the outer as such ; for it is an object, 
or is itself posited in the form of being, and as present for 
observation. 
265. The organic substance as inner is the simple, unitary soul, 
the pure Notion of End or the universal, which in its partition 
equally remains a universal fluidity, and therefore appears in 
its being as the action or movement of the vanishing actuality ; 
whereas the outer, opposed to that existent inner, subsists in the 
quiescent being of the organism. The law, as the relation of that 
inner to this outer, thus expresses its content, once by setting 
forth universal moments or simple essentialities, and again by set­
ting forth the actualized essentiality or shape. Those first simple, 
organic properties, to call them such, are Sensibility, I rritability, 
and Reproduction. These properties, at least the first two, seem 
indeed to refer not to the organism in general, but only to the 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
animal organism. A s  a matter of fact the vegetable organism 
expresses only the simple Notion of the organism, which does 
not develop its moments. Consequently, in regard to those 
moments, so far as observation has to take account of them, 
we must confine ourselves to the organism which exhibits them 
in their developed existence. 
266. Now, as regards these moments themselves, they are 
directly derived from the notion of 'end-in-itself', of a being 
whose end is its own self. For Sensibility expresses in general 
the simple Notion of organic reflection-into-self, or the uni­
versal fluidity of this Notion. Irritability, though, expresses 
organic elasticity, the capacity of the organism to react at the 
same time that it is reflected into itself, the actualization which 
is opposed to the initial quiescent being-within-self, an actualiza­
tion in which that abstract being-for-self is a being :for-another. 
Reproduction, however, is the action of this whole introreflected 
organism, its activity as in itself an End, or as genus, in which 
the individual repels itself from itself, and in the procreative 
act reproduces either its organic members or the whole indivi­
dual. Reproduction, taken in the sense of self-preservation in 
general, expresses the formal Notion of the organism, or Sensi­
bility; but it is, strictly speaking, the real organic Notion or 
the whole, which returns into itself, either qua individual by pro­
ducing single parts of itself, or, qua genus, by bringing forth in­
dividuals. 
267. The other significance of these organic elements, viz. 
as outer, is their particular shape, according to which they are 
present as [outwardly] actual, but at the same time, universal 
parts, or organic systems : Sensibility, let us say, as a nervous 
system, I rritability as a muscular system, Reproduction as a 
visceral system, for the preservation of the individual and the 
species. 
268. The laws peculiar to organisms accordingly concern a 
relationship of the organic moments in their twofold signifi­
cance, once as being a part of the organic structure, and again 
as being a universal fluid determinateness which pervades a!l 
those systems. Thus, in formulating such a law, a specific sensi­
bility, e.g., would find its expression, qua moment of the whole 
organism, in a specifically formed nervous system, or it would 
also be linked up with a specific reproduction of the organic parts 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
of the individual or with the propagation of the whole, and so 
on. Both aspects of such a law can be observed. The outer, in ac­
cordance with its Notion is being-for-another; sensibility, e.g., has 
its immediately actualized mode in the system of sensibility ; and, 
as a universal property, it is in its outer expressions an objective 
existence as well. The aspect which is called the inner has its 
own outer aspect, which is distinct from what in general is called 
the outer. 
26g. Both aspects of an organic law would thus no doubt be 
observable, but not the law connecting them ; and observation 
is unable to perceive these laws, not because, qua observation, it 
is too short-sighted and ought not to proceed empirically but 
ought to start from the Idea-for such laws, if they were some­
thing real, must in fact actually exist and therefore be observ­
able ; but rather because the conception of laws of this kind 
proves to have no truth. 
2 70. We found that a law existed when the relation was such 
that the universal organic property in an organic system had made 
itself into a Thing, and in this Thing had a structured copy 
of itself, so that both were the same being, present in the one 
case as a universal moment, and in the other, as a Thing. But, 
in addition, the aspect of the inner is, on its own account, also 
a relationship of several aspects ; and we are therefore pre­
sented, to begin with, with the conception of a law as an inter­
relationship of the universal organic activities or properties. 
Whether such a law is possible must be decided from the nature 
of such a property. This, however, as a universal fluid is, on 
the one hand, not something restricted like a Thing, keeping 
itself to the restricted form which is supposed to constitute its 
shape : sensibility extends beyond the nervous system and per­
meates all the other systems of the organism. On the other hand, 
such a property is a universal moment, which is essentially not 
divorced or separated from reaction or irritability, and repm­
duction. For, as reflection-into-self, it eo ipso contains reaction. 
Mere reflectedness-into-selfis passivity or a dead being, not sen­
sibility ; j ust as action-which is the same as reaction-when 
not reflected into itself, is not irritability. It is precisely the unity 
of reflection in action or reaction, and action or reaction in re­
flection, that constitutes the organism, a unity which is synony­
mous with organic reproduction. It follows from this that, in 

O BS E R V I NG R EA S O N  
every mode of the organism's actuality, there must b e  present 
the same quantity of sensibility-since to begin with we are con­
sidering the relation of sensibility and irritability to one 
another-as of irritability, and that an organic phenomenon 
can be apprehended and determined or, if you like, explained, 
just as much in terms of the one as of the other. What one person 
takes, say, for high sensibility, another may equally well take 
for high irritability, and irritability of the same degree. If they 
are calledfactors, and this word is not to be meaningless, they 
are thereby declared to be moments of the Notion ; thus the real 
object whose essence is constituted by this Notion, contains 
them both equally within it, and if the object is character­
ized according to the one moment as very sensitive, it must 
also be stated, according to the other moment, to be just as 
irritable. 
2 7 1 .  If they are distinguished, as they necessarily are, this 
is in accordance with the Notion, and their opposition is qualita­
tive. But when, apart from this true difference, they are also 
posited as they immediately are, and for ordinary thought, as 
they might be as aspects of the law, then they appear as quantita­
tively distinct. 
Their peculiar qualitative 
antithesis 
thus 
becomes one of magnitude, and there arise laws of this kind, for 
example, that sensibility and irritability stand in an inverse 
ratio of their magnitude, so that as the one increases the other 
decreases ; or better, taking directly the magnitude itself as the 
content, as its smallness decreases. Should, however, a specific 
content be given to this law, say, that the size of a hole increases, 
the more what it is filled with decreases, then this inverse relation 
can equally be changed into a direct relation and expressed in 
this way, that the size of the hole increases in direct ratio to the 
amount taken 
away-a tautological proposition, 
whether 
expressed as a direct or an inverse ratio. As so expressed, the 
proposition means simply this, that a quantity increases as this 
quantity increases. Just as the hole and what fills it and is taken 
away are qualitatively opposed, but what is real in them, and 
its specific quantity, is one and the same in both, and similarly, 
increase of magnitude and decrease of smallness are the same, 
and their meaningless antithesis amounts to a tautology : so are 
the organic moments alike indivisible in their real content, and 
in their magnitude, which is the magnitude of that being; the 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
one decreases only with the other and increases only with it ; 
or rather, it is a matter of indifference whether an organic 
phenomenon is considered as irritability or as sensibility ; this 
is so in general and equally when its magnitude is under discus­
sion. Similarly, it is a matter of indifference whether we speak 
of the increase of a hole as an increase of the hole qua emptiness, 
or as an increase of the filling removed from it. Or again, a 
number, e.g. three, remains the same quantity whether it is taken 
positively or negatively, and if l increase the three to four, then 
both the positive and the negative have become four ;  just as 
the south pole of a magnet is exactly as strong as its north pole, 
or a positive electricity, or an acid, is exactly as strong as its 
negative, or the base on which it acts. An organic existence is 
just such a magnitude as the said 'three', or a magnet, etc. It 
is that which is increased or diminished, and when it is increased 
both of its factors are increased, just as both poles of the magnet 
or both kinds of electricity increase if the potential of a magnet 
or of one of the electric currents is raised. That both can vary 
just as little in intension and extension, that the one cannot de­
crease in extension but increase in intension, while the other, 
conversely, is supposed to decrease its intension but increase 
its extension-this stems from the same notion of an empty anti­
thesis ; the real intension is absolutely as great as the extension, 
and vice versa. 
272. I t  is evident that what really happens in formulating 
this kind of law is that at the outset irritability and sensibility 
constitute the organic antithesis ; but this content gets lost sight 
of and the antithesis deteriorates into a formal one of quantita­
tive increase and decrease, or of varying intension and exten­
sion-an antithesis which no longer has anything to do with 
the nature of sensibility and irritability, and no longer expresses 
it. Hence this empty play of formulating laws is not confined 
to organic moments but can be practised everywhere and with 
everything, and rests in general on a lack of acquaintance with 
the logical nature of these antitheses. 
273. Lastly, if instead of sensibility and irritability, repro­
duction is brought into relation with one or the other of them, 
there is no longer even the occasion for making laws of this kind ; 
for reproduction does not stand in an antithetical relation to 
those moments as they do to one another ; and since this law-

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
making is based on such an antithesis, here even the show of 
its being practised is absent. 
274. The law-making just considered contains the dif­
ferences of the organism in their significance as moments of its 
Notion, and strictly speaking should be an a priori formulation 
of the law. But it essentially involves this thought, that those 
differences have the significance of being already given, and the 
consciousness that merely observes has, moreover, to confine 
itself only to their outer existence. The actual organism neces­
sarily contains such an antithesis as is expressed by its Notion, 
and such as can be determined as irritability and sensibility, 
as these in turn appear distinct from reproduction. The exter­
nality in which the moments of the Notion of organism are here 
considered is the inner's own immediate externality, not the outer 
which is the outer of the whole organism and its shape; the inner 
in its relation to this is to be considered later on. 
275. If, however, the antithesis of the moments is understood 
in the way it is present in outer existence, then sensibility, irrit­
ability, reproduction, sink to the level of common properties, 
which are universalities equally indifferent towards one 
another as are specific gravity, colour, hardness, etc. In this 
sense it may well be observed that the organism is more sensitive 
or more irritable, or has a greater reproductive capacity than 
another, just as we may observe that the sensibility of one is 
different in kind from that of another, that one reacts differently 
to a given stimulus than another, e.g. a horse reacts differently 
to oats than to hay, and a dog again differently to both, dif­
ferences as readily observable as that one body is harder than 
another, and so on. But these sensuous properties, hardness, 
colour, etc., as also the phenomena of response to the stimulus 
of oats, of irritable response to loads, or of the number and kind 
of young produced, when they are related to one another and 
compared among themselves, essentially conflict with any con­
formity to a law. For what characterizes their sensuous being is 
just this, that they exist in complete mutual indifference, and 
manifest the freedom of Nature released from the control of the 
Notion rather than the unity of a relation, irrationally playing 
up and down on the scale of contingent magnitude between 
the moments of the Notion, rather than exhibiting these 
moments themselves. 

166 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
276. It i s  the other aspect, where the simple moments of the 
Notion of organism are compared with the moments of the outer 
structure, that would first furnish the genuine law expressing the 
true outer as a copy of the inner. Now, because those simple 
moments are pervasive fluid properties, they do not have in the 
organic thing such a separate, real expression as what is called 
an individual system of the shape. Or, again, if the abstract 
Idea of the organism is truly expressed in those three moments, 
merely because they are not static and are only moments of 
the Notion and of movement, the organism, on the other hand, 
as a structured shape, is not exhaustively dealt with in the three 
specific systems into which it is analysed by anatomy. I n  so far 
as such systems are supposed to be found actually existing, and 
to be authenticated by being so found, it must also be borne 
in mind that anatomy presents us not only with three such sys­
tems but with a good many more. Furthermore, apart from this, 
the system of sensibility as a whole must mean something quite 
different from what is called the nervous system, the irritable 
system something different from the muscular system, the re­
productive system something different from the intestinal 
mechanism of reproduction. I n  the systems of shape as such, the 
organism is apprehended from the abstract aspect of a dead 
existence ; its moments so taken pertain to anatomy and the 
corpse, not to cognition and the living organism. I n  such parts, 
the moments have really ceased to be, for they cease to be pro­
cesses. Since the being of the organism is essentially a universality 
or a reflection-into-self, the being of its totality, like its moments, 
cannot consist in an anatomical system ; on the contrary, the 
actual expression of the whole, and the externalization of its 
moments, are really found only as a movement which runs its 
course through the various parts of the structure, a movement 
in which what is forcibly detached and fixed as an individual 
system essentially displays itself as a fluid moment. Con­
sequently, that actual existence as it is found by anatomy must 
not be reckoned as its real being, but only that existence taken 
as a process, in which alone even the anatomical parts have 
a meaning. 
277. We see, then, that the moments of the organic inner, 
taken by themselves, are incapable of furnishing the aspects of 
a law ofbeing, since in such a law they are asserted of an outer 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
existence, are distinguished from one another, and neither 
aspect could be equally named in place of the other; further, 
that, placed on one side, they do not find in the other side their 
realization in a fixed system ; for this latter would as little possess 
any organic truth [i.e. the truth of organic being] as it would 
be the expression of those moments of the [organic] inner. The 
essential nature of organic being, since it is in itself the universal, 
rather consists in general in its moments being equally universal 
in actual existence, i.e. in their being pervasive processes, but 
not in giving an image of the universal in an isolated thing. 
2 78. In this way the idea of a law in the case of organic being 
is altogether lost. The law wants to grasp and express the anti­
thesis as inert aspects, and in them the determinateness which 
is their relation to one another. The inner, to which the mani­
fested universality be˸ongs, and the outer, to which belong the 
parts of the inert shape, were supposed to constitute the corre­
sponding aspects of the law, but as thus held apart, they lose 
their organic significance ; and what lies at the base of the idea 
oflaw is precisely this, that each of its two aspects should have 
an independent, indifferent subsistence of its own, the relation 
of the aspects being shared between them as a twofold deter­
minateness corresponding to that relation. The fact is that each 
aspect of the organism is in its own self just this : to be a simple 
universality in which all determinations are dissolved, and to 
be the movement of this process. 
2 79. An insight into the difference between this way of 
formulating a law and previous forms will make its nature per­
fectly clear. If, namely, we look back to the movement of per­
ceiving and to that of the Understanding, in which the latter 
reflects itself into itself, and thereby determines its object,· we 
see that the Understanding does not, in that movement, have 
before itself in its object the relation of these abstract determina­
tions of universal and individual, essential and external : it is 
itself the transition, which does not become objective to it. Here, 
on the contrary, the organic unity, which is just the relation 
of those opposites, this relation being a pure transition, is itself 
the obJect. This transition in its simplicity is immediately uni­
versality ; and since this universality explicates the different 
moments whose relation is to express the law, its moments are 
universal objects of this consciousness, and the law runs, 'the 

1 68 
C. ( AA . )  R E A S O N  
outer i s  the expression of the inner'. Here, the Understanding 
has grasped the thought of the law itself, whereas previously it 
only looked for laws generally, and their moments were only 
vaguely present to it as a specific content, but not as the 
thoughts ofthe laws. As regards content, the laws obtained here 
ought not to be such as are merely a passive taking-up into the 
form of universality of simply inert differences, but laws which 
directly possess in these differences the unrest of the Notion, 
and consequently at the same time possess the necessity of the 
relation between the aspects. But just because the object, the 
organic unity, directly unites the infinite supersession, or abso­
lute negation, of being with inert being, and because the 
moments are essentially a pure transition, there are no such inert 
aspects as are required for the law. 
280. In order to obtain such aspects, the Understanding 
must keep to the other moment ofthe organic relationship, viz. 
to the reflectedness of organic existence into itself. But this being 
is so completely reflected into itself that there is no determinate­
ness related to something else left over for it. Immediate sensuous 
being is immediately one with the determinateness as such, and 
therefore expresses a qualitative difference in that being, e.g. 
blue as against red, acid as against alkali, and so on. But organic 
being that has returned into itself is completely indifferent to­
wards an other, its existence is a simple universality, and it 
denies to observation any lasting sensuous differences or, what 
is the same thing, displays its essential determinateness only as 
the flux of inert determinatenesses. Consequently, the way in 
which difference, qua inert, expresses itself is just this, that it 
is an indiferent difference, i.e. difference as magnitude. In this, 
however, the Notion is extinguished and necessity has vanished. 
But then the content and filling of this indifferent being, the 
flux of sensuous determinations gathered up into an organic de­
termination, expresses also this, that the content really does not 
have that determinateness, viz. that of the immediate property, 
and the qualitative element falls solely in [the determination 
of] magnitude, as we saw above. 
281 .  Although, then, the objective aspect which is appre­
hended as an organic determinateness itself contains the Notion 
and is thereby distinguished from the object as it presents itself 
to the Understanding which, in apprehending the content of 

OBS E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
t 6g 
its laws, behaves purely as perception, yet apprehension in the 
first case relapses completely into the principle and the manner 
of the Understanding that merely perceives. For by so doing, 
what is apprehended receives the character of a fixed deter­
minateness, the form of an immediate property or of an inert 
phenomenon ; furthermore, it is subsumed under the category 
of quantity and the nature of the Notion is suppressed. The 
exchange of an object that is merely perceived for one reflected 
into itself, of a merely sensuous determinateness for an organic 
one, thus loses once more its value and does so by the fact that 
the Understanding has not yet put behind it the formulating 
of laws. 
282. To illustrate this exchange by some examples, we may 
find perhaps that something which perception takes to be an 
'animal with strong muscles' is defined as an 'animal organism 
ofhigh irritability', or what perception takes to be a 'condition 
of great weakness' is defined as a 'condition of high sensibility', 
or, if we prefer it, as an 'abnormal affection' and, moreover, 
a 'raising of it to a higher potency' -expressions which translate 
sensuous facts into Latin, and a bad Latin at that, instead of 
into the Notion. That an animal has strong muscles may also 
be expressed by the Understanding by saying that the animal 
'possessesagrea t muscular force' -great weakness meaningsimi­
larly a 'slight force'. Determination in terms of irritability has 
this advantage over determination in terms of force, that the 
latter expresses indeterminate, but the former determinate, re­
flection-into-self; for the force peculiar to muscle is precisely 
irritability ; and irritability is a preferable determination to 
'strong muscles', since, as in 'force', reflection-into-self is 
already directly implied in it. Similarly, weakness or slight 
force, organic passivity, is given determinate expression in terms 
of sensibility. But when this sensibility is so taken by itself and 
fixed and, in addition, is bound up with quantitative determina­
tions and, qua greater or less sensibility, is opposed to a greater 
or less irritability, each is wholly in the element of sense and 
is reduced to the ordinary form of a property ; what connects 
them is not the Notion but, on the contrary, a quantitative anti­
thesis, which becomes a difference lacking any thought-con­
tent. Though the indefiniteness of the expressions 'force', 
'strength', and 'weakness' was thereby eliminated, there now 

1 70 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
arises the equally futile, vague floundering-about between the 
antitheses ofhigher and lower sensibility and irritability as they 
increase and decrease relatively to one another. The determina­
tions of greater or lesser sensibility or irritability are no less the 
unthinking apprP:hension and expression of a sensuous pheno­
menon than are the wholly sensuous determinations of strength 
and weakness which are devoid of any thought-content. Those 
thoughtless expressions have not been replaced by the Notion ; 
instead, 'strength' and 'weakness' have been given a determina­
tion which, taken solely by itself, is based on the Notion, which 
it has for its content, but loses completely this origin and charac­
ter. On account of the form of simplicity and immediacy in 
which this content is made into the aspect of a law, and because 
quantity constitutes the element of difference in such determi­
nations, the essence of the content, which originally is the 
Notion and is posited as such, retains the mode of sense-percep­
tion, and remains as far removed from being cognized as when 
determined in terms of strength and weakness or by immediate 
sense-properties. 
283. Now, there still remains to be considered, solely on its 
own account, what the outer aspect of organic being is, and how 
in it the ;mtithesis of its inner and outer is determined ; just as 
at first the inner of the whole in relation to its own outer was 
considered. 
284. The outer, considered by itself, is the structured shape in 
general, the system of life articulating itself in the element of 
being, and at the same time essentially the being for an other 
of the organism--objective being in its being-for-self. This other 
appears, in the first instance, as its outer inorganic nature. If 
these two are considered in relation to a law, the inorganic 
nature cannot, as we saw above, constitute the aspect of a law 
over against the organism, because the latter is at the same time 
absolutely for itself, and has a universal and free relation to in­
organic nature. 
285. To define more precisely, however, the relationship of 
these two aspects in the organic shape, this shape is, in one 
aspect, turned against its inorganic nature, while in the other 
it is for itself and reflected in to itself. The actual organism is the 
middle term which unites the being-for-self of life, with the outer 
in general, or with being-in-itself. The extreme of being-for-self 

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
1 7 1  
is, however, the inner as an infinite One which takes back into 
itself, out of their subsistence and connection with outer Nature, 
the moments of shape itself; it is that which, without a content 
ofits own, gives itself a content in its shape and appears in shape 
as its process. In this extreme where it is a simple negativity or 
a pure singular, the organism possesses its absolute freedom in 
virtue of which it is indifferent towards, and secured against, 
being-for-other, and the determinateness of the moments of 
shape. This freedom is at the same time freedom of the moments 
themselves, it is their possibility of appearing as an outer existence, 
and of being apprehended as such ; and just as, in this freedom, 
they are free and indifferent towards this outer existence, so, 
too, are they in relation to one another ; for the simplicity of this 
freedom is being, or is their simple substance. This Notion, or 
pure freedom, is one and the same life, no matter how many 
and varied its shapes or its being-for-other ; it is a matter of in­
difference to this stream oflife what kind of mills its drives. Now, 
in the first place it is to be noted that this Notion is not to be 
understood here as it was formerly, when we were considering 
the properly inner in its form of process, or the development of 
its moments, but in its form of a simple inner, which constitutes 
the purely universal aspect in contrast to the actual living being, 
or as the element in which the existent members of the [organic] 
shape have their subsistence. For it is this shape that we are con­
sidering here, and in it the essence of life is present as the sim­
plicity of subsistence. In the next place, the being-for-other, or 
the determinateness of the actual structured shape, is taken up 
into this simple universality which is its essence, a determinate­
ness which is equally simple, universal, and non-sensuous, and 
can only be that which is expressed in number. This determinate­
ness is the middle term of the shape which links indeterminate 
life with the actual life, simple like the former and determinate 
like the latter. That which in the former, the inner, would be 
expressed numerically, the outer would have to express in accord­
ance with its mode as a multiform actuality, viz. as its manner 
of life, colour, etc., in general, as the entire host of differences 
which are developed in the world of appearance. 
286. lf the two aspects of the organic whole-the one being 
the inner, while the other is the outer, in such a way that each 
again has in its own self an inner and an outer-are compared 

C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
with reference to the inner which each aspect has, then the inner 
of the first aspect was the Notion as the unrest of abstraction ; 
the second, however, has for its inner a quiescent universality 
which also involves a quiescent determinateness, number. If, 
therefore, the first inner, because the Notion develops its 
moments in it, made a deceptive promise of laws on account 
of the show of necessity in the relationship, the second directly 
disclaims doing so, since number shows itself to be the determi­
nation of one aspect of its laws. For number is just that com­
pletely quiescent, lifeless, and indifferent determinateness in 
which all movement and relation is extinguished, and which 
has broken the bridge to the living element of instincts, manner 
of life, and other aspects of sensuous existence. 
287. But to consider the shape of the organism as such, and 
the inner, qua inner, merely of the shape, is in fact no longer 
to consider organic being. For the two aspects which were sup­
pose,d to be related are posited as merely indifferent towards 
each other, with the result that the reflection-into-self which 
constitutes the essence of the organism is done away with. What 
really happens here is that the attempted comparison of inner 
and outer is transferred to inorganic Nature. Here the infinite 
Notion is only the essence which is concealed within, or falls with­
out in self-consciousness, and no longer, as in the organism, is 
objectively present. This relation of inner and outer has thus 
still to be considered in its own proper sphere. 
288. In the first place, that inner aspect of shape as the simple 
singularity of an inorganic thing is specific gravity. As a simple 
being, it can be observed just as well as the determinateness 
of number, of which alone it is capable, or, strictly speaking, 
it can be found by comparing observations ; and it seems in this 
way to give one aspect of the law. Shape, colour, hardness, 
toughness, and a countless host of other properties would 
together constitute the outer aspect, and would have to give 
expression to the determinateness of the inner, viz. number, so 
that the one would have its counterpart in the other. 
28g. Now, because negativity is understood here not as a 
movement of the process, but as a unity brought to rest, or as 
a simple being-for-self, it appears rather as that by which the thing 
resists the process. and inwardly preserves itself, as indifferent 
towards it. But, in virtue of the fact that this simple being-for-

O B S E R V I N G  R EASON 
' 73 
selfis a tranquil indifference towards an other, specific gravity 
appears as one property alongside others ; and with that, all neces­
sary relation ofit to this plurality, in other words, all conformity 
to law, ceases. Specific gravity, as this simple inner, does not 
have [the moment of) difference within itself, in other words, 
the difference it has is only unessential ; for it is just its pure sim­
plicity that effaces all essential distinction. This unessential dif­
ference, magnitude, must therefore have its counterpart or other 
in the other aspect, viz. the plurality of properties, since it is 
only through this that it is difference at all. If this plurality itself 
is concentrated into the simplicity of the antithesis, and deter­
mined, say, as cohesion, so that this cohesion is a being-for-self 
in otherness Uust as specific gravity is a pure being-for-self) , then 
this cohesion is in the first place pure determinateness posited 
in the Notion in contrast to that other determinateness ; and 
the way of formulating the law would be that which we con­
sidered above, in connection with the relation of sensibility to 
irritability. In the next place, cohesion, qua Notion of being-for­
self in otherness, is further only the abstraction of the aspect 
standing over against specific gravity, and as such has no exist­
ence. For being-for-self in otherness is the process in which the 
inorganic would have to express its being-for-self as a self-pre­
servation, which would secure it from emerging from the process 
as moment of a product. But j ust this is contrary to its nature, 
which has no purpose or universality in it. Its process, rather, 
is merely the specific activity in which its being-for-self, i.e. its 
specific gravity, is suspended. But this specific activity itself in 
which its cohesion would exist in its true Notion, and the specific 
quantity of its specific gravity, are Notions completely in­
different towards each other. If the way in which they react 
to each other is left out of account, and attention is confined 
to the idea of quantity, we could perhaps think of the determi­
nation like this, that a greater specific weight, as a more in­
tensive being-within-self, would resist involvement in the pro­
cess more than would a smaller specific weight. But, conversely, 
the freedom of being-for-self only proves itself in the ease with 
which it enters into relation with everything, and preserves itself 
in this multiplicity. The said intensity without extension of rela­
tions is an empty abstraction, for extension constitutes the outer 
existence of intension. But the self-preservation of the inorganic 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
i n  its relation falls, as w e  have noted, outside of its nature, since 
the inorganic does not contain within itself the principle of 
movement, or, in other words, because its being is not absolute 
negativity and Notion. 
290. This other aspect of the inorganic, on the other hand, 
when considered not as process but as a quiescent being, is ordi­
nary cohesion, a simple sensuous property standing over against 
the liberated moment of otherness which is separated into a 
number of mutually indifferent properties and which, like spe­
cific gravity, is one of these properties. The multiplicity of prop­
erties together, then, constitutes the other aspect of cohesion. 
In this, however, as in the other properties, number is the sole 
determinateness, and this not only does not express a relation 
between these properties and a transition from one to another, 
but is essentially just the absence of any necessary relation and 
it represents rather the abolition of all conformity to law ; for 
it is the expression of a determinateness that is unessential. This 
being so, then a series of bodies in which the difference is 
expressed as a numerical difference of their specific gravities 
by no means runs parallel to a series in which the difference 
is that of the other properties, even if, to facilitate the compari­
son, only one or some of them are taken. For, as a matter of 
fact, only the entire bundle of properties could constitute the 
other series in such a parallel. To bring this into order and bind 
it into a whole, observation has at its disposal, on the one hand, 
the quantitative determinatenesses of these various properties ; 
on the other hand, however, their differences are manifest as 
qualitative. Now in this heap of properties, what would have 
to be characterized as positive or negative and as mutually 
cancelling each other-in general, the internal arrangement 
and exposition of the formula, which would be a very compli­
cated matter-this would be for the Notion to determine ; but 
the Notion is excluded by the very manner in which the proper­
ties are immediately there and taken up. In this [mere] being 
[of the properties], none displays the character of a negative 
over against the other ; on the contrary, one is just as well as 
the other is, nor does it indicate in any other way its place in 
the arrangement of the whole. In the case of a series which pro­
gresses with parallel differences-whether the relation is meant 
to be one of simultaneous increase on both sides, or of increase 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
1 75 
only on one and decrease on the other-what is of interest is 
only the final simple expression of this combined whole, which 
was supposed to constitute one aspect of the law over against 
specific gravity ; but this one aspect, as a given result, is precisely 
nothing else than what has already been mentioned, viz. a 
single property, say, like ordinary cohesion, alongside which 
the indifferent others, specific gravity among them, are found, 
and each of the ·others can with equal right, i.e. with equal in­
correctness, be taken as representative of the entire other side ; 
the one, like the other, would merely represent [repriisentieren J, 
in German, vorstellen, the essential nature, but would not itself 
be that essential nature. So that the attempt to find series of 
bodies which would run simply parallel to each other and 
would express the essential nature of the bodies according to 
a law o( these two series must be regarded as a conception that 
is ignorant of its task and of the means whereby it should be 
carried out. 
29 1 .  Previously, the connection of inner and outer in the 
organic shape, which is supposed to be present to observation, 
was straightway transferred to the sphere of the inorganic. The 
determination which produced this transfer can now be more 
precisely indicated, and resulting therefrom we have still 
another form and connection of this relationship. Namely, what 
in the case of the inorganic seems to offer the possibility of such 
a comparison of inner and outer, in the case of the organism 
is altogether absent. The inorganic inner is a simple inner which 
presents itself to perception as a property that merely is ; its 
determinateness is therefore essentially magnitude, and, as a 
property that merely is, it appears indifferent towards the outer, 
or the various other sensuous properties. But the being-for-self 
of the living organism does not stand on one side in this way 
over against its outer ; on the contrary, it has in its own self 
the principle of otherness. If we define being-for-self as simple, 
self-preserving relation-to-self, then its otherness is simple negativity ; 
and organic unity is the unity of a self-identical relating-to-self 
and pure negativity. This unity is, qua unity, the inwardnes!' 
of the organism ; this is thereby in itself universal, or it is genus. 
But the freedom of the genus, in relation to its actual existence, 
is different from the freedom of specific gravity in relation to 
shape. That of the latter is a freedom that merely is, in other 

C .  ( A A . )  R EASON 
words, specific gravity as a particular property stands on one 
side. But because it is a freedom that merely is, it is also only 
a determinateness which essentially . belongs to this shape, or 
whereby this shape, qua essential being, is something determi­
nate. The freedom of the genus, however, is a universal freedom 
and is indifferent towards this shape or towards its actuality. 
The determinateness which attaches to the being-for-self of the in­
organic as such falls therefore in the case of organic being under 
its being-for-self, just as, in the case of the inorganic, it falls only 
under the being of the latter. Hence, although determinateness 
in the inorganic is at the ,same time present only as a property, 
yet it acquires the dignity of essential being because, as a simple 
negative, it stands over against outer existence which is a being­
for-another ; and this simple negative is, in its ultimate single 
determinateness, a number. The organic being, however, is a 
singular individual, which is itself pure negativity, and there­
fore destroys within itself the fixed determinateness which 
attaches to indijferent being. In so far, therefore, as it has within 
it the moment of indifferent being, and so, too, of number, this 
latter can be taken as merely a by-product, but not as the 
essence of its vitality. 
292. But now, though pure negativity, the principle of the 
process, does not fall outside of the organism, which therefore 
does not have it in its essence as a determinateness, the single 
individual being itself intrinsically universal, yet in the organ­
ism the moments of this pure individual are not developed and 
actual as moments which are themselves abstract or universal. On 
the contrary, this their expression appears outside of that uni­
versality, which falls back into the inwardness of the organism ; 
and between the actual existence or shape, i.e. the self-develop­
ing individual, and the organic universal or the genus, there 
comes the determinate universal, the species. The concrete exist­
ence attained by the negativity of the universal or the genus 
is only the developed movement of a process which runs its 
course in the parts of the [inert] existence of the shape. If the genus, 
as a quiescent unitary being, had within it the differentiated 
parts, and if, too, its simple negativity as such were at the same 
time a movement which ran through parts which were equally 
simple and immediately universal in themselves, parts which 
here were actual as such moments, then the organic genus 

OBS E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
1 77 
would be consciousness. But, as it is, the simple determinateness, 
qua determinateness of the species, is present in the genus in 
a non-spiritual manner ; actuality starts from the genus, or, 
what enters into actual existence is not the genus as such, i.e. 
in general, not the thought of it. The genus as an actual organ­
ism is merely represented by a surrogate, by number. This lat­
ter, number, seems to mark the transition from the genus into 
the individual structured shape, and to provide observation 
with the two necessary aspects of the latter, one as a simple 
determinateness, and the other as a shape whose manifold 
nature is fully developed. This number, however, really indi­
cates the indifference and freedom of the universal and the in­
dividual in relation to one another ; the genus puts the indivi­
dual at the mercy of the non-essential quantitative difference, 
but the individual itself, qua living individual, equally shows 
itself to be free. True universality, as we have defined it, is here 
only an inner essence ; as determinateness of the species it is a formal 
universality, and, over against this, the true universality takes 
its stand on the side of the single individual, which is thereby 
a living individual, and in virtue of its inner being takes no 
account of its determinateness as species. But this individual is not 
at the same time a universal individual, i.e. one in which the 
universality would have an outer actual existence as well ; the 
universal individual falls outside of the living organism. This 
universal individual, however, as immediately the individual of 
natural structured shapes, is not consciousness itself; its exist­
ence as a single organic living individual must not fall outside of 
it if it is to be consciousness. 
293 ·  Consequently, we have a syllogism in which one 
extreme is the universal life as a universal or as genus, the other 
extreme, however, being the same universal as a single individual, 
or as a universal individual ; but the middle term is composed 
of both : the first seems to fit itself into it as a determinate uni­
versality or as species, the other, however, as individuality proper 
or as a single individual. And since this syllogism pertains 
wholly to the aspect of the structured shape, it equally embraces 
within its scope what is distinguished as inorganic Nature. 
294· Now, since the universal life, qua the simple essence of the 
genus, develops from its side the differences of the Notion, and 
must exhibit them as a series of simple determinatenesses, this 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
series i ˹  a system of differences posited as [mutually] indifferent, 
or is a numerical series. Whereas previously the organism in the 
form of a single individual was set over against this essenceless 
difference, which neither expresses nor contains its living 
nature ; and whereas just the same must be said in respect of 
the inorganic, taking it as an existence in which the whole of 
its properties are developed : it is now the universal individual 
we have to consider, and not merely as free from any systemat­
ization of the genus, but also as the power controlling the genus. 
The genus, which divides itself into species on the basis of the 
general determinateness of number, or which may adopt as its 
principle of division particular features of its existence, e.g. 
shape, colour, etc., while peacefully engaged in this activity, 
suffers violence from the universal individual, the Earth, which 
as the universal negativity preserves the differences as they exist 
within itself-their nature, on account of the substance to which 
they belong, being different from the nature of those of the 
genus-and in face of the systematization of the genus. This 
action of the genus comes to be a quite restricted affair which 
it is permitted to carry on only inside those powerful elements, 
and which is interrupted, incomplete and curtailed on all sides 
by their unchecked violence. 
295· It follows from this that in existence in its structured 
shape, observation can encounter Reason only as life in general, 
which, however, in its differentiating process does not actually 
possess any rational ordering and arrangement of parts, and 
is not an immanently grounded system of shapes. If, in the syl­
logism of organic structured shapes, the middle term, which 
contains the species and its actuality as a single individuality, 
had in its own self the extremes ofinner universality and of uni­
versal individuality, then this middle term would have in the 
movement of its actuality the expression and the nature of uni­
versality, and would be a self-systematizing development. It is 
thus that consciousness, as the middle term between universal 
Spirit and its individuality or sense-consciousness, has for 
middle term the system of structured shapes assumed by con­
sciousness as a self-systematizing whole of the life of Spirit­
the system that we are considering here, and which has its obj ec­
tive existence as world-history. But organic Nature has no his­
tory ; it falls from its universal, from life, directly into the single-

O B S E R V I N G  R EASON 
1 79 
ness of existence, and the moments of simple determinateness, 
and the single organic life united in this actuality, produce the 
process of Becoming merely as a contingent movement, in 
which each is active in its own part and the whole is preserved ; 
but this activity is restricted, so flu as itselfis concerned, merely 
to its centre, because the whole is not present in it, and is not 
present in it because here it is not qua wholefor itself. 
2g6. Apart, then, from the fact that Reason, in observing 
organic Nature, attains only to a contemplation of itself as uni­
versal life as such, it comes to see its development and realiza­
tion merely in the form of systems distinguished quite generally, 
whose essential character lies not in the organic as such, but 
in the universal individual [the Earth] ; and it sees that develop­
ment and realization among these differences belonging to the 
Earth in the form of arrangements which the genus attempts 
to achieve. 
297. Since, then, the universality rif organic life falls, in its actu­
ality, directly into the extreme of singleness without a genuine 
mediation of its own, the thing before the observing Reason 
is only something 'meant' ; and if Reason can take an idle inter­
est in observing this ' meanf thing, it is restricted to the descrip­
tion and narration of the ' meanings' and fanciful conceits it 
finds in Nature. This unspiritual freedom of 'meaning' will, it 
is true, offer on all sides the beginnings of law˺, traces of 
necessity, allusions to order and system, ingenious and plausible 
connections. But, as regards law and necessity, when observa­
tion connects the organic with the merely given differences of 
the inorganic, the elements, zones, and climates, it does not get 
beyond the idea of a 'great influence'. So, too, on the other side, 
where individuality has the significance, not of the Earth, but 
of the oneness immanent in life, and where this, in immediate unity 
with the universal, does indeed constitute the genus, the simple 
unity of which, however, is just for that reason determined only 
as number, and therefore sets free the qualitative manifestation ; 
here observation cannot do more than to make clever remark$, 
indicate interesting connections, and make a friendly approach 
to the Notion. But clever remarks are not a knowledge of 
necessity, interesting connections go no further than being 'of 
interest', while the interest is still nothing more than a subjec­
tive opinion about Reason ; and the friendliness with which the 

1 8o 
C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
individual alludes to a Notion i s  a childlike friendliness which 
is c*ildish if it wants to be, or is supposed to be, valid in and 
for Itself. 
b. Observation cif self-consciousness in its purity and in its relation to 
external actuality. Logical and psychological laws 
298. Observation of Nature finds the Notion realized in in­
organi: Nature, laws whose moments are things which, at the 
same time, have the character of abstractions ; but this Notion 
is not a simplicity that is reflected into itself. The life of organic 
Nature, on the other hand, is only this introreftected simplicity; 
the antithesis within it of universal and individual does not 
sunder itself in the essence of this life itself. The essence is not 
the genus which, in its undifferentiated element, would be self­
sundered and self-moved, and at the same time would be, for 
itself, undifferentiated in its antithesis. Observation finds this 
free Notion, whose universality contains j ust as absolutely 
within it developed individuality, only in the Notion which 
itself exists at Notion, i.e. in self-consciousness. 
299· When observation now turns in upon itself and directs 
its attention to the Notion existing as free Notion, it finds, to 
begin with, the Laws cif Thought. This individuality which 
Thought is in its own selfis the abstract movement of the nega­
tive, a movement wholly retracted into simplicity ; and the 
Laws are outside of reality. To say that they have no reality, 
means, in general, nothing else than that they lack truth. They 
are indeed, not supposed to be the entire truth, but stillformal 
truth. But what is purely formal without any reality is a mere 
figment of thought, or pure abstraction without that internal 
division which would be nothing else but the content.-On the 
other hand, however, since they are Laws of pure thought, and 
pure thought is intrinsically universal, and therefore a know­
ledge which immediately contains being, and therein all reality, 
these Laws are absolute Notions, and are inseparably the essen­
tial principles both of form and of things. Since immanent self­
moving universality is the sundered simple Notion, the latter thus 
has in itself a content, and one which is all content, only not a 
sensuous being. It is a content which is neither in contradiction 
with the form nor is separated at all from it ; rather, it is essenti-

OBS E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
ally the form itself, for the latter is nothing else but the universal 
dividing itself into its pure moments. 
300. But the way in which this form or content presents itself 
to observation qua observation gives it the character of something 
found, something that is given, i.e. a content that merely is. It 
becomes a quiescent being of relations, a multitude of detached 
necessities which, as in and for themselves afixed content, are 
supposed to have truth in their determinateness, and thus are, in 
fact, withdrawn from the form. This absolute truth of fixed 
determinatenesses, or of a number of different Laws, con­
tradicts, however, the unity of self-consciousness, or of thought 
and form in general. What is asserted to be a fixed Law that 
is in itself constant can only be a moment of the unity which 
is reflected into itself, can only appear as a vanishing magni­
tude. But, torn out of this context of movement in the course 
of considering them, and represented separately, it is not con­
tent that they lack, for they possess a definite content, but rather 
form which is their essence. In point of fact, these Laws are 
not the truth of thought, not because they are supposed to be 
merely formal, and to possess no content, but rather for the 
opposite reason, viz. that they are supposed in their deter­
minateness, or just as a content from which form has been re­
.noved, to rank as something absolute. In their truth, as vanish­
ing moments in the unity of thought, they would have to be 
taken as a knowing, or as a movement of thought, but not as 
Laws of being. But observing is not knowing itself, and is ignorant 
of it ; it converts its own nature into the form of being, i.e. it 
grasps its negativity only as laws of knowing. It is sufficient here 
to have pointed out the invalidity of the so-called Laws of 
Thought from the general nature of the case. The more precise 
development belongs to speculative philosophy in which they 
show themselves to be what they are in truth, viz. single vanish­
ing moments whose truth is only the whole movement of 
thought, knowing itself. 
30 1 .  This negative unity of thought is for itself, or rather it 
is being-for-its-own-self, the principle of individuality, and in its 
actuality is active consciousness. Consequently, the observing con­
sciousness will, by the nature of the case, be led towards this 
as the actuality of those laws. Since this connection is not 
explicit for the observing consciousness, it supposes that 

1 82 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
thought, i n  its Laws, remains over o n  one side, and that, on 
the other side, it obtains another being in what is now an object 
for it, viz. the active consciousness, which is for itself in such 
a way that it supersedes otherness and, in this intuition of itself 
as the negative, has its actuality. 
302. A new field thus opens up for observation in the beha­
viour of consciousness in its actuality. Psychology contains the collec­
tion oflaws in accordance with which Spirit relates itself in vari­
ous ways to the various modes of its actuality as an otherness 
already given. On the one hand, Spirit receives these modes into 
itself, conforming to the habits, customs, and way of thinking 
already to hand, as being that in which it is an actuality or 
an object to itself; and, on the other hand, Spirit knows itself 
as spontaneously active in face of them, and in singling out from 
them something for itself, it follows its own inclinations and 
desires, making the object conform to it : in the first case it 
behaves negatively towards itself as an individuality ; in the 
second case, negatively towards itself as a universal being. 
According to the first aspect, independence gives to what is 
already there merely the form of self-conscious individuality as 
such and, as regards the content, remains within the general 
actuality already given ; according to the second aspect, it gives 
the actuality at least a peculiar modification which does not 
contradict its essential content, or one even whereby the indivi­
dual, qua particular actuality with a peculiar content, sets itself 
in opposition to the general actuality, an opposition which 
becomes wrongdoing or crime when it sets aside that actuality 
in a merely individual manner, or when it does this in a general 
way and thus for all, putting another world, another right, law, 
and customs in place of those already existing. 
303. Observational psychology, which in the first instance 
records its perceptions of the general modes coming to its notice 
in the active consciousness, comes across all sorts of faculties, 
inclinations, and passions ; and since, while recounting the 
details of this collection it cannot help recalling the unity of 
self-consciousness, it must at least go so far as to be astonished 
that such a contingent medley of heterogeneous beings can be 
together in the mind like things in a bag, more especially since 
they show themselves to be not dead, inert things but restless 
movements. 
304. Observation, in recounting these various faculties, is 

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
keeping to the universal aspect ;  the unity of these manifold 
capacities is the opposite aspect to this universality, the actual 
individuality. However, to take up again in this way the dis­
tinctive actual individualities, and to recount that one man has 
more inclination for this, another for that, that one has more 
intelligence than another, all this is much less interesting even 
than enumerating the species of insects, mosses, etc. ; for these 
give observation the right to take them thus singly and un­
comprehendingly, because they belong essentially to the ele­
ment of contingent particularization. On the other hand, to 
take conscious individuality unintelligently, as a manifestation 
that is single and separate, involves a contradiction, since its 
essential nature is the universal of Spirit. But, since observation 
in apprehending it, endows it with the form of universality, it 
finds its law, and seems now to have a rational aim and to be 
engaged in a necessary activity. 
305. The moments constituting the content of the law are, 
on the one hand, the individuality itself, on the other hand, 
its universal inorganic nature, viz. the given circumstances, 
situation, habits, customs, religion, and so on ; from these the 
specific individuality is to be comprehended. They embrace 
specific as well as universal elements, and are at the same time 
something given, something which provides material for 
observation and which, on the other hand, expresses itself in 
the form of individuality. 
306. Now, the law of this relation of the two sides would have 
to state the kind of effect and influence exerted on the individu­
ality by these specific circumstances. But this individuality con­
sists precisely both in being the universal, and hence directly and 
unresistingly coalescing with the given universal, the customs, 
habits, etc., and becoming conformed to them ; and in setting 
itself in opposition to them and in faq transforming them ; and 
again, in behaving towards them in its individuality with com­
plete indifference, neither letting them exert an influence on it, 
nor being active against them. Therefore, what is to have an 
influence on the individuality, and what kind of influence it is 
to have-which really mean the same thing--depend solely on 
the individuality itself; to say that by such and such an influence 
this individuality has become this specific individuality means 
nothing else than that it has been this all along. Circumstances, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
situation, customs, etc., which on the one hand are shown as 
already there, and on the other hand as present in this specific indivi­
duality, express only the indeterminate nature of the individu­
ality, which is not the point under consideration. If these cir­
cumstances, way of thinking, customs, in general the state of 
the world, had not been, then of course the individual would 
not have become what he is ; for all those elements present in 
this 'state of the world' are this universal substance. The fact, 
however, that the state of the world has particularized itselfin 
this particular individual-and it is such an individual that is 
to be comprehended-implies that it must also have particu­
larized itself on its own account and have operated on an indivi­
dual in this specific character which it has given itself; only in 
this way would it have made itselfinto this specific individual 
that he is. If the constitution which the external world has spon­
taneously given itself is that which is manifest in the individu­
ality, the latter would be comprehended from the former. We 
should have a double gallery of pictures, one of which would 
be the reflection of the other : the one, the gallery of external 
circumstances which completely determine and circumscribe 
the individual, the other, the same gallery translated into the 
form in which those circumstances are present in the conscious 
individual : the former the spherical surface, the latter the 
centre which represents that surface within it. 
307. But the spherical surface, the world of the individual, 
has at once an ambiguous meaning : it is the actual state of the 
world as it is in and for itself, and it is the world of the indivi­
dual ; it is the latter either in so far as the individual has merely 
coalesced with that world, has let it, just as it is, enter into him, 
behaving towards it as a merely formal consciousness ; or, on 
the other hand, it is the world of the individual, in the sense 
that the actual world as given has been transformed by the indivi­
dual. Since, on account of this freedom, the actual world is 
capable ofhaving this twofold meaning, the world of the indivi­
dual is to be comprehended only from the individual himself; 
and the influence on the individual of the actual world, conceived 
as existing in and for itself, receives through the individual the 
absolutely opposite significance, viz. that the individual either 
allows free play to the stream of the actual world flowing in upon 
it, or else breaks it off and transforms it. The result of this, how-

O BS E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
r 8s 
ever, is that 'psychological necessity' becomes an empty phrase, 
so empty that there exists the absolute possibility that what is 
supposed to have had this influence could just as well not have 
had it. 
308. Thus there is no question of a being which would be in 
and for itself and was supposed to constitute one aspect, and the 
universal aspect at that, of a law. Individuality is what its world 
is, the world that is its own. Individuality is itself the cycle of 
its action in which it has exhibited itself as an actual world, 
and as simply and solely the unity of the world as given and 
the world it has made; a unity whose sides do not fall apart, 
as in the conception of psychological law, into a world that in 
itself is already given, and an individuality existing on its own 
account. Or, if those sides are thus considered each by itself, there 
exists no necessity and no law of their connection with one 
another. 
c. Observation of the relation of self-consciousness to its immediate actu­
ality. Physiognomy and Phrenology 
309. 
Psychological observation discovers no law for the re­
lation of self-consciousness to actuality, or to the world over 
against it ; and, through the mutual indifference of both, it is 
forced to fall back on the peculiar determinateness of real individu­
ality which exists in and for itself, or contains the antithesis of 
beingfor itself and being in itself effaced within its own absolute 
mediation. Individuality has now become the object for 
observation, or the object to which observation now turns. 
3 1  o. The individual exists in and for himself: he is for himself 
or is a free activity ; but he has also an iTJtrinsic being or has 
an original determinate being of his own-a determinateness 
which is in principle the same as what psychology thought to 
find outside of him. In his own self, therefore, there emerges 
the antithesis, this duality of being the movement of conscious­
ness, and the fixed being of an appearing actuality, an actuality 
which in the individual is immediately his own. This being, the 
body of the specific individuality, is the latter's original aspect, 
that aspect in the making of which it has not itself played a 
part. But since the individual is at the same time only what 
he has done, his body is also the expression of himself which 

1 86 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
he has himself produced; it is at the same time a sign, which has 
not remained an immediate fact, but something through which 
the individual only makes known what he really is, when he 
sets his original nature to work. 
3 1  r .  If we consider the moments here before us in relation to 
the previous view, we have here a general human shape, or at 
least the general character of a climate, a continent, a people, 
just as previously we had the same general customs and culture. 
In addition, there are the particular circumstances and situa­
tion within the general sphere of actuality ; here this particular 
actuality is present as a particular formation of the shape of 
the individual. On the other side, just as previously the free 
activity of the individual was made explicit, as also the fact 
ofhis own actuality in the face of the actuality already given, here 
the shape stands for the expression of his own actualization 
established by the individual himself, the lineaments and 
forms of his spontaneously active being. But the actuality, 
both general and particular, which observation previously 
found given outside of the individual, is here the actuality of 
the individual, his inherited body, and it is precisely in this that 
the 'expression' originating from his activity appears. From the 
psychological point of view, actuality in and for itself and the 
specific individuality were supposed to be brought into relation 
to one another; here, however, the whole specific individuality 
is the object of observation ; and each side of the antithesis is 
itself the whole. To the outer whole, therefore, belongs not on!y 
the original being, the inherited body, but equally the formation 
of the body resulting from the activity of the inner being; the 
body is the unity of the unshaped and of the shaped being, and 
is the individual's actuality permeated by his being-for-self. 
This whole, which contains within it the specific original fixed 
parts and the lineaments arising solely from the activity, is, and 
this being is the expression of the inner being, of the individual 
posited as consciousness and movement. This inner being is, too, 
no longer a formal, spontaneous activity, devoid of content or 
indeterminate, an activity whose content and determinateness, 
as before was the case, Ia y in external circumstances ; on the 
contrary, it is an intrinsically determined original character, 
whose form is merely the activity. We have then to consider 
here how to determine the relation between these two sides and 

O BS E R V I N G  R E ASON 
what is to be understood by this 'expression' of the inner in the 
outer. 
3 1 2. This outer, in the first place, acts only as an organ in 
making the inner visible or, in general, a being-for-another; 
for the inner, in so far as it is in the organ, is the activity itself. 
The speaking mouth, the working hand, and, if you like, the 
legs too are the organs of performance and actualization which 
have within them the action qua action, or the inner as such. 
But the externality which the inner obtains through them is 
the action as a reality separated from the individual. Speech 
and work are outer expressions in which the individual no 
longer keeps and possesses himself within himself, but lets the 
inner get completely outside of him, leaving it to the mercy of 
something other than himself. For that reason we can say with 
equal truth that these expressions express the inner too much, 
as that they do so too little : too much, because the inner itself 
breaks out in them and there remains no antithesis between 
them and it; they give not merely an expression of the inner, 
but directly the inner itself; too little, because in speech and 
action the inner turns itself into something else, thus putting 
itself at the mercy of the element of change, which twists the 
spoken word and the accomplished act into meaning something 
else than they are in and for themselves, as actions of this par­
ticular individual. Not only do the results of the actions, 
through this externality of the influences of others, lose the 
·character of being something constant in face of other indivi­
dualities, but since, in their relationship to the inner which they 
contain, they behave as a separated, indifferent externality, they 
can, qua inner, through the individual himself, be something other 
than they appear to be : either the individual intentionally 
makes them appear to be other than what they are in truth ; 
or else he is too clumsy to give himself the outer aspect he really 
wanted, and to establish it so firmly that his work cannot be 
misconstrued by others. The action, then, as a completed work, 
has the double and opposite meaning of being either the inner 
individuality and not its expression, or, qua external, a reality free 
from the inner, a reality which is something quite different from 
the inner. On account of this ambiguity, we must look around 
for the inner as it still is within the individual himself, but in 
a visible or external shape. In the organ, however, it is present 

188 
C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
only as the immediate activity itself, which attains its external­
ization in the deed, which either does, or again does not 
 
' 
represent the inner. The organ, regarded in the light of this 
antithesis, does not therefore provide the expression which is 
sought. 
3 r 3· If now the outer shape could express the inner individu­
ality only in so far as that shape is neither an organ nor an 
action, hence only in so far as it is a passive whole, it would 
behave as an existent Thing, which passively received the inner 
as an alien element into its passive existence, and thereby 
became a sign of it-an external contingent expression whose 
actual aspect lacked any meaning of its own-a language whose 
sounds and sound-combinations are not the real thing itself, but 
are linked with it by sheer caprice and are contingent in relation 
to it. 
3 1 4. Such an arbitrary combination of factors that are 
external for one another yields no law. Physiognomy, how­
ever, is supposed to differ from other questionable arts and per­
nicious studies because it considers specific individuality in the 
necessary antithesis of an inner and an outer, of character as a 
conscious disposition, and this again as an existent shape, and 
the way it relates these factors to each other is the way they 
are related by their Notion ; hence these factors must constitute 
the content of a law. In astrology, palmistry, and similar 
sciences, on the other hand, what seems to be related is only 
an outer to an outer, something or other to an element alien 
to it. This particular constellation at birth, and, when this 
external element is brought closer to the body, these particular 
lines on the hand, are external factors indicating a longer or 
shorter life, and the fate in general of the particular individual. 
Being externalities, they are indifferent towards each other, and 
lack the necessity for one another that ought to lie in the relation 
of an outer to an inner. 
' 
3 1 5. Admittedly the hand does not seem to be such a very 
external factor for fate ; it seems rather to be related to it as 
something inner. For fate itself is also only the manifestation 
of what the particular individuality is in itself as an inner origi­
nal specific character. Now, to find out what this particular in­
dividuality is in itself, the palmist, like the physiognomist, takes 
a shorter cut than, e.g., Solon, who thought he could only know 

OBS E R V I N G R E A S O N  
189 
this from and after the course of the whole life ;  he examined 
the manifestation, but the former examines the [ unexplicated) 
in-itself. That the hand, however, must represent the in-itself 
of the individuality in respect ofits fate is easy to see from the 
fact that, next to the organ of speech, it is the hand most of 
all by which a man manifests and actualizes himself. It is the 
living artificer of his fortune. We may say of the hand that 
it is what a man does, for in it, as the active organ of his self­
fulfilment, he is present as the animating soul ; and since he 
is primarily his own fate, his hand will thus express this in­
itself. 
3 r 6. From this nature of the organ of activity, to be a [passive] 
being as well as the action within it, or from the fact that the 
in-itself-ness is itself present in it, and has a being for others, we 
obtain another view of it than the preceding. Namely, if the 
organs in general showed themselves to be incapable of being 
taken as expressions of the inner, because in them the action qua 
action is present, but the action qua [completed) deed is merely 
external, and inner and outer in this way fall apart and are 
or can be alien to each other, then the organ must now, in 
accordance with its nature, be taken again as also a middle term 
of both. This very fact that the action is present in it constitutes 
an externality of it, and, moreover, one that is other than the 
deed ; for the organ remains with and in the individual. Now, 
this middle term and unity ofinner and outer is in the first place 
itself external too. But then this externality is at the same time 
taken up into the inner ; as simple externality it stands over 
against the dispersed externality, which either is merely a single 
deed or condition contingent for the individuality as a whole, 
or else, as a total externality, is fate split up into a multiplicity 
of deeds and conditions. Thus the simple lines of the hand, the 
timbre and compass of the voice as the individual characteristic 
.of speech-this too again as expressed in writing, where the 
hand gives it a more durable existence than the voice does, 
especially in the particular style of handwriting-all this is an 
expression of the inner, so that, as a simple externality, the expres­
sion again stands over against the manifold externality of action 
and fate, stands in relation to them as an inner. Thus, if at first 
the specific nature and innate peculiarity of the individual, 
together with what these have become as a result of cultivation 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
and education, are taken as the inner, as the essence of his action 
and his fate, then this essence has its appearance and externality 
to begin with in his mouth, hand, voice, handwriting, and the 
other organs and their permanent characteristics. Thereafter, 
and not till then, does it give itself further outward expression 
in its actual existence in the world. 
3 1  7. Now, because this middle term gives itself the form of 
an outer expression, which is at the same time taken back into 
the inner, its existence is not restricted to the immediate organ 
of the action ; the middle term is rather the movement and form 
of countenance and figure in general, which take no part in 
the action. These lineaments and their movements are, accord­
ing to this notion, the action which is held back and which 
remains in the individual, and as regards the individual's rela­
tion to the action really performed, they constitute his own con­
trol and observation of the action, expression in the sense of a 
reflection on the actual expression. The individual is therefore not 
dumb as regards his external action, because he is thereby at 
once reflected into himself, and gives expression to this reflec­
tedness-into-self. This thl:oretical action, or the individual's 
speech with himself about the external action, is also percep­
tible to others, for this speech is itself an expression. 
3 1 8. In this inner, therefore, which in its expression remains 
an inner, there is observed the individual as reflected out of 
his actual being ; and we have to see what is the significance 
of this necessity which is posited in this unity. This reflected ness 
is in the first place different from the deed itself and therefore 
can be something other than the deed, and can be taken for 
something other. We see from a man's face whether he is in 
earnest about what he is saying or doing. Conversely, however, 
what is here supposed to be the expression of the inner is at 
the same time an expression in the form of immediate being, and 
hence is itself degraded to the level of [mere] being, which is 
absolutely contingent for the self-conscious being. It is therefore 
indeed an expression, but at the same time only in the sense 
of a sign, so that the particular way in which the content is 
expressed is a matter of complete indifference so far as the con­
tent i tselfis concerned. In this appearance, the inner is no doubt 
a visible invisible, but it is not tied to this appearance : it can 
be manifested just as well in another way, just as another inner 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
r g r  
can be manifested in the same appearance. Lichtenberg1 there­
fore rightly says : 'Suppose the physiognomist ever did take the 
measure of a man, it would only require a courageous resolve 
on the part of the man to make himself incomprehensible again 
for a thousand years.' 
Just as, in the previous relationship, the given circumstances 
were a [passive] being from which the individuality took what 
it could and wanted, either submitting to or transforming that 
being, for which reason it did not contain the necessity and 
essential nature of the individuality ; so here, the manifest im­
mediate being of the individuality is one which either expresses 
the fact of its being reflected out of its actual existence and its 
being within itself, or which is for the individuality merely a 
sign indifferent to what is signified, therefore truly signifying 
nothing ; for the individuality, it is as much its countenance as 
its mask which it can lay aside. The individuality permeates 
its shape, moves and speaks in it; but this existence in its entirety 
equally turns into a being that is indifferent to the will and the 
deed. Individuality effaces from it the significance it formerly 
had, viz. of being that in which the individuality is reflected 
into itself or has its true essence; instead it places its essence 
rather in the will and the deed. 
3 1 9. Individuality gives up that rejlectedness-into-selfwhich is 
expressed in lines and lineaments, and places its essence in the work 
it has done. Herein it contradicts the relationship established by 
the instinct of Reason, which is engaged in observing the self­
conscious individuality, ascertaining what its inner and outer are 
supposed to be. This point of view leads us to the thought which 
really lies at the base of the 'science'-if one wishes to call it 
such--of physiognomy. The antithesis which this observation 
encounters has the form of the antithesis of the practical and 
the theoretical, both falling within the practical aspect itself­
the antithesis ofindividuality making itself actual in its 'doing' 
('doing' in its most general sense), and individuality as being 
at the same time reflected out of this 'doing' into itself and mak­
ing this its object. Observation accepts this antithesis in the 
same inverted relationship which characterizes it in the sphere 
of appearance. I t  regards as the unessential outer the deed itself 
and the performance1 whether it be that of speech or a more 
I Ober Physiognomik, znd edn., Gottingen, r nB, p. 35· 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
durable reality; but it is the being-within-self of the individu­
ality which is for it the essential inner. Of the two aspects possessed 
by the practical consciousness, intention and deed (what is 
'meant' or intended by the deed and the deed itself) , observa­
tion selects the former as the true inner; the intention is sup­
posed to have its more or less unessential expression in the deed, 
but it has its true expression in the shape of the individuality. 
The latter expression is the immediate sensuous presence of the 
individual spirit ; the inwardness which is supposed to be the 
true inner is the particularity of the intention and the singleness 
of the being-for-self; both together are the spirit as only 'meant' 
or intended. What observation has for its objects is thus an exist­
ence which is only 'meant', and it looks for laws between such 
existences. 
320. Theformingofopinions prima facie about the presumed 
[outward] presence of Spirit is natural or everyday physiog­
nomy, the over-hasty judgement formed at first sight about the 
inner nature and character of its outer shape. The object of this 
opinion is of such a kind that its essence involves its being in 
truth something else than merely sensuous immediate being. 
True, it is also just this reftectedness into itself, out of sense, 
in sensuous form, and this which is visibly present as visibility 
of the invisible, is the object of observation. But just this sen­
suous immediate presence is the reality of S_pirit Qnly for mere 
opinion ; and observation, in keeping with this aspect, busies 
itself with this presumed existence of Spirit, with physiognomy, 
handwriting, sound of voice, etc. It connects such existence with 
just such a presumed inner. It is not the murderer, the thief, who 
is to be recognized, but the capacity to be one. The fixed abstract 
quality thereby gets lost in the concrete, infinitely determinate, 
character of the particular individual, which now demands more 
skilfully contrived delineations than those qualifications are. 
Such ingenious delineations certainly say more than the qualifi­
cation, 'murderer', 'thief', or 'good-natured', 'unspoiled', and 
so on ; but they are far from being adequate for their purpose, 
which is to express the presumed being or the particular individu­
ality; as inadequate as the delineations of the bodily shape 
which go [no)l further than a 'flat forehead', a 'long nose', etc. 
For the individual shape, like the individual self-consciousness, 
I The sense seems to require a 'no' here. 

O B S E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
193 
is, qua a being that is 'meant', inexpressible. The 'science of 
knowing men',1 which deals with the supposed human being, 
like the 'science' of physiognomy which deals with his presumed 
reality, and aims at raising the unconscious judging of everyday 
physiognomy to the level of knowledge, is therefore something 
which lacks both foundation and finality ; it can never succeed 
in saying what it means becaus'e it merely 'means' and its con­
tent is something merely 'meant'. 
32 I .  The laws which this 'science' sets out to find are rela­
tions between these two supposed aspects, and hence can them­
selves be nothing more than empty subjective opinions. Also, 
since the object of this supposed way of knowing, which takes 
it upon itselfto deal with the reality of Spirit, is just the reflec­
tion of Spirit out of its sensuous existence back into itself, and 
a particular [physical] existence is for Spirit something in­
different and contingent, this kind of knowing must be directly 
aware that the laws it has discovered tell us nothing, that, 
strictly speaking, it is idle chatter, or merely the voicing of one's 
own opinion (an expression which contains the truth about itself, 
viz. that it is one's own opinion that is put forward, hence not 
the matter itself but merely an opinion of one's own) . As regards 
their content, however, these observations are on a par with 
these : 'It always rains when we have our annual fair,' says the 
dealer ; 'and every time, too,' says the housewife, 'when I am 
drying my washing'. 
322. Lichtenberg, who characterizes physiognomic observa­
tion in this way, also says this : 'If anyone said, "You certainly 
act like an honest man, but I see from your face that you are 
forcing yourself to do so and are a rogue at heart" ; without 
a doubt, every honest fellow to the end of time, when thus 
addressed, will retort with a box on the ear.' This retort is to 
the point, because it refutes the primary assumption of such a 
'science' of mere subjective opinion, viz. that the reality of a 
man is his face, etc. The true being of a man is rather his deed ; 
in this the individual is actual, and it is the deed that does away 
with both aspects of what is [merely] 'meant' to be : in the one 
aspect where what is 'meant' has the form of a corporeal passive 
1 This refers to the claims put forward by Lavater, whose work was entitled Physiognomi­
sche Fragmente zur Beforderung der Menschenkenntniss und Menschenliebe, Leipzig, 1 77Õ-8 
(Baillie's note). 

194 
C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
being, the individuality, in the deed, exhibits itself rather as 
the negative essence, which only is in so far as it supersedes [mere] 
being. Then, too, the deed equally does away with the inexpres­
sibility of what is 'meant', in respect of the self-conscious indivi­
duality. In such mere opinion the individuality is infinitely de­
termined and determinable. In the accomplished deed this 
spurious infinity is destroyed. The deed is something simply de­
termined, universal, to be grasped in an abstraction ; it is 
murder, theft, or a good action, a brave deed, and so on, and 
what it is can be said of it. It is this, and its being is not merely 
a sign, but the fact itself. It is this, and the individual human 
being is what the deed is. In the simplicity of this being, the indivi­
dual is for others a universal being who really is, and who ceases 
to be something only 'meant'. It is true that, in the deed, he 
is not explicitly present as Spirit ; but when it is a question of 
his being qua being, and, on the one hand, the twofold being 
of bodily shape and deed are contrasted, each purporting to 
be what he actually is, then it is the deed alone that must be 
affirmed as his genuine being-not his face or outward appearance, 
which is supposed to express what he 'means' by his deeds, or 
what anyone might suppose he merely could do. Similarly, on 
the other hand, when his performance and his inner possibility, 
capacity or intention are contrasted, it is the former alone which 
is to be regarded as his true actuality, even if he deceives himself 
on the point, and, turning away from his action into himself, 
fancies that in this inner self he is something else than what he 
is in the deed. Individuality, when it commits itself to the objec­
tive element in putting itself into a deed, does of course risk 
being altered and perverted. But what settles the character of 
the deed is just this : whether the deed is an actual being that 
endures, or whether it is merely a fancied performance, that 
in itself is nothing at all, and passes away. The analysis of this 
being into intentions and subtleties of that sort, whereby the 
actual man, i.e. his deed, is to be explained away again in terms 
of a being that is only 'meant', just as the individual himself 
even may create for himself special intentions concerning his 
actuality, all this must be left to the laziness of mere conjecture. 
Should this idle thinking want to set its sterile wisdom to work, 
with the aim of denying the doer the character of Reason, and 
so ill-using him as to declare that not his deed, but his face and 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
1 95 
lineaments are his real being, then it may expect to get the retort 
spoken of above, a retort which demonstrates that the face or 
outward appearance is not the individual's in-itselfbut, on the 
contrary, can be an object for handling. 
323. If we look now at the range of relationships as a whole, 
in which the self-conscious individuality can be observed to 
stand towards its outer aspect, there will be one left which has 
still to be made an object for observation. In psychology it is 
the external reality of things which is supposed to have its self­
conscious counterpart in Spirit and to make Spirit intelligible. 
In physiognomy, on the other hand, Spirit is supposed to be 
known in its own outer aspect, as in a being which is the utterance 
of Spirit-the visible invisibility of its essence. There remains 
the further determination of the aspect of reality, viz. that the 
individuality expresses its essence in its immediate, firmly estab­
lished, and purely existent actuality. This last relation is thus 
distinguished from the physiognomic by the fact that this is the 
speaking presence of the individual who, in expressing himself 
in action, at the same time exhibits himself as inwardly reflecting 
and contemplating himself, an expression which is itself a move­
ment, features in repose which are themselves essentially a 
mediated being. In the determination yet to be considered, 
however, the outer aspect is lastly a wholly immobile reality 
which is not in its own self a speaking sign but, separated from 
self-conscious movement, presents itself on its own account and 
is a mere Thing. 
324. In the first place, in regard to the relation of the inner 
to this its outer, it seems clear that that relation must be grasped 
as a causal connection, since the relation of one being-in-itself to 
another being-in-itself, qua a necessary relation, is a causal con­
nection. 
325. Now, for spiritual individuality to have an effect on the 
body it must, qua cause, be itself corporeal. The corporeal ele­
ment, however, in which it acts as cause is the organ, but the 
organ not of action against external reality, but of the internal 
action of the self-conscious being operating outwards only 
against its own body. It is not at once clear which organs these 
can be. If we were thinking only of organs in general, the organ 
for work as such would be quite obvious, similarly the organ 
of sex, and so on. Organs of that sort, however, are to be 

1 96 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
considered as instruments or parts which Spirit, as one extreme, 
possesses as a middle term against the other extreme, which is the 
external object. Here, however, is to be understood an organ in 
which the self-conscious individual, as an extreme, preserves 
himself for himself against his own [corporeal] actuality which 
is opposed to him, the individual at the same time not being 
turned to the outer world but reflected in his action, and in 
which is an organ in which the aspect of being is not a being­
for-another. It is true that in the physiognomic relation the organ 
is also considered as an existence reflected into itself and review­
ing the action ; but this being is an objective being, and the 
result of the physiognomic observation is this, that self-con­
sciousness confronts this its actuality as something to which it 
is indifferent. This indifference vanishes in the fact that this very 
reflected ness-into-self is productive of an effect ; thereby that 
objective existence receives a necessary relation to it. But to act 
on that existence the reflectedness-into-self must itself have a 
being, though not, strictly speaking, an objective being, and 
as such an organ it must be pointed out. 
326. Now, in ordinary life, anger, e.g., as such an internal 
action, is located in the liver. Plato1 even assigns the liver some­
thing still higher, something which is even regarded by some 
as the highest function of all, viz. prophesying, or the gift of 
speaking of holy and eternal things in a non-rational manner. 
But the movement which the individual has in his liver, heart, 
and so on, cannot be regarded as wholly reflected into itself; 
rather it is present in such a manner that it has already taken 
on a corporeal aspect in him and has an animal existence turn­
ing outwards to external reality. 
327. The nervous system, on the other hand, is the immediate 
repose of the organism in its movement. The nerves themselves, 
it is true, are again the organs of that consciousness which is 
already immersed in its outward-directed activity; brain and 
spinal cord, however, may be considered as the immediate pre­
sence of self-consciousness, a presence which abides within itself, 
is not objective and also does not look outwards. In so far as 
the moment of being which this organ has is a being-for-another, 
i.e. is an outer existence, it is a dead thing and no longer the 
presence of self-consciousness. This being-within-itself, however, 
1 Timatus, 7 1 ,  72. 

O B S E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
1 97 
is by its very· nature a fluid system, in which the circles cast 
into it immediately dissolve, and in which no lasting distinction 
is expressed. Meanwhile, as Spirit itselfis not abstractly simple, 
but a system of movements in which it differentiates itself into 
moments, but in this very differentiation remains free ; and as 
Spirit articulates its body into a variety of functions, and allots 
one particular part for only one function : so too, the fluid being 
of its being-within-self can be thought of as articulated into parts. 
And it seems that it must be thought of in this way, because 
the being of Spirit which, in the brain, is reflected into itself, 
is itself again only a middle term between Spirit's pure essence 
and its corporeal articulation, a middle term which therefore 
must partake of the nature of both ; the corporeal aspect must 
therefore also be present in the middle term in the form of imme­
diate being. 
328.' The spiritually organic being has at the same time the 
necessary aspect of an inert, enduring existence; the former, qua 
the extreme of being-for-self, must step back, and have this lat­
ter as the other extreme over against it, which is then the object 
on which the spiritually organic being acts as cause. If now the 
brain and spinal cord together constitute that corporeal being­
for-self of Spirit, the skull and vertebral column form the other 
extreme to it, an extreme which is separated off, viz. the solid, 
inert Thing. When, however, anyone thinks of the proper loca­
tion of Spirit's outer existence, it is not the back that comes 
to mind but only the head. Therefore, in examining a way of 
knowing like the one we are now dealing with, we can be 
satisfied with this reason-not a very bad reason in this case­
in order to confine this existence to the skull. Should it occur 
to anyone to think of the back as the location of Spirit in so 
far as by it, too, knowing and doing are no doubt sometimes 
partly driven in and partly driven out, this would be no proof 
at all that the spinal cord must be taken as included in the in­
dwelling seat of Spirit, because this proves too much. For one 
may equally recall that there are other popular external ways, 
too, for getting at the activity of Spirit in order to stimulate 
or inhibit it. The vertebral column is, then, rightly ruled out, 
if you like ; that the skull alone does not contain the organs of 
Spirit is as well 'explained' as many another doctrine of 'philo­
sophy of Nature'. For this was previously excluded from the 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
Notion of this relation, and for this reason the skull was taken 
for the aspect of outer existence ; or, if we are not to be allowed 
to recall the Notion of the relation, then certainly experience 
teaches that, as it is with the eye qua organ that we see, so it 
is not with the skull that we murder, steal, write poetry, etc. 
That is the reason why we must also refrain from using the 
expression 'organ' for that significance of the skull which has still 
to be mentioned. For although it is commonly said that reason­
able men pay attention not to the word but to the thing itself, 
yet this does not give us permission to describe a thing in terms 
inappropriate to it. For this is at once incompetence and deceit, 
to fancy and to pretend that one merely has not the right word, 
and to hide from oneself that really one has failed to get hold 
of the thing itself, i.e. the Notion. If one had the Notion, then 
one would also have the right word. What has been determined 
here in the first instance is only that just as the brain is the living 
head, the skull is the caput mortuum. 
329. It is in this dead being, then, that the mental processes 
and specific functions of the brain would have to display their 
outer reality, a reality, however, which is still in the individual 
himself. For the relation of those processes and functions to the 
skull, which as a dead being does not have Spirit dwelling 
within it, there presents itself, in the first instance, the external 
mechanical relation established above, so that the organs 
proper-and these are in the brain-here press the skull out 
around, there widen or flatten it, or in whatever other way one 
cares to represent this action on it. Being itself a part of the 
organism, it must indeed be credited, as in the case of every 
bone, with a living spontaneous formative activity so that, from 
this point of view, it is rather the skull that on its part presses 
on the brain, and fixes its outer boundary ; and it is better able 
to do this, being the harder. But in that case the same relation 
would still obtain in the determination of their reciprocal 
activity ; for whether the skull is the determining factor or the 
factor determined, this would produce no alteration at all in 
the causal connection, except that the skull would then be made 
the immediate organ of self-consciousness because in it, qua 
cause, would be found the aspect of being-for-self But in point 
offact, since being-for-self, as an organic spontaneity,'·is equally 
present in both, any causal connection between them is ruled 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
199 
out. This development of the two, however, would be inwardly 
connected, and would be an organic pre-established harmony, 
which would leave the two interrelated aspects free in respect 
of each other, each with its own shape to which the shape of 
the other need not correspond ; and still more so as regards the 
relation between the shape and the quality, just as the shape 
of the grape and the taste of the wine are mutually independent. 
But since the determination of being-for-self falls on the side of 
the brain, but that of existence on the side of the skull, there is 
also to be established a causal connection between them within 
the organic unity-a necessary relation between them as 
external for one another, i.e. a relation itself external through 
which, therefore, the shape of each would be determined by the 
other. 
330. However, as regards the determination in which the 
organ of self-consciousness would act causally on the opposite 
aspect, all sorts of things can be said. For what is in question 
is the constitution of a cause which is considered in regard to 
its indifferent outer existence, its shape and size, a cause whose 
inner being and being-for-self are to be precisely of a kind which 
does not conern the immediate or outer existence. The organic 
spontaneous formation of the skull is in the first place indifferent 
to any mechanical influence exerted on it, and the relationship 
of these two relations, since the former is a relating of itself to 
itself, is just this very indefiniteness and unboundedness. 
Furthermore, even if the brain received into itself the dis­
tinctions ofSpirit as existential distinctions and were a plurality 
of internal organs each occupying a different space, it would 
be left undetermined whether a spiritual feature would, accord­
ing as it was originally stronger or weaker, be bound to possess 
in the first case a more expanded brain-organ, or in the latter 
case a more contracted brain-organ, or even the other way 
about. But it is contradictory to Nature for the brain to be such 
a plurality of internal organs, for Nature gives the moments 
of the Notion an existence of their own, and therefore puts the 
fluid simplicity of organic life clearly on one side, and its articu­
lation and division with its distinctions clearly on the other, so 
that in the way they are to be grasped here, they display them­
selves as particular anatomical things. Similarly with the ques­
tion whether the development of the brain would enlarge or 

200 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
diminish the organ, whether it would make it coarser and 
thicker or finer. From the fact that it remains undetermined 
how the cause is constituted, it is equally left undetermined how 
the effect is produced in the skull, whether it is an enlarging 
or a narrowing and falling-in of the latter. When this influence 
is defined, as it were, more imposingly as a 'stimulation', it is 
still undetermined whether this takes place by swelling, like the 
effect of a cantharides plaster, or by shrivelling, like the effect 
of vinegar. All views of this kind can be supported by plausible 
grounds, for the organic relation which just as much plays a 
part accommodates one view as readily as another, and is 
indifferent to all this cleverness. 
33 I .  However, it is not the function of observation to seek 
to determine this relation, for in any case it is not the brain, 
qua a physical part, which stands on the one side, but the brain 
qua the being of the self-conscious individuality. This latter as a 
lasting character and spontaneous conscious activity existsfor 
itself and within itself. Over against this being-far-and-within­
itself stand its actuality and its existence-for-another. The 
being-for-and-within-itselfis the essence and the subject which 
has a being in the brain ; this being is subsumed under the subject, 
and gets its value only through its indwelling significance. But 
the other aspect of self-conscious individuality, the aspect 
of its outer existence, is being qua indepeQdent and subject, or 
qua a 'thing', viz. a bone : the actuality and existence of man is his 
skull-bone. This is how the relationship and the two sides of this 
· relation are understood by the consciousness observing them. 
332 . Observation has now to deal with the more determinate 
relation of these aspects. The skull-bone does have in general 
the significance of being the immediate actuality of Spirit. But 
the many-sidedness of Spirit gives its existence a corresponding 
variety of meanings. What we have to obtain is the specific 
meaning of the particular areas into which this existence is 
divided ; and we have to see how these areas contain an indica­
tion of that specific meaning. 
333· The skull-bone is not an organ of activity, nor even a 
'speaking' movement. We neither commit theft, murder, etc. 
with the skull-bone, nor does it in the least betray such deeds 
by a change of countenance, so that the skull-bone would 
become a speaking gesture. Nor has this immediate being the 

O BS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
2 0 1  
value even of a sign. Look and gesture, tone of voice, even a 
pillar or post erected on a desert island, directly proclaim that 
they mean something else than what they simply are at first sight. 
They at once profess to be signs, since they have in them a pecu­
liarity which points to something else, by the fact that it does 
not properly belong to them. A variety of ideas may well occur 
to us in connection with a skull, like those of Hamlet over 
Yorick's skull ; but the skull-bone just by itself is such an in­
different, natural thing that nothing else is to be directly seen 
in it, or fancied about it, than simply the bone itself. It does 
indeed remind us of the brain and its specific nature, and of 
skulls of a different formation, but not of a conscious movement, 
since there is impressed on it neither a look nor a gesture, nor 
anything that proclaims itself to have come from a conscious 
action ; for it is an actuality whose role it is to exhibit another 
sort of aspect of the individuality, one that would no longer 
be a self-reflected, but a purely immediate being. 
334· Further, while the skull-bone does not itself feel, it 
seems that perhaps a more specific significance could still be 
found for it in the fact that specific feelings, through their prox­
imity to the skull, might enable us to ascertain what it is that 
the skull means to convey ; and when a conscious mode of Spirit 
has its feeling in a specific area of the skull, the shape of this 
part of the skull might perhaps indicate what that mode is, and 
what is its special nature. Just as, e.g., some people complain 
of feeling a painful tension somewhere in the head when they 
are thinking hard, or even when thinking at all, so too could 
stealing, committing murder, writing poetry, and so on, each 
be accompanied by its own feeling, which besides would neces­
sarily be localized in its own special place. This area of the brain 
which would in this way be more moved and activated would 
probably also develop the adjacent area of the skull-bone ; or 
again this particular area would, from sympathy or consensus, 
not be inert, but would enlarge or diminish itself or modify its 
shape in some way or other. What, however, makes this hypo­
thesis improbable is this, that feeling as such is something in­
determinate, and feeling in the head as the centre might be a 
general sympathetic feeling accompanying all forms of suffer­
ing, so that mixed up with the thiefs, murderer's, poet's, head­
itching or headache are other feelings which could as little be 

202 
C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
distinguished from one another and also from those we can call 
merely bodily feelings, as an illness can be diagnosed from the 
symptom of headache, if we restrict its significance merely to 
the bodily aspect. 
335· In fact, from whatever side we look at the matter, there 
is no necessary reciprocal relation at all between them, nor any 
direct indication of such a relation. If, all the same, the relation 
is still to exist, what remains and is necessary to form it is an 
irrational, free, pre-established harmony of the corresponding 
determination of the two aspects ; for one of the two aspects is 
to be a non-spiritual reality, a mere thing.-On the one side, 
then, we have a multitude of inert areas of the skull, on the 
other, a multitude of mental properties, whose number and 
character will depend on the state of psychology. The more 
paltry the conception ofSpirit, the easier becomes the task from 
this side ; for partly, the mental properties become fewer, and 
partly, they become more detached, rigid, and ossified, and 
therefore more akin to characteristics of the bone, and more 
comparable with them. But, although the task is made much 
easier by the paltry conception of Spirit, yet there still remains 
a very great deal to be done on both sides : there remains for 
observation the entire contingency of their relation. If the child­
ren of Israel, who were likened in number to the sands of the 
sea-shore, should each take unto himself the grain of sand 
which stood for him, the indifference and arbitrariness of such 
a procedure would be no more glaring than that which assigns 
to every faculty of soul, to every passion, and-what must 
equally be considered here-to each nuance of character which 
the more refined psychology and 'knowledge of human nature' 
likes to talk about, its particular area of skull and shape of skull­
bone. The skull of a murderer has-not this organ or even 
sign-but this bump. But this murderer has as well a multitude 
of other properties,just as he has other bumps, and along with 
the bumps also hollows ; one has a choice of bumps and hollows. 
And again, his murderous disposition can be related to any 
bump or hollow, and this in turn to any mental property ; for 
the murderer is neither merely this abstraction of a murderer, 
nor does he h.•ve only one bump and one hollow. The observa­
tions indulge1 in on this point must, just for that reason, sound 
as sensible as those of the dealer and of the housewife about 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
203 
rain at the annual fair and on wash-day. Dealer and housewife 
might as well make the observation that it always rains when 
a particular neighbour goes by, or when they eat roast pork. 
Just as rain is indifferent to circumstances like these, so too, 
from the standpoint of observation, a particular determinateness 
of Spirit is indifferent to a particular formation of the skull. For 
of the two objects of this observation, one is a dry, sapless being­
for-itself, an ossified property of Spirit, the other is an equally 
sapless being-in-itself; such an ossified thing as both are is com­
pletely indifferent to everything else. It is just as much a matter 
of indifference to the high bump whether a murderer is in its 
vicinity, as ii is to the murderer whether flatness is close by him. 
336. It is of course undeniable that there remains the possi­
bility that a bump at some place or other is connected with a 
particular property, passion, etc. One can imagine the murderer 
with a high bump here at this place on the skull, and the thief 
with one there. From this aspect phrenology is capable of still 
greater expansion ; for in the first instance it seems to confine 
itself to connecting a bump with a property in the same indivi­
dual, that is, the individual possesses both. But natural or every­
day phrenology-for there must be such a 'science' as well as 
a natural physiognomy-already goes beyond this restriction. 
It not only declares that a cheating fellow has a bump as big 
as your fist behind his ear, but also asserts that, not the unfaith­
ful wife herself, but the other conjugal party, has a bump on 
the forehead. Similarly, one can imagine the man who is living 
under the same roof as the murderer, or even his neighbour, 
or, going further afield, imagine his fellow-citizens, etc. with 
high bumps on some part or other of the skull, just as well as 
one can imagine the flying cow, that first was caressed by the 
crab, that was riding on the donkey, etc. etc. But if possibility 
is taken, not in the sense of the possibility of imagining, but in 
the sense of inner possi hili ty, or the possi hili ty of the Notion, then 
the object is a reality of the kind which is a pure 'thing', and 
is, and should be, without a significance of this sort, and can 
therefore have it only in imagination or picture-thinking. 
33 7. The observer, ignoring the mutual indifference of the 
two aspects, may nevertheless set to work to determine their 
relations, partly encouraged by the general rational principle 
that the outer is the expression of the inner, and partly supported 

204 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
by the analogy of the skulls of animals-which indeed may well 
have a simpler character than human beings, but of which at 
the same time it will be all the harder to say what character 
they do have, since it cannot be easy for anyone really to enter 
in imagination into the nature of an animal. Should, however, 
the observer do so, he will find, in assuring us of the certainty 
of the laws he claims to have discovered, an excellent aid in a 
distinction which must necessarily occur to us here too. The 
being of Spirit cannot in any case be taken as something fixed 
and immovable. Man is free; it is admitted that the original 
being consists merely of dispositions, about which a man is free 
to do much as he wishes, or which require favourable circum­
stances for their development ;  i.e. an original being of Spirit is 
equally well to be spoken of as a being that does not exist qua 
being. Were observations therefore to conflict with what some­
one happens to maintain is a law, should it happen to be fine 
weather at the annual fair or on wash-day-then dealer and 
housewife might say that really it ought to rain, and that the ten­
dency to rain is certainly present. So too when observing the skull, 
it might be said that this individual really ought to be what, 
according to the law, his skull proclaims him to be, and that 
he has an original disposition, but one that has not been de­
veloped : this quality is not present, but it ought to be present. The 
'law' and the 'ought' are based on observation of actual rainfall, 
and on the actual significance in the case of this particular 
characteristic feature of the skull ; but if the reality is not present, 
the empty possibility serves equally well. This possibility, i.e. non­
actuality, of the stated law, ૨nd hence the observations conflict­
ing with the law, inevitably result from the fact that the freedom 
of the individual, and the developing circumstances, are in­
different to being as such [or to what merely is], indifferent to 
being, both as an original inner and as an outer osseous form, 
and this also from the fact that the individual can be something 
else than he is by inner disposition, and still more than what 
he is as a bone. 
338. We get then the possibility that this bump or this hollow 
on the skull rna y denote something actual, as well as merely 
a disposition, one, moreover, that is so ill-defined as to denote 
something that is not actual ; we see what happens, as always, 
to a bad subterfuge, viz. that it is itself ready to be used against 

O B S E R V I N G  R EA S O N  
205 
what it is supposed to support. We see mere subjective imagin­
ing brought by the very nature of the fact to say-but unthink­
ingly-the opposite of what it affirms ; to say that by this particu­
lar bone something or other is indicated, but equally too, is not 
indicated. 
339· What such imagining vaguely has in mind in the case 
of this subterfuge is the true thought which, in fact, abolishes 
that imagining, viz. that being as such is not the truth of Spirit 
at all. Just as the disposition is itself an original being, which has 
no part in the activity of Spirit, just such a being is the bone 
on its side. What merely is, without any spiritual activity is, 
for consciousness, a Thing, and, far from being the essence of 
consciousness, is rather its opposite ; and consciousness is only 
actual to itself through the negation and abolition of such a 
being. From this point of view it must be regarded as a complete 
denial of Reason to pass off a bone as the actual existence of con­
sciousness ; and it is passed off as such when it is regarded as 
the outer being of Spirit, for the outer is just that reality which 
merely is. It is no use saying that the inner is only being inferred 
from the outer, and is something diferent, nor that the outer is 
not the inner itself, but only its expression. For in the relation 
of the two to one another the determination of the reality that 
thinks itself, and is in the form of thought, does fall on the side 
of the inner; but on the side of the outer, falls the determination 
of the reality which merely is. When, therefore, a man is told 
'You (your inner being) are this kind of person because your 
skull-bone is constituted in such and such a way,' this means 
nothing else than, 'i regard a bone as your reality'. To reply to 
such a judgement with a box on the ear, as in the case of a 
similar judgement in physiognomy mentioned above, at first 
takes away from the soft parts their importance and position, 
and proves only that these are no true in-itself, are not the reality 
of Spirit ; the retort here would, strictly speaking, have to go 
the length of beating in the skull of anyone making such a judge­
ment, in order to demonstrate in a manner just as palpable as 
his wisdom, that for a man, a bone is nothing in itself, much 
less his true reality. 
340. The crude instinct of self-conscious Reason will reject 
out of hand such a 'science' of phrenology-this other obser­
vational instinct of self-conscious Reason which, having 

206 
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
attained to a glimpse of the cognitive process, has grasped it 
unintelligently in a way that takes the outer to be the expression 
of the inner. But the worse the conception, the less sometimes 
does it occur to one wherein its badness specifically lies, and 
the harder it is to analyse it. For a conception is said to be worse, 
the purer and emptier the abstraction which is taken to be its 
essence. But the antithesis we are here concerned with has for 
its sides the individuality that is conscious of itself, and the 
abstraction of externality that has become wholly a Thing­
that inner being of Spirit grasped as a fixed non-spiritual being, 
opposed to just such a being. But Reason, in its role of observer, 
having reached thus far, seems also to have reached its peak, 
at which point it must abandon itself and do a right-about turn ; 
for only what is wholly bad is implicitly charged with the imme­
diate necessity of changing round into its opposite. Just so, it 
may be said of the Jewish people that it is precisely because 
they stand before the portal of salvation that they are, and have 
been, the most reprobate and rejected : what that people should 
be in and for it self, this essential nature of its own self, is not 
explicitly present to it; on the contrary, it places it beyond itself. 
By this alienation it creates for itself the possibility of a higher 
existence, if only it could take back again into itself its alienated 
object, than if it had remained undisturbed within the imme­
diacy of being-because Spirit is all the greater, the greater the 
opposition from which it has returned into itself; but it creates 
this opposition for itself by setting aside its immediate unity, 
and by alienating its being-for-self. However, if such a con­
sciousness does not reflect on itself, the intermediate position, 
or middle term, which it occupies is an unhappy void, since 
what should fill and fulfil it has been turned into a fixed 
extreme. Thus it is that this final stage of Reason in its obser­
vational role is its worst ; and that is why its reversal becomes 
a necessity. 
34 1 .  For a survey of the series of relations considered so far 
which constitute the content and object of observation shows 
that in their first form, i.e. in the observation of the relations 
of inorganic Nature, sensuous being is already lost to view ; the 
moments of the relations present themselves as pure abstrac­
tions and as simple Notions which should be firmly tied to the 
existence of things, an existence, however, which gets lost, so 

OBS E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
that the moment demonstrates itself to be a pure movement 
and a universal. This free process which is complete within itself 
retains the significance of something objective, but now appears 
as a unitary being ; in the process of the inorganic, this unitary 
being is the non-existent inner ; but the process existing as a uni­
tary being is the organism. The unitary being, qua a being-for­
self or negative being, stands in antithesis to the universal, 
draws away from it, and remains free for itself, so that the 
Notion, being realized only in the element of absolute singleness 
and isolation, doe_s not find in organic existence its true expres­
sion, viz. to be present as a universal, but remains an outer or, 
what is the same thing, an inner of organic Nature. The organic 
process is only implicitly free, but is not explicitly free for itself; 
the being-for-self of its freedom appears in purpose and exists as 
another being, as a wisdom that is conscious ofitselfand is outside 
of the process. Reason in the role of observer thus turns to this 
wisdom, turns to Spirit, to the Notion existing as a universality, 
or to purpose existing as purpose ; and henceforth the object 
before it is its own essence. 
342. It turns its attention at first to its purity [i.e. its abstract 
form] ; but since Reason qua observer apprehends the object, 
which moves among its own distinct moments, as an inert being, 
its Laws of Thought become connections of one constant 
moment to another constant moment. But the content of these 
laws being only moments, these run together into the single unit 
of self-consciousness. This new object, similarly taken as an inert 
being, is the single, contingent self-consciousness. Observation 
stands, therefore, within what it imagines to be Spirit, and 
within the contingent relation of conscious reality to a reality 
that is not conscious. Spirit alone is in its own self the necessity 
of this relation. Observation therefore looks more closely at this 
object, and compares its reality which wills and acts with its 
reality which ponders and is reflected into itself, a reality which 
is itself objective. This outer aspect, although a language of the 
individual which he possesses within himself, is at the same 
time, qua sign, something indifferent to the content it is sup­
posed to denote, just as that which posits for itself the sign is 
indifferent to it. 
343· For this reason, observation finally goes back again 
from this inconstant language to the fixed being, and declares, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E AS O N  
in accordance with its Notion, that externality is the outer and 
immediate reality of Spirit, not as an organ, and not as a lan­
guage or a sign, but as a dead Thing. What was ruled out by 
the very first observation of inorganic Nature, viz. the idea that 
the Notion ought to be present in the form of a Thing, is rein­
stated by this last form of observation in such a way that it turns 
the reality of Spirit itself into a Thing or, expressing it the other 
way round, gives to lifeless being the significance of Spirit. 
Observation has here reached the point where it openly de­
clares what our Notion ofit was, viz. that the certainty of Reason 
seeks its own self as an objective reality. Of course, the intention 
here is not to state that Spirit, which is represented by a skull, 
is a Thing ; there is not meant to be any materialism, as it is 
called, in this idea ; rather Spirit must be something more and 
other than these bones. But to say that Spirit [merely] is, means 
nothing else than that it is a Thing. When being as such, or 
thinghood, is predicated of Spirit, the true expression of this 
is that Spirit is, therefore, the same kind of being that a bone 
is. It must therefore be regarded as extremely important that 
the true expression has been found for the bare statement about 
Spirit-that it is. When in other respects it is said of Spirit that 
it is, that it has being, is a Thing, a single, separate reality, this 
is not intended to mean that it is something we can see or take 
in our hands or touch, and so on, but that is what is said; and 
what really is said is expressed by saying that the being of Spirit 
is a bone. 
34+ Now this result has a twofold significance. One is its 
true meaning, in so far as it is a completion of the outcome of 
the preceding movement of self-consciousness. The Unhappy 
Self-consciousness renounced its independence, and struggled to 
make its being-for-self into a Thing. It thereby reverted from self­
consciousness to consciousness, i.e. to the consciousness for which 
the object is something which merely is, a Thing ; but here, what 
is a Thing is self-consciousness ; the Thing is, therefore, the unity 
of the 'I' and being-the category. The object being determined 
th ·.ts for consciousness, the latter possesses Reason. Conscious­
ness, as well as self-consciousness, is in itself Reason ; but only 
that consciousness for which the object is determined as the 
category can be said to have Reason. From this, however, we 
must still distinguish the knowledge of what Reason is. The 

O B S E R V I N G  R E A S O N  
209 
category, which is the immediate unity of being and self, 1 must 
pass through both forms, and it is precisely for consciousness 
qua observer that the category presents itself in the form of being. 
This consciousness, in its result, enunciates as a proposition that 
of which it is the unconscious certainty-the proposition that 
is implicit in the N otion of Reason. This proposition is the irifinite 
judgement that the self is a Thing, a judgement that suspends 
itself. Through this result, then, the category is further deter­
mined as being this self-superseding antithesis. The pure cate­
gory, which is present for consciousness in the form of being or 
immediacy, is the object as still unmediated, as merely given, and 
consciousness is equally unmediated in its relation to it. The 
moment of that infinite judgement is the transition of immediacy 
into mediation, or negativity. The given object is consequently 
determined as a negative object ; consciousness, however, is de­
termined as self-consciousness over against it ; in other words, 
the category which, in the course of observation, has run 
through the form of being is now posited in the form of being­
for-self: consciousness no longer aims to find itself immediately, 
but to produce itself by its own activity. It is itself the End at 
which its action aims, whereas in its role of observer it was con­
cerned only with things. 
345· The other significance of the result is the one already 
considered, viz. the significance of an observational activity 
that dispenses with the Notion. This knows no other way of 
understanding and expressing itself than na·ively asserting the 
reality of self-consciousness to lie in the bone just as it exists as 
a sensuous thing, and which at the same time does not lose its 
objectivity for consciousness. It has no clear consciousness, how­
ever, of what is implied in its assertion, and does not grasp the 
specific character of the subject and predicate, and their rela­
tion in its proposition, still less in the sense of the infinite, self­
suspending judgement and of the Notion. Rather, out of a pro­
founder self-consciousness of Spirit, which here appears as a 
natural honesty, it conceals from itself the disgracefulness of the 
irrational, crude thought which takes a bone for the reality of 
self-consciousness ; and it whitewashes that thought by unthink­
ingly mixing up with it all sorts of relationships of cause and 
effect, of 'sign', 'organ', etc. which are meaningless here, and 
1 Einheit des Seins und des Seinen. 

210 
C .  ( A A . )  REA S O N  
it hides the crudity of the proposition by distinctions derived 
from them. 
346. Brain fibres and the like, when regarded as the being 
ofSpirit, are no more than a merely hypothetical reality exist­
ing only in one's head, not the true reality which has an outer 
existence, and which can be felt and seen ; when they exist out 
there, when they are seen, they are dead objects, and then no 
longer pass for the being of Spirit. But objectivity proper must 
be an immediate, sensuous objectivity, so that in this dead objec­
tivity-for the bone is a dead thing, so far as what is dead is 
present in the living being itself-Spirit is explicitly present as 
actual. The Notion underlying this idea is that Reason takes 
itself to be all thinghood, even purely objective thinghood itself; but 
it is this only in the Notion, or, only the Notion is the truth of 
this idea ; and the purer the Notion itself is, the sillier an idea 
it becomes when its content is in the form, not of the Notion, 
but of picture-thinking, i.e. if the self-suspending judgement is 
not taken with the consciousness of this its infinitude, but as 
a fixed proposition the subject and predicate of which are valid 
each on its own account, the self fixed as self, the thing fixed 
as thing, and yet each is supposed to be the other. Reason, essen­
tially the Notion, is directly sundered into itself and its opposite, 
an antithesis which for that very reason is equally immediately 
resolved. But when Reason is presented as its own self and its 
opposite, and is held fast in the entirely separate moment of 
this asunderness, it is apprehended irrationally; and the purer 
the moments of this asunderness, the cruder is the appearance 
of this content which is either only for consciousness, or only 
ingenuously expressed by it. The depth which Spirit brings forth 
from within-but only as far as its picture-thinking conscious­
ness where it lets it remain-and the ignorance of this conscious­
ness about what it really is saying, are the same conjunction of 
the high and the low which, in the living being, Nature na'ively 
expresses when it combines the organ of its highest fulfilment, 
the organ of generation, with the organ of urination. The in­
finite judgement, qua infinite, would be the fulfilment of life 
that comprehends itself; the consciousness of the infinite judge­
ment that remains at the level of picture-thinking behaves as 
urination.1 
I cr. Philosophy of Nature, p. 404 (Miller's translation) : 'In many animals the organs 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
2 1 1 
B .  T H E  A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  R A T I O N A L  S E L F ­
C O N S C I O U S N E S S T H R O U G H  I T S  O W N  A C T I V I T Y  
34 7. Self-consciousness found the Thing to be like itself, and 
itself to be like a Thing ; i.e. it is aware that it is in itself the 
objectively real world. It is no longer the immediate certainty 
of being all reality, but a certainty for which the immediate 
in general has the form of something superseded, so that the 
obJectivity of the immediate still has only the value of something 
superficial, its inner being and essence being self-consciousness 
itself. The object, to which it is positively related, is therefore 
a self-consciousness. It is in the form of thing hood, i.e. it is inde­
pendent ;  but it is certain that this independent object is for it 
not something alien, and thus it knows that it is in principle recog­
nized by the object. It is Spirit which, in the duplication of its 
self-consciousness and in the independence of both, has the cer­
tainty of its unity with itself. This certainty has now to be raised 
to the level of truth ; what holds good for it in principle, and in 
its inner certainty, has to enter into its consciousness and 
become explicit for it. 
348. What the general stages of this actualization will be is 
readily apparent in a general way from a comparison with the 
path hitherto followed. Just as Reason, in the role of observer, 
repeated, in the element of the category, the movement of con­
sciousness, viz. sense-certainty, perception, and the Understand­
ing, so will Reason again run through the double movement 
of self-consciousness, and pass over from independence into its 
freedom. To begin with, this active Reason is aware of itself 
merely as an individual and as such must demand and produce 
its reality in an 'other'. Then, however, its consciousness having 
raised itself into universality, it becomes universal Reason, and 
is conscious of itself as Reason, as a consciousness that is already 
recognized in and for itself, which in its pure consciousness 
unites all self-consciousness. It is the simple, spiritual essence 
which, in attaining consciousness, is at the same time real Sub­
stance, into which the earlier forms return as into their ground, 
of excretion and the genitals, the highest and lowest parts in the animal organization, 
are intimately connected : just as speech and kissing, on the one hand, and eating, drinkÖ 
ing and spitting, on the other, are all done with the mouth.' 

2 1 2  
C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
so that, in comparison with the latter, they are merely particu­
lar moments of its Becoming, moments which do indeed break 
loose and appear as independent forms, but in fact have exist­
ence and reality only as grounded in that Becoming, and possess 
their truth only in so far as they are and remain in it. 
349· If we take this goal-and this is the Notion which for 
us has already appeared on the scene-in its reality, viz. the 
self-consciousness that is recognized and acknowledged, and 
which has its own self-certainty in the other free self-conscious­
ness, and possesses its truth precisely in that 'other' ; in other 
words, if we look on this still inner Spirit as Substance that has 
already advanced to the stage of having an outer existence, then 
in this Notion there is disclosed the realm of ethical life. For this 
is nothing else than the absolute spiritual unity of the essence 
of individuals in their independent actual existence ; it is an in­
trinsically universal self-consciousness that takes itself to be 
actual in another consciousness, in such wise that this has com­
plete independence, or is looked on as a Thing, and it is pre­
cisely therein that the universal self-consciousness is aware of 
its unity with it, and only in this unity with this objective being 
is it self-consciousness. This ethical Substance, taken in its 
abstract universality, is only law in the form of thought; but it 
is no less immediately actual self-consciousness, or it is custom. The 
single individual consciousness, conversely, is only this existent 
unit in so far as it is aware of the universal consciousness in 
its individuality as its own being, since what it does and is, is 
the universal custom. 
350. It is in fact in the life of a people or nation that the 
Notion of self-conscious Reason's actualization--of beholding, 
in the independence of the 'other', complete unity with it, or 
having for my object the free thinghood of an 'other' which 
confronts me and is the negative of myself, as my own being­
for-myself-that the Notion has its complete reality. Reason is 
present here as the fluid universal Substance, as unchangeable 
simple thinghood, which yet bursts asunder into many com­
pletely independent beings, just as light bursts asunder into 
stars as countless self-luminous points, which in their absolute 
being-for-self are dissolved, not merely implicitly in the simple 
independent Substance, but explicitly for themselves. They are 
conscious of being these separate independent beings through 

ACT U A L I ZA T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E SS 
2 1 3  
the sacrifice of their particularity, and by having this universal 
Substance as their soul and essence, just as this universal again 
is their own doing as particular individuals, or is the work that 
they have produced. 
35 1 .  the purely particular activity and occupation of the 
individual refers to the needs which he has as a natural creature, 
i.e. as a merely immediate individuality. That even these, its com­
monest functions, are not frustrated, but enjoy an actual exist­
ence, is due to the universal sustaining medium, to the might 
of the entire nation. But, in the universal Substance, the indivi­
dual has this form of subsistence not only for his activity as such, 
but no less also for the content of that activity ; what he does is 
the skill and customary practice of all. This content, in so far 
as it is completely particularized, is, in its actual existence, con­
fined within the framework of the activity of all. The labour of 
the individual for his own needs is just as much a satisfaction 
of the needs of others as of his own, and the satisfaction of his 
own needs he obtains only through the labour of others. As the 
individual in his individual work already unconsciously performs 
a universal work, so again he also performs the universal work 
as his conscious object ; the whole becomes, as a whole, his own 
work, for which he sacrifices himself and precisely in so doing 
receives back from it his own self. There is nothing here which 
would not be reciprocal, nothing in relation to which the inde­
pendence of the individual would not, in the dissolution of its 
being-for-self in the negation of itself, give itself its positive signifi­
cance ofbeingfor itself. This unity of being-for-another or mak­
ing oneself a Thing, and of being-for-self, this universal Sub­
stance, speaks its universal language in the customs and laws of 
its nation. But this existent unchangeable essence is the expres­
sion of the very individuality which seems opposed to it ; the 
laws proclaim what each individual is and does ; the individual 
knows them not only as his universal objective thinghood, but 
equally knows himself in them, or knows them as particularized 
in his own individuality, and in each of his fellow citizens. In 
the universal Spirit, therefore, each has only the certainty of 
himself, of finding in the actual world nothing but himself; he 
is as certain of the others as he is of himself. I perceive in all 
of them the fact that they know themselves to be only these 
independent beings, just as I am. I perceive in them the free 

2 1 4  
C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
unity with others in such wise that, just as this unity exists 
through me, so it exists through the others too-l regard them 
as myself and myself as them. 
352. In a free nation, therefore, Reason is in truth realized. 
It is a present living Spirit in which the individual not only 
finds his essential character, i.e. his universal and particular 
nature, expressed, and present to h{m in the form ofthinghood, 
but is himself this essence, and also has realized that essential 
character. The wisest men of antiquity have therefore declared 
that wisdom and virtue consist in living in accordance with the 
customs of one's nation. 
353· But from this happy state of having realized its essential 
character and of living in it, self-consciousness, which at first 
is Spirit only immediately and in principle, has withdrawn, or else 
has not yet realized it ; for both may equally well be said. 
354· Reason must withdraw from this happy state ; for the 
life of a free people is only in principle or immediately the reality 
of an ethical order. In other words, the ethical order exists 
merely as something given ; therefore this universal Spirit itself 
is a separate, individual spirit, and the customs and laws in their 
entirety are a specific ethical substance, which only in the higher 
stage, viz. in Spirit's consciousness of its essence, sheds this limi­
tation and in this knowledge alone has its absolute truth, not 
directly as it immediately is. In the latter form it is a limited ethical 
substance, and absolute limitation is just this, that Spirit is in 
the form of [mere] being. 
355· Further, therefore, the single, individual consciousness 
as it exists immediately in the real ethical order, or in the nation, 
is a solid unshaken trust in which Spirit has not, for the indivi­
dual, resolved itself into its abstract moments, and therefore he 
is not aware ofhimselfas being a pure individuality on his own 
account. But once he has arrived at this idea, as he must, then 
this immediate unity with Spirit, the [mere] being of himself in 
Spirit, his trust, is lost. Isolated and on his own, it is he who 
is now the essence, no longer universal Spirit. This individuality 
of self-consciousness is, it is true, a moment in universal Spirit 
itself, but only as a vanishing quantity which, appearing on its 
own, is at once resolved within universal Spirit, and enters con­
sciousness merely as trust. In thus establishing himself-and 
each moment, because it is a moment of the essence, must sue-

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F- C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
2 1 5  
ceed in exhibiting itself as the essence-the individual has 
thereby placed himself in opposition to the laws and customs. 
These are regarded as mere ideas having no absolute essenti­
ality, an abstract theory without any reality, while he as this 
particular 'I' is his own living truth. 
356. Or, self-consciousness has not yet attained this happy state 
of being the ethical substance, the Spirit of a people. For having 
turned back from its role of observer, Spirit, at first, is not yet 
as such realized through itself; it is established only as an inner 
essence or as an abstraction. In other words, Spirit is, at first, 
immediate; but existing immediately, it is separate and indivi­
dual. It is the practical consciousness, which steps into its world 
which it finds already given, with the aim of duplicating itself 
in this distinct form of something separate and individual, of 
producing itself as this individual, as this existent counterpart 
ofitself, and of becoming conscious of this unity of its own actu­
ality with the objective being of the world. Self-consciousness 
has the certainty of this unity; it holds that the unity is implicitly 
already present, or that this agreement of itself with thinghood 
already exists, and has only to become so for it through its own 
agency ; or that the production of that unity is equally the find­
ing of it. Since this unity means happiness, the individual is 
sent out into the world by his own spirit to seek his happiness. 
357· If, then ,Jor us the truth of this rational self-consciousness 
is the ethical substance, here, Jor that self-consciousness, it is the 
beginning of its ethical experience of the world. In so far as 
it has not yet become the ethical substance, this movement 
presses forward to it, and what is superseded in the movement 
are the individual moments which for self-consciousness are 
valid in their isolation. They have the form of an immediate 
will or natural impulse which obtains its satisfaction, which is itself 
the content of a fresh impulse. If, however, self-consciousness 
has lost the happiness of being in the substance, these natural 
impulses are bound up with an awareness that their goal is the 
true character and essential nature of self-consciousness. The 
ethical substance has sunk to the level of a predicate devoid 
of self, whose living subjects are individuals who themselves 
have to provide the filling for their universality and to fulfil 
their essential nature through their own efforts. Taken in the 
former sense, then, those forms are the coming-to-be of the 

2 1 6  
C .  ( A A . )  R E AS O N  
ethical substance and precede it ; in the latter, they succeed it 
and reveal to self-consciousness what its essential nature is. In the 
former case, the immediacy or rawness of the impulses gets lost 
in the process of getting to know what their truth is, and their 
content takes on a higher form. In the latter case, what is lost 
is the false idea of the consciousness which places its essential 
nature in those impulses. In the former case, the goal they attain 
is the ethical Substance, while, in the latter, it is the conscious­
ness of that Substance, a consciousness which knows the Sub­
stance to be its own essence ; and to that extent this process 
would be the coming into existence of morality, of a higher form 
than the ethical Substance. But these forms, at the same time, 
constitute only one side of morality's entry into existence, that, 
namely, which belongs to being-for-self, or in which conscious­
ness sets aside its Ends-not the side where morality arises from 
the [ethical] substance itself. Since these moments cannot as 
yet carry the significance of being made into Ends opposed to 
the lost ethical order, they signify here, it is true, no more than 
what they immediately are, and the goal which they strive to 
attain is the ethical Substance ; but since in our times that form 
of these moments is more familiar in which they appear after 
consciousness has lost its ethical life and, in the search for it, 
repeats those forms, they may be represented more in terms of 
this sort. 
358. Self-consciousness which is at first only the Notion of 
Spirit, enters on this path with the characteristic ofholding itself 
to be, as a particular spirit, essential being ; and its aim, there­
fore, is to give itself as a particular individual an actual existence 
and to enjoy itself as an individual in it. 
359· In holding itself to be, qua being-for-self, essential being, 
it is the negativity of the 'other'. In its consciousness, therefore, 
it appears as the Positive in contrast to something which cer­
tainly is, but which has for it the significance of something with­
out intrinsic being ; consciousness appears split into this given 
actuality and the End which it realizes by superseding that 
actuality, an End which, in fact, it makes an actuality in 
place of that which was given. Its primary End, however, is its 
immediate abstract being-for-self; in other words, seeing itself as 
this particular individual in another, or seeing another self-con­
sciousness as itself. The experience of what the truth of this End 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - CO N S C I O U S N E SS 
2 1 7  
is raises self-consciousness to a higher level, and from now on 
it is itself its own End, in so far as it is at the same time universal 
and has the law directly within it. In carrying out this law of 
its heart, however, it learns that the individual, in doing so, 
cannot preserve himself, but rather tht the good can only be 
accomplished through the sacrifice of the individual : and self­
consciousness becomes virtue. What virtue learns from experi­
ence can only be this, that its End is already attained in prin­
ciple, that happiness is found directly in the action itself, and 
that action itself is the good. The Notion or principle of this 
entire sphere, viz. that thinghood is Spirit's very being-for-itself, 
becomes in the course of this experience a truth for self-con­
sciousness. Having discovered this, self-consciousness thus 
knows itself to be reality in the form of an individuality that 
directly expresses itself, an individuality which no longer 
encounters resistance from an actual world opposed to it, and 
whose aim and object are only this expressing of itself. 
a. Pleasure and Necessity 
360. Self-consciousness which, on the whole, knows itself to be 
reality, has its object in its own self, but as an object which ini­
tially is merely for self-consciousness, and does not as yet possess 
[objective] being which confronts it as a reality other than its 
own ; and self-consciousness, by behaving as a being-for-self, 
aims to see itself as another independent being. This primary 
End is to become aware of itself as an individual in the other 
self-consciousness, or to make this other into itself; it is certain 
that this other is in principle already itself. In so far as it has 
lifted itself out of the ethical Substance and the tranquil being 
ofthought to its being-for-self, it has left behind the law of cus­
tom and existence, the knowledge acquired through observa­
tion, and theory, as a grey shadow which is in the act of passing 
out of sight. For the latter is rather a knowledge of something 
whose being-for-self and actuality are other than those of this 
self-consciousness. Instead of the heavenly-seeming Spirit 
of the universality of knowledge and action in which the feel­
ing and enjoyment of individuality are stilled, there has 
entered into it the Spirit of the earth, for which true actuality 
is ૩erely that being which is the actuality of the individual con­
sciOusness. 

218 
C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
It despises intellect and science 
The supreme gifts of man 
It has given itself to the devil 
And must perish1 
361 .  It plunges therefore into life and indulges to the full the 
pure individuality in which it appears. It does not so much 
make its own happiness as straightway take it and enjoy it. The 
shadowy existence of science, laws and principles, which alone 
stand between it and its own reality, vanishes like a lifeless mist 
which cannot compare with the certainty of its own reality. It 
takes hold of life much as a ripe fruit is plucked, which readily 
offers itself to the hand that takes it. 
362. Its action is only in one respect an action of desire. It 
does not aim at the destruction of objective being in its entirety, 
but only at the form of its otherness or its independence, which 
is a show devoid of essence ; for it holds this objectivity to be 
in principle the same essence as itself, or its selfhood. The element 
in which desire and its object subsist, as mutually indifferent 
and independent, is animate existence ; the enjoyment of desire 
puts an end to this existence so far as it belongs to the object 
of desire. But here this element which gives to both a separate 
actuality is rather the category, a being which is essentially 
in the form of thought. It is therefore the consciousness of indepen­
dence-let it be natural consciousness, or consciousness de­
veloped into a system of laws-which preserves the individuals 
each for himself. This separation is not in itself a fact for self­
consciousness, which knows the other as its own selfhood. It 
attains therefore to the enjoyment of pleasure, to the conscious­
ness of its actualization in a consciousness which appears as in­
dependent, or to the vision of the unity of the two independent 
self-consdousnesses. It attains its End, but only to learn there 
what the truth of that End is. It comprehends itself as this par­
ticular individual who existsfor himself, but the realization of 
this End is itself the setting-aside of the latter. For it is not as 
this particular individual that it becomes an object to itself, but 
rather as the unity of itself and the other self-consciousness, 
hence as an individual that is only a moment, or a universal. 
363. The pleasure enjoyed has indeed the positive signifi­
' Faust, Part I (adapted). 

A C T U A L I Z AT I O N  O F  S E L F - C ON S C I O U S N E S S  
2 19 
cance that self-consciousness has become objective to itself; but 
equally it has the negative one of having reduced itself to a 
moment. And since it grasped its realization in the former sense 
only, its experience is of a contradiction in which the attained 
reality of its individuality sees itself destroyed by the negative 
essence confronting it, which is devoid of reality and content, 
and which yet is the power which destroys it. This essence is 
nothing else than the Notion ofwhat this individuality in itself 
is. It is, however, as yet the poorest form of self-realizing Spirit ; 
for it is aware of itself at first only as the abstraction of Reason, 
or is the immediacy of the unity of being-for-itself and being-in­
itself; its essence is, therefore, only the abstract category. Never­
theless it no longer has the form of immediate simple being, as 
it has for Reason in its observational role where it is abstract 
being or, posited in the foriଌ]. of an alien being, is thinghood in 
general. Here in this thinghood there has entered being-for-self 
and mediation. It therefore makes its appearance as a circle 
whose content is the developed pure relation of the simple essen­
tialities. The realization attained by this individuality consists 
therefore in nothing more than this, viz. that it has cast forth 
this circle of abstractions from its confinement within simple self­
consciousness, into the element where they are for self-con­
sciousness, in other words, are expanded into an objective ex­
istence. The object, then, that is for self-consciousness as it takes 
its pleasure its essence is the expansion of those empty essentiali­
ties of pure unity, of pure difference, and their relation ; beyond 
this, the object which the individuality experiences as its essence, 
has no content. It is what is called necessity ; for necessity, fate, 
and the like, is just that about which we cannot say what it does, 
what its specific laws and positive content are, because it is the 
absolute pure Notion itself viewed as [mere] being, a relation that 
is simple and empty, but also irresistible and imperturbable, 
whose work is merely the nothingness of individuality. It is this 
fixed relation, because what is related is the pure essentialities 
or empty abstractions. Unity, difference, and relation are cate­
gories each of which is nothing in and for itself, but only in 
relation to its opposite, and they cannot therefore be separated 
from one another. They are related to one another through 
their Notion, for they are pure Notions themselves ; and this abso­
lute relation and abstract movement constitutes necessity. The 

220 
C. ( A A . ) R E A S O N  
merely single individuality which, i n  the first instance, has only 
the pure Notion of Reason for its content, instead of having 
taken the plunge from dead Theory into Life, has there­
fore really only plunged into the consciousness of its own life­
lessness and has as its lot only empty and alien necessity, a dead 
actuality. 
364. The transition is made from the form of the one or unit 
into that of universality, from one absolute abstraction into the 
other, from the purpose of pure being:for-seljwhich has thrown 
off all community with others, into the sheer opposite which 
is thus equally abstract being-in-itself. Consequently, the form 
in which this appears is that the individual has simply perished, 
and the absolute unyieldingness of individual existence is pul­
verized on the equally unrelenting but continuous world of ac­
tuality. Since it is, as consciousness, the unity of itself and its 
opposite, this downfall is still for it its goal and realization, as 
also the contradiction of what was for it essence and what is 
in itself essence. It experiences the double meaning implicit in 
what it did, viz. when it took hold of life and possessed it ; but 
in doing so it really laid hold of death. 
365. This transition of its living being into a lifeless necessity 
therefore appears to it as an inversion which is not mediated by 
anything at all. The mediating agency would have to be that in 
which both sides would be one, where, therefore, consciousness 
recognized one moment in the other : its purpose and action 
in fate, and its fate in its purpose and action, that is, would 
recognize its own essence in this necessity. But this unity is, for 
this consciousness, just pleasure itself, or the simple single feel­
ing, and the transition from the moment of this its purpose into 
the moment of its true essence is for it a sheer leap into its anti­
thesis. For these moments are not contained and linked together 
in feeling, but only in the pure self, which is a universal or 
thought. Consciousness, therefore, through its experience in 
which it should have found its truth, has really become a riddle 
to itself, the consequences of its deeds are for it not the deeds 
themselves. What befalls it is, for it, not the experience of what 
it is in itself, the transition is not a mere alteration of the form 
of the same content and essence, presented now as the content 
and essence, and again as object or [outwardly] beheld essence 
of itself. The abstract necessity therefore has the character of the 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
221 
merely negative, uncomprehended power of universality, on 
which individuality is smashed to pieces. 
366. This is as far as the manifestation of this form of self­
consciousness goes. The final moment of its existence is the 
thought of the loss of itselfin necessity, or the thought of itself 
as a being that is absolutely alien to it. However, self-conscious­
ness has in itself survived this loss ; for this necessity or pure uni­
versality is its own essence. This reflection of consciousness into 
itself, the knowledge that necessity is itself, is a new form of con­
sciOusness. 
b. The law of the heart and the frenzy of self-conceit 
367. What necessity truly is in self-consciousness, it is for this 
new form of self-consciousness, in which it knows its own self 
to be the principle ofnecessity. lt knows that it has the universal 
oflaw immediately within itself, and because the law is immediately 
present in the being-for-self of consciousness, it is called the law 
of the heart. This form takes itself to be, qua individuality, 
essence like the previous form ;  but the new form is richer 
because its being:for-self has for it the character of necessity or 
universality. 
368. The law, therefore, which is immediately self-con­
sciousness's own law, or a heart which, however, has within it 
a law, is the End which self-consciousness proceeds to realize. 
We have to see whether its realization corresponds to this 
Notion and whether in that realization it will find that this its 
law is its essential nature. 
369. This heart is confronted by a real world ; for in the heart 
the law is, in the first place, only for its own self, it is not yet 
realised, and is therefore at the same time something other than 
what the Notion is. This other is thereby characterized as a 
reality which is the opposite of what is to be realized, and con­
sequently is the contradiction of the law and the individuality. 
This reality is, therefore, on the one hand a law by which the 
particular individuality is oppressed, a violent ordering of the 
world which contradicts the law of the heart, and, on the other 
hand, a humanity suffering under that ordering, a humanity 
that does not follow the law of the heart, but is subjected to 
an alien necessity. It is evident that this real world which 
appears over against the present form of consciousness is 

2 2 2  
C. ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
nothing else but the foregoing discordant relationship ofindivi­
d uali ty and its truth, the relationship of a cruel necessity by which 
the former is oppressed. For us, the preceding movement 
appears to stand over against the new form, because the latter 
in itself has resulted from it, and the moment from which it 
has come is therefore necessary for it ; but to the new form that 
moment appears as something already given, since it is not con­
scious of its origin, and it holds that its essential nature is rather 
to be for its own self, or the negative clement relatively to this 
positive in-itself. 
370. This individuality therefore directs its energies to get­
ting rid of this necessity which contradicts the law of the heart, 
and also the suffering caused by it. And so it is no longer charac­
terized by the levity of the previous form of self-consciousness, 
which only wanted the particular pleasure of the individual ; 
on the contrary, it is the earnestness of a high purpose which 
seeks its pleasure in displaying the excellence of its own nature, 
and in promoting the welfare of mankind. What it realizes is 
itself the law, and its pleasure is therefore at the same time the 
universal pleasure of all hearts. To it the two are undivided ; 
its pleasure is what conforms to the law, and the realization 
of the law of universal humanity procures for it its own particu­
lar pleasure. For within its own self, individuality and the neces­
sary are immediately one ; the law is the law of the heart. Indivi­
duality is not as yet dislodged from its seat, and the unity of 
both has not been brought about by the mediating agency of 
the individuality itself, has not yet been achieved by discipline. 
The realization of the immediate undisciplined nature passes for 
a display of its excellence and as productive of the welfare of 
humanity. 
37 1 .  The law, on the other hand, which confronts the law of 
the heart is separated from the heart, and exists in its own right. 
Humanity which is bound by this law does not live in the blessed 
unity of the law with the heart ; but either lives in their cruel 
separation and in suffering, or at least dispenses with the en­
joyment ojitseljin obeying the law, and lacks the consciousness 
of its own excellence in transgressing it. Because that authori­
tative divine and human ordinance is separated from the heart, 
it is for the latter a mere show which ought to lose what is still 
associated with it, viz. the power of authority and reality. In 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - CO N S C I O U S N E S S  
223 
its content it may well by chance agree with the law of the heart, 
and then the latter can submit to it ; but for the heart, what 
is essential is not the bare conformity to law as such, but that 
in the law it has the consciousness of itself, that therein it has 
satisfied itself. Where, however, the content of universal 
necessity does not agree with the heart then necessity, even as 
regards its content, is in itself nothing and must give way before 
the law of the heart. 
372. The individual, then, carries out the law ofhis heart. This 
becomes a universal ordinance, and pleasure becomes a reality 
which absolutely conforms to law. But, in this realization, the 
law has in fact escaped the individual ; it directly becomes 
merely the relation which was supposed to be got rid of. The 
law of the heart, through its very realization, ceases to be a law 
of the heart. For in its realization it receives the form of an 
[affirmative] being, and is now a universal power for which this 
particular heart is a matter of indifference, so that the indivi­
dual, by setting up his own ordinance, no longer finds it to be 
his own. Consequently, what the individual brings into being 
through the realization ofhis law, is not his law ; on the contrary, 
since the realization is in principle his own, but actually is for 
him an alien affair, what he brings about is merely the entangle­
ment of himself in the actual ordinance, an entanglement in 
it, moreover, not as a superior power which is only alien to him, 
but one which is hostile. By his act he places himself in, or rather 
posits himself as, the universal element of existent reality, and 
his act is supposed to have, even according to his own inter­
pretation, the value of a universal ordinance. But he has thereby 
freed himself from himself; he goes on growing qua universality, 
on his own account and purges himselfofhis particularity. The 
individual who wants to recognize universality only in the form 
of his immediate being-for-self does not therefore recognize 
himself in this free universality, while at the same time he 
belongs to it, for it is his doing. This doing, therefore, has the 
reverse significance ; it contradicts the universal ordinance. for 
the individual's act is supposed to be the act of his particular 
heart, not a free universal reality; and at the same time he has 
in fact recognized the latter, for his action has the significance 
of positing his essential being as a free reality, i.e. of acknow­
ledging the real world to be his own essential being. 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
3 7 3 ·  The individual has, by the principle of his action, deter­
mined the more precise way in which the actual universality, 
to which he has attached himself, turns against him. His deed, 
qua actuality, belongs to the universal ; but its content is his own 
individuality which, as this particular individuality, wants to 
preserve itselfin opposition to the universal. It is not any specific 
law the setting-up of which would be in question ; on the con­
trary, the immediate unity of the individual heart with uni­
versality is the thought, elevated into a supposedly valid law, 
that, in what"is law, every heart must recognize its own self. But 
only the heart of this individual has placed its reality in its deed,' 
which expresses for him his being-for-self or his pleasure. The deed 
is supposed to have immediately the status of a universal ; that 
is to say, it is in truth something particular, and has merely 
the form of universality ; the particular content of the heart as 
such is supposed to have the status of a universal. Consequently, 
others do not find in this content the fulfilment of the law of 
their hearts, but rather that of someone else ; and, precisely in 
accordance with the universal law that each shall find in what 
is law his own heart, they turn against the reality he set up, just 
as he turned against theirs. Thus, just as the individual at first 
finds only the rigid law, now he finds the hearts of men them­
selves, opposed to his excellent intentions and detestable. 
374· Because this consciousness at first knows universality 
only as immediate, and necessity as necessity of the heart, the 
nature of the realization and the activity is unknown to it ; it 
does not know that this realization as what affirmatively is, is in 
truth rather the implicit universal in which the individuality of 
consciousness, which entrusts itself to it in order to be this par­
ticular immediate individuality, really perishes ; instead of 
acquiring a being of its own, it therefore attains to being the 
alienation of itself. But that in which it does not recognize itself 
is no longer a dead necessity, but a necessity animated by the 
universal individuality. It took this divine and human ordi­
nance which it found as an accepted authority to be a dead 
authority in which not only its own self-to which it clings as 
this particular independent heart opposed to the universal­
but also those subject to that ordinance would have no con­
sciousness of themselves ; but it finds that this ordinance is really 
animated by the consciousness of all, that it is the law of every 

ACTU A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
225 
heart. It learns from experience that the reality is a vivified ordi­
nance, and it learns this in fact precisely in realizing the law 
of its own heart ; for this means nothing else than that individu­
ality becomes an object to itself in the form of universality in 
which, however, it does not recognize itself. 
375· Thus what emerges from the experience of this shape 
of self-consciousness as the true, contradicts what this conscious­
ness isfor itself. But what it is for itself, has itself the form of 
absolute universality for it, and it is the law of the heart which 
is immediately one with the consciousness of self At the same 
time, the established living order is equally its own essential being 
and work ; it produces nothing else but that ; that order is in 
equally immediate unity with self-consciousness. In this way 
self-consciousness is related to a twofold antithetic essence ; 
it is in its own self a contradiction, and is distraught in its inmost 
being. The law of this particular heart is alone that in which 
self-consciousness recognizes itself; but the universally valid 
order has, through the realizing of that law, equally become 
for self-consciousness its own essential being and its own reality. 
Thus what contradicts itselfin its consciousness has for it in each 
case the form of essence and of its own reality. 
376. In giving expression to this moment of its self-conscious 
downfall as the result of its experience, it reveals itself to be 
this inner perversion of itself, to be a deranged consciousness 
which finds that its essential being is immediately non-essential, 
its reality immediately an unreality. The derangement cannot 
be taken to mean that in general something devoid of essence 
is regarded as essential, something unreal as real, so that what 
for one person is essential or real would not be so for another, 
and that the consciousness of reality and unreality, or of essenti­
ality and unessentiality, would thus fall apart. If something is 
in fact real and essential for consciousness in general, but is 
not so for me, then in the consciousness of its nothingness I have 
at the same time-since I am consciousness in general-the 
consciousness of its reality ; and since they are both fixed [in 
my consciousness], this is a unity which is madness in general. 
But in this state only an object is deranged for consciousness, 
not consciousness as such within and for itself. But in the out­
come of experience which here has come to view, consciousness, 
in its law, is aware of being itself this reality ; and at the same 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
time, since the very same essentiality, the same reality, is 
alienated from it, it is, qua self-consciousness, qua absolute reality, 
aware ofits own unreality. In other words, it holds the two sides 
in their contradiction to be immediately its essential being, 
which is thus in its inmost being distraught. 
377· The heart-throb for the welfare of humanity therefore 
passes into the ravings of an insane self-conceit, into the fury of 
consciousness to preserve itselffrom destruction ; and it does this 
by expelling from itself the perversion which it is itself, and by 
striving to look on it and express it as something else. It therefore 
speaks of the universal order as a perversion of the law of the 
heart and of its happiness, a perversion invented by fanatical 
priests, gluttonous despots and their minions, who compensate 
themselves for their own degradation by degrading and 
oppressing others, a perversion which has led to the nameless 
misery of deluded humanity. In this its derangement, con­
sciousness declares individuality to be the source of this de­
rangement and perversion, but one that is alien and accidental. 
It is the heart, however, or the individuality of consciousness 
that would be immediately universal, that is itself the source 
of this derangement and perversion, and the outcome of its 
action is merely that its consciousness becomes aware of this 
contradiction. For the True is for it the law of the heart-some­
thing merely intended which, unlike the established order, has 
not stood the test of time, but rather when thus tested is over­
thrown. This its law ought to have reality; the law, then, is for 
i tquareali ty, qua valid ordinance, i tsownaimand essential nature; 
but reality, that very law qua valid ordinance, is on the contrary 
immediately for it something which is not valid. Similarly, its 
own reality, the heart itself as a particular individual conscious­
ness, is for it its essence; but its purpose is to establish that par­
ticular individuality as an [objective] being. Thus it is rather 
its self as not a particular individual that is immediately for it 
its essence, or its purpose has the form of a law, hence the form 
of a universality, which it is for its own consciousness. This its 
Notion becomes by its own action its object; thus the heart 
learns rather that its self is not real, and that its reality is an 
unreality. It is therefore not an accidental and alien individu­
ality, but just this particular heart, which in all its aspects is, 
in its own self, perverted and perverting. 

A C TUA L I ZA T I O N  O F  S E L F- C O N S C I O US N E S S  
227 
378. While, however, the immediately universal individuality 
is perverted and the source of perversion, this universal ordi­
nance, since it is the law of all hearts, i.e. of what is perverted, 
is no less itself essentially perverted, as the ravings of the 
deranged consciousness declared. On the one hand, this ordi­
nance proves itself to be a law of all hearts, by the resistance 
which the law of one individual heart encounters from other 
individuals. The established laws are defended against the law 
of an individual, because they are not an unconscious, empty, 
and dead necessity, but a spiritual universality and Substance, 
in which those in whom this spiritual substance has its actuality 
live as individuals, and are conscious of themselves ; so that even 
when they complain about this ordinance as if it went against 
their own inner law, and maintain against it the opinions of 
the heart, they cling to it with their hearts, as being their essen­
tial being ; and, if this ordinance is taken from them, or they 
place themselves outside it, they lose everything. Since it is pre­
cisely in this that the reality and power of public order consist, 
the latter thus appears as the self-identical essence alive in 
everyone, and individuality appears as its form. But this ordi­
nance is equally a perversion. 
379· The fact that it is the law of all hearts, that all indivi­
duals are immediately this universal, means that the ordinance 
is a reality which is only that of the individuality that is for itself, 
or as only the reality of the heart. The consciousness which sets 
up the law of its heart therefore meets with resistance from 
others, because it contradicts the equally individual laws of their 
hearts ; and these others in their resistance are doing nothing 
else but setting up and claiming validity for their own law. The 
universal that we have here is, then, only a universal resistance 
and struggle of all against one another, in which each claims 
validity for his own individuality, but at the same time does 
not succeed in his efforts, because each meets with the same 
resistance from the others, and is nullified by their reciprocal 
resistance. What seems to be public order, then, is this universal 
state of war, in which each wrests what he can for himself, exe­
cutes justice on the individuality of others and establishes his 
own, which is equally nullified through the action of the others. 
It is the 'way of the world', the show of an unchanging course 
that is only meant to be a universality, and whose content is 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
rather the essenceless pia y of establishing and nullifying indivi­
dualities. 
380. Ifwe contrast the two sides of the universal ordinance, 
we see that this latter universality has for its content the restless 
individuality which regards [mere] opinion or individuality as 
law, what is real as unreal, and what is unreal as real. But it 
is at the same time the side of the reality of the ordinance, for 
to it belongs the individuality's being-for-self. The other side is 
the universal in the form of a tranquil essence ; but it is for that 
very reason only something inner which, though not absolutely 
non-existent, still has no reality and can itself become a reality 
only by getting rid of the individuality which has arrogated 
reality to itself. This shape of consciousness which, in the law, 
is aware of itself, which knows itself in what is intrinsically true 
and good, not as an individuality but only as it becomes an 
essential being; and which knows individuality to be perverted 
and the source of perversion, and therefore knows it must sacri­
fice the individuality of consciousness-this shape of conscious­
ness is Virtue. 
c. Virtue and the way of the world 
381 .  In the first shape of active Reason, self-consciousness 
took itself to be pure individuality, and it was confronted by 
an empty universality. In the second, the two sides of the anti­
thesis each had both moments within them, law and individu­
ality; but one side, the heart, was their immediate unity, the 
other their antithesis. Here, in the relationship of virtue and 
the 'way of the world', the two members are each severally the 
unity and antithesis of these moments, or are each a movement 
oflaw and individuality towards one another, but a movement 
of opposition. For the virtuous consciousness law is the essential 
moment, and individuality the one to be nullified, and therefore 
both in its own consciousness as well as in the 'way of the world'. 
In the former case, one's own individuality is to be brought 
under the discipline of the universal, the intrinsically true and 
good ; but under that discipline it still remains a personal con­
sciousness. True discipline requires nothing less than the sacri­
fice of the entire personality as proof that individual peculiari­
ties are in fact no longer insisted on. In this individual sacrifice, 
the individuality in the 'way of the world' is at the same time 

ACTU A L I Z AT I ON O F  S E L F - C ON S C I O U S N E S S  
229 
eradicated, for it too is a simple moment common to both. In 
the 'way of the world', individuality behaves in a way which 
is the reverse of its behaviour in the virtuous consciousness, viz. 
it makes itself the essential moment, whereas what is intrinsically 
good and true it subordinates to itself. Further, the 'way of the 
world', too, is for virtue not merely this universal which is per­
verted by individuality ; on the contrary, the absolute order is like­
wise a common moment, only one that is not present for con­
sciousness as an existent reality, bu.t as the inner essence of the 
'way of the world'. That order, strictly speaking, has not first 
to be brought into existence by virtue, for to bring into existence 
is, qua action, a consciousness ofindividuality, and individuality 
is really what has to be nullified ; but this nullifying of individu­
ality merely makes room, as it were, for the in-itself of the 'way 
of the world' to enter into existence on its own account. 
382. The general content of the actual 'way of the world' we 
already know; looked at more closely, it is again nothing else 
but the two preceding movements of self-consciousness. From 
them has issued the shape of virtue ; since they are its origin, 
they are antecedent to it ; but virtue proceeds to nullify its ori­
gin, and to realize itself, in other words, to become for itself. 
The 'way of the world' is thus, on the one hand, the single in­
dividuality which seeks its [own] pleasure and enjoyment. It 
is true that in doing so it destroys itself, and thus satisfies the 
universal, but this very satisfaction, like the rest of the moments 
of this relationship, is a perverted form and movement of the 
universal. The reality is only the individuality of the pleasure 
and enjoyment to which, however, the universal is opposed, a 
necessity which is merely the empty form of the universal, a 
merely negative reaction and an action devoid of content. The 
other moment of the 'way of the world' is the individuality 
which claims to be law in its own right, and in its own conceit 
disturbs the existing order. The universal law, it is true, pre­
serves itself in face of this conceit, and no longer makes its 
appearance as something opposed to consciousness and empty 
of content, as a blind necessity, but as a necessity within conscious­
ness itself. But, when it exists as the conscious relation of an abso­
lutely contradictory reality, it is madness ; as an objective reality, 
however, it is perversion in general. The universal, then, 
does display itself in both aspects as the might which moves 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
them, but the existence of this might is merely a universal 
perversion. 
383. It is from virtue now that the universal is to receive its 
true reality by nullifying individuality, the principle of the per­
version. Virtue's purpose is, by so doing, to reverse again the 
perverted 'way of the world' and to make manifest its true 
essence. This true essence is at first only implicit in the 'way 
of the world', only its in-itself; it is not yet actual, and con­
sequently virtue only believes it. This faith virtue proceeds to 
raise to sight, without, however, enjoying the fruits of its labour 
and sacrifice. For in so far as it is an individuality, it is the activity 
of the conflict it wages with the 'way of the world' ;  but its aim 
and true nature is to conquer the reality of the 'way of the 
world'. The bringing into existence of the good thus effected 
is thus the cessation of its activity or of the consciousness of indivi­
duality. What will be the outcome of this conflict itself, what 
virtue learns from it, whether, by the sacrifice it makes of itself, 
the 'way of the world' succumbs while virtue triumphs-this 
must be decided by the nature of the living weapons borne by 
the combatants. For the weapons are nothing else but the nature 
of the combatants themselves, a nature which only makes its 
appearance for both of them reciprocally. What their weapons 
are is already evident from what is implicitly present in this 
conflict. 
384. The universal is true for the virtuous consciousness in 
its faith, or is implicitly true ; it is not yet an actual, but an abstract, 
universality ; in this consciousness itself it is present as a purpose, 
in the 'way of the world' as an inner principle. It is precisely 
in this determination that the universal is present in virtue, too, 
in relation to the 'way of the world'. For virtue as yet only wills 
to accomplish the good, and does not, to begin with, claim that 
it is a reality. This characteristic can also be looked at in this 
way : the good, in making its appearance in the conflict with 
the 'way of the world', thereby presents itself as being for an 
other, as something that does not have a being of its own, for 
otherwise it would not want to make itself true by conquering 
its opposite. That it is, to begin with, only for an other, means 
the same as was shown in the opposite way of looking at it, viz. 
that it is, to begin with, an abstraction which has reality, not 
in its own right, but only in its relation to the 'way of the world'. 

ACTUAL I Z A T I O N  O F  S E LF-CO N S C I O US N E S S  
231 
385. The good or the universal, then, as it comes to view 
there, is what are called gifts, capacities, powers. It is a mode 
of the spiritual, in which it is represented as a universal, which 
requires the principle of individuality to give it life and move­
ment, and in this principle has an actual existence. This uni­
versal is put to good use by the principle of individuality, in so 
far as this principle lives in the virtuous consciousness, but is 
misused in so far as it clings to the 'way of the world' -a passive 
instrument which, controlled by a free individuality which is 
indifferent to the use it makes of it, can also be misused for the 
production of an actual existence which destroys it : a lifeless 
material lacking an independence of its own, which can be 
formed this way or that, or even to its own ruin. 
386. Since this universal is equally at the disposal of the vir­
tuous consciousness and the 'way of the world', it is not 
apparent whether virtue thus armed will conquer vice. The 
weapons are the same ; they are these capacities and powers. 
Virtue has, it is true, held in reserve its belief in the original 
unity of its own purpose and the essential nature of the 'way 
of the world', a reserve that is intended to fall on the enemy 
from the rear during the fight, and in principle to achieve that 
aim. As a matter of fact, therefore, the knight of virtue's own 
part in the fighting is, strictly speaking, a sham-fight which he 
cannot take seriously-because he knows that his true strength 
lies in the fact that the good exists absolutely in its own right, 
i.e. brings itself to fulfilment-a sham-fight which he also dare 
not allow to become serious. For what he turns against the 
enemy and finds turned against himself, and what he runs the 
risk of wasting and damaging both in his own case as well as 
that of the enemy, is not to be the good itself; for he fights to 
preserve and accomplish that. What are risked in the fight are 
only the gifts and capacities which are not themselves at issue. 
But these are, in fact, nothing else butjust that very universal 
in which individuality has been nullified, which is supposed to 
be preserved and realized by the conflict. But, at the same time, 
this universal is already realized directly by the very notion of 
the conflict, it is the in-itself, the universal, and its realization 
means merely this, that it is at the same time for an 'other'. 
The two aspects specified above, in accordance with each of 
which it became an abstraction, are no longer separated ; it is 

C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
especially in and through the conflict that the good is estab­
lished in both modes. The virtuous consciousness, however, 
enters into conflict with the 'way of the world', as if this were 
something opposed to the good ; what the conflict offers to it 
is the universal, not merely as an abstract universal, but as a 
universal animated by individuality and existing for an other, 
in other words, the actual good. Therefore, wherever virtue 
comes to grips with the 'way of the world', it always hits upon 
places which are the actual existence of the good itself which, 
as the in-itself-of the 'way of the world', is inextricably inter­
woven in every manifestation of the 'way of the world'. And 
in the actuality of that in-itself, virtue has its own existence, 
too ; for virtue, therefore, the 'way of the world' is invulnerable. 
All the moments which in virtue itself were supposed to be 
risked and sacrificed, are just such existences of the good, and 
hence are inviolable relationships. Consequently, the conflict 
can only be an oscillation between preserving and sacrificing; 
or rather there can be neither a sacrifice of what is one's own, 
nor a violation of what is alien. Virtue is not merely like the 
combatant who, in the conflict, is only concerned with keeping 
his sword bright, but it has even started the fight in order to 
preserve the weapons. And not only can it not use its own 
weapons, it must also preserve intact those of the enemy and 
protect them against its own attack, for all are noble parts of 
the good, on behalf of which it went into battle. 
387. For this enemy, on the other hand, what is the essence 
is not the in-itself, the implicit universal, but individuality ; its 
power, therefore, is the negative principle for which nothing 
is established or absolutely sacred, but which can risk and 
endure the loss of anything and everything. In doing so, it is 
just as certain of victory through its own resources, as through 
the contradiction in which its opponent gets entangled. What 
virtue holds to be an intrinsic being, the 'way of the world' regards 
as merely an [indifferent] object ; it is free from every principle 
that virtue holds to be established, and by which it is bound. 
Such a principle the 'way of the world' has in its power, since 
it regards it as something it can either set aside or let be, as 
it can also the virtuous knight who is fast-bound by it. The latter 
cannot disentangle himselffrom it, as if it were a cloak thrown 
round him from which he could free himself by leaving it 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
233 
behind ; for to him it is something essential which he must not 
give up. 
388. Finally, as regards the ambush from which the intrinsic­
ally good is to attack the 'way of the world' cunningly from 
the rear, this is essentially a vain hope. The 'way of the world' 
is the alert, self-assured consciousness that cannot be got at from 
behind, but faces in every direction ; for its nature is that every­
thing is [merely J an object for it, that everything stands in front 
of it. But when the intrinsically good is an [indifferent] object 
for the enemy, then it is involved in the conflict we have seen ; 
but in so far as it is not such an object but possesses intrinsic 
being, it is the passive instrument of gifts and capacities, a 
material lacking reality. If represented as a real being, it would 
be a dormant consciousness, one remaining in the background, 
no one knows where. 
389. Virtue, therefore, is conquered by the 'way of the world' 
because its purpose is, in fact, the abstract, unreal essence, and 
because its action as regards reality rests on distinctions which 
are purely nominal. It wanted to consist iq bringing the good 
into actual existence by the sacrifice of individuality, but the 
side of reality is itself nothing else but the side of individuality. 
The good was supposed to be that which has an implicit being, 
and to be opposed to what is; but the in-itself, taken in its real 
and true sense, is rather being itself. The in-itself is, in the first 
instance, the abstraction if essence in contrast to reality ; but an 
abstraction is precisely what is not true, but exists only for con­
sciousness, which means, however, that it is itself what is called 
real; for the real is that which is essentially for an other, or is 
being. But the consciousness of virtue rests on this distinction 
between the in-itself and being, a distinction which has no truth. 
The 'way of the world' was supposed to be the perversion of 
the good because it had individuality for its principle ; only, 
individuality is the principle of the real world ; for it is precisely 
individuality that is consciousness, whereby what exists in itself 
exists equally for an other; it does pervert the Unchangeable, 
but it perverts it in fact from the nothing of abstraction into the 
being of reality. 
390. Thus the 'way of the world' triumphs over what, in 
opposition to it, constitutes virtue, triumphs over that which is 
the essenceless abstraction of essence. However, it does not 

C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
triumph over something real but over the creation of dis­
tinctions that are no distinctions ; it glories in this pompous talk 
about doing what is best for humanity, about the oppression 
of humanity, about making sacrifices for the sake of the good, 
and the misuse of gifts. Ideal entities and purposes of this kind 
are empty, ineffectual words which lift up the heart but leave 
reason unsatisfied, which edify, but raise no edifice ; declama­
tions which specifically declare merely this : that the individual 
who professes to act for such noble ends and who deals in such 
fine phrases is in his own eyes an excellent creature-a puffing­
up which inflates him with a sense of importance in his own 
eyes and in the eyes of others, whereas he is, in fact, inflated 
with his own conceit. 
Virtue in the ancient world had its own definite sure mean­
ing, for it had in the spiritual substance of the nation a foundation 
full of meaning, and for its purpose an actual good already in 
existence. Consequently, too, it was not directed against the 
actual world as against something generally perverted, and against 
a 'way of the world'. But the virtue we are considering has its 
being outside of the spiritual substance, it is an unreal virtue, 
a virtue in imagination and name only, which lacks that sub­
stantial content. The emptiness of this rhetoric which 
denounces the 'way of the world' would be at once revealed 
if the meaning of its fine phrases had to be stated. These, there­
fore, are assumed to be something the meaning of which is fami­
liar. The request to say what this familiar meaning is would 
be met either by a fresh flood of phrases or by an appeal to 
the heart, which inwardly says what they mean-which amounts 
to admitting that it is in fact unable to say what the meaning 
is. The fatuousness of this rhetoric seems, too, in an unconscious 
way to have come to be a certainty for the culture of our time, 
since all interest in the whole mass of such rhetoric, and the 
way it is used to boost one's ego, has vanished-a loss of interest 
which is expressed in the fact that it produces only a feeling 
of boredom. 
39 1 .  The result, then, which issues from this antithesis con­
sists in the fact that consciousness drops like a discarded cloak 
its idea of a good that exists [only] in principle, but has as yet 
no actual existence. In its conflict it has learnt by experience 
that the 'way of the world' is not as bad as it looked ; for its 

A C T U A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
235 
reality is the reality of the universal. With this lesson in mind, 
the idea of bringing the good into existence by means of the 
sacrifice of individuality is abandoned ; for individuality is pre­
cisely the actualizing of what exists only in principle, and the 
perversion ceases to be regarded as a perversion of the good, 
for it is in fact really the conversion of the good; as a mere End, 
into an actual existence : the movement of individuality is the 
reality of the universal. 
392. However, with this result, that which as the 'way of 
the world' stood opposed to the consciousness of what existed 
[only] in principle, has in fact likewise been conquered and has 
vanished. In that antithesis, individuality's being-for-self was 
opposed to essence or the universal, and appeared as a reality 
separated from what exists [only] in itself or in principle. But, 
since reality has shown itself to be in undivided unity with the 
universal, then, just as the in-itself of virtue is merely an aspect, 
so does the being-for-self of the 'way of the world' also prove 
to be no more than that. The individuality of the 'way of the 
world' may well imagine that it acts only for itself or in its own 
interest. It is better than it thinks, for its action is at the same 
time an implicitly universal action. When it acts in its own 
interest, it simply does not know what it is doing; and when 
it avers that everyone acts in his own interest, it is merely assert­
ing that no one knows what action is. When it acts for itself, 
it simply gives reality to what, to begin with, exists only in itself. 
The purpose of its being-for-self, which it imagines is opposed 
to what virtue is in itself, its shallow cunning, as also its fine­
spun explanations which know how to demonstrate the pre­
sence of self-interest in every action-all these have vanished, 
just as the purpose of virtue that exists only in itself, along with 
its rhetoric, have vanished. 
393· Thus the activity of individuality, all that it does, is in 
its own self an End ; the employment of its powers, the play of 
these powers in action, is what gives them life ; otherwise they 
would be a lifeless in-itself. But the in-itself is not an unrealized 
abstract universal that lacks an existence, but rather is itself 
immediately the present, real existence of the process of indivi­
duality. 

C .  (A A . )  R EA S O N  
C .  I N D I V I D U A L I T Y  W H I C H  T A K E S  I T S E L F  T O  B E  R E A L  I N  
A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
394· Self-consciousness has now grasped the Notion of itself 
which, to begin with, was only our Notion of it, viz. that in its 
certainty of itselfit is all reality; and End and essence are for 
it henceforth the spontaneous interfusion of the universal--of 
gifts and capacities-and individuality. The individual 
moments of this fulfilling and interfusion, prior to the unity in 
which they have coalesced, are the Ends hitherto considered. 
These have vanished, being abstractions and chimeras belong­
ing to those first shallow shapes of spiritual self-consciousness, 
and having their truth only in the imaginary being of the heart, 
in imagination and rhetoric, not in Reason. This, being now 
absolutely certain of its reality, no longer seeks only to realize 
itself as End in an antithesis to the reality which immediately 
confronts it but, on the contrary, has the category as such for 
the object of its consciousness. 
In other words, self-consciousness determined as being for 
itself, or as the negative self-consciousness in which Reason at 
first made its appearance, is set aside; this self-consciousness 
came face to face with a reality supposedly the negative of it, 
and only by overcoming it did it realize its End. But since End 
and intrinsic being have proved to be the same as being-for-an­
other and the reality confronting it, truth is no loriger separated 
from certainty, no matter whether the proposed End is taken 
as certainty of self and the realization of it as truth, or whether 
the End is taken for truth and the reality for certainty. On the 
contrary, intrinsic being and End in and for itself are the cer­
tainty of immediate reality itself, the interfusion of being-in-itself 
and being-for-itself, of the universal and individuality. Action 
is in its own self its truth and reality, and individuality in its 
setting-forth or expression is, in relation to action, the End in 
and for itself. 
395· With this Notion of itself, therefore, self-comciousness 
has returned into itself out of those opposed determinations . 
which the category had for it, and which characterized the re­
lation of self-consciousness to the category in its observational 
and also active roles. It has for its object the pure category 
itself, or it is the category which has become aware of itself. 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  I TS E L F  
237 
Its account with its previous shapes is thereby closed ; they lie 
forgotten behind it, and no longer confront it as a world given 
to it, but are developed solely within itself as transparent 
moments. Yet they still fall apart within its consciousness as a 
movement of distinct moments, a movement which has not yet 
brought them together into their substantial unity. But in all 
these moments self-consciousness holds fast to the simple unity 
of [objective] being and the self, a unity which is its genus. 
396. In so doing, consciousness has cast away all opposition 
and every condition affecting its action ; it starts afresh from 
itself, and is occupied not with an other, but with itself Since 
individuality is in its own self actuality, the material of its efforts 
and the aim of action lie in the action itself. Action has, there­
fore, the appearance of the movement of a circle which moves 
freely within itself in a void, which, unimpeded, now expands, 
now contracts, and is perfectly content to operate in and with 
its own self. The element in which individuality sets forth its 
shape has the significance solely of putting on the shape of in­
dividuality; it is the daylight in which consciousness wants to 
display itself. Action alters nothing and opposes nothing. It is 
the pure form of a transition from a state of not being seen to 
one of being seen, and the content which is brought out into 
the daylight and displayed, is nothing else but what this action 
already is in itself. It is implicit: this is its form as a unity in 
thought; and it is actual-this is its form as an existent unity. Action 
itself is, a content only when, in this determination of simplicity, 
it is contrasted with its character as a transition and movement. 
a. The spiritual animal kingdom and deceit, or the 'matter in hand' itself 
397· This intrinsically real individuality is at first again a 
single and specific one. The absolute reality which it knows itself 
to be is, therefore, as it will become aware, an abstract, universal 
reality lacking filling and content, merely the empty thought 
of this category. We have to see how this Notion of intrinsically 
real individuality characterizes itselfin its moments, and how 
its Notion of itself enters into its consciousness .. 
398. The Notion of this individuality, which as such knows 
itself to be all reality, is to begin with a result: it has not yet 
set forth its movement and reality, and is posited here immedi­
ately as a simple in-itself or implicit being. Negativity, however, 

C .  ( A A . ) R E A S O N  
which is the same as that which is manifested as move­
ment, is present in the simple in-itself as a determinateness ; and 
(mere] being, or the simple in-itself, becomes a definite range 
of being. Accordingly, individuality appears on the scene as an 
original determinate nature : original, for it is implicit ; originally 
determinate, for the negative moment is present in the in-itself 
and this latter is thus a quality. This limitation of being, how­
ever, cannot limit the action of consciousness, for here conscious­
ness is a relation purely of itself to itself: relation to an other, 
which would be a limitation of it, has been eliminated. The 
original determinateness of the nature is, therefore, only a 
simple principle, a transparent universal element, in which the 
individuality remains as free and self-identical as it is un­
impeded in unfolding its different moments, and in its realiza­
tion is simply in a reciprocal relation with itself; just as in the 
case of indeterminate animal life, which breathes the breath 
oflife, let us say, into the element of water, or air or earth, and 
within these again into more specific principles, steeping its 
entire nature in them, and yet keeping that nature under its 
own control, and preserving itself as a unity, in spite of the limi­
tation imposed by the element, and remaining in the form of 
this particular organization the same general animal life. 
399· This determinate original nature of consciousness which 
remains free and entire in it appears as the immediate a11d 
sole proper content of that which for the individual is its End. 
Admittedly, it is a determinate content, but it is only a content 
at all in so far as we consider the in-itselfin isolation. In truth, 
however, it is the reality that is permeated by individuality, 
actuality as it is present in consciousness qua individual, and 
it is, in the first instance, posited as (merely] being, not yet as 
acting. But as regards action, that determinateness is, on the one 
hand, not a limitation it would want to overcome, for, regarded 
as an existent quality, it is the simple colour of the element in 
which it moves ; on the other hand, however, negativity is a 
determinateness only in being; but action is itself nothing else but 
negativity. Therefore, when individuality acts, determinateness 
is dissolved in the general process of negativity or in the sum 
total of every determinateness. 
400. In action and the consciousness of action, the simple 
original nature now splits up into the distinction which action 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R EAL I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
239 
implies. Action is present at first in the form of obJect, an object, 
too, as pertaining to consciousness, as End, and hence opposed 
to a reality already given. The second moment is the move­
ment of the End conceived as passive, and realization conceived 
as the relation of the End to the wholly formal actuality, hence 
the idea of the transition itself, or the means. The third moment 
is, finally, tfie object, which is no longer in the form of an End 
directly known by the agent to be his own, but as brought out 
into the light of day and havingfor him the form of an 'other'. 
The Notion of this sphere requires that these various aspects 
be grasped in such a way that the content in them remains the 
same without any distinction, whether between individuality 
and being in general, or between End as against individuality 
as an original nature, or between End and the given reality; 
or between the means and that reality as an absolute End, or 
between the reality brought about by the agent as against the 
End, or the original nature, or the means. 
40 1 .  First of all, then, the originally determinate nature [or 
natural predisposition] of individuality, its immediate essence, is 
not as yet posited as active, and as such is called special capacity, 
talent, character, and so on. This peculiar tinge of Spirit is to 
be looked on as the sole content of the End itself and as the 
sole reality. If we thought of consciousness as going beyond that, 
and as wanting to give reality to a different content; then we 
should be thinking of it as a Nothing working towards Nothing. 
Further, this original essence is not merely tae content of the 
End, but is in itself the reality as well, which otherwise has the 
appearance of being a given material of the action, of being a 
reality found to begin with, which is to be shaped by the action. 
That is to say, action simply translates an initially implicit being 
into a being that is made explicit ; the being-in-itself of the 
reality opposed to consciousness is reduced to a mere empty 
show. This consciousness, then, when bringing itself to act, does 
not let itself be led astray by what is merely the show of a given 
reality, and equally it has to avoid floundering about in empty 
thoughts and Ends, and has to hold on to the original content 
ofits essence. True, this original content is only explicit for con­
sciousness when the latter has made it into a reality; but the 
distinction between a content, which is explicitjor consciousness 
only within consciousness itself, and an intrinsic reality outside it, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E ASON 
no longer exists. Consciousness must act merely in order that 
what it is in itself may become explicit for it; in other words, 
action is simply the coming-to-be of Spirit as consciousness. What 
the latter is in itself, it knows therefore from what it actually is. 
Accordingly, an individual cannot know what he [really] is un­
til he has made himself a reality through action. However, this 
seems to imply that he cannot determine the End of his action 
until he has carried it out; but at the same time, since he is 
a conscious individual, he must have the action in front of him 
beforehand as entirely his ou•n, i.e. as an End. The individual who 
is going to act seems, therefore, to find himself in a circle in 
which each moment already presupposes the other, and thus 
he seems unable to find a beginning, because he only gets to 
know his original nature, which must be his End, .from the deed, 
while, in order to act, he must have that End beforehand. But 
for that very reason he has to start immediately, and, whatever 
the circumstances, without further scruples about beginning, 
means, or End, proceed to action ; for his essence and intrinsic 
nature is beginning, means, and End, all in one. As beginning, 
this nature is present in the circumstances of the action ; and 
the interest which the individual finds in something is the answer 
already given to the question, 'whether he should act, and what 
should be done in a given case'. For what seems to be a given 
reality is in itself his own original nature, which has merely the 
illusory appearance of an [objective] being-an appearance 
implied in the Notion of action with its twofold aspect, but 
which shows itself to be his own original nature by the interest 
he takes in it. Similarly, the 'how' or the means is determined 
in and for itself. Talent is likewise nothing else but the determi­
nate, original individuality considered as an inner means, or as 
a transition from End to an achieved reality. But the actual means 
and the real transition are the unity of talent with the nature 
of the matter in hand, present in that interest : talent represents 
in the means the side of action, interest the side of content ; both 
are individuality itself, as an interfusion of being find action. 
What we have, therefore, is a set of given circumstances which 
are in themselves the individual's own original nature ; next, the 
interest which treats them as its own or as its End ; and finally, 
the union [of these] and the abolition of the antithesis in the 
means. This union itself still falls within consciousness and the 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R EA L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
241 
whole just considered is one side of an anti thesis. This illusory 
appearance of an antithesis which still remains, is removed by 
the transition or the means ; for the means is a unity of inner 
and outer, the antithesis of the specific character it has as an 
inner means. I t  therefore rids itself of that character and posits 
itself-this unity of action and being-equally as an outer, as 
an individuality that has itself become a reality, i.e. an individu­
ality which is posited for individuality itself as [objectively] 
existent. In this way, the entire action does not go outside itself, 
either as circumstances, or as End, or means, or as a work done. 
402 . But with 'work done' the difference of the original 
natures seems to enter; the work, like the individual's original 
nature which it expresses, is something specific ; for the nega­
tivity implicit in action, being freely discharged by it as an 
existent reality, is present in the action as a quality. Conscious­
ness, however, as against the work, is determined as that in 
which the quality is present as negativity in general, i.e. as action ; 
it is thus the universal as against the specific character of the 
work done. It can therefore compare one work with another, 
and by so doing grasp individualities themselves as diferent; it 
can regard an individual whose work is more wide-ranging as 
possessing greater energy of will or a richer nature, i.e. a nature 
whose native quality is less limited ; and another, on the other 
hand, as a weaker and poorer nature. 
403. In contrast with this unessential quantitative difference, 
'good' and 'bad' would express an absolute difference ; but here 
this is not in place. Whether something is held to be good or 
bad, it is in either case an action and an activity in which an 
individuality exhibits and expresses itself, and for that reason 
· 
it is all good ; and it. would, strictly speaking, be impossible to 
say what 'badness' was supposed to be. What would be called 
a bad work is the individual life of a specific nature, which 
therein gives itself reality. I t  would only be put down as a bad 
work by a comparing reflection, which, however, is an idle 
affair, since it goes beyond the essential nature of the work, 
which is to be a self-expression of the individuality, and in it 
looks for and demands something else, no one knows what. The 
comparison could only have regard to the above-mentioned dif­
ference. But this, being a quantitative difference, is in itself not 
an essential one ; and here, specifically, because the things 

C .  ( AA . )  R E A S O N  
compared would be different works or individualities. But these 
have no connection with one another; each is purely self­
related. The original nature is alone the in-itself, or what could 
be laid down as a standard for judging the work, and con­
versely. Both, however, correspond to each other : there is 
nothingfor individuality which has not been made so by it, or 
there is no reality which is not individuality's own nature and 
doing, and no action nor "in-itself of individuality that is not 
real ; and only these moments are to be compared. 
404. Therefore, feelings of exaltation, or lamentation, or 
repentance are altogether out of place. For all that sort of thing 
stems from a mind which imagines a content and an in-itself 
which are different from the original nature of the individual 
and the actual carrying-out of it in the real world. Whatever 
it is that the individual does, and whatever happens to him, 
that he has done himself, and he is that himself. He can have 
only the consciousness of the simple transference of himself from 
the night of possibility into the daylight of the present, from 
the abstract in-itselfinto the significance of actual being, and can 
have only the certainty that what happens to him in the latter 
is nothing else but what lay dormant in the former. It is true ' 
that the consciousness of this unity is likewise a comparison, 
but what is compared is merely an illusory appearance of an 
antithesis, an appearance of the form [of antithesis] which, for 
self-conscious Reason that is aware that individuality in its own 
selfis reality, is nothing more than an illusory show. The indivi­
dual, therefore, knowing that in his actual world he can find 
nothing else but its unity with himself, or only the certainty 
of himself in the truth of that world, can experience only joy in 
himself. 
405. This is the Notion which consciousness forms of itself, 
of itself as an absolute interfusion of individuality and being. 
Let us see whether this Notion is confirmed by experience, and 
whether its reality corresponds to it. The work produced is the 
reality which consciousness gives itself; it is that in which the 
individual is explicitly for himself what he is implicitly or in 
himself, and in such a manner that the consciousness, for which 
the individual becomes explicit in the work, is not the particu­
lar, but the universal, consciousness. In his work, he has placed 
himself altogether in the element of universality, in the quality-

I N D I V I DU A L I TY R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
243 
less void ofbeing. The consciousness which withdraws from its 
work is, in fact, the universal consciousness in contrast to its 
work, which is determinate or particular-and it is universal 
because it is absolute negativity or action in this antithesis. It 
thus goes beyond itself in the work, and is itself the quality­
less void which is left unfilled by its work. But if their unity 
before was preserved in the Notion, this happened simply 
because the work qua existent was sublated. But it is supposed 
to exist, and we have to see how in its existence the individuality 
will preserve its universality, and will know how to satisfy itself. 
In the first place, we have to consider by itself the work pro­
duced. It has received into itself the whole nature of the indivi­
duality. Its being is therefore itself an action in which all dif­
ferences interpenetrate and are dissolved. The work is thus 
expelled into an existence in which . the quality of the original 
nature in fact turns against other determinate natures, 
encroaches on them, and gets lost as a vanishing element in 
this general process. Although within the Notion of the objectively 
real individuality all the moments-circumstances, end, 
means, and realization-have the same value, and the original 
specific nature has the value of no more than a universal ele­
ment, on the other hand, when this element becomes an objec­
tive being, its specific character as such comes to light in the work 
done, and obtains its truth in its dissolution. More precisely, 
the form which this dissolution takes is that, in this specific 
character, the individual, qua this particular individual, has 
become aware of himself as actual ; but the specific character 
is not only the content of the reality, but equally its form ; in 
other words, the reality simply as such is just this quality of 
being opposed to self-consciousness. Looked at from this aspect, 
the reality is revealed as a reality that has vanished from the 
Notion, and is merely an alien reality that is found given. The 
work is, i.e. it exists for other individualities, and is for them 
an alien reality, which they must replace by their own in order 
to obtain through their action the consciousness of their unity 
with reality; in other words, their interest in the work which 
stems from their original nature, is something different from this 
work's own peculiar interest, which is thereby converted into 
something different. Thus the work, is, in general, something 
perishable, which is obliterated by the counter-action of other 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
forces and interests, and really exhibits the reality of the indivi­
duality as vanishing rather than as achieved. 
406. Consciousness, then, in doing its work, is aware of the 
anti thesis of doing and being, which in the earlier shapes of con­
sciousness was at the same time the beginning of action, while 
here it is only a result. But in fact this antithesis was likewise 
the foundation, in that consciousness proceeded to act as an 
implicitly real individuality ; for the action presupposed the spe­
cific original nature as the in-itself of the individuality, and the 
content of that nature was achievement simply for the sake of 
achievement. Pure action, however, is a self-identical form with 
which, therefore, the specific character of the original nature is 
not in agreement. Here, as elsewhere, it is a matter of in­
difference which of the two is called Notion and which reality. 
The original nature has only an ideal existence, or is the in­
itselfin contrast to the action in which it first becomes a reality ; 
or in other words, the original nature is the being both of the 
individuality as such and of the individuality in the form of 
work, while action is the original Notion as an absolute transi­
tion, or as the coming-to-be [of the reality] . This disparity 
between Notion and reality which lies in its essence, is learnt 
by consciousness from experience in its work; in work, there­
fore, consciousness becomes what it is in truth, and its empty 
Notion of itself vanishes. 
407. In this fundamental contradiction inherent in work­
which is the truth of this essentially real individuality-all the 
aspects of the individuality thus appear again as contradictory ; 
that is to say, the work, qua the content of the whole individu­
ality, when transferred from the doing of it, which is the negative 
unity holding captive all the moments of that content, now lets 
the moments go free; and in the element of existence they 
become indifferent to one another. Notion and reality are thus 
separated into purpose, and that which is the original essenti­
ality. It is accidental if the purpose has a truly essential nature, 
or if the in-itself is made the purpose. Even so, Notion and 
reality again fall apart as a transition to reality and as purpose; 
in other words, it is accidental if a means is chosen which 
expresses the purpose. And finally the entirety of these inner 
moments (whether they possess an inner unity or not) , i.e. the 
action of the individual, is again in an accidental relationship 

I N D I V I DU A L I TY R EA L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
245 
to reality in general ; fortune decides as well in favour of an ill­
disposed purpose and an ill-chosen means, as against them. 
408. If, now, consciousness is thus made aware in its work 
of the antithesis of willing and achieving, between end and means, 
and, again, between this inner nature in its entirety and reality 
itself, an antithesis which in general includes within it the con­
tingency of its action, yet the unity and necessity of the action 
are no less present, too. The latter aspect overlaps the former, 
and the experience of the contingency of the action is itself only 
a contingent experience. The necessity of the action consists in 
the fact that purpose is related simply to actuality, and this unity 
is the Notion of action; action takes place because action is in 
and for itself the essence of actuality. In the work, it is true, 
there is revealed the contingency possessed by achievement 
when contrasted with willing and doing; and this experience, 
which seems as if it must be accepted as truth, contradicts that 
Notion of action. If, however, we consider the content of this 
experience in its completeness, it is seen to be the vanishing 
work. What is preserved is not the vanishing : the vanishing is 
itself actual and is bound up with the work and vanishes with 
it ; the negative itself perishes along with the positive whose 
negative it is. 
409. This vanishing of the vanishing lies in the Notion of the 
intrinsically real individuality itself; for that in which the work 
vanishes or what vanishes in the work, and what was supposed 
to give experience, as it was called, its supremacy over individu­
ality's own Notion of itself, is the objective reality. Objective 
reality, however, is a moment which itself no longer possesses 
any truth on its own account in this consciousness ; that truth 
consists solely in the unity of this consciousness with the action, 
and the true work is only that unity of doing and being, of willing 
and achieving. Consciousness, then, because of the funda­
mental certainty of its actions, holds the reality opposed to that 
certainty to be for it alone ; for self-consciousness which has 
returned into itself, and for which all antithesis has vanished, 
antithesis can no longer take this form ofbeingfor itself in anti­
thesis to reality. On the contrary, then, the antithesis and the 
negativity manifested in work affect not merely the content of 
the work or the content of consciousness as well, but affect the 
reality as such, and hence affect the antithesis present in that 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
reality, and present only in virtue of it, and the vanishing of 
the work. In this way, then, consciousness is reflected out of 
its perishable work into itself, and preserves its Notion and its 
certainty as what objectively exists and endures in face of the 
experience of the contingency of action. It experiences in point 
offact its Notion, in which reality is only a moment, i.e. some­
thing for consciousness, not something which exists in its own 
right; it experiences it as a vanishing moment, and reality there­
fore has for consciousness only the value of being as such, whose 
universality is one with action. This unity is the true work; it 
is the very heart of the matter [die Sache selbst] which completely 
holds its own and is experienced as that which endures, indepen­
dently of what is merely the contingent result of an individual 
action, the result of contingent circumstances, means, and 
reality. 
4 1 0. The 'heart of the matter' is only opposed to these 
moments in so far as they are supposed to be isolated, but as 
an interfusion of the reality and the individuality it is essentially 
their unity. It is equally an action and, qua action, pure action 
in general, hence just as much an action of this particular indivi­
dual ; and this action as still his in antithesis to reality, is a pur­
pose. Equally, it is the transition from this determinateness into 
the opposite, and lastly it is a reality which is explicitly present 
for consciousness. The 'heart of the matter' thus expresses the 
spiritual essentiality in which all these moments have lost all 
validity of their own, and are valid therefore only as universal, 
and in which the certainty consciousness has ofitselfis an objec­
tive entity, an objective fact for it, an object born of self-con­
sciousness as its own, without ceasing to be a free object in the 
proper sense. The Thing of sense-certainty and perception now 
acquires its significance through self-consciousness and through 
it alone ; on this rests the distinction between a Thing and a 
cause or a 'matter in hand'. A movement corresponding to that 
from [sense-] certainty to perception will run its course here. 
41 1 .  In the 'matter in hand', then, in which the interfusion 
ofindividuality and objectivity has itself become objective, self­
consciousness has come into possession of its true Notion, or has 
attained to a consciousness of its substance. At the same time, 
this consciousness as it exists here is one that has just now come 
into being, and hence is. an immediate consciousness of its sub-

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R EA L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
247 
stance ; and this is the specific way in which spiritual being is 
present here ; it has not yet developed into a truly real sub­
stance. The 'matter in hand' has, in this immediate conscious­
ness of its substance, the form of simple essence which, as a uni­
versal, contains within itself all its various moments and belongs 
to them, but, again, is also indifferent to them as specific 
moments, and is free and independent, and as this free, simple, 
abstract 'matter in hand' has the value of essential being. The 
various moments of the original determinateness or of the 'mat­
ter in hand' of this particular individual, the moments of his 
End, of the means, of the action itself, and of the reality, all 
these are, on the one hand, single particular moments for this 
consciousness, which, in comparison with the 'matter in hand', 
it can abandon and surrender. On the other hand, however, 
they all have this 'matter in hand' as their essence but only in 
such a way that it, being their abstract universal, can be found 
in each of these various moments, and can be a predicate of them. 
The 'matter in hand' is not yet a subject ; but those moments 
count as subject because they fall on the side of individuality in 
general, whereas the 'matter in hand' is at first only the simple 
universal. It is the genus which is found in all these moments 
as species ofitself, and is equally free and independent of them. 
4 1 2. Consciousness is called honest when it has on the one 
hand attained to the idealism which the 'matter in hand' 
expresses, and on the other hand possesses the truth in it qua 
this formal universality ; a consciousness which is concerned 
solely with the 'matter in hand' and therefore busies itself solely 
with the various moments or species of it ; and when it does · 
not attain the 'matter in hand' in one of these moments or in 
one meaning, it for that very reason gets hold of it in another. 
Consequently, it does in fact always obtain the satisfaction 
which it should enjoy in virtue of its Notion. Whichever way 
things turn out, it has accomplished and attained the 'matter 
in hand', for this being the universal genus of those moments 
is the predicate of them all. 
4 1  3· If this consciousness does not convert its purpose into 
a reality, it has at least willed it, i.e. it makes the purpose qua 
purpose, the mere doing which does nothing, the 'heart of the 
matter', and can therefore explain and console itself with the 
fact that all the same something was taken in hand and done. 

C. ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
Since the universal itself contains subsumed under it the nega­
tive moment or the vanishing, the fact that the work annihilates 
itself, this too is its doing. It has incited the others to do this, 
and in the vanishing of its reality still finds satisfaction, just like 
naughty boys who enjoy themselves when they get their ears 
boxed because they are the cause of its being done. Or, again, 
suppose it has not even attempted to carry out the 'matter in 
hand', and has done absolutely nothing, then it has not been 
able to ; the 'matter in hand' is for it just the unity of its resolve 
and the reality; it asserts that the reality would be nothing else 
but what it was possible for it to do. Finally, suppose something 
ofinterest to him has come his way without any effort on his 
part, then for him this reality is the 'matter in hand' just because 
of the interest he finds in it, even though that reality has not 
been produced by him, If it is a piece of good fortune that has 
befallen him personally, then he is sure that it is his own doing 
and his own desert ; if, on the other hand, it should be an event 
of historical importance which does not really concern him, he 
makes it likewise his own ; and an interest for which he has done 
nothing is, in his own eyes, a party interest which he has 
favoured or opposed, and even combated or supported. 
4 1 4. The integrity of this consciousness, as well as the satisfac­
tion it experiences in all its relationships, obviously consists in 
the fact that it does not bring together its thoughts about the 
'matter in hand'. For it, the 'matter in hand' is as much its 
own affair as not a work at all, or is a mere action and an empty 
purpose, or even a reality involving no action at all ; it makes 
one meaning after another the subject of this predicate, and 
forgets them one after another. Now, the 'matter in hand' in 
being merely willed, or even in being incapable of realization, 
has the meaning of an empty purpose and of a unity of willing 
and achievement only in thought. The consolation for the failure 
of the purpose which at least was willed, or at least simply done, 
as well as the satisfaction of having given others something to 
do, makes simple doing, or thoroughly bad work, the essence 
of the whole affair; for that work is to be called bad which is 
no work at all. Finally, in the lucky event of finding the reality 
already in being, this 'being' becomes without any effort the 
'matter in hand' itself. 
4 1 5. The truth about this integrity, however, is that it is not 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
249 
as honest as it seems. For it cannot be so unthinking as to let 
these various moments actually fall apart in that way; it must 
be directly aware of their antithesis because they are absolutely 
interrelated. The pure action is essentially the action of this par­
ticular individual, and this action is equally essentially a reality 
or a 'matter in hand'. Conversely, the reality is essentially only 
as his doing and as action in general as well ; and his action is 
at the same time only as action in general and so, too, as reality 
in general. While, then, it seems to him that his concern is only 
with the 'matter in hand' as an abstract reality, it is also a fact 
that he is concerned with it as his own doing. But just because 
he is concerned merely with being active and busy, he is not 
really in earnest about it ; he has only to do with some objective 
matter and with one that is his own. Since, finally, he seems 
to will only his own affair or his own action, it is again a matter 
of dealing with an affair in general or with a reality that endures 
in its own right. 
416. Just as the 'matter in hand' itself and its moments 
appear here as content, they are equally necessary, too, asforms 
in consciousness. They appear as content only to vanish, each 
making room for the other. They must therefore be present in 
the character of superseded forms; but as such they are aspects 
of consciousness itself. The 'matter in hand' is present as the in­
itself or the reflection into itself of consciousness ; the supplant­
ing of the moments by one another finds expression there, how­
ever, in their being established in consciousness, not as they are 
in themselves but only as existing for another consciousness. 
One of the moments of the content is exposed by it to the light 
of day and made manifest to others ; but consciousness is at the 
same time reflected back from it into itself and the opposite is 
equally present within consciousness which retains it for itself 
as its own. At the same time what occurs is not that one or other 
of the moments is merely exposed, and another merely retained ; 
on the contrary, consciousness operates alternately with them, 
for it must make one as well as another essential for itself and 
for the others. The whole is the spontaneous interfusion of indivi­
duality and the universal ; but because this whole is present for 
consciousness only as the simple essence, and thus as the abstrac­
tion, of the 'matter in hand' its separate moments fall apart 
outside of that 'matter in hand' and of one another. As a whole, 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
it is only exhaustively exhibited by alternately exposing its 
moments and retaining them for itself. Since in this alternation 
consciousness keeps, in its reflection, one moment for itself and 
as essential, while another is only externally present in it, or 
is for others, there thus enters a play of individualities with one 
another in which each and all find themselves both deceiving 
and deceived. 
4 1 7. An individuality sets about carrying out something; by 
so doing it seems to have made something its own affair; it acts, 
and in acting becomes involved with others and seems to itself 
to be having to do with reality. The others therefore take its 
action for a sign of its interest in the 'matter in hand' as such, 
and its purpose to be the carrying-out of the matter per se, re­
gardless whether this is done by the first individuality or by 
them. Accordingly, when they point out that this matter has 
already been accomplished by them, or, if it has not, offer and 
furnish their assistance, then this consciousness has really left 
the position they believe it to occupy; it is its own action and 
its own effort that constitute its interest in the 'matter in hand', 
and when the others become aware that this was really the 'mat­
ter in hand,' then they feel they have been deceived. But actu­
ally their eagerness to come and help was itself nothing else but 
a desire to see and exhibit their own action, not the matter in 
hand itself; that is, they wanted to deceive the others in just 
the same way that they complain of having been deceived. 
Since it now turns out that its own action and effort, the play 
of its own powers, is the 'heart of the matter', it seems that con­
sciousness is occupied with its own interest, not with that of 
others, and is anxious only about action as its own action, not 
about action as the action of others, and hence seems to allow 
the others to do as they like about the matter they have in hand. 
But again they are mistaken ; that consciousness has already left 
the position they thought it occupied. It is not concerned with 
the 'matter in hand' as its own particular affair, but simply as 
a 'matter in hand', as a universal, which is for everyone. It inter­
feres, therefore in the action and work of others, and, if it can 
no longer take the work out of their hands, it at least shows 
an interest in it by passing judgement on it ; if it gives it the 
stamp of its approval and praise, this is meant to imply that, 
in the work, it praises not only the work itself, but also its own 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R E A L  I N  AND F O R  I TS.E L F  
251 
generosity and moderation in not having damaged the work 
as work, nor damaged it by its censure. In showing an interest 
in the work, it is enjoying its own self; and the work which it 
censures is equally welcome to it for just this enjoyment of its 
own action which its censure provides. Those, however, who 
think or pretend to think that they have been deceived by this 
interference, wanted really themselves to practise the same kind 
of deceit. They pretend that their action and efforts are some­
thing for themselves alone in which they have only themselves 
and their own essential nature in mind. However, in doing 
something, and thus bringing themselves out into the light of 
day, they directly contradict by their deed their pretence of 
wanting to exclude the glare ofpublicity and participation by 
all and sundry. Actualization is, on the contrary, a display of 
what is one's own in the element of universality whereby it 
becomes, and should become, the affair of everyone. 
418. It is, then, equally a deception of oneself and of others 
if it is pretended that what one is concerned with is the 'matter 
in hand' alone. A consciousness that opens up a subject-matter 
soon learns that others hurry along like flies to freshly poured­
out milk, and want to busy themselves with it ; and they learn 
about that individual that he, too, is concerned with the sub­
ject-matter, not as an obJect, but as his own affair. On the other 
hand, if what is supposed to be essential is merely the doing 
of it, the employment of powers and capacities, or the expres­
sion of this particular individuality, then equally it is learned 
by all parties that they all regard themselves as affected and 
invited to participate, and instead of a mere 'doing', or separate 
action, peculiar to the individual who opened up the subject­
matter, something has been opened up that is for others as well, 
or is a subject-matter on its own account. In both cases the same 
thing happens and only has a different significance by contrast 
with what was assumed and was supposed to be accepted. Con­
sciousness experiences both sides as equally essential moments, 
and in doing so learns what the nature of the ' matter in hand' really 
is, viz. that it is neither merely something which stands opposed 
to action in general, and to individual action, nor action which 
stands opposed to a continuing being and which would be the 
free genus of these moments as its species. Rather is its nature 
such that its being is the action of the single individual and of 

C .  ( AA . )  R E A S O N  
all individuals and whose action is immediately for others, or 
is a 'matter in hand' and is such only as the action of each and 
everyone : the essence which is the essence of all beings, viz. spiri­
tual essence. Consciousness learns that no one of these moments 
is subject, but rather gets dissolved in the universal 'matter in hand' ; 
the moments of the individuality which this unthinking con­
sciousness regarded as subject, one after the other, coalesce into 
simple individuality, which, as this particular individuality, is 
no less immediately universal. Thus the 'matter in hand' no 
longer has the character of a predicate, and loses the character­
istic of lifeless abstract universality. It is rather substance per­
meated by individuality, subject in which there is individuality 
just as much qua individual, or qua this particular individual, as 
qua all individuals ; and it is the universal which has being only 
as this action of all and each, and a reality in the f\lct that this 
particular consciousness knows it to be its own individual reality 
and the reality of all. The pure 'matter in hand' itself is what 
was defined above as 'the category', being that is the 'I' or 
the ' I' that is being, but in the form of thought which is still distin­
guished from actual self-consciousness. Here, however, the 
moments of actual self-consciousness in so far as we call them 
its content (purpose, action, and reality), and also in so far as 
we call them its form (being-for-self and being-for-another) , are 
posited as one with the simple category itself, and the category 
is thereby at the same time the entire content. 
b. Reason as lawgiver 
4 1  g. Spiritual essence is, in its simple being, pure consciousness, 
and this self-consciousness. The originally determinate nature of 
the individual has lost its positive meaning of being in itself the 
element and the purpose ofits activity ; it is merely a superseded 
moment, and the individual is a self in the form of a universal 
self. Conversely, theformal 'matter in hand' gets its filling from 
the active, self-differentiating individuality ; for the differences 
within the latter constitute the content of that universal. The 
category is in itself, or implicit, as the universal of pure conscious­
ness; it is equally for itself or explicit, for the self of consciousness 
is equally a moment of it. It is absolute being, for that uni­
versality is the simple self-identity of being. 
420. Thus what is object for consciousness has the signifi-

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R EA L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
253 
cance of being the True ; it is and it is authoritative, in the sense 
that it exists and is authoritative in and for itself. It is the absolute 
'matter in hand', which no longer suffers from the antithesis 
of certainty and its truth, between universal and individual, 
between purpose and its reality, but whose existence is the reality 
and action of self-consciousness. This 'matter in hand' is therefore 
the ethical substance; and consciousness of it is the ethical con­
sciousness. Its object is likewise for it the True, for it combines 
self-consciousness and being in a single unity. It has the value 
of the Absolute, for self-consciousness cannot and does not want 
any more to go beyond this object, for in it, it is in communion 
with itself: it cannot, for it is all being and all power; it does 
not want to, for it is the self or the will of this self. The object, 
is in its own self real as object, for it contains within itself the 
distinction characteristic of consciousness; it divides itself into 
'masses' [ Massen] or spheres which are the determinate laws of 
the absolute essence. These 'masses', however, do not obscure 
the Notion, for the moments of being and pure consciousness 
and ofthe self remain enclosed within it-a unity which con­
stitutes the essence of these 'masses' and which, in this dis­
tinction, no longer lets these moments fall apart from one 
another. 
42 1 .  These laws or 'masses' of the ethical substance are im­
mediately acknowledged. We cannot ask for their origin and 
justification, nor can we look for any other warrant ;  for some­
thing other than essence that is in and for itself could only be 
self-consciousness itself. But self-consciousness is nothing but 
this essence, for i  t is itself the being-for self of this essence which 
is the truth, just because it is as much the self of consciousness 
as it is its in-itself or pure consciousness. 
422. Since self-consciousness knows itself to be a moment of 
the being-for-self of this substance, it expresses the existence of 
the law within itself as follows : sound Reason knows imme­
diately what is right and good. Just as it knows the law imme­
diately, so too the law is valid for it immediately, and it says 
direct! y :  'this is right and good' -and, moreover, this particular 
law. The laws are determinate; the law is the 'matter in hand' 
itself filled with a significant content. 
423. What is thus given immediately must likewise be 
accepted and considered immediately. Just as in the case of 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
sense-certainty, we had to examine the nature of what it imme­
diately expressed as being, so here, too, we have to see how the 
being expressed by this immediate ethical certainty, or by the 
immediately existing 'masses' of the ethical substance, is con­
stituted. Examples of some such laws will show us this ; and since 
we take them in the form of declarations of the sound Reason 
which knows them, u•e do not have first to introduce the moment 
which has to be made valid in them, considered as immediate 
ethical laws. 
424. 'Everyone ought to speak the truth.' In this duty as 
expressed unconditionally, the condition will at once be 
admitted : ifhe knows the truth. The commandment, then, will 
now run : everyone ought to speak the truth at all times, accord­
ing to his knowledge and conviction. Sound Reason, this ethical 
Substance precisely, which knows immediately what is right 
and good, will also explain that this condition was already so 
much part and parcel of that universal maxim that this is how 
it meant that commandment to be understood. But, with this 
admission, it in fact admits that already, in the very act of 
saying the commandment, it really violates it. It said: everyone 
ought to speak the truth ; but it meant : he ought to speak it 
according to his knowledge and conviction; that is to say, what 
it said was different from what it meant ; and to speak otherwise 
than one means, means not speaking the truth. The untruth 
or inapt expression in its improved form now runs : everyone 
ought to speak the truth according to his knowledge and con­
viction at the time. But with this correction, what the proposi­
tion wanted to enunciate as universally necessary and intrinsic­
ally valid, has really turned round into something completely 
contingent. For speaking the truth is made contingent on 
whether I can know it, and can convince myselfofit ; and the 
proposition says nothing more than that a confused muddle of 
truth and falsehood ought to be spoken just as anyone happens 
to know, mean, and understand it. This contingency of the con­
tent has universality merely in the propositional form in which 
it is expressed ; but as an ethical proposition it promises a uni­
versal and necessary content, and thus contradicts itself by the 
content being contingent. Finally, if the proposition were recti­
fied by saying that the contingency of the knowledge and convic­
tion of the truth ought to be dropped, and that the truth ought 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R EA L  I N  A N D  F O R  I TS E L F  
255 
also to be known, then this would be a commandment which 
directly contradicts the one we started from. Sound Reason was 
at first supposed to possess immediately the capacity to speak the 
truth ; now, however, it is said that it ought to know, that is to 
say, that it does not immediately know what is true. Looking at 
this from the side of the content, then this has dropped out in 
the demand that we should know the truth ; for this refers to 
knowing in general: we ought to know. What is demanded is, there­
fore, really something free of all specific content. But here the 
point in question was about a specific content, a distinction in the 
ethical substance. Yet this immediate determination of the sub­
stance is a content which showed itself to be really completely 
contingent and which, when raised into universality and 
necessity by making the law refer to knowing [instead of to con­
tent], in fact vanishes. 
425. Another celebrated commandment is : 'Love thy 
neighbour as thyself.' It is directed to the individual in his rela­
tionship with other individuals and asserts the commandment 
as a relationship between two individuals, or as a relationship 
of feeling Active love-for love that does not act has no exist­
ence and is therefore hardly intended here-aims at removing 
an evil from someone and being good to him. For this purpose 
I have to distinguish what is bad for him, what is the appropri­
ate good to counter this evil, and what in general is good for 
him ; i.e. I must love him intelligently. Unintelligent love will 
perhaps do him more harm than hatred. lntelligent, substantial 
beneficence is, however, in its richest and most important form 
the intelligent universal action of the state-an action com­
pared with which the action of a single individual, as an indivi­
dual, is so insignificant that it is hardly worth talking about. 
The action of the state is, moreover, of so great a power that, 
if the action of the individual were to oppose it, and either were 
intended to be a downright, explicitly criminal act, or the in­
dividual out of love for someone else wanted to cheat the uni­
versal out of its right, and its share in the action, such an action 
would be altogether useless and inevitably frustrated. The only 
significance left for beneficence, which is a sentiment, is that of 
an action which is quite single and isolated, ofhel p in (a situation 
of] need, which is as contingent as it is transitory. Chance deter­
mines not only the occasion of the action but also whether it 

C .  ( A A . )  R E A S O N  
is a 'work' at all, whether it is not immediately undone and 
even perverted into something bad. Thus this acting for the 
good of others which is said to be necessary, is of such kind that 
it may, or may not, exist ; is such that, if by chance the occasion 
offers, the action is perhaps a 'work' and is good, but also per­
haps not. This law, therefore, as little has a universal content 
as the one we first considered, and does not express, as an abso­
lute ethical law should, something that is valid in and for itself. 
In other words, such laws stop short at Ought, they have no 
actuality; they are not laws, but merely commandments. 
426. It is evident, however, from the very nature of the case, 
that we must give up all idea of a universal, absolute content. 
For any determinateness placed in the simple substance (whose 
nature is to be simple) is inadequate to it. The commandment 
in its simple absoluteness itself expresses an immediate ethical 
being; the distinction appearing in it is a determinateness, and 
therefore a content subsumed under the absolute universality 
of this simple being. Since, then, all idea of an absolute content 
must be given up, it can only claim a formal universality, or 
that it is not self-contradictory. For universality that lacks a 
content is [merely] formal, and an absolute content itself is tanta­
mount to a distinction which is no distinction, i.e. to absence 
of content. 
427. All that is left, then, for the making of a law is the mere 
form of universality, or, in fact, the tautology of consciousness 
which stands over against the content, and the knowledge, not 
of an existing or a real content, but only of the essence or self­
identity of a content. 
428. The ethical nature, therefore, is not itself simply as such 
a content, but only a standard for deciding whether a content 
is capable of being a law or not, i.e. whether it is or is not self­
contradictory. Reason as the giver of laws is reduced to a 
Reason which merely critically examines them. 
c. Reason as testing lazt's 
429. A distinction within the simple ethical substance is for 
it an accident which appeared, as we saw in specific command­
ments, as the contingency of the knowledge [of the circum­
stances], of the circumstances themselves, and of the action. 
The comparison of that simple being with the determinateness 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
257 
corresponding to it was made by us ; and in that comparison 
the simple substance has shown itself to be a formal universality, 
or pure consciousness which is free from the content and stands 
over against it, and is a knowing of it as something determinate. 
This universality in this way remains the same as what the 'mat­
ter in hand' itself was. But in consciousness it is something else ; 
it is, namely, no longer the unthinking, inert genus, but is 
related to the particular and regarded as the power over it and 
as its .truth. This consciousness seems at first to be the same pro­
cess of testing which formerly we carried out, and it seems that 
its action cannot be anything other than what has already hap­
pened, viz. a comparison of the universal with the determinate 
particular which, as previously, would reveal their disparity. 
Here, however, the relationship of the content to the universal 
is different, since the latter has acquired a different significance ; 
it is a formal universality of which the determinate content is 
capable, for in that universality the content is considered only 
in relation to itself. When u·e were testing, the universal pure 
substance stood over against the determinateness, which dis­
played itself as a contingency of the consciousness into which 
the substance entered. Here, one term of the comparison has 
vanished ; the universal is no longer the affirmatively present 
and authoritative substance, or that which is right in and for 
itself, but a simple knowing or a form, which compares a con­
tent only with itself, and considers whether it is a tautology. 
Laws are no longer given, but tested; and for the consciousness 
which tests them they are already given. It takes up their content 
simply as it is, without concerning itself, as we did, with the 
particularity and contingency inherent in its reality; it is con­
cerned with the commandment simply as commandment, and 
its attitude towards it is just as unc;omplicated as is its being 
a criterion for testing it. 
430. But that is the reason why this testing does not get very 
far. Just because the criterion is a tautology, and indifferent 
to the content, one content is just as acceptable to it as its oppo­
site. Suppose the question is : Ought it to be an absolute law 
that there should be property ? Absolute, and not on grounds 
of utility for other ends : the essence of ethics consists just in 
law being identical with itself and through this self-identity, 
i.e. through having its ground in itself, it is unconditioned. 

C .  ( AA . )  REAS O N  
Property, simply as such, does not contradict itself; it is an iso­
lated determinateness, or is posited as merely self-identical. Non­
property, the non-ownership of things, or a common ownership 
of goods, is just as little self-contradictory. That something 
belongs to nobody, or to the first-comer who takes possession 
ofit, or to all together, to each according to his need or in equal 
portions-that is a simple determinateness, a formal thought, like 
its opposite, property. Admittedly, if a thing that belongs to 
no one is considered as a necessary object of a need, then it is neces­
sary that it become the property of some particular individual ; 
and the contradiction would stem rather from the freedom of 
the thing being made into a law. But by non-ownership of the 
thing is not meant absolute non-ownership, but that it shall 
come into someone's possession according to the individual's 
need, and, moreover, not in order to be kept, but to be used 
immediately. But to provide for the need in such a completely 
arbitrary way is contradictory to the nature of the conscious 
individual who alone is under discussion. For such an indivi­
dual must think of his need in the form of universality, must pro­
vide for the whole of his existence, and acquire a lasting posses­
sion. This being so, the idea of a thing being arbitrarily allotted 
to the first self-conscious individual who comes along and needs 
it, does not accord with itself. In a society based on a common 
ownership of goods, in which provision would be made in ac­
cordance with a universal fixed rule, either each receives as 
much as he needs-in which case there is a contradiction 
between this inequality and the essential nature of that con­
sciousness whose principle is the equality of individuals--or, in 
accordance with that principle, goods will be equally distri­
buted, and in this case the share is not related to the need, 
although such a relationship alone constitutes the very notion 
of 'sharing'. 
43 1 .  Still, if in this way [the notion of] non-property appears 
contradictory, this is only because it has not been left as a simple 
determinateness. The same applies to (the notion of] property, 
if this is resolved into its moments. The single thing that is my 
property is held as such to be something universal, solidly estab­
lished, and permanent; but this contradicts its nature, which 
consists in its being used and in vanishzng. At the same time, 
i tis held to be mine, something which everyone else acknowledges, 

I N D I V I D U A L I TY R E AL I N  AND FO R I T S E L F  
259 
and lets alone. The fact, however, that I am acknowledged 
implies rather my equality, my identity, with everyone, and 
that is the opposite of exclusiveness. What I possess is a Thing, 
i.e. something which is for others in general and is only for me 
in a quite general, undefined way; that I possess it, contradicts 
its universal thinghood. Consequently, property is just as much 
an all-round contradiction as non-property; each contains 
within it these two opposed, self-contradictory moments of in­
dividuality and universality. But each of these determina­
tenesses when thought of as simple, as property or non-property, 
without explicating them further, is as simple as the other, i.e. 
is not self-contradictory. The criterion oflaw which Reason pos­
sesses within itself fits every case equally well, and is thus in 
fact no criterion at all. It would be strange, too, if tautology, 
the maxim of contradiction, which is admitted to be only a 
formal criterion for the cognition of theoretical truth, i.e. some­
thing which is quite indifferent to truth and falsehood, were 
supposed to be more than this for the cognition of practical 
truth. 
432 .  In both the above moments, which fill the former 
emptiness of spiritual being, the process of placing immediate 
determinatenesses in the ethical substance, and then getting to 
know whether they are laws, has been eliminated. The result 
therefore seems to be that neither specific laws nor a knowledge 
of them is admissible. But the substance is the consciousness of 
itself as absolutely essential being, which, therefore, can give 
up neither the distinction within it nor the knowledge of that dis­
tinction. That law-giving and the testing of laws have proved 
to be futile, means that both, when taken singly and in isolation, 
are merely unstable moments of the ethical consciousness ; and 
the movement in which they appear has the formal meaning 
that the ethical substance there by ex hi bits itself as consciousness. 
433· In so far as these two moments are more precise deter­
minations of consciousness of the 'matter in hand', they can be 
regarded as forms of the honest consciousness which, as previ­
ously in the case of its formal moments, now busies itself with 
a supposed content of the good and the right, and with testing 
such established truth, and fancies that in sound Reason and 
intelligent insight it possesses that which gives force and validity 
to commandments. 

C .  ( A A . )  R E AS O N  
434· However, without this honesty, laws do not have 
validity as the essence of consciousness, nor, similarly, does the 
testing of them count as an action within consciousness. On the 
contrary, these moments, appearing each by itself immediately 
as a reality, express in the one case an invalid establishing and 
existence of actual laws, and in the other case an equally invalid 
immunity from them. The law, as a specific law, has a contin­
gent content ; this means here that it is the law of a single con­
sciousness and has an arbitrary content. To legislate imme­
diately in that way is thus the tyrannical insolence which makes 
caprice into a law and ethical behaviour into obedience to such 
caprice---{)bedience to laws which are merely laws and not at 
the same time commandments, So, too, the second moment, in 
so far as it is isolated, means testing the laws, moving the im­
movable, means the insolence of a knowledge which argues 
itself into a freedom from absolute laws, treating them as an 
alien caprice. 
435· In both forms, these moments are a negative relation 
to substance or real spiritual being ;  or we may say that in them 
substance does not as yet possess its reality, but rather that con­
sciousness contains them still in the form of its own immediacy, 
and that substance is at first only a willing and knowing by this 
particular individual, or the 'ought to be' of an unreal com­
mandment and a knowledge of formal universality. But since 
these modes have been superseded, consciousness has returned 
into the universal and those antitheses have vanished. Spiritual 
being is actual substance through these modes being valid, not 
in isolation, but only as superseded [moments] ; and the unity 
in which they are merely moments is the self of consciousness 
which, being from now on posited in the spiritual being, makes 
that being actual, full-filled, and self-conscious. 
436. The spiritual being thus exists first of all for self-con­
sciousness as law which has an intrinsic being; the universality 
associated with testing the law, a merely formal, not an essential 
universality, is now behind us. The law is equally an eternal 
law which is grounded not in the will of a particular individual, 
but is valid in and for itself; it is the absolute pure will of all 
which has the form of immediate being. Also, it is not a com­
mandment, which only ought to be : it is and is valid; it is the uni­
versal 'I' of the category, the 'I' which is immediately a reality, 

I N D I V I D U A L ITY R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  I T S E L F  
261 
and the world is only this reality. But since this existent law 
is valid unconditionally, the obedience of self-consciousness is 
not the serving of a master whose commands were arbitrary, 
and in which it would not recognize itself. On the contrary, 
laws are the thoughts of its own absolute consciousness, 
thoughts which are immediately its own. Also, it does not believe 
in them, for although belief does perceive essential being 
it perceives it as something alien to itself. Ethical self-con­
sciousness is immediately one with essential being through the 
universality of its self; belief, on the other hand, starts from the 
individual consciousness; it is the movement of that consciousness 
always towards this unity, but without attaining to the presence 
of its essential being. The above consciousness, on the other 
hand, has put its merely individual aspect behind it, this media­
tion is finished and complete, and only because this is so, is this 
consciousness immediate self-consciousness of the ethical sub­
stance. 
437· The difference between self-consciousness and essence, 
is therefore, perfectly transparent. Because of this, the dis­
tinctions in essence itself are not accidental determinatenesses ; 
on the contrary, in virtue of the unity of essence and self-con­
sciousness (this latter being the only possible source of dis­
parity), they are 'masses' articulated into groups by the life of 
the unity which permeates them, unalienated spirits trans­
parent to themselves, stainless celestial figures that preserve in 
all their differences the undefiled innocence and harmony of 
their essential nature. The relationship of self-consciousness to 
them is equally simple and clear. They are, and nothing more ; 
this is what constitutes the awareness of its relationship to them. 
Thus, Sophocles' Antigone1 acknowledges them as the unwritten 
and infallible law of the gods. 
They are not of yesterday or today, but everlasting, 
Though where they came from, none of us can tell. 
They are. If I inquire after their origin and confine them to 
the point whence they arose, then I have transcended them ; 
for now it is I who am the universal, and they are the conditioned 
and limited. If they are supposed to be validated by my insight, 
then I have already denied their unshakeable, intrinsic being, 
1 Sophocles, Antigone, II. 45×7-

C .  ( A A . )  R EA S O N  
and regard them as something which, for me, is perhaps true, 
but also is perhaps not true. Ethical disposition consists just in 
sticking steadfastly to what is right, and abstaining from all 
attempts to move or shake it, or derive it. Suppose something 
has been entrusted to me ; it is the property of someone else 
and I acknowledge this because it is so, and I keep myself un­
falteringly in this relationship. Ifl should keep for myself what 
is entrusted to me, then according to the principle I follow in 
testing laws, which is a tautology, I am not in the least guilty 
of contradiction ; for then I no longer look upon it as the prop­
erty of someone else : to hold on to something which I do not 
regard as belonging to someone else is perfectly consistent. 
Alteration of the point rif view is not contradiction ; for what we 
are concerned with is not the point of view, but the object and 
content, which ought not to be self-contradictory. Just as I 
can-as I do when I give something away-alter the view that 
it is my property into the view that it belongs to someone else, 
without becoming guilty of a contradiction, so I can equally 
pursue the reverse course. It is not, therefore, because I find 
something is not self-contradictory that it is right ; on the con­
trary, it is right because it is what is right. That something is 
the property of another, this is fundamental ; I have not to argue 
about it, or hunt around for or entertain thoughts, connections, 
aspects, of various kinds ; I have to think neither of making laws 
nor of testing them. All such thinking on my part would upset 
that relation, since, if I liked, I CQuld in fact just as well make 
the opposite conform to my indeterminate tautological know­
ledge and make that the law. But whether this or the opposite 
determination is the right, that is determined in and for itself. 
I could make whichever of them I liked the law, and just as 
well neither of them, and as soon as I start to test them I have 
already begun to tread an unethical path. By acknowledging 
the absoluteness of the right, I am within the ethical substance ; 
and this substance is thus the essence of self-consciousness. But 
this self-consciousness is the actuality and existence of the sub­
stance, its self and its will. 

( B B . ) S PIRI T 
V I . S P I R I T  
438. Reason is Spirit when its certainty of being all reality 
has been raised to truth, and it is conscious of itself as its own 
world, and of the world as itself. The coming-to-be of Spirit 
was indicated in the immediately preceding movement in 
which the object of consciousness, the pure category, rose to 
be the Notion ofReason. In Reason as observer, this pure unity of 
the I and being, ofbeingfor itself and being in itself, is determined 
as the in-itself or as being, and the consciousness of Reason finds 
itself. But the truth of observation is rather that it leaves behind 
it this immediate instinct which merely finds Reason, this un­
conscious existence of Reason. The intuited category, the found 
Thing, enters consciousness as the being-for-self of the 'I', which 
is now aware ofitselfas the selfin objective being. But this deter­
mination of the category, of being-for-self opposed to being­
in-itself, is equally one-sided and is a moment that supersedes 
itself. The category is therefore determined for consciousness 
as it is in its universal truth, as a being that is in and for itself. 
This still abstract determination which constitutes the 'matter 
in hand' itself is at first only spiritual essence, and its conscious­
ness [only] a formal knowing of it, which busies itself with all 
kinds of content of the essence. This consciousness, as a particu­
lar individual, is still in fact distinct from substance, and 
either makes arbitrary laws or fancies that in simply know­
ing laws it possesses them in their own absolute nature. Or, 
looked at from the side of substance, this is spiritual essence that 
is in and for itself, but which is not yet consciousness of itself. But 
essence that is in and for itself, and which is at the same time 
actual as consciousness and aware of itself, this is Spirit. 
439· Its spiritual essence has already been designated as ethi­
cal substance; but Spirit is the actuality of that substance. It is 
the self of actual consciousness to which it stands opposed, or 
rather which it opposes to itself as an objective, actual world, 
but a world which has completely lost the meaning for the self 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
of something alien to it, just as the self has completely lost the 
meaning of a being-for-self separated from the world, whether 
dependent on it or not. Spirit, being the substance and the uni­
versal, self-identical, and abiding essence, is the unmoved solid 
ground and starting-point for the action of all, and it is their pur­
pose and goal, the in-itself of every self-consciousness expressed 
in thought. This substance is equally the universal work pro­
duced by the action of all and each as their unity and identity, 
for it is the being-for-self, the self, action. As substance, Spirit is 
unshaken righteous self-identity; but as being-for-selfit is a frag­
mented being, self-sacrificing and benevolent, in which each 
accomplishes his own work, rends asunder the universal being, 
and takes from it his own share. This resolving of the essence 
into individuals is precisely the moment of the action and the 
self of all ; it is the movement and soul of substance and the 
resultant universal being. Just because it is a being that is 
resolved in the self, it is not a dead essence, but is actual and 
alive. 
440. Spirit is thus self-supporting, absolute, real being. All 
previous shapes of consciousness are abstract forms of it. They 
result from Spirit analysing itself, distinguishing its moments, 
and dwelling for a while with each. This isolating of those 
moments presupposes Spirit itself and subsists therein ; in other 
words, the isolation exists only in Spirit which is a concrete ex­
istence. In this isolation they have the appearance of really 
existing as such ; but that they are only moments or vanishing 
quantities is shown by their advance and retreat into their 
ground and essence ; and this essence isjust this movement and 
resolution of these moments. Here, where Spirit, or Spirit's re­
flection into itself, is posited, we may briefly recall this aspect 
of them in our own reflection : they were consciousness, self­
consciousness, and Reason. Spirit, then is consciousness in 
general which embraces sense-certainty, perception, and the 
Understanding, in so far as in its self-analysis Spirit holds fast 
to the moment ofbeing an objectively existent actuality to itself, 
and ignores the fact that this actuality is its own being-for-self. 
If, on the contrary, it holds fast to the other moment of the 
analysis, viz. that its object is its own being-for-self, then it is 
self-consciousness. But as immediate consciousness of the being 
that is in and for itself, as unity of consciousness and self-con-

SPIRIT 
sciousness, Spirit is consciousness that has Reason; it is conscious­
ness which, as the word 'has' indicates, has the object in a shape 
which is implicitly determined by Reason or by the value of the 
category, but in such a way that it does not as yet have for 
consciousness the value of the category. Spirit is that conscious­
ness which we were considering immediately prior to the 
present stage. Finally, when this Reason which Spirit has is in­
tuited by Spirit as Reason that exists, or as Reason that is actual 
in Spirit and is its world, then Spirit exists in its truth ; it is 
Spirit, the ethical essence that has an actual existence. 
441. Spirit is the ethical life of a nation in so far as it is the 
immediate truth-the individual that is a world. It must advance 
to the consciousness of what it is immediately, must leave 
behind it the beauty of ethical life, and by passing through a 
series of shapes attain to a knowledge of itself. These shapes, 
however, are distinguished from the previous ones by the fact 
that they are real Spirits, actualities in the strict meaning of 
the word, and instead of being shapes merely of consciousness, 
are shapes of a world. 
442. The living ethical world is Spirit in its truth. When Spirit 
first arrives at an abstract knowledge of its essence, ethical life 
is submerged in the formal universality oflegality or law. Spirit, 
which henceforth is divided within itself, traces one of its worlds, 
the realm qf culture, in the harsh reality of its objective element; 
over against this realm, it traces in the element of thought the 
world qf beliif or faith, the realm qf essential being. Both worlds, 
however, when grasped by Spirit-which, after this loss of itself, 
withdraws into itself-when grasped by the Notion, are con­
founded and revolutionized by the insight [of the individual] 
and the diffusion of that insight, known as the Enlightenment ; 
and the realm which waज divided and expanded into this world 
and the beyond, returns in'to self-consciousness which now, in 
the form of morality, grasps itself as the essentiality and essence 
as the actual self; it no longer places its world and its ground out­
side ofitself, but lets everything fade into itself, and, as conscience, 
is Spirit that is certain of itself. 
443· The ethical world, the world which is rent asunder into 
this world and a beyond, and the moral view of the world, 
are thus the Spirits whose process and return into the simple 
· self-consciousness of Spirit are now to be developed. The goal 

C .  ( B B . )  SPIRIT 
and outcome of that process will appear on the scene as the 
actual self-consciousness of absolute Spirit. 
A .  T H E  T RU E  S P I RI T .  T H E  E T H I CA L  ORDER 
444· Spirit is, in its simple truth, consciousness, and forces 
its moments apart. Action divides it into substance, and con­
sciousness of the substance; and divides the substance as well 
as consciousness. Sझbstance, as the universal essence and End, 
stands over against the individualized reality; the infinite middle 
term is self-consciousness which, being the implicit unity of itself 
and substance, now becomes that unity explicitly and unites 
the universal essence and its individualized reality. The latter 
it raises to the former and acts ethically, the former it brings 
down to the latter and realizes the End, the substance which 
had an existence only in thought. It brings into existence the 
unity ofits self and substance as its own work, and thus as an 
actual existence. 
445· In this separation of the moments of consciousness, the 
simple substance has, on the one hand, preserved the antithesis 
to self-consciousness, and on the other, it equally exhibits in 
its own self the nature of consciousness, viz. to create distinctions 
within itself, exhibiting itself as a world articulated into its 
[separate] spheres. It thus splits itself up into distinct ethical 
substances, into a human and a divine law. Similarly, the self­
consciousness confronting the substance assigns to itself accord­
ing to its nature one of these powers, and as a knowing, is on 
the one hand ignorant of what it does, and on the other knows 
what it does, a knowledge which for that reason is a deceptive 
knowledge. It learns through its own act the contradiction of 
those powers into which the substance divided itself and their 
mutual downfall, as well as the contradiction between its know­
ledge of the ethical character of its action, and what is in its 
own proper nature ethical, and thus finds its own downfall. In 
point of fact, however, the ethical substance has developed 
through this process into actual self-consciousnञss ; in othटr 
words, this particular self has become the actuality ठf what It 
is in essence; but precisely in this development the ethical order 
has been destroyed. 

THE ETH I CA L  ORDER 
a. The ethical world. Human and Divine Law: Man and Woman 
446. The simple substance of Spirit, as consciousness, is 
divided. In other words, just as the consciousness of abstract 
sensuous being passes over into perception, so also does the im­
mediate certainty of a real ethical situation ; and just as for sense­
perception simple being becomes a Thing of many properties, 
so for ethical perception a given action is an actual situation 
with many ethical connections. For the former, however, the 
superfluous plurality of properties concentrates itself into the 
essential antithesis of individuality and universality; and still 
more for ethical perception, which is the purified substantial 
consciousness, does the plurality of ethical moments become the 
duality of a law of individuality and a law of universality. But 
each of these divisions of substance remains Spirit in its entirety; 
if in sense-perception things have no other substance than the 
two determinations ofindividuality and universality, here these 
determinations express only the superficial antithesis of the two 
sides. 
447· In the essence we are considering here, individuality 
has the meaning of self-consciousness in general, not of a particu­
lar, contingent consciousness. In this determination, therefore, 
the ethical substance is actual substance, absolute Spirit realized 
in the plurality of existent consciousnesses ; this spirit is the com­
munity which, when we entered the sphere of Reason in its 
practical embodiment, was for us absolute essence, and here has 
emerged on its own account in its truth as conscious ethical essence, 
and as essence for the consciousness which here is our object. 
It is Spirit which is for itself in that it preserves itself in its reflec­
tion in individuals ; and it is implicitly Spirit, or substance, in 
that it preserves them within itself. As actual substance, it is a 
nation, as actual consciousness, it is the citizens of that nation. This 
consciousness has its essence in simple Spirit, and the .certainty 
of itself in the actuality of this Spirit, in the nation as a whole; 
it has its truth, therefore, not in something that is not actual, 
but in a Spirit that exists and prevails. 
448. This Spirit can be called the human law, because it is 
essentially in the form of a reality that is conscious of itself. In 
the form of universality it is the known law, and the prevailing 
custom ; in the form of individuality it is the actual certainty 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
ofitselfin the individual as such, and the certainty of itself as 
a simple individuality is that Spirit as government. Its truth 
is the authority which is openly accepJed and manifest to all; 
a concrete existence which appears for immediate certainty in the 
form an existence that has freely issued forth. 
449· Confronting this clearly manifest ethical power there 
is, however, another power, the Divine Law. For the ethical 
power of the state, being the movement of self-conscious action, 
finds its antithesis in the simple and immediate essence of the 
ethical sphere ; as actual universality it is a force actively opposed 
to individual being-for-self; and as actuality in general it finds 
in that inner essence something other than the ethical power of 
the state. 
450. It has already been mentioned that each of the oppo­
sites in which the ethical substance exists contains the entire 
substance, and all the moments of its content. If, then, the com­
munity is that substance conscious of what it actually does, the 
other side has the form of immediate substance or substance 
that simply is. The latter is thus on the one hand the inner 
Notion or general possibility of the ethical sphere in general, 
but on the other hand equally contains within it the moment 
of self-consciousness. This moment which expresses the ethical 
sphere in this element ofimmediacy or [simple] being, or which 
is an immediate consciousness of itself, both as essence and as this 
particular self, in an 'other', i.e. as a natural ethical com­
munity-this is the Family. The Family, as the unconscious, still 
inner Notion [of the ethical order], stands opposed to its actual, 
self-conscious existence ; as the element of the nation's actual ex­
istence, it stands opposed to the nation itself; as the immediate 
being of the ethical order, it stands over against that order 
which shapes and maintains itself by working for the universal ; 
the Penates stand opposed to the universal Spirit. 
451. However, although the Family is immediately deter­
mined as an ethical being, it is within itself an ethical entity only 
so far as it is not the natural relationship of its members, or so 
far as their connection is an immediate connection of separate, 
actual individuals ; for the ethical principle is intrinsically uni­
versal, and this natural relationship is just as much a spiritual 
one, and it is only as a spiritual entity that it is ethical. We 
have to see what constitutes its peculiar ethical character. In 

THE ETH I C A L  O R DER 
269 
the first place, because the ethical principle is intrinsically uni­
versal, the ethical connection between the members of the 
Family is not that offeeling, or the relationship oflove. It seems, 
then, that the ethical principle must be placed in the relation 
of the individual member of the Family to the whole Family as 
the Substance, so that the End and content of what he does and 
actually is, is solely the Family. But the conscious End motivat­
ing the action of this whole, so far as it is directed towards that 
whole, is itself the individual. The acquisition and maintenance 
of power and wealth is in part concerned only with needs and 
belongs to the sphere of appetite; in part, they become in their 
higher determination something that is only mediated. This de­
termination does not fall within the Family itself, but bears on 
what is truly universal, the community; it has, rather, a nega­
tive relation to the Family, and consists in expelling the indivi­
dual from the Family, subduing the natural aspect and 
separateness of his existence, and training him to be virtuous, 
to a life in and for the universal. The positive End peculiar to 
the Family is the individual as such. Now, in order that this 
relationship be ethical, neither he who performs the action, nor 
he to whom the action refers, can be in an accidental relationship 
as happens perhaps in rendering some assistance or service in 
a particular case. The content of the ethical action must be sub­
stantial or whole and universal ; therefore it can only be related 
to the whole individual or to the individual qua universal. And 
this, again, must not be understood as if it were only imagined 
that doing him a service would promote his total happiness, 
whereas the service, being an immediate and actual deed, pro­
duces only a particular effect on him. Nor must we imagine 
that service in the form of education, i.e. in a series of efforts, 
really has him in his entirety for object, and produces him as 
a 'work' ; for apart from the purpose which is negatively con­
nected with the Family, the actual deed has only a limited con­
tent. Finally, just as little should we understand the service as 
a help in time of need by which in truth the individual in his 
entirety is rescued ; for such help is itself a completely contingent 
act, the occasion of which is an ordinary reality which can either 
be or not be. The deed, then, which embraces the entire exist­
ence of the blood-relation, does not concern the citizen, for he 
does not belong to the Family, nor the individual who is to 

270 
C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
become a citizen and will cease to count as this particular in­
dividual ; it has as its object and content this particular indivi­
dual who belongs to the Family, but is taken as a universal being 
freed from his sensuous, i.e. individual, reality. The deed no 
longer concerns the living but the dead, the individual who, 
after a long succession of separate disconnected experiences, con­
centrates himself into a single completed shape, and has raised 
himself out of the unrest of the accidents of life into the calm 
of simple universality. But because it is only as a citizen that 
he is actual and substantial, the individual, so far as he is not 
a citizen but belongs to the Family, is only an unreal impotent 
shadow. 
452. This universality which the individual as such attains 
is pure being, death; it is a state which has been reached imme­
diately, in the course of Nature, not the result of an action con­
sciously done. The duty of the member of a Family is on that 
account to add this aspect, in order that the individual's ulti­
mate being, too, shall not belong solely to Nature and remain 
something irrational, but shall be something done, and the right 
of consciousness be asserted in it. Or rather, the meaning of 
the action is that because in truth the calm and universality 
of a self-conscious being do not belong to Nature, the illusory 
appearance that the death of the individual results from a con­
scious action on the part of Nature may be dispelled, and the 
truth established. What Nature did in the individual is that 
aspect in which his development into a universal is exhibited 
as the movement of an [immediate] existent. This movement 
falls, it is true, within the ethical community, and has this for 
its End ; death is the fulfilment and the supreme 'work' 
which the individual as such undertakes on its behalf. But in 
so far as he is essentially a particular individual, it is an accident 
that his death was directly connected with his 'work' for the 
universal and was the result of it ; partly because, if his death 
was such a result, it is the natural negativity and movement of 
the individual as a [mere J existent, in which consciousness does 
not' return into itself and become self-consciousness; or partly 
because, since the movement of what [merely] exists consists 
in its being superseded and becoming a being-for-self, death 
is the side of diremption in which the attained being-for-self 
is something other than the mere existent which began the 

T H E  ETH I CA L  ORDER 
27 1 
movement. Because the ethical or-der is Spirit in its immediate 
truth, the sides into which its consciousness sunders itself also 
fall into this form of immediacy, and individuality passes over 
into this abstract negativity which, being in its own self without 
consolation and reconciliation, must receive them essentially 
through a real and external act. Blood-relationship supplements, 
then, the abstract natural process by adding to it the movement 
of consciousness, interrupting the work of Nature and rescuing 
the blood-relation from destruction ; or better, because destruc­
tion is necessary, the passage of the blood-relation into mere 
being, it takes on itself the act of destruction. Through this it 
comes about that the dead, the universal being, becomes a being 
that has returned into itself, a being-for-self, or, the powerless, 
simply isolated individual has been raised to universal individu­
ality. The dead individual; by having liberated his being from 
his action or his negative unity, is an empty singular, merely 
a passive being-for-another, at the mercy of every lower 
irrational individuality and the forces of abstract material ele­
ments, all of which are now more powerful than himself: the 
former on account of the life they possess, the latter on account 
of their negative nature. The Family keeps away from the dead 
this dishonouring of him by unconscious appetites and abstract 
entities, and puts its own action in their place, and weds the 
blood-relation to the bosom of the earth, to the elemental 
imperishable individuality. The Family thereby makes him a 
member of a community which prevails over and holds under 
control the forces of particular material elements and the lower 
forms of life, which sought to unloose themselves against him 
and to destroy him. 
453· This last duty thus constitutes the perfect divine law, or 
the'positive ethical action towards the individual. Every other 
relationship to him which does not remain one simply of love 
but is ethical, belongs to human law and has the negative sig­
nificance of raising the individual above his confinement within 
the natural community to which he in his [natural] existence 
belongs. Now, although human right has for its content and 
power the actual ethical substance that is conscious of itself, 
i.e. the entire nation, while the divine right and law has for its 
content and power the individual who is beyond the real world, 
yet he is not without power. His power is the abstract, pure 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
universal, the elemental individual which equally draws back into 
the pure abstraction which is its essence the individuality that 
breaks loose from the element, and constitutes the self-conscious 
reality of the nation--draws it back into the essence which is 
its ground. How this power is manifested in the Notion itself, 
we shall see in the ensuing development. 
454· Now, in fhe one law as in the other there are also dif­
ferences and gradations. For since both laws have within them 
the moment of consciousness, difference is developed within the 
laws themselves, and this constitutes their movement and their 
own peculiar life. Consideration of these differences reveals the 
way in which they operate, and the mode of self-consciousness 
of the two universal essential natures of the ethical world, and 
also their connection and transition into one another. 
455· The community, the superior law whose validity is openly 
apparent, has its real vitality in the government as that in which 
it has an individual form. Government is the reality of Spirit 
that is reflected into itself, the simple self of the entire ethical 
substance. This simple power does indeed allow the Family to 
expand into its constituent members, and to give to each part 
an enduring being and a being-for-self of its own. Spirit has 
in this its reality or its objective existence, and the Family is 
the element of this reality. But Spirit is at the same time the power 
of the whole, which brings these parts together again into a 
negative unity, giving them the feeling of their lack of indepen­
dence, and keeping them aware that they have their life only 
in the whole. The community may, on the one hand, organize 
itself into systems of personal independence and property, of 
laws relating to persons and things ; and, on the other hand, 
the various ways of working for Ends which are in the first in­
stance particular Ends-those of gain and enjoyment-it may 
articulate into their own special and independent associations. 
The Spirit of universal assembly and association is the simple 
and negative essence of those systems which tend to isolate 
themselves. In order not to let them become rooted and set in 
this isolation, thereby breaking up the whole and letting the 
[communal] spirit evaporate, government has from time to 
time to shake them to their core by war. By this means the 
government upsets their established order, and violates their 
right to independence, while the individuals who, absorbed in 

T H E  ETH I CA L  ORDER 
273 
their own way of life, break loose from the whole and strive 
after the inviolable independence and security of the person, 
are made to feel in the task laid on them their lord and master, 
death. Spirit, by thus throwing into the melting-pot the stable 
existence of these systems, checks their tendency to fall away 
from the ethical order, and to be submerged in a [merely) 
natural existence; and it preserves and raises conscious self into 
freedom and its own power. The negative essence shows itself 
to be the real power of the community and the force of its self­
preservation. The community therefore possesses the truth and 
the confirmation of its power in the essence of the Divine Law 
and in the realm of the nether world. 
456. The Divine Law which governs the family has likewise 
on its side differences within itself whose interrelationships con­
stitute the living process of its actuality. But among the three 
relationships, of husband and wife, parents and children, 
brothers and sisters, the relationship of husband and wife is in 
the first place the one in which one consciousness immediately 
recognizes itself in another, and in which there is knowledge 
of this mutual recognition. Because this self-recognition is a 
natural and not an ethical one, it is only a representation, an 
image of Spirit, not actually Spirit itself. A representation or 
image, however, has its actual existence in something other 
than itself. This relationship therefore has its actual existence 
not in itself but in the child-an 'other', whose coming into 
existence is the relationship, and is also that in which the rela­
tionship itself gradually passes away ; and this alternation of 
successive generations has its enduring basis in the nation. The 
dutiful reverence of husband and wife towards each other is 
thus mixed with a natural relation and with feeling, and the 
छeturn-into-self of the relationship does not take place within 
the relationship itself; similarly with the second relationship, 
the dutiful reverence of parents and children towards one 
another. That of parents towards their children is emotionally 
affected by the fact that the objective reality of the relationship 
does not exist in them, but in the children, and by their witness­
ing the development in the children of an independent existence 
which they are unable to take back again ; the independent ex­
istence of the children remains an alien reality, a reality all its 
own. That of children towards parents is emotionally affected, 

274 
C. ( BB.) S P I R I T  
conversely, by the fact that they derive their existence from, or 
have their essential being in, what is other than themselves, and 
passes away, and by their attaining independence and a 
self-consciousness of their own only by being separated from 
their source-a separation in which the source dries up. 
457· Both these relationships are confined within the transi­
tion and the disparity of the sides which are assigned to them. 
The relationship in its unmixed form is found, however, in that 
between brother and sister. They are the same blood which has, 
however, in them reached a state of rest and equilibrium. 
Therefore, they do not desire one another, nor have they given 
to, or received from, one another this independent being-for­
self; on the contrary, they are free individualities in regard to 
each other. Consequently, the feminine, in the form of the 
sister, has the highest intuitive awareness ofwhat is ethical. She 
does not attain to consciousness of it, or to the objective existence 
ofit, because the law of the Family is an implicit, inner essence 
which is not exposed to the daylight of consciousness, but 
remains an inner feeling and the divine element that is exempt 
from an existence in the real world. The woman is associated 
with these household gods [Penates] and beholds in them both 
her universal substance and her particular individuality, yet 
in such a way that this relation of her individuality to them 
is at the same time not the natural one of desire. As a daughter, 
the woman must now see her parents pass away with a natural 
emotion and ethical resignation, for it is only at the cost of this 
relationship that she can achieve that existence of her own of 
which she is capable. Thus in the parents, she does not behold 
her own being-for-self in a positive form. The relationships of 
mother and wife, however, are those of particular individuals, 
partly in the form of something natural pertaining to desire, 
partly in the form of something negative which sees in those 
relationships only something evanescent and also, again, the 
particular individual is for that very reason a contingent ele­
ment which can be replaced by another individual. In the ethi­
cal household, it is not a question of this particular husband, 
this particular child, but simply of husband and children gener­
ally ; the relationships of the woman are based, not on feeling, 
but on the universal. The difference between the ethical life 
of the woman and that of the man consists just in this, that in 

THE ETH I C A L  O R D E R  
275 
her vocation as an individual and in her pleasure, her interest 
is centred on the universal and remains alien to the particularity 
of desire ; whereas in the husband these two sides are separated ; 
and since he possesses as a citizen the self-conscious power of 
universality, he thereby acquires the right of desire and, at the 
same time, preserves his freedom in regard to it. Since, then, 
in this relationship of the wife there is an admixture of particu­
larity, her ethical life is not pure ; but in so far as it is ethical, 
the particularity is a matter of indifference, and the wife is with­
out the moment of knowing herself as this particular self in the 
other partner. The brother, however, is for the sister a passive, 
similar being in general ; the recognition ofherselfin him is pure 
and unmixed with any natural desire. In this relationship, 
therefore, the indifference of the particularity, and the ethical 
contingency of the latter, are not present ; but the moment of 
the individual self, recognizing and being recognized, can here 
assert its right, because it is linked to the equilibrium of the 
blood and is a relation devoid of desire. The loss of the brother 
is therefore irreparable to the sister and her duty towards him 
is the highest.1 
458. This relationship is at the same time the limit at which 
the self-contained life of the Family breaks up and goes beyond 
itself. The brother is the member of the Family in whom its 
Spirit becomes an individuality which turns towards another 
sphere, and passes over into the consciousness of universality. 
The brother leaves this immediate, elemental, and therefore, 
strictly speaking, negative ethical life of the Family, in order 
to acquire and produce the ethical life that is conscious of itself 
and actual. 
459· He passes from the divine law, within whose sphere he 
lived, over to human law. But the sister becomes, or the wife 
remains, the head of the household and the guardian of the 
divine law. In this way, the two sexes overcome their [merely] 
natural being and appear in their ethical significance, as diverse 
beings who share between them the two distinctions belonging 
to the ethical substance. These two universal beings of the ethical 
world have, therefore, their specific individuality in naturally dis­
tinct self-consciousnesses, because the ethical Spirit is the imme­
diate unity of the substance with self-consciousness-an imme­
• Cf. Antigone, I. 910. 

C .  (BB. ) S PIR I T  
diacy which appears, therefore, both from the side of reality and 
of difference, as the existence of a natural difference. It is that 
side which, in the shape of individuality that is real to itself, 
showed itself in the Notion of spiritual being as an originally 
determinate nature. This moment loses the indeterminateness 
which it still has there, and the contingent diversity of disposi­
tions and capacities. It is now the specific antithesis of the two 
sexes whose natural existence acquires at the same time the sig­
nificance of their ethical determination. 
460. The difference of the sexes and their ethical content 
remains, however, in the unity of the substance, and its move­
ment is just the constant becoming of that substance. The hus­
band is sent out by the Spirit of the Family into the community 
in which he finds his self-conscious being. Just as the Family 
in this way possesses in the community its substance and endur­
ing being, so, conversely, the community possesses in the Family 
the formal element of its actual existence, and in the divine law 
its power and authentication. Neither of the two is by itself abso­
lutely valid ; human law proceeds in its living process from the 
divine, the law valid on earth from that of the nether world, 
the conscious from the unconscious, mediation from imme­
diacy-and equally returns whence it came. The power of the 
nether world, on the other hand, has its actual existence on 
earth ; through consciousness, it becomes existence and 
activity. 
46r .  The universal ethical beings are, then, the substance 
qua universal, and the substance qua an individual conscious­
ness. Their universal actuality is the nation and the Family ; 
while they have their natural self and operative individuality 
in man and woman. In this content of the ethical world we 
see achieved those ends which the previous insubstantial forms 
of consciousness set themselves ; what reason apprehended only 
as object has become self-consciousness, and what the latter pos­
sessed only within itself is now present as a true, objective 
reality. What observation knew as a given object in which the 
self had no part, is here a given custom, but a reality which 
is at the same time the deed and the work of the subject finding 
it. The individual who seeks the pleasure of enjoying his individu­
ality, finds it in the Family, and the necessity in which that 
pleasure passes away is his own self-consciousness as a citizen 

THE E T H I C A L  O R DE R  
of his nation. Or, again, it is in knowing that the law of his 
own heart is the law of all hearts, in knowing the consciousness 
of the self as the acknowledged universal order; it is virtue, 
which enjoys the fruits of its sacrifice, which brings about what 
it sets out to do, viz. to bring forth the essence into the light 
of day, and its enjoyment is this universal life. Finally, con­
sciousness of the 'matter in hand' itselffinds satisfaction in the 
real substance which contains and preserves in a positive man­
ner the abstract moments of that empty category. That sub­
stance has, in the ethical powers, a genuine content that takes 
the place of the insubstantial commandments which sound 
Reason wanted to give and to know ; and thus it gets an in­
trinsically determinate standard for testing, not the laws, but 
what is done. 
462. The whole is a stable equilibrium of all the parts, and 
each part is a Spirit at home in this whole, a Spirit which does 
not seek its satisfaction outside of itself but finds it within itself, 
because it is itself in this equilibrium with the whole. This equi­
librium can, it is true, only be a living one by inequality arising 
in it, and being brought back to equilibrium by Justice. Justice, 
however, is neither an alien entity remote from this whole, nor 
the reality (unworthy of the name of Justice) of mutual malice, 
treachery, ingratitude, etc. which would execute judgement in 
an unreasoning, arbitrary manner, by misunderstanding the 
context of the action, and by unconscious acts of omission and 
commission. On the contrary, it is the Justice of human law 
which brings back into the universal the element of being-for­
self which has broken away from the balanced whole, viz. the 
independent classes and individuals ; it is the government of the 
nation, which is the self-affirming individuality of the universal 
essence and the self-conscious will of all. The Justice, however, 
which brings back to equilibrium the universal in its ascen­
dancy over the individual is equally the simple Spirit of the 
individual who has suffered wrong; it is not split up into two, 
the one who has suffered the wrong and an entity in a remote 
beyond. The individual himself is the power of the nether 
world, and it is his Erinys, his 'fury', which wreaks vengeance. 
For his individuality, his blood, still lives on in the household, 
his substance has an enduring reality. The wrong which can 
be inflicted on the individual in the ethical realm is simply this, 

C. (BB. ) S P I R IT 
that something merely happens to him. The power which inflicts 
this wrong on the conscious individual of making him into a 
mere Thing, is Nature ; it is the universality not of the community, 
but the abstract universality of mere being; and the individual, 
in avenging the wrong he has suffered, does not turn against 
the former, for it is not at its hands that he has suffered, but 
against the latter. As we saw, the consciousness of [those who 
share] the blood of the individual repair this wrong in such a 
way that what has simply happened becomes rather a work deliber­
ately done, in order that the mere being of the wrong, its ultimate 
form,mayalsobesomethingwilledand thussomethingagreeable. 
463. The ethical realm is in this way in its enduring existence 
an immaculate world, a world unsullied by any internal dis­
sension. Similarly, its process is a tranquil transition of one of 
its powers into the other, in such a way that each preserves and 
brings forth the other. We do indeed see it divide itself into two 
essences and their reality ; but their antithesis is rather the auth­
entication of one through the other, and where they come into 
direct contact with each other as real opposites, their middle 
term and common element is their immediate interpenetration. 
The one extreme, the universal self-conscious Spirit, becomes, 
through the individuality of the man, united with its other 
extreme, its force and element, with unconscious Spirit. On the 
other hand, the divine law has its individualization--or the 
unconscious Spirit of the individual its real existence-in the 
woman, through whom, as the middle term, the unconscious 
Spirit rises out of its unreality into actual existence, out of a 
state in which it is unknowing and unconscious into the realm 
of conscious Spirit. The union of man and woman constitutes 
the active middle term of the whole and the element which 
sunders itself into these extremes of divine and human law. It 
is equally their immediate union which converts those first two 
syllogisms into one and the same syllogism, and unites into one 
process the opposite movements : one from actuality down to 
unreality, the downward movement of human law, organized 
into independent members, to the danger and trial of death ; 
and the other, the upward movement of the law of the nether 
world to the actuality of the light of day and to conscious exist­
ence. Of these movements, the former falls to man, the latter 
to woman. 

THE E T H I C A L  O R D E R  
279 
b. Ethical action. Human and Divine knowledge. Guilt and Destiny 
464. The way in which the antithesis is constituted in this 
ethical realm is such that self-consciousness has not yet received 
its due as a particular individuality. There it has the value, on 
the one hand, merely of the universal will, and on the other, 
of consanguinity. This particular individual counts only as a 
shadowy unreality. As yet, no deed has been committed ; but 
the deed is the actual self It disturbs the peaceful organization 
and movement of the ethical world. What there appears as 
order and harmony of its two essences, each of which authenti­
cates and completes the other, becomes through the deed a 
transition of opposites in which each proves itself to be the non­
reality, rather than the authentication, of itself and the other. 
It becomes the negative movement, or the eternal necessity, of 
a dreadful fate which engulfs in the abyss of its single nature 
divine and human law alike, as well as the two self-con­
sciousnesses in which these powers have their existence-and 
for us passes over into the absolute being-for-self of the purely 
individual self-consciousness. 
465. The ground from which this movement starts and on 
which it takes place, is the ethical realm ; what is active in this 
movement, however, is self-consciousness. Qua ethical con­
sciousness, it is the simple, pure direction of activity towards 
the. essentiality of ethical life, i.e. duty. In it there is no caprice 
and equally no struggle, no indecision, since the making and 
testing of law has been given up ; on the contrary, the essence 
of ethical life is for this consciousness immediate, unwavering, 
without contradiction. Consequently, we are not faced with the 
sorry spectacle of a collision between passion and duty, nor with 
the comic spectacle of a collision between duty and duty-a 
collision which, as regards its content, is the same as that 
between passion and duty ; for pa:ssion is equally capable of 
being seen as a duty, because when consciousness separates itself 
from its immediate, substantial essence and withdraws into 
itself, it becomes the merely formal universal into which one 
content as well as another fits equally well as we found before. 
But the collision of duties is comic because it expresses a con­
tradiction, viz. the contradiction of an Absolute that is opposed 
to itself: an Absolute, and then the nothingness of this so-called 

280 
C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
Absolute or duty. The ethical consciousness, however, knows 
what it has to do, and has already decided whether to belong 
to the divine or the human law. This immediate firmness of 
decision is something implicit, and therefore has at the same 
time the significance of a natural being as we have seen. Nature, 
not the accident of circumstances or choice, assigns one sex to 
one law, the other to the other law ; or conversely, the two 
ethical powers themselves give themselves an individual exist­
ence and actualize themselves in the two sexes. 
466. Now, because, on the one hand, the ethical order essen­
tially consists in this immediate firmness of decision, and for 
that reason there is for comciousness essentially only one law, 
while, on the other hand, the ethical powers are real and effec­
tive in the self of consciousness, these powers acquire the signifi­
cance of excluding and opposing one another : in self-conscious­
ness they exist explicitly, whereas in the ethical order they are 
only implicit. The ethical consciousness, because it is decisively 
for one of the two powers, is essentially character ; it does not 
accept that both have the same essential nature. For this reason, 
the opposition between them appears as an unfortunate collision 
of duty merely with a reality which possesses no rights of its 
own. The ethical consciousness is, qua self-consciousness, in this 
opposition and as such it at once proceeds to force into subjec­
tion to the law which it accepts, the reality which is opposed 
to it, or else to outwit it. Since it sees right only on one side 
and wrong on the other, that consciousness which belongs to 
the divine law sees in the other side only the violence of human 
caprice, while that which holds to human law sees in the other 
only the self-will and disobedience of the individual who insists 
on being his own authority. For the commands of government 
have a universal, public meaning open to the light of day ; the 
will of the other law, however, is locked up in the darkness of 
the nether regions, and in its outer existence manifests as the 
will of an isolated individual which, as contradicting the first, 
is a wanton outrage. 
467. In this way there arises in consciousness the antithesis 
of the known and the unknown, just as in substance there was 
anantithesisofthe conscious and the unconscious ; and the abso­
lute right of ethical self-consciousness comes into conflict with 
the divine right of essential being. For self-consciousness, qua 

THE ETH ICAL O R D E R  
consciousness, the world of objective reality as such has an 
essential being ; but according to its substance it is the unity 
of itself and this opposite ; and ethical self-consciousness is the 
consciousness of that substance ; therefore the object, in its 
opposition to the subject, has lost entirely the significance of 
having an essential being of its own. Just as those spheres in 
which it is only a Thing have long since vanished, so too have 
these spheres in which consciousness gives a fixed existence to 
something from out of itself and converts an isolated moment 
into essence. Against such one-sidedness, the actual world has 
a power of its own ; it stands leagued with truth against con­
sciousness, and itself shows the latter what truth is. The ethical 
consciousness, however, has drunk from the cup of substance 
and has forgotten all the one-sidedness of being-for-self, of its 
ends and peculiar notions, and has, therefore, at the same time 
drowned in this Stygian water all essentiality of its own, and 
all independence of the objective, actual world. Its absolute 
right is, therefore, that when it acts in accordance with ethical 
law, it shall find in this actualization nothing else but the fulfil­
ment of this law itself, and the deed shall manifest only ethical 
action. डNhat is ethical, being at once absolute essence and abso­
lute power, cannot suffer any perversion of its content. If it were 
only absolute essence without power, it could suffer perversion 
by the individuality ; but this, as an ethical consciousness, when 
it gave up its one-sided being-for-self, renounced its right to per­
vert the content ; just as, conversely, mere power would be per­
verted by essence if it were a one-sided being-for-self. On 
account of this unity, the individuality is the pure form of sub­
stance which is the content, and the action is the transition from 
thought to actuality merely as the movement of an insubstantial 
antithesis whose moments have no particular, distinctive con­
tent and no essentiality of their own. Consequently, the absolute 
right of the ethical consciousness is that the deed, the shape in 
which it actualizes itself, shall be nothing else but what it knows. 
468. But the ethical essence has split itself into two laws, and 
consciousness, as an undivided attitude towards law, is assigned 
only to one. Just as this simple, unitary consciousness insists, 
as its absolute right, that the essence has appeared to it, qua ethi­
cal, as the essence is in iise/j, so too this essence insists on the 
right belonging to its reality, or on its own right to be a twofold 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
essence. But at the same time this right of the essence does not 
stand over against self-consciousness, as if the essence existed 
somewhere else ; on the contrary, it is self-consciousness's own 
essence ; it has its existence and its power in self-consciousness 
alone, and its antithesis is the act of self-consciousness itself. For 
this latter,just because it is a selfto itself and advances to action, 
raises itself out of simple immediacy, and spontaneously splits 
itselfinto two. By this act it gives up the specific quality of the 
ethical life, of being the simple certainty of immediate truth, 
and initiates the division of itself into itself as the active prin­
ciple, and into the reality over against it, a reality which, for 
it, is negative. By the deed, therefore, it becomes guilt. For the 
deed is its own doing, and 'doing' is its inmost nature. And the 
guilt also acquires the meaning of crime ; for as simple, ethical 
consciousness, it has turned towards one law, but turned its 
back on the other and violates the latter by its deed. Guilt is 
not an indifferent, ambiguous affair, as if the deed as actually 
seen in the light of day could, or perhaps could not, be the action 
of the self, as if with the doing of it there could be linked some­
thing external and accidental that did not belong to it, from 
which aspect, therefore, the action would be innocent. On the 
contrary, the action is itself this splitting into two, this explicit 
self-affirmation and the establishing over against itself of an 
alien external reality ; that there is such a reality, this stems from 
the action itself and results from it. Innocence, therefore, is 
merely non-action, like the mere being of a stone, not even that 
of a child. As regards content, however, the ethical action con­
tains the moment of crime, because it does not do away with 
the natural allocation of the two laws to the two sexes, but rather, 
being an undivided attitude towards the law, remains within 
the sphere of natural immediacy, and, qua action, turns this one­
sidedness into guilt by seizing on only one side of the essence, 
and adopting a negative attitude towards the other, i.e. violat­
ing it. The place in the universal ethical life of guilt and crime, 
of deeds and actions, will find more definite expression later ; 
but this much is immediately evident, that it is not this particu­
lar individual who acts and is guilty ; for as this self he is only 
the unreal shadow, or he exists merely as a universal self, and 
individuality is purely the formal moment of the action as such, 
the content being the laws and customs which, for the indivi-

T H E  E T H I C A L  ORDER 
dual, are those of his class and station. He is the Substance qua 
genus, which by its determinateness, becomes indeed a species, 
though the species remains at the same time the universal of 
the genus. Self-consciousness within the nation descends from 
the universal only as far down as mere particularity, and not 
down to the single individuality which posits an exclusive self, 
an actual existence which in its action is negative towards itself. 
On the contrary, its action rests on secure confidence in the 
whole, unmixed with any alien element, neither with fear nor 
hostility. 
469. Ethical self-consciousness now learns from its deed the 
developed nature of what it actually did, as much when it 
obeyed divine law as when it followed human law. The law 
that is manifest to it is linked in the essence with its opposite ; 
the essence is the unity of both ; but the deed has only carried 
out one law in contrast to the other. But the two laws being 
linked in the essence, the fulfilment of the one evokes the other 
and-the deed having made it so-calls it forth as a violated 
and now hostile entity demanding revenge. In the action, only 
one aspect of the resolve as such is clearly manifest. The resolve, 
however, is in itself the negative aspect which confronts the 
resolve with an 'other', with something alien to the resolve 
which knows what it does. Actuality therefore holds concealed 
within it the other aspect which is alien to this knowledge, and 
does not reveal the whole truth about itself to consciousness: 
the son does not recognize his father in the man who has 
wronged him and whom he slays, nor his mother in the queen 
whom he makes his wife. In this way, a power which shuns the 
light of day ensnares the ethical self-consciousness, a power 
which breaks forth only after the deed is done, and seizes the 
doer in the act. For the accomplished deed is the removal of 
the antithesis between the knowing self and the actuality con­
fronting it. The doer cannot deny the crime or his guilt : the 
significance of the deed is that what was unmoved has been 
set in motion, and that what was locked up in mere possibility 
has been brought out into the open, hence to link together the 
unconscious and the conscious, non-being with being. In this 
truth, therefore, the deed is brought out into the light of day, 
as something in which the conscious is bound up with the un­
conscious, what is one's own with what is alien to it, as an entity 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
divided within itself, whose other aspect consciousness experi­
ences and also finds to be its own, but as the power it has vio­
lated and roused to hostility. 
470. It can be that the right which lay in wait is not present 
in its own proper shape to the consciousness of the doer, but is 
present only implicitly in the inner guilt of the resolve and the 
action. But the ethical consciousness is more complete, its guilt 
more inexcusable, if it knows beforehand the law and the power 
which it opposes, if it takes them to be violence and wrong, 
to be ethical merely by accident, and, like Antigone, knowingly 
commits the crime. The accomplished deed completely alters 
its point of view ; the very performance of it declares that what 
is ethical must be actual; for the realization of the purpose is the 
purpose of the action. Doing directly expresses the unity of actu­
ality and substance ; it declares that actuality is not an accident 
of essence, but that, in union with essence, it is not granted to 
any right that is not a true right. The ethical consciousness 
must, on account of this actuality and on account of its deed, 
acknowledge its opposite as its own actuality, must acknow­
ledge its guilt. 
Because we suffer we acknowledge we have erred.1 
471. With this acknowledgement there is no longer any con­
flict between ethical purpose and actuality ; it signifies the 
return to an ethical frame of mind, which knows that nothing 
counts but right. But the doer thereby surrenders his own 
character and the reality of his self, and has been ruined. His being 
consists in his belonging to his ethical law, as his substance ; 
in acknowledging the opposite law, the other ceases to be for 
him his substance, and instead of attaining actuality it has 
become an unreality, a sentiment or disposition. The substance 
does appear, it is true, in the individuality as his 'pathos', and 
the individuality appears as that which animates the substance 
and hence stands above it ; but the substance is a 'pathos' that 
is at the same time his character. The ethical individuality is 
directly and intrinsically one with this his universal aspect, 
exists in it alone, and is incapable of surviving the destruction 
of this ethical power by its opposite. 
472. But at the same time, this individuality has the certainty 
that that individuality whose 'pathos' is this opposing power 
'Antigone, I. 926. 

T H E  ETH I C A L  ORDER 
suffers no more injury than it has inflicted. The movement of 
the ethical powers against each other and of the individualities 
calling them into life and action have attained their true end 
only in so far as both sides suffer the same destruction. For 
neither power has any advantage over the other that would 
make it a more essential moment of the substance. The equal 
essentiality of both and their indifferent existence alongside 
each other means that they are without a self. In the deed they 
exist as beings with a self, but with a diverse self; and this con­
tradicts the unity gf the self, and constitutes their unrighteous­
ness and necessary destruction. Character likewise, in respect 
of its 'pathos' or substance, in part belongs to one only; in part, 
from the aspect of knowing, the one character like the other 
is split up into a conscious and an unconscious part; and since 
each itself calls forth this opposition and its not-knowing is, 
through the deed, its own affair, each is responsible for the guilt 
which destroys it. The victory of one power and its character, 
and the defeat of the other, would thus be only the part and 
the incomplete work which irresistibly advances to the equilib­
rium of the two. Only in the downfall of both sides alike is abso­
lute right accomplished, and the ethical substance as the nega­
tive power which engulfs both sides, that is, omnipotent and 
righteous Destiny, steps on the scene. 
4 73· lfboth powers are taken according to their specific con­
tent and its individualization, we are presented with the picture 
of the conflict between them in their individual forms. On its 
formal side, it is the conflict of the ethical order and self-con­
sciousness with unconscious Nature and the contingency stem­
ming from Nature. The latter has a right against the former, 
because this is only true Spirit, is only in an immediate unity with 
its substance. On the side of content, it is the clash between 
divine and human law. The youth comes away from the uncon­
scioy.s Spirit of the Family, and becomes the individuality of 
the community. But that he still belongs to the Nature from 
which he wrenched himself free is evidenced by the fact that 
he emerges in the contingent form of two brothers, each of 
whom with equal right takes possession of the community; the 
inequality of the earlier and later birth, an inequality which 
is a natural difference, has no importance for them when they 
enter the ethical life of the community. But the government, 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
as the unitary soul or the self of the national Spirit, does not 
tolerate a duality of individuality·; and the ethical necessity of 
this unity is confronted by the natural accident of there being 
more than one. These two brothers therefore fall into dispute 
and their equal right to the power of the state destroys them 
both, for they were equally wrong. Looked at from the human 
point of view, the one who has committed the crime is the one 
who, not being in actual possession, attacks the community at 
the head of which the other stood, while, on the other hand, 
he has right on his side who knew how to apprehend the other 
merely as an isolated individual, detached from the com­
munity, and, taking advantage of his powerlessness, banished 
him ; he has struck only at the individual as such, not the com­
munity, not at the essence of human right. The community, 
attacked and defended by what is merely particular, and so 
without a substantial content, preserves itself, and the brothers 
bring about their own destruction through their reciprocal 
action. For individuality, which for the sake of its being-for­
self, puts the whole in peril, has expelled itself from the com­
munity, and is the source of its own destruction. The com­
munity, however, will honour the one who was found on its 
side ; but the government, the restored unitary self of the 
community, will punish him who already proclaimed its 
devastation on the walls of the city, by depriving him of the 
last honour. He who wantonly attacked the Spirit's highest 
form of consciousness, the Spirit of the community, must be 
stripped of the honour of his entire and finished being, the 
honour due to the Spirit of the departed. 
474· But if the universal thus easily knocks off the very tip 
of the pyramid and, indeed, carries off the victory over the 
rebellious principle of pure individuality, viz. the Family, it has 
thereby merely entered on a conflict with the divine law, a con­
flict of self-conscious Spirit with what is unconscious. For the 
latter is the other essential power, and is therefore not de­
stroyed, but merely wronged, by the conscious Spirit. But it 
has only the bloodless shade to help it in actually carrying out 
its law in face of the power and authority of that other, publicly 
manifest law. Being the law of weakness and darkness it there­
fore at first succumbs to the powerful law of the upper world, 
for the power of the former is effective in the underworld, not 

T H E  ETH I C A L  O R D E R  
on earth. But the outwardly actual which has taken away from 
the inner world its honour and power has in so doing consumed 
its own essence. The publicly manifest Spirit has the root of 
its power in the nether world. The self-certainty and self­
assurance of a nation possesses the truth of its oath, which binds 
all into one, solely in the mute unconscious substance of all, 
in the waters of forgetfulness. Thus it is that the fulfilment of 
the Spirit of the upper world is transformed into its opposite, 
and it learns that its supreme right is a supreme wrong, that 
its victory is rather its own downfall. The dead, whose right 
is denied, knows therefore how to find instruments of ven­
geance, which are equally effective and powerful as the power 
which has injured it. These powers are other communities 
whose altars the dogs or birds defiled with the corpse, which 
is not raised into unconscious universality by being given back, 
as is its due, to the elemental individuality [the earth], but 
remains above ground in the realm of outer reality, and has 
now acquired as a force of divine law a self-conscious, real 
universality. They rise up in hostility and destroy the com­
munity which has dishonoured and shattered its own power, 
the sacred claims of the Family. 
475· In this representation, the movement of human and 
divine law finds its necessity expressed in individuals in whom 
the universal appears as a 'pathos', and the activity of the move­
ment appears as the action of individuals, which gives the 
appearance of contingency to the necessity of the activity. But 
individuality and action constitute the principle of individu­
ality as such, a principle which in its pure universality was called 
inner divine law. As a moment of the visible community its 
activity is not confined merely to the underworld, or to its outer 
existence, but it has an equally visible existence and movement 
in the actual nation. Taken in this form, what was represented 
as a simple movement of the individualized 'pathos' acquires 
a different look, and the crime and consequent destruction of 
the community acquire the proper and characteristic form of 
their existence. Human law in its universal existence is the com­
munity, in its activity in general is the manhood of the com­
munity, in its real and effective activity is the government. It 
is, moves, and maintains itself by consuming and absorbing into 
itself the separatism of the Penates, or the separation into 

288 
C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
independent families presided over by womankind, and by keep­
ing them dissolved in the fluid continuity of its own nature. But 
the Family is, at the same time, in general its element, the in­
dividual consciousness the basis of its general activity. Since the 
community only gets an existence through its interference with 
the happiness of the Family, and by dissolving [individual] self­
consciousness into the universal, it creates for itself in what it 
suppresses and what is at the same time essential to it an internal 
enemy-womankind in general. Womankind-the everlasting 
irony [in the life] of the community--changes by intrigue the 
universal end of the government into a private end, transforms 
its universal activity into a work of some particular individual, 
and perverts the universal property of the state into a possession 
and ornament for the Family. Woman in this way turns to ridi­
cule the earnest wisdom of mature age which, indifferent to 
purely private pleasures and enjoyments, as well as to playing 
an active part, only thinks of and cares for the universal. She 
makes this wisdom an object of derision for raw and irrespon­
sible youth and unworthy of their enthusiasm. In general, she 
maintains that it is the power of youth that really counts : the 
worth of the son lies in his being the lord and master of the 
mother who bore him, that of the brother as being one in whom 
the sister finds man on a level of equality, that of the youth 
as being one through whom the daughter, freed from her depen­
dence [on the family] obtains the enjoyment and dignity of 
wifehood. The community, however, can only maintain itself 
by suppressing this spirit of individualism, and, because it is 
an essential moment, all the same creates it and, moreover, cre­
ates it by its repressive attitude towards it as a hostile principle. 
However, this principle, being merely evil and futile in its 
separation from the universal end, would be quite ineffectual 
if the community itself did not recognize the power of youth 
(the manhood which, while immature, still stands within the 
sphere of individuality), as the power of the whole. For the com­
munity is a nation, is itself an individuality, and essentially is 
only such for itself by other individualities being for it, by 
excluding them from itself and knowing itself to be independent 
of them. The negative side of the community, suppressing the 
isolation of individuals within it, but spontaneously active in an 
outward direction, finds its weapons in individuality. War is the 

THE ETH I CA L  ORDER 
Spirit and the form in which the essential moment of the ethical 
substance, the absolute freedom of the ethical self from every 
existential form, is present in its actual and authentic existence. 
While, on the one hand, war makes the individual systems of 
property and personal independence, as well as the personality 
of the individual himself, feel the power of the negative, on the 
other hand, this negativity is prominent in war as that which 
preserves the whole. The brave youth in whom woman finds 
her pleasure, the suppressed principle of corruption, now has 
his day and his worth is openly acknowledged. Now, it is physi­
cal strength and what appears as a matter of luck, that decides 
on the existence of ethical life and spiritual necessity. Because 
the existence of ethical life rests on strength and luck, the decision 
is already made that its downfall has come. Just as previously only 
the Penates succumbed to the national Spirit, so now the living 
Spirits of the nation succumb through their own individuality 
and perish in a universal community, whose simple universality 
is soulless and dead, and is alive only in the single individual, 
qua single. The ethical shape of Spirit has vanished and another 
takes its place. 
4 76. This ruin of the ethical Substance and its passage into 
another form is thus determined by the fact that the ethical 
consciousness is directed on to the law in a way that is essentially 
immediate. This determination of immediacy means that Nature 
as such enters into the ethical act, the reality of which simply 
reveals the contradiction and the germ of destruction inherent 
in the beautiful harmony and tranquil equilibrium of the ethi­
cal Spirit itself. For this immediacy has the contradictory mean­
ing ofbeing the unconscious tranquillity of Nature, and also the 
self-conscious restless tranquillity of Spirit. On account of this 
natural aspect, this ethical nation is, in general, an individuality 
determined by Nature and therefore limited, and thus meets 
its downfall at the hands of another. But with the vanishing 
of this determinateness-which in the form of a real existence is 
a limitation, but equally the negative element in general and the 
self of the individuality-the life of Spirit and this Substance, 
which is self-conscious in everyone, is lost. The substance emerges 
as a formal universality in them, no longer dwelling in them as a 
living Spirit ; on the contrary, the simple compactness of their in­
dividuality has been shattered into am ulti tude of separate atoms. 

:zgo 
C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
c. Legal status 
477· The universal unity into which the living immediate 
unity of individuality and substance withdraws is the soulless 
community which has ceased to be the substance-itself uncon­
scious--of individuals, and in which they now have the value 
of selves and substances, possessing a separate being-for-self. 
The universal being thus split up into a mere multiplicity of 
individuals, this lifeless Spirit is an equality, in which all count 
the same, i.e. as persons. What in the world of the ethical order 
was called the hidden divine law, has in fact emerged from 
its inward state into actuality; in the former state the individual 
was actual, and counted as such, merely as a blood-relation of 
the family. As this particular individual, he was the departed 
spirit devoid of a self; now, however, he has emerged from his 
unreal existence. Because the ethical substance is only the true 
Spirit, the individual therefore withdraws into the certainty of 
his own self; he is that substance as the positive universal, but 
his actuality consists in his being a negative universal self. We 
saw the powers and shapes of the ethical world swallowed up 
in the simple necessity of a blank Destiny. This power of the 
ethical world is the substance reflected into its simple unitary 
nature; but that being which is reflected back into itself, that 
very necessity of blank Destiny, is nothing else but the 'I' of 
self-consciousness. 
4 78. This, therefore, counts henceforth as a being that is 
in and for itself. To be so acknowledged is its substantiality. 
But it is an abstract universality because its content is this 
rigid unyielding self, not the self that is dissolved in the 
substance. 
4 79· Personality, then, has stepped out of the life of the ethi­
cal substance. It is the independence of consciousness, an inde­
pendence which has actual validity. The non-actual thought of 
it which came from renouncing the actual world appeared 
earlier as the Stoical self-consciousness. Just as this proceeded 
from lordship and bondage, as the immediate existence of self­
consciousness, so personality has proceeded from the immediate 
life of Spirit, which is the universal dominating will of all, and 
equally their service of obedience. What was for Stoicism only 
the abstraction of an intrinsic reality is now an actual world. Stoi-

THE ETH I CA L  O R D E R  
cism is nothing else but the consciousness which reduces to its 
abstract form the principle of legal status, an independence that 
lacks the life of Spirit. By its flight from the actual world it 
attained only to the thought of independence ; it is absolutely 
for itself, in that it does not attach its being to anything that 
exists, but claims to give up everything that exists and places 
its essence solely in the unity of pure thought. In the same 
way, the right of a person is not tied to a richer or more 
powerful existence of the individual as such, nor again to a 
universal living Spirit, but rather to the pure One of its 
abstract actuality, or to that One qua self-consciousness in 
general. 
480. Now, justas the abstract independence of Stoicism exhib­
ited [the process of] its actualization, so too will this last form 
of independence [=personality] reca pi tula te the process of the 
first form. The former passes over into the sceptical confusion 
of consciousness, into a negative rambling which, lacking any 
stable form, strays fortuitously from one form of being and 
thought to another, dissolving them, it is true, in [its] absolute 
independence but no less recreating them ; it is, in fact, merely 
the contradiction of a consciousness which is at once indepen­
dent and dependent. Personal independence in the sphere of 
legal right is really a similar general confusion and reciprocal 
dissolution of this kind. For what counts as absolute, essential 
being is self-consciousness as the sheer empty unit of the person. 
In contrast to this empty universality, substance has the form 
ofjulness and content, and this content is now set free and is un­
organized ; for the Spirit that subdued it and held it together 
in its unity is no longer present. This empty unit of the person 
is, therefore, in its reality a contingent existence, and essentially 
a process and an action that comes to no lasting result. Like 
Scepticism, the formalism of legal right is thus by its very nature 
without a peculiar content of its own ; it finds before it a mani­
fold existence in the form of 'possession' and, as Scepticism did, 
stamps it with the same abstract universality, whereby it is 
called 'property'. But whereas in Scepticism the reality so deter­
mined is called an illusory appearance and has only a negative 
value, in legal right it has a positive value. That negative value 
consists in the actual having the significance of the self qua 
thought, qua the implicit universal ; the positive value in the case 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
of legal right, however, consists in its being mine in the sense 
of the category, as something whose validity is recognized and 
actual. Both are the same abstract universal. The actual content 
or the specific character of what is mine-whether it be an 
external possession, or also the inner riches or poverty of spirit 
and character-is not contained in this empty form, and does 
not concern it. The content belongs, therefore, to an autono­
mous power, which is something different from the formal uni­
versal, to a power which is arbitrary and capricious. Conscious­
ness of right, therefore, in the very fact of being recognized as 
having validity, experiences rather the loss of its reality and its 
complete inessentiality ; and to describe an individual as a 'per­
son' is an expression of contempt. 
48r .  The free power of the content determines itself in such 
a way that the dispersion of the content into a sheer multiplicity 
of personal atoms is, by the nature of this determinateness, at 
the same time gathered into a single point, alien to them and 
soulless as well. This single point is, on the one hand, like the 
unyielding rigidity of their personality, a merely single per­
sonality ; but in contrast to their empty singleness, it has at the 
same time the significance for them of the whole content, hence 
of real essence, and as against their presumedly absolute, but 
intrinsically essenceless, reality it is absolute power and absolute 
actuality. This lord and master of the world holds himself in 
this way to be the absolute person, at the same time embracing 
within himself the whole of existence, the person for whom there 
exists no superior Spirit. He is a person, but the solitary person 
who stands over against all the rest. These constitute the real 
authoritative universality of that person ; for the single indivi­
dual as such is true only as a universal multiplicity of single 
individuals. Cut off from this multiplicity, the solitary self is, 
in fact, an unreal, impotent self. At the same time it is the con­
sciousness of the content which has placed itself in antithesis 
to that universal personality. But this content, liberated from 
the negative power controlling it, is the chaos of spiritual powers 
which, in their unfettered freedom, become elemental beings 
raging madly against one another in a frenzy of destructive 
activity. Their impotent self-consciousness is the defenceless 
enclosed arena of their tumult. In this knowledge of himself as 
the sum and substance of all actual powers, this lord and master 

THE ETH I CA L  O R D E R  
293 
ofthe world is the titanic self-consciousness that thinks of itself 
as being an actual living god. But since he is only the formal 
selfwhich is unable to tame those powers, his activities and self­
enjoyment are equally monstrous excesses. 
482. The lord of the world becomes really conscious of what 
he is, viz. the universal power of the actual world, in the destruc­
tive power he exercises against the self of his subjects, the self 
which stands over against him. For his power is not the union 
and harmony of Spirit in which persons would recognize their 
own self-consciousness. Rather they exist, as persons, on their 
own account, and exclude any continuity with others from the 
rigid unyieldingness of their atomicity. They exist, therefore, 
in a merely negative relationship, both to one another and to 
him who is their bond of connection or continuity. As this conti­
nuity, he is the essence and the content of their merely formal 
self, but a content alien to them, and a hostile being which in 
reality deprives them of that very thing which they regard as 
their essential nature, viz. the completely empty form of being­
for-self; and, again, as the continuity of their personality, he 
destroys this very personality itself. Legal personality thus 
learns rather that it is without any substance, since the alien 
content makes itself authoritative in it, and does so because that 
content is the reality of such personality. On the other hand, 
by indulging in this destructive activity in this insubstantial 
arena, the lord of the world obtains for himself the consciousness 
of his complete supremacy. However, this self is a mere laying­
waste of everything and therefore merely beside itself, and is 
really the abandonment of its own self-consciousness. 
483. Such, then, is the constitution of that aspect in which 
self-consciousness, qua absolute Being, is actual. But the con­
sciousness that is driven back into itself from this actuality ponders 
this its inessential nature. Earlier we saw the Stoical indepen­
dence of pure thought pass through Scepticism and find its truth 
in the Unhappy Consciousness-the truth about what con­
stitutes its own true being. If this knowledge appeared then 
merely as the one-sided view of consciousness as consciousness, 
here the actual truth of that view has become apparent. This 
truth consists in the fact that this universally acknowledged authority 
of self-consciousness is the reality from which it is alienated. 
This acknowledgement ofits authority is the universal actuality 

294 
C .  ( B B. ) S P I R IT 
of the self; but this actuality is directly the perversion of the 
self as well ; it is the loss of its essence. The actuality of the self 
that did not exist in the ethical world has been won by its return 
in to the 'person' ; what in the former was harmoniously one now 
emerges in a developed form, but as alienated from itself 
B .  S E L F - A L I E N A T E D  S P I R I T. 
C U L T U R E  
484. The ethical Substance kept the antithesis confined 
within its simply unitary consciousness, and preserved this con­
sciousness in an immediate unity with its essence. Essence has, 
therefore, the simple determinateness of mere being for con­
sciousness, which is directed immediately upon it, and is the 
essence in the form of custom. Consciousness neither thinks of 
itself as this particular exclusive self, nor has substance the 
significance of an existence excluded from it, with which 
it would have to become united only by alienating itself from 
itself and at the same time producing the substance itself. But 
the Spirit whose self is an absolutely discrete unit has its content 
confronting it as an equally hard unyielding reality, and here 
the world has the character of being something external, the 
negative of self-consciousness. This world is, however, a spiri­
tual entity, it is in itself the interfusion of being and individu­
ality ; this its existence is the work of self-consciousness, but it 
is also an alien reality already present and given, a reality which 
has a being of its own and in which it does not recognize itself. 
This real world is the external essence and the free content of 
legal right. But this external world, which the lord of the world 
oflegal right takes to himself, is not merely this elemental being 
confronting the self as something contingently given ; on the 
contrary, it is his work, but not in a positive, rather in a nega­
tive, sense. It obtains its existence through self-consciousness's 
own externalization and separation of itself from its essence 
which, in the ruin and devastation which prevail in the world 
oflegal right, seems to inflict on self-consciousness from without, 
the violence of the Iibera ted elements. These by themselves are 
sheer ruin and devastation and the dissolution of themselves. 
This dissolution, however, this negative nature of theirs, is just 
the self; it is their subject, their activity, and their process. But 
this activity and process whereby the substance becomes actual 

C U L T U R E  
295 
is the alienation of the personality, for the self that has an abso­
lute significance in its immediate existence, i.e. without having 
alienated itself from itself, is without substance, and is the 
plaything of those raging elements. Its substance, therefore, is 
its externalization, and the externalization is the substance, i.e. 
the spiritual powers ordering themselves into a world and 
thereby preserving themselves. 
485. Substance is in this way Spirit, the self-conscious unity 
of the self and essence ; each has for the other the significance 
of alienation. Spirit is the consciousness of an objective real world 
freely existing on its own account ;  but this consciousness is con­
fronted by the unity of the self and essence, actual consciousness 
by pure consciousness. On the one side, actual self-consciousness, 
through its externalization, passes over into the actual world, 
and the latter back into actual self-consciousness. On the other 
side, this same actuality-both person and objectivity-is 
superseded ; they are purely universal. This their alienation is 
pure consciousness or essence. The present actual world has its anti­
thesis directly in its beyond, which is both the thinking of it and 
its thought-form, just as the beyond has in the present world 
its actuality, but an actuality alienated from it. 
486. Consequently, this Spirit constructs for itself not merely 
a world, but a world that is double, divided and self-opposed. 
The world of the ethical Spirit is its own present world ; and 
therefore each of its powers exists in this unity, and in so far 
as they are distinct from one another they are in equilibrium 
with the whole. Nothing has the significance ofbeing the nega­
tive of self-consciousness ; even the departed spirit is present in 
his blood-relationship, in the self of the family, and the universal 
power of the government is the will, the self of the nation. Here, 
however, what is present has the significance only of an objective 
reality, the consciousness of which exists in a beyond ; each 
single moment qua essence receives this, and with it actuality, 
from an 'other', and so far as it is actual, its essence is something 
other than its own actuality. Nothing has a Spirit that is 
grounded within itself and indwells it, but each has its being 
in something outside of and alien to it. The equilibrium of the 
whole is not the unity which remains with itself, nor the con­
tentment that comes from having returned into itself, but rests 
on the alienation of opposites. The whole, therefore, like each 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
single moment, is a self-alienated actuality ; it falls apart into 
a realm in which self-consciousness as well as its object is actllill, 
and into another, the realm of pure consciousness which, lying 
beyond the first, is not a present actuality but exists only for 
Faith. Now, just as the ethical world which is separated into 
divine and human law in their various forms, and its conscious­
ness which is separated into knowing and not-knowing, returns 
from that dividedness into its destiny, into the self as the negative 
power of this antithesis, so these two realms of the self-alienated 
Spirit will also return into the self; but if the former was the 
first, merely immediately valid self, the single person, this second 
realm, which returns out of its externalization into itself, will 
be the universal self, the consciousness which has grasped its 
Notion, and these spiritual worlds, all of whose moments insist 
on a fixed actuality and non-spiritual existence of their own, 
will dissolve in pure intellectual insight. This insight, as the self 
that apprehends itself, completes [the stage of] culture ; it appre­
hends nothing but self and everything as self, i.e. it comprehends 
everything, wipes out the objectivity of things and converts all 
intrinsic being into a being for itself. In its hostility to Faith as 
the alien realm of essence lying in the beyond, it is the Enlighten­
ment. This Enlightenment completes the alienation of Spirit 
in this realm, too, in which that Spirit takes refuge and where 
it is conscious of an unruffled peace. It upsets the housekeeping 
of Spirit in the household of Faith by bringing into that house­
hold the tools and utensils of this world, a world which that 
Spirit cannot deny is its own, because its consciousness likewise 
belongs to it. In this negative activity pure insight at the same 
time realizes itself, and produces its own object, the unknowable 
absolute Being and the principle of utility. Since in this way actu­
ality has lost all substantiality and nothing in it has intrinsic 
being, not only the realm of Faith, but also the realm of the 
actual world, is overthrown. This revolution gives birth to abso­
lute freedom, and with this freedom the previously alienated 
Spirit has completely returned into itself, has abandoned this 
region of culture and passes on to another region, the region 
of the moral consciousness. 
I .  
T H E  W O R L D  O F  S E L F - A L I E N A T E D  S P I R I T 
487. The world of this Spirit breaks up into two. The first 

C U L T U R E  
297 
is the world of reality or of its self-alienation ; but the other is 
that which Spirit, rising above the first, constructs for itself in 
the Aether of pure consciousness. This second world, standing 
in antithesis to that alienation, is for that very reason not free 
from it ; on the contrary, it is really only the other form of that 
alienation which consists precisely in being conscious of two dif­
ferent worlds, and which embraces both. Therefore, it is not 
the self-consciousness of absolute being as it is in and for itself, 
not religion, that is here dealt with but Faith, so far as this is 
ajlight from the real world and thus is not in and for itself. This 
flight from the realm of the present is, therefore, in its own self 
dual-natured. Pure consciousness is the element into which 
Spirit raises itself, but it is not only the element of Faith, but 
equally of the Notion. Consequently, both together make their 
appearance at the same time, and the former comes into con­
sideration only in its antithesis to the latter. 
a. Culture and its realm of actuality 
488. The Spirit of this world is a spiritual essence that is per­
meated by a self-consciousness which knows itself, and knows 
the essence as an actuality confronting it. But the existence of 
this world, as also the actuality of self-consciousness, rests on 
the process in which the latter divests itself of its personality, 
thereby creating its world. This world it looks on as something 
alien, a world, therefore, of which it must now take possession. 
But the renunciation of its being-for-self is itself the product of 
the actual world, and by this renunciation, therefore, self-con­
sciousness directly takes possession of this world. Or we may 
say that self-consciousness is merely a 'something', it has actu­
ality only in so far as it alienates itself from itself; by so doing, 
it gives itself the character of a universal, and this its universality 
is its authentication and actuality. This equality with everyone 
is, therefore, not the equality of the sphere of legal right, not 
that immediate recognition and validity of self-consciousness 
simply because it is ; on the contrary, to be valid it must have 
conformed itself to the universal by the mediating process of 
alienation. The non-spiritual universality of the sphere of legal 
right accepts every natural form of character as well as of exist­
ence and justifies them. The universality which counts here, 

C .  (BB . )  S P I R I T  
however, is one that has made itself what it is and for that reason 
is actual. 
489. It is therefore through culture that the individu().l 
acquires standing and actuality. His true original nature and sub­
stance is the alienation of himself as Spirit from his natural being. 
This externalization is, therefore, both the purpose and the ex­
istence of the individual ; it is at once the means, or the transition, 
both of the [mere] thought-form of substance into actuality, and, 
conversely, of the specific individuality into essentiality. This indivi­
duality moulds itself by culture into what it intrinsically is, and 
only by so doing is it an intrinsic being that has an actual exist­
ence ; the measure of its culture is the measure of its actuality 
and power. Although here the self knows itself as this self, yet 
its actuality consists solely in the setting-aside of its natural self. 
Consequently, the originally specific nature is reduced to the un­
essential difference of quantity, to a greater or lesser energy of 
will. But the purpose and content of the will belong solely to 
the universal substance itself and can only be a universal. The 
particularity of a nature which becomes purpose and content is 
something powerless and unreal ; it is a 'kind' of being which 
vainly and ridiculously strains every nerve to get going ; it is 
the contradiction of giving to what is particular an actuality 
which is immediately a universal. If, therefore, individuality 
is erroneously supposed to be rooted in the particularity of nature 
and character, then in the actual world there are no individuali­
ties and no characters, but everyone is like everyone else ; but 
this presumed individuality really only exists in someone's 
mind, an imaginary existence which has no abiding place in this 
world, where only that which externalizes itself, and, therefore, 
only the universal, obtains an actual existence. That is why such 
an imagined existence is esteemed for what it is, for a kind of 
being. 'Kind' is not quite the same as espece, 'the most horrid 
of all nicknames ; for it denotes mediocrity and expresses the 
highest degree ofcontempt'.1 'Kind' and 'good of its kind' are, 
however, German expressions which add an air of honesty to 
this meaning, as ifit were not really meant so badly ; or, again, 
consciousness is, in fact, not yet aware what 'kind', and what 
'culture' and 'reality' are. 
490. What, in relation to the single individual, appears as his 
1 Diderot, Nephew of Rameau. 

C U L T U R E  
299 
culture, is the essential moment of the substance itself, viz. the 
immediate passage of the [mere] thought-form of its uni­
versality into actuality ; or, culture is the simple soul of the 
substance by means of which, what is implicit in the substance, 
acquires an acknowledged, real existence. The process in which the 
individuality moulds itself by culture is, therefore, at the same 
time the development of it as the universal, object'ive essence, 
i.e. the development of the actual world. Although this world 
has come into being through individuality, it is for self-con­
sciousness immediately an alienated world which has the form 
of a fixed and solid reality over against it. But at the same time, 
certain that this world is its substance, it sets about making it 
its own. It gains this power over it through culture which, 
looked at from this aspect, has the appearance of self-conscious­
ness making itself conform to reality, and doing so to the extent 
that the energy of its original character and talent permits. 
What appears here as the power and authority of the individual 
ext>rcised over the substance, which is thereby superseded, is 
the same thing as the actualization of the substance. For the 
power of the individual consists in conforming itself to that sub­
stance, i.e. in externalizing its own self and thus establishing 
itself as substance that has an objective existence. Its culture 
and its own actuality are, therefore, the actualization of the sub­
stance itself. 
49 1. The self knows itself as actual only as a transcended self. 
Therefore, it is not constituted by the unity of consciousness of 
itself and the object ; on the contrary, the object is, for the self, 
its negative. Thus, by means of the self as soul of the process, 
substance is so moulded and developed in its moments that one 
opposite stirs the other into life, each by its alienation from the 
other gives it an existence and equally receives from it an exist­
ence of its own. At the same time, each moment possesses its 
own specific nature as something unchallengeably valid and as 
a firm reality vis-a-vis the other. Thinking fixes this difference 
in the most general way by the absolute antithesis of good and 
bad which, shunning each other, cannot in any way become 
one and the same. The soul of this fixed being, however, is the 
immediate transition into its opposite ; existence is really the 
perversion of every determinateness into its opposite, and it is 
only this alienation that is the essential nature and support of 

300 
C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
the whole. We have now to consider this process in which the 
moments are stirred into life and given an existence of their 
own ; the alienation will alienate itself, and the whole will, 
through this alienation, return into its Notion. 
492. We have first to consider the simple unitary substance 
itself in the immediate organization of its moments, which are 
present in the substance but as yet have not been stirred into 
life. In the same way that Nature displays itself in the universal 
elements of Air, Water, Fire, and Earth : Air is the enduring, 
purely universal, and transparent element ; Water, the element 
that is perpetually sacrificed ; Fire, the unity which energizes 
them into opposition while at the same time it perpetually 
resolves the opposition ; lastly, Earth, which is the firm and solid 
knot of this articulated whole, the subject of these elements and 
of their process, that from which they start and to which they 
return ; so in the same way, the inner essence or simple Spirit 
of self-conscious actuality displays itself in similar such uni­
versal-but here spiritual-'masses' or spheres, displays itself 
as a world. In the first sphere it is an implicitly universal, self­
identical spiritual being; in the second it is explicitly for itself 
and has become inwardly divided against itself, sacrificing and 
abandoning itself; in the third, which as self-consciousness is 
Subject, it possesses directly in its own self the force of Fire. 
In the first it is conscious of itself as an intrinsic being; but in 
the second it develops an explicit being of its own by sacrificing 
the universal. Spirit, however, is itself at once the essence and 
the actuality of the whole, which sunders itself into a substance 
which endures, and a substance which sacrifices itself, and 
which at the same time also takes them back into its unity ; it 
is both the outburst of flaming Fire which consumes the sub­
stance, and also the abiding form of that substance. We see 
that these spheres correspond to the community and the family 
in the ethical world, without, however, possessing the native 
Spirit peculiar to the latter. On the other hand, while Destiny 
is alien to this Spirit, here self-consciousness is and knows itself 
to be the real power of these spheres. 
493· We have to consider how, in the first instance, these 
two members are represented within pure consciousness as 
thoughts, or as having only an implicit being ; an also how. thचy 
are represented in actual consciousness as havmg an obJectwe 

C U L T U R E  
301 
existence. In the simple form of thoughts, the first is the Good­
the self-accordant, immediate, and unchangeable essence of 
every consciousness, the independent spiritual power of the in­
itself, alongside which the activity of actual consciousness is 
something merely incidental. Its other, on the contrary, is the 
passive spiritual essence, or the universal in so far as it surrenders 
itself and allows individuals to get in it the consciousness of their 
separate existence ; it is the essence that is null and invalid, the 
Bad. This absolute break-up of the essence is itself permanent. 
While the first essence is the foundation, starting-point, and 
result ofindivid'uals who in it are purely universal, the second, 
on the other hand, is partly their self-sacrificing being-for­
another, and partly, for that very reason, their perpetual 
return-to-self as separate individuals and the perpetual process 
in which they develop a being of their own. 
494· But [secondly], these simple thoughts of Good and Bad 
are likewise immediately self-alienated ; they are actual and are 
present in actual consciousness as objective moments. Thus the 
first essence is state power, the other is wealth. As state power is 
the simple substance, so too is it the universal 'work'-the absolute 
'heart of the rna tter' itself in which individuals find their essential 
nature expressed, and where their separate individuality is 
merely a consciousness of their universality. It is also the 'work' 
and the simple result from which the sense that it results from 
their doing has vanished ; it remains the absolute foundation and 
subsistence of all that they do. This simple, ethereal substance 
of their life is, in virtue of this determination oftheir unchange­
able self-identity, [mere] being and, in addition, merely a being­
for-another. It is thus directly the opposite of itself, wealth. 
Although this is indeed something passive, something devoid 
of inner worth, it is equally the perpetually produced result of 
the labour and activity of all, just as it is dissipated again in 
the enjoyment of all. It is true that in the enjoyment, the indivi­
duality develops an awareness ofhimselfas a particular indivi­
dual, but this enjoyment itself is the result of the general 
activity, just as reciprocally, wealth produces universal labour 
and enjoyment for all. The actual has simply the spiritual sig­
nificance of being immediately universal. Each individual is 
quite sure that he is acting in his own interest when seeking 
this enjoyment ; for it is in this that he becomes conscious of 

302 
C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
his own independent existence and for that reason does not take 
it to be something spiritual. Yet, even when looked at from an 
external point of view, it is evident that each in his own 
enjoyment provides enjoyment for all, just as in working for 
himself he is at the same time working for all and all are working 
for him. His being for himself is therefore in itself universal and 
his self-interest is something merely in his mind, something that 
cannot get as far as making a reality of what it means to do, 
viz. to do something that would not benefit all. 
495· In these two spiritual powers, then, self-consciousness 
recognizes its substance, content, and purpose ; in them it 
beholds its dual nature : in one it sees what it implicitly is, in 
the other what it is explicitly for itself. But it is at the same' time, 
qua Spirit, the negative unity of their subsistence and of the 
separation of individuality from the universal, or of actuality 
and the self. Dominion and wealth therefore confront the 
individual as objects, i.e. as things from which he knows himself 
to be free, and between which he believes he can choose, or 
even choose neither. As this free and pure consciousness he con­
fronts the essence as something which is merely for him. He has, 
then, the essence, qua essence, within himself. In this pure con­
sciousness the moments of substance are for him not state power 
and wealth, but the thoughts of Good and Bad. But further, self­
consciousness is the relation of its pure consciousness to Its actual 
consciousness, of what is in the form of thought to what exists 
objectively : it is essentially judgement. It is true that the imme­
diate determinations of the two sides of objective reality have 
already made clear which is Good and which is Bad ; the Good 
is state power, the Bad is wealth. But this first judgement cannot 
be regarded as a spiritual judgement ; for in it one side has been 
determined only as a being-in-itself, or as the positive, the other 
only as a being-for-itself, and as the negative. But as spiritual 
essences each is the interfusion of both moments, and is there­
fore not exhausted in those determinations ; and self-conscious­
ness which is self-related is both in and for itself. It must there­
fore be related to each determination in a twofold manner, with 
the result that their nature, which consists in being self­
alienated determinations, will be brought to light. 
496. Now, self-consciousness holds that object to be good, 
and to possess intrinsic being, in which it finds itself; and that 

C U LTURE 
to be bad in which it finds the opposite of itself. Goodness is 
the likeness of objective reality to it, Badness, however, their 
unlikeness. At the same time, what for self-consciousness is good 
and bad, is intrinsically good and bad ; for it is just that in which 
these two moments of intrinsic being, and of being for it, are the 
same. It is the actual Spirit of the objective realities, and the 
judgement is the proof of its power within them, a power which 
makes them into what they are in themselves. It is not how they 
are like or unlike directly in themselves, i.e. not abstract being­
in-itself or being-for-itself, that is their criterion and their truth, 
but how they are in the relation of Spirit to them : their likeness 
or unlikeness to Spirit. Spirit's relation to them, in virtue of 
which they lose their initial status of obJects and develop their 
own in-itself or intrinsic nature, becomes at the same time their 
reflection into themselves, through which they acquire an actual 
spiritual being; and what their Spirit is, comes to view. But 
just as their first immediate determination is distinct-from the rela­
tion of Spirit to them, so also will the third moment, their 
own proper Spirit, be distinct from the second. First of all, 
their second in-itself, which stems from the relation of Spirit 
to them, must, of course, turn out to be different from 
the immediate in-itself; for this mediation of Spirit rather acts 
on the immediate determinateness and makes it into something 
else. 
497· It follows, then, that the consciousness that is in and 
for itself does find in the state power its simple essence and sub­
sistence in general, but not its individuality as such ; it does find 
there its intrinsic being, but not what it explicitly is for itself. 
Rather, it finds that the state power disowns action qua indivi­
dual action and subdues it into obedience. The individual, 
therefore, faced with this power reflects himself into himself; 
it is for him an oppressor and the Bad ; for, instead of being 
oflike nature to himself, its nature is essentially different from 
that ofindividuality. Wealth, on the other hand, is the Good ; 
it leads to the general enjoyment, is there to be made use of, 
and procures for everyone the consciousness of his particular 
self. It is implicitly universal beneficence ; if it refuses a particular 
benefit and does not choose to satisfy every need, this is acciden­
tal and does not detract from its universal and necessary nature 
of imparting itself to all and being a universal provider. 

C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
498. These two judgements give the thoughts of Good and 
Bad a content which is the opposite of what they had for us. 
But self-consciousness was at first only incompletely related to 
its objects, viz. only according to the criterion of being-for-self. 
Consciousness has equally, however, an intrinsic nature of its own 
and must likewise make this aspect a criterion, and only when 
it has done this is the spiritual judgement complete. According 
to this aspect, the state power expresses its essence ; this power 
is in part the established law, and in part government and com­
mand, which regulates the particular activities within the 
action of the whole. The one is the simple Substance itself, the 
other is its action which animates and sustains itself and every- · 
one. The individual thus finds therein his ground and essence 
expressed, organized, and manifested. On the other hand, the 
individual, through the enjoyment of wealth, gains no experi­
ence of his universal nature, but only gets a transitory conscious­
ness and enjoyment of himself qua single and independent in­
dividual, and of the disparity between himself and his essence. 
The Notions ofGood and Bad thus receive here a content which 
is the opposite of what they had before. 
499· Each of these two ways of judging finds a likeness and 
a disparity ; in the first case consciousness judges the state power 
to be essentially different from it, and the enjoyment of wealth 
to accord with its own nature ; while in the second case it judges 
the state power to accord with its nature and the enjoyment 
of wealth to be essentially different from it. We have before us 
a twofold finding oflikeness and a twofold finding of disparity, 
an antithetical relation between the two real essentialities. We 
must ourselves judge these different judgements and apply to 
them the criterion set up. According to this, the conscious rela­
tion which finds likeness is the Good ; that which finds disparity 
is the Bad ; and these two forms of the relation we are henceforth 
to hold fast as diverse shapes of consciousness. By forming 
diverse relationships, consciousness itself comes to be deter­
mined as diverse, as being good or bad ; not because it had for 
its principle either being-for-itself or pure being-in-itself, for 
both are equally essential moments. In the twofold judging con­
sidered above, the principles were thought of as separate, and 
therefore contained merely abstract ways of judging. Actual con­
sciousness has within it both principles, and the distinction 

C U L T U R E  
between them falls solely within its own essence, viz. in the rela­
tion of itself to the actual. 
500. There are two antithetical forms of this relation : one 
is a relationship to the state power and wealth as to something 
oflike nature to itself; the other as to something disparate from 
it. The consciousness which finds them of like nature to itself 
is noble. It sees in public authority what is in accord with itself, 
sees in it its own simple essence and the factual evidence of it, 
and in the service of that authority its attitude towards it is one 
of actual obedience and respect. Similarly, in the case ofwealth, 
it sees that this procures for it awareness of its other essential 
side, the consciousness ofbeingfor itself; it therefore looks upon 
wealth likewise as essential in relation to itself, and acknowledges 
the source of its enjoyment as a benefactor to whom it lies under 
an obligation. 
501 .  The consciousness which adopts the other relation is, 
on the contrary, ignoble. It clings to the disparity between the 
two essentialities, thus sees in the sovereign power a fetter and 
a suppression of its own being-for-self, and therefore hates the 
ruler, obeys only with a secret malice, and is always on the point 
of revolt. It sees, too, in wealth, by which it attains to the 
enjoyment of its own self-centred existence, only the disparity 
with its permanent essence; since through wealth it becomes con­
scious of itself merely as an isolated individual, conscious only 
of a transitory enjoyment, loving yet hating wealth, and with 
the passing of the enjoyment, of something that is essentially 
evanescent, it regards its relation to the rich as also having 
vanished. 
502. Now, these relations express, in the first instance, the 
judgement, the determination, of what these two essential reali­
ties are as objects for consciousness, not as yet what they are in 
and for themselves. The reflection which is presented in the 
judgement is partly an affirmation of the one as of the other 
only for us, and is therefore an equal annulling of both ; it is 
not yet the reflection of them for consciousness itself. Partly, 
at first, they simply are essences, they have not become such, nor 
do they possess self-consciousness : that for which they are is not 
that which animates them, they are predicates which are not 
yet themselves subject. On account of this separation, the whole 
of the spiritual judgement falls apart into two consciousnesses, 

C .  (88.) S P I R I T  
each of which is subject to a one-sided determination. Now, 
just as at first the indiference of the two sides of the alienation­
one ofwhich was the in-itseljofpure consciousness, viz. the spe­
cific thoughts of Good and Bad, the other their existence as state 
power and wealth-was raised into a relation between them, 
into a judgement, so must this external relation be raised to 
an inner unity, or to a relation of thought to actuality, and the 
Spirit ofboth forms ofthejudgement must make its appearance. 
This happens when the judgement becomes a syllogism, i.e. 
becomes the· mediating process in which the necessity and the 
middle term of both sides of the judgement come to view. 
503. The noble consciousness thus finds itself, in the judge­
ment, confronting the state power in such a way that the latter 
is, indeed, not yet a self, but only the universal substance ; it 
is, however, conscious of being the essence of that substance, its 
end and absolute content. Being so positively related to it, 
it adopts a negative attitude to its own ends, to its particular 
content and existence, and lets them vanish. This consciousness 
is the heroism of service, the virtue which sacrifices the single in­
dividual to the universal, thereby bringing this into existence­
the person, one who voluntarily renounces possessions and 
enjoyment and acts and is effective in the interests of the ruling 
power. 
504. Through this process the universal becomes united with 
existence in general,just as the [merely] existent consciousness 
through this renunciation develops into an essential existence. 
That from which this consciousness alienates itself in serving 
the universal is the consciousness that is immersed in [mere] 
existence ; but the being that is alienated from itself is the in­
itself. Through this development, therefore, it wins self-respect 
and the respect of others. The state power, however, which was 
at first only the universal in thought, the in-itself, becomes 
through this very process the universal in existence, actual power. 
This it actually is only in the actual obedience which it gets 
through self-consciousness judging the state power to be the 
essence, and through the free sacrifice of self-consciousness to it. 
This action which unites the essence with the self produces the 
twofold actuality: the self that has a true actuality, and the state 
power as the True which is acknowledged as such. 
505. Through this alienation, however, the state power is not 

C U L T U R E  
a self-consciousness that knows itself as state power. It is only 
its law, or its in-itself, that has authority ; it has as yet no particular 
will. For the self-consciousness that serves the state power has 
not as yet renounced its own pure self and made it the active 
principle of the state power; it has only given that power its 
mere being, has only sacrificed its outer existence to it, not its in­
trinsic being. This self-consciousness is deemed to be in con­
formity with the essence and is acknowledged on account of what 
it intrinsically is. In it the others find their own essence exempli­
fied, but not their own being-for-self-find their thought, or 
pure consciousness, fulfilled, but not their individuality. It 
therefore possesses authority in their thoughts and enjoys honour. 
It is the haughty vassal who is active on behalf of the state power 
in so far as the latter is not a personal will, but an essential will ; 
the vassal who knows himself to be esteemed only in that honour, 
only in the essential representation of him in general opinion, 
not in the gratitude shown to him by an individuality, for he 
has not helped this individuality to gratify his being-for-self. His 
language, were he to stand ;in relation to the state power which 
has not yet come into being, would take the form of counsel, 
imparted for the general good. 
506. State power, therefore, still lacks a will with which to 
oppose counsel, and the power to decide which of the different 
opinions is best for the general good. It is not yet a government, 
and therefore not yet in truth an actual state power. The being­
for-self, the will, which, as will is not sacrificed, is the inner, 
separated Spirit of the various classes and 'estates', and this, 
in spite of its chatter about the general good, reserves to itself 
what suits its own best interest, and is inclined to make this chat­
ter about the general good a substitute for action. The sacrifice 
of existence which happens in the service of the state is indeed 
complete when it has gone as far as death ; but the hazard of 
death which the individual survives leaves him with a definite 
existence and hence with a particular self-interest, and this makes 
his counsel about what is best for the general good ambiguous 
and open to suspicion. It means that he has in fact reserved 
his own opinion and his own particular will in face of the power 
of the state. His conduct, therefore, conflicts with the interests 
of the state and is characteristic of the ignoble consciousness 
which is always on the point of revolt. 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
507. This contradiction which being-for-self must resolve, 
that of the disparity between its being-for-self and the state 
power, is at the sam.e time present in the following form. That 
renunciation of existence, when it is complete, as it is in death, 
is simply a renunciation ; it does not return into consciousness ; 
consciousness does not survive the renunciation, is not in and 
for itself, but merely passes over into its unreconciled opposite. 
Consequently, the true sacrifice of being-for-self is solely that in 
which it surrenders itself as completely as in death, yet in this 
renunciation no less preserves itself. It thereby becomes in actu­
ality what it is in itself, becomes the identical unity of itself and 
of its opposed self. The separated inner Spirit, the self as such, 
havii;J.g come forward and renounced itself, the state power is 
at the same time raised to the position of having a self of its 
own. Without this renunciation of self, the deeds ofhonour, the 
deeds of the noble consciousness, and the counsels based on its 
insight would retain the ambiguity possessed by that private 
reserve of particular intention and self-will. 
508. But this alienation takes place solely in language, which 
here appears in its characteristic significance. In the world of 
ethical order, in law and command, and in the actual world, in 
counsel only, language has the essence for its content and is the 
form of that content ; but here it has for its content the form 
itself, the form which language itself is, and is authoritative as 
language. It is the power of speech, as that which performs what 
has to be performed. For it is the real existence of the pure self 
as self; in speech, self-consciousness, qua independent separate in­
dividuality, comes as such into existence, so that it exists for others. 
Otherwise the 'I', this pure 'I', is non-existent, is not there; in 
every other expression it is immersed in a reality, and is in a 
shape from which it can withdraw itself; it is reflected back into 
itself from its action, as well as from its physiognomic expres­
sion, and dissociates itself from such an imperfect existence, in 
which there is always at once too much as too little, letting it 
remain lifeless behind. Language, however, contains it in its 
purity, it alone expresses the 'I', the 'I' itself. This real existence 
of the 'I' is, qua real existence, an objectivity which has in it 
the true nature of the 'I'. The 'I' is this particular 'I' -but 
equally the universal 'I' ; its manifesting is also at once the exter­
nalization and vanishing of this particular 'I', and as a result 

C U LTURE 
the 'I' remains in its universality. The 'I' that utters itself is 
heard or perceived; it is an infection in which it has immediately 
passed into unity with those for whom it is a real existence, and 
is a universal self-consciousness. That it is perceived or heard 
means that its real existence dies away ; this its otherness has been 
taken back into itself; and its real existence is just this : that 
as a self-conscious Now, as a real existence, it is not a real exist­
ence, and through this vanishing it is a real existence. This 
vanishing is thus itself at once its abiding; it is its own knowing 
of itself, and its knowing itself as a self that has passed over into 
another self that has been perceived and is universal. 
509. Spirit obtains this actuality here because the extremes, 
of which it is the unity, are also directly determined as being 
actualities on their own account. Their unity is broken up into 
two rigid, unyielding sides, each of which is for the other an 
actual object excluded from it. Consequently, the unity appears 
as a middle term, which is excluded and distinct from the 
separated, actual existence of the sides ; it has, therefore, itself 
an actual objective existence distinct from its sides, and has 
reality for them, i.e. is something that exists. The spiritual sub­
stance enters as such into existence only when it has gained for 
its two sides self-consciousnesses which know this pure self as 
an actual existence having immediate validity, and in knowing 
this are also immediately aware that they are such actual exist­
ences only through the mediation of their self-alienation. 
Through that pure self, the moments of substance are so far 
purified as to be the self-knowing category, and thus to be 
moments ofSpirit ; through this mediation Spirit comes to exist 
qua Spirit as a reality. It is thus the middle term which presup­
poses those extremes and is created by their existence-but 
equally it is the spiritual whole issuing forth between them, 
which sunders itselfinto them and only by means of this contact 
creates each into the whole in terms of its own principle. The 
fact that both extremes are already implicitly reduced to 
moments and set apart produces their unity, and this is the pro .. 
cess which brings both into a unity, interchanges their determi­
nations, and unites them in each extreme. This mediation thus 
posits the Notion of each of the two extremes in its actuality, 
or makes what each is in itself into its Spirit. 
5 1  o. The two extremes, the state power and the noble 

310 
C. ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
consciousness, are split up by the latter : the state power into the 
abstract universal which is obeyed, and into the self-centred 
will which, however, does not yet conform to the universal ; and 
the noble consciousness into the obedience rendered by the ex­
istence which is not self-centred, or the intrinsic being of self-re­
spect and honour, and into the still unsurrendered being-for­
self, the will that still reserves its independence. The two 
moments into which both sides are purified and which, there­
fore, are moments of language, are the abstract universal, called 
'the general good', and the pure self which, in serving the state, 
renounced its own many and various interests. Both are essenti­
ally the same ; for pure self is just the abstract universal, and 
consequently their unity is expressed as their middle term. But 
the selfis at first actual only in consciousness, in the one extreme, 
while the in-itself is actual only in the state power, the other 
extreme. What consciousness lacks is the actual transference to 
it of the state power, not merely in the form of honour; and what 
is lacking in the state power is that it should be obeyed, not 
merely as the so-called 'general good', but as will, or that it 
should endow the self with the power of decision. The unity 
of the Notion in which the state power still stands and into 
which consciousness has been purified becomes actual in this 
process of mediation, the simple existence of which as middle term 
is language. However, the sides of the unity are not yet selves 
which exist as selves ; for the state power has yet to be energized 
into a self. This language is, therefore, not yet Spirit that com­
pletely knows and expresses itself. 
5 i I .  The noble consciousness, being the extreme which is the 
self, appears as the source of the language by which the sides 
of the relation are shaped into animated wholes. The heroism 
ofsilent service becomes the heroism of flattery. This vocal re­
flection of service constitutes the spiritual self-separating middle 
term and reflects back into itself not only its own extreme, but 
also reflects back into this self the extreme of universal power, 
making that power, which is at first only implicit, into a power 
that is explicit with an existence of its own, makes it into a self­
conscious individuality. The result is that the Spirit of this power 
is now an unlimited monarch : unlimited, because the language of 
flattery raises this power in to its purified universality ; this 
moment being the product of language, of an existence which 

CULTURE 
3 1 1  
has been purified into Spirit, is a purified self-identity ; a 
monarch, for such language likewise raises individuality to its 
extreme point ;  what the noble consciousness divests itself of as 
regards this aspect of the simple spiritual unity is the pure in­
trinsic being of its thinking, its very 'I'. Expressed more definitely, 
it raises the individuality, which otherwise is only a presumed 
existence, into the existence of its pure form, by giving the 
monarch his own proper name ; for it is in the name alone that 
the difference of the individual from everyone else is not presumed, 
but is made actual by all. In the name, the individual counts as 
a pure individual, no longer only in his own consciousness, but 
in the consciousness of everyone. By his name, then, the 
monarch is absolutely separated off from everyone else, exclu­
sive and solitary ; as monarch, he is a unique atom that cannot 
impart any of its essential nature. This name is thus the reflec­
tion-into-self, or the actuality which the universal power has in 
its own self; through the name the power is the monarch. Con­
versely, he, this particular individual, thereby knows himself, 
this individual, to be the universal power, knows that the nobles 
not only are ready and prepared for the service of the state 
power, but that they group themselves round the throne as an 
ornamental setting, and that they are continually telling him who 
sits on it what he is. 
5 1 2. The language of their praise is in this way the Spirit 
that in the state power itself unites the two extremes. It reflects the 
abstract power into itself and gives it the moment of the other 
extreme, the being-for-self that wills and decides, and by so doing 
gives it a self-conscious existence ; or otherwise expressed, this 
individual, actual self-consciousness attains to the certain know­
ledge of itself as the power of the state. It is the point of the self 
into which the many points or selves through renouncing their 
own inner certainty, are fused into one. Since, however, this Spirit 
proper of state power consists in its obtaining actuality and 
nourishment from the sacrifice of action and thought by the 
noble consciousness, it is an independence that is self-alienated; the 
noble consciousness, the extreme of being-for-self, receives back 
the other extreme, that of actual universality, in return for the 
universality of thought which it relinquished ; the power of the 
state has passed to the noble consciousness. In it, that power is 
first made truly effective ; in the being-for-self of the noble 

C .  ( BB. ) S P I R I T  
consciousness it ceases to be the inert entity which it appeared to 
be as the extreme of abstract being-in-itself. Considered as it 
is in itself, state power that is reflected into itself, or has become 
Spirit, simply means that it has become a moment of self-con­
sciousness, i.e. it exists only as superseded. Consequently, it is now 
essence in the form of something, the Spirit of which is that it 
is to be sacrified and surrendered, i.e. it exists as wealth. It does, 
indeed, at the same time have a continuing existence as a reality 
vis-a-vis wealth, into which it is ever changing in accordance with 
its Notion ; but it is a reality whose Notion is just this process 
of passing over-by way of the service and honour done to it 
and from which it derives its existence-into its opposite, into 
the relinquishment of power. Thus the peculiar self that is its 
will knows that through the debasement of the noble conscious­
ness it has become a universality that renounces itself, has 
become a completely separate and contingent individuality 
which is at the mercy of every more powerful will. What 
remains to it of universally acknowledged and incommunicable 
independence is the empty name. 
5 1 3. While, therefore, the noble consciousness behaves as if 
it were conforming to the universal power, the truth about it is 
rather that in its service it retains its own being-for-self, and 
that in the genuine renunciation of its personality, it actually 
-sets aside and rends in pieces the universal Substance. Its Spirit 
is a completely disparate relationship : on the one hand, in its 
position of honour it retains its own will ; on the other hand, 
it gives up its will, but in so doing it in part alienates itself from 
its own inner nature and becomes utterly at variance with itself, 
and in part subjects to itself the universal substance and makes 
it completely at variance with itself. It is clear that, as a result, 
the specific character which it was judged to have in compari­
son with what was called the ignoble consciousness has dis­
appeared and with it the latter too. The ignoble consciousness 
has achieved its purpose, viz. to bring the universal power 
under the control of being-for-self. 
5 1 4. Self-consciousness, thus enriched by the universal 
power, exists as universal beneficence, or is wealth which is itself 
in turn an object for consciousness. For although wealth is, for 
consciousness, the deposed universal, the latter has not yet by 
this first subjection returned absolutely into the self. The self 

C U L T U R E  
3 ' 3  
has not yet for object itself qua self, but the subordinated uni­
versal essence. Since this object has only just come into being, 
consciousness has formed an immediate relation with it and thus 
has not yet exhibited its disparity with it ; we have here the 
noble consciousness which preserves its being-for-self in the uni­
versal which has become unessential, and therefore acknow­
ledges the object and is grateful to the benefactor. 
5 I 5. Wealth already contains within it the moment of being­
for-self. It is not the self-less universal of state power, or the 
na·ive inorganic nature of Spirit"; it is state power which wills 
to hold its own against those who would take possession of it 
for their own enjoyment. But since wealth has merely the form 
of essence, this one-sided being-for-self which has no intrinsic 
being of its own, but is rather the cancelling of it, is in its 
enjoyment the essenceless return of the individual into himself. 
It therefore itself requires to be ensouled ; and the movement 
ofits reflection consists in this, that wealth which is only for itself, 
develops an intrinsic being of its own, that, instead of being a can­
celled essence, it develops an essential being. It thus receives 
within itself a Spirit of its own. Since the form of this movement 
has already been set forth in detail, it is sufficient here to charac­
terize its content. 
5 I 6. The noble consciousness, then, is not related here to the 
object as an essence in general ; on the contrary, what is alien 
to it is its own being-for-self Itfinds confronting it its own, but 
alienated, self as such, in the shape of an objective fixed reality 
which it has to receive from another fixed being-for-self. Its 
object is a being-for-self, i.e. its own being-for-self; but, because 
it is an object, it is at the same time ipso facto an alien reality 
which has its own being-for-self, which ,has a will of its own ; 
i.e. it sees self in the power of an alien will on which it is depen­
dent for possession of its own self. 
5 I 7. Self-consciousness can make abstraction from every 
particular aspect, and for that reason, even when it is tied to 
one of them, it retains the recognition and intrinsic validity of 
itself as an independent being. Here, however, as regards the 
aspect of that pure actuality which is its very own, viz. its own 
'I', it finds that it is outside of itself and belongs to another, 
finds its personality as such dependent on the contingent per­
sonality of another, on the accident of a moment, on a caprice, 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
or some other utterly unimportant circumstance. In the sphere 
of law, what is in the power of an objective being appears as 
a contingent content from which it is possible to make abstraction, 
and the controlling power does not affect the self as such ; on 
the contrary, the self is acknowledged. Here, however, the self 
sees its self-certainty as such to be completely devoid of essence, 
sees that its pure personality is absolutely not a personality. The 
spirit of its gratitude is, therefore, the feeling of the most pro­
found dejection as well as of extreme rebellion. When the pure 
'I' beholds itself outside of itself and rent asunder, then every­
thing that has continuity and universality, everything that is 
called law, good, and right, is at the same time rent asunder 
and is destroyed. All identity dissolves away, for the utmost dis­
parity now occupies the scene ; what is absolutely essential is 
now absolutely unessential, being-for-self is now external to 
itself: the pure 'I' itself is absolutely disrupted. 
5 1 8. Therefore, although this consciousness receives back 
from riches the objectivity of its being-for-self and supersedes 
it, it is not only, like the preceding reflection, incomplete in 
principle, but is conscious of not being satisfied ; the reflection, 
in which the self receives itself as something objective to it, is 
thus a direct contradiction lodged in the pure 'I' itself. Qua self, 
however, it stands at the same time directly above this con­
tradiction ; it is absolutely elastic and therefore again super­
sedes this supersession of its self, rejects this disowning of itself 
which would make its being-for-self into something alien, and 
rebels against this reception of itself, and in this very reception 
is conscious of itself. 
5 1 9. Since, then, the condition of this consciousness is linked 
with this absolute disruption, the distinction within its Spirit 
of being noble, as opposed to ignoble, falls away and both are 
the same. The beneficent Spirit ofwealth can, further, be distin­
guished from that of the consciousness receiving the benefit, and 
has to be considered separately. The Spirit of wealth was an 
essenceless being-for-self, something to be sacrificed for others. 
But by imparting itself it becomes intrinsic being; in fulfilling its 
destiny, which is to sacrifice itself, it rids itself of the singleness 
which characterizes its merely self-centred enjoyment, and as 
such subordinated individuality it is universality or essence. What 
it imparts, what it gives to others, is being-for-self. It does not. 

C U LTURE 
however, give itself over as a nature that has no self, as the un­
controlled surrender of the condition of life, but as a self-con­
scious being in control of itself; it is not the inorganic power 
of the element that is known by the consciousness receiving it 
to be essentially transitory, but is the power over the self, the 
power that knows itself to be independent and arbitrary, and at the 
same time knows that what it dispenses is the self of another. 
Wealth thus shares its dejection with the recipient ; but in place 
of rebellion appears arrogance. For in one respect it knows as 
well as the recipient that being:for-self is a contingent Thing; 
but it is itself this contingency in the power of which personality 
stands. In this arrogance which fancies it has, by the gift of a 
meal, acquired the self of another's 'I' and thereby gained for 
itself the submission of that other's inmost being, it overlooks 
the inner rebellion of the other; it overlooks the fact that all 
restraints have been cast off, overlooks this state of sheer dis­
ruption in which, the self-identity of being-for-self having 
become divided against itself, all identity, all existence, is dis­
rupted, and in which the sentiment and view-point of the bene­
factor suffer most distortion. It stands on the very edge of this 
innermost abyss, of this bottomless depth, in which all stability 
and Substance have vanished ; and in this depth it sees nothing 
but a common thing, a plaything of its whims, an accident of 
its caprice. Its Spirit is a subjective opinion wholly devoid of 
essentiality, a superficiality from which Spirit has fled. 
520. Just as self-consciousness had its own language with 
state power, in other words, just as Spirit emerged as actively 
mediating between these extremes, so also has self-consciousness 
its own language in dealing with wealth ; but still more so when 
it rebels. The language that gives wealth a sense of its essential 
significance, and thereby gains possession of it, is likewise the 
language of flattery, but of base flattery ; for what it pronounces 
to be an essence, it knows to be expendable, to be without any 
intrinsic being. The language of flattery, however, as we have 
already observed, is Spirit that is still one-sided. For although 
its moments are indeed the selfwhich has been refined by the 
discipline of service into a pure existence, and the intrinsic being 
of power, yet the pure Notion in which the simple, unitary self 
and the in-itself, the former a pure 'I' and the latter this pure 
essence or thought, are the same-this unity of the two sides 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T , 
which are in reciprocal relation is not present in the conscious­
ness that uses this language. The object is still for consciousness 
an intrinsic being in contrast to the self, that is, the object is not 
for consciousness at the same time consciousness's own self as 
such. The language of this disrupted consciousness is, however, 
the perfect language and the authentic existent Spirit of this 
entire world of culture. This self-consciousness which rebels 
against this rejection of itself is eo ipso absolutely self-identical 
in its absolute disruption, the pure mediation of pure self-con­
sciousness with itself. It is the sameness of the identical judge­
ment in which one and the same personality is both subject and 
predicate. But this identical judgement is at the same time the 
infinite judgement; for this personality is absolutely dirempted, 
and subject and predicate are utterly indifferent, immediate 
beings which have nothing to do with one another, which have 
no necessary unity, so much so that each is the power of a separ­
ate independent personality. The being-for-self [of this con­
sciousness] has its own being-for-self for object as an out-and­
out 'other', and yet, at the same time, directly as its own self­
itself as an 'other' ; not as if this had a different content, for 
the content is the same self in the form of an absolute antithesis 
and a completely indifferent existence of its own. Here, then, 
we have the Spirit of this real world of culture, Spirit that is 
conscious of itself in its truth and in its Notion. 
52 1 .  It is this absolute and universal inversion and alienation 
of the actual world and of thought ; it is pure culture. What is 
learnt in this world is that neither the actuality of power and 
wealth, nor their specific Notions, 'good' and 'bad', or the con­
sciousness of 'good' and 'bad' (the noble and the ignoble con­
sciousness) , possess truth ; on the contrary, all these moments 
become inverted, one changing into the other, and each is the 
opposite of itself. The universal power, which is the Substance, 
when it acquires a spiritual nature of its own through the prin­
ciple of individuality, receives its own self merely as a name, 
and though it is the actuality of power, is really the powerless 
being that sacrifices its own self. But this expendable, self-less 
being, or the self that has become a Thing, is rather the return 
of that being into itself; it is being-for-self that is explicitly for 
itself, the concrete existence of Spirit. The thoughts of these two 
essences, of'good' and 'bad', are similarly inverted in this move-

C U LT U R E  
3 ' 7  
ment; what is characterized as good is bad, and vice versa. The 
consciousness of each of these moments, the consciousnesses 
judged as noble and ignoble, are rather in their truth just as 
much the reverse of what these characterizations are supposed 
to be ; the noble consciousness is ignoble and repudiated, just 
as the repudiated consciousness changes round into the nobility 
which characterizes the most highly developed freedom of self­
consciousness. From a formal standpoint, everything is out­
wardly the reverse of what it is for itself; and, again, it is not 
in truth what it is for itself, but something else than it wants 
to be ; being-for-self is rather the loss of itself, and its self-aliena­
tion rather the preservation of itself. What we have here, then, 
is that all the moments execute a universal justice on one 
another, each just as much alienates its own self, as it forms 
itself into its opposite and in this way inverts it. Tn1e Spirit, 
however, is just this unity of the absolutely separate moments, 
and, indeed, it is just through the free actuality of these self­
less extremes that, as their middle term, it achieves a concrete 
existence. It exists in the universal talk and destructive judge­
ment which strips oftheir significance all those moments which 
are sQpposed to count as the true being and as actual members 
of the whole, and is equally this nihilistic game which it plays 
with itself. This judging and talking is, therefore, what is true 
and invincible, while it overpowers everything; it is solely with 
this alone that one has truly to do with in this actual world. 
In this world, the Spirit of each part finds expression, or is 
wittily talked about, and finds said about it what it is. The honest 
individual takes each moment to be an abiding essentiality, and 
is the uneducated thoughtlessness of not knowing that it is 
equally doing the reverse. The disrupted consciousness, how­
ever, is consciousness of the perversion, and, moreover, of the 
absolute perversion. What prevails in it is the Notion, which 
brings together in a unity the thoughts which, in the honest 
individual, lie far apart, and its language is therefore clever and 
witty. 
522. The content of what Spirit says about itself is thus the 
perversion of every Notion and reality, the universal deception 
of itself and others ; and the shamelessness which gives utterance 
to this deception is just for that reason the greatest truth. This 
kind of talk is the madness of the musician 'who heaped up and 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
mixed together thirty arias, Italian, French, tragic, comic, of 
every sort ; now with a deep bass he descended into hell, then, 
contracting his throat, he rent the vaults of heaven with a fal­
setto tone, frantic and soothed, imperious and mocking, by 
turns'.! To the tranquil consciousnes which, in its honest way, 
takes the melody of the Good and the True to consist in the 
evenness of the notes, i.e. in unison, this talk appears as a 'rig­
marole of wisdom and folly, as a medley of as much skill as 
baseness, of as many correct as false ideas, a mixture com­
pounded of a complete perversion of sentiment, of absolute 
shamefulness, and of perfect frankness and truth. It will be un­
able to refrain from entering into all these tones and running 
up and down the entire scale of feelings from the profoundest 
contempt and dejection to the highest pitch of admiration and 
emotion ; but blended with the latter will be a tinge of ridicule 
which spoils them.'2 The former, however, will find in their 
very frankness a strain of reconciliation, will find in their sub­
versive depths the all-powerful note which restores Spirit to 
itself. 
523. If we contrast with the speech of this mind which is fully 
aware of its confused state, the speech of that simple conscious­
ness of the true and the good, we find that in face of the frank 
and self-conscious eloquence of the educated mind, it can be 
no more than taciturn ; for to the latter it can say nothing that 
it does not already know and say. If it gets beyond speaking 
in monosyllables, it says, therefore, the same thing that is said 
by the educated mind, but in doing so also commits the folly 
of imagining it is saying something new and different. Its very 
words 'shameful', 'ignoble' are already this folly, for the other 
says them about itself. This latter mind perverts in its speech 
all that is unequivocal, because what is self-identical is only an 
abstraction, but in its actual existence is in its own self a perver­
sion. The plain mind, on the other hand, takes under its protec­
tion the good and noble i.e. what retains its self-identity in 
its utterance, in the only way here possible-that is to say, the 
'good' does not lose its value because it may be associated or 
mixed with the 'bad', for this is its condition and necessity, and 
in this fact lies the wisdom ofN ature. Yet this plain mind, while 
1 Diderot, Nephew of Rameau. 
2 ibid. 

C U L T U R E  
it imagined it was contradicting what was said, has, in doing 
so, merely condensed into a trivial form the content of Spirit's 
utterance ; in making the opposite of the noble and good into 
the condition and necessity of the noble and good, it thoughtlessly 
supposes itself to be saying something else than that what is 
called noble and good is in its essence the reverse of itself, or 
that, conversely, the 'bad' is the 'excellent'. 
524. If the simple consciousness compensates for this 
dull, uninspired thought by the actuality of the excellent, by 
adducing an example of the latter, either in the form of a fictitious 
case or a true story, thus showing that it is no empty name 
but actually exists, the universal actuality of the perverted 
action stands opposed to the whole of the real world in which 
the said example constitutes something quite single and 
separate, an espece, a mere 'sort' of thing; and to represent the 
existence of the good and noble as an isolated anecdote, 
whether fictitious or true, is the most disparaging thing that 
can be said about it. Finally, should the plain mind demand 
the dissolution of this whole world of perversion, it cannot 
demand of the individual that he remove himselffrom it, for even 
Diogenes in his tub is conditioned by it, and to make this 
demand of the individual is just what is reckoned to be bad, 
viz. to care for himself qua individual. But if the demand for this 
removal is directed to the universal individuality, it cannot mean 
that Reason should give up again the spiritually developed con­
sciousness it has acquired, should submerge the widespread 
wealth of its moments again in the simplicity of the natural 
heart, and relapse into the wilderness ofthe nearly animal con­
sciousness, which is also called Nature or innocence. On the 
contrary, the demand for this dissolution can only be directed 
to the Spirit of culture itself, in order that it return out of its 
confusion to itself as Spirit, and win for itself a still higher con­
sciousness. 
525. But in point of fact, Spirit has already accomplished 
this in principle. The consciousness that is aware of its dis­
ruption and openly declares it, derides existence and the uni­
versal confusion, and derides its own self as well ; it is at the 
same time the fading, but still audible, sound of all this con­
fusion. This vanity of all reality and every definite N'otion, 
vanity which knows itself to be such, is the double reflection 

320 
C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
of the real world into itself: once in this particular self of con­
sciousness qua particular, and again in the pure universality of 
consciousness, or in thought. In the first case, Spirit that has 
come to itself has directed its gaze to the world of actuality and 
still has there its purpose and immediate content ;  but, in the 
other case, its gaze is in part turned only inward and negatively 
against it, and in part is turned away from that world towards 
heaven, and its object is the beyond of this world. 
526. In that aspect of the return into the self, the vanity of 
all things is iखs own vanity, it is itself vain. It is the self-centred 
self that knows, not only how to pass judgement on and chatter 
about everything, but how to give witty expression to the con­
tradiction that is present in the solid elements of the actual world, 
as also in the fixed determinations posited by judgement ; and 
this contradiction is their truth. Looked at from the point of 
view of form, it knows everything to be self-alienated, being­
for-self is separated from being-in-itself; what is meant, and 
purpose, are separated from truth ; and from both again, the 
being-for-another, the ostensible meaning from the real mean­
ing, from the true thing and intention. Thus it knows how to 
give correct expression to each moment in relation to its oppo­
site, in general, how to express accurately the perversion of 
everything ; it knows better than each what each is, no matter 
what its specific nature is. Since it knows the substantial from 
the side of the disunion and conflict which are united within 
the substantial itself, but not from the side of this union, it 
understands very well how to pass judgement on it, but has lost 
the ability to comprehend it. This vanity at the same time needs 
the vanity of all things in order to get from them the conscious­
ness of self; it therefore creates this vanity itself and is the soul 
that supports it. Power and wealth are the supreme ends of its 
exertions, it knows that through renunciation and sacrifice it 
forms itself into the universal, attains to the possession of it, and 
in this possession is universally recognized and accepted : state 
power and wealth are the real and acknowledged powers. How­
ever, this recognition and acceptance is itselfvain ; and just by 
taking possession of power and wealth it knows them to be with­
out a self of their own, knows rather that it is the power over 
them, while they are vain things. The fact that in possessing 
them it is itself apart from and beyond them, is exhibited in 

C U L T U R E  
32 1  
its witty talk which is, therefore, its supreme interest and the 
truth of the whole relationship. In such talk, this particular self, 
qua this pure self, determined neither by reality nor by thought, 
develops into a spiritual self that is of truly universal worth. 
It is the self-disruptive nature of all relationships and the con­
scious disruption of them ; but only as self-consciousness in 
revolt is it aware of its own disrupted state, and in thus knowing 
it has immediately risen above it. In that vanity, all content 
is turned into something negative which can no longer be 
grasped as having a positive significance. The positive object 
is merely the pure '/' itself, and the disrupted consciousness in 
itself this pure self-identity of self-consciousness that has 
returned to itself. 
b. Faith and pure insight 
527. The Spirit of self-alienation has its existence in the 
world of culture. But since this whole has become alienated 
from iJself, there stands beyond that world the unreal world 
of pure consciousness, or of thought. Its content is in the form of 
pure thought, and thought is its absolute element. Since, how­
ever, thought is in the first instance [only] the element of this 
world, consciousness only has these thoughts, but as yet it does 
not think them, or is unaware that they are thoughts ; they exist 
for consciousness in the form of picture-thoughts. For it steps out 
of its actual world into pure consciousness, yet is itself generally 
still in the sphere of the actual world and its determinateness. 
The disrupted consciousness is only in itself, or implicitly, the 
self-identity of pure consciousness, a fact that is known to us, but 
not to itself Thus, it is only the immediate elevation of itself, an 
elevation it has not yet accomplished within itself, and it still 
has within it its opposite principle by which it is conditioned, 
without having become master of it through the movement 
of mediation. Consequently, the essence of its thought has for 
it the value of essence, not merely in the form of the abstract 
in-itself, but in the form of a common actuality, of an actuality 
that has merely been raised into another element without hav­
ing lost therein the specific character of an actuality that does 
not exist merely in thought. It is essential to distinguish it from 
the in-itself which is the essence of the Stoic consciousness. What 
counted for the latter was merely the form of thought as such 

C .  ( BB . )  S PI R I T 
which, besides, has any alien content taken from the actual 
world. What counts, however, for the consciousness we are deal­
ing with is not the form of thought. This, too, is essentially distinct 
from the in-itself of the virtuous consciousness for which essence, 
though it stands in a relationship to the actual world and is 
the essence of the actual world itself, yet is initially a non-actual 
essence. In the consciousness under discussion essence, although 
lying beyond the actual world, none the less counts as an actual 
essence. In the same way, what is intrinsically right and good 
in the sphere of legislative Reason, and the universal that is 
adopted by consciousness in testing laws, these also do not pos­
sess the character of actuality. Therefore, while pure thought 
fell within the world of culture itself as an aspect of the aliena­
tion, viz. as the standard for judging Good and Bad in the 
abstract, through having passed through the process of the 
whole, it has become enriched with the moment of actuality 
and thereby with content. But this actuality of the essence is 
at the same time only an actuality of pure, not of actual, con­
sciousness ; although it is raised into the element of thought it 
does not yet count as a thought for this actual consciousness ; 
rather it lies for the latter beyond its own actuality, for it is 
the flight from this actuality. 
528. Religion-for it is obviously religion that we are speak­
ing about-in the form in which it appears here as the faith 
belonging to the world of culture, does not yet appear as it is 
in and for itself. We have already seen it in other characteristic 
forms, viz. as the Unhappy Consciousness, as a shape of the 
insubstantial process of consciousness itself. It made its appear­
ance, too, in the ethical Substance as faith in the underworld, 
though consciousness of the departed spirit is, strictly speaking, 
not faith, not essence posited in the element of pure conscious­
ness beyond the actual world, but has itself an immediate pre­
sence ; its element is the family. Here, however, religion in part 
has proceeded from the Substance and is the pure consciousness 
of it ; in part, this pure consciousness is alienated from its actual 
consciousness the essence from its existence. True, it is thus no 
longer the insubstantial process of consciousness, but it still has 
the characteristic of an antithesis to actuality as this actuality 
in general, and of an antithesis to self-consciousness in particu­
lar. It is therefore essentially merely a belief 

CULTURE 
529. This pure consciousness of absolute Being is an alienated 
consciousness. We have now to look more closely at the specific 
nature of that ofwhich it is the 'other', and we must consider 
it only in connection with this 'other'. To begin with, this pure 
consciousness seems to have over against it only the world of 
actuality ; but since it is the flight from this world and therefore 
has the character of an antithesis to it, it bears this world within 
itself; pure consciousness is therefore in its own self alienated 
from itself, and faith constitutes only one aspect of it. At the 
same time, the other aspect has already come to view. Pure con­
sciousness, namely, is reflection out of the world of culture in 
such a way that the Substance of that world, and also the 
'masses' or groups into which it is articulated, are shown to be 
what they are in themselves, spiritual essentialities, absolutely 
restless processes or determinations which are directly cancelled 
in their opposite. Their essence, simple consciousness, is thus 
the simplicity of absolute diiference which is at once no difference. 
Consequently, it is pure being-for-self, not as this single self but 
as the immanently universal self in the form of a restless process 
which attacks and pervades the passive essence of the 'matter 
in hand'. In it is thus to be found the certainty that at once 
knows itself to be the truth, pure thought as the absolute Notion 
in the might of its negativity, which eliminates everything objec­
tive that supposedly stands over against consciousness, and 
makes it into a being which has its origin in consciousness. This 
pure consciousness is at the same time equally simple, just 
because its difference is no difference. But as this form of simple 
reflection-into-self, it is the element of faith in which Spirit 
has the determinateness of positive universality, of being-in-itself 
in contrast to that being-for-self of self-consciousness. Forced 
back into itself out of the essenceless, merely dissolving world, 
Spirit, in accordance with its truth, is in an undivided unity, 
at once the absolute movement and negativity of its process of mani­
festation, as well as its inwardly satisfied essence and its positive 
repose. But coming generally under the determinateness of 
alienation, these two moments fall apart into a dual conscious­
ness. The former is pure insight as the spiritual process which 
focuses itself in self-consciousness, a process which is confronted 
by consciousness of what is positive, the form of objectivity or 
of picture-thinking, and which turns against it ; but pure 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
insight's own object is only the pure '/'. The simple consciousness 
of the positive, or of tranquil self-identity, on the other hand, 
has for its object the inner essence qua essence. Pure insight has, 
therefore, in the first instance, no content of its own, because 
it is negative being-for-self; to faith, on the other hand, there 
belongs a content, but without insight. If the former does not 
step outside self-consciousness, the latter certainly has its con­
tent in the element of pure self-consciousness, but in thought, 
not in Notions, in pure consciousness, not in pure self-consciousness. 
Hence faith is certainly pure consciousness of essence, i.e. of the 
simple inner being, and thus is thought-the cardinal factor in 
the nature of faith, which is usually overlooked. The immediacy 
of the presence of essence in it is due to the fact that its object 
is essence, i.e. pure thought. This immediacy, however, so far as 
thought enters into consciousness, or pure consciousness enters into 
self-consciousness, acquires the significance of an objective being 
which lies beyond the consciousness of the self. It is through 
this significance which the immediacy and simplicity of pure 
thought obtains in consciousness, that the essence of faith is no 
longer a [pure] thought, but is reduced to the level of something 
imagined, and becomes a supersensible world which is essenti­
ally an 'other' in relation to self-consciousness. In pure insight, 
on the other hand, the transition of pure thought into conscious­
ness has the opposite determination ; objectivity has the signifi­
cance of a merely negative content, a content which is reduced 
to a moment and returns into the self; that is to say, only the 
self is really the object of the self, or the object only has truth so 
far as it has the form of the self. 
530. Just as faith and pure insight belong in common to the 
element of pure consciousness, so also are they in common the 
return from the actual world of culture. Consequently, they 
present themselves according to three aspects. First, each is an 
intrinsic being on its own account, apart from all relationships ; 
second, each stands in relationship with the actual world in an 
antithesis to pure consciousness ; and third, each is related 
within pure consciousness to the other. 
53 1 .  In the consciousness of the believer, the aspect of being 
in andjor itself is its absolute object whose content and determi­
nation we already know. For according to the Notion of faith 
it is nothing else but the actual world raised into the universality 

C U L T U R E  
of pure consciousness. The articulation of this world, therefore, 
constitutes the organization of the world of faith, except that 
in the latter the parts do not alienate themselves in their spiri­
tualization, but are Beings, each with an existence of its own, 
Spirits which have returned into themselves and abide with 
themselves. The movement of their transition [into one 
another] is therefore only for us an alienation of the specific 
character in which they exist in their distinctiveness, and is only 
for us a necessary series ; for faith, however, their difference is a 
tranquil diversity and their movement a [real] happening. 
532. To name them briefly according to the external deter­
mination of their form :  just as in the world of culture state 
power, or the Good, was primary, so here, too, the first is the 
Absolute Being, Spirit that is in and for itself in so far as it is 
the simple eternal substance. But in the actualization of its 
Notion, in being Spirit, it passes over into being-for-another, its 
self-identity becomes an actual, self-sacrijicing absolute Being ; it 
becomes a self, but a mortal, perishable self. Consequently, the 
third moment is the return of this alienated self and of the 
humiliated substance into their original simplicity ; only in this 
way is substance represented as Spirit. 
533· These distinct Beings, when brought back to themselves 
by thought, out of the flux of the actual world, are immutable 
eternal Spirits, whose being lies in thinking the unity which they 
constitute. Removed thus from self-consciousness, these Beings 
are nevertheless actively present in it ; for if the absolute Being 
were to remain unmoved in the form of the first simple sub­
stance, it would remain alien to self-consciousness. But the 
externalization of this substance, and then its Spirit, involves 
the moment of actuality and thereby makes itself a participant 
in the self-consciousness of the believer, or the believing con­
sciousness belongs to the actual world. 
534· According to this second relationship, the believing 
consciousness partly has its actuality in the real world of culture, 
and constitutes the Spirit and the existence of that world which 
we have already considered ; partly, however, the believing 
consciousness confronts this its own actuality as something 
worthless, and is the process of overcoming it. This process does 
not consist in the believing consciousness making brilliant 
remarks about the perversion ofits real world ; for it is the simple 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R IT 
na·ive consciousness which reckons such brilliance as vanity, 
since it still has the real world for its purpose. On the contrary, 
contrasted with the tranquil realm of its thought, the real world 
is a soulless existence, which therefore has to be overcome in 
an external manner. This obedience of service and praise, by 
setting aside sense-knowledge and action, produces the con­
sciousness of unity with the absolute Being, though not as a 
unity that is actually perceived ; on the contrary, this service 
is only the perpetual process of producing that unity, a process 
which does not completely attain its goal in the present. The 
[religious] community, it is true, does so, for it is universal self­
consciousness ; but for the individual self-consciousness, the 
realm of pure thought necessarily remains a beyond of its actual 
world, or since this beyond, through the externalization of the 
eternal Being, has entered the actual world, the actuality is an 
uncomprehended, sensuous actuality. But one sensuous actu­
ality remains indifferent to the other, and the beyond has only 
received the further character of remoteness in space and time. 
The Notion, however, the actuality of Spirit present to itself, 
remains in the consciousness of the believer the inner being, which 
is everything and which acts, but does not itself come forth. 
535· In pure Insight, however, the Notion is alone the actual ; 
and this third aspect of Faith, that of being an object for pure 
Insight, is really the true relation in which Faith here appears. 
Pure Insight itself, like Faith, is to be considered partly in and 
for itself, and partly in its relationship to the actual world so 
far as this is still present in a positive form, viz. as a vain con­
sciousness, and lastly, in that relation to faith mentioned above. 
536. We have seen what pure insight is in and for itself. As 
faith is the tranquil pure consciousness of Spirit as essence, so is 
pure insight the self-consciousness of Spirit as essence ; it there­
fore knows essence, not as essence, but as absolute self. It there­
fore seeks to abolish every kind of independence other than that 
of self-consciousness, whether it be the independence of what 
is actual, or of what possesses intrinsic being, and to give it the 
form of Notion. Pure insight is not only the certainty of self-con­
scious Reason that it is all truth : it knows that it is. 
537· However, in the form in which the Notion of pure in­
sight first makes its appearance, it is not yet realized. Accord­
ingly, its consciousness still appears as contingent, as single and 

C U LTU R E  
separate, and its essence appears for it in the form of an end 
which it has to realize. It has, to begin with, the intention of mak­
ing pure insight universal, i.e. of making everything that is actual 
into a Notion, and into one and the same Notion in every self­
consciousness. The intention is pure, for it has pure insight for 
its content ; and this insight is likewise pure, for its content is 
solely the absolute Notion, which meets with no opposition in 
an object, nor is it restricted in its own self. In the unrestricted 
Notion there are directly found the two aspects : that everything 
objective has only the significance of being-for-self, of self-con­
sciousness, and that this has the significance of a universal, that 
pure insight is to become the property of every self-conscious­
ness. This second aspect of the intention is a result of culture 
in so far as in this culture, the difference of objective Spirit, 
the parts and the determinations which its judgement imposed 
on the world, as well as the differences which appear as natural 
predispositions, have all been upset. Genius, talent, special 
capacities generally, belong to the world of actuality, in so far 
as this world still contains the aspect of being a spiritual animal 
kingdom in which individuals, amid confusion and mutual vio­
lence, cheat and struggle over the essence of the actual world. 
These differences, it is true, have no place in this world as honest 
especes ; individuality neither is contented with the unreal 'mat­
ter in hand' itself nor has it a particular content and ends 
of its own. On the contrary, it counts merely as something uni­
versally acknowledged, viz. as an educated individuality ; and 
the difference is reduced to one ofless or more energy, a quantita­
tive difference, i.e. a non-essential difference. This last dif­
ference, however, has been effaced by the fact that in the com­
pletely disrupted state of consciousness difference changed 
round into an absolutely qualitative difference. There, what 
is for the 'I' an 'other' is only the 'I' itself. In this infinite judge­
ment all one-sidedness and peculiarity of the original being­
for-self has been eradicated ; the self knows itself qua pure self 
· to be its own object ;  and this absolute identity of the two sides 
is the element of pure insight. Pure insight is, therefore, the 
simple, immanently differentiated essence, and equally the uni­
versal work or achievement and a universal possession. In this 
simple spiritual substance, self-consciousness gives itself and pre­
serves for itself in every object the consciousness of this its own 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
particular being or of its own action, just as conversely, the 
individuality of self-consciousness is therein self-identical and 
universal. This pure insight is thus the Spirit that calls to every 
consciousness : be for yourselves what you all are in yourselves­
reasonable. 
I I .  T H E  E N L I G H T E N M E N T  
538. The peculiar object against which pure insight directs 
the power of the Notion is faith, which is the form of pure con­
sciousness confronting it in the same element. But it also has 
a relation to the actual world for, like faith, it is the return 
from the actual world into pure consciousness. We have, first 
of all, to see the nature of its activity as it is directed against 
the impure intentions and perverse insights of the actual world. 
539· We have already mentioned the tranquil consciousness 
that stands opposed to this turmoil which, having once settled 
down starts up all over again ; it constitutes the side of pure 
insight and intention. This tranquil consciousness, however, as 
we saw, has no special insight into the world of culture ; this latter 
has itself rather the most painful feeling and the truest insight 
about itself: the feeling that all its defences have broken down, 
that every part of its being has been tortured on the rack and 
every bone broken ; it is also the language of this feeling and 
the brilliant talk which pronounces judgement on every aspect 
of its condition. Here, therefore, pure insight can have no 
activity and content of its own and thus can only behave as 
the formal and faithful apprehension of its own brilliant insight 
into the world and of its own peculiar language. Since this lan­
guage is that of a distracted mind, and the pronouncement only 
some twaddle uttered on the spur of the moment, which is again 
quickly forgotten, and exists as a whole only for a third con­
sciousness, this latter can only be distinguished as pure insight 
if it brings these scattered traits into a general picture and then 
makes them into an insight for everyone. 
540. By this simple means it will clear up the confusion of 
this world. For we have found that it is not the groups [Massen] 
and the specific Notions and individualities that are the essence 
of this actuality, but that this has its substance and support 
solely in the Spirit which exists qua judging and discussing, and 

CULTURE 
that the interest of having a content for this argumentation and 
chatter alone preserves the whole and the groups into which 
it is articulated. In this language of insight, its self-conscious­
ness is for it still a being existing on its own account, this single indivi­
dual; but the vanity of the content is at the same time the vanity 
of the self that knows itself to be vain. When the placidly 
apprehending consciousness makes a collection of the most tell­
ing and penetrating versions of all this brilliant talk, the soul 
that still preserves the whole, then the vanity of witty judge­
ments perishes with that other vanity, the vanity of existence. 
The collection shows to most people a better wit, or to everyone 
at least a more varied wit, than their own, and shows that 
'knowing better' and 'judging' are in general something uni­
versal and now universally known. With this, the sole remain­
ing interest is eradicated, and the individual judgement is 
resolved into the universal insight. However, the knowledge of 
essence is still firmly established as superior to empty know­
ledge, and pure insight only manifests its own peculiar activity 
in so far as it opposes itself to faith. 
a. The struggle of the Enlightenment with Superstition 
541 .  The various modes of the negative attitude of conscious­
ness, the attitude of scepticism and that of theoretical and 
practical idealism, are inferior shapes compared with that of 
pure insight and its diffusion, of the Enlightenment; for pure insight 
is born of the substance [of Spirit], knows the pure self of con­
sciousness to be absolute, and enters into dispute with the pure 
consciousness of the absolute essence of all reality. Since faith 
and insight are the same pure consciousness, but as regards form 
are opposed-the essence is for faith [mere] thought, not Notion, 
and is therefore the sheer opposite of self-consciousness, whereas 
for pure insight the essence is the self-their nature is such that 
each is for the other the sheer negative of it. In their appearance 
as mutually opposed, all content falls to faith, for each moment 
in its tranquil element of thought, obtains an enduring being, 
Pure insight, however, is in the first instance devoid of content 
and is rather the pure vanishing of it ; but by the negative move­
ment towards what is negative to it, it will realize itself and 
give itself a content. 
542. It knows that faith is opposed to pure insight, opposed 

C. (BB.) SPIRIT 
to Reason and truth. Just as it sees faith in general to be a tissue 
of superstitions, prejudices, and errors, so it further sees the con­
sciousness of this content organized into a realm of error in 
which false insight, common to the mass of people, is immediate, 
naive, and unreflective; but also it has within it the moment 
of reflection-into-self, or of self-consciousness, separated from 
its na·ivety, in the shape of an insight which remains indepen­
dently in the background, and an evil intention by which the 
general mass of the people is befooled. The masses are the vic­
tims of the deception of a priesthood which, in its envious conceit, 
holds itself to be the sole possessor of insight and pursues its 
other selfish ends as well. At the same time it conspires with 
despotism which, as the synthetic, non-notional unity of the real 
and this ideal realmÌa curiously inconsistent entityÍstands 
above the bad insight of the multitude and the bad intentions 
of the priests, and yet unites both within itself. From the stu­
pidity and confusion of the people brought about by the trickery 
of priestcraft, despotism, which despises both, draws for itself 
the advantage of undisturbed domination and the fulfilment 
of its desires and caprices, but is itself at the same time this same 
dullness of insight, the same superstition and error. 
543· The Enlightenment does not attack these three aspects 
of the enemy without making a distinction. For since its essence 
is pure insight, what is universal in and for itself, its true relation 
to the other extreme is that in which it concerns itself with the 
common and identical element in both. The aspect of individuality, 
isolating itself from the general na·ive consciousness, is its anti­
thesis which it cannot directly affect. The will of the deceiving 
priesthood and of the oppressive despot is, therefore, not 
directly the object of its activity; its object is the insight devoid 
of will which has no separable individuality of its own, the 
Notion of rational self-consciousness which has its existence in 
the general mass but is not yet present there qua Notion. Pure 
insight, however, in delivering this honest insight and its essenti­
ally na·ive nature from prejudices and errors, wrests from the 
hands of the bad intention the reality and power of its deceit, 
for whose realm the na·ive consciousness of the general mass of 
the people provides its basis and materialÎi.e. the being-for­
self( of that realm] has its suhstancein the simple, na·ive conscious-
ness as such. 
· 

CULTURE 
331 
544· The relation of pure insight to the na'ive consciousness 
of absolute Being now has a twofold aspect. On the one hand, 
pure insight is itself the same as that consciousness. On the other 
hand, this na'ive consciousness gives complete liberty to absolute 
Being, as well as to its parts, in the simple element of its thought, 
and allows them to subsist there and to be valid only as its 
implicit being, and hence to be objectively valid; but in this 
implicit being it renounces its own being-for-self. In so far as, 
according to the first aspect, this faith is for pure insight in itself 
pure self-consciousness and has only to become this explicitly 
for itself, pure insight. has, in this Notion of self-consciousness, 
the element in which, instead of false insight, it realizes itself. 
545· Since from this aspect both are essentially the same and 
the relation of pure insight takes place through and in the same 
element, the communication between them is direct and their 
giving and receiving is an unimpeded flow of each into the 
other. Whatever wedges of any sort may be driven into con­
sciousness, it is in itself this simplicity in which everything is dis­
solved, forgotten, and unbiased, and which therefore is abso­
lutely receptive to the Notion. It is on this account that the 
communication of pure insight is comparable to a silent expan­
sion or to the dijjusion, say, of a perfume in the unresisting atmo­
sphere. It is a penetrating infection which does not make itself 
noticeable beforehand as something opposed to the indifferent 
element into which it insinuates itself, and therefore cannot be 
warded off. Only when the infection has become widespread 
is that consciousness, which unheedingly yielded to its influ­
ence, aware of it. For though the nature of what consciousness 
received into itself was simple and homogeneous with it, yet 
it was also the simplicity of an introreflected negativity which 
subsequently also develops, in keeping with its nature, into 
something opposed to it and thereby reminds consciousness of 
its previous state. This simplicity is the Notion, which is the 
simple knowing that knows itself and also its opposite, but 
knows this opposite to be reduced to a moment within it. Con­
sequently, when consciousness does become aware of pure in­
sight, the latter is already widespread; the struggle against it 
betrays the fact that infection has occurred. The struggle is too 
late, and every remedy adopted only aggravates the disease, 
for it has laid hold of the marrow of spiritual life, viz. the Notion 

332 
C. (BB . )  S P I R I T  
of consciousness, or the pure essence itself of consगiousness. 
Therefore too there is no power in consciousness which could 
overcome he disease. Because this is present in the essence itself, 
its manifestations, while still isolated, can be suppressed and 
the superficial symptoms smothered. This is greatly to its ad­
vantage, for it does not now squander its power or show itself 
unworthy of its real nature, which is the case when it breaks 
out in symptoms and single eruptions antagonistic to the con­
tent offaith and to its connection with the reality of the world 
outside of it. Rather, being now an invisible and imperceptible 
Spirit, it infiltrates the noble parts through and through and 
soon has taken complete possession of all the vitals and members 
of the unconscious idol ; then 'one fine morning it gives its com­
rade a shove witli the elbow, and bang! crash ! the idol lies on 
the floor' .1 On 'one fine morning' whose noon is bloodless if 
the infection has penetrated to every organ of spiritual life. 
Memory alone then still preserves the dead form of the Spirit's 
previous shape as a vanished history, vanished one knows not 
how. And the new serpent of wisdom raised on high for adora­
tion has in this way painlessly cast merely a withered skin. 
546. But this silent, ceaseless weaving of the Spirit in the 
simple inwardness of its substance, Spirit concealing its action 
from itself, is only one side of the realization of pure insight. 
Its diffusion consists not merely in the fact that like goes 
together with like, nor is its actualization merely an expansion 
in which there is no antithesis. On the contrary, the action of 
the negative essence is no less essentially a developed, self-dif­
ferenting movement which, being a conscious act, must give 
its moments a definite manifest existence and must appear on 
the scene as a sheer uproar and a violent struggle with its anti­
thesis. 
54 7. We have therefore to see how pure insight and intention 
behaves in its negative attitude to that 'other' which it finds con­
fronting it. Pure insight and intention which takes up a negative 
attitude can only be-since its Notion is all essentiality and 
there is nothing outside of it-the negative of itself As insigh t, 
therefore, it becomes the negative of pure insight, becomes un­
truth and unreason, and, as intention, it becomes the negative 
of pure intention, becomes a lie and insincerity of purpose. 
t Diderot's Nephew of Rameau. 

CULTURE 
333 
548. It entangles itself in this contradiction through engag­
ing in dispute, and imagines that what it is attacking is some­
thing other than itself. It only imagines this, for its essence as 
absolute negativity implies that it contains that otherness 
within itself. The absolute Notion is the category ; in that 
Notion, knowing and the object known are the same. Con­
sequently, what pure insight pronounces to be its other, what 
it asserts to be an error or a lie, can be nothing else but its own 
self; it can condemn only what it is itself. What is not rational 
has no truth, or, what is not grasped conceptually, is not. When, 
therefore, Reason speaks of something other than itself, it speaks 
in fact only of itself; so doing, it does not go outside of itself. 
This struggle with its antithesis, therefore, also has the signifi­
cance of being the actualization of insight. For this consists pre­
cisely in the process of developing the moments and taking them 
back into itself. One part of this process is the differentiation 
in which intellectual insight confronts its own self as object ; so 
long as it persists in this relationship it is alienated from itself. 
As pure insight it is devoid of all content ; the process of its realiza­
tion consists in its making itself its content ; for nothing else can 
become its content because it is the self-consciousness of the 
category. But since in confronting the content, pure insight at 
first knows it only as a content and not yet as its own self, it does 
not recognize itself in it. Complete insight is therefore attained 
when the content, which to begin with was objective to it, is 
recognized as its own. Its result, however, will thus be neither 
the re-establishment of the errors it struggles against, nor 
merely its original Notion, but an insight which recognizes the 
absolute negation of itself to be its own actual existence, to be 
its own self, or an insight whose Notion recognizes its own self. 
This nature of the struggle of the Enlightenment with errors, 
that of fighting itself in them, and of condemning in them what 
it itself asserts, is explicit/or us, or what Enlightenmenघ and its 
struggle is in itself. It is the first aspect of this struggle, however, 
the defilement of Enlightenment through the adoption by its 
self-identical purity of a negative attitude, that is an object for 
faith, which therefore comes to know it as falsehood, unreason, 
and as ill-intentioned, just as Enlightenment regards faith as 
error and prejudice. As regards its content, it is in the first in­
stance an empty insight whose content appears to it to be some-

334 
C .  ( B B . )  S P I R IT 
thing other than itself; consequently, itjindsit given in the shape 
of a content which is not yet its own, as something that exists 
quite independently of it, finds it given in faith. 
549· The way, therefore, in which Enlightenment appre­
hends its object in the first instance and generally, is that it takes 
it as pure insight, and, not recognizing itself therein, decla,res it 
to be error. In insight as such, consciousness apprehends an 
object in such a way that it becomes the essence of conscious­
ness, or becomes an object which consciousness permeates, in 
which consciousness preserves itself, abides with itself, and 
remains present to itself, and since it is thus the movement of 
the object, brings it into existence. It is just this that Enlighten­
ment rightly declares faith to be, when it says that what is 
for faith the absolute Being, is a Being of its own consciousness, 
is its own thought, something that is a creation of consciousness 
itself. Thus what Enlightenment declares to be an error and 
a fiction is the very same thing as Enlightenmen't itself is. 
Enlightenment that wants to teach faith the new wisdom does 
not tell it anything new ; for its object is also for it just this, 
viz. a pure essence of its own consciousness, so that this con­
sciousness does not take itself to be lost and negated in that 
object, but rather puts its trust in it, i.e. it finds itself as this 
particular consciousness, or as self-consciousness, precisely in the 
obJect. Whomsoever I trust, his certainty qf himself is for ङe the 
certainty of myself; I recognize in him my own being-for-self, 
know that he acknowledges it and that it is for him purpose 
and essence. Trust, however, is faith, because the consciousness 
of the believer is directly related to its object and is thus also in­
tuitively aware that it is one with it and in it. Further, since 
what is object for me is that in which I recognize myself, I am 
for myself at the same time in that object in the form of another 
self-consciousness, i.e. one which has become in that object 
alienated from its particular individuality, viz. from its natural 
and contingent existence, but which partly remains therein self­
consciousness, partly, in that object, is an essential consciousness 
just as pure insight is. The Notion of pure insight implies not 
merely that consciousness recognizes itself in the object of its 
insight and is immediately present in it without first leaving the 
element of thought and returning into itself; it also implies that 
consciousness is aware of itself as being also the mediating move-

CULTURE 
335 
ment, aware of itself as being the activity of producing the 
object. This unity of itself as unity of self and object is thereby 
explicit for it in thought. Faith, too, is just this consciousness. 
Obedience and action form a necessary moment, through 
which the certainty that absolute Being is comes about. This 
action of faith does not indeed make it appear as if absolute 
Being itself is produced by it. But the absolute Being of faith 
is essentially not the abstract essence that would exist beyond 
the consciousness of the believer ; on the contrary, it is the Spirit 
of the [religious] community, the unity of the abstract essence 
and self-consciousness. That it be the Spirit of the community, 
this requires as a necessary moment the action of the com­
munity. It is this Spirit, only by being produced by consciousness ; 
or rather, it does not exist as the Spirit of the community without 
having been produced by consciousness. For essential as is the 
producing of it, this is equally essentially not the sole ground 
of absolute Being, but only a moment. Absolute Being is at the 
same time in and for itself. 
550. On the other side, the Notion of pure insight is some­
thing other to itself than its own object ; for it is just this negative 
determination that constitutes the object. Thus, from the other 
side, it also declares the essence of faith to be something alien 
to consciousness, to be not its essence but a changeling foisted 
on it. But here Enlightenment is foolish ; faith regards it as not 
knowing what it is saying, and as not understanding the real 
facts when it talks about priestly deception and deluding the 
people. It talks about this as if by some hocus-pocus of conjt1ring 
priests consciousness had been palmed off with something abso­
lutely alien and 'other' to it in place of its own essence ; and at 
the same time it says that this is an essence of consciousness, 
that consciousness believes in it, puts its trust in it, and seeks to 
make it favourably disposed towards itself, i.e. consciousness 
beholds in it its pure essence just as much as its own single and 
universal individuality, and through this action produces this 
unity of itself with its essence. Thus what it asserts to be alien 
to consciousness, it directly declares to be the inmost nature of 
consciousness itself. How then can it possibly talk about deception 
and delusion? Since, in the same voice, it asserts the very_oppo­
site of what it maintains regarding faith, it really reveals itself 
to faith as the conscious lie. How are delusion and deception 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
to take piace where consciousness in its truth has directly the 
certainty of itself, where in its object it possesses its own self, since 
it just as much finds as produces itself in it? The distinction 
no longer exists even in words. If the general question has been 
propounded, whether it is permissible to delude a people,1 the 
answer would in fact have to be that the question is pointless, 
because it is impossible to deceive a people in this matter. Brass 
instead of gold, counterfeit instead of genuine money, may well 
be passed off in isolated cases ; many may be persuaded to 
believe that a battle lost was a battle won, and other lies about 
things of sense and isolated happenings may be made credible 
for a time ; but in the knowledge of that essential being in which 
consciousness has the immediate certainty of itself, the idea of 
delusion is quite out of the question. 
· 
55 1 .  Let us see further how faith experiences the Enlighten­
ment in the dijferent moments of its own consciousness, to 
which the view mentioned above referred to only generally. 
These moments are : pure thought or, as object, absolute Being 
in and for itself; then its relation-as a knowing-to absolute 
Being, the ground of its belief; and lastly, its relation to absolute 
Being in its acts, or its worship and service. Just as pure insight 
has failed to recognize itself and has denied itself in belief gener­
ally, so too in these moments it will behave in an equally per­
verse manner. 
552. Pure insight adopts a negative attitude to the absolute 
Being of the believing consciousness. This Being is pure thought, 
and pure thought posited within itself as an object or as essence ; 
in the believing consciousness, this intrinsic being of thought 
acquires at the same time for consciousness that is for itself, the 
form-but only the empty form-of objectivity ; it has the 
character of something presented to consciousness. To pure in­
sight, however, since it is pure consciousness from the side of 
the self that is for itself, the 'other' appears as something negative 
of self-consciousness. This could still be taken either as the pure 
intrinsic being of thought, or also as the being of sense-certainty. But 
sir.ce it is at the same time for the self, and this self, qua self 
that has an object, is an actual consciousness, the object proper 
as such is for pure insight an ordinary Thing of sense-certainty 
that merely is. This its object is manifest to it in the picture-thought 
• The subject of a prize essay proposed by Frederick the Great in 1 778. 

CULTURE 
337 
of faith. It condemns this picture-thought, and in It Its own 
object. But in apprehending the object offaith as insight's own 
object, it already does faith a wrong. For it is saying that the 
absolute Being offaith is a piece of stone, a block of wood, which 
has eyes and sees not, or again, a piece of dough which, having 
come from the field is transformed by man and returned to 
earth again ; or in whatever other ways faith anthropomor­
phizes absolute Being, making it into an object that it can 
represent to itself. 
553· Enlightenment, which professes to be pure, here con­
verts what is for Spirit eternal life and Holy Spirit into an 
actual, perishable thing, and defiles it with sense-certainty's view 
of it, a viewpoint which is essentially trivial and definitely 
absent from faith in its worship, so that Enlightenment is com­
pletely in the wrong when it imputes this view to faith. What 
faith reveres, it certainly does not regard as stone or wood or 
dough, nor any other kind of temporal, sensuous thing. If 
Enlightenment has a mind to say that, all the same, its object 
is also this, or even that it is essentially and in truth this, then 
firstly, faith is equally well aware of that 'also' which, however, 
lies outside of its worship ; secondly, however, faith does not 
regard such things as stones, etc. as possessing intrinsic being ; 
on the contrary, what has intrinsic being for faith is solely the 
essential being of pure thought. 
554· The second moment is the relation of faith to this abso­
lute Being as a consciousness that knows it. For faith, as a think­
ing, pure consciousness, this Being is immediately present ; but 
pure consciousness is just as much a mediated relation of certainty 
to truth, a relation which constitutes the ground of faith. For 
Enlightenment, this ground becomes equally a fortuitous know­
ledge of fortuitous events. But the ground of knowledge is the con­
scious universal, and in its truth is absolute Spirit which, in 
abstract pure consciousness, or in thought as such, is merely 
absolute Being, but, qua self-consciousness, is knowledge of itself. 
Pure insight characterizes this conscious universal, the simple, 
self-knowing Spirit, equally as a negative of self-consciousness. It 
is true that pure insight is itself pure mediated, i.e. self-mediated 
thought, is a pure knowing; but since it is a pure insight, a pure 
knowing, that does not as yet know itself, i.e. is not aware that 
it is this pure, mediating movement, the mediation seems to 

C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
insight, as does everything that is itself insight, to be an 'other'. 
In its realization, therefore, it develops this moment which is 
essential to it; but this moment seems to it to belong to faith 
and to have the character of something external to pure insight, 
to be a fortuitous knowledge of narratives of real events, real 
in the ordinary sense of the word. Here, therefore, it falsely 
charges religious belief with basing its certainty on some particu­
lar historical evidences which, considered as historical evidences, 
would certanly not guarantee the degree of certainty about 
their content which is given by newspaper accounts of any 
happening-further, that its certainty rests on the accidental 
preservation of these evidences ; on the one hand, the preservation 
by means of paper, and on the other hand, by the skill and 
honesty of their transference from one piece of paper to another, 
and lastly, on the correct interpretation of the meaning of dead 
words and letters. In fact, however, it does not occur to faith 
to fasten its certainty to such evidences and such fortuitous cir­
cumstances. Faith, in its certainty, is an unsophisticated rela­
tionship to its absolute object, a pure knowing of it which does 
not mix up letters, paper, and copyists in its consciousness of 
absolute Being, and does not bring itself into relation with it 
by means of things ofthat kind. On the contrary, this conscious­
ness is the self-mediating ground of its knowledge ; it is Spirit 
itself which bears witness to itself, both in the inwardness of the 
individual consciousness and through the universal presence in 
everyone of faith in it. If faith wants to appeal to historical 
evidences in order to get that kind of foundation, or at least 
confirmation, of its content that Enlightenment talks about, 
and seriously thinks and acts as if that were a matter of im­
portance, then it has already let itself be corrupted by the 
Enlightenment ; and its efforts to establish and consolidate 
itself in such a way are merely evidence it gives of its corrup­
tion by the Enlightenment. 
555· There still remains the third side, the relation to absolute 
Being of consciousness as action. This action is the setting-aside of 
the particularity of the individual, or of the natural mode of 
its being-for-self, whence proceeds its certainty of being pure 
self-consciousness, of being, in accordance with its action, i.e. 
as an independent individual, one with absolute Being. Since, in 
action, purposiveness and End are distinguished, and pure insight 

C U L T U R E  
339 
in relation to this action equally adopts a negative attitude and, 
as in the other moments, denies its own self, it must, as regards 
purposiveness, exhibit itself as lacking in intelligence, since insight 
united with intention, i.e. the harmony of End and Means, 
appears to it as an 'other', or rather as the opposite of insight; 
as regards the End itself, however, it has to make badness, 
enjoyment, and possession its End and so prove itself to be the 
impurest kind of intention, since pure intention, qua 'other', is 
equally impure intention. 
556. Accordingly, we see that as regards purposiveness, 
Enlightenment finds it foolish when the believer gives himself 
the superior consciousness of not being in bondage to natural 
enjoyment and pleasure by actually denying himself natural 
enjoyment and pleasure, and demonstrating by his actions that his 
contempt for them is no lie but is genuine. Similarly, Enlighten­
ment finds it foolish that the individual absolves itself of its 
quality of being absolutely individual, excluding all others and 
of possessing property of its own, by itself giving up its property ; 
for thereby it shows in truth that it is not in earnest with this 
isolation of itself, but is raised above the natural necessity of 
isolating itself, and in this absolute isolation of being-for-self 
denying that others are the same as itself. Pure insight finds both 
to be of no purpose as well as wrong :  the purpose of showing 
oneself to be free of pleasure and possession is not served by 
denying oneself pleasure and giving away a possession ; in the 
opposite case, therefore, it will declare the man a fuol who, in 
order to eat, has recourse to actually eating. Insight also finds 
it wrong to deny oneself a meal and to give away butter and 
eggs, not for money, nor money for butter and eggs, but simply 
to give them away without receiving anything in return ; it de­
clares a meal or the possession of things of that sort to be an 
End in itself, and hence in fact declares itself to be a very impure 
intention, which treats such enjoyment and possession as some­
thing wholly essential. Again, it also affirms as a pure intention 
the necessity of rising above natural existence, above acquisi­
tiveness about the means of existence ; only it finds it foolish 
and wrong that this elevation should be demonstrated by deeds ; 
in other words, this pure insight is in truth a deception, which 
feigns and demands an inner elevation, but declares that it is 
superfluous, foolish, and even wrong to be in earnest about it, 

C .  (BB. ) S P I R I T  
to put this elevation into actual practice and demonstrate its truth. 
Pure insight thus denies itself both as pure insight-for it denies 
directly purposive action-and as pure intention-for it denies 
the intention of proving itself freed from the Ends of a separate 
individual existence. 
557· It is thus that Enlightenment lets itself be understood 
by faith. It presents itself in this bad light because, just by being 
in relation to an 'other', it gives itself a negative reality, or exhibits 
itself as the opposite of itself; but pure insight and intention must 
enter into this relationship, for it is their realization. This at 
first appeared as a negative reality. Perhaps its positive reality 
is better constituted. Let us see how things stand with this. If 
all prejudice and superstition have been banished, the question 
arises, What next? What is the truth Enlightenment has propagated 
in their stead? It has already declared that this positive content 
is in its extirpation of error, for that alienation of itself is just 
as much its positive reality. In its approach to what, for faith, 
is absolute Spirit, it interprets any determinateness it discovers there 
as wood, stone, etc., as particular, real things. Since in this way 
it grasps in general every determinateness, i.e. all content and 
filling, as something.finite, as a human entity and [mere] idea, abso­
lute Being becomes for it a vacuum to which no determinations, 
no predicates, can be attributed. The attribution of predicates 
to such a vacuum would be in itself reprehensible ; and it is just 
in such a union that the monstrosities of superstition have been 
produced. Reason, pure insight, is certainly not empty itself, since 
the negative of itself is for it, and is its content ;  on the contrary, 
it is rich, but rich only in particularity and limitations. To let 
nothing of that sort appertain to absolute Being or be attributed 
to it, this is the prudent behaviour of Reason, of pure insight, 
which knows how to put itself and its finite riches in their proper 
place, and how to deal with the Absolute in a worthy manner. 
558. In contrast to this empty Being there stands, as the 
second moment of the positive truth of Enlightenment, the 
singleness in general of consciousness and of all being, a singleness 
excluded from absolute Being and in the form of absolute being­
in-and-for-itself Consciousness, which in its very first reality is 
sense-certainty and mere 'meaning', returns here to this from 
the whole course of its experience and is again a knowledge of 
what is purely negative of itself, or of things of sense, i.e. of things 

C U LTURE 
which immediately and indifferently confront its being-for-self. 
Here, however, it is not an immediate, natural consciousness ; on 
the contrary, it has become such for itself. Whereas at first it was 
at the mercy of every sort of entanglement into which it was 
plunged by its unfolding, and now has been led back by pure 
insight to its first shape, it has experienced that shape as result. 
Being based on the nothingness of all the other shapes of con­
sciousness, and hence of everything beyond sense-certainty, this 
sense-certainty is no longer mere 'meaning', but rather absolute 
truth. This nothingness of everything that lies beyond sense­
certainty is no doubt merely a negative proof of this truth ; but 
it is not susceptible of any other. For the positive truth of sense­
certainty is in its own self the immediate being-for-self of the 
Notion itself qua object, and that too in the form of otherness­
the positive truth that every consciousness is absolutely certain 
that it is, and that there are other real things outside of it, and 
that in its natural being it, like these things, is in and for itself 
or absolute. 
559· Lastly, the third moment of the truth of Enlightenment is 
the relation of the individual being to absolute Being, is the 
relation between the first two moments. Insight, qua pure in­
sight of what is identical or unrestricted, also goes beyond what is 
not identical, viz. beyond finite reality, or beyond itself as mere 
otherness. For the beyond of this otherness it has the vozd to 
which, therefore, it relates the sensuous reality. In the determi­
nation of this relation, both of the sides do not enter as content; 
for one of them is the void, and it is only through the other, 
the sensuous reality, that a content is present. But the form of 
the relation, to the determination of which the side of the in­
itself contributes, can be a matter of choice ; for the form is some­
thing intrinsically negative, and therefore self-opposed :  being as. 
well as nothing, the in-self as well as its opposite ; or, what is the 
same thing, the relation of the actual world to the in-itself qua 
a beyond, is as much a negating as a positing of that actual world. 
Finite reality can therefore, properly speaking, be taken just 
as one needs. The sensuous is therefore now related positively 
to the Absolute as to the in-itself, and sensuous reality is itself 
an intrinsic being ; the Absolute makes it, fosters and cherishes 
it. Then, again, it is related to the Absolute as an opposite, as 
to its own non-being; in this relationship it is not anything in 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
itself, but exists only for an 'other'. Whereas in the preceding 
shape of consciousness, the Notions of the antithesis were deter­
mined as Good and Bad, in the case of pure insight, on the other 
hand, they become the purer abstractions of being-in-itself and 
being-for-another. 
56o. Both ways of viewing the positive and the negative rela­
tions of the finite to the in-itself are, however, in fact equally 
necessary, and everything is thus as much something in itself 
as it is for an 'other' ; in other words, everything is useful. Every­
thing is at the mercy of everything else, now lets itself be used 
by others and isfor them, and now, so to speak, stands again 
on its hind legs, is stand-offish towards the other, is for itself, 
and uses the other in its turn. From this, we see what is the 
essence and what is the place of man regarded as a Thing that 
is conscious of this relation. As he immediately is, as a natural 
consciousness per se, man is good, as an individual he is absolute 
and all else exists for him ; and moreover, since the moments 
have for him, qua self-conscious animal, the significance of uni­
versality, everything exists for his pleasure and delight and, as 
one who has come from the hand of God, he walks the earth 
as in a garden planted for him. He must also have plucked the 
fruit of the tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil. He possesses 
in this an advantage which distinguishes him from all other 
creatures, for it happens that his intrinsically good nature is 
also so constituted that an excess of pleasure does it harm, or 
rather his individuality has also its beyond within it, can go 
beyond itself and destroy itself. To counter this, Reason is for 
him a useful instrument for keeping this excess within bounds, 
or rather for preserving himself when he oversteps his limit ; for 
this is the power of consciousness. Enjoyment on the part of 
the conscious, intrinsically universal being, must not itself be 
something determinate as regards variety and duration, but 
universal. 'Measure' or proportion has therefore the function 
of preventing pleasure in its variety and duration from being 
cut short ; i.e. the function of 'measure' is immoderation. Just 
as everything is useful to man, so man is useful too, and his 
vocation is to make himself a member of the group, of use for 
the common good and serviceable to all. The extent to which 
he looks after his own interests must also be matched by the 
extent to which he serves others, and so far as he serves others, 

C U L T U R E  
343 
so far is he taking care of himself: one hand washes the other. 
But wherever he finds himself, there he is in his right place; 
he makes use of others and is himself made use of. 
561 .  Different things are useful to one another in different 
ways; but all things are mutually serviceable through their own 
nature, viz. through being related to the Absolute in two ways, 
the one positive, whereby they exist entirely on their own 
account, the other negative, whereby they exist for others. The 
relation to absolute Being, or religion, is therefore of all useful 
things the supremely useful ; for it is pure utility itself, it is this 
enduring being of all things, or their being-in-and-for-themselves, 
and it is their downfall, or their being-for-another. 
562. To faith, of course, this positive outcome of Enlighten­
ment is as much an abomination as its negative attitude to­
wards belief. This [enlightened] insight into absolute Being 
which sees nothing in it but just absolute Being, the 11tre supreme, 
or the void-this intention to regard everything in its immediate 
existence as having intrinsic being or as good, and finally, to 
regard the relation of the individual conscious being to absolute 
Being, religion, as exhaustively expressed in the Notion of 
utility-all this is for faith utterly detestable. This wisdom, pecu­
liar to Enlightenment, at the same time necessarily seems to 
faith to be undiluted platitude, and the confession of platitude ; 
because it consists of knowing nothing of absolute Being or, 
what amounts to the same thing, in knowing this quite flat tru­
ism about it, just that it is only absolute Being ; and, on the other 
hand, in knowing only what is finite and, moreover, knowing 
it as truth, and thinking that this knowledge of the finite as true 
is the highest knowledge attainable. 
563. Faith has the divine right, the right of absolute self­
identity or of pure thought, as against Enlightenment, and 
receives at its hands nothing but wrong; for Enlightenment dis­
torts all the moments of faith, changing them into something 
different from what they are in it. But Enlightenment has only 
a human right as against faith and for the support of its 
own truth ; for the wrong it commits is the right to be non-identi­
cal, and consists in perverting and altering, a right which 
belongs to the nature of self-consciousness as against simple essen­
tial being or thought. But since the right of Enlightenment is the 
right of self-consciousness, it will not only also retain its own 

344 
C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
right, so that two equal rights of Spirit could be left confronting 
each other, neither being capable of satisfying the other: it will 
maintain its absolute right because self-consciousness is the 
negativity of the Notion, a negativity which is active not only 
on its own account, but which also takes within its grasp its 
opposite. And because faith itself is a consciousness it will not 
be able to deny Enlightenment its right. 
564. For Enlightenment does not employ principles peculiar 
to itself in its attack on faith, but principles which are implicit 
in faith itself. Enlightenment merely presents faith with its own 
thoughts which faith unconsciously lets fall apart, but which 
Enlightenment brings together ; it merely reminds faith when 
one of its own modes is present to it, of the others which it also 
has, but which it always forgets when the other one is present. 
Enlightenment shows itself to faith to be pure insight by the 
fact that, in a specific moment, it sees the whole, brings for­
ward the other moment which is opposed to it, and, converting 
one into the other, brings to notice the negative essence of both 
thoughts, the Notion. To faith, it seems to be a perversion and 
a lie because it points out the otherness of its moments ; in doing 
so, it seems directly to make something else out of them than 
they are in their separateness ; but this 'other' is equally essential 
and, in truth, is present in the believing consciousness itself, only 
this does not think about it, but puts it away somewhere. Con­
sequently, it is neither alien to faith, nor can faith disavow it. 
565. Enlightenment itself, however, which reminds faith of 
the opposite aspect of its separated moments, is just as little en­
lightened about itself. It has a purely negative attitude to faith 
so far as it excludes its own content from its purity and takes 
that content to be the negative of itself. It therefore neither recog­
nizes itself in this negative, in the content of faith, nor for this 
reason does it bring the two thoughts together, the one which 
it puts forward itself, and the one to which it opposes the first. 
Since it does not recognize that what it condemns in faith is 
directly its own thought, it is itself in the antithesis of the two 
moments, only one of which-viz. in every case the one opposed 
to faith-it acknowledges, but separates the other from the first, 
just as faith does. Consequently, Enlightenment does not pro­
duce the unity of both as their unity, i.e. the Notion ; but the 
Notion comes into being for it of its own accord, in other words, 

CULTURE 
345 
Enlightenment.finds the Notion there merely as something given. 
For, in itself, the realization of pure insight is just this, that in­
sight, whose essence is the Notion, at first becomes for itself an 
absolute 'other' and repudiates itself-for the antithesis of the 
Notion is an absolute antithesis-and then out of this otherness 
it comes to itself, or to its Notion. But Enlightenment is only 
this movement, it is the still unconscious activity of the pure 
Notion, an activity which, though it does arrive at its object, 
takes it to be an other, and, too, does not know the nature of the 
Notion, viz. that it is the undifferentiated which absolutely 
sunders itself. As against faith, then, insight is the might of the 
Notion in so far as it is the movement and the relating of the 
moments lying asunder in its consciousness, a relating in which 
their contradiction comes to light. Herein lies the absolute right 
oftheauthority which insight exercises over faith ; but the reality 
on which it exercises this authority lies just in the fact that the 
believing consciousness is itself the Notion, and therefore itself 
acknowledges the opposite [aspect] which insight puts before 
it. Insight therefore retains its right as against faith because it 
makes valid in faith what is necessary to faith itself and what 
faith possesses in itself. 
566. At first, Enlightenment affirms this moment of the 
Notion, that it is an act of consciousness ; opposing faith, it main­
tains that the absolute Being of faith is a Being of the believer's 
own consciousness qua a self, or that this absolute Being is a 
product of consciousness. To faith, its absolute Being, while it 
is possessed of intrinsic being for the believer, is also at the same 
time not like an alien thing which is just found in him, no one 
knowing how and whence it came. On the contrary, the faith 
of the believer consists just in his .finding himself as this particular 
personal consciousness in the absolute Being, and his obedience 
and service consist in producing, through his own activity, that 
Being as his own absolute Being. Enlightenment, strictly speak­
ing, only reminds faith of this, if faith roundly asserts that the 
in-itself of absolute Being is beyond the activity of consciousness. 
But while Enlightenment, it is true, corrects the one-sidedness 
of faith by bringing to its notice the opposite moment of action 
in contrast to being-and it is being which faith is alone thinking 
ofhere-and yet does not itself bring its own thoughts together, 
it isolates the pure moment of action and asserts that the in-itself 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
of faith is only a product of consciousness. This action, taken in 
isolation and opposed to the in-itself, is, however, a contingent 
action and, qua an activity of picture-thinking, is a creating of 
fictions-picture-thoughts which possess no intrinsic being; and 
this is how Enlightenment regards the content of faith. But, 
conversely, pure insight equally says the reverse. In maintain­
ing the moment of cJtherness which the Notion has within it, it 
pronounces [absolute] Being to be for faith something which 
in no wऒ co!lcerns consciousness, lies beyond it, is alien to it 
and unknown. The case is similar with faith. On the one hand, 
it puts its trust in absolute Being, and in doing so obtains the 
certainty of itself; on the other hand, for faith, absolute Being 
is unsearchable in all its ways and in its Being unattainable. 
567. Further, Enlightenment maintains against the believer 
a right which the latter himself concedes, when Enlightenment 
regards the object of the believer's veneration as stone and 
wood, or else as something finite and anthropomorphic. For 
since this consciousness is divided within itself, having a beyond 
of the real world and a world that is altogether this side of the 
world beyond, there is, as a matter offact, also present in it this 
view of the thing of sense according to which it counts as a being 
that is in and for itself; but faith does not bring together these 
two thoughts of absolute Being, which is for it at one time pure 
essence and at another time an ordinary thing of sense. Even its 
pure consciousness is affected by the latter view ; for the dif­
ferences of the supersensible world, because this is without the 
Notion, are a series of independent shapes and their movement 
is a happening, i.e. they exist only in picture-thinking and have 
within them the marks of sensuous existence. Enlightenment, 
on its side, equally isolates the actual world as an entity for­
saken by Spirit, isolates determinateness as unmoved fini­
tude, as if it were not even a moment in the spiritual movement 
of essential being, not nothing, but also not something that 
absolutely is, but something that is evanescent. 
568. It is clear that the same is the case with the ground of 
knowledge. Faith itself acknowledges a contingent knowledge ; 
for it has a relationship to contingent things, and absolute Being 
itself exists for faith in the form of a pictorial representation 
of a common reality. Consequently, the believing conscious­
ness, too, is a certainty which does not possess the truth within 

C U L T U R E  
347 
itself, and it confesses itself to be such an unessential conscious­
ness, to be or' this world and separated from the Spirit that is 
certain of itself and self-authenticated. But it forgets this 
moment in its immediate spiritual knowledge of absolute Being. 
Enlightenment, however, which reminds it of this, in its turn 
thinks only of contingent being and forgets the other-thinks 
only of the mediation which takes place through an alien third 
term, not of the mediation in which the immediate is itself the 
third term through which it mediates itselfwith the other, viz. 
with its own self. 
569. Finally, Enlightenment in its view of the action of faith 
finds the rejection ofenjoyment and possessions wrong and pur­
poseless. As to the rejection being wrong, Enlightenment is in 
agreement with faith on this point ; for faith itself acknowledges 
tfiis reality of possessing, holding on to, and enjoying, property. 
In holding on to property its behaviour is all the more self­
centred and stubborn, and in its enjoymer:tt it is all the more 
crudely self-abandoned, since its religious act of giving up posses­
sions and enjoyment falls on the far side of this reality and pur­
chases freedom for itself on that side. This service of sacrifice 
of natural impulses and enjoyments has, in fact, owing to this 
a•ltithesis, no truth. Retention occurs along with sacrifice ; the 
latter is merely a symbol which performs real sacrifice on only 
a small portion, and is therefore in point of fact only a sacrifice 
in imagination. 
5 70. As regards purposiveness, Enlightenment finds it inept to 
throw away one possession in order to know and to prove that 
one is liberated from all possessions, to deny oneself one 
enjoyment in order to know and to prove that one is liberated 
from all enjoyment. Faith itself apprehends the absolute action 
as a universal action ; not only is the action of its absolute Being 
as its object a universal action for faith, but the individual con­
sciousness, too, has to show that it is liberated entirely and 
generally from its sensual nature. But throwing away a single 
possession, or renouncing a single enjoyment, is not this uni­
versal action ; and since in the action the purpose, which is a 
universal purpose, and the performance, which is a single per­
formance, would be bound to present themselves to conscious­
ness as essentially incompatible, that action shows itself to be 
one in which consciousness has no part, and thus this kind of 

C. (BB. ) S P I R I T  
action is seen to be really too na·ive to be an action at all. It 
is too na·ive to fast, in order to prove that one is liberated from 
the pleasures of the table ; too na·ive to rid the body of another 
pleasure, as Origen did, in order to show that that pleasure is 
finished and done with. The action itself proves to be an external 
and single operation ; but desire is rooted inwardly and is a uni­
versal. Its pleasure disappears neither with the instrument nor 
by abstention from particular pleasures. 
57 1 .  But Enlightenment on its side here isolates the inward, 
the unreal, as opposed to reality, just as it held fast to the exter­
nality of the Thing as opposed to the inwardness of faith in the 
latter's contemplation and devotion. It places the essential fac­
tor in the intention, in the thought, and thereby saves itself the 
trouble of actually accomplishing the liberation from natural 
aims. On the contrary, this inwardness is itself the formal ele­
ment which has its filling in the natural impulses, which are 
justified simply by the fact that they are inward, that they 
belong to universal being, to Nature. 
572. Enlightenment, then, holds an irresistible authority 
over faith because, in the believer's own consciousness, are 
found the very moments which Enlightenment has established 
as valid. Examining the effect of this authority more closely, 
its behaviour towards faith seems to rend asunder the beautiful 
unity of trust and immediate certainty, to pollute its spiritual con­
sciousness with mean thoughts of sensuous reality, to destroy the 
soul which is composed and secure in its submission, by the vanity 
of the Understanding and of self-will and self-fulfilment. But 
as a matter of fact, the result of the Enlightenment is rather 
to do away with the thoughtless, or rather non-notional, separation 
which is present in faith. The believing consciousness weighs 
and measures by a twofold standard ; it has two sorts of 
eyes, two sorts of ears, speaks with two voices, has duplicated 
all ideas without comparing the twofold meanings. In other 
words, faith lives in two sorts of non-notional perceptions, the 
one the perceptions of the slumbering consciousness which lives 
purely in non-notional thoughts, the other those of the waking 
consciousness which lives solely in the world of sense ; and in 
each of them it has its own separate housekeeping. The 
enlightenment illuminates that heavenly world with ideas 
belonging to the world of sense, and points out this finitude which 

C U L T U R E  
349 
faith cannot deny, because it is self-consciousness and hence is 
the unity to which both kinds of ideas belong and in which they 
do not fall apart ; for they belong to the same indivisible unitary 
self into which faith has passed. 
573· As a result, faith has lost the content which filled its 
element, and collapses into a state in which it moves listlessly 
to and fro within itself. It has been expelled from its kingdom ; 
or, this kingdom has been ransacked, since the waking con­
sciousness has monopolized every distinction and expansion of 
it and has vindicated earth's ownership of every portion of 
it and given them back to earth. Yet faith is not on that account 
satisfied, for this illumination has everywhere brought to light 
only single, separate entities, so that what speaks to Spirit is 
only a reality without any substance, and a finitude forsaken 
by Spirit. Since faith is without any content and it cannot 
remain in this void, or since, in going beyond the finite which 
is the sole content, it finds only the void, it is a sheer yearning, 
its truth an empty beyond, for which a fitting content can no 
longer be found, for everything is bestowed elsewhere. Faith 
has, in fact, become the same as Enlightenment, viz. the con­
sciousness of the relation of what is in itself finite to an Absolute 
without predicates, an Absolute unknown and unknowable ; 
but there is this difference, the latter is satisfied Enlightenment, 
but faith is unsatisfied Enlightenment. However, we shall see 
whether Enlightenment can remain satisfied ; that yearning of 
the troubled Spirit which mourns over the loss of its spiritual 
world lurks in the background. Enlightenment itself bears 
within it this blemish of an unsatisfied yearning: as pure object, 
in its empty absolute Being; as action and movement, in going beyond 
its individual self to an empty and unfulfilled beyond ; as an 
object with a content, in the lack of selfhood in the thing that is 
'useful'. Enlightenment will rid itself of this blemish ; a closer 
examination of the positive result which is its truth will show 
that in that result the blemish is in principle already removed. 
b. The truth of Enlightenment 
574· The listless movement of Spirit which no longer creates 
a distinction within itself has thus entered into its own self 
beyond consciousness, which, on the other hand, sees itself 
clearly. The first moment of this clarity is determined in its 

350 
C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
necessity and condition by the fact that pure insight, or insight 
that is implicitly Notion, actualizes itself; it does so when it posits 
otherness or determinateness within itself. In this way it is 
negative pure insight, i.e. a negation of the Notion ; this 
negation is equally pure ; and thus there has come in to being 
the pure Thing, the absolute Being, that has no further 
determination whatever. Characterized more precisely, pure 
insight, qua absolute Notion, is a distinguishing of differences 
which are no longer differences, of abstractions or pure Notions 
which are no longer self-supporting, but are supported and 
distinguished only by the movement as a whole. This distinguishing 
of what contains no difference consists simply in the fact that 
the absolute Notion makes itself into its object and posits itself 
as the essence over against that movement. This results in the 
essence being without that side wherein abstractions or 
differences are held apart, and therefore becomes pure thought in 
the form of a pure Thing. This, then, is just the listless, 
unconscious movement to and fro within itself of Spirit to which 
faith was reduced when it lost a content that contained a 
difference ; it is at the same time that movement of pure self­
consciousness for which the essence is supposed to be the 
absolutely alien beyond. For because this pure self­
consciousness moves about in pure Notions, in differences that 
are not differences, it collapses in fact into the unconscious 
movement to and fro of Spirit, i.e. into pure feeling, or pure 
thinghood. The self-alienated Notion-for the Notion here is still 
standing at the stage of this alienation-does not, however, 
recognize this identical essence of the two sides-the movement 
of self-consciousness and of its absolute Being--does not 
recognize their identical essence which is, in fact, their substance 
and enduring being. Since the Notion is unconscious of this 
unity, absolute Being has value for it only in the form of a 
beyond standing over against it, while the consciousness making 
these distinctiions and in this way having the in-itself outside 
of it, is held to be a finite consciousness. 
575· In regard to that absolute Being, Enlightenment is 
caught up in the same internal conflict that it formerly 
experienced in connection with faith, and it divides itself into 
two parties. One party proves itself to be victorious by breaking 
up into two parties ; for in so doing, it shows that it contains 

C U LT U R E  
35' 
within itself the principle it is attacking, and thus has rid itself 
of the one-sidedness in which it previously appeared. The inter­
est which was divided between itself and the other party now 
falls entirely within itself, and the other party is forgotten, 
because that interest finds within itself the antithesis which 
occupies its attention. At the same time, however, it has been 
raised into the higher victorious element in which it exhibits 
itself in a clarified form. So that the schism that arises in one 
of the parties and seems to be a misfortune, demonstrates rather 
that party's good fortune. 
5 76. The pure essence itself has no difference in it; con­
sequently, the way in which it does obtain a difference is that 
two such pure essences exhibit themselves for consciousness, or 
there is a twofold consciousness of the essence. Pure absolute 
Being is only in pure thought, or rather it is pure thought itself, 
and therefore utterly beyond the finite, beyond self-consciousness, 
and is only Being in a negative sense. But in this way, it is just 
[mere] being, the negative of self-consciousness. As the negative 
of self-consciousness it is also related to it ; it is an external being 
which, related to self-consciousness within which differences 
and determination fall, receives within it the differences of 
being tasted, seen, etc. ; and the relationship is that of sense-cer­
tainty and perception. 
577· Ifwe start from this sensuous being into which that nega­
tive beyond necessarily passes, but abstract from these specific 
ways in which consciousness is related to it, then what remains 
is pure matter as a listless, aimless movement to and fro within 
itself. In this connection, it is important to bear in mind that 
pure matter is merely what is left over when we abstract from seeing, 
feeling, tasting, etc., i.e. it is not matter that is seen, tasted, felt, 
etc. ; what is seen, felt, tasted, is not matter, but colour, a stone, 
a salt, etc. Matter is rather a pure abstraction ; and so what we 
are presented with here is the pure essence of thought, or pure 
thought itself as the Absolute, which contains no differences, 
is indeterminate and devoid of predicates. 
578. One party of the Enlightenment calls absolute Being 
that predicateless Absolute which exists in thought beyond the 
actual consciousness which formed the starting-point ; the 
other calls it matter. If these were to be distinguished as Nature 
and Spirit, or God, then the unconscious and aimless inner 

C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
movement to and fro would lack the wealth of developed life 
which would make it Nature, and the self-differentiated con­
sciousness which would make it Spirit or God. The two, as we 
saw, are absolutely the same Notion ; the difference lies not in 
what they actually are, but simply and solely in the different 
starting-points of the two developments, and in the fact that 
each sticks to its own point in the movement of thought. If they 
could disregard their own starting-points they would meet and 
would recognize that what to the one is, so it pretends, an 
abomination, and to the other, a folly, is the same thing. For 
to the one, absolute Being is in its pure thinking, or is imme­
diately for pure consciousness, is outside finite consciousness, 
the negative beyond of it. If it would reflect, firstly, that the 
simple immediacy of thought is nothing else but pure being, and 
secondly, that what is negative for consciousness is at the same 
time related to it, that in the negative judgement the 'is' 
(copula) holds together as well as separates the terms, it would 
come to see that this beyond, characterized as something exist­
ing externally, stands in a relation to consciousness and is thus 
the same as what is called pure matter: the missing moment of 
presence would be gained. The other Enlightenment starts from 
sensuous being, then abstracts from the sensuous relation of tast­
ing, seeing, etc., and makes that being into a pure in-itself, into 
an absolute matter, into what is neither felt nor tasted. This being 
has in this way become something simple without predicates, 
the essence of pure consciousness; it is the pure Notion as implicitly 
existent, or pure thought within itself This insight does not con­
sciously take the reverse step from what is, what simply is, to what 
is thought, which is the same as what simply is, does not take 
the step from the pure positive to the pure negative; although, 
after all, the positive is pure solely through negation, while the 
pure negative, as pure, is in its own self self-identical and just 
for that reason positive. Or again, they have not arrived at the 
Notion found in Descartes's metaphysics, that being and 
thought are, in themselves, the same; they have not arrived at 
the thought that being, pure being, is not something concretely 
real but a pure abstraction, and conversely, pure thought, self­
identity or essence, partly is the negative of self-consciousness and 
therefore being, partly, as immediately simple, is likewise noth­
ing else but being ; thought is thing hood, or thing hood is thought. 

CULTURE 
353 
579· Essence, here, is split into two in such a way that, to 
begin with, two different ways of considering it are involved. 
In part, essence must contain difference within itself; in part, 
just because of this, the two ways of considering it merge into 
one ; for the abstract moments of pure being and the negative, 
by which they are distinguished, are then united in the object 
so considered. The universal common to both is the abstraction 
of a pure, inward oscillation, or of pure self-thinking. This 
simple rotatory motion must become more complex because it 
is itself only motion by distinguishing its moments. This distin­
guishing of the moments leaves their unmoved [unity] behind 
as the empty husk of pure being, which is no longer actual 
thought, no longer has any life within it ; for this process of dif­
ferentiation is, qua difference, all the content. This process, how­
ever, which places itself outside of that unity, is an alternation­
an alternation which does not return into itself, ofbeing:for-an-other, 
and of being-for -self; it is reality in the way this is an object 
for the actual consciousness of pure insight-Utility. 
580. Bad as Utility may look to faith or sentimentality, or 
even to the abstract thought that calls itself speculation, which 
clings to the in-itself, yet i t is in Utility that pure insight achieves 
its realization and has itself for its object, an object which it now 
no longer repudiates and which, too, no longer has for it the 
value of the void or the pure beyond. For pure insight is, as 
we saw, the existent Notion itself, or pure self-identical per­
sonality distinguishing itself within itself in such a way that each 
of the distinguished moments is itself pure Notion, i.e. is at the 
same time not distinguished ; pure insight is simple, pure self­
consciousness which is for itself as well as in itself in an immediate 
unity. Its being-in-itself is .therefore not an enduring being, but 
in its difference immediately ceases to be something ; such a 
being, however, that is immediately without support is not an 
intrinsic being, but is essentially for an other which is the power 
that absorbs it. But this second moment which is opposed to 
the first, to the being-in-itself, equally vanishes immediately like 
the first ; or, as a being which is only for an other, it is rather 
the vanishing itself, and there is posited the accomplished retum 
into itself, being-for-self. This simple being-for-self, however, as 
self-identity, is rather a [mere] being, or is thereby for an other. 
This nature of pure insight in the unfolding of its moments, 

354 
C .  ( BB. ) S P I R I T  
or insight qua object, is expressed in the Useful. What is useful, 
is something with an enduring being in itself, or a Thing; this 
being-in-itself is at the same time only a pure moment ;  hence 
it is absolutely for an other, but equally is for an 'other' merely 
what it is in itself; these opposed moments have returned into 
the indivisible unity of being-for-self. While the Useful does 
express the Notion of pure insight, it is not pure insight as such 
but insight conceived by it in the form of object; it is merely the 
restless alternation of those moments, of which one indeed is 
itself the accomplished return into itself, but only as a being­
for-self, i.e. as an abstract moment appearing on one side over 
against the others. The Useful itself is not a negative essence, 
having in itself these moments in their antithesis and, at the 
same time as undivided in one and the same respect, or as thought, 
as they are qua pure insight ; the moment of being:for-selfis cer­
tainly presept in the Useful, but not in such a way that it 
overarches the other moments, the in-itself and the being:for-an 
other, in which case it would be the self. Pure insight has, there­
fore, in the Useful its own Notion in its pure moments for object; 
it is the awareness of this metaphysics, but not as yet the compre­
hension ofit; consciousness has not yet reached the unity of Being 
and Notion itself. Since the Useful still has the form of an object 
for pure insight, it does have a world, one which, it is true, is 
no longer in and for itself, but yet a world which it distinguishes 
from itself. Only, since the antitheses have emerged at the 
summit of the Notion, the next stage will see them come into 
collision, and the Enlightenment will taste the fruits of its deeds. 
581 .  Looking at the object obtained, in relation to this whole 
sphere, we see that the actual world of culture was summed 
up in the vanity of self-consciousness, jnto a being-for-self whose 
content is still that confused world of culture and which is still 
the single, individual Notion, not yet the explicitly universal 
Notion. But returned into itself, that Notion is pure insight-pure 
consciousness as pure self, or negativity, just as faith is precisely 
the same as pure thought, or positivity. In that self, faith has the 
moment that makes it complete ; but perishing through being 
thus completed, it is in pure insight that we now see the two 
moments : as absolute Being, which is simply thought or the nega­
tive, and as matter, which has positive being. This completeness 
still lacks that actual world of self-consciousness which belongs 

C U LTURE 
355 
to the vain consciousness-the world out of which thought raised 
itself to itself. What is thus lacking is obtained in Utility in so 
far as pure insight there acquires positive objectivity ; pure in­
sight is thereby an actual consciousness satisfied within itself. 
This objectivity now constitutes its world; it has become the 
truth of the entire preceding world, of the ideal, as well as of 
the real, world. The first world of Spirit is the widespread realm 
of its self-dispersed existence and of the self-certainty of its indivi­
dual forms, just as Nature disperses its life into infinitely various 
forms without the genus of those forms having an actual exist­
ence. The second world contains the genus and is the realm of 
intrinsic being or truth over against that certainty. The third 
world, however, that of the Useful, is the truth which is equally 
the certainty of itself. The realm of the truth of faith lacks the 
principle of actuality, or the certainty of self as this particular 
individual. But the actuality or the certainty of self as this par­
ticular individual lacks intrinsic being. In the object of pure in­
sight both worlds are united. The Useful is the object in so far 
as self-consciousness penetrates it and has in it the certainty of its 
individual self, its enjoyment (its being-for-self) ; self-consciousness 
sees right into the object, and this insight contains the true 
essence of the object (which is to be something that is penetrated 
(by consciousness], or to be for an 'other') . This insight is thus 
· itself a true knowing, and self-consciousness has equally directly 
the universal certainty of itself, its pure consciousness, in this rela­
tionship in which, therefore, truth as well as presence and actu­
ality are united. The two worlds are reconciled and heaven is 
transplanted to earth below. 
I I I .  
A B S O L U T E  F R E E D O M  A N D  T E R R O R  
582. Consciousness has found its Notion i n  Utility. But it 
is partly still an object, and partly, for that very reason, still an 
End to be attained, which consciousness does not find itself to 
possess immediately. Utility is still a predicate of the object, 
not itself a subject or the immediate and sole actuality of the 
object. It is the same thing that appeared before, when being­
for-selfhad not yet shown itself to be the substance of the other 
moments, a demonstration which would have meant that the 
Useful was directly nothing dse but the self of conscious­
ness and that this latter was thereby in possession of it. This 

356 
C .  ( BB.) S P I R I T  
withdrawal from the form of objectivity of the Useful has, how­
ever, already taken place in principle and from this inner revo­
lution there emerges the actual revolution of the actual world, 
the new shape of consciousness, absolute freedom. 
583. In fact, what we have here is no more than an empty 
show of objectivity separating self-consciousness from posses­
sion. For, partly, all existence and validity of the specific 
members of the organization of the actual world and the world 
of faith have, in general, returned into this simple determina­
tion as into their ground and spiritual principle ; partly, how­
ever, this simple determination no longer possesses anything of 
its own, it is rather pure metaphysic, pure Notion, or a pure 
knowing by self-consciousness. That is to say, of the being-in­
and-for-itself of the Useful qua object, consciousness recognizes 
that its being-in-itselfis essentially a being-for-an-other; being-inओ 
itself, as devoid of self, is in truth a passive self, or that which 
is a self for another self. The object, however, exists for con­
sciousness in this abstract form of pure being-in-itself, for con­
sciousness is pure insight whose distinctions are in the pure form 
of Notions. But the being-for-self into which being-for-an-other 
returns, i.e. the self, is not a self belonging exclusively to what 
is called object and distinct from the 'I' ; for consciousness, qua 
pure insight, is not a single self which could be confronted by 
the object as equally having a self of its own, but is pure Notion, 
the gazing of the self into the self, the absolute seeing of itself 
doubled ; the certainty of itself is the universal Subject, and its 
conscious Notion is the essence of all actuality. If, then, the Use­
ful was merely the alternation of the moments, an alternation 
which did not return into its own unity, and hence was still an 
object for knowing, it now ceases to be this. For knowing is itself 
the movement of those abstract moments, it is the universal self, 
the self of itself as well as of the object and, as universal, is the 
self-returning unity of this movement. 
584. Spirit thus comes before us as absolutefreedom. It is self­
consciousness which grasps the fact that its certainty of itself 
is the essence of all the spiritual 'masses', or spheres, of the real 
as well as of the supersensible world, or conversely, that essence 
and actuality are consciousness's knowledge of itself. It is con­
scious of its pure personality and therein of all spiritual reality, 
and all reality is solely spiritual ; the world is for it simply its 

C U LTURE 
357 
own will, and this is a general will. And what is more, this will 
is not the empty thought of will which consists in silent assent, 
or assent by a representative, but a real general will, the will 
of all individuals as such. For will is in itself the consciousness 
of personality, or of each, and it is as this genuine actual will 
that it ought to be, as the self-conscious essence of each and 
every personality, so that each, undivided from the whole, 
always does everything, and what appears as done by the whole 
is the direct and conscious deed of each. 
585. This undivided Substance of absolute freedom ascends 
the throne of the world without any power being able to resist 
it. For since, in truth, consciousness alone is the element in 
which the spiritual beings or powers have their substance, their 
entire system which is organized and maintained by division 
into 'masses' or spheres has collapsed, now that the individual 
consciousness conceives the object as having no other essence 
than self-consciousness itself, or as being absolutely Notion. 
What made the Notion into an existent object was its diremption 
into separate subsistent spheres, but when the object becomes 
a Notion, there is no longer anything in it with a continuing 
existence ; negativity has permeated all its moments. It comes 
into existence in such a way that each individual consciousness 
raises itself out of its allotted sphere, no longer finds its essence 
and its work in this pa1 ticular sphere, but grasps itself as the 
Notion of will, grasps all spheres as the essence of this will, and 
therefore can ouiy realize itself in a work which is a work of 
the whole. In this absolute freedom, therefore, all social groups 
or classes which are the spiritual spheres into which the whole 
is articulated are abolished ; the individual consciousness that 
belonged to any such sphere, and willed and fulfilled itself in 
it, has put aside its limitation ; its purpose is the general purpose, 
its language universal law, its work the universal work. 
586. The object and the [moment of] diference have here lost 
the meiming of utility, which was the predicate of all real being ; 
consciousness does not begin its movement in the object as if 
this were something alien from which it first had to return into 
itself; on the contrary, the object is for it consciousness itself. 
The antithesis, consists, therefore, solely in the difference 
between the individual and the universal consciousness ; but the 
individual consciousness itself is directly in its own eyes that 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
which had only the semblance of an antithesis ; it is universal con­
sciousness and will. The beyond of this its actual existence hovers 
over the corpse of the vanished independence of real being, 
or the being of faith, merely as the exhalation of a stale gas, 
of the vacuous ftre supreme. 
587. After the various spiritual spheres and the restricted 
life of the individual have been done away with, as well as his 
two worlds, all that remains, therefore, is the immanent move­
ment of universal self-consciousness as a reciprocity of self-con­
sciousness in the form of universality and of personal conscious­
ness : the universal will goes into itself and is a single, individual 
will to which universal law and work stand opposed. But this 
individual consciousness is no less directly conscious of itself as 
universal will ; it is aware that its object is a law given by that 
will and a work accomplished by it ; therefore, in passing over 
into action and in creating objectivity, it is doing nothing in­
dividual, but carrying out the laws and functions of the state. 
588. This movement is thus the interaction of consciousness 
with itself in which it lets nothing break loose to become a free 
object standing over against it. It follows from this that it cannot 
achieve anything positive, either universal works of language 
or of reality, either oflaws and general institutions of conscious 
freedom, or of deeds and works of a freedom that wills them. 
The work which conscious freedom might accomplish would con­
sist in that freedom, qua universal substance, making itself into 
an object and into an enduring being. This otherness would be the 
moment of difference in it whereby it divided itself into stable 
spiritual 'masses' or spheres and into the members of various 
powers. These spheres would be partly the 'thought-things' of 
a power that is separated in to legislative, judicial, and executive 
powers ; but partly, they would be the real essences we found in 
the real world of culture, and, looking more closely at the content 
of universal action, they would be the particular spheres of 
labour which would be further distinguished as more specific 
'estates' or classes. Universal freedom, which would have 
separated itself in this way into its constituent parts and by the 
very fact of doing so would have made itself into an existent Sub­
stance, would thereby be free from particular individuality, and 
would apportion the plurality of individuals to its various con­
stituent parts. This, however, would restrict the activity and 

C U LTURE 
359 
the being of the personality to a branch of the whole, to one 
kind of activity and being ; when placed in the element of being, 
personality would have the significance of a specific per­
sonality ; it would cease to be in truth universal self-conscious­
ness. Neither by the mere idea of obedience to self-given laws 
which would assign to it only a part of the whole, nor by its 
being represented in law-making and universal action, does self­
consciousness let itself be cheated out of reality, the reality of 
itself making the law and accomplishing, not a particular work, 
but the universal work itsel£ For where the self is merely repre­
sented and is present only as an idea, there it is not actual ; where 
it is represented by proxy, it is not. 
589. Just as the individual self-consciousness does not find 
itself in this universal work of absolute freedom qua existent Sub­
stance, so little does it find itself in the deeds proper and individual 
actions of the will of this freedom. Before the universal can per­
form a deed it must concentrate itself into the One of individu­
ality and put at the head an individual self-consciousness ; for 
the universal will is only an actual will in a self, which is a One. 
But thereby all other individuals are excluded from the entirety 
of this deed and have only a limited share in it, so that the deed 
would not be a deed of the actual universal self-consciousness. 
Universal freedom, therefore, can produce neither a positive 
work nor a deed ; there is left for it only negative action ; it is 
merely the jury of destruction. 
590. But the supreme reality and the reality which stands 
in the greatest antithesis to universal freedom, or rather the sole 
object that will still exist for that freedom, is the freedom and 
individuality of actual self-consciousness itself. For that uni­
versality which does not let itself advance to the reality of an 
organic articulation, and whose aim is to maintain itself in an 
unbroken continuity, at the same time creates a distinction 
within itself, because it is movement or consciousness in general. 
And, moreover, by virtue of its own abstraction, it divides itself 
into extremes equally abstract, into a simple, inflexible cold 
universality, and into the discrete, absolute hard rigidity and 
self-willed atomism of actual self-consciousness. Now that it has 
completed the destruction of .the actual organization of the 
world, and exists now just for itself, this is its sole object, an 
object that no longer has any content, possession, existence, or 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
outer extension, but is merely this knowledge of itself as an abso­
lutely pure and free individual self. All that remains of the 
object by which it can be laid hold of is solely its abstract exist­
ence as such. The relation, then, of these two, since each exists 
indivisibly and absolutely for itself, and thus cannot dispose of 
a middle term which would link them together, is one of wholly 
unmediated pure negation, a negation, moreover, of the indivi­
dual as a being existing in the universal. The sole work and deed 
of universal freedom is therefore death, a death too which has 
no inner significance or filling, for what is negated is the empty 
point of the absolutely free self. It is thus the coldest and 
meanest of all deaths, with no more significance than cutting 
off a head of cabbage or swallowing a mouthful of water. 
59 I .  In this flat, commonplace monosyllable is contained the 
wisdom of the government, the abstract intelligence of the uni­
versal will, in the fulfilling of itself. The government is itself 
nothing else but the self-established focus, or the individuality, 
of the universal will. The government, which wills and executes 
its will from a single point, at the same time wills and executes 
a specific order and action. On the one hand, it excludes all 
other individuals from its act, and on the other hand, it thereby 
constitutes itself a government that is a specific will, and so 
standsopposed to the universal will ; consequently, it is absolutely 
impossible for it to exhibit itself as anything else but a faction. 
What is called government is merely the victorious faction, and 
in the very fact of its being a faction lies the direct necessity 
ofits overthrow ; and its being government makes it, conversely, 
into a faction, and [so] guilty. When the universal will main­
tains that what the government has actually done is a crime 
committed against it, the government, for its part, has nothing 
specific and outwardly apparent by which the guilt of the will 
opposed to it could be demonstrated ; for what stands opposed 
to it as the actual universal will is only an unreal pure will, inten­
tion. Being suspected, therefore, takes the place, or has the signifi­
cance and effect, of being guilty ; and the external reaction 
against this reality that lies in the simple inwardness of inten­
tion, consists in the cold, matter-of-fact annihilation of this 
existent self, from which nothing else can be taken away but 
its mere being. 
592. In this its characteristic work, absolute freedom becomes 

C U LTURE 
explicitly objective to itself, and self-consciousness learns what 
absolute freedom in effect is. In itself, it is just this abstract self­
consciousness, which effaces all distinction and all continuance 
of distinction within it. It is as such that it is objective to itself; 
the terror of death is the vision of this negative nature of itself. · 
But absolutely free self-consciousness finds this its reality quite 
different from what its own Notion of itself was, viz. that the 
universal will is merely the positive essence of personality, and 
that this latter knows itself in it only positively, or as preserved 
therein. Here, however, this self-consciousness which, as pure 
insight, completely separates its positive and its negative 
nature-completely separates the predicateless Absolute as 
pure Thought and as pure Matter-is confronted with the abso­
lute transition of the one into the other as a present reality. The 
universal will, qua absolutely positive, actual self-consciousness, 
because it is this self-conscious reality heightened to the level 
of pure thought or of abstract matter, changes roun·d into its nega­
tive nature and shows itself to be equally that which puts an 
end to the thinking of oneself, or to self-consciousness. 
593· Absolute freedom as pure self-identity of the universal 
will thus has within it negation ; but this means that it contains 
diference in general, and this again it develops as an actual dif­
ference. For pure negativity has i'n the self-identical universal 
will the element of subsistence, or the Substance in which its 
moments are realized ; it has the matter which it can utilize 
in accordance with its own determinateness ; and in so far as 
this Substance has shown itself to be the negative element for 
the individual consciousness, the organization of spiritual 
'masses' or spheres to which the plurality of individual con­
sciousnesses are assigned thus takes shape once more. These in­
dividuals who have felt the fear of death, of their absolute master, 
again submit to negation and distinctions, arrange themselves 
in the various spheres, and return to an apportioned and limited 
task, but thereby to their substantial reality. 
594· Out of this tumult, Spirit would be thrown back to its 
starting-point, to the ethical and real world of culture, which 
would have been merely refreshed and rejuvenated by the fear 
of the lord and master which has again entered men's hearts. 
Spirit would have to traverse anew and continually repeat this 
cycle of necessity if the result were only the complete in terpene-

C. ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
tration of self-consciousness and Substance-an interpenetra­
tion in which self-consciousness, which has experienced the 
negative power ofits universal essence acting on it, would desire 
to know and find itself, not as this particular individual, but 
only as a universal, and therefore, too, would be able to endure 
the objective reality of universal Spirit, a reality excluding self­
consciousness qua particular. But in absolute freedom there was 
no reciprocal action between a consciousness that is immersed 
in the complexities of existence, or that sets itself specific aims 
and thoughts, and a valid external world, whether of reality or 
thought ;  instead, the world was absolutely in the form of con­
sciousness as a universal will, and equally self-consciousness was 
drawn together out of the whole expanse of existence or mani­
fested aims and judgements, and concentrated into the simple 
self. The culture to which it attains in interaction with that 
essence is, therefore, the grandest and the last, is that of seeing 
its pure, simple reality immediately vanish and pass away into 
empty nothingness. In the world of culture itself it does not get 
as far as to behold its negation or alienation in this form of pure 
abstraction ; on the contrary, its negation is filled with a con­
tent, either honour or wealth, which it gains in place of the 
self that it has alienated from itself; or the language of Spirit 
and insight which the disrupted consciousness acquires ; or it 
is the heaven offaith, or the Utility of the Enlightenment. All 
these determinations have vanished in the loss suffered by the 
selfin absolute freedom ; its negation is the death that is without 
meaning, the sheer terror of the negative that contains nothing 
positive, nothing that fills it with a content. At the same time, 
however, this negation in its real existence is not something 
alien ; it is neither the universal inaccessible necessity in which 
the ethical world perishes, nor the particular accident of private 
possession, nor the whim of the owner on which the disrupted 
consciousness sees itself dependent ; on the contrary, it is the 
universal will which in this its ultimate abstraction has nothing 
positive and therefore can give nothing in return for the sacri­
fice. But for that very reason it is immediately one with self­
consciousness, or it is the pure positive, because it is the pure 
negative ; and the meaningless death, the unfilled negativity of 
the self, changes round in its inner Notion into absolute posit­
ivity. For consciousness, the immediate unity of itself with the 

C U LT U R E  
universal will, its demand to know itself as this specific point 
in the universal will, is changed round into the absolutely oppo­
site experience. What vanishes for it in that experience is 
abstract being or the immediacy of that insubstantial point, and 
this vanished immediacy is the universal will itself which it now 
knows itself to be in so far as it is a pure knowing or pure will. 
Consequently, it knows that will to be itself, and knows itself 
to be essential being ; but not essential being as an immediate 
existence, not will as revolutionary government or anarchy striv­
ing to establish anarchy, nor itself as the centre of this faction 
or the opposite faction ; on the contrary, the universal will is its 
pure knowing and willing and it is the universal will qua this pure 
knowing and willing. It does not lose itself in that will, for pure 
knowing and willing is much more it than is that atomic point 
of consciousness. It is thus the interaction of pure knowing with 
itself; pure knowing qua essential being is the universal will ; but 
this essential being is abolutely nothing else but pure knowing. 
Self-consciousness is, therefore, the pure knowing of essential 
being qua pure knowing. Further, as an individual self, it is only 
the form of the subject or of real action, a form which is known 
by it as form. Similarly, objective reality, being, is for it simply 
a selfless form ; for that reality would be something that is not 
known. This knowing, however, knows knowing to be essen­
tial being. 
595· Absolute freedom has thus removed the antithesis 
between the universal and the individual will. The self­
alienated Spirit, driven to the extreme of its antithesis in which 
pure willing and the agent of that pure willing are still distinct, 
reduces the antithesis to a transparent form and therein finds 
itself. Just as the realm of the real world passes over into the 
realm of faith and insight, so does absolute freedom leave its 
self-destroying reality and pass over into another land of self­
conscious Spirit where, in this unreal world, freedom has the 
value of truth. In the thought of this truth Spirit refreshes itself, 
in so far as it is and remains thought, and knows this being which 
is enclosed within self-consciousness to be essential being in its 
perfection and completeness. There has arisen the new shape 
of Spirit, that of the moral Spirit. 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
C .  S P I R I T  T H A T  I S  C E R T A I N  O F  I T S E L F .  M O R A L I T Y  
596. 
The ethical world showed its fate and its truth to be 
the Spirit that had merely passed away in it, the individual self. 
This legal person, however, has its Substance and fulfilment out­
side of that world. The movement of the world of culture and 
faith does away with this abstraction of the person, and, 
through the completed alienation, through the ultimate 
abstraction, Substance becomes for Spirit at first the universal 
will, and finally Spirit's own possession. Here, then, knowledge 
appears at last to have become completely identical with its 
truth ; for its truth is this very knowledge and any antithesis 
between the two sides has vanished, vanished not only for us 
or in itself, but for self-consciousness itself. In other words, self­
consciousness has gained the mastery over the antithesis within 
consciousness itself. This anti thesis rests on the anti thesis of the 
certainty of self and of the object. Now, however, the object 
is for consciousness itself the certainty of itself, viz. knowledge­
just as the certainty of itself as such no longer has ends of its 
own, is therefore no longer [contained] within a determinate­
ness, but is pure knowledge. 
597. Thus for self-consciousness, its knowledge is the Sub­
stance itself. This Substance is for it just as immediate as it is abso­
lutely mediated in an indivisible unity. It is immediate, like the 
ethical consciousness which knows its duty and does it, and is 
bound up with it as with its own nature ; but it is not character, 
as that ethical consciousness is which, on account of its imme­
diacy, is a specifically determined Spirit, belongs only to one 
of the ethical essentialities, and has the characteristic of not 
knowing. It is absolute mediation, like the consciousness which cul­
tivates itself, and the consciousness which believes ; for it is 
essentially the movement of the self to set aside the abstraction 
of immediate existence, and to become conscious of itself as a uni­
versal-and yet to do so neither by the pure alienation and 
disruption of itself and of actuality, nor by fleeing from it. 
Rather, it is immediately present to itself in its substance, for this 
is its knowledge, is the intuited pure certainty of itself; and just 
this immediacy which is its own reality, is all reality, for the imme­
diate is being itself, and, as pure immediacy purified by absolute 
negativity, it is being in general, or all being. 

MORAL I TY 
598. Absolute essential being is, therefore, not exhausted 
when determined as the simple essence of thought; it is all reality, 
and this reality is only as knowledge. What consciousness did 
not know would have no significance for consciousness and can 
have no power over it. Into its conscious will all objectivity, 
the whole world, has withdrawn. It is absolutely free in that 
it knows its freedom, and just this knowledge is its substance 
and purpose and its sole content. 
a. The moral view of the world 
599· Self-consciousness knows duty to be the absolute 
essence. It is bound only by duty, and this substance is its own 
pure consciousness, for which duty cannot receive the form of 
something alien. However, as thus locked up within itself, moral 
self-consciousness is not yet posited and considered as conscious­
ness. The object is immediate knowledge, and, being thus per­
meated purely by the self is not an object. But because self-con­
sciousness is essentially a mediation and negativity, its Notion 
implies relation to an otherness and [thus] is consciousness. This 
otherness, because duty constitutes the sole aim and object of 
consciousness, is, on the one hand, a reality completely without 
significance for consciousness. But because this consciousness is 
so completely locked up within itself, it behaves with perfect 
freedom and indifference towards this otherness ; and therefore 
the existence of this otherness, on the other hand, is left com­
pletely free by self-consciousness, an existence that similarly is 
related only to itself. The freer self-consciousness becomes, the 
freer also is the negative object of its consciousness. The object 
has thus become a complete world within itself with an indivi­
duality of its own, a self-subsistent whole of laws peculiar to 
itself, as well as an independent operation of those laws, and 
a free realization of them-in general, a Nature whose laws like 
its actions belong to itself as a being which is indifferent to moral 
self-consciousness, just as the latter is indifferent to it. 
6oo. From this .determination is developed a moral view of 
the world which consists in the relation between the absoluteness 
of morality and the absoluteness of Nature. This relation is 
based, on the one hand, on the complete indiference. and in­
dependence of Nature towards moral purposes and activity, 
and, on the other hand, on the consciousness of duty alone as 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
the essential fact, and of Nature as completely devoid of inde­
pendence and essential being. The moral view of the world con­
tains the development of the moments which are present in this 
relation of such completely conflicting presuppositions. 
6or .  To begin with, then, the moral consciousness as such 
is presupposed ; duty is the essence for this consciousness which 
is actual and active, and in its actuality and action fulfils its 
duty. But this moral consciousness is at the same time faced 
with the presupposed freedom of Nature ; in other words, it 
learns from experience that Nature is not concerned with giving 
the moral consciousness a sense of the unity of its reality with 
that of Nature, and hence that Nature perhaps may let it 
become happy, or perhaps may not. The non-moral conscious­
ness, on the other hand, finds, perhaps by chance, its realization 
where the moral consciousness sees only an occasion for acting, 
but does not see itself obtaining, through its action, the happi­
ness of performance and the enjoyment of achievement. There­
fore, it finds rather cause for complaint about such a state of 
incompatibility between itself and existence, and about the in­
justice which restricts it to having its object merely as a pure 
duty, but refuses to let it see the object and itself realized. 
602. The moral consciousness cannot forego happiness and 
leave this element out of its absolute purpose. The purpose, 
which is expressed as pure duty, essentially implies this individual 
self-consciousness ; individual conviction and the knowledge of it 
constitute an absolute element in morality. This element in the 
objectified purpose, in the fulfilled duty, is the individual conscious­
ness that beholds itself as realized ; in other words, it is 
enjoyment, which is thus implied in the Notion of morality, not 
indeed immediately, in morality regarded as sentiment or dis­
position, but only in the Notion of its actualization. This, how­
ever, means that enjoyment is also implied in morality as dis­
position, for this does not remain disposition in contrast to 
action, but proceeds to act or to realize itself. Thus the purpose, 
expttessed as the whole with the consciousness of its moments, 
is that the fulfilled duty is just as much a moral action as a real­
ized individuality, and that Nature, the aspect of individuality 
in contrast to the abstract purpose, is one with this purpose. 
Necessary as is the experience of the disharmony of the two 
sides, because Nature is free, even so, what is essential is duty 

M O RAL I TY 
alone, and Nature contrasted with it is devoid of a self. That 
purpose in its entirety which the harmony of the two constitutes, 
contains within it actuality itself. It is at the same time the 
thought of actuality. The harmony of mornlity and Nature--or, 
since Nature comes into account only in so far as consciousness 
experiences its unity with it-the harmony of monility and 
happiness, is thought of as something that necessarily is, i.e. it 
is postulated. For to say that something is demanded, means that 
something is thought of in the form of being that is not yet 
actual-a necessity not of the Notion qua Notion, but of being. 
But necessity is at the same time essentially relation based on 
the Notion. The being that is demanded, then, is not the ima­
gined being of a contingent consciousness, but is implied in the 
Notion of morality itself, whose true content is the unity of the 
pure and the individual consciousness ; it is for the latter to see 
that this unity be ,for it, an actuality: in the content of the purpose 
this is happiness, but in its form, is existence in general. The 
existence thus demanded, i.e. the unity of both, is therefore not 
a wish nor, regarded as purpose, one whose attainment were 
still uncertain ; it is rather a demand ofReason, or an immediate 
certainty and presupposition of Reason. 
603. That first experience and this postulate are not the sole 
postulates, but a whole circle of postulates opens up. Nature, 
that is to say, is not merely this wholly free, external mode of 
being in which, as a pure object, consciousness had to realize 
its purpose. This consciousness is, in its own self, essentially one 
for which this other free actual existence is, i.e. it is itself a con tin­
gent and natural existence. This Nature, which is for conscious­
ness its own nature, is sensuousness, which in the shape of voli­
tion, as instincts and inclinations, possesses a specific essentiality 
ofits own, or has its own individual purposes, and thus is opposed 
to the pure will and its pure purpose. However, in contrast with 
this opposition, pure consciousness has rather the relation of 
sensuousness to it, the absolute unity of the latter with it, for 
its essence. Both of these, pure thought and the sensuous aspect 
of consciousness, are in themselves a single consciousness, and it is 
precisely pure thought for which and in which this pure unity 
is. But qua consciousness, what is explicit for it is the antithesis 
of itself and impulses and instincts. In this conflict between 
Reason and sensuousness, the essential thing for Reason is that 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
the conflict be resolved, the result being the emergence of the 
unity ofboth, a unity which is not the former original (i.e. imme­
diate] unity of both in a single individual, but a unity which 
proceeds from the known antithesis of both. Only such a unity 
is actual morality, for in it is contained the antithesis whereby 
the self is consciousness, or first is an actual self in fact, and 
at the same time a universal. In other words, in that unity there 
is expressed that mediation which, as we see, is essential to 
morality. Since, of the two moments of the antithesis, sensuous­
ness is sheer otherness, or the negative, while, on the other hand, 
the pure thought of duty is the essence, no element of which 
can be given up, it seems that the resultant unity can only be 
brought about by getting rid of sensuousness. But since sen­
suousness is itself a moment of the process producing the unity, 
viz. the moment of actuality, we have to be content, in the first 
instance, with expressing the unity by saying that sensuousness 
should be in conformity with morality. This unity is likewise a 
postulated being ; it is not actually there ; for what is there is con­
sciousness, or the antithesis of sensuousness and pure conscious­
ness. But at the same time, the unity is not an in-itself or merely 
implicit like the first postulate in which free Nature constitutes 
an element of the unity, and in consequence the harmony of 
Nature with the moral consciousness falls outside of the latter. 
On the contrary, Nature here is that which is an element of 
consciousness itself, and we have here to deal with morality as 
such, with a morality that is the active self's very own. Con­
sciousness has, therefore, itself to bring about this harmony and 
continually to be making progress in morality. But the con­
summation of this progress has to be projected into a future 
infinitely remote ; for if it actually came about, this would do 
away with the moral consciousness. For morality is only moral 
consciousness as negative essence, for whose pure duty sensuous­
ness has only a negative significance, is only not in conformity 
with duty. But, in that harmony, morality qua consciousness, i.e. 
its actuality, vanishes, just as in the moral consciousness, or in 
thऔ actuality of morality, the harmony vanishes. The consumma­
tion, therefore, cannot be attained, but is to be thought of 
merely as an absolute task, i.e. one which simply remains a task. 
Yet at the same time its content has to be thought of as some­
thing which simply must be, and must not remain a task : 

MORAL ITY 
whether we imagine the [moral] consciousness to be altogether 
done away with in this goal, or not. Which of these really is 
the case can no longer clearly be determined in the dim remote­
ness of infinity, to which for that very reason the attainment 
of the goal is postponed. Strictly speaking, we shall have to say 
that a definite idea on this point ought not to interest us, and 
ought not to be looked for, because it leads to contradictions­
the contradiction of a task which is to remain a task and yet 
ought to be fulfilled, and the contradiction of a morality which 
is no longer to be [a moral] consciousness, i.e. not actual. How­
ever, the idea that a perfected morality would involve a con­
tradiction would do harm to the sanctity of the very essence 
of morality, and absolute duty would appear as something un­
real. 
604. The first postulate was the harmony of morality and 
objective Nature, the final purpose of the world; the other, the 
harmony of morality and the sensuous will, the final purpose 
of self-consciousness as such. The first, then, is harmony in the 
form of an implicit being, the other, in the form of being-for-self 
But what connects, as middle term, these postulated two 
extreme final purposes is the movement of actual conduct itself. 
They are harmonies whose moments, in their abstract_ dis­
tinctiveness, have not yet developed into objects [for conscious­
ness]. This occurs in the actuality in which the sides appear 
in consciousness proper, each as the other of the other. The postu­
lates arising from this now contain the harmonies both in and 
for themselves, whereas previously they were postulated only 
as separate, one being in itself or implicit and the other being 
for itself or explicit. 
605. The moral consciousness as the simple knowing and wil­
ling of pure duty is, in the doing of it, brought into relation 
with the object which stands in contrast to its simplicity, into 
relation with the actuality of the complex case, and thereby 
has a complex moral relationship with it. Here arise, in relation 
to content, the many laws generally, and in relation to form, 
the contradictory powers of the knowing consciousness and of 
the non-conscious. 
In the first place, as regards the many duties, the moral 
consciousness in general heeds only the pure duty in them ; the 
many duties qua manifold are specific and therefore as such have 

370 
C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
nothing sacred about them for the moral consciousness. At the 
same time, however, being necessary, since the Notion of 'doing' 
implies a complex actuality and therefore a complex moral rela­
tion to it, these many duties must be regarded as possessing an 
intrinsic being of their own. Further, since they can exist only 
in a moral consciousness, they exist at the same time in another 
consciousness than that for which only pure duty qua pure duty 
possesses an intrinsic being of its own and is sacred. 
6o6. Thus it is postulated that it is another consciousness 
which makes them sacred, or which knows and wills them as 
duties. The first holds to pure duty, indifferent to all specific 
content, and duty is only this indifference towards such content. 
The other, however, contains the equally essential relation to 
'doing', and to the necessity of the specific content : since for this 
other, duties mean specific duties, the content as such is equally 
essential as the form which makes the content a duty. This con­
sciousness is consequently one in which universal and particular 
are simply one, and its Notion is, therefore, the same as the 
Notion of the harmony of morality and happiness. For this anti­
thesis equally expresses the separation of the self-equal moral 
consciousness from that actuality which, as manifold being, con­
flicts with the simple essential nature of duty. While, however, 
the first postulate expresses the harmony of morality and 
Nature, as a harmony that simply is, because in it Nature is 
this negative aspect of self-consciousness, is the moment of being, 
this implicit harmony, on the other hand, is now essentially 
posited as consciousness. For what simply is, now has the form 
of the content of duty, or is the determinateness in the determinate 
duty. The implicit harmony is thus the unity of what are simple 
essentialities, essentialities of thought, and are therefore only in 
a consciousness. This is then henceforth a master and ruler of 
the world, who brings about the harmony of morality and 
happiness, and at the same time sanctifies duties in their multi­
plicity. This last means this much, that for the consciousness 
of pure duty, the determinate or specific duty cannot straightway 
be sacred ; but because a specific duty, on account of the actual 
'doing' which is a specific action, is likewise necessary, its necessity 
falls outside of that consciousness into another consciousness, 
which thus mediates or brings together the specific and the pure 
duty and is the reason why the former also has validity. 

MORAL ITY 
371 
607. In the actual 'doing', however, consciousness behaves 
as this particular self, as completely individual ; it is directed 
towards reality as such, and has this for its purpose, for it wills 
to achieve something. Duty in general thus falls outside of it 
into another being, which is consciousness and the sacred law­
giver of pure duty. For the consciousness which acts, and just 
because it acts, the validity of the other consciousness, that of 
pure duty, is directly acknowledged ; this pure duty is thus the 
content of another consciousness, and is sacred for the con­
sciousness that acts only mediately, viz. through the agency of 
this other consciousness. 
6o8. Because it is in this way posited that the validation of 
duty, as something absolutely sacred, falls outside of actual con­
sciousness, this latter accordingly stands altogether on one side 
as the imperfect moral consciousness. Just as, in regard to its know­
ledge, it knows itself then as a consciousness whose knowledge 
and conviction are imperfect and contingent; similarly, in 
regard to its willing, it knows itself as a consciousness whose pur­
poses are affected with sensuousness. On account of its un­
worthiness, therefore, it cannot look on happiness as necessary, 
but as something contingent, and can expect it only as a gift 
of Grace. 
6og. But though its actuality is imperfect, all the same its 
pure will and knowledge hold duty to be what is essential. In 
the Notion, therefore, so far as the Notion is contrasted with 
reality, or in thought, it is perfect. But the absolute Being is 
just this being that is thought, a being that is postulated beyond 
reality. It is, therefore, the thought in which morally imperfect 
knowledge and willing are held to be perfect, and the absolute 
Being, since it gives full weight to this imperfection, bestows 
happiness according to worthiness, i.e. according to the merit 
ascribed to the imperfect moral consciousness. 
610. In this, the moral view of the world is completed. For 
in the Notion of the moral self-consciousness the two aspects, 
pure duty and actuality, are explicitly joined in a single unity, 
and consequently the one, like the other, is expressly without 
a being of its own, but is only a moment, or is superseded. This 
becomes explicit for consciousness in the last phase of the moral 
view of the world. That is to say, it places pure duty in a being 
other than itself, i.e. it posits pure duty partly as something 

372 
C. ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
existing only in thought, partly as something that is not valid 
in and for itself; rather it is the non-moral [consciousness] that 
is held to be perfect. Equally, it gives itself the character of a 
consciousness whose actuality, not being in conformity with 
duty, is superseded and, qua superseded, or in the idea of abso­
lute Being, no longer contradicts morality. 
6I I .  For the moral consciousness itself, however, its moral 
view of the world does not mean that consciousness develops 
therein its own Notion, and makes this its object. It is not con­
scious of this antithesis either as regards the form or the content ; 
it does not relate and compare the sides of this antithesis with 
one another, but, in its development, rolls onward, without 
being the Notion which holds the moments together. For it 
knows only the pure essence, or the object so far as it is duty, so 
far as it is an abstract object of its pure consciousness, as a pure 
knowing, or as its own self. It thinks, therefore, only in abstrac­
tions, and does not comprehend [i.e. in terms of the Notion]. 
Consequently, the object of its actual consciousness is not yet 
transparent to it ; it is not the absolute Notion, which alone 
grasps otherness as such, or its absolute opposite, as its own self. 
It does indeed hold its own reality, like all objective reality, 
to be unessential; but its freedom is the freedom of pure thought, 
in contrast to which, therefore, Nature likewise has arisen as 
an existence that is equally free. Because both are equally 
present in it, i.e. thefreedom of [mere] being, and the inclusion 
of this being within consciousness, its object becomes one that 
has being, but at the same time exists only in thought; in the last 
stage of the moral view of the world, the content is explicitly 
such that its being is given to it by thought, and this conjunction 
of being and thought is pronounced to be what in fact it is­
tmagtnzng. 
6 I 2. When we consider the moral view of the world in such 
a way that this objective mode is nothing else than the very 
Notion of moral self-consciousness which it makes objective to 
itself, this awareness of the form of its origin gives rise to its 
exposition in another shape. The first stage which forms the 
starting-point is the actual moral self-consciousness, or the fact 
that there is such a moral self-consciousness. For the Notion gives 
it this explicit character, viz. that all reality in general has essen­
tial being for it only so far as it is in conformity with duty ; and 

MORAL ITY 
373 
this essential being it characterizes as knowledge, i.e. as in im­
mediate unity with the actual self. Hence this unity is itself 
actual, it is a moral, actual consciousness. This now, qua con­
sciousness, pictures its content to itself as an object, viz. as the 
final purpose of the world, as harmony of morality and all 
reality. But since it thinks of this unity as object, and is not the 
Notion which has mastery over the object as such, the unity 
is a negative of self-consciousness for it, or it falls outside of it, 
as something beyond its actual existence, and yet at the same 
time is something that also has being, but a being existing only 
in thought. 
6 1 3. This self-consciousness which, qua self-consciousness, is 
other than the object, is thus left with the lack of harmony 
between the consciousness of duty and reality, and that, too, 
its own reality. Accordingly, the proposition now runs as fol­
lows : 'There is no moral, perfect, actual self-consciousness' ;  and, 
since the moral sphere is at all, only in so far as it is perfect, 
for duty is the pure unadulterated intrinsic being or in-itself, and 
morality consists only in conformity to this pure in-itself-the 
second proposition simply runs : 'There is no moral existence 
in reality.' 
61 4· Since, however, in the third place, it is a single self, it 
is in itself or implicitly the unity of duty and reality. This unity 
therefore becomes an object for it as perfect morality-but as 
a beyond of its reality, yet a beyond that ought to be actual. 
6 1 5. In this goal of the synthetic unity of the first two pro­
positions, the self-conscious reality [i.e. actual self-conscious­
ness] as well as duty, is posited as only a superseded moment. For 
neither of these two is single and separate ; on the contrary, each 
of them, whose essential determination lies in their being free 
from one another, is thus in the unity no longer free from the other, 
and each therefore is superseded. Hence, as regards content, 
they become as such, objects each of which counts .as object 
for the other, and as regards form, in such a way that this inter­
change is at the same time only imagined [i.e. occurs only in 
thought], Or, again, the actually non-moral sphere, because it is 
equally pure thought, and is raised above its actual existence, 
is yet, in imagination, moral, and is taken to be completely 
valid. In this way, the first proposition, that there is a moral self­
consciousness, is reinstated, but is bound up witti the second, 

374 
C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
that there is none, i.e. that there is one, but only in imagination ; 
or, in other words, it is true that there is none, yet, all the same, 
it is allowed by another consciousness to pass for one. 
b. Dissemblance or duplicity 
6 I 6. In the moral view of the world we see, on the one hand, 
consciousness itself consciously produce its object; we see that it 
neither encounters the object as something alien to it, nor does 
the object come before it in an unconscious manner. On the 
contrary, it proceeds in every case in accordance with a prin­
ciple on the basis of which it posits objective being. It thus knows 
this latter to be its own self, for it knows itself to be the active agent 
that produces it. It seems, therefore, to attain here its peace 
and satisfaction, for this can only be found where it no longer 
needs to go beyond its object, because this no longer goes 
beyond it. On the other hand, however, consciousness itself really 
places the object outside itself as a beyond of itself. But this object 
with an intrinsic being of its own is equally posited as being, 
not free from self-consciousness, but as existing in the interest 
of, and by means of, it. 
6 I 7. The moral world-view is, therefore, in fact nothing 
other than the elaboration of this fundamental contradiction 
in its various aspects. It is, to employ here a Kantian expression 
where it is most appropriate, a 'whole nest' of thoughtless con­
tradictions. The way in which consciousness proceeds in this de­
velopment, is to establish one moment and to pass directly from 
it to another, setting aside the first ; but now, as soon as it has 
set up this second moment, it also sets it aside again, and really 
makes the opposite moment the essential one. At the same time, 
it is also aware of its contradiction and shiftiness, for it passes 
from one moment, immediately in its relation to this very 
moment, over to the opposite. Because a moment has no reality 
for it, it posits that very same moment as real: or, what comes 
to the same thing, in order to assert one moment as possessing 
being in itself, it asserts the opposite as the one that possesses 
being in itself. In so doing it confesses that, as a matter of fact, 
it is in earnest with neither of them. We must examine more 
closely the moments of this insincere shuffling. 
6 I 8. Let us, to begin with, not question the assumption that 
there is an actual moral consciousness, because the assumption 

MORAL ITY 
375 
is made directly and not in connection with something preced­
ing ; and let us turn to the harmony of morality and Nature, the 
first postulate. It is supposed to be an implicit harmony, not expli­
citly for actual consciousness, not present ; on the contrary, 
what is present is rather only the contradiction of the two. In 
the present, morality is assumed as already in existence, and actu­
ality is so placed that it is not in harmony with it. The actual 
moral consciousness, however, is one that acts; it is precisely 
therein that the actuality of its morality consists. But in the very 
doing or acting, the place [given to actuality] is displaced ; for 
the action is nothing other than the actualization of the inner 
moral purpose, nothing other than the production of an actuality 
determined by the purpose, or of the harmony of the moral purpose 
and actuality itself. At the same time, the performance of the 
action is a fact of which consciousness is aware, it is the presence 
of this unity of actuality and purpose, and because, in the 
accomplished deed, consciousness knows itself to be actualized 
as this particular consciousness, or beholds existence returned 
into itself-and enjoyment consists in this-there is also con­
tained in the actuality of the moral purpose that form of actu­
ality which is called enjoyment and happiness. Action, there­
fore, in fact directly fulfils what was asserted could not take place, 
what was supposed to be merely a postulate, merely a beyond. 
Consciousness thus proclaims through its deed that it is not in 
earnest in making its postulate, because the meaning of the 
action is really this, to make into a present reality what was 
not supposed to exist in the present. And, since the harmony 
is postulated for the sake of the action-that is to say, what is to 
to become actual through action, must be so in itself, otherwise 
actuality would not be possible-the connection of action and 
postulate is so constituted that, for the sake of the action, i.e. 
for the sake of the actual harmony of purpose and actuality, this 
harmony is postulated as not actual, as a beyond. 
619. Since action does take place, the lack offitness between 
purpose and reality is not taken seriously at all. On the other 
hand, action itself does seem to be taken seriously. In point of 
fact, however, the actual deed is only a deed of the individual 
consciousness, and therefore itself only something individual, 
and the result contingent. But the purpose of Reason as the uni­
versal, all-embracing purpose, is nothing less than the whole 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
world ; a final purpose going far beyond the content of this indivi­
dual deed, and therefore to be placed altogether beyond any­
thing actually done. Because the universal best ought to be 
carried out, nothing good is done. In fact, however, the nullity 
ofwhatisactually done, and the reality of the whole purpose alone, 
which are now postulated-these, too, are in every respect 
again 'displaced'. The moral action is not something con tin gent 
and restricted, for it has as its essence pure duty. This constitutes 
the sole entire purpose ; and thus the deed, no matter in what 
other way its content is limited, is, qua actualization of that pur­
pose, the accomplishment of the entire absolute purpose. Or, 
again, ifreality is taken to be Nature, which has its own laws 
and stands in contrast to pure duty, so that duty cannot realize 
its law within Nature, then, since it is duty as such that essenti­
ally matters, what we are in fact concerned with is not the fulfil­
ment of pure duty, which is the whole purpose ; for the fulfil­
ment would really have as its purpose, not pure duty, but its 
antithesis, reality. But there is again a shift from the position 
that it is not reality with which we are concerned ; for according 
to the Notion of moral action, pure duty is essentially an active 
consciousness. Thus there certainly ought to be action, absolute 
duty ought to be expressed in the whole of Nature, and moral 
law to become natural law. 
620. If then we allow that it is this highest good that essenti­
ally matters, then consciousness is not in earnest with morality 
at all. For in this highest good, Nature does not have a different 
law from that of morality. Hence moral action itself is ruled 
out, for action takes place only on the assumption of a negative 
which is to be set aside by the action. But if Nature is in con­
formity with the moral law, the latter would in fact be violated 
by the setting-aside ofwhat is in existence. In the assumption 
that the highest good is what essentially matters, there is 
admitted a situation in which moral action is superfluous, and 
does not take place at all. The postulate of the harmony of 
morality and reality-a harmony posited by the Notion of 
moral action, which implies bringing the two into agreement­
is expressed from this point of view, too, in the form : 'Because 
moral action is the absolute purpose, the absolute purpose is, 
that there should be no such thing as moral action.' 
62 1 .  When we put together these moments, which conscious-

M O R A L I TY 
377 
ness has traversed in its ideas of morality, it is clear that each 
one in turn is superseded in its opposite. Consciousness starts 
from the idea that,jor it, morality and reality do not harmonize ; 
but it is not in earnest about this, for in the deed the presence 
of this harmony becomes explicit for it. But it is not in earnest 
even about this deed, since the deed is something individual ; 
for it has such a high purpose, the highest good. But this again 
is only a dissemblance of the facts, for such dissemblance would 
do away with all action and all morality. In other words, con­
sciousness is not, strictly speaking, in earnest with moral action : 
what it really holds to be most desirable, to be the Absolute, 
is that the highest good be accomplished, and that moral action 
be superfluous. 
622. From this result consciousness must go on still further 
in its contradictory movement, and of necessity again dissemble 
this suppression of moral action. Morality is the 'in-itself', the 
merely implicit element ; if it is to be actual, the final purpose 
of the world cannot be fulfilled ; rather the moral consciousness 
must exist on its own account and find itself confronted by a 
Nature opposed to it. But it must be perfected in its own self. 
This leads to the second postulate of the harmony of itself and 
the Nature which is immediately an element in it, i.e. the sense­
nature. Moral self-consciousness asserts that its purpose is pure, 
is independent of inclinations and impulses, which implies that 
it has eliminated within itself sensuous purposes. But this 
alleged elimination of the element of sense it dissembles again. 
It acts, brings its purpose into actual existence, and the self­
conscious sense-nature which is supposed to be eliminated is 
precisely this middle term or mediating element between pure 
consciousness and actual existence-it कs the instrument or 
organ of the former for its realization, and what is called 
impulse, inclination. Moral self-consciousness is not, therefore, 
in earnest with the elimination of inclinations and impulses, for 
it is just these that are the self-realizing self-consciousness. But also 
they ought not to be suppressed, but only to be in conformity with 
Reason. And they are in conformity with Reason, for moral 
action is nothing else but consciousness realizing itself, thus giv­
ing itself the shape of an impulse, i.e. it is immediately the present 
harmony of impulse and morality. But impulse is not in fact 
merely this empty shape which could have within it a spring 

C. ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
of action other than the one it is, and be impelled by it. For 
sense-nature is one which contains within itself its own laws and 
springs of action ; consequently, morality cannot therefore be 
in earnest about being itself the mainspring of impulses, the 
angle of inclination for inclinations. For since these have their 
own fixed quality and peculiar content, the consciousness to 
which they were to conform would be rather in conformity with 
them-a conformity with which moral self-consciousness refuses 
to comply. The harmony of the two is thus merely implicit, 
merely postulated. 
In moral action the actually present harmony of morality and 
the sense-nature was just now asserted, but now is 'displaced' ;  
the harmony is beyond consciousness in a nebulous remoteness 
where nothing can any more be accurately distinguished 
or comprehended ; for our attempt just now to comprehend 
this unity failed. In this [merely] implicit harmony, however, 
consciousness surrenders itself altogether. This implicit har­
mony is its moral perfection, where the struggle of morality and 
the sense-nature has ceased, and the latter is in conformity 
with morality in a way that is beyond our comprehension. For 
that reason this perfection is again only a dissemblance, a falsifi­
cation of the situation, since as a matter of fact it would be 
rather morality itself that was given up in that perfection, 
because it is only consciousness of absolute purpose as pure pur­
pose, one therefore opposed to all other purposes. Morality is 
both the actiuity of this pure purpose, and also the consciousness 
of rising above sense-nature, of being mixed up with sense­
nature and struggling against it. That consciousness is not in 
earnest about the perfection of morality is indicated by the fact 
that consciousness itself shifts it away into infinity, i.e. asserts 
that the perfection is never perfected. 
623. What consciousness really holds to be the truth of the 
matter is only this intermediate state of imperfection, a state 
nevertheless which at least is supposed to be a progress towards 
perfection. But it cannot even be that ; for to advance in 
morality would really be to move towards its disappearance. 
That is to say, the goal would be the nothingness or the aboli­
tion, mentioned above, of morality and consciousness itself; but 
to approach ever nearer to nothingness means to diminish. 
Besides, 'advancing' as such, like 'diminishing', would assume 

MORAL ITY 
379 
quantitative differences in morality ; but there can be no question 
of these in it. In morality, as in consciousness, for which the 
moral purpose is pure duty, there cannot be any thought at all 
of difference, least of all ofthe superficial one of quantity; there 
is only one virtue, only one pure duty, only one morality. 
624. Since, then, it is not moral perfection that is taken seri­
ously, but rather the intermediate state, i.e. as just argued, non­
morality, we thus return, from another aspect, to the content 
ofthe first postulate : viz. we cannot understand how happiness 
is to be demanded for this moral consciousness on the ground 
of its worthiness. It is aware of its imperfection and cannot, there­
fore, in point offact demand happiness as a desert, as something 
of which it is worthy. It can only ask for happiness to be granted 
as a free act of grace, i.e. it can only ask for happiness as such, 
as something existing in and for itself, and can expect it, not 
on the absolute ground mentioned above, but as coming to it 
by chance and caprice. Here, then, non-morality declares just 
what it is-that it is concerned not about morality, but solely 
about happiness as such without reference to morality. 
625. By this second aspect of the moral view of the world, 
the other assertion of the first aspect, in which the disharmony 
of morality and happiness is assumed, is also nullified. It is 
claimed that experience shows that in this present world the 
moral individual often fares badly, while the immoral indivi­
dual often flourishes. But the intermediate state of an imperfect 
morality, which has shown itselfto be the essential one, clearly 
shows that this observation, this supposed experience, is merely 
a dissemblance of the true state of the case. For since morality 
is imperfect, i.e. morality in fact is not, what can there be in 
the experience that morality fares badly? Since, at the same 
time, it has turned out that it is happiness simply as such that 
is involved, it is evident that in making the judgement that the 
immoral individual flourishes, it was not intended to imply that 
an injustice occurred here. The designation of an individual 
as immoral necessarily falls away when morality in general is im­
perfect, and has therefore only an arbitrary basis. Therefore, 
the sense and content of the judgement of experience is solely 
this, that happiness simply as such should not have been the 
lot of some individuals, i.e. the judgement is an expression of 
envy which covers itself with the cloak of morality. The reason, 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
however, why so-called good luck should fall to the lot of others, 
is good friendship, which grants and wishes them, and itself, too, 
this lucky chance. 
626. Morality, then, in the moral consciousness is imperfect ; 
this is now what is put forward. But it is the essence of morality 
to be only the perfectly pure ; imperfect morality is therefore 
impure, or is immorality. Morality itself thus exists in another 
being than the actual consciousness. This other being is a holy 
moral lawgiver. The imperfect morality in consciousness, which 
is the reason for making these postulates, means, in the first in­
stance, that morality, when it is posited in consciousness as actual, 
stands in relation to an 'other', to an existence, and therefore 
itself receives within it otherness or difference, giving rise to a 
whole variety of moral laws. The moral self-consciousness at 
the same time, however, holds these many duties to be unessen­
tial ; for it is concerned only with the one pure duty, and the 
many have no truth for it in so far as they are specific duties. They 
can therefore have their truth only in another being and are 
made sacred-which they arऎ not for the moral consciousness­
by a holy lawgiver. But this again is only a dissemblance of the 
real position. For the moral self-consciousness is its own Abso­
lute, and duty is absolutely only what it knows as duty. But duty 
it knows only as pure duty ; what is not sacred for it is not sacred 
in itself, and what is not in itself sacred, cannot be made sacred 
by the holy being. The moral consciousness, too, is not really 
in earnest about letting something be made sacred by another 
consciousness than itself; for that alone it holds to be sacred which 
it has itself made sacred, and is sacred in it. It is, therefore, just 
as little in earnest about the holiness of this other being, for 
in this something was supposed to obtain an essentiality which 
for the moral consciousness, i.e. in itself, it did not possess. 
627. If the holy being was postulated in order that in it duty 
might have its validity, not as pure duty, but as a multiplicity 
of specific duties, then this again must be dissembled, and the 
other being alone must be holy in so far as only pure duty has 
validity in it. Pure duty has also in point of fact validity only 
in another being, not in the moral consciousness. Although in 
the latter it seems that pure morality alone has validity, the 
position must be put in another way, for it is at the same time 
a natural consciousness. In it, morality is affected and con-

MORAL ITY 
ditioned by the sense-nature, and is therefore not free and inde­
pendent, but contingent on free will; in it, however, as pure 
will, morality is contingent on knowledge. Morality, therefore, 
in and for itself is in another being. 
628. This other being, then, is here the purely perfect 
morality, for in it morality does not stand in a relation to Nature 
and sense. But the reality of pure duty is its realization in Nature 
and sense. The moral consciousness attributes its imperfection 
to the fact that in it morality has a positive relation to Nature 
and sense, because it holds that an essential moment in morality 
is that it should have a negative, and only a negative, relation 
to them. The pure moral being, on the other hand, because 
it is above the struggle with Nature and sense, does not stand 
in a negative relation to them. Therefore, in fact, there remains 
for it only the positive relation to them, i.e. just what a moment 
ago was, qua imperfect, held to be immoral. But a pure morality 
that was completely separated from reality, and so likewise was 
without any positive relation to it, would be an unconscious, 
unreal abstraction in which the concept of morality, which in­
volves thinking of pure duty, willing, and doing it, would be 
done away with. Such a purely moral being is therefore again 
a dissemblance of the facts, and has to be given up. 
62g. In this purely moral being, however, the moments of 
the contradiction, in which this synthetic presentation of them 
flounders about, are brought closer together; and consciousness 
lets these opposites follow one after the other, one always being 
replaced by the other, without bringing its thoughts together, 
so that in the end it is forced to give up its moral view of the 
world and seek refuge within itself. 
630. It knows its morality to be imperfect because it is 
affected by the sense-nature and Nature opposed to it, which 
in part adulterate morality itself as such, and in part give rise 
to a host of duties by which in concrete cases of real action it 
is embarrassed. For each case is the concrescence of many moral 
relations, just as an object of perception in general is a thing 
of many properties ; and since the specific duty is a purpose, it 
has a content, and its content is part of the purpose, and morality 
is not pure. This latter therefore has its reality in another being. 
This reality, however, means nothing else than that the being 
of morality here is both intrinsic and explicit: explicit, i.e. it is 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
the morality of a conscious being, and intrinsic, i.e. it has an exist­
ence and a reality. In that first, imperfect consciousness morality 
is not realized. There, it is the 'in-itself', or merely implicit 
being in the sense of a mere 'thought-thing' ; for it is associated 
with Nature and sense, with the reality of being and conscious­
ness which constitutes its content, and Nature and sense are 
morally nothing. In the second consciousness morality exists as 
peifect and not as an unrealized 'thought-thing'. But this perfec­
tion consists precisely in morality having reality in a consciousness, 
as well as a free reality, an existence in general, in being some­
thing not empty but full-filled, full of content ; i.e. the perfection 
of morality is placed in the fact that what has just been charac­
terized as morally nothing is present in it and intrinsic to it. 
On one hand it is supposed to have validity simply and solely 
as the unreal 'thought-thing' of pure abstraction, and then 
again equally to have no validity in that mode ; its truth is sup­
posed to consist in its being opposed to reality, and to be entirely 
free and empty of it, and then again, to consist in its being 
reality. 
63 1 .  The syncretism of these contradictions which is set forth 
at length in the moral view of the world, collapses internally, 
since the distinction on which it rests, the distinction between 
what must be thought and postulated, and yet is at the same 
time not essential, becomes a distinction which no longer exists 
even in words. What finally is posited as diverse, both as a noth­
ing and also as a reality, is one and the very same thing, viz. 
existence and reality ; and what is supposed to be absolute, only 
as the beyond of real being and consciousness, and yet equally 
to be absolute only in them, and so as a beyond to be nothing­
this Absolute is pure duty, and the knowledge of duty as essence. 
The consciousness which makes this distinction that is no dis­
tinction, which asserts that actual existence has no validity, and 
at the same time that it is real, that pure morality is both truly 
essential, and also devoid of essence-such a consciousness 
expresses in one and the same breath the thoughts which it pre­
viously separated, and itself proclaims that it is not in earnest 
about this determination and separation of the moments of self 
and in-itself or intrinsic being; but that on the contrary, what 
it asserts as having absolute being outside of consciousness, it 
really keeps enclosed within the self of self-consciousness, and 

MORAL ITY 
that what it asserts to have absolute being in thought, or to be 
absolutely intrinsic being, it for that very reason takes to be some­
thing that has no truth. Consciousness comes to see that the 
placing-apart of these moments is a 'displacing' of them, a dis­
semblance, and that it would be hypocrisy if, nevertheless, it were 
to keep them separate. But as moral pure self-consciousness, it 
flees from this disparity between the way it thinks [of these 
moments] and its own essential nature, flees from this untruth 
which asserts that to be true which it holds to be untrue, flees 
from this with abhorrence back into itself. It is a pure conscience 
which rejects with scorn such a moral idea of the world ; it is 
in its own self the simple Spirit that, certain of itself, acts con­
scientiously regardless of such ideas, and in this immediacy pos­
sesses its truth. While, however, this world of dissemblance is 
nothing else but the development of moral self-consciousness 
in its moments, and hence is its reality, its essential nature, by 
retreating into itself, will not become anything different. Its 
retreat into itself means rather that consciousness has realized 
that its truth is a pretended truth. It would always have to be 
giving out this pretended truth as its truth, for it would have 
to express and present itself as an objective idea, but would be 
aware that all this is merely a dissemblance. It would therefore 
be, in fact, hypocrisy, and the scornful rejection of that dis­
semblance would be itself the first expression of hypocrisy. 
c. Conscience. The 'beautiful soul', evil and its forgiveness 
632. The antinomy of the moral view of the world, viz. that 
there is a moral consciousness, and that there is none, or that 
the validation of duty lies beyond consciousness, and con­
versely, takes place in it-these contradications were gathered 
up in the idea in which the non-moral consciousness has moral 
validity, its contingent knowing and willing are assumed to 
have full weight, and happiness is granted to it as an act of 
grace. Moral self-consciousness did not accept responsibility for 
this self-contradictory idea, but shifted it on to a being other 
than itself. But this placing outside of itself what it must think 
of as necessary is as much a contradiction as regards form, as 
the other was as regards content. Because, however, what 
appear as contradictory propositions, which the moral con­
sciousness makes clumsy efforts first to separate and then to 

C .  (BB . )  S P I R I T  
reconcile, are intrinsically the same, since pure duty, viz. as pure 
knowing, is nothing else than the self of consciousness, and the 
self of consciousness is being and actuality : and similarly, because 
what is supposed to lie beyond actual consciousness is nothing 
else than pure thought, and thus is, in fact, the self-because 
this is so, self-consciousness,jor us or in itself, retreats into itself, 
and is aware that that being is its own self, in which what is 
actual is at the same time pure knowing and pure duty. It is 
itself in its contingency completely valid in its own sight, and 
knows its immediate individuality to be pure knowing and 
doing, to be the true reality and harmony. 
633. This self of conscience, Spirit that is directly aware of 
itself as absolute truth and being, is the third self. We have 
reached it as the outcome of the third world of Spirit and we 
shall briefly compare it with the two preceding selves. The 
totality or actuality which shows itself to be the truth of the 
ethical world is the self of the [legal] person ; its existence con­
sists in its being acknowledged by others. Just as this person 
is the self that is devoid of substance, so is its existence an 
abstract reality too. The person counts, and that simply as a per­
son: the self is the point immediately at rest in the element of 
its being. That point is not separated off from its universality, 
and therefore the two are not actively related to one another: 
the universal is in it without any distinction, and is neither the 
content of the self, nor is the self filled by itself. The second 
self is the world of culture which has attained its truth, or it 
is Spirit that has recovered itself from its dividedness-absolute 
freedom. In this self, that first, immediate unity of individuality 
and universality is sundered ; the universal which all the same 
remains a purely spiritual entity, the state of being acknow­
ledged or a universal willing and knowing, is object and content 
of the self and its universal reality. But it does not have the form 
of an existence free from the self; in this self, therefore, it obtains 
no filling and no positive content, no world. Moral self-con­
sciousness does indeed let its universality go free so that it 
becomes a nature ofits own, and equally it holds fast to it within 
itself as a superseded moment. It is, however, merely an in­
sincere play of alternating these two determinations. It is as con­
science that it first has, in its self-certainty, a content for the previ­
ously empty duty, as also for the right and the universal will 

MORAL ITY 
that were empty of content. And because this self-assurance is 
at the same time an immediacy, conscience exists. 
634. Moral self-consciousness having attained its truth, it 
therefore abandons, or rather supersedes, the internal division 
which gave rise to the dissemblance, the division between the 
in-itself and the self, between pure duty qua pure purpose, and 
reality qua a Nature and sense opposed to pure purpose.-It is, 
when thus returned into itself, concrete moral Spirit which, in 
the consciousness of pure duty, does not give itself an empty 
criterion to be used against actual consciousness ; on the con­
trary, pure duty, as also the Nature opposed to it, are super­
seded moments. Spirit is, in an immediate unity, a self-actualiz­
ing being, and the action is immediately something concretely 
moral. 
635. Suppose a case of moral action ; it is an objective reality 
for the knowing consciousness. This, qua conscience, knows it 
in an immediate, concrete manner ; and at the same time it is 
only as conscience knows it. Knowing is contingent in so far 
as it is something other than the object ; but Spirit that is self­
certain is no longer such a contingent knower, and a producer 
of thoughts divorced from reality. On the contrary, since the 
separation of the in-itself and the selfhas been done away with, 
a case of moral action is, in the sense-certainty of knowing, 
directly as it is in itself, and it is in itself only in the way that 
it is in this [kind of] knowing. Action qua actualization is thus 
the pure form of will-the simple conversion of a reality that 
merely is into a reality that results from action, the conversion 
of the bare mode of objective knowing [i.e. knowing an object] 
into one ofknowing reality as something produced by conscious­
ness. Just as sense-certainty is immediately taken up, or rather 
converted, into the in-itself of Spirit, so this conversion, too, 
is simple and unmediated, a transition effected by the pure 
Notion without alteration of the content, the content being de­
termined by the interest of the consciousness knowing it. 
Further, conscience does not split up the circumstancएs of the 
case into a variety of duties. It does not behave as a positive uni­
versal medium, wherein the many duties would acquire, each for 
itself, a fixed substantial nature. If it did, then either no action 
could take place at all, because each concrete case involves an 
antithesis in general, and, in a case of morality, a clash of 

C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
duties-and therefore by the very nature of action one side 
would be injured, one duty violated : or else, if action did take 
place, there would be an actual violation of one of the conflict­
ing duties. Conscience is rather the negative One, or absolute 
self, which does away with these various moral substances ; it 
is simple action in accordance with duty, which fulfills not this 
or that duty, but knows and does what is concretely right. It 
is, therefore, first of all moral action qua action into which the 
previous moral consciousness that did not act has passed. The 
concrete shape of the deed may be analysed by the conscious­
ness looking for distinctions into various properties, i.e. here, 
into various moral relations ; and each of these may either be 
asserted as absolutely valid (as it must be if it is supposed to 
be duty) , or else compared and tested. In the simple moral 
action of conscience, duties are lumped together in such a way 
that all these single entities are straightway demolished, and the 
sifting of them in the steadfast certainty of conscience to ascer­
tain what our duty is, simply does not take place. 
636. Just as little is there present in conscience that fluctuat­
ing uncertainty of consciousness which now places so-called 
pure morality outside ofitselfinto another, holy being and takes 
itself to be unholy, buuhen again places so-called pure morality 
within itself, and the connection of the sensuous with the moral 
in that other being. 
637. It renounces all these attitudes and dissemblances, con­
nected with the moral view of the world, when it renounces 
that consciousness which thinks of duty and reality as contradic­
tory. According to this latter view, I act morally when I am 
conscious of performing only pure duty and nothing else but that ; 
this means, in fact, when I do not act. But when I really act, 
I am conscious of an 'other', of a reality which is already in 
existence, and of a reality I wish to produce ; I have a specific 
purpose and fulfil a specific duty in which there is something 
else than the pure duty which alone should be intended. Con­
science, on the other hand, is awareness of the fact that, when 
the moral consciousness declares pure duty to be the essence of 
its action, this pure purpose is a dissemblance of the truth of 
the matter; for the fact is that pure duty consists in the empty 
abstraction of pure thought, a!ld has its reality and its content 
only in a specific reality, in a reality which is the reality of con-

MORAL I TY 
sciousness itself, and consciousness not as a mere 'thought-thing' 
but as an individual. As for conscience itself, this knows that 
it has its truth in the immediate certainty of itself. This immediate 
concrete self-certainty is the essence [of the action] ; looking at 
this certainty from the point of view of the antithesis of con­
sciousness, the content of the moral action is the doer's own 
immediate individuality ; and theform of that content is just this 
self as a pure movement, viz. as [the individual's] knowing or 
his own conviction. 
638. Looking more closely at the unity of the moral con­
sciousness and at the significance of its moments, we see that 
it regards itself as the in-itself or essence ; but as conscience, it 
apprehends its being-for-self or its self. The contradiction of the 
moral consciousness resolves itself, i.e. the difference which lies 
at its base proves to be none, and it runs away into pure nega­
tivity ; but this precisely is the self, a simple self which is both 
a pure knowing and a knowledge of itself as this individual con­
sciousness. Consequently, this self constitutes the content of 
what was previously the empty essence ; for it is actual, a self 
which no longer has the significance of being a nature alien 
to the essence and, with laws of its own, independent of it. As 
the negative, it is the dijference within pure essence, a content, 
and one, too, which is valid in and for itself. 
639. Further, this self, qua a pure self-identical knowing, is 
the absolute universal, so that just this knowing, as its own know­
ing, as conviction, is duty. Duty is no longer the universal that 
stands over against the self; on the contrary, it is known to have 
no validity when thus separated. It is now the law that exists 
for the sake of the self, not the self that exists for the sake of 
the law. Law and duty, however, have for that reason the sig­
nificance not only of being-for-self but also of intrinsic being; for 
this knowing, because it is self-identical, is precisely the in-itself. 
In consciousness, too, this in-itself separates itself from that im­
mediate unity with being-for-self; as thus standing over against 
the latter it is being, a being-for-another. Duty itself, as duty for­
saken by the self, is now known to be only a moment ; from signify­
ing the absolute essence, it has fallen to the level of mere being, 
which is not self, is not for itself, and is therefore a being-for­
another. But the being-for-another remains an essential moment 
just because the self, qua consciousness, cons ti tu tes the anti thesis 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
ofbeing-for-selfand being-for-another; and now duty is present 
in consciousness as something directly actual, is no longer merely 
abstract pure consciousness. 
640. This being-for-another is, therefore, the substance which 
remains in itself or unexplicated, which is distinct from the self. 
Conscience has not given up pure duty or the abstract in-itself; 
duty is the essential moment of relating itself, qua universality, 
to another. Conscience is the common element of the two self­
consciousnesses, and this element is the substance in which the 
deed has an enduring reality, the moment of being recognized and 
acknowledged by others. The moral consciousness does not possess 
this moment of recognition by others, of pure consciousness which 
has a real existence ; and consequently does not act, or actualize 
anything at all. Its in-itselfis for it either abstract, unreal essence, 
or being as a reality which is not spiritual. The existent reality 
of conscience, however, is one which is a self, an existence which 
is conscious of itself, the spiritual element of being recognized 
and acknowledged. The action is thus only the translation of 
its individual content into the objective element, in which it is uni­
versal and recognized, and it is just the fact that it is recognized 
that makes the deed a reality. The deed is recognized and 
thereby made real because the existent reality is directly linked 
with conviction or knowledge ; or, in other words, knowing 
one's purpose is directly the element of existence, is universal 
recognition. For the essence of the action, duty, consists in con­
science's conviction about it ; it is just this conviction that is the 
in-itself; it is the implicitly universal self-consciousness, or the state 
of being recognized, and hence a reality. What is done with the 
conviction of duty is, therefore, at once something that has 
standing and a real existence. There is, then, no more talk of 
good intentions coming to nothing, or of the good man faring 
badly ; on the contrary, the duty that is known to be such is 
fulfilled and becomes a reality, just because what is essentially 
a duty is the universal for all self-consciousnesses, is that which 
is recognized and acknowledged and thus positively is. But, 
taken separately and alone, without the content of self, duty 
is a being-for-another, something transparent which has merely 
the significance of an essentiality in general, lacking all content. 
641 .  If we look back on the sphere where spiritual reality 
first made its appearance, we find that the Notion involved was 

M O R A L ITY 
that the utterance of individuality is that which is both in and 
for itself. But the shape which immediately expressed this Notion 
was the honest consciousness which busied itself with the abstract 
thing itself [Sac he selbst]. This 'thing itself' was there a predicate ; 
but it is in conscience that it is for the first time a subject which 
has made explicit all the moments of consciousness within it, 
and for which all these moments, substantiality in general, 
external existence, and the essential nature of thought, are con­
tained in this certainty of itself. The 'thing itself' has substanti­
ality in general in the ethical sphere, external existence in 
culture, the self-knowing essentiality of thought in morality; 
and in conscience it is the subject that knows these moments 
within it. While the 'honest consciousness' always seizes merely 
the empty thing itself, conscience, on the other hand, wins the 
thing in its fullness, a fullness given to it by conscience itself. 
Conscience is this power because it knows the moments of con­
sciousness as moments, dominating them as their negative 
essence. 
642. When conscience is considered in relation to the single 
determinations of the antithesis manifest in action and its 
awareness of the nature of those determinations, its relation to 
the actual case in which it has to act is, in the first instance, 
that of knower. In so far as this knowing has in it the moment 
of universality, conscientious action requires that the actual case 
before it should be viewed unrestrictedly in all its bearings, and 
therefore that all the circumstances of the case should be accu­
rately known and taken into consideration. But this knowing, 
since it knows the universality as a moment, is at the same time 
aware that it does not know all the circumstances, or, in other 
words, that it does not act conscientiously. The genuinely uni­
versal and pure relation of knowing would be a relation to some­
thing not containing an antithesis, a relation to itself; but action, 
in virtue of the antithesis it essentially contains, is related to 
a negative of consciousness, to a reality possessing intrinsic being. 
Contrasted with the simplicity of pure consciousness, with the 
absolute other or implicit manifoldness, this reality is a plurality 
of circumstances which breaks up and spreads out endlessly in 
all directions, backwards into their conditions, sideways into 
their connections, forwards in their consequences. The con­
scientious mind is aware of this nature of the thing and of its 

390 
C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
relation to it, and knows that, in the case in which it acts, it 
does not possess that full acquaintance with all the attendant 
circumstances which is required, and that its pretence of conऐ 
scientiously weighing all the circumstances is vain. However, 
this acquaintance with, and weighing of, all the circumstances 
are not altogether lacking ; but they exist only as a moment, as 
something which is only for others ; and this incomplete knowledge 
is held by the conscientious mind to be sufficient and complete, 
because it is its own knowledge. 
643. Similarly with the universality of the essence, that is, with 
the determination of the content by pure consciousness. Con­
science, when it proceeds to action, enters into relation with 
the many aspects of the case. The case breaks up into its various 
separate parts and so, too, does the relation of pure conscious­
ness to it, with the result that the manifold nature of the case 
becomes a multiplicity of duties. Conscience knows that it has 
to choose between them, and to make a decision ; for none of 
them, in its specific character or in its content, is absolute ; only 
pure duty is that. But this abstraction [of pure duty] has 
attained in its reality the significance of the self-conscious 'I'. 
The self-certain Spirit rests, qua conscience, within itself, and 
its real universality or its duty lies in its pure conviction of duty. 
This pure conviction is, as such, as empty as pure duty, is pure 
in the sense that there is nothing in it, no specific content that 
is a duty. But action is called for, something must be determined 
by the individual, and the self-certain Spirit in which the in­
itselfhas attained the significance of the self-conscious 'I', knows 
that it has this determination and content in the immediate cer­
tainty ofitself. This, as a determination and content, is the natural 
consciousness, i.e. impulses and inclinations. Conscience does 
not recognize the absoluteness of any content, for it is the abso­
lute negativity of everything determinate. It determines from 
its own self; but the sphere of the self into which falls the deter­
minateness as such is the so-called sense-nature ; to have a con­
tent taken from the immediate certainty of itself means that 
it has nothing to draw on but sense-nature. Everything that 
in previous forms of experience presented itself as good or bad, 
as law and right, is something other than the immediate cer­
tainty of self; it is a universal which is now a being-for-another. 
Or, looked at from another aspect, it is an object which, while 

MORAL ITY 
391 
mediating consciousness with itself, comes between conscious­
ness and its own truth, so that instead of the object being the 
immediacy of consciousness, it rather cuts consciousness off 
from itself. For conscience, however, self-certainty is the pure, 
immediate truth ; and this truth is thus its immediate certainty 
of self, conceived as content, i.e. this truth is in general the caprice 
of the individual, and the contingency of his unconscious 
natural being [his sense-nature]. 
644. This content at the same time counts as a moral essenti­
ality or as duty. For pure duty, as was found when testing laws, 
is utterly indifferent to any content and tolerates any content. 
Here it has, at the same time, the essential form of being-for­
self, and this form of individual conviction is nothing else but 
consciousness of the emptiness of pure duty and of the fact that 
pure duty is only a moment, that its substantiality is a predicate 
which has its subject in the individual, whose caprice gives it 
its content and can associate every content with this form and 
attach its conscientiousness to the content. An individual in­
creases his property in a certain way ; it is everyone's duty to 
provide for the support of himself and his family, and no less 
to have regard to the possibility of being useful to his fellow men, 
and of doing good to those in need. The individual is aware 
that this is a duty, for this content is directly contained in his 
certainty of himself; furthermore, he perceives that he fulfils 
this duty in this particular case. Others, perhaps, hold this spe­
cific way of behaving to be humbug; they hold to other aspects 
of the concrete case, he, however, holds firmly to this aspect, 
because he is conscious of the increase of property as a pure 
duty. Thus, what others call violence and wrongdoing, is the 
fulfilment of the individual's duty to maintain his independence 
in face of others ; what they call cowardice, is the duty of sup­
porting life and the possibility of being useful to others ; but 
what they call courage violates both duties. But cowardice can­
not be so inept as not to know that the preservation oflife and 
the possibility of being useful to others are duties-so inept as 
not to be convinced of the moral obligatoriness of its action, and 
not to know that this obligatoriness consists in knowing it to be 
such. Otherwise it would be guilty of ineptitude, of being 
immoral. Since morality lies in the consciousness of having ful­
filled one's duty, this will not be lacking when the action is 

392 
C. ( BB. ) S P I R I T  
called cowardice any more than when it is called courage. The 
abstraction called duty, being capable of any content, is also 
capable of cowardice. The doer, then, knows what he does to 
be a duty, and since he knows this, and the conviction of duty 
is the very essence of moral obligation, he is thus recognized 
and acknowledged by others. The action is thereby validated 
and has an actual existence. 
645. It is of no use to object to this freedom, which places 
any and every kind of content in the universal passive medium 
of 'duty' and 'knowing', by maintaning that another content 
ought to have been placed in it ; for whatever content it be, 
it contains the blemish of determinateness from which pure knowing 
is free, determinateness which pure knowing can disdainfully 
reject, or equally can accept. Every content, because it is 
determinate, stands on the same level as any other, even if it 
does seem to be characterized by the elimination in it of the 
element of particularity. It may seem that, since, in the actual 
case, duty in general is sundered into an antithesis and thereby 
into the antithesis of individuality and universality, the duty 
whose content is the universal itself directly contains the nature 
of pure duty, and form and content are thus completely in 
accord. It might seem, then, that action for the general good 
is to be preferred to action for the good of the individual ; but 
this universal duty is simply what already exists as absolute sub­
stance, as law and right, and is valid on its own account in­
dependently of the individual's knowledge and conviction, not 
to mention his own immediate interest. It is, therefore, precisely 
against the form of that duty that morality in general is directed. 
But as regards its content, that too is a determinate content, in so 
far as the general good is opposed to the good of the individual. 
Consequently, its law is one from which conscience knows itself 
to be absolutely free, and it gives itself the authority to add to 
and take from, to neglect as well as fulfil it. Then, again, the 
above distinction between duty to the individual and duty to 
the universal is, in accordance with the nature of the antithesis 
as such, not something definitely fixed. The truth is rather that 
what the individual does for himself also contributes to the 
general good ; the more he has made provision for himself, not 
only is there a greater possibility of his being of service to others, 
but his actual existence itself consists only in his being and living 

MORAL ITY 
393 
in contact with others. His individual enjoyment essentially has 
the meaning of putting what is his own at the disposal of others 
and of helping them to obtain their enjoyment. Therefore, in 
the fulfilment of duty to individuals and so to oneself, the duty 
to the universal is also fulfilled. Any weighing and comparing 
of duties which might be made here would be tantamount to 
calculating the advantage accruing to the universal from an 
action. But firstly, the result would be that morality would be 
made dependent on the necessary contingency of insight, and 
secondly, it is precisely the essence of conscience to have no 
truck with this calculating and weighing of duties, and to make 
its own decision without reference to any such reasons. 
646. In this way, then, conscience acts and preserves itself 
in the unity of its essential and actual being, in the unity of pure 
thought and individuality : it is the self-assured Spirit which has 
its truth within itself, in its knowledge, and therein as knowledge 
of duty. It maintains itself therein by the very fact that what 
is positive in the action-the content as well as the form of duty 
and the knowledge of it-belongs to the self, to the certainty 
of itself; but what seeks to confront the self with an essential being 
of its own is held to be something not true, something stripped 
of its self-subsistence and only a moment. Consequently, what 
counts is not simply knowing in general, but conscience's know­
ledge of the circumstances. It places in duty, as the universal 
in-itselfness, the content which it takes from its natural indivi­
duality ; for the content is one that is present within itself. This 
content, in virtue of the universal medium in which it exists, 
becomes the duty which it carries out, and empty pure duty, 
just through this action, becomes established as something not 
self-subsistent, as only a moment ; this content is the cancelled 
emptiness of pure duty, or its fulfilment. But even so, conscience 
is free from any content whatever ; it absolves itself from any 
specific duty which is supposed to have the validity of law. In 
the strength of its own self-assurance it possesses the majesty 
of absolute autarky, to bind and to loose. This self-determination 
is therefore without more ado absolutely in conformity with 
duty. Duty is the knowing itself; this simple selfhood, however, 
is the in-itself; for the in-itself is pure self-identity, and this is 
in this consciousness. 
64 7. This pure knowing is immediately a being-for-another ; 

394 
C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
for, as pure self-identity, it is immediacy, or being. But this being 
is at the same time the pure universal, the selfhood of all : in 
other words, the action is acknowledged and therefore actual. 
This being is the element whereby conscience stands directly 
in a relation of equality with every self-consciousness ; and the 
meaning of this relation is not an impersonal law, but the self 
of conscience. 
648. However, in that this right thing which conscience does 
is at the same time a being-for-another, it seems that a disparity 
attaches to conscience. The duty which it fulfils is a specific con­
tent; it is true that this content is the self of consciousness, and 
so consciousness's knowledge of itself, its identity with itself. But 
once fulfilled, set in the medium of being, this identity is no 
longer knowing, no longer this process of differentiation in 
which its differences are at the same time immediately super­
seded ; on the contrary, in being, the difference is established 
as an enduring difference, and the action is a specific action, not 
identical with the element of everyone's self-consciousness, and 
therefore not necessarily acknowledged. Both sides, the con­
science that acts and the universal consciousness that acknow­
ledges this action as duty, are equally free from the specificity 
of this action. On account of this freedom, their relationship 
in the common medium of their connection is really a relation 
of complete disparity, as a result of which the consciousness 
which is explicitly aware of the action finds itself in a state of 
complete uncertainty about the Spirit which does the action and 
is certain of itself. The latter acts, it gives being to a specific 
content ; others hold to this being as this Spirit's truth, and are 
therein certain of this Spirit; it has declared therein what it holds 
to be duty. But it is free from any specific duty ; it is not present 
at that point where others imagine it actually to be ; and this 
very medium ofbeing, and duty as something possessing intrinsic 
being, count for it only as a moment. What, therefore, it places 
before them it also 'displaces' again, or rather has straightway 
'displaced' or dissembled. For its actual being is for it not this 
duty and determinate character it has put forward, but the ac­
tuality which it has in the absolute certainty of itself. 
649. Others, therefore, do not know whether this conscience 
is morally good or evil, or rather they not only cannot know, 
but they must also take it to be evil. For, just as it is free from 

MOR A L I TY 
395 
the specificity of duty, and from duty as possessing an intrinsic 
being, so likewise are they. What conscience places before them, 
they themselves know how to 'displace' or dissemble ; it is some­
thing expressing only the self of another, not their own self: not 
only do they know themselves to be free from it, but they must 
dispose of it in their own consciousness, nullify it by judging 
and explaining it in order to preserve their own self. 
650. But the action of conscience is not only this determination 
of being which is forsaken by the pure self. What is to be valid, 
and to be recognized as duty, is so only through the knowledge 
and conviction that it is duty, through the knowledge of oneself 
in the deed. If the deed ceases to have this self within it, it ceases 
to be that which alone is its essence. Its existence, forsaken by 
this consciousness, would be an ordinary reality, and the action 
would appear to us to be the fulfilling of one's pleasure and 
desire. What ought to be there, is here an essentiality solely by 
its being known to be the self-expression of an individuality ; and 
it is this being known that is acknowledged by others, and which 
as such ought to have an existence. 
65 1 .  The self enters into existence as self; the self-assured 
Spirit exists as such for others. Its immediate action is not that 
which has validity and is actual ; what is acknowledged is not 
the determinate aspect of the action, not its intrinsic being, but 
solely the self-knowing self as such. The element oflasting being 
is the universal self-consciousness ; what enters into this element 
cannot be the effect of the action : the effect cannot endure in 
it, and acquires no permanence ; it is only self-consciousness that 
is acknowledged and that obtains an actual existence. 
652. Here again, then, we see language as the existence of 
Spirit. Language is self-consciousness existingfor others, self-con­
sciousness which as such is immediately present, and as this self­
consciousness is universal. It is the self that separates itself from 
itself, which as pure 'I' = 'I' becomes objective to itself, which 
in this objectivity equally preserves itself as this self, just as it 
coalesces directly with other selves and is their self-consciousness. 
It perceives itself just as it is perceived by others, and the per­
ceiving is just existence which has become a self. 
653. The content which language has here acquired is no 
longer the perverted, and perverting and distracted, self of the 
world of culture ; on the contrary, it is the Spirit that has 

C .  ( B B . )  S P I R I T  
returned into itself, is certain of itself, and certain in itself of 
its truth, or of its own recognition [of that truth], and which 
is acknowledged as knowing it. The language of the ethical 
Spirit is law and simple command, and complaint, which is 
more the shedding of a tear about necessity. Moral conscious­
ness, on the other hand, is still dumb, shut up with itself within 
its inner life, for there the self does not as yet have an existence : 
existence and the self stand as yet only in an external relation 
to each other. Language, however, only emerges as the middle 
term, mediating between independent and acknowledged self­
consciousnesses ; and the existent self is immediately universal ac­
knowledgement, an acknowledgement on the part of many, and 
in this manifoldness a simple acknowledgement. The content 
of the language of conscience is the self that knows itself as essential 
being. This alone is what it declares, and this declaration is the 
true actuality of the act, and the validating of the action. Con­
sciousness declares its conviction ; it is in this conviction alone that 
the action is a duty ; also it is valid as duty solely through the 
conviction being declared. For universal self-consciousness is free 
from the specific action that merely is ;  what is valid for that self­
consciousness is not the action as an existence, but the conviction 
that it is a duty ; and this is made actual in language. To make 
the deed a reality does not mean here translating its content from 
the form of.purpose or being-for-self into the form of an abstract 
reality : it means translating it from the form of immediate 
self-certainty, which knows its knowledge or being-for-self to be 
essential being, into the form of an assurance that consciousness 
is convinced of its duty and, as conscience, knows in its own mind 
what duty is. This assurance thus affirms that consciousness is 
convinced that its conviction is the essence of the matter. 
654. Whether the assurance of acting from a conviction of 
duty is true, whether what is done is actually a duty-these ques­
tions or doubts have no meaning when addressed to conscience. 
To ask whether the assurance is true would presuppose that 
the inner intention is different from the one put forward, i.e. 
that what the individual self wills, can be separated from duty, 
from the will of the universal and pure consciousness ; the latter 
would be put into words, but the former would be strictly the 
true motive of the action. But this distinction between the uni­
versal consciousness and the individual selfis just what has been 

MORAL I TY 
397 
superseded, and the supersession of it is conscience. The self's 
immediate knowing that is certain of itself is law and duty. Its 
intention, through being its own intention, is what is right ; all 
that is required is that it should know this, and should state 
its conviction that its knowing and willing are right. The 
declaration of this assurance in itself rids the form of its particu­
larity. It thereby acknowledges the necessary universality of the self 
In calling itself conscience, it calls itself pure knowledge of itself 
and pure abstract willing, i.e. it calls itself a universal knowing 
and willing"which r.ecognizes and acknowledges others, is the 
same as them-for they are just this pure self-knowing and will­
ing-and which for that reason is als_o recognized and acknow­
ledged by them. In the will of the self that is certain of itself, 
in this knowledge that the self is essential being, lies the essence 
of what is right. Therefore, whoever says he acts in such and 
such a way from conscience, speaks the truth, for his conscience 
is the self that knows and wills. But it is essential that he should 
say so, for this self must be at the same time the universal self. 
It is not universal in the content of the act, for this, on account 
of its specificity, is intrinsically an indifferent affair: it is in the 
form of the act that the universality lies. It is this form which 
is to be established as actual : it is the self which as such is actual 
in language, which declares itself to be the truth, and just by 
so doing acknowledges all other selves and is acknowledged by 
them. 
655. Conscience, then, in the majesty of its elevation above 
specific law and every content of duty, puts whatever content 
it pleases into its knowing and willing. It is the moral genius 
which knows the inner voice of what it immediately knows to 
be a divine voice ; and since, in knowing this, it has an equally 
immediate knowledge of existence, it is the divine creative 
power which in its Notion possesses the spontaneity of life. 
Equally, it is in its own self divine worship, for its action is the 
contemplation of its own divinity. 
656. This solitary divine worship is at the same time essenti­
ally the divine worship of a community, and the pure inner know­
ing and perceiving of itself advances to the moment of conscious­
ness. The contemplation of itself is its objective existence and this 
objective dement is the declaration of its knowing and willing 
as something universal. Through this declaration the self 

C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
acquires moral validity and the act becomes an effective deed. 
The actuality and lasting existence of what it does is universal 
self-consciousness ; but the declaration of conscience affirms the 
certainty of itself to be pure self, and there by to be a universal 
self. On account of this utterance in which the self is expressed 
and acknowledged as essential being, the validity of the act is 
acknowledged by others. The spirit and substance of their 
association are thus the mutual assurance of their conscientious­
ness, good intentions, the rejoicing over this mutual purity, and 
the refreshing of themselves in the glory of knowing and utter­
ing, of cherishing and fostering, such an excellent state of affairs. 
In so far as this conscience still distinguishes its abstract con­
sciousness from its self-consciousness, it has only a hidden life in 
God ; it is true that God is immediately present in its mind and 
heart, in its self; but what is manifest, its actual consciousness 
and the mediating movement of that consciousness, is for it 
something other than that hidden inner life and the immediacy 
of God's presence. It is only in the completed form of conscience 
that the distinction between its abstract consciousness and its 
self-consciousness is eliminated. Conscience knows that the 
abstract consciousness is just this self, this being-for-itself that is 
certain of itself, knows that it is precisely in the immediacy of 
the relation of the self to the in-itself-which when posited outside 
the self is an abstract God and hidden from it-that the dif­
ference is eliminated. For that relation is a mediating one in 
which the related terms are not one and the same, but each 
is an other for the other, and only in a third term are they one. 
The immediate relation, however, means in fact nothing else but 
the unity of the terms. The consciousness that has risen above 
the thoughtlessness that still holds these differences-which are 
none-to be differences, knows the immediacy of the presence 
within it of the absolute Being as the unity of that Being and 
its own self: it thus knows itself as the living in-itself, and knows 
that this knowledge is religion, which as knowledge that has 
a perceived or outer existence is the utterance of the community 
concerning its own Spirit. 
657. Here, then, we see self-consciousness withdrawn into its 
innermost being, for which all externality as such has 
vanished-withdrawn into the contemplation of the 'I' = 'I', in 
which this 'I' is the whole of essentiality and existence. It is 

M O R A L I TY 
399 
submerged in this Notion of itself, for it has been driven to the 
limit of its extremes, and, moreover, in such a way, that the 
moments distinguished whereby it is real, or is still consciousness, 
are not only for us these pure extremes ; on the contrary, what 
it is for itself, and what is for it intrinsic and what is for it existence, 
have evaporated into abstractions which no longer have any 
stability, any substance, for this consciousness itself; and all that 
before was essential being for consciousness has reverted in to 
these abstractions. Refined into this purity, consciousness exists 
in its poorest form, and the poverty which constitutes its sole 
possession is itself a vanishing. This absolute certainty into which 
substance has resolved itself is the absolute untruth which col­
lapses internally ; it is the absolute self-consciousness in which con­
sciousness is submerged. 
658. Looking at this submergence of consciousness within 
itself, we see that the unexplicated substance is, for consciousness, 
knowledge as its knowledge. As consciousness, it is divided into 
the antithesis of itself and its object which is, for it, essence ; 
but it is just this object that is perfectly transparent, is its own 
self, and its consciousness is only this knowledge of itself. All 
life, all spiritual essentiality, has withdrawn into this self and 
has lost its difference from the I itself. The moments of con­
sciousness are, therefore, these extreme abstractions, none of 
which endures but each of which loses itself in the other and 
produces it. It is the fluctuating attitude to itself of the Unhappy 
Consciousness ; but here this fluctuation takes place explicitly 
for consciousness within itself, and is conscious of being the 
Notion ofReason, whereas the Unhappy Consciousness is only 
implicitly that Notion. The absolute certainty of itself thus finds 
itself, qua consciousness, changed immediately into a sound that 
dies away, into an objectification of its being-for-self; but this 
created world is its speech, which likewise it has immediately 
heard and only the echo of which returns to it. This return, 
therefore, does not mean that the self is in essence and actuality 
present in its speech ; for essence is not for it an it-self or merely 
implicit being, but its very self. Just as little has consciousness 
an outer existence, for the objective aspect does not get as far as 
being a negative of the actual self, in the same way that this 
self does not attain to an actual existence. It lacks the power 
to externalize itself, the power to make itself into a Thing, and 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
to endure [mere] being. It lives in dread of besmirching the 
splendour of its inner being by action and an existence ; and, 
in order to preserve the purity of its heart, it flees from contact 
with the actual world, and persists in its self-willed impotence 
to renounce its self which is reduced to the extreme of ultimate 
abstraction, and to give itself a substantial existence, or to trans­
form its thought into being and put its trust in the absolute dif­
ference (between thought and being]. The hollow object which 
it has produced for itself now fills it, therefore, with a sense of 
emptiness. Its activity is a yearning which merely loses itself 
as consciousness becomes an object devoid of substance, and, 
rising above this loss, and falling back on itself, finds itself only 
as a lost soul. In this transparent purity of its moments, an un­
happy, so-called 'beautiful soul', its light dies away within it, 
a?d it vanishes like a shapeless vapour that dissolves into thin 
a1r. 
659. This silent fusion of the pithless essentialities of the eva­
porated life has, however, still to be taken in the other meaning 
of the actuality of conscience, and in the manifestation of its move­
ment: conscience has to be considered as acting. The objective 
moment in this consciousness acquired above the determination 
of a universal consciousness. The knowledge that knows itself 
is, qua this particular self, distinct from other selves ; the lan­
guage in which all reciprocally acknowledge each other as act­
ing conscientiously, this universal identity, falls apart into the 
non-identity of individual being-for-self: each consciousness is 
just as much simply reflected out of its universality into itself. 
As a result, the antithesis of individuality to other individuals, 
and to the universal, inevitably comes on the scene, and we 
have to consider this relationship and its movement. In other 
words, this universality and duty have the very opposite signifi­
cance of the specific individuality that exempts itself from the 
universal, for which pure duty is only a universality that 
appears on the surface, and is turned outwards : duty is only 
a matter of words, and counts as a being-for-another. Con­
science, which in the first instance is only negatively directed 
against duty as this given specific duty, knows itself to be free from 
it ; but since it fills the empty duty with a specific conteritfrom 
itself, it is positively aware that it, as this particular self, makes 
the content. Its pure self, as an empty knowing, is something 

MORAL ITY 
401 
devoid of content and determination. The content which it 
gives to that knowing is taken from its own self, as this specific 
self, is taken from itself as a natural individuality. And, in speak­
ing of the conscientiousness of its action, it may well be aware 
of its pure self, but in the purpose of its action, a purpose with 
an actual content, it is aware of itself as this particular indivi­
dual, and is conscious of the antithesis between what it is for 
itself and what it is for others, of the antithesis of universality 
or duty and its reflection out of universality into itself. 
66o. While in this way the antithesis, into which conscience 
enters when it acts, expresses itself in its inner being, the anti­
thesis is at the same time a disparity on its outer side in the 
element of existence, the disparity of its particular individuality 
in relation to another individual. Its particularity consists in 
the fact that the two moments constituting its consciousness, 
the self and the in-itself, are held to be unequal in value within 
it, a disparity in which they are so determined that the certainty 
of itself is the essential being in face of the in-itself or the uni­
versal, which counts only as a moment. In contrast to this inter­
nal determination there thus stands the element of existence 
or universal consciousness, for which the essential being is 
rather universality, duty ; while individuality, on the other 
hand, which in contrast to the universal is for itself, counts only 
as a superseded moment. For the consciousness which holds 
firmly to duty, the first consciousness counts as evil, because of 
the disparity between its inner being and the universal ; and since, 
at the same time, this first consciousness declares its action to 
be in conformity with itself, to be duty and conscientiousness, 
it is held by the universal consciousness to be hypocrisy. 
661 .  The movement of this antithesis is in the first instance the 
formal production of an identity of what the evil consciousness 
is in its own self and what it declares itself to be ; it must be 
made apparent that it is evil, and thus its existence made to 
correspond to its essence ; the hypocrisy must be unmasked. 
This return of the disparity present in hypocrisy into a corre­
spondence is not already an accomplished fact because hypo­
crisy, as is commonly said, demonstrates its respect for duty and 
virtue just by making a show of them, and using them as a mask 
to hide itself from its own consciousness, no less than from 
others ; as if in this acknowledgement of the antithesis within 

402 
C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
itself, identity and correspondence were implied. Only, it is at 
the same time just as much reflected out of this spoken acknow­
ledgement and into itself; and the fact that it uses what is an 
essence as a being:for-another implies rather its own contempt for 
that essence, and the exposure to everyone of its own lack of 
any substantial being. For what lets itself be used as an external 
instrument shows itself to be a thing which possesses no impor­
tance of its own. 
662. Also, this identity is not brought about either by the 
one-sided persistence of the evil consciousness in its own atti­
tude, or by the judgement of the universal consciousness. If the 
former denies itself in face of the consciousness of duty, and de­
clares that what this asserts to be wickedness, to be absolutely 
non-identical with the universal, is an action in accordance 
with inner law and conscience, then in this one-sided assurance 
of an identity there still remains its non-identity with the other, 
since this other does not believe it or acknowledge it. In other 
words, since the one-sided persistence in one extreme cancels 
itself out, evil would, it is true, thereby confess to being evil, 
but in so doing it would directly abolish itself and cease to be 
hypocrisy, and would not, as such, unmask itself. It admits, in 
fact, to being evil by asserting that it acts, in opposition to the 
acknowledged universal, according to its own inner law and 
conscience. For if this law and conscience were not the law of 
its single individuality and caprice, it would not be something 
inner or peculiar to it, but what is universally acknowledged. 
Therefore, when anyone says that he is acting according to his 
own law and conscience against others, he is saying, in fact, that 
he is wronging them. But actual conscience is not this persistence 
in a knowing and willing that opposes itself to the universal ; 
on the contrary, the universal is the element of its existence, 
and its language declares its action to be an acknowledged duty. 
663. Just as little is the persistence of the universal conscious­
ness in its judgement an unmasking and abolition of hypocrisy. 
In denouncing hypocrisy as base, vile, and so on, it is appealing 
in such judgement to its own law, just as the evil consciousness 
appeals to its law. For the former comes forward in opposition 
to the latter and thereby as a particular law. It has, therefore, 
no superiority over the other law, rather it legitimizes it. And 
this zeal does the very opposite of what it means to do ; for it 

MORAL ITY 
shows that what it calls true or genuine duty and which ought 
to be universally acknowledged, is something not acknowledged ; 
in so doing it concedes to the other an equal right to be for itself. 
664. This judgement has, however, at the same time another 
aspect from which it becomes the way to a resolution of the 
antithesis confronting it. The consciousness of the universal, in 
its relation to the first [evil] consciousness, does not behave as 
one that is actual and acts-for the latter is rather the actual 
consciousness-but in its antithesis to it, is a consciousness that 
is not entangled in the antithesis of individuality and uni­
versality, which occurs when action is entered upon. It remains 
in the universality of thought, behaves as a consciousness that 
apprehends, and its first action is merely one of judgement. Now, 
through this judgement, it places itself, as we have just 
remarked, alongside the first consciousness, and the latter, through 
this likeness, comes to see its own self in this other consciousness. 
For the consciousness of duty maintains an attitude of passive 
apprehension ; but it is thereby in contradiction with itself as 
the absolute will of duty, as a consciousness whose determining 
comes solely from itself. It does well to preserve itself in its 
purity, for it does not act; it is the hypocrisy which wants its judg­
ing to be taken for an actual deed, and instead of proving its 
rectitude by actions, does so by uttering fine sentiments. Its 
nature, then, is altogether the same as that which is reproached 
with making duty a mere matter of words. In both alike, the 
side of reality is distinct from the words uttered : in the one, 
through the selfish purpose of the action, in the other, through 
the failure to act at all, although the necessity to act is involved 
in the very talk of duty, for duty without deeds is utterly mean­
ingless. 
665. Judging, however, is also to be looked at as a positive 
act of thought and has a positive content. Through this aspect, 
the contradiction present in the apprehending consciousness, 
and its identity with the first consciousness, become still more 
complete. The consciousness that acts declares its specific action 
to be a duty, and the consciousness that judges it cannot deny 
this ; for duty itself is the form which lacks all content but is 
capable of any. In other words, the concrete action which in 
its many-sidedness is in its own self diverse, contains the uni­
versal aspect-that which is taken as duty-just as much as the 

C. (BB.) S P I R I T  
particular aspect which constitutes the share and interest of the 
individual in the action. Now, the judging consciousness does 
not stop short at the former aspect of duty, at the doer's know­
ledge of it, that this is his duty, and at the fact that the doer 
knows it to be his duty, the condition and status of his reality. 
On the contrary, it holds to the other aspect, looks at what the 
action is in itself, and explains it as resulting from an intention 
different from the action itself, and from selfish motives. Just as 
every action is capable ofbeing looked at from the point of view 
of conformity to duty, so too can it be considered from the point 
of view of the particularity [of the doer] ; for, qua action, it is 
the actuality of the individual. This judging of the action thus 
takes it out of its outer existence and reflects it into its inner 
aspect, or into the form of its own particularity. If the action 
is accompanied by fame, then it knows this inner aspect to be 
a desire for fame. If it is altogether in keeping with the station 
of the individual, without going beyond this station, and of such 
a nature that the individuality does not possess its station as 
a character externally attached to it, but through its own self 
gives filling to this universality, thereby showing itself capable 
of a higher station, then the inner aspect of the action is judged 
to be ambition, and so on. Since, in the action as such, the doer 
attains to a vision of himself in objectivity, or to a feeling of self 
in his existence, and thus to enjoyment, the inner aspect is 
judged to be an urge to secure his own happiness, even though 
this were to consist merely in an inner moral conceit, in the 
enjoyment of being conscious of his own superiority and in the 
foretaste of a hope of future happiness. No action can escape 
such judgement, for duty for duty's sake, this pure purpose, is 
an unreality ; it becomes a reality in the deed of an individu­
ality, and the action is thereby charged with the aspect of parti­
cularity. No man is a hero to his valet ; not, however, because 
the man is not a hero, but because the valet-is a valet, whose 
dealings are with the man, not as a hero, but as one who eats, 
drinks, and wears clothes, in general, with his individual wants 
and fancies. Thus, for the judging consciousness, there is no 
action in which it could not oppose to the universal aspect of 
the action, the personal aspect of the individuality, and play 
the part of the moral valet towards the agen t.1 
' Cf l.ecttJres on Philosophy of World History (H. B. Nisbet's trans!. p. 87) .  

MORALITY 
666. The consciousness that judges in this way is itself base, 
because it divides up the action, producing and holding fast 
to the disparity of the action with itself. Further, it is hypocrisy, 
because it passes off such judging, not as another manner of 
being wicked, but as the correct consciousness of the action, 
setting itself up in this unreality and conceit of knowing well 
and better above the deeds it discredits, and wanting its words 
without deeds to be taken for a superior kind of reality. By put­
ting itself, then, in this way on a level with the doer on whom 
it passes judgement, it is recognized by the latter as the same 
as himself. This latter does not merely find himself apprehended 
by the other as something alien and disparate from it, but rather 
finds that other, according to its own nature and disposition, 
identical with himself. Perceiving this identity and giving 
utterance to it, he confesses this to the other, and equally expects 
that the other, having in fact put himself on the same level, 
will also respond in words in which he will give utterance to 
this identity with him, and expects that this mutual recognition 
will now exist in fact. His confession is not an abasement, a 
humiliation, a throwing-away of himself in relaऑion to the 
other ; for this utterance is not a one-sided affair, which would 
establish his disparity with the other: on the contrary, he gives 
himself utterance solely on account of his having seen his 
identity with the other ; he, on his side, gives expression to their 
common identity in his confession, and gives utterance to it for 
the reason that language is the existence ofSpirit as an immediate 
self. He therefore expects that the other will contribute his part 
to this existence. 
667. But the confession of the one who is wicked, 'I am so', 
is not followed by a reciprocal similar confession. This was not 
what the judging consciousness meant: quite the contrary. It 
repels this community of nature, and is the hard heart that is 
for itself, and which rejects any continuity with the other. As 
a result, the situation is reversed. The one who made the con­
fession sees himself repulsed, and sees the other to be in the wrong 
when he refuses to let his own inner being come forth into the 
outer existence of speech, when the other contrasts the beauty 
of his own soul with the penitent's wickedness, yet confronts 
the confession of the penitent with his own stiff-necked un­
repentant character, mutely keeping himself to himself and 

C .  ( BB . )  S P I R I T  
refusing to throw himself away for someone else. There is here 
expressed in its extreme form the rebellion of the Spirit that 
is certain of itself; for it beholds itself, as this simple self-know­
ledge, in someone else, and, too, in such a way that even the 
outer shape of this other is not, as in the case of material wealth, 
something without substantial being, is not a Thing ; on the con­
trary, what is held opposed to this other is Thought, simply 
knowledge itself, this absolutely fluid continuity of pure knowing 
which refuses to put itself into communication with the other 
which, in its confession, had ipso facto renounced its separate 
being-for-self, and thereby expressly superseded its particularity, 
and in so doing posited itself in continuity with the other as 
a universal. The other, however, retains within itself and for itself 
its uncommunicative being-for-self; and it retains, in face of the 
individual who did confess, just the same uncommunicative 
being-for-self, although the latter has already thrown this away. 
It thereby reveals itself as a consciousness which is forsaken by 
and which itself denies Spirit ; for it does not know that Spirit, 
in the absolute certainty of itself, is lord and master over every 
deed and actuality, and can cast them off, and make them as 
if they had never happened. At the same time, it does not recog­
nize the contradiction it falls into in not letting the rejection 
which has taken place in words, be validated as a genuine rejec­
tion, while itself has the certainty of its Spirit, not in an actual 
deed, but in its inner being, and finds the outer existence of 
this inner being in the utterance of its judgement. It is thus its 
own selfwhich hinders that other's return from the deed into 
the spiritual existence of speech and into the identity of Spirit, 
and by this hardness ofheart produces the disparity which still 
exists. 
668. Now, in so far as the self-certain Spirit, as a 'beautiful 
soul', does not possess the power to renounce the knowledge 
of itselfwhich it keeps to itself, it cannot attain to an identity 
with the consciousness it has repul$ed, nor therefore to a vision 
of the unity of itself in the other, cannot attain to an objective 
existence. Consequently, the identity comes about only nega­
tively, as a being devoid of Spirit. The 'beautiful soul', lacking 
an actual existence, entangled in the contradiction between its 
pure self and the necessity of that self to externalize itself and 
change itself into an actual existence, and dwelling in the imme-

M O R A L I TY 
diacy of this firmly held antithesis-an immediacy which alone 
is the middle term reconciling the antithesis, which has been 
intensified to its pure abstraction, and is pure being or empty 
nothingness-this 'beautiful soul', then, being conscious of this 
contradiction in its unreconciled immediacy, is disordered to 
the point of madness, wastes itself in yearning and pines away 
in consumption. Thereby it does in fact surrender the being-for­
self to which it so stubbornly clings ; but what it brings forth 
is only the non-spiritual unity of [mere] being. 
66g. The true, i.e. the self-conscious and existent, equalization 
of the two sides is necessitated by and already contained in the 
foregoing. The breaking of the hard heart, and the raising of 
it to universality, is the same movement which was expressed 
in the consciousness that made confession of itself. The wounds 
of the Spirit heal, and leave no scars behind. The deed is not 
imperishable ; it is taken back by Spirit into itself, and the aspect 
of individuality present in it, whether as intention or as an 
existent negativity and limitation, straightway vanishes. The 
self that carries out the action, the form ofits act, is only a moment 
of the whole, and so likewise is the knowledge, that by its judge­
ment determines and establishes the distinction between the in­
dividual and universal aspects of the action. The evil conscious­
ness, referred to above, posits this externalization of itself, or 
posits itself, as a moment, being enticed into openly confessing 
itself by the vision of itself in the other. But just as the former 
has to surrender its one-sided, unacknowledged existence of its 
particular being-for-self, so too must this other set aside its one­
sided, unacknowledged judgement. And just as the former 
exhibits the power of Spirit over its actual existence, so does 
this other exhibit the power of Spirit over the specific Notion 
of itself. 
670. The latter, however, renounces the divisive thought, 
and the hard-heartedness of the being-for-self which clings to 
it, because it has in fact seen itself in the first. This first con­
sciousness which turns its back on its actual existence, and 
makes itself into a superseded particular consciousness, thereby 
displays itself as in fact a universal. It returns from its external 
actual existence back into itself as essential being, and therein 
the universal consciousness thus recognizes itself. The forgive­
ness which it extends to the other is the renunciation of itself, 

C .  (BB.) S P I R I T  
of its unreal essential being which it put on a level with that 
other which was a real action, and acknowledges that what 
thought characterized as bad, viz. action, is good ; or rather 
it abandons this distinction of the specific thought and its subjec­
tively determined judgement, just as the other abandons its sub­
jective characterization of"action. The word of reconciliation is 
the objectively existent Spirit, which beholds the pure knowledge 
of itself qua universal essence, in its opposite, in the pure know­
ledge of itself qua absolutely self-contained and exclusive indivi­
duality-a reciprocal recognition which is absolute Spirit. 
67 r .  It enters into existence only at that point where its pure 
knowledge about itself is the antithesis and alternation [of its 
dual aspect]. Aware that its pure knowledge is an abstract 
essence, absolute Spirit is this conscious duty in absolute anti­
thesis to the knowledge that is conscious of itself, qua absolute 
individuality of self, as essence. The former is the pure continuity 
of the universal, which is aware that the individuality which 
is conscious of itself as essence, is intrinsically a nullity, is evil. 
This, however, is the absolute discreteness which is conscious 
of itself in its pure oneness as absolute, and of the universal as 
something unreal, which exists only for someone else. Both aspects 
are purified into the unity in which there is no longer in them 
any existence devoid of self, any negative of consciousness, 
where, on the contrary, duty is the unchanging identical charac­
ter of its self-knowledge, and evil equally has its purpose in its 
being-within-itself, and its actuality in its utterance. The content 
of this utterance is the substance of its enduring existence ; it 
is the assurance of Spirit's immanent self-certainty. Each of 
these two self-certain Spirits has no other purpose than its own 
pure self, and no other reality and existence than just this pure 
self. But yet they are different ;  and the difference is absolute 
because it is set in this element of the pure Notion. It is also 
absolute, not only for us, but for the Notions themselves which 
stand in this antithesis. For these Notions, though specific in rela­
tion to one another, are at the same time in themselves uni­
versal, so that they fill out the whole range of the self, and this 
self has no other content than this its own determinateness, 
which neither goes beyond the self nor is more restricted than 
it ; for one of them, the absolute universal, is equally the pure 
knowledge of itself, as the other is the absolute discreteness of 

MORALITY 
individuality, and both are only this pure self-knowledge. Both 
determinatenesses are thus pure conscious Notions, whose 
determinatenness is itself immediately a knowing, or whose rela­
tionship and antithesis is the 'I'. Consequently, they are these 
sheer opposites for one another; it is the completely inner being 
which thus confronts its own self and enters into outer existence. 
They constitute pure knowledge which, through this antithesis, 
is posited as consciousness. But it is still not yet self-consciousness. 
It becomes actually such in the movement of this antithesis. 
For this antithesis is rather itself the indiscrete continuity and 
identity of' I' = 'I' ; and each, through the very contradiction of its 
pure universality, which at the same time still strives against 
its identity with the other, and cuts itself off from it, explicitly 
supersedes itselfwithin its own self. Through this externaliza­
tion, this knowledge which in its existence is self-discordant 
returns into the unity ofthe self. It is the actual ' I', the universal 
knowledge of itself in its absolute opposite, in the knowledge which 
remains internal, and which, on account of the purity of its 
separated being-within-self, is itself completely universal. The 
reconciling Yea, in which the two 'l's let go their antithetical 
existence, is the existence of the 'I' which has expanded into a 
duality, and therein remains identical with itself, and, in its 
complete externalization and opposite, possesses the certainty 
of itself: it is God manifested in the midst of those who know 
themselves in the form of pure knowledge. 

(CC.) RELIGION 
V I I .  R E L I G I O N 
672. In the structured forms hitherto considered which are 
distinguished in general as Consciousness, Self-consciousness, 
Reason, and Spirit, religion, too, as consciousness of absolute 
Being as such, has indeed made its appearance, although only 
from the standpoint of the consciousness that is conscious of absolute 
Being ; but absolute Being in and for itself, the self-consciousness 
of Spirit, has not appeared in those 'shapes'. 
673. Even Consciousness, in so far as it is the Understanding, 
is consciousness of the supersensible or the inner side of objective 
existence. But the supersensible, the eternal, or whatever else 
it may be called, is devoid of self; it is only, to begin with, the 
universal, which is a long way yet from being Spirit that knows 
itself as Spirit. Then there was the self-consciousness that 
reached its final 'shape' in the Unhappy Consciousness, that was 
only the pain of the Spirit that wrestled, but without success, 
to reach out into objectivity. The unity of the individual self­
consciousness and its changeless essence, to which the former 
attains, remains, therefore, a beyond for self-consciousness. The 
immediate existence of Reason which, for us, issued from that 
pain, and its peculiar shapes, have no religion, because the self­
consciousness of them knows or seeks itself in the immediate 
present. 
674. On the other hand, in the ethical world we did see a 
religion, namely, the religion of the underworld. It is the belief 
in the terrible, unknown night of Fate and in the Eumenides 
of the departed spirit: the former is pure negativity in the form 
ofuniversality, the latter the same negativity in the form of in­
dividuality. Absolute Being is, in the latter form, indeed the 
self and present, since other than present the self cannot be. But 
the individual self is this individual shade which has separated 
from itself the universality which Fate is. True, it is a shade, 
a superseded particular self, and thus a universal self; but the 
negative significance of the shade has still not changed round 

R E L·I G I O N  
41 1  
into the positive significance of the universal self, and therefore 
the superseded self still has, at the same time, the immediate 
significance of this particular and essenceless being. But Fate 
devoid of self remains the unconscious night which does not 
attain to an immanent differentiation, nor to the clarity of self­
knowledge. 
675. This belief in the nothingness of necessity and in the 
underworld becomes belief in Heaven, because the departed 
selfmust unite with its universality, must explicate in this uni­
versality what it contains and thus become clear to itself. This 
kingdom offaith, however, we saw unfold its content only in the 
element of thought without the [concrete] Notion, and for that 
reason perish in its fate, viz. in the religion of the Enlight­
enment. In this religion, the supersensible beyond of the 
Understanding is reinstated, but in such a way that self-'con­
sciousness remains satisfied in this world ; and the supersensible, 
empty beyond which is neither to be known nor feared it knows 
neither as a self nor as a power. 
676. In the religion of morality, the fact that absolute Being 
is a positive content is at last again recognized ; but the content 
is bound up with the negativity of the Enlightenment. It is a 
being that is at the same time taken back into the self, in which 
it remains shut up, and a dijferentiated content whose parts are 
just as immediately negated as they are produced. The Fate, 
however, which engulfs this contradictory movement is the self 
which is conscious of itself as the Fate of what is essential and 
actual. 
677. The self-knowing Spirit is, in religion, immediately its 
own pure self-consciousness. Those forms of it which have been 
considered, viz. the true Spirit, the self-alienated Spirit, and 
the Spirit that is certain of itself, together constitute Spirit in 
its consciousness which, confronting its world, does not recognize 
itself therein. But in conscience it brings itself, as well as its 
objective world in general, into subjection, as also its picture­
thinking and its specific Notions, and is now a self-consciousness 
that communes with its own self. In this, Spirit conceived as 
object, has for itself the significance of being the universal Spirit 
that contains within itself all essence and all actuality ; yet it 
is not in the form of free actuality or the apparent independence 
of Nature. True, it has 'shape' or the form of being, in that it 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
is the object of its consciousness ; but because in religion con­
sciousness is posited essentially in the determination of self-con ­
sciousness, the shape is perfectly transparent to itself; and the 
reality it contains is shut up in it and superseded in it in just 
the same way as when we speak of 'all reality' ; it is universal 
reality as thought. 
678. Since, then, in religion the determination of the con­
sciousness proper of Spirit does not have the form of free other­
ness, Spirit's existence is distinct from its self-consciousness, and its 
reality proper falls outside of religion. There is indeed one Spirit 
of both, but its consciousness does not embrace both together, 
and religion appears as a part of existence, of conduct and 
activity, whose other part is the life lived in its real world. As 
we now know that Spirit in its own world and Spirit conscious 
of itself as Spirit, or Spirit in religion, are the same, the perfec­
tion of religion consists in the two becoming identical with each 
other: not only that religion concerns itself with Spirit's reality 
but, conversely, that Spirit, as self-conscious Spirit, becomes 
actual to itself and object of its consciousness. So far as Spirit in 
religion pictures itself to itself, it is indeed consciousness, and the 
reality enclosed within religion is the shape and the guise of 
its picture-thinking. But, in this picture-thinking, reality does 
not receive its perfect due, viz. to be not merely a guise but 
an independent free existence ; and, conversely, because it lacks 
perfection within itself it is a specific shape which does not attain 
to what it ought to show forth, viz. Spirit that is conscious of 
itself. If its shape is to express Spirit itself, it must be nothing 
else than Spirit, and Spirit must appear to itself, or be in actu­
ality, what it is in its essence. Only by so doing would that also 
be obtained which may seem to be the demand for the opposite, 
viz. that the object of its consciousness have at the same time 
the form offree actuality ; but only Spirit that is object to itself 
as absolute Spirit is conscious of itself as a free actuality to the 
extent that it is and remains conscious of itself therein. 
679. When self-consciousness and consciousness proper, reli­
gion and Spirit in its world, or Spirit's existence, are in the first 
instance distinguished from each other, the latter consists in the 
totality of Spirit so far as its moments exhibit themselves in 
separation, each on its own account. But the moments are con­
sciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and Spirit-Spirit, that is, as 

R E L I G I O N  
immediate Spirit, which is not yet consciousness of Spirit. Their 
totality, taken together, constitutes Spirit in its mundane existence 
generally ; Spirit as such contains the previous structured shapes 
in universal determinations, in the moments just named. Reli­
gion presupposes that these have run their full course and is 
their simple totality or absolute self. The course traversed by 
these moments is, moreover, in relation to religion, not to be 
represented as occurring in Time. Only the totality of Spirit 
is in Time, and the 'shapes', which are 'shapes' of the totality 
of Spirit, display themselves in a temporal succession ; for only 
the whole has true actuality and therefore the form of pure free­
dom in face of an 'other', a form which expresses itself as Time. 
But the moments of the whole, consciousness, self-consciousness, 
Reason, and Spirit, just because they are moments, have no 
existence in separation from one another. Just as Spirit was dis­
tinguished from its moments, so we have further, in the third 
place, to distinguish from these moments themselves their in­
dividual determination. We saw that each of those moments 
was differentiated again in its own self into a process of its own, 
and assumed different 'shapes' : as, e.g., in consciousness, sense­
certainty and perception were distinct from each other. These 
latter shapes fall apart in Time and belong to a particular totality. 
For Spirit descends from its universality to individuality 
through determination. The determination, or middle term, is 
consciousness, self-consciousness, and so on. But individuality is 
constituted by the shapes assumed by these moments. These, 
therefore, exhibit Spirit in its individuality or actuality, and are 
distinguished from one another in Time, though in such a way 
that the later moment retains within it the preceding one. 
68o. If, therefore, religion is the perfection of Spirit into 
which its individual moments--consciousness, self-conscious­
ness, Reason, and Spirit-return and have returned as into 
their ground, they together constitute the existent actuality of 
the totality of Spirit, which is only as the differentiating and 
self-returning movement of these its aspects. The genesis of reli­
gion in general is contained in the movement of the universal 
moments. But since each of these attributes was exhibited, not 
merely as it determines itself in general, but as it is in and for 
itself, i.e. as it runs its course as a totality within itself, therefore, 
what has come to be is not merely the genesis of religion in 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
general : those complete processes of the individual aspects at the 
same time contain the specific forms of religion itself. The totality 
of Spirit, the Spirit of religion, is again the movement away 
from its immediacy towards the attainment of the knowledge of 
what it is in itself or immediately, the movement in which, fin­
ally, the 'shape' in which it appears for its consciousness will be 
perfectly identical with its essence, and it will behold itself as 
it is. In this genesis of religion, Spirit itself therefore assumes 
specific 'shapes' which constitute the different moments of this 
movement; at the same time, the specific religion has likewise 
a specific actual Spirit. Thus, if consciousness, self-conscious­
ness, Reason, and Spirit, belong to self-knowing Spirit in 
general, similarly the specific 'shapes' which were specially de­
veloped within consciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and 
Spirit, belong to the specific 'shapes' of self-knowing Spirit. 
From the 'shapes' belonging to each of its moments, the specific 
'shape' of religion picks out the one appropriate to it for its 
actual Spirit. The one distinctive feature which characterizes 
the religion penetrates every aspect of its actual existence and 
stamps them with this common character. 
681 .  In this way, the arrangement of the 'shapes' which have 
hitherto appeared differs from the way they appeared in their 
own order. On this point we shall observe briefly at the start 
what is necessary. In the series we considered, each moment, 
exploring its own depths, formed itself into a totality within its 
own peculiar principle ; and cognition was the depth, or the 
Spirit, wherein the moments which have no other subsistence 
of their own possessed their substance. But this substance is now 
manifest ;  it is the depth of Spirit that is certain of itself, which 
does not allow the principle of each individual moment to 
become isolated and to make itself a totality within itself; on 
the contrary, gathering and holding together all these moments 
within itself, it advances within this total wealth of its actual 
Spirit, and all its particular moments take and receive in com­
mon into themselves the like determinateness of the whole. This 
self-certain Spirit and its movement is their true actuality and 
the being-in-and-for-self which belongs to each moment. Thus 
while the previous single series in its advance marked the retro­
gressive steps in it by nodes, but continued itself again from 
them in a single line, it is now, as it were, broken at these nodes, 

RE L I G I ON 
at these universal moments, and falls apart into many lines 
which, gathered up into a single bundle, at the same time com­
bine symmetrically so that the similar differences in which each 
particular moment took shape within itself meet together. 
However, it is self-evident from the whole exposition how this 
co-ordination of the general directions here represented is to 
be understood ; so that it is superfluous to remark that these 
differences are to be grasped essentially only as moments of the 
development, not as parts. In actual Spirit, they are attributes 
of its substance, but in religion, on the other hand, they are 
only predicates of the Subject. Similarly, all forms in general 
are certainly in themselves or for us contained in Spirit and in 
each Spirit, but as regards Spirit's actuality, the main point 
is solely which determinateness is explicit for it in its conscious­
ness, in which determinateness it has expressed its self, or in 
which 'shape' it knows its essence. 
682. The distinction which was made between actual Spirit 
and Spirit that knows itself as Spirit, or between itself, qua con­
sciousness, and qua self-consciousness, is superseded in the Spirit 
that knows itself in its truth ; its consciousness and its self-con­
sciousness are on the same level. But, as religion here is, to begin 
with, immediate, this distinction has not yet returned into Spirit. 
What is posited is only the Notion of religion ; in this the essence 
is self-consciousness, which is conscious of being all truth and 
contains all reality within that truth. This self-consciousness 
has, as consciousness, itself for object. Spirit which, to begin 
with, has an immediate knowledge of itself is thus to itself Spirit 
in the form of immediacy, and the determinateness of the form 
in which it appears to itself is that of [mere] being. This being, 
it is true, is .filled neither with sensation nor a manifold material, 
nor with any other kind of one-sided moments, purposes, and 
determinations : it is filled with Spirit and is known by itself 
to be all truth and reality. Such.filling is not identical with its 
shape, Spirit qua essence is not identical with its consciousness. 
Spirit is actual as absolute Spirit only when it is also' for itself 
in its truth as it is in its certainty of itself, or when the extremes 
into which, as consciousness, it parts itself are explicitly for each 
other in the shape of Spirit. The shape which Spirit assumes 
as object of its consciousness remains filled by the certainty of 
Spirit as by its substance ; through this content, the object is . 

.p6 
C. ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
saved from being degraded to pure objectivity, to the form of 
negativity of self-consciousness. Spirit's immediate unity with 
itself is the basis, or pure consciousness, within which conscious­
ness parts asunder (into the duality of subject and object]. In 
this way Spirit, shut up within its pure self-consciousness, does 
not exist in religion as the creator of a Nature in general ; what 
it does create in this movement are its shapes qua Spirits, which 
together constitute the completeness of its manifestation. And 
this movement itself is the genesis ofits complete reality through 
its individual aspects, or through its incomplete shapes. 
683. The first reality of Spirit is the Notion of religion itself, 
or religion as immediate, and therefore Natural Religion. In this, 
Spirit knows itself as its object in a natural or immediate shape. 
The second reality, however, is necessarily that in which Spirit 
knows itself in the shape of a superseded natural existence, or of 
the self. This, therefore, ·is the Religion of Art ; for the shape 
raises itself to the form of the self through the creative activity 
of consciousness whereby this beholds in its object its act or the 
self. Finally, the third reality overcomes the one-sidedness of 
the first two ; the selfisjust as much an immediacy, as the imme­
diacy is the self. If, in the first reality, Spirit in general is in 
the form of consciousness, and in the second, in that of self-con­
sciousness, in the third it is in the form of the unity of both. 
It has the shape of being-in-and-for-itself; and when it is thus 
conceived as it is in and for itself, this is the Revealed Religion. 
But although in this, Spirit has indeed attained its true shape, 
yet the shape itself and the picture-thought are still the un­
vanquished aspect from which Spirit must pass over into the 
Notion, in order wholly to resolve therein the form of objec­
tivity, in the Notion which equally embraces within itself its 
own opposite. It is then that Spirit has grasped the Notion of 
itself, just as we now have first grasped it ; and its shape or the 
element of its existence, being the Notion, is Spirit itself. 
A .  N A T U R A L  R E L I G I O N  
684. The Spirit that knows Spirit is consciousness of itself and 
is present to itself in objective form ;  it is ;  and is at the same 
time being that isfor itself It is for itself, it is the aspect of self­
consciousness, and that too, in contrast to the aspect of its con-

N ATURAL R E L I G I O N  
sciousness, or of the relating of itself to itself as object. In its con­
sciousness there is antithesis, and in consequence the specific 
character of the 'shape' in which it appears to itself and knows 
itself. It is solely with this that we are concerned in this 
treatment of religion ; for we have already considered its un­
embodied essence, or its pure Notion. But at the same time the 
difference of consciousness and self-consciousness falls within 
the latter ; the 'shape' of religion contains, not the existence of 
Spirit as Nature that is free from thought, nor as a thought that 
is free from existence ; but it is an existence that is preserved 
in thinking, and also something thought that is objectively 
present to it. It is in accordance with the specific character of 
this 'shape' in which Spirit knows itself that one religion is dis­
tinguished from another ; but we have at the same time to note 
that the exposition of this knowledge of itselfwithin the frame­
work of this single specific character does not in fact exhaust 
the totality of an actual religion. The series of different religions 
which will come to view, just as much sets forth again only 
the different aspects pf a single religion, and, moreover, of 
every single religion, and the ideas which seem to distinguish 
one actual religion from another occur in each one. At the 
same time, however, the difference must also be viewed as 
a difference of religion. For since Spirit lives in the difference 
of its consciousness and its self-consciousness, the aim of the 
movement is to supersede this cardinal distinction and to 
give the form of self-consciousness to the 'shape' that is the 
object of consciousness. But this difference is not superseded 
simply by the fact that the 'shapes' contained by self-con­
sciousness have within them the moment of self, and that God 
is thought of as self-consciousness. The self that is thought of is not 
the actual self; in order that the self, like any other more precise 
determination of 'shape', may in truth belong to this 'shape', 
it must, on the one hand, be posited in the 'shape' by the act 
of self-consciousness, and, on the other hand, the lower determi­
nation must show itself to be reduced to a moment of the higher 
and to be comprehended by it. For what is thought of, ceases 
to be something [merely] thought of, something alien to the 
self's knowledge, only when the self has produced it, and there­
fore beholds the determination of the object as its own, con­
sequently beholds itseljin the object. Through this activity, the 

C. ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
lower determination has at the same time vanished ; for the act 
is the negative that is realized at the expense of something else. 
In so far as the lower determination is still present, it has 
retreated into an unessential aspect ;just as, on the other hand, 
where the lower is still dominant but the higher is also present, 
the one determination devoid of self has its place alongside the 
other. Accordingly, if the various ideas within a particular reli­
gion do indeed exhibit the entire movement of its 'shapes' , the 
character of each idea is determined by the particular unity 
of consciousness and self-consciousness [in that religion], i.e. by 
the fact that self-consciousness embraces within itself the deter­
mination of the object of consciousness, by its act has completely 
appropriated it and knows it as the essential determination in 
face of the other. The truth of the belief in a determination of 
the religious Spirit is revealed in the fact that the constitution 
of the actual Spirit is similar to that of the 'shape' in which Spirit 
beholds itself in the religion-as, e.g., the incarnation of God 
which occurs in oriental religion has no truth, because the 
actual Spirit of that religion is without this reconciliation. It 
is inappropriate here to return from the totality of determina­
tions to the individual ones, and to show in which 'shape' within 
the totality and its particular religion the others are contained 
in their completeness. The higher form being placed under a 
lower has lost its significance for self-consciousness, belongs to 
it only superficially and to its picture-thought. It is to be con­
sidered in its proper significance only where it is the principle 
of this particular religion and is upheld by its actual Spirit. 
a. God as Light 
685. Spirit as the essence that is self-consciousness--or the self­
conscious Being that is all truth and knows all reality as its 
own self-is, to begin with, only its Notion in contrast to the 
actualitywhich it gives its elfin the movementofits consciousness. 
And this Notion is, as contrasted with the daylight of this 
explicit development, the night of its essence ; as contrasted with 
the outer existence of its moments as independent shapes, it is 
the creative secret of its birth. This secret has its revelation 
within itself; for the existence of its moments has its necessity 
in this Notion, because this Notion is self-knowing Spirit and 

NATURAL R E L I G I ON 
therefore has in its essence the moment of being consciousness, 
and of presenting itself objectively.-This is the pure 'I', which 
in its externalization has within itself as universal object the cer­
tainty of its own self, or, in other words, this object is for the 
'I' the penetration of all thought and all reality. 
686. In the immediate, first diremption of self-knowing abso­
lute Spirit its 'shape' has the determination which belongs to 
immediate consciousness or to sense-certainty. Spirit beholds itself 
in the form of being, though not of the non-spiritual being that 
is filled with the contingent determinations of sensation, the 
being that belongs to sense-certainty ; on the contrary, it is being 
that is filled with Spirit. It also includes the form which 
appeared in immediate self-consciousness, the form of lord and 
master over against the self-consciousness that retreats from its 
object. This being which is filled with the Notion of Spirit is, 
then, the 'shape' of the simple relation of Spirit to itself, or the 
'shape' of 'shapelessness'. In virtue of this determination, this 
'shape' is the pure, all-embracing and all-pervading essential 
light of sunrise, which preserves itself in its formless substanti­
ality. Its otherness is the equally simple negative, darkness. The 
movements of its own externalization, its creations in the un­
resisting element of its otherness, are torrents of light ; in their 
simplicity, they are at the same time the genesis of its being­
for-self and the return from the existence [of its moments], 
streams of fire destructive of [all] structured form. Tht; 
[moment of] difference which it gives itself does, it is true, pro­
liferate unchecked in the substance of existence and shapes itself 
to the forms ofNature ; yet the essential simplicity of its thought 
moves aimlessly about in it without stability or intelligence, 
enlarges its bounds to the measureless, and its beauty, heigh­
tened to splendour, is dissolved in its sublimity. 
687. The content developed by this pure being, or the activity 
ofits perceiving, is, therefore, an essenceless by-play in this sub­
stance which merely ascends, without descending into its depths 
to become a subject and through the self to consolidate its dis­
tinct moments. The determinations of this substance arc only 
attributes which do not attain to self-subsistence, but remain 
merely names of the many-named One. This One is clothed 
with the manifold powers of existence and with the 'shapes' of 
reality as with an adornment that lacks a self; they are merely 

420 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
messengers, having no will of their own, messengers of its might, 
visions of its glory, voices in its praise. 
688. However, this reeling, unconstrained Life must deter­
mine itself as being-for-self and endow its vanishing 'shapes' 
with an enduring subsistence. The immediate being in which it 
stands in antithesis to its consciousness is itself the negative power 
which dissolves its distinctions. It is thus in truth the Self; and 
Spirit therefore passes on to know itself in the form of self. Pure 
Light disperses its unitary nature into an infinity of forms, and 
offers up itself as a sacrifice to being-for-self, so that from its 
substance the individual may take an enduring existence for 
itself. 
b. Plant and animal 
68g. Self-conscious Spirit that has withdrawn into itself from 
the shapeless essence, or has raised its immediacy to self in 
general, determines its unitary nature as a manifoldness of 
being-for-self, and is the religion of spiritual perception. In this 
it falls apart into the numberless multiplicity of weaker and 
stronger, richer and poorer Spirits. This pantheism which, to 
begin with, is the passive subsistence of these spiritual atoms 
develops into a hostile movement within itself. The innocence 
of the flower religion, which is merely the self-less idea of self, 
gives place to the earnestness of warring life, to the guilt of ani­
mal religions ; the passivity and impotence of contemplative in­
dividuality pass into destructive being-for-self. It is of no use 
to have taken from the things of perception the deadness of 
abstraction, and to have raised them to beings of spiritual per­
ception ; the ensoulment of this kingdom of Spirits bears this 
death within it owing to the determinateness and the negativity 
which encroach upon the innocent indifference of plant life. 
Through this negativity, the dispersion into the multiplicity of 
passive plant forms becomes a hostile movement in which the 
hatred which stems from being-for-self is aroused. The actual 
self-consciousness of this dispersed Spirit is a host of separate, 
antagonistic national Spirits who hate and fight each other to 
the death and become conscious of specific forms of animals 
as their essence ; for they are nothing else than animal spirits, 
animal lives which separate themselves off from one another 
and are unconscious of their universality. 

NATURAL R E L I G ION 
6go. In this hatred, however, the determinateness of purely 
negative being-for-self consumes itself, and through this move­
ment of the Notion Spirit enters into another shape. Superseded 
being-for-self is the form of the object, a form produced by the self, 
or rather is the produced self, the self-consuming self, i.e. the 
self that becomes a Thing. The artificer therefore retains the 
upper hand over these mutually destructive animal spirits, and 
his action is not merely negative, but tranquil and positive. 
Spirit's consciousness is thus now the movement which is above 
and beyond the immediate in-itself as it is above and beyond 
the abstract being-for..:self. Since the in-itself is reduced, 
through opposition, to being a determinateness, it is no longer 
the proper form of absolute Spirit, but a reality which its con­
sciousness finds- confronting it as an ordinary existent thing, and 
which it supersedes ; at the same time, this consciousness is not 
only this being-for-self which supersedes its object, but it also 
produces its own idea, the being-for-self that is put forth in the 
form of an object. This productive activity, however, is not a 
perfect, but a conditioned, activity, the fashioning of a material 
already to hand. 
c. The artificer 
6g 1. Spirit, therefore, here appears, as an artificer, and its 
action whereby it produces itself as object but without having 
yet grasped the thought of itself is an instinctive operation, like 
the building of a honeycomb by bees. 
6g2. The first form, because it is immediate, is the abstract 
form of the Understanding, and the work is not yet in its own 
self filled with Spirit. The crystals of pyramids and obelisks, 
simple combinations of straight lines with plane surfaces and 
equal proportions of parts, in which the incommensurability 
of the round is destroyed, these are the works of this artificer 
ofrigid form. On account of the merely abstract intelligibleness 
of the form, the significance of the work is not in the work itself, 
is not the spiritual self. Thus either the works receive Spirit into 
them only as an alien, departed spirit that has forsaken its living 
saturation with reality and, being itself dead, takes up its abode 
in this lifeless crystal ; or they have an external relation to Spirit 
as something which is itself there externally and not as Spirit-

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I ON 
they are related to it as to the dawning light, which casts its 
significance on them. 
693. The division from which the artificer-spirit starts-the 
in-itselfwhich becomes the material it fashions, and the being­
for-self which is the aspect of self-consciousness at work-this 
division has become objective to it in its work. Its further efforts 
must aim at getting rid of this division of soul and body : to 
clothe and give shape to soul in its own self, and to endow body 
with soul. The two aspects, in being brought closer to each 
other, retain the specific character of Spirit as ideally conceived 
and as its enveloping husk ; Spirit's unity with itself contains 
this antithesis of individuality and universality. Since the work, 
in the coming-together of its aspects, comes closer to itself, this 
at the same time produces another result, viz. that the work 
comes closer to the self-consciousness performing it and that the 
latter, in the work, comes to know itself as it is in its truth. But 
in this way, the work at first constitutes only the abstract aspect 
of the activity of Spirit, which does not yet know the content 
of this activity within itself, but in its work, which is a Thing. 
The artificer himself, Spirit in its entirety, has not yet appeared, 
but is the still inner, hidden essence which, as an entirety, is 
presem only as divided into active self-consciousness and the 
object it has produced. 
694. The surrounding habitation, then, the outer reality 
which has been raised at first only into the abstract form of the 
Understanding, is fashioned by the artificer into a more lifelike 
form. For this purpose he employs plant-life, which is no longer 
sacred as it was to the earlier, impotent pantheism ; on the con­
trary, the artificer who grasps himself as the being that is for 
itself, takes that plant life as something to be used and reduces 
it to an outer aspect, to a mere ornament. But it is not used 
unaltered ; for the artificer of the self-conscious form at the same 
time destroys the transitoriness inherent in the immediate exist­
ence of this life and brings its organic forms nearer to the more 
rigid and more universal forms of thought. The organic form 
which, left to itself, proliferates unchecked in particularity, 
being itself subjugated by the form of thought, in turn raises 
these rectilinear flat shapes into a roundness more typical of 
the organic form-a blending which becomes the root of free 
architecture. 

NATURAL R E L I G I O N  
6gs. This dwelling, the aspect of the universal element or in­
organic nature of Spirit, now also includes within it a shape 
of individuality which brings nearer to actuality the Spirit that 
previously was separated from existence, and was external or 
internal to it, and thereby makes the work more in harmony 
with active self-consciousness. The artificer lays hold first of all 
of the form of being-for-self in general, of the animal shape. 
That he is no longer conscious of himself immediately in animal 
life, he proves by constituting himself the productive power in 
relation to it, and knows himself in it as in his work, whereby 
the animal shape at the same time becomes superseded and the 
hieroglyph of another meaning, of a thought. Consequently, 
the shape, too, is no longer solely and entirely used by the artifi­
cer, but is blended with the shape of thought, with the human 
form. But the work still lacks the shape and outer reality in 
which the self exists as self; it still does not in its own self pro­
claim that it includes within it an inner meaning, it lacks 
speech, the element in which the meaning filling it is itself 
present. Therefore the work, even when it is wholly purged of 
the animal element and wears only the shape of self-conscious­
ness, is still the soundless shape which needs the rays of the rising 
sun in order to have sound which, generated by light, is even 
then merely noise and not speech, and reveals only an outer, 
not the inner, self. 
6g6. Over against this outer shape of the self stands the other 
shape which proclaims its possession of an inner being. Nature, 
withdrawing into its essence, deposes its living, self-particulariz­
ing, self-entangling manifold existence to the level of an un­
essential husk, which is the covering for the inner being; and this 
inner being is, in the first instance, still simple darkness, the 
unmoved, the black, formless stone. (The Black Stone in the 
Kaaba at Mecca.] 
6g7. Both representations contain inwardness and outer ex­
istence-the two moments of Spirit ; and both representations 
contain the two moments at once in an antithetical relation, 
the self both as inner and as outer. The two have to be united. 
The soul of the statue in human shape does not yet come forth 
from the inner being, is not yet speech, the outer existence that 
is in its own self inward ; and the inner being of multiform exist­
ence is still soundless, is not immanently differentiated and is 

C .  ( CC . )  R E L I G I O N  
still separated from its outer existence to which all differences 
belong. The artificer therefore unites the two by blending the 
natural and the self-conscious shape, and this ambiguous being 
which is a riddle to itself, the conscious wrestling with the non­
conscious, the simple inner with the multiform outer, the dark­
ness of thought mating with the clarity of utterance, these break 
out into the language of a profound, but scarcely intelligible 
wisdom. 
6g8. In this work, there is an end of the instinctive effort 
which produced the work that, in contrast to self-consciousness, 
lacked consciousness ; for in it, the activity of the artificer, which 
constitutes self-consciousness, comes face to face with an equally 
self-conscious, self-expressive inner being. In it he has worked 
himself up to the point where his consciousness is divided 
against itself, where Spirit meets Spirit. In this unity of self­
conscious Spirit with itself, in so far as it is the shape and the 
object of its consciousness, its blendings with the unconscious· 
shapes are purged of the immediate shapes of Nature. These 
monsters in shape, word, and deed are dissolved into spiritual 
shape : into an outer that has retreated into itself, and an inner 
that utters or expresses itself out of itself and in its own self; 
into thought which begets itself, which preserves its shape in 
harmony with itself and is a lucid, intelligible existence. Spirit 
is Artist. 
B .  R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  A R T  
6gg. Spirit has raised the shape in which it is present to its 
own consciousness into the form of consciousness itself and it 
produces such a shape for itself. The artificer has given up the 
synthetic effort to blend the heterogeneous forms of thought and 
natural objects ; now that the shape has gained the form of self­
conscious activity, he has become a spiritual worker. 
700. lfwe ask, which is the actual Spirit which has the con­
sciousness of its absolute essence in the religion of art, we find 
that it is the ethical or the true Spirit. This is not merely the uni­
versal substance of all individuals ; on the contrary, since this 
substance has for actual consciousness the shape of consciousness 
and it is individualized, it follows that the substance is known 
by the individuals as their own essence and their own work. 

R E L I G I O N  I N  THE F O R M  O F  ART 
It is for them neither the divine, essential Light in whose unity 
the being-for-self of self-consciousness is contained only nega­
tively, only transitorily, and in which it beholds the lord and 
master of its actual world ; nor is it the restless destruction of 
hostile peoples, nor their subjection to a caste-system which 
gives the semblance of organization of a completed whole, but 
in which the universal freedom of the individuals is lacking. 
On the contrary, this Spirit is the free nation in which hallowed 
custom constitutes the substance of all, whose actuality and ex­
istence each and everyone knows to be his own will and deed. 
7or .  The religion of the ethical Spirit is, however, its eleva­
tion above its real world, the withdrawal from its truth into 
the pure knowledge of itself. Since the ethical nation lives in 
immediate unity with its substance and lacks the principle of 
the pure individuality of self-consciousness, the complete form 
of its religion first appears as divorced from its existential shape 
[Bestehen]. For the reality of the ethical substance rests partly 
on its passive unchangeableness as contrasted with the absolute 
movement of self-consciousness, and consequently on the fact 
that this self-consciousness has not yet withdrawn into itself 
from its contented acceptance of custom and its firm trust 
therein. Partly, too, on its organization into a multiplicity of 
rights and duties, as also on its distribution into the spheres of 
the various classes and their particular activities which co-oper­
ate to form the whole ; and hence on the fact that the individual 
is content with the limitation of his existence and has not yet 
grasped the unrestricted thought ofhis free self. But that tran­
quil immediate trust in the substance turns back into trust in one­
self and into the certainty of oneself; and the multiplicity of 
rights and duties, like the restricted activity, is the same dialecti­
cal movement of the ethical sphere as the multiplicity of things 
and their specific natures-a movement which finds its rest and 
stability only in the simplicity of the Spirit that is certain of 
itself. The consummation of the ethical sphere in free self-con­
sciousness, and the fate of the ethical world, are therefore the 
individuality that has withdrawn into itself, the absolute levity 
of the ethical Spirit which has dissolved within itself all the 
firmly established distinctions of its stable existence and the 
spheres of its organically ordered world and, being perfectly 
sure of itself, has attained to unrestrained joyfulness and the 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
freest enjoyment of itself. This simple certainty of Spirit within 
itself has a twofold meaning : it is a serene, stable existence and 
settled truth, and also absolute unrest and the passing-away of 
the ethical order. But it changes round into the latter ; for the 
truth of the ethical Spirit is, in the first instance, still only this 
substantial essence and trust in it, in which the self does not 
know itself as a free individuality, and which, therefore, in this 
inwardness, or in the liberation of the self, perishes. Since, then, 
its trust is broken, and the substance of the nation bruised, 
Spirit, which hitherto mediated the unstable extremes, has now 
stepped forth as an extreme, that of self-consciousness grasping 
itself as essence. This is Spirit, inwardly sure of itself, which 
mourns over the loss of its world, and now out of the purity 
of self creates its own essence which is raised above the real 
world. 
702. In such an epoch, absolute art makes its appearance. 
Prior to this it is an instinctive fashioning of material ; sub­
merged in the world of determinate being, it works its way out 
of it and into it ; it does not possess its substance in the free ethi­
cal sphere, and therefore does not have the character of free 
spiritual activity for the self at work. Later on, Spirit transcends 
art in order to gain a higher representation of itself, viz. to be 
.not merely the substance born of the self, but to be, in its repre­
sentation as object, this self, not only to give birth to itself from 
its Notion, but to have its very Notion for its shape, so that the 
Notion and the work of art produced know each other as one 
and the same. 
703. Tht: ethical substance having withdrawn from its outer 
existence back into its pure self-consciousness, this is the aspect 
of the Notion or of the activity with which Spirit brings itself 
forth as object. This activity is pure form, because the indivi­
dual, in ethical obedience and service, has worked off every un­
consdous existence and fixed determination in the same way 
that substance itself has become this fluid essence. This form 
is the night in which substance was betrayed and made itself 
into Subject. It is out of this night of pure certainty of self that 
the ethical Spirit is resurrected as a shape freed from Nature 
and its own immediate existence. 
704. The concrete existence of the pure Notion into which 
Spirit has fled from its body is an individual which Spirit selects 

R E L I G ION I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  ART 
to be the vessel of its sorrow. Spirit is present in this individual 
as his universal and as the power over him from which he sufferउ 
violence, as his 'pathos', by giving himself over to which his 
self-consciousness loses its freedom. But that positive power of 
universality is subdued by the pure self of the individual, the 
negative power. This pure activity, conscious of its inalienable 
strength, wrestles with the shapeless essence. Becoming its 
master, it has made the 'pathos' into its material and given itself 
its content, and this unity emerges as a work, universal Spirit 
individualized and set before us. 
a. The abstract work of art 
705. The first work of art, as immediate, is abstract and in­
dividual. As for itself, it has to move away from this immediate 
and objective mode towards self-consciousness, while self-con­
sciousness, on the other hand, in the cult aims at getting rid 
of the distinction by which it distinguishes itself at first from 
its Spirit, and by so doing to produce a work of art which is 
in its own self animate. 
706. The first mode in which the artistic spirit keeps its shape 
and its active consciousness farthest apart is the immediate 
mode, viz. the shape is there or is immediately present simply as 
a thing. In this mode, the shape is broken up into the distinction 
of individuality, which bears within it the shape of the self, and 
of universality, which represents the inorganic essence in 
reference to the shape, its environment and habitation. This 
shape, through the raising of the whole into the pure Notion, 
acquires its pure, spiritually appropriate form. It is neither the 
crystal, the form characteristic of the Understanding, which 
houses the dead or is illumined by a soul outside of it, nor is 
it that blending of the forms of Nature and of thought which 
first emerged from the plant, thought's activity in this being 
still an imitation. On the contrary, the Notion strips off the traces 
of root, branches, and leaves still adhering to the forms and 
purifies the latter into shapes in which the crystal's straight lines 
and flat surfaces are raised into incommensurable ratios, so that 
the ensoulment of the organic is taken up into the abstract form 
of the Understanding and, at the same time, its essential 
nature-incommensurability-is preserved for the Under­
standing. 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
707. But the indwelling god is the Black Stone drawn forth 
from its animal covering and pervaded with the light of con­
sciousness. The human form strips off the animal shape with 
which it was blended ; the animal is for the god merely an acci­
dental guise ; it steps alongside its true shape and no longer has 
any worth on its own account, but is reduced to signifying some­
thing else and has sunk to the level of a mere symbol. By this 
very fact, the shape of the god in its own self strips off also the 
poverty of the natural conditions of animal existence, and hints 
at the internal dispositions of animal life melted into its surface 
and belonging only to this surface. The essential being of the 
god is, however, the unity of the universal existence of Nature 
and of self-conscious Spirit which, in its actuality, confronts the 
former. At the same time, being in the first instance an individual 
shape, its existence is one of the elements of Nature, just as its 
self-conscious actuality is an individual national Spirit. But the 
former is, in this unity, that element reflected into Spirit, 
Nature transfigured by thought and united with self-conscious 
life. The form of the gods has, therefore, its Nature-element 
within it as a transcended moment, as a dim memory. The 
chaotic being and confused strife of the freely existing elements, 
the unethical realm of the Titans, is conquered and banished 
to the fringes of an actuality that has become transparent to 
itself, to the obscure boundaries of the world which finds itself 
in [the sphere of] Spirit and is there at peace. These ancient 
gods, first-born children of the union of Light with Darkness, 
Heaven, Earth, Ocean, Sun, the Earth's blind typhonic Fire, 
and so on, are supplanted by shapes which only dimly recall 
those Titans, and which are no longer creatures of Nature, but 
lucid, ethical Spirits of self-conscious nations. 
708. This simple shape has thus rid itself of the unrest of end­
less individuation, both of its Nature-element which, only qua 
universal essence, is ruled by necessity, but in its existence and 
activity is open to contingency ; and of the nation which, dis­
persed in to particular spheres of activity and individual centres 
of self-consciousness, has an existence which is manifold in 
meaning and activity. All this individuation has been got rid 
of by this simple form and brought together into an individu­
ality that is at rest. This individuality is, therefore, confronted 
by the moment of unrest, it-the essence-is confronted by self-

R E L I G I O N  I N  THE FOR M OF ART 
consciousness for which, as the birthplace of that unrest, nothing 
remains except to be pure activity. What belongs to the substance, 
the artist gave entirely to his work, but to himself as a particular 
individuality he gave in his work no actual existence : he could 
impart perfection to his work only by emptying himself of his 
particularity, depersonalizing himself and rising to the abstrac­
tion of pure action. In this first immediate production, the 
separation of the work from his self-conscious activity is not yet 
restored to their unity. The work by itself is not, therefore, actu­
ally an inspired work ; it is a whole only together with its genesis. 
The common element in a work of art, viz. that it is produced 
in consciousness and is made by human hands, is the moment 
of the Notion existing qua Notion, which stands in contrast to 
the work. And if this Notion, whether in the shape of artist or 
spectator, is unselfish enough to declare the work of art to be 
in its own self absolutely inspired, and to forget himself as per­
former or as spectator, then against this we must stick to the 
Notion of Spirit which cannot dispense with the moment of 
being conscious of itself. This moment, however, stands con­
trasted with the work because in this initial duality of itself 
Spirit gives the two sides their abstract, contrasted characters 
of action and of being a Thing, and their return into the unity 
from which they proceeded has not yet come about. 
709. The artist, then, learns in his work that he did not pro­
duce a being like himself. From it, it is true, there comes back 
to him a consciousness in the sense that an admiring crowd 
reveres it as the Spirit which is their own essence. But this in­
spiration, since it returns to him his self-consciousness only as 
admiration, is rather a confession to the artist that the inspired 
work is not on the same level as himself. Since his work comes 
back to him simply as joyfulness, he does not find therein the 
painful labour of making himself into an artist, and of creation, 
nor the strain and effort of his work. Furthermore, the crowd 
may judge the work or bring it offerings, endue it with their 
own consciousness in whatever way it may be : if they with their 
knowledge set themselves above it, he knows how much more 
his act is than what they understand and say ; if they put them­
selves below it and recognize in it the essence which dominates 
them, he knows himself as the master of this being. 
7 1  o. The work of art therefore demands· another element of 

430 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
its existence, the god another mode of coming forth than this, 
in which, out of the depths of his creative night, he descends 
into the opposite, into externality, into the determination of the 
Thing which lacks self-consciousness. This higher element is 
Language-an outer reality that is immediately self-conscious 
existence. Just as the individual self-consciousness is immediately 
present in language, so it is also immediately present as a uni­
versal infection ; the complete separation into independent selves 
is at the same time the fluidity and the universally communi­
cated unity of the many selves ; language is the soul existing 
as soul. The god, therefore, who has language for the element 
of his shape is the work of art that is in its own self inspired, 
that possesses immediately in its outer existence the pure 
activity which, when it existed as a Thing, was in contrast to 
it. In other words, self-consciousness, in the objectification of 
its essence, abides immediately with itself. Abiding thus with 
itself in its essence, it is pure thought, or the devotion whose inward­
ness in the hymn has at the same time an outer existence. It 
retains within itself the individuality of self-consciousness, and 
this individuality is at the same time heard as a universal indivi­
duality that is immediately present. Devotion, kindled in the 
manifold units of self-consciousness, is conscious of its act as the 
act of all alike and as simple being. Spirit, as this universal self­
consciousness of all, has its pure inwardness, no less than the 
being-for-others and the being-for-self of the individuals, in a 
single unity. 
7 1 r .  This language is distinct from another language of the 
god which is not that of universal self-consciousness. The Oracle, 
both of the god of the religions of art and of the preceding reli­
gions, is the necessary, first form of the god's utterance ; for the 
Notion of the god implies that he is the essence of both Nature 
and Spirit, and therefore has not only natural but spiritual ex­
istence as well. In so far as this moment is at first merely implied 
in his Notion and not yet realized in religion, the language is, 
for the religious self-consciousness, the language of an alien self­
consciousness. The self-consciousness that is still alien to its com­
munity is not yet immediately present in the manner demanded 
by its Notion. The self is sim pie or unitary, and thereby abso­
lutely universal being-for-self; but the self that is separated from 
the self-consciousness of the community is at first only an indivi-

R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  ART 
43 1 
dual self. The content of this its own and individual language 
stems from the universal determinateness in which absolute 
Spirit in general is posited in its religion. Thus the universal 
Spirit of the Sunrise which has not yet particularized its exist­
ence utters equally simple and universal statements about the 
divine Being, the substantial content of which is sublime in its 
simple truth, but on account of this universality at the same 
time appears trivial to the progressively developing self-con­
sciousness. 
7 1 2 . The further developed self which rises to become a 
being-for-selfis master over the pure 'pathos' of substance, over 
the objectivity of the Light ofSunrise, and knows that simplicity 
of truth as essential being which does not have the form of contin­
gent existence through an alien speech, knows it as the sure and 
unwritten law of the gods, a law that is 'everlasting and no one knows 
whence it came' .1 Just as the universal truth which was revealed 
by the divine Light has here withdrawn into the inner or nether 
world of being, and is thus freed from the form of contingent 
existence, so, on the other hand, in the religion of art because 
the shape of the god has taken on consciousness and hence in­
dividuality in general, the utterance peculiar to the god who 
is the Spirit of an ethical nation is the Oracle, which knows 
its particular affairs and what is advantageous concerning 
them. The universal truths, however, because they are known 
as that which possesses essential being are claimed by conscious 
thought for itself, and their speech is no longer alien to it but 
is its own. Just as that wise man of old2 searched in hjs own 
thought for what was good and beautiful, but left it to his 'dae­
mon' to know the petty contingent content of what he wanted 
to know-whether it would be good for him to keep company 
with this or that person, or good for one of his acquaintances 
to go on a journey, and similar unimportant things ; in the same 
way the universal consciousness draws knowledge of the contin­
gent from birds, or trees, or the yeasty earth, the vapour from 
which deprives self-consciousness of its self-possession. For the 
contingent is something that is not self-possessed and is alien, 
and therefore the ethical consciousness lets itself settle such mat­
ters too, as by a throw of the dice, in an unthinking and .. alien 
1 Sophocles, Antigone. 
• Socrates. 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
manner. When the individual, by using his understanding, 
makes up his mind, and after deliberation chooses what is 
advantageous for him, this self-determination is based on the 
specific nature of his particular character. This latter is itself 
contingent, and therefore knowledge supplied by the under­
standing as to what is advantageous for the individual is just 
such a knowledge as that of the oracles or of the 'lot' ; only that 
he who questions the oracle or 'lot' thereby expresses the ethical 
sentiment of indifference to what is contingent, while the 
former, on the other hand, treats what is intrinsically contin­
gent as an important concern of his thinking and knowing. 
What is higher than both, however, is not only to make 
deliberation the Oracle for a contingent action but, in addition, 
to know that this deliberate action is itself something contingent 
on account of its connection with the particular aspect of the 
action and of its advantageousness. 
7 1  3· The true self-conscious existence which Spirit receives 
in speech which is not the utterance of an alien, and therefore 
contingent, not universal, self-consciousness, is the work of art 
we met with before. It stands in contrast to the Thing-like 
character of the statue. Whereas this exists at rest, speech is a 
vanishing existence ; and whereas in the statue the liberated 
objectivity lacks an immediate self of its own, in speech, on the 
other hand, objectivity remains too much shut up within the 
self, falls short of attaining a lasting shape and is, like Time, no 
longer immediately present in the very moment of its being 
present. 
. 
7 1 4. The movement of the two sides constitutes the Cult : 
a movement in which the divine shape in motion in the pure 
feeling element of self-consciousness, and the divine shape at 
rest in the element of thinghood, mutually surrender their dis­
tinctive characters, and the unity which is the Notion of their 
essence achieves an existence. In the Cult, the self gives itself 
the consciousness of the divine Being descending to it from its 
remoteness, and this divine Being, which formerly was not 
actual but only an object over against it, through this act 
receives the actuality proper to self-consciousness. 
7 r 5· This Notion of the Cult is already implicitly contained 
and present in the stream of sacred song. This devotion is the 
immediate, pure satisfaction of the self by and within itself. It 

R E L I G I ON I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  ART 
433 
is the purified soul which, in this purity, is directly only essence 
and is one with essence. The soul, because of its abstract charac­
ter, is not consciousness which distinguishes its object from 
itself; it is thus only the night of its existence and the place pre­
pared for its [outer] shape. The abstract Cult therefore raises 
the self in to being this pure divine element. The soul perfects 
this purification with consciousness. Yet it is still not the self 
that has descended into its depths and knows itself as evil ; but 
it is something that only immediately is, a soul that cleanses its 
exterior by washing it, and puts on white robes, while its inward 
being traverses the imaginatively conceived path of works, 
punishments, and rewards, the path of spiritual training in 
general, i.e. of ridding itself of its particularity, as a result of 
which it reaches the dwellings and the community of the blest. 
7 1 6. This Cult is, at first, only a secret fulfilment, i.e. a fulfil­
ment only in imagination, not in actuality. It must be an actual 
deed, for a deed that is not actual is self-contradictory. Conscious­
ness proper thereby raises itself into its pure self-consciousness. 
The divine Being has in this the meaning of a free object ; 
through the actual Cult, this object returns in to the self; and 
in so far as it has, in pure consciousness, the meaning of the 
pure divine Being dwelling beyond reality, this Being descends 
from its universality, through the mediation of the Cult, into 
individuality, and thus unites itself with reality. 
7 1 7. The way the two sides enter into the act is determined 
as follows : for the self-conscious aspect, so far as it is actual con­
sciousness, the divine Being presents itself as actual Nature ; on 
the one hand, Nature belongs to consciousness as its possession 
and property, and has the value of an existence that has no 
being cif its own. On the other hand, Nature is consciousness's 
own immediate actuality and individuality, which equally is 
regarded as a non-essential being and is stripped of its apparent 
independence. But for its pure consciousness, this external 
Nature has at the same time the opposite meaning, viz. of being 
the implicitly divine Being, for which the self sacrifices its un­
essential being, just as, conversely, it sacrifices the unessential 
aspect of Nature to itself. This makes the act a spiritual move­
ment, because it is this twofold process, on the one hand, of 
superseding the abstraction of the divine Being (which is how 
devotion determines its object) and making it actual, and, on 

434 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
the other hand, of superseding the actual (which is how the 
doer determines the object and himself) and raising it into a 
universality. 
7 1 8. The act of the Cult itselfbegins, therefore, with the pure 
surrender of a possession which the owner, apparently without 
any profit whatever to himself, pours away or lets rise up in 
smoke. In so doing, he renounces before the essence of his pure 
consciousness all possession and right of the property and 
enjoyment thereof, renounces (his] personality and the return 
ofhis act into himself; and he reflects the act into the universal, 
or into the divine Being, rather than into himself. Conversely, 
however, the divine Being in its immediacy also perishes in this 
act. The animal sacrificed is the symbol of a god ; the fruits con­
sumed are the living Ceres and Bacchus themselves. In the 
former, die the powers of the upper law which has blood and 
actual life, in the latter, the powers of the lower law that pos­
sesses in bloodless form secret and cunning power. The sacrifice 
of the divine substance, in so far as it is an act, belongs to the 
self-conscious aspect ; that this actual deed . be possible, the 
divine Being must already have sacrificed itself in principle. This 
it has done by giving itself an [outer] existence and has made 
itself into an individual animal and into fruit. This renun­
ciation, therefore, which the divine Being has already 
accomplished in principle, is shown forth by the self who performs 
the sacrifice as an existent fact and for his own consciousness, 
thus replacing that immediate actuality of the divine Being by 
the higher actuality, viz. that of himself. For the unity which 
has resulted from overcoming the singleness and separation of 
the two sides is not merely a negative fate, but has a positive 
significance. It is only to the abstract being of the underworld 
that the sacrificial offering is wholly surrendered, and thus the 
reflection of possessions and being-for-self in to the universal is 
distinguished from the self as such. At the same time, however, 
this is only a small part, and the other act of sacrifice is merely 
the destruction ofwhat cannot be used, and is really the pre­
paration of the offering for a meal, the feast that cheats the act 
out of its negative significance. At that first sacrifice, the person 
making the offering reserves the greatest share for his own 
enjoyment, and from the latter sacrifice, what is useful, for the 
same purpose. This enjoyment is the negative power which puts 

R E L I G I O N I N  THE FO R M  OF A R T  
435 
an end both to the divine Being and to the singleness, and it 
is at the same time the positive actuality in which the objective 
existence of the divine Being is transformed into self-conscious 
existence, and the self has consciousness of its unity with the 
divine Being. 
7 r g. For the rest, though this Cult is in fact an act, its mean­
ing yet lies mostly in devotion. What belongs to devotion is not 
objectively produced, just as the result, in the enjoyment [of 
the feast], is itself robbed of its outer existence. The Cult, there­
fore, goes further and replaces this defect, in the first instance 
by giving its devotion an enduring objective existence, since the 
Cult is the common task--or the individual task for each and 
all to do--which produces a dwelling and adornments for the 
glory of the god. By so doing, in part the objectivity of the statue 
is transcended ; for by this dedication of his gifts and labours 
the labourer inclines the god to look favourably upon him, and 
contemplates his self as belonging to the god. In part, too, this 
action is not the individual labour of the artist, this particular 
aspect of it being dissolved in universality. But it is not only 
the glory of the god that is accomplished, and the blessing of 
his favour shed on the labourer only ideally and in imagination : 
the work has also a meaning the reverse of the first, which was 
that of alienating and glorifying something alien. The dwell­
ings and halls of the god are for the use of man, the treasures 
preserved therein are his own in -case of need ; the honour and 
glory enjoyed by the god in his adornment are the honour and 
glory of the nation, great in soul and in artistic achievement. 
At the festival, this people adorns its own dwellings and 
garments, no less than the things of the god, with graceful 
decorations. In this way, they receive from the grateful god a 
return for their gifts and proofs of his favour, in which through 
their work they became united with him, not as a hope and 
in a future realization, but rather, in witnessing to his glory 
and in bringing him gifts, the nation has the immediate 
enjoyment of its own wealth and adornment. 
b. The living work of art 
720. The nation that approaches its god in the Cult of the 
religion of art is the ethical nation that knows its state and the 
actions of the state to be the will and the achievement of its 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I ON 
own self. This Spirit, confronting the self-conscious nation is, 
therefore, not the divine Light which, being devoid of a self, 
does not contain within it the self-certainty of the individuals, 
but is only their universal essence and the lordly power in which 
they disappear. The Cult of the religion of this simple, amor­
phous essence gives back to its votaries, therefore, in general 
merely this : that they are the people of their god, who secures 
for them only their enduring existence and their substance as 
such ; not, however, their actual self which, on the contrary, 
is rejected. For they reverence their god as the empty Depth, 
not as Spirit. But the Cult of the religion of art, on the other 
hand, is without that abstract simplicity of the essence and there­
fore of its depth. That essence, however, which is immediately 
united with the self is in itselfSpirit and the truth that is a knowing, 
though still not the truth that is known, or the truth that knows 
itself in the depths of its nature. Because, then, the essence here 
contains a self, its manifestation is well disposed towards con­
sciousness ; and, in the Cult, consciousness receives not only the 
general sanction of its enduring existence, but also its conscious 
existence in the Cult itself; just as, conversely, the essence does 
not have an actuality devoid of self, in a rejected people whose 
substance merely is acknowledged, but in the people whose self 
is acknowledged in its substance. 
72 r .  Self-consciousness, then, comes forth from the Cult 
satisfied in its essence, and the god enters into it as into its habita­
tion. This habitation is, by itself, the night of Substance or its 
pure individuality, but no longer the tense individuality of the 
artist, an individuality which has not yet reconciled itselfwith 
its essence that is in process of becoming objective ; it is the 
satisfied night [of substance] which has its 'pathos' within 
it and is not in need of anything, because it returns from 
intuition, from the objectivity that has been superseded. 
This 'pathos' is, by itself, the Being of the risen Sun, but 
a Being which has now 'set' within itself, and has its 'setting' 
or going-down, i.e. self-consciousness-and hence existence and 
actuality-within itself. It has here traversed the movement of 
its actualization. Coming down from its pure essential nature 
and becoming an objective force of Nature and the expressions 
of that force, it is an outer existence for the 'other', for the self 
by which it is consumed. The silent essence of self-less Nature 

R E L I G IO N  I N  THE F O R M  OF ART 
437 
in its fruits attains to that stage where, self-prepared and 
digested, it offers itself to life that has a self-like nature. In its 
usefulness as food and drink it reaches its highest perfection ; 
for in this it is the possibility of a higher existence and comes 
into contact with spiritual reality. In its metamorphosis, the 
Earth-Spirit has developed, partly into a silently energizing 
Substance, partly into a spiritual fermentation : in the first case 
it is the feminine principle of nourishment, in the other the 
masculine principle, the self-impelling force of self-conscious ex­
istence. 
722. In this enjoymen.t, then, is revealed what that divine 
risen Light really is ; enjoyment is the mystery of its being. For 
the mystical is not concealment of a secret, or ignorance, but 
consists in the self knowing itself to be one with the divine Being 
and that this, therefore, is revealed. Only the self is manifest to 
itself; or what is manifest is so, only in the immediate certainty 
of itself. But it is in this immediate certainty that the simple 
divine Being has been placed by the Cult ; as a thing that can 
be used it not only has an existence that is seen, felt, smelt, 
tasted, but it is also an object of desire, and by being actually 
enjoyed becomes one with the self and thereby completely 
revealed to the self and manifest to it. That which is said to 
be manifest to Reason, to the heart, is in fact still secret, for 
it still lacks the actual certainty of immediate existence, both 
the certainty of objectivity and the certainty belonging to 
enjoyment, a certainty which in religion, however, is not merely 
immediate and unthinking, but is at the same time purely the 
certainty that is known by the self. 
723. What has thus, through the Cult, become manifest to 
self-conscious Spirit within itself, is simple essence as the move­
ment, partly out of its dark night of concealment up into con­
sciousness, there to be its silently nourishing substance ; but no 
less, however, the movement of again losing itself in the nether 
darkness, and lingering above only with a silent maternal 
yearning. The moving impulse is, however, nothing but the 
many-named divine Light of the risen Sun and its undisciplined 
tumultuous life which, similarly let go from its [merely] abstract 
Being, at first enters into the objective existence of the fruit, 
and then, surrendering itself to self-consciousness, in it attains 
to genuine reality-and now roams about as a crowd of frenzied 

C .  ( CC . )  R E L I G I ON 
females, the untamed revelry of Nature 
m self-conscious 
form. 
724. But what is disclosed to consciousness is still only abso­
lute [i.e. abstract] Spirit, which is this simple essence, not Spirit 
as it is in its own self; in other words, it is only immediate Spirit, 
the Spirit ofNature. Consequently, its self-conscious life is only 
the mystery of bread and wine, of Ceres and of Bacchus, not 
of the other, the strictly higher, gods whose individuality in­
cludes as an essential moment self:.consciousness as such. There­
fore, Spirit has not yet sacrificed itself as self-conscious Spirit to 
self-consciousness, and the mystery of bread and wine is not yet 
the mystery of flesh and blood. 
725. This undisciplined revelry of the god must bring itself 
to rest as an object, and the enthusiasm which did not attain 
to consciousness must produce a work that confronts it, as in 
the previous case the statue confronts the artist ; as a work, 
moreover, that is equally complete, but not, however, as an in­
trinsically lifeless, but as a living, self. Such a Cult is the festival 
which man celebrates in his own honour, though not yet 
imparting to that Cult the significance of the absolute Being ; 
for it is essence that is manifest to him at first, not yet Spirit ; 
not as something that essentially takes on human form. But this 
Cult lays the foundation for this revelation and unfolds its 
moments separately. Thus here we have the abstract moment 
of the living corporeality of essence, just as previously we had the 
unity ofboth in an unconscious revelry. Man thus puts himself 
in the place of the statue as the shape that has been raised and 
fashioned for perfectly free movement, just as the statue is per­
fectly free repose. Although each individual knows how to play 
the part of at least a torch-bearer, one of them comes forward 
who is the patterned movement, the smooth elaboration and 
fluent energy of all the participants. He is an inspired and living 
work of art that matches strength with its beauty ; and on him 
is bestowed, as a reward for his strength, the decoration with 
which the statue was honoured, and the honour of being, in 
place of the god in stone, the highest bodily representation 
among his people of their essence. 
726. In both representations which have just come before 
us there is present the unity of self-consciousness and spiritual 
essence ; but they are still not equally balanced against each 

R E L I G ION I N  THE F O R M  O F  ART 
439 
other. In the Bacchic enthusiasm it is the self that is beside itself, 
but in corporeal beauty it is spiritual essence. The stupor of 
consciousness and its wild stammering utterance in the former 
case must be taken up into the clear existence of the latter, and 
the non-spiritual clarity of the latter into the inwardness of 
the former. The perfect element in which inwardness is just as 
external as externality is inward is once again speech ; but it 
is neither the speech of the Oracle, wholly contingent and in­
dividual as regards its content, nor the emotional hymn sung 
in praise of the individual god, nor again is it the meaningless 
stammer of Bacchic frenzy. On the contrary, it has gained a 
lucid and universal content :  a content that is lucid, because the 
artist has worked his way out of the initial enthusiasm, originat­
ing wholly from substance, into a [definite] shape. This shape 
is his own existence which, in all its stirrings and impulses, is 
permeated and accompanied by self-conscious soul ; and the 
content is universal, for in this festival which honours man there 
vanishes the one-sidedness of the statues which contain only a 
national Spirit, a specific character of the divine nature. The 
handsome warrior is indeed the glory of his particular nation, 
but he is a corporeal individuality in which are swallowed up 
the fulness and seriousness of meaning and the inner character 
of the Spirit which bears the particular life, the demands, the 
needs, and customs of his nation. In this kenosis, this external­
ization of itself, into complete corporeality, Spirit has laid aside 
the special influences and sympathies of Nature which, as the 
Spirit of the nation, it contained shut up within it. Its nation 
is, therefore, no longer conscious in this Spirit of its particularity 
but rather of having laid this aside, and is conscious of the uni­
versality of its human existence. 
c. The spiritual work of art 
727. The national Spirits which become conscious of their 
essence in the shape of a particular animal coalesce into a single 
Spirit. Thus it is that the separate beautiful national Spirits 
unite into a single pantheon, the element and habitation of 
which is language. The pure intuition of itself as universal 
humanity has, in the actuality of the national Spirit, this form : 
the national Spirit combines with the others with which it con­
stitutes through Nature a single nation, in a common undertak-

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I ON 
ing, and for this task forms a collective nation and therewith 
a collective Heaven. This universality to which Spirit in its ex­
istence attains, is, however, only this first universality which 
first issues from the individuality of the ethical sphere, which 
has not yet overcome its immediacy, has not yet formed a single 
State out of its peoples. The ethical life of the actual national 
Spirit rests partly on the immediate trust of the individuals in 
their nation as a whole, partly on the direct share which all, 
regardless of differences of class, take in the decisions and 
actions of the government. In the union which, to begin with, 
is not a permanent arrangement but only for the purpose of a 
common action, that freedom of participation by each and all 
is,Jor the time being, put on one side. This first alliance is, there­
fore, more an assembly of individualities than their domination 
by an abstract thought which would rob the individuals of their 
self-conscious participation in the will and deed of the State. 
728. The assembly of national Spirits constitutes a circle of 
shapes which now embraces the whole of Nature as well as the 
whole ethical world. They stand, too, under the supreme com­
mand of the one, rather than under his sovereignty. By themselves, 
they are the universal substances of what the self-conscious 
essence in itseljis and does. This, however, constitutes the power 
and, in the first instance, the centre at least with which those 
universal beings are concerned, and which at first seems to 
merge their affairs only contingently. But it is the return of the 
divine Being into self-consciousness that already contains the 
reason why self-consciousness forms the centre for those divine 
powers and conceals their unity, to begin with, under the form 
of a friendly, external connection of the two worlds. 
729. The same universality which belongs to this content 
attaches necessarily also to the form of consciousness in which 
the content appears. It is no longer the actual practice of the 
Cult, but a practice that is raised, not yet indeed into the 
Notion, but at first into picture-thinking, into the synthetic link­
ing-together of self-conscious and external existence. The 
external existence of this picture-thinking, language, is the 
earliest language, the Epic as such, which contains the universal 
content of the world, universal at least in the sense of complete­
ness, though not indeed as the universality of thought. The 
Minstrel is the individual and actual Spirit from whom, as a 

R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  ART 
44' 
subject of this world, it [the world] is produced and by whom 
it is borne. His 'pathos' is not the stupefying power of Nature 
but Mnemosyne, recollection and a gradually developed in­
wardness, the remembrance of essence that formerly was 
directly present. He is the organ that vanishes in its content ; 
what counts is not his own selfbut his Muse, his universal song. 
What, however, is in fact present is the syllogism in which the 
extreme of universality, the world of the gods, is linked with 
individuality, with the Minstrel, through the middle term of 
particularity. The middle term is the nation in its heroes, who 
are individual men like the Minstrel, but presented only in idea, 
and are thereby at the same time universal, like the free extreme 
of universality, the gods. 
730. In this Epic, then, there is in general presented to con­
sciousness what is implicitly accomplished in the Cult, the rela­
tion of the divine to the human. The content is an action of the 
self-conscious essence. The acting disturbs the tranquillity of the 
Substance and excites the essence so that its simple, unitary 
nature is divided and opened up into the manifold world of 
natural and ethical powers. The action is the violation of the 
peaceful earth, the trench which, animated by blood, evokes 
the departed spirits and these, thirsting for life, receive it in the 
action of self-consciousness. The business which is the object 
of these general exertions has two sides : the side of the self, by 
which the business is accomplished by a totality of actual 
nations and the individualities standing at their head ; and the 
side of the universal, by which it is accomplished by their sub­
stantial powers. Formerly, however, the relation of the two bore 
the character of a synthetic combination of the universal and 
the individuai, i.e. of picture-thinking. On this specific charac­
ter depends the appraisal of this world. The relation of the two 
is thus a mingling of them which inconsistently divides and 
apportions the unity of the action, and superfluously throws the 
action over from one side to the other. The universal powers 
have the form of individuality and hence the principle of action 
in them ; what they effect appears, therefore, to proceed entirely 
from them and to be as free an action as that of men. Con­
sequently, both gods and men have done one and the same 
thing. The earnestness of those divine powers is a ridiculous 
superfluity, since they are in fact the power or strength of the 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
individuality performing the action ; while the exertions and 
labour of the latter is an equally useless effort, since it is rather 
the gods who manage everything. Ephemeral mortals who are 
as nothing are at the same time the mighty self that brings into 
subjection the universal Beings, offends the gods, and, in 
general, procures for them an actual existence and an interest 
in acting. Just as, conversely, these impotent universal Beings 
who nourish themselves on the gifts of men and through them 
alone get something to do, are the natural substance and the 
material of all events, and are equally the ethical matter and 
the 'pathos' of action. If their elemental natures are first 
brought into actual existence and into an active relationship 
by the free self of individuality, they are no less the universal 
that withdraws itself from this connection, that remains un­
restricted in its own specific character, and through the in­
vincible elasticity of its unity effaces the atomistic singleness of 
the doer and his constructions, preserves itself in its purity and 
dissolves everything individual in its fluid nature. 
73 1 .  Just as the gods fall into a contradictory relation with 
the self-like nature opposed to them, so too their universality 
comes into conflict with their own specific character and its 
relationship to others. They are the eternal, beautiful indivi­
duals who, serene in their own existence, are exempt from trans­
itoriness and the influence of alien powers. But they are at the 
same time specific elements, particular gods, which therefore stand 
in relation to others. But that relation to others which, in virtue 
of the opposition involved in it, is a conflict with them, is a comi­
cal self-forgetfulness of their eternal nature. Determinateness 
is rooted in their divine existence and possesses in its limitation 
the independence of the whole individuality ; through this their 
characters at once lose the sharpness of their peculiar disposi­
tion and blend together in their ambiguity. One purpose of the 
activity-and their activity itself-since it is directed against 
an 'other', and hence against an invincible divine power, is an 
arbitrary showing-offwhich at once melts away and transforms 
the apparent earnestness of the action into a harmless, self-con­
fident play, without result or outcome. If, however, in the 
nature of their divinity, the negative element or the specific 
determinateness of that nature appears merely as the inconsis­
tency of their activity and as the contradiction between purpose 

R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  FOR M O F  A R T  
443 
and result, and if that independent assurance retains the pre­
ponderance over the element of determinateness, then by that 
very fact the pure power of the negative confronts it, and, more­
over, as the ultimate power over it and against which it can 
do nothing. They are the universal, and the positive, over 
against the individual self of mortals which cannot hold out 
against their might ; but the universal self, for that reason, 
hovers over them and over this whole world of picture-thinking 
to which the entire content belongs, as the irrational void of 
Necessity-a mere happening which they must face as beings 
without a self and sorrowfully, for these determinate natures can­
not find themselves in this purity. 
732. This Necessity, however, is the unity of the Notion which 
brings under control the contradictory substantial being of the 
separate moments, a unity in which the inconsistency and arbi­
trariness of their action is orderly disposed, and the play of their 
actions receives its earnestness and worth in the actions them­
selves. The content of the world of pictorial thought freely un­
folds itself in the middle term on its own account, gathering itself 
round the individuality of a hero who, however, in his strength 
and beauty feels his life is broken and sorrowfully awaits an 
early death. For the individuality that is in itself firmly estab­
lished and actual is banished to its extreme and split into its 
moments which have not yet found and united themselves. The 
one individual moment, the abstract non-actual one, is 
Necessity, which shares in the life of the middle term just as 
little as does the other, the actual individual, the Minstrel, who 
keeps himself outside of it and is lost in his performance. Both 
extremes must draw nearer to the content ;  one of them, 
Necessity, has to fill itself with the content, the other, the lan­
guage of the Minstrel, must participate in it ; and the content 
formerly left to itself must receive within it the certainty and 
the fixed character of the negative. 
733· This higher language, that of Tragedy, gathers closer 
together the dispersed moments of the inneऊ eऋsenऌial world and 
the world of action : the substance of the d1vme, m accordance 
with the nature of the Notion, sunders itself into its shapऍs, and 
their movement is likewise in conformity with the NotiOn. IK 
regard to form, the language ceases to be narrative because 1t 
enters into the content, just as the content ceases to be one that 

444 
C .  ( C C . ) R E L I G I O N  
is imaginatively presented. The hero is himself the speaker, and 
the performance displays to the audience-who are also specta­
tors-self-conscious human beings whnknow their rights and pur­
poses, the power and the will of their specific nature and know 
how to assert them. They are artists, who do not express with 
unconscious naturalness and naivety the external aspect of their 
resolves and enterprises, as happens in the language accom­
panying ordinary actions in actual life ; on the contrary, they 
give utterance to the inner essence, they prove the rightness of 
their action, and the 'pathos' which moves them is soberly 
asserted and definitely expressed in its universal individuality, 
free from the accidents of circumstance and personal idiosyn­
crasies. Lastly, these characters exist as actual human beings 
who impersonate the heroes and portray them, not in the form 
of a narrative, but in the actual speech of the actors themselves. 
Just as it is essential for the statue to be the work of human 
hands, so is the actor essential to his mask-not as an external 
condition from which artistically considered we must abstract ; 
or, so far as we do have to make abstraction from it, we admit 
just this, that Art does not yet contain in it the true and proper 
self. 
734· The general ground on which the movement ot these 
shapes produced from the Notion takes place, is the conscious­
ness expressed in the first imaginative language [that of the 
Epic] where the content, devoid of a self, is left disunited. It 
is the commonalty as such whose wisdom finds utterance in the 
Chorus of the Elders ; in the powerlessness of this chorus the 
commonalty has its representative, because the common people 
themselves constitute merely the positive and passive material 
of the individuality of the government confronting it. Lacking 
the power of the negat\ve, it is unable to hold together and to 
subdue the riches and varied abundance of the divine life, but 
lets it all go its own separate ways, and in its reverential hymns 
it extols each individual moment as an independent god, first 
one and then another. But where it does detect the earnestness 
of the Notion in its onward march dashing these figures to 
pieces, and comes to see how ill it fares with its venerated gods 
who dare to trespass on ground where the Notion holds sway, 
then it is not itself the negative power which actively interferes ; 
on the contrary, it clings to the self-less thought of such power, 

R E L I G I O N  I N  THE F O R M  OF A R T  
445 
clings to the consciousness of an alien fate and produces the 
empty desire for ease and comfort, and feeble talk of appease­
ment. In its fear of the higher powers which are the immediate 
instruments of the Substance, feaiful of their struggles among 
themselves, and feaiful of the simple self of Necessity which 
crushes them as well as the living beings linked with them ; in 
its compassion for these living beings which it also knows to 
be the same as itself-it is conscious only of a paralysing terror 
of this movement, of equally helpless pity, and as the end of 
it all, the empty repose of submission to Necessity, whose work 
is understood neither as the necessary deed of the character, 
nor as the action of the absolute Being within itself. 
735· At the level of this spectator-consciousness [the 
Chorus], the indifferent ground on which the performance 
takes place, Spirit does not appear in its scattered multiplicity, 
but in the simple diremption of the Notion. Its Substance, there­
fore, shows itself torn asunder merely into its two extreme 
powers. These elementary universal beings are at the same time 
self-conscious individualities-heroes, who place their conscious­
ness into one of these powers, find in it determinateness of 
character and constitute the effective activity and actuality of 
these powers. This universal individuation descends again, 
as will be remembered, to the immediate reality of existence 
and presents itself to a crowd of spectators who have in the 
Chorus their counterpart, or rather their own thought express­
ing itself .. 
736. The content and movement of SpiL·it which here is 
object to itself has already been considered as the nature and 
realization of the ethical substance. In its religion, it attains to 
a consciousness of itself, or exhibits itself to consciousness in its 
purer form and its simpler embodiment. If, then, the ethical 
substance, in virtue of its Notion, split itself as regards its content 
into powers which were defined as divine and human law, or 
law of the nether and of the upper world-the one the Family, 
the other the State power, the first being the feminine and the 
second the masculine character-similarly, now, the previously 
multiform circle of gods with its fluctuating characteristics con­
fines itself to these powers which are thereby brought closer to 
genuine individuality. For the previous dispersion of the whole 
into manifold and abstract forces, which appear hypostatized, 

446 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
is the dissolution of the Subject, which comprehends them only 
as moments within its self, so that individuality is merely the 
superficial form of these entities. Conversely, a further dis-. 
tinction of characters than that just named is to be attributed 
to contingent and intrinsically external personality. 
73 7. At the same time, the [ethical] substance is divided with 
respect to itsform or to knowing. Spirit when acting appears qua 
consciousness over against the object to which its activity is 
directed and which, consequently, is determined as the negative 
of the knower ; the doer finds himself thereby in the antithesis 
of knowing and not-knowing. He takes his purpose from his 
character and knows it as an ethical essentiality ; but on account 
of the determinateness of his character he knows only the one 
power ofsubstance, the other remaining for him concealed. The 
present reality is, therefore, one thing in itself, and another thing 
for consciousness ; the upper and the nether law come to signify 
in this connection the power that knows and reveals itself to 
consciousness, and the power that conceals itself and lies in 
ambush. The one is the aspect of Light, the god of the Oracle 
who, in accordance with its natural moment, has sprung from 
the all-illuminating Sun, knows all and reveals all-Phoebus, 
and Zeus who is his father. But the commands of this truth­
speaking god and his announcements of what is, are really de­
ceptive. For this knowing is, in its principle, immediately a not­
knowing, because consciousness, in its action, is in its own self 
this antithesis. He1 who was able to unlock the riddle of the 
Sphinx, and he who trusted with childlike confidence, 2 are, 
therefore both sent to destruction through what the god 
revealed to them. This priestess through whom the beautiful 
god speaks3 is in no way different from the equivocating sisters 
ofFate4 who, by their promises, drive to crime [those who listen 
to them], and who by the double-tongued character of what 
they announced as a certainty deceive him5 who relied on the 
obvious meaning. The consciousness,6 therefore, that is purer 
than the latter5 which believes witches, and is more prudent, 
' Oedipus. 
• Orestes. 
3 The Delphic Oracle. 
• The witches in Macbeth. 
• Macbeth. 
• Hamlet. 

R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  F O R M  O F  ART 
447 
more solid, and thorough than the former which trusts the pries­
tess and the beautiful god, tarries with his revenge, even though 
the very spirit of his father reveals to him the crime by which 
he was murdered, and institutes still other proofs-for the 
reason that this revelatory spirit could also be the devil. 
738. The grounds of this mistrust are that the knowing con­
sciousness is caught up in the antithesis of the certainty of itself 
and objective essence. Ethical rightness, which holds that what 
actually is, is in itself nothing when opposed to absolute law, 
learns that its knowing is one-sided, its law only a law of its 
own character, and that it has seized on only one of the powers 
of the substance. The action itself is this inversion of the known 
into its opposite, into being, is the changing-round of the right­
ness based on character and knowing into the rightness of the 
very opposite with which the former is bound up in the essential 
nature of the Substance--converts it into the Furies [Erinnyes] 
who embody the other power and character aroused into hos­
tility. This nether right sits with Zeus on the throne and enjoys 
equal honour with the god who is revealed and known. 
739· To these three beings, the world of the gods of the 
Chorus is restricted by the acting individuality. One of them 
is the Substance, the power presiding over the hearth and the 
spirit of family piety, as well as the universal power of state and 
government. Since this distinction belongs to the substance as 
such, when it is pictorially represented it is not individualized 
in two distinct figures, but has in actuality the two persons of 
its characters. On the other hand, the distinction between 
knowing and not-knowing falls within each of the self-con­
sciousnesses-and only in abstraction, in the element of uni­
versality, is it divided into two individual shapes. For the self 
of the hero has an existence only as a whole consciousness and 
·is therefore essentially the whole of the distinction belonging to 
the form ; but its substance is determinate and only one side 
of the distinguished content belongs to him. Therefore, the two 
sides of consciousness which have in actuality no separate in­
dividuality peculiar to each receive, when pictorially represented, 
each its own particular shape : the one, that of the revelatory 
god, the other, that of the Furies who keep themselves con­
cealed. In part, both enjoy equal honour, but again, the shape 
assumed by the substance, Zeus, is the necessity of the relation 

C. ( C C . )  R E L I G IO N  
ofthe two to each other. The substance is the relation [a] that 
the knowing is for itself, but has its truth in what is simple ; [b] 
that the distinction through and in which actual consciousness 
exists has its basis in that inner being which destroys it ; [ c] that 
the clear conscious assurance of certainty has its confirmation in 
forgeifulness. 
740. Consciousness disclosed this antithesis through action ; 
acting in accordance with the knowledge revealed it finds out 
that that knowledge is deceptive ; and being committed as 
regards the content of that knowledge to one of the attributes 
of substance, it violated the other and so gave it the right as 
against itself. In following the god that knows, it really got hold 
of what was not revealed, and pays the penalty of trusting a 
knowledge whose ambiguity, for such is its nature, also becomes 
explicitfor consciousness and a warning to it. The ravings of 
the priestess, the inhuman shape of the witches, the voices of 
trees and birds, dreams and so forth, are not the ways in which 
truth manifests itself; they are warning signs of deception, of 
an absence of self-possession, of the singularity and contingency 
of the knowing. Or, in other words, the opposite power which 
is violated by consciousness is present as express law and valid 
right, whether law of the family or of the state ; consciousness, 
on the other hand, followed its own way of knowing and con­
cealed from itself what was openly revealed. The truth, how­
ever, of the opposing powers of the content [of the knowledge] 
and of consciousness is the result that both are equally right, 
and therefore in their antithesis, which is brought about by 
action, are equally wrong. The action, in being carried out, 
demonstrates their unity in the natural downfall of both powers 
and both self-conscious characters. The reconciliation of the 
opposition with itself is the Lethe of the underworld in death ; 
or the Lethe of the upper world as absolution, not from guilt 
(for consciousness cannot deny its guilt, because it committed 
the act) , but from the crime ; and also the peace of mind follow­
ing atonement for the crime. Both are oblivion, the vanished­
ness of the reality and the action of the powers of substance, 
of their individualities, and of the powers of the abstract 
thought of good and evil ; for none of them by itself is the 
essence, which rather is the repose of the whole within itself, 
the unmoved unity of Fate, the peaceful existence and con-

R E L I G I O N  I N  T H E  FORM O F  ART 
449 
sequent inactivity and lack of vitality of family and govern­
ment, and the equal honour and consequent indifferent unreality 
of Apollo and the Furies, and the return of their spiritual life 
and activity into the unitary being of Zeus. 
74 1 .  This Fate completes the depopulation of Heaven, of 
that unthinking mingling ofindividuality and essence-a ming­
ling whereby the action of essence appears as inconsequent, 
arbitrary, unworthy of itself; for individuality that is only 
superficially attached to essence is unessential. The expulsion 
of such shadowy, insubstantial picture-thoughts' which was 
demanded by the philosophers of antiquity thus already begins 
in [Greek] Tragedy in general through the fact that the division 
of the substance is controlled by the Notion, and consequently 
individuality is essential individuality, a,nd the determinations 
are absolute characters. The self-consciousness that is repre­
sented in Tragedy, knows and acknowledges, therefore, only 
one supreme power, and this Zeus only as the power of the state 
or of the hearth, and in the antithesis belonging to knowing 
[of knower and known], only as the father of the particular that 
is taking shape in the knowing; and also as the Zeus of the oath 
and of the Furies, the Zeus of the universal, of the inner being 
dwelling in concealment. The further moments issuing from the 
Notion and dispersed throughout the pictorial representation, 
moments which the Chorus allows to hold sway one after the 
other, are, on the other hand, not the 'pathos' of the hero ; they 
sink to the level of passions in the hero, to the level of contingent, 
insubstantial moments which, though praised by the imper­
sonal Chorus, are not capable of constituting the character of 
the heroes, nor of being expressed and honoured as their essen­
tial nature. 
742. But also the persons of the divine Being itself, as well 
as the character of its substance, coalesce into the simplicity 
of what is without consciousness. This Necessity has, in contrast 
to self-consciousness, the characteristic of being the negative 
power of all the shapes that appear, a power in which they do 
not recognize themselves but, on the contrary, perish. The self 
appears merely as assigned to the characters, not as the mediating 
factor of the movement. But self-consciousness, the simple cer­
tainty of self, is in fact the negative power, the unity of Zeus, 
of substantial being and of abstract Necessity ; it is the spiritual 

450 
C. ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
unity into which everything returns. Because actual self-con­
sciousness is still distinguished from the substance and Fate, it 
is partly the Chorus, or rather the crowd of spectators, whom 
this movement of the divine life fills with fear as being some­
thing alien, or in whom this movement, as something close to 
them, produces merely the emotion of passive sympathy. 
Partly, too, so far as consciousness is involved and belongs to 
the characters, this union is an external one, is a hypocrisy, 
because the true union, that of the self, Fate, and substance, 
is not yet present. The hero who appears before the onlookers 
splits up into his mask and the actor, into the person in the 
play and the actual self. 
743· The self-consciousness of the hero must step forth from 
his mask and present itself as knowing itself to be the fate both 
of the gods of the chorus and of the absolute powers themselves, 
and as being no longer separated from the chorus, from the uni­
versal consciousness. 
744· Comedy has, therefore, above all, the aspect that actual 
self-consciousness exhibits itself as the fate of the gods. These 
elementary Beings are, as universal moments, not a self and are 
not equal. They are, it is true, endowed with the form of indivi­
duality, but this is only in imagination and does not really and 
truly belong to them ; the actual self does not have such an 
abstract moment for its substance and content. It, the Subject, is 
raised above such a moment, such a single property, and clothed 
in this mask it proclaims the irony of such a property wanting to 
be something on its own account. The pretensions of universal 
essentiality are uncovered in the self; it shows itself to be 
entangled in an actual existence, and drops the mask just 
because it wants to be something genuine. The self, appearing 
here in its significance as something actual, plays with the mask 
which it once put on in order to act its part ; but it as quickly 
breaks out again from this illusory character and stands forth 
in its own nakedness and ordinariness, which it shows to be not 
distinct from the genuine self, the actor, or from the spectator. 
745· This general dissolution of the shapes of the essentiality 
as a whole in their individuality becomes in its content more 
petulant and bitter in so far as the content has its more serious 
and necessary meaning. The divine substance unites within 
itselfthe meaning ofnatural and ethical essentiality. As regards 

R E L I G I O N  I N  THE F O R M  O F  ART 
451 
the natural element, actual self-consciousness shows in the very 
fact of employing things of Nature for its adornment, for its 
dwelling, and also in feasting on its sacrificial offering, that it 
is itself the Fate to which the secret is revealed, viz. the truth 
about the essential independence of Nature. In the mystery of 
bread and wine, it appropriates this independence along with 
the meaning of the inner essence ; and in Comedy, it is conscious 
of the irony of this meaning generally. Now, in so far as this 
meaning contains ethical essentiality, it is partly the nation in 
its two aspects of the state, or Demos proper, and the individu­
ality of the Family ; partly, however, it is a self-conscious pure 
knowing, or the rational thinking of the universal. This Demos, 
the general mass, which knows itself as lord and ruler, and is 
also aware of being the intelligence and insight which demand 
respect, is constrained and befooled through the particularity 
of its actual existence, and exhibits the ludicrous contrast 
between its own opinion of itself and its immediate existence, 
between its necessity and contingency, its universality and its 
commonness. If the principle of its individuality, separated 
from the universal, makes itself conspicuous in the proper shape 
of an actual existence and openly usurps and administers the 
commonwealth to which it is a secret detriment, then there is 
exposed more immediately the contrast between the universal 
as a theory and that with which practice is concerned ; there 
is exposed the complete emancipation of the purposes of the 
immediate individuality from the universal order, and the con­
tempt of such an individuality for that order. 
746. Rational thinking frees the divine Being from its contin­
gent shape and, in antithesis to the unthinking wisdom of the 
Chorus which produces all sorts of ethical maxims and gives 
currency to a host of laws and specific concepts of duty and 
of right, lifts these into the simple Ideas of the Beautiful and 
the Good. The movement of this abstraction is the consciousness 
of the dialectic contained in these maxims and laws themselves, 
and, consequently, the consciousness of the vanishing of the 
absolute validity previously attaching to them. With the 
l'anishing of the contingent character and superficial individu­
ality which imagination lent to the divine Beings, all that is 
left to them as regards their natural aspect is the bareness of their 
immediate existence ; they are clouds, an evanescent mist, like 

452 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I ON 
those imaginative representations. The essence of these having 
been given the form of thought, they have become the simple 
thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good, which tolerate being 
filled with any kind of content. The power of dialectic know­
ledge puts specific laws and maxims of conduct at the mercy 
of the pleasure and frivolity of youth which is led astray by it, 
and provides weapons for deceiving old age with its fears and 
apprehensions and which is restricted to life in its individual 
aspect. The pure thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good thus 
display a comic spectacle : through their liberation from the 
opinion which contains both their specific determinateness as 
content and also their absolute determinateness, liberation, 
that is, from the firm hold of consciousness on these determina­
tenesses, they become empty, and just for that reason the sport 
of mere opinion and the caprice of any chance individuality. 
74:7· Therefore, the Fate which up to this point has lacked 
consciousness and consists in an empty repose and oblivion, and 
is separated from self-consciousness, this Fate is now united with 
self-consciousness. The individual self is the negative power 
through which and in which the gods, as also their moments, 
viz. existent Nature and the thoughts of their specific charac­
ters, vanish. At the same time, the individual self is not the 
emptiness of this disappearance but, on the contrary, preserves 
itself in this very nothingness, abides with itself and is the sole 
actuality. In it, the religion of Art is consummated and has com­
pletely returned into itself. Through the fact that it is the indivi­
dual consciousness in the certainty of itself that exhibits itself 
as this absolute power, this latter has lost the form of something 
presented to consciousness, something altogether separate from con­
sciousness and alien to it, as were the statue, and also the living 
beautiful corporeality, or the content of the Epic and the powers 
and persons of Tragedy. This unity, too, is not the unconscious 
unity of the Cult and the mysteries ; on the contrary, the actual 
self of the actor coincides with what he impersonates, just as 
the spectator is completely at home in the drama performed 
before him and sees himself playing in it. What this self-con­
sciousness beholds is that whatever assumes the form of essenti­
ality over against it, is instead dissolved in it-in its thinking, 
its existence, and its action-and is at its mercy. It is the return 
of everything universal into the certainty of itself which, in con-

THE R EV E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
453 
sequence, is this complete loss of fear and of essential being on 
the part of all that is alien. This self-certainty is a state of 
spiritual well-being and of repose therein, such as is not to be 
found anywhere outside of this Comedy. 
C .  
T H E  R E V E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
748. Through the religion of Art, Spirit has advanced from 
the form of Substance to assume that of Subject, for it produces its 
[outer] shape, thus making explicit in it the act, or the self­
consciousness, that merely vanishes in the awful Substance, and 
does not apprehend its own self in its trust. This incarnation 
of the divine Being starts from the statue which wears only the 
outer shape of the Self, the inwardness, the Selfs activity, falling 
outside of it. But in the Cult the two sides have become one ; 
and in the outcome of ऄhe religion of Art this unity, in its con­
summation, has even gone right over at the same time to the 
extreme of the Self. In Spirit that is completely certain of itself 
in the individuality of consciousness, all essentiality is sub­
merged. The proposition that expresses this levity runs : 'The 
Self is absolute Being.' The essence, the Substance, for which 
the Selfwas [only] an accident, has sunk to the level of a predi­
cate ; and in this self-consciousness over against which there is 
nothing in the form of essence, Spirit has lost its consciousness. 
749· This proposition : 'The Self is absolute Being', belongs 
quite obviously to the non-religious, actual [or secular] Spirit ; 
and we have to remember which shape of that Spirit it is which 
expresses it. It will contain the movement, and also the con­
version of it, which degrades the Self to the level of a predicate 
and elevates Substance to Subject ; and in this manner, that 
the converse proposition does not in itself or for us make Sub­
stance into Subject, or, to put the same thing another way, it 
does not reinstate Substance in such a manner that Spirit's con­
sciousness is led back to its beginning, to natural religion ; on 
the contrary, this conversion is one that is brought about for 
and by self-consciousness itself. Since self-consciousness surrenders 
itself consciously, it is preserved in its alienation and 
remains the Subject of substance, but since it is likewise self­
alienated, it still has the consciousness of the substance ; or, 
since self-consciousness through its sacrifice brings forth sub-

454 
C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I ON 
stance as Subject, the substance remains self-consciousness's 
own Self. In the first of the two alternative propositions, the 
substantiality of the Subject merely vanishes, and in the second, 
Substance is only a predicate, and both sides are thus present 
in each with contrary inequality of value. Here, however, the 
result achieved is the union and permeation of the two natures 
in which both are, with equal value, essential and at the same 
time only moments ; so that Spirit is simultaneously consciousness 
of itself as its objec live s u bs tance, and simple self-consciousness com­
muning with itself. 
750. The religion of Art belongs to the ethical Spirit which 
we earlier saw perish in the condition of right or law, i.e. in the 
proposition : 'The Self as such, the abstract person, is absolute 
Being.' In the ethical life, the Self is submerged in the Spirit 
ofits people, it is the universality that is .filled. But simple individu­
ality raises itself out of this content, and its levity refines it into 
a 'person', into the abstract universality of right or law. In this, 
the reality of the ethical Spirit is lost, and having lost all content, 
the Spirits of national individuals are gathered into a single 
pantheon, not into a pantheon of picture-thought whose power­
less form lets each Spirit go its own way, but into the pantheon 
of abstract universality, of pure thought, which disembodies 
them and imparts to the spiritless Self, to the individual person, 
a being that is in and for itself. 
75 1 .  But this Self has, through its emptiness, let the content 
go free, it is only within itself that consciousness is essence ; its 
own existence, the legal recognition of the person, is the unfilled 
abstraction. What it possesses, therefore, is rather only the 
thought of itself; or in other words, in the mode in which it 
immediately exists and knows itself as object, it is something 
that is not actual. Hence it is only the Stoic independence of 
thought, which passes through the dialectic of the Sceptical 
consciousness to find its truth in that shape which we have 
called the Unhappy Self-consciousness. 
752. This self-consciousness knows what the validity of the 
abstract person amounts to in reality and equally in pure 
thought. It knows that such validity is rather a complete loss ; 
it is itself this conscious loss of itself and the alienation of its 
knowledge about itself. We see that this Unhappy Conscious­
ness constitutes the counterpart and the completion of the 

TH E REVEALED R E L I G I O N  
455 
comic consciousness that is perfectly happy within itself. Into 
the latter, all divine being returns, or it is the complete aliena­
tion of substance. The Unhappy Consciousness, on the other 
hand, is, conversely, the tragic fate of the certainty of self that 
aims to be absolute. It is the consciousness of the loss of all essen­
tial being in this certainty rif itself, and of the loss even of this 
knowledge about itself-the loss of substance as well as of the 
Self, it is the grief which expresses itself in the hard saying that 
'God is dead'. 
753· In the condition of right or law, then, the ethical world 
and the religion of that world are submerged and lost in the 
comic consciousness, and the Unhappy Consciousness is the 
knowledge of this total loss. It has lost both the worth it attached 
to its immediate personality and the worth attached to its per­
sonality as mediated, as thought. Trust in the eternal laws of the 
gods has vanished, and the Oracles, which pronounced on par­
ticular questions, are dumb. The statues are now only stones 
from which the living soul has flown, just as the hymns are 
words from which belief has gone. The tables of the gods pro­
vide no spiritual food and drink, and in his games and festivals 
man no longer recovers the joyful consciousness ofhis unity with 
the divine. The works of the Muse now lack the power of the 
Spirit, for the Spirit has gained its certainty of itself from the 
crushing of gods and men. They have become what they are 
for us now-beautiful fruit already picked from the tree, which 
a friendly Fate has offered us, as a girl might set the fruit before 
us. It cannot give us the actual life in which they existed, not 
the tree that bore them, not the earth and the elements which 
constituted their substance, not the climate which gave them 
their peculiar character, nor the cycle of the changing seasons 
that governed the process of their growth. So Fate does not re­
store their world to us along with the works of antique Art, it 
gives not the spring and summer of the ethical life in which 
they blossomed and ripened, but only the veiled recollection 
of that actual world. Our active enjoyment of them is therefore 
not an act of divine worship through which our consciousness 
might come to its perfect truth and fulfilment; it is an external 
activity-the wiping-off of some drops of rain or specks of dust 
from these fruits, so to speak--one which erects an intricate 
scaffolding of the dead elements of their outward existence-

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
the language, the historical circumstances, etc. in place of the 
inner elements of the ethical life which environed, created, and 
inspired them. And all this we do, not in order to enter into 
their very life but only to possess an idea of them in our imagina­
tion. But,just as the girl who offers us the plucked fruits is more 
than the Nature which directly provides them-the Nature 
diversified into their conditions and elements, the tree, air, 
light, and so on-because she sums all this up in a higher mode, 
in the gleam of her self-conscious eye and in the gesture with 
which she offers them, so, too, the Spirit of the Fate that presents 
us with those works of art is more than the ethical life and the 
actual world of that nation, for it is the inwardizing in us of the 
Spirit which in them was still [only] outwardly manifested ; it 
is the Spirit of the tragic Fate which gathers all those indivi­
dual gods and attributes of the [divine] substance into one 
pantheon, into the Spirit that is itself conscious of itself as 
Spirit. 
754· All the conditions for its production are to hand, and 
this totality of its conditions constitutes its coming-to-be, its 
Notion, or the production of it in principle. The circle of the crea­
tions of Art embraces the forms in which absolute substance 
has externalized itself. Absolute substance is in the form of in­
dividuality as a Thing, an object of sensuous consciousness that 
simply is-as pure language, or the coming-to-be of a shape 
whose existence does not go outside of the Self, but is purely 
a vanishing object ;  as immediate unity with the universal self­
consciousness in its inspiration, and as a mediated unity in the 
act of the Cult ; as a beautiful, self-like corporeality ; and lastly, 
as existence raised into an ideational presentation and the 
expansion of this existence into a world which finally collects 
itself together into a universality which is at the same time a 
pure certainty of itself. These forms, and on the other side, the 
world of the person and of law, the destructive ferocity of the 
freed elements of the content, as also the person as thought in 
Stoicism, and the unstable restlessness of the Sceptical con­
sciousness, constitute the [audience or] periphery of shapes 
which stands impatiently expectant round the birthplace of 
Spirit as it becomes self-consciousness [i.e. round the manger 
at Bethlehem]. The grief and longing of the Unhappy Self-con­
sciousness which permeates them all is their centre and the com-

T H E  REVEALED R E L I G I O N  
457 
mon birth-pang of its emergence-the simplicity of the pure 
Notion, which contains those forms as its moments. 
755· Spirit has in it the two sides which are presented above 
as two converse propositions : one is this, that substance 
alienates itself from itself and becomes self-consciousness ; the 
other is the converse, that self-consciousness alienates itselffrom 
itself and gives itself the nature of a Thing, or makes itself a 
universal Self. Both sides have in this way encountered each 
other, and through this encounter their true union has come 
into being. The externalization [or kenosis] of substance, its 
growth into self-consciousness, expresses the transition into the 
opposite, the unconscious transition of necessity ; in other words, 
that substance is in itself self-consciousness. Conversely, the 
externalization of self-consciousness expresses this, that it is in 
itself the universal essence, or-since the Self is pure being-for­
self which in its opposite communes with itself-that it is just 
because substance is self-consciousness for the Self, that it is 
Spirit. Of this Spirit, which has abandoned the form of Sub­
stance and enters existence in the shape of self-consciousness, 
it may therefore be said-if we wish to employ relationships de­
rived from natural generation-that it has an actual mother but 
an implicit father. For actuality or self-consciousness, and the in­
itself as substance, are its two moments through whose reciprocal 
externalization, each becoming the other, Spirit comes into ex­
istence as this their unity. 
756. In so far as self-consciousness one-sidedly grasps only 
its own externalization, then, even though its object is for it just 
as much Being as Self, and it knows all existence to be spiritual 
in nature, nevertheless true Spirit has still not yet come to be 
explicitly for self-consciousness, inasmuch as being in general, 
or Substance, has not equally, on its side, implicitly externalized 
itself and become self-consciousness. For in that case, then, all 
existence is spiritual being only from the standpoint of con­
sciousness, not in its own self. Spirit is in this way only imagined 
into existence ; this imagining is the visionary dreaming which 
insinuates into both Nature and history, into the world and into 
the mythical ideas of earlier religions, another, esoteric mean­
ing than that which lies on the surface, and in the case of reli­
gions, another meaning than the one known in them by the 
self-consciousness whose religions they were. But this meaning 

C. ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
is one that is borrowed, a garment which does not cover the 
nakedness of the appearance and merits neither belief nor 
reverence ; it is no more than the dark night and self-delusive 
rapture of consciousness. 
7 57. If, therefore, this meaning of the objective is not to be 
mere imagination, it must possess intrinsic being, must originally 
appear in consciousness as stemming from the Notion and must 
come forth in its necessity. It is thus that self-knowing Spirit 
has arisen for us, viz. through the cognition of the immediate con­
sciousness, or of the consciousness of the object in its immediacy, 
through its necessary movement. This Notion which, as imme­
diate, had also the shape of immediacy for its consciousness, 
has, in the second place, given itself the shape of implicit self­
consciousness, i.e. by just the same necessity of the Notion by 
which being or the immediacy which is the content-less object of 
sensuous consciousness, externalizes itself and becomes the 'I' 
for consciousness. But the immediate in-itself or the necessity that 
simply is, is itself different from the in-itself that thinks, or from 
the cognition of necessity-a difference, however, which at the 
same time does not lie outside of the Notion, for the simple unity 
of the Notion is immediate being itself. The Notion is at once a 
self-externalization or a coming-to-be of intuitively perceived 
necessity, and also in this necessity is in communion with itself, 
knows it and comprehends it. The immediate in-itself of Spirit 
that gives itself the shape of self-consciousness means nothing 
else than that the actual World-Spirit has attained to this know­
ledge of itself; it is then, too, that this knowledge also first enters 
its consciousness. How that came about we have already seen. 
758. That absolute Spirit has given itself implicitly the shape 
of self-consciousness, and therefore has also given it for its con­
sciousness-this now appears as the belief of the world that Spirit 
is immediately present as a self-conscious Being, i.e. as an actual 
man, that the believer is immediately certain of Spirit, sees ,feels, 
and hears this divinity. Thus this self-consciousness is not imagi­
nation, but is actual in the believer. Consciousness, then, does 
not start from its inner life, from thought, and unite within itself 
the thought of God with existence ; on the contrary, it starts 
from an existence that is immediately present and recognizes 
God therein. The moment of immediate being is present in the 
content of the Notion in such a way that the religious Spirit, 

T H E  R E V E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
459 
in the return of all essentiality into consciousness, has become 
a simple positive Self, just as the actual Spirit as such in the Un­
happy Consciousness was just this simple, self-conscious nega­
tivity. The Self of existent Spirit has, as a result, the form of 
complete immediacy ; it is posited neither as something thought 
or imagined, nor as something produced, as is the case with 
the immediate Self in natural religion, and also in the religion 
of Art ; on the contrary, this God is sensuously and directly 
beheld as a Self, as an actual individual man ; only so is this 
God self-consciousness. 
7 59· This incarnation of the divine Being, or the fact that 
it essentially and directly has the shape of self-consciousness, 
is the simple content of the absolute religion. In this religion 
the divine Being is known as Spirit, or this religion is the con­
_sciousness of the divine Being that it is Spirit. For Spirit is the 
knowledge of oneself in the externalization of oneself; the being 
that is the movement of retaining its self-identity in its other­
ness. This, however, is Substance, in so far as Substance is, in 
its accidents, at the same time reflected into itself, not in­
different to them as to something unessential or present in them 
as in an alien element, but in them it is within itself, i.e. in so 
far as it is Subject or Self. Consequently, in this religion the 
divine Being is revealed. Its being revealed obviously consists 
in this, that what it is, is known. But it is known precisely in 
its being known as Spirit, as a Being that is essentially a self­
conscious Being. For there is something hidden from consciousness 
in its object if the object is for consciousness an 'other' or some­
thing alien, and if it does not know it as its own self. This con­
cealment ceases when the absolute Being qua Spirit is the object 
of consciousness ; for then the object has the form of Self in its 
relation to consciousness, i.e. consciousness knows itself imme­
diately in the object, or is manifest to itself in the object. Con­
sciousness is manifest to itself only in its own certainty of itself; 
its object now is the Self, but the Self is nothing alien ; on the 
contrary, it is the indissoluble unity with itself, the universal that 
is immediately such. It is the pure Notion, pure Thought or 
being-for-self which is immediately being, and consequently being­
for-an other, and as this being-for-an other is immediately returned 
into itself and in communion with itself; it is, therefore, that 
which is truly and alone revealed. The Good, the Righteous, 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G IO N  
the Holy, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and so on, are predi­
cates of a Subject-universal moments which have their sup­
port on this point and only are when consciousness withdraws 
into thought. As long as it is they that are known, their ground 
and essence, the Subject itself is not yet revealed ; and sअp1ilarly, 
the determinations of the universal are not this universal itself. The 
Subject itself, and consequently this pure universal too, is, how­
ever, revealed as Self, for this is just this inner being which is 
reflected into itself and which is immediately present and is the 
self-certainty of the Selffor which it is present. This-to be in 
accordance with its Notion that which is revealed-this is, then, 
the true shape ofSpirit, and this its shape, the Notion, is likewise 
alone its essence and its substance. Spirit is known as self-con­
sciousness and to this self-consciousness it is immediately 
revealed, for Spirit is this self-consciousness itself. The divine 
nature is the same as the human, and it is this unity that is 
beheld. 
760. Here, therefore, consciousness-or the mode in which 
essence is for consciousness itself, i.e. its shape-is, in fact, identi­
cal with its self-consciousness. This shape is itself a self-con­
sciousness ; it is thus at the same time an object in the mode 
of immediate being, and this being, likewise immediately, has 
the significance of pure Thought, of absolute Being. The abso­
lute Being which exists as an actual self-consciousness seems 
to have come down from its eternal simplicity, but by thus com­
ing down it has in fact attained for the first time to its own highest 
essence. For it is only when the Notion of essence has reached 
its simple purity that it is the absolute abstraction which is pure 
Thought and hence the pure individuality of Self, just as, on 
account of its simplicity, it is also the immediate or being. What 
is called sense-consciousness is just this pure abstraction, it is this 
thinking for which being is the immediate. Thus the lowest 
is at the same time the highest ; the revealed which has come 
forth wholly on to the surface is precisely therein the most pro­
found. That the supreme Being is seen, heard, etc. as an imme­
diately present self-consciousness, this therefore is indeed the 
consummation of its Notion ; and through this consummation 
that Being is immediately present qua supreme Being. 
76 I .  This immediate existence is at the same time not solely 
and simply immediate consciousness, but is religious conscious-

THE REVEALED R E L I G I O N  
ness ; the immediacy has inseparably the meaning not only of 
a self-consciousness that immediately is, but also of the supreme 
Being as an absolute essence in pure thought, or absolute Being. 
What we are conscious of in our Notion, viz. that Being is 
Essence, is what the religious consciousness is also conscious of. 
This unity of Being and .Essence, of Thought which is imme­
diately Existence, is both the thought of this religious conscious­
ness, or its mediated knowledge, and equally its immediate know­
ledge ; for this unity of Being and Thought is self-cqnsciousness 
and is itself immediately present, or the thought unity has at the 
same time this [existential] shape of what it is. Here, therefore, 
God is revealed as He is ; He is immediately present as He is in 
Himself, i.e. He is immediately present as Spirit. God is attainable 
in pure speculative knowledge alone and is only in that know­
ledge, and is only that knowledge itself, for He is Spirit; and 
this speculative knowledge is the knowledge of the revealed reli­
gion. Speculative knowledge knows God as Thought or pure 
Essence, and knows this Thought as simple Being and as Exist­
ence, and Existence as the negativity of itself, hence as Self, as 
the Self that is at the same time this individual, and also the 
universal, Self. It is precisely this that the revealed religion 
knows. The hopes and expectations of the world up till now 
had pressed forward solely to this revelation, to behold what 
absolute Being is, and in it to find itself. The joy of beholding 
itself in absolute Being enters self-consciousness and seizes the 
whole world ; for it is Spirit, it is the simple movement of those 
pure moments, which expresses just this : that only when abso­
lute Being is beheld as an immediate self-consciousness is it known 
as Spirit. 
762. This Notion of Spirit that knows itself as Spirit is itself 
the immediate Notion and is not yet developed. Absolute Being 
is Spirit, i.e it has appeared, it is revealed ; this first revelation 
is itself immediate ;  but the immediacy is equally pure mediation 
or thought, and it must therefore exhibit this in its own sphere 
as such. Looking at this more closely, Spirit, in the immediacy 
of self-consciousness, is this individual self-consciousness, and so 
in an antithesis to the universal self-consciousness. It is an exclu­
sive One or unit which has the still unresolved form of a sen­
suous 'other' for the consciousness for which it is immediately 
present. This 'other' does not as yet know Spirit as its own, 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
i.e. Spirit as an individual Self is not yet equally the universal 
Self, the Self of everyone. In other words, the shape has not 
as yet the form of the Notion, i.e. of the universal Self, of the 
Self that in its immediate actuality is at the same time a super­
seded Self, viz. Thought, universality, without losing its actu­
ality in this universality. But the proximate form of this uni­
versality, the form that is itself immediate, is not yet the form 
of thought itself, of the Notion as Notion, but the universality of 
reality, the 'allness' or totality of the selves, and the raising of 
existence into an ideational form ; aआ in every case, and to cite 
a specific example, the superseded This of sense is, in the first 
place, the Thing of perception, not yet the universal of the Under­
standing. 
763. This individual man, then, which absolute Being has 
revealed itself to be, accomplishes in himself as an individual 
the movement of sensuous Being. He is the immediately present 
God ; consequently, his 'being' passes over into 'having been'. Con­
sciousness, for which God is thus sensuously present, ceases to 
see and to hear Him ; it has seen and heard Him ; and it is 
because it only has seen and heard Him that it first becomes 
itself spiritual consciousness. Or, in other words,just as formerly 
He rose up for consciousness as a sensuous existence, now He has 
arisen in the Spirit. For a consciousness that sensuously sees and 
hears Him is itself a merely immediate consciousness, which has 
not overcome the disparity of objectivity, has not taken it back 
into pure thought : it knows this objective individual, but not 
itself, as Spirit. In the vanishing of the immediate existence 
known to be absolute Being the immediacy receives its negative 
moment ; Spirit remains the immediate Self of actuality, but 
as the universal self-consciousness of the [religious] community, a 
self-consciousness which reposes in its own substance, just as 
in it this Substance is a universal Subject: not the individual 
by himself, but together with the consciousness of the com­
munity and what he is for this community, is the complete 
whole of the individual as Spirit. 
764. Remoteness in time and space is, however, only the imper­
fect form in which the immediate mode [of existence] is given 
a mediated or universal character ; it is merely dipped superfici­
ally in the element of Thought, is preserved in it as a sensuous 
mode, and not made one with the nature of Thought itself. It 

T H E  R E V E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
is merely raised into the realm of picture-thinking, for this is 
the synthetic combination of sensuous immediacy and its uni­
versality or Thought. 
765. This form of picture-thinking constitutes the specific mode 
in which Spirit, in this community, becomes aware of itself. This 
form is not yet Spirit's self-consciousness that has advanced to 
its Notion qua Notion : the mediation is still incomplete. This 
combination of Being and Thought is, therefore, defective in 
that spiritual Being is still burdened with an unreconciled split 
into a Here and a Beyond. The content is the true content, but 
all its moments, when placed in the medium of picture-think­
ing, have the character of being uncomprehended [in terms of 
the Notion], of appearing as completely independent sides 
which are externally connected with each other. Before the true 
content can also receive its true form for consciousness, a higher 
formative development of consciousness is necessary ; it must 
raise its intuition of absolute Substance into the Notion, and 
equate its consciousness with its self-consciousness for itself, just 
as this has happened for us, or in itself 
766. This content is to be considered as it exists in its con­
sciousness. Absolute Spirit is the content, and is thus in the shape 
of its truth. But its truth is to be not merely the Substance or 
the in-itself of the community, nor merely to step forth out of 
this inwardness into the objectivity of picture-thinking, but to 
become an actual Self, to reflect itself into itself and to be Sub­
ject. This, therefore, is the movement which it accomplishes in 
its community, or this is the life of the community. Con­
sequently, what this self-revealing Spirit is in andfor itself, is not 
elicited by, as it were, unravelling the rich life of Spirit in the 
community and tracing it back to its original strands, to the 
ideas, say, of the primitive imperfect community, or even to 
the utterances of the actual man himself. This 'tracing-back' 
is based on the instinct to get to the Notion ; but it confuses 
the origin of the Notion as the immediate existence of its first 
manifestation with the simplicity of the Notion. What results 
from this impoverishment ofSpirit, from getting rid of the idea of 
the community, and its action with regard to its idea, is not the 
Notion, but rather bare externality and singularity, the historical 
manner of the manifestation in its immediacy and the non-spiri­
tual recollection of a supposed individual figure and of its past. 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
767. Spirit is the content of its consciousness at first in the 
form of pure substance, or is the content of its pure consciousness. 
This element of Thought is the movement of descending into 
existence or into individuality. The middle term between these 
two is their synthetic connection, the consciousness of passing 
into otherness, or picture-thinking as such. The third moment 
is the return from picture-thinking and otherness, or the ele­
ment of self-consciousness itself. These three moments con­
stitute Spirit ; its dissociation in picture-thinking consists in its 
existing in a specific or determinate mode ; but this determinate­
ness is nothing else than one of its moments. Its complete move'­
ment is therefore this, to diffuse its nature throughout each of 
its moments as in its native element; since each of these spheres 
completes itself within itself, this reflection of one sphere into 
itself is at the same time the transition into another. Picture­
thinking constitutes the middle term between pure thought and 
self-consciousness as such, and is only one of the specific or 
determinate forms ; at the same time, however, as we have seen, 
its character-that of being a synthetic connection-is diffused 
throughout all these elements and is their common deter­
minateness. 
768. The content itself which we have to consider has partly 
been met with already as the idea of the 'unhappy' and the 
'believing' consciousness ; but in the former, it has the character 
of a content produced from consciousness for which Spirit 
yearns, and in which Spirit cannot be satiated or find rest, 
because it is not yet in itself its own content, or is not the Sub­
stance of it. In the 'believing' consciousness, on the other hand, 
the content was regarded as the self-less Being of the world, or 
as essentially an objective content of picture-thinking, of a 
picture-thinking that simply flees from reality and consequently 
is without the certainty of self-consciousness, which is separated 
from it partly by the conceit of knowing and partly by pure 
insight. The consciousness of the community, on the other 
hand, possesses the content for its substance, just as the content 
is the certainty of the community's own Spirit. 
769. When Spirit is at first conceived of as substance in the 
element of pure thought, it is immediately simple and self­
identical, eternal essence, which does not, however, have this 
abstract meaning of essence, but the meaning of absolute Spirit. 

THE R EV EALED R EL I G I O N  
Only Spirit is not a 'meaning', is not what is inner, but what 
is actual. Therefore simple, eternal essence would be Spirit only 
as a form of empty words, if we went no further than the idea 
expressed in the phrase 'simple, eternal essence'. But simple 
essence, because it is an abstraction, is, in fact, the negative in 
its own self and, moreover, the negativity of thought, or nega­
tivity as it is in itself in essence ; i.e. simple essence is absolute 
diference from itself, or its pure othering of itself. As essence it 
is only in itself or for us ; but since this purity is just abstraction 
or negativity, it is for itself, or is the Self, the Notion. It is thus 
objective ; and since picture-thinking interprets and expresses 
as a happening what has just been expressed as the necessity of 
the Notion, it is said that the eternal Being begets for itself an 
'other'. But in this otherness it has at the same time immediately 
returned into itself; for the difference is the difference in itself, 
i.e. it is immediately distinguished only from itself and is thus 
the unity that has returned into itself. 
770. There are thus three distinct moments : essence, being­
for-self which is the otherness of essence and for which essence 
is, and being-for-self, or the knowledge of itself in the 'other'. 
Essence beholds only its own self in its being-for-self; in this 
externalization of itself it stays only with itself: the being-for­
self that shuts itself out from essence is essence's knowledge of its 
own self It is the word which, when uttered, leaves behind, 
externalized and emptied, him who uttered it, but which is as 
immediately heard, and only this hearing of its own self is 
the existence of the Word. Thus the distinctions made are im­
mediately resolved as soon as they are made, and are made as 
soon as they are resolved, and what is true and actual is precisely 
this immanent circular movement. 
77 1 .  This immanent movement proclaims the absolute 
Being as Spirit. Absolute Being that is not grasped as Spirit is 
merely the abstract void, just as Spirit that is not grasped as 
this movement is only an empty word. When its moments are 
grasped in their purity, they are the restless Notions which only 
are, in being in themselves their own opposite, and in finding 
their rest in the whole. But the picture-thinking of the religious 
community is not this speculative thinking ; it has the content, 
but without its necessity, and instead of the form of the Notion 
it brings into the realm of pure consciousness the natural rela-

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
tionships of father and son. Since this consciousness, even in 
its thinking, remains at the level of picture-thinking, absolute 
Being is indeed revealed to it, but the moments of this Being, 
on account of this [empirically] synthetic presentation, partly 
themselves fall asunder so that they are not related to one 
another through their own Notion, and partly this consciousness 
retreats from this its pure object, relating itself to it only in 
an external manner. The object is revealed to it by something 
alien, and it does not recognize itself in this thought of Spirit, 
does not recognize the nature of pure self-consciousness. In 
so far as the form of picture-thinking and of those relationships 
derived from Nature must be transcended, and especially also 
the standpoint which takes the moments of the movement 
which Spirit is, as isolated immovable Substances or Subjects, 
instead of transient moments-the transcending of this stand­
point is to be regarded as a compulsion on the part of the 
Notion, as we pointed out earlier in connection with another 
aspect. But since this compulsion is instinctive, self-conscious­
ness misunderstands its own nature, rejects the content as well 
as the form and, what amounts to the same thing, degrades the 
content into a historical pictorial idea and to an heirloom 
handed down by tradition. In this way, it is only the purely 
external element in belief that is retained and as something 
therefore that is dead and cannot be known ; but the inner ele­
ment in faith has vanished, because this would be the Notion 
that knows itself as Notion. 
772. Absolute Spirit as pictured in pure essence is not indeed 
abstract pure essence ; for abstract essence has sunk to the level 
of being merely an element, just because it is only a moment in 
[the life of] Spirit. But the representation of Spirit in this ele­
ment is charged with the same defect of form which essence as 
such has. Essence is an abstraction and is therefore the negation 
of its simple, unitary nature, is an 'other' ; similarly, Spirit in 
the element of essence is the form of simple oneness, which there­
fore is equally essentially an othering of itself. Or, what is the 
same thing, the relation of the eternal Being to its being-for­
selfis the immediately simple one of pure thought. In this simple 
beholding of itself in the 'other', the otherness is therefore not 
posited as such ; it is the difference which, in pure thought, is 
immediately no dijference; a loving recognition in which the two 

THE REVEALED R E L I G I O N  
sides, as regards their essence, do not stand in an antithetical 
relation to each other. Spirit that is expressed in the element 
of pure thought is itself essentially this, to be not merely in this 
element, but to be actual Spirit, for in its Notion lies otherness 
itself, i.e. the supersession of the pure Notion that is only 
thought. 
773· The element of pure thought, because it is an abstract 
element, is itself rather the 'other' of its simple, unitary nature, 
and therefore passes over into the element proper to picture­
thinking-the element in which the moments of the pure 
Notion obtain a substantial existence relatively to one another, 
and also are Subjects which do not possess for a third the in­
difference towards each other of [mere] being but, being re­
flected into themselves, spontaneously part asunder and also 
place themselves over against each other. 
774· Thus the merely eternal or abstract Spirit becomes an 
'other' to itself, or enters into existence, and directly into imme­
diate existence. Accordingly, it creates a world. This 'creating' 
is picture-thinking's word for the Notion itself in its absolute 
movement ; or to express the fact that the simple which has been 
asserted as absolute, or pure thought, just because it is abstract, 
is rather the negative, and hence the self-opposed or 'other' of 
itself; or because, toputthesamethinginanotherform, that which 
is posited as essence is simple immediacy or being, but qua imme­
diacy or being lacks Self and, therefore, lacking inwardness is 
passive, or a being:for-another. This being:for-another is at the same 
time a world; Spirit, in the determination of being-for-another, 
is the inert subsistence of the moments formerly enclosed within 
pure thought, is therefore the dissolution of their simple uni­
versality and the parting asunder of them into their own parti­
cularity. 
775· But the world is not merely this Spirit cast out and dis­
persed into the fulness [of natural existence] and its external 
ordering; for since Spirit is essentially the simple Self, this Self 
is equally present in the world : it is the existent Spirit, which 
is the individual Self which has consciousness and distinguishes 
itself as 'other', or as world, from itself. This individual Self as 
at first thus immediately posited, is not yet Spirit for itself; it 
does not exist as Spirit ; it can be called 'innocent' but hardly 
'good'. Before it can in fact be Self and Spirit it must first 

G. ( C C . )  R E L I G I O N  
become an 'other' to its own self, just as the eternal Being 
exhibits itself as the movement of being self-identical in its oth­
erness. Since this Spirit is determined as at first an immediate 
existence, or as dispersed into the multifariousness of its con­
sciousness, its othering of itself is the withdrawal into itself, or 
self-centredness, of knowing as such. Immediate existence sud­
denly turns into thought, or mere sense-consciousness into 
consciousness of thought; and, moreover, because the thought 
stems from immediacy or is conditioned thought, it is not pure 
knowledge, but thought that is charged with otherness and is, 
therefore, the self-opposed thought of Good and Evil. Man is 
pictorially thought of in this way : that it once happened, without 
any necessity, that he lost the form of being at one with himself 
through plucking the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of Good 
and Evil, and was expelled from the state of innocence, from 
Nature which yielded its fruits without toil, and from Paradise, 
from the garden with its creatures. 
776. Since this withdrawal into itself or self-centredness of 
the existent consciousness immediately makes it self-discordant, 
Evil appears as the primary existence of the inwardly-turned 
consciousness ; and because the thoughts of Good and Evil are 
utterly opposed and this antithesis is not yet resolved, this con­
sciousness is essentially only evil. But at the same time, on 
account of just this antithesis, there is also present the good con­
sciousness opposing it, and their relation to each other. In so 
far as immediate existence suddenly changes into Thought, and 
the being-within-self is on the one hand itself a thinking, while 
on the other hand the moment of the othering of essence is more 
precisely determined by it-[because of this double aspect] the 
becoming of Evil can be shifted further back out of the existent 
world even into the primary realm of Thought. It can therefore 
be said that it is the very first-born Son of Light [Lucifer] him­
self who fell because he withdrew into himself or, became self­
centred, but that in his place another was at once created. Such 
a form of expression as 'fallen' which, like the expression 'Son', 
belongs, moreover, to picture-thinking and not to the Notion, 
degrades the moments of the Notion to the level of picture­
thinking or carries picture-thinking over into the realm of 
thought. Likewise it makes no difference if we co-ordinate a 
multiplicity of other shapes with the simple thought of otherness 

THE REVEALED R E L I G I O N  
in the eternal Being and transfer the self-centredness into them. 
In fact, this co-ordination must be approved, since by means 
of it this moment of otherness also expresses diversity, as it should ; 
and, moreover, not as plurality in general, but also as a specific 
diversity, so that one part, the Son, is that which is simple and 
knows itself to be essential Being, while the other part is the 
alienation, the externalization ofbeing_-for-selfwhich lives only 
to praise that Being; to this part, then, can be assigned the tak­
ing back again of the externalized being-for-self and the with­
drawal into self of the evil principle. In so far as the otherness 
falls into two parts, Spirit might, as regards its moments-if 
these are to be counted-be more exactly expressed as a qua­
ternity in unity or, because the quantity itself again falls into 
two parts, viz. one part which has remained good and the other 
which has become evil, might even be expressed as a five-in­
one. But to count the moments can be reckoned as altogether 
useless, since in the first place what is differentiated is itself just 
as much only one thing-viz. the thought of the difference which 
is only one thought-as it [the differentiated] is this differenti­
ated element, the second relatively to the first. And, secondly, 
it is useless to count because the thought which grasps the Many 
in a One must be dissolved out of its universality and differenti­
ated into more than three or four distinct components ; and this 
universality appears, in contrast to the absolute determinate­
ness of the abstract unit, the principle of number, as indeter­
minateness with respect to number as such, so that we could 
speak only of numbers in general, i.e. not of a specific number 
of differences. Here, therefore, it is quite superfluous to think 
of numbers and counting at all, just as in other respects the 
mere difference of quantity and amount has no notional signifi­
cance and makes no difference. 
777. Good and Evil were the specific differences yielded by 
the thought of Spirit as immediately existent. Since their anti­
thesis has not yet been resolved and they are conceived of as 
the essence of thought, each of them having an independent 
existence of its own, man is a self lacking any essential being 
and is the synthetic ground of their existence and their conflict. 
But these universal powers just as much belong to the self, or 
the self is their actuality. In accordance with this moment, it 
therefore comes to pass that, just as Evil is nothing other than 

470 
C. ( C C . ) R E L I G I O N  
the self-centredness of the natural existence of Spirit, so, con­
versely, Good enters into actuality and appears as an existent 
self-consciousness. That which in the pure thought of Spirit is 
in general merely hinted at as the othering of the divine Being, 
here comes nearer to its realization for picture-thinking : this 
realization consists for picture-thinking in the self-abasement 
of the divine Being who renounces his abstract and non-actual 
nature. Picture-thinking takes the other aspect, evil, to be a 
happening alien to the divine Being ; to grasp it in the divine 
Being itself as the wrath of God, this demands from picture-think­
ing, struggling against its limitations, its supreme and most 
strenuous effort, an effort which, since it lacks the Notion, 
remains fruitless. 
778. The alienation of the divine Being is thus made explicit 
in its twofold form : the Self of Spirit and its simple thought 
are the two moments whose absolute unity is Spirit itself. Its 
alienation consists in the moments going apart from one 
another and in one of them having an unequal value compared 
with the other. This disparity is therefore twofold, and two rela­
tionships arise whose common moments are those just given. 
In one of them, the divine Being counts as essence, while natural 
existence and the Self count as the unessential aspect which is 
to be superseded. In the other, on _the contrary, being-for-self 
counts as the essential and the simple, divine Being as unessen­
tial. Their still empty middle term is existence in general, the 
bare community of their two moments. 
779· This antithesis is resolved not so much through the con­
flict between the two moments which are pictured as separate 
and independent Beings : their very independence implies that 
each of them in its own self, through its Notion, must resolve 
itself. The conflict begins where both cease to be these minglings 
of thought and of independent existence, and where they con­
front each other only as thoughts. For then they are, as specific 
Notions, only in the relation of an antithesis ; as independent, 
on the other hand, they have their essentiality outside of their 
antithesis. Their movement is, therefore, their own free and 
spontaneous movement. As, then, the movement of the two 
sides is an intrinsic movement, since it is to be considered in the 
sides themselves, it is initiated by that side which is determined 
as possessing being-in-itself as contrasted with the other. This 

T H E  R E V E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
47 1 
is depicted as a spontaneous act ; but the necessity for its exter­
nalization lies in the Notion that being-in-itself, which is so de­
termined in the antithesis, has just for that reason no genuine 
subsistence. It is, therefore, that side which has not being-for­
selfbut simple being as its essence that alienates itself from itself, 
yields to death, and thereby reconciles absolute essence with 
itself. For, in this movement, it manifests itself as Spirit ; abstract 
essence is alienated from itself, it has natural existence and self­
like actuality ; this its otherness, or its sensuous presence, is taken 
back again by the second othering and posited as superseded, 
as universal. The [absolute] essence has thereby come to be its 
own Self in its sensuous presence ; the immediate existence of 
actuality has ceased to be something alien and external for the 
absolute essence, since that existence is superseded, is universal. 
This death is, therefore, its resurrection as Spirit. 
780. The transcended immediate presence of the self-con­
scious essence has the form of universal self-consciousness. This 
Notion of the transcended individual self that is absolute Being 
immediately expresses, therefore, the establishing of a com­
munity which, tarrying hitherto in the sphere of picture-think­
ing, now returns into itself as the Self; and in doing this, Spirit 
passes over from the second element constituting it, i.e. from 
picture-thinking, into the third element, self-consciousness as 
such. If we further consider the behaviour of picture-thinking 
in its progress, we find first of all the declaration that the divine 
Being takes on human nature. Here it is already asserted that 
in themselves the two are not separate ; likewise in the declaration 
that the divine Beingfrom the beginning externalizes itself, that 
its existence withdraws into itself and becomes self-centred and 
evil, implies, though it does not expressly assert, that this evil 
existence is not in itself something alien to the divine Being. 
Absolute Being would be but an empty name if in truth there 
were for it an 'other', if there were a 'fall' from it ; on the con­
trary, the moment of being-within-self constitutes the essential 
moment of the Self of Spirit. That this being-within-self and the 
actuality which follows from it belong to absolute Being itself, 
this which for us is Notion, and in so far as it is Notion, appears 
to the picture-thinking consciousness as an incomprehensible 
happening ; the in-itself assumes for it the form of indijferent being. 
The thought that those moments of absolute Being and of the 

472 
C. ( C C . )  R E L I G IO N  
self-centred Self which seem to flee from each other are not 
separate, also appears in this picture-thinking-for it does pos­
sess the true content-but this picture-thought comes later, in 
the externalization of the divine Being who is made flesh. The 
picture-thought is in this way still immediate, and therefore not 
spiritual, i.e. it knows the human form of the divine Being at 
first only as a particular, not yet as a universal, form ; it be­
comes spiritual for this consciousness in the movement whereby 
this divine Being in human shape sacrifices his immediate 
existenceagainandreturnstothedivineBeing: onlywhenessence 
is reflected into itself is it Spirit. In this picture-thought there 
is depicted the reconciliation of the divine Being with its 'other' 
in general, and specifically with the thought of it-Evil. If 
this reconciliation is notionally expressed by saying that it con­
sists in the fact that Evil is in itself the same as Goodness, or 
again that the divine Being is the same as Nature in its whole 
extent, or that Nature separated from the divine Being is simply 
nothing-we must regard this as an unspiritual way of talking 
and one that is necessarily bound to give rise to misunderstand­
ings. If Evil is the same as Goodness, then Evil is just not Evil, 
nor Goodness Good : on the contrary, both are suspended 
moments-Evil in general is self-centred being-for-self, and 
Goodness is what is simple and without a self. When thus 
expressed in terms of their Notion, their unity is at once evident ; 
for self-centred being-for-self is simple knowing, and simple 
[being] that lacks a Self is equally pure self-centred being-for 
self. If, therefore, it must be said, that according to this their 
Notion, Good and Evil, i.e. in so far as they are not Good and 
Evil, are the same, it must also no less emphatically be asserted 
that they are not the same, but are utterly dijferent ;  for simple 
being-for-self, or pure knowing too, is each in its own self 
equally pure negativity or absolute difference. The whole is 
only complete when the two propositions are made together, 
and when the first is asserted and maintained, it must be 
countered by clinging to the other with invincible stubbornness. 
Since both are equally right, they are both equally wrong, and 
the mistake consists in taking such abstract forms as 'the same' 
and 'not the same', 'identity' and 'non-identity', to be some­
thing true, fixed, and actual, and in resting on them. Neither 
the one nor the other has truth ; the truth is just their movement 

T H E  R E V E A L E D  R E L I G ION 
473 
in which simple sameness is an abstraction and hence absolute 
difference, but this, as difference in itself, is distinguished from 
itself and is therefore selfsameness. This is precisely the case with 
the 'selfsameness' of the divine Being and Nature in general, 
and human nature in particular : the former is Nature in so far 
as it is not essential Being, and the latter is divine according 
to its essence. But it is Spirit in which the truth of these two 
abstract sides is made explicit, viz. by reducing them to 
suspended moments, an explication which cannot be expressed 
by the judgement and the lifeless 'is' which forms its copula. 
Similarly, Nature is nothing apart from its essence ; but this same 
'nothing' just as much is ; it is an absolute abstraction, and thus 
pure thought or being-within-self, and with the moment of its 
antithesis to the spiritual unity it is Evil. The difficulty that is 
found in these Notions stems solely from clinging to the 'is' and 
forgetting the thinking of the Notions in which the moments 
just as much are as they are not-are only the movement which 
is Spirit. It is this spiritual unity, or the unity in which the dif­
ferences are present only as moments or as suspended, which 
has become explicit for the picture-thinking consciousness in 
that reconciliation spoken of above ; and since this unity is the 
universality of self-consciousness, self-consciousness has ceased 
to think in pictures : the movement has returned into self-con­
sciOusness. 
781 .  Spirit is thus posited in the third element, in universal 
self-consciousness ; it is its community. The movement of the com­
munity as self-consciousness that has distinguished itself from 
its picture-thought is to make explicit what has been implicitly 
established. The dead divine Man or human God is in himself 
the universal self-consciousness ; this he has to become explicitly 
for this self-consciousness. Or, since this self-consciousness con­
stitutes one side of the antithesis in picture-thought, viz. the 
side of evil, for which natural existence and individual self-con­
sciousness count as essence-this side which is pictured as inde­
pendent, not yet as a moment, has on account of its indepen­
dence to raise itself through its own nature to Spirit, i.e. it has 
to exhibit in its own self the movement of Spirit. 
782. This self-consciousness is natural Spirit; the self has to 
withdraw from this natural existence and retreat into itself, 
which would mean, to become evil. But this side is already in 

474 
C. ( C C . ) R E L I G I ON 
itself evil ; its withdrawal into itself consists, therefore, in convinc­
ing itself that natural existence is evil. For the consciousness that 
thinks in pictures the world has actually become, and is, evil, 
and the propitiation of the absolute Being was a real event ; 
but in self-consciousness as such, what is thus pictured as 
happening, as an event, has as regards its form the significance 
only of a suspended moment, for the self is the negative and 
hence a knowing-a knowing that is a pure act within con­
sciousness itself. This moment of the negative must likewise 
express itself in the content. That is to say, since absolute Being 
is already reconciled with itself in itself and is a spiritual unity 
in which the parts of the picture-thought are suspended or are 
moments, what is expressed in the content is that each part of 
the picture-thought here receives the opposite meaning to what 
it had before ; each meaning thereby completes itself in the 
other, and only through this self-completion is the content a 
spiritual one ; since the dइterminateness is just as much its oppo­
site, unity in otherness, i.e. the spiritual relationship, is an 
accomplished fact: just as the opposite meanings were united 
previously for us, or in themselves, and even the abstract forms 
of'the same' and 'not the same', of'identity' and 'non-identity' 
were reduced to moments. 
783. If, then, in the picture-thinking consciousness the in­
wardizing of natural self-consciousness was the real existence of 
evil, that inwardizing in the element of self-consciousness is the 
knowledge rif evil as something that is implicit in existence. This 
knowledge is, of course, a genesis of evil, but only a genesis of 
the thought of evil, and is therefore recognized as the first 
moment of reconciliation. For as a withdrawal into itself from 
the immediacy of Nature which is determined as evil, it is a 
forsaking of that immediacy and a dying away of sin. It is not 
natural existence as such that is forsaken by consciousness, but 
natural existence that is at the same time known as evil. The 
immediate movement of withdrawal into self is just as much a 
mediated movement ;  it presupposes itself, or is its own ground :  
that is to say, the ground of the withdrawal into self is that 
Nature has already withdrawn into itself; on account of evil, 
man must withdraw into himself; but evil is itself the with­
drawal into self. This first movement is for that very reason only 
immediate, or the simple Notion of that movement, because it 

THE REVEALED R E L I G I ON 
475 
is the same as what its ground is. The movement or othering 
has therefore still to appear, but in its own more characteristic 
form. 
784. Besides this immediacy, therefore, the mediation of the 
picture-thought is necessary. The knowledge ofN ature as the un­
true existence of Spirit, and this immanently developed uni­
versality of the Self is in itself the reconciliation of Spirit with 
itself. For the self-consciousness that does not think in terms of 
the Notion, this in-itself receives the form of something that pos­
sesses immediate being and is imagimitively represented. Com­
prehension is, therefore, for that self-consciousness not a grasp­
ing of this Notion which knows superseded natural existence 
to be universal and therefore reconciled with itself; but rather 
a grasping of the imaginative idea, that by bringing to pass its 
own externalization, in its historical incarnation and death, the 
divine Being has been reconciled with its [natural] existence. 
The grasping of this idea now expresses more definitely what 
was previously called the spiritual resurrection in this same con­
text, i.e. the coming into existence of God's individual self-con­
sciousness as a universal self-consciousness, or as the religious 
community. The death of the divine Man, as death, is abstract 
negativity, the immediate result of the movement which ends 
only in natural universality. Death loses this natural meaning 
in spiritual self-consciousness, i.e. it comes to be its just stated 
Notion ; death becomes transfigured from its immediate mean­
ing, viz. the non-being of this particular individual, into the uni­
versality of the Spirit who dwells in His community, dies in it 
every day, and is daily resurrected. 
785. Thus what belongs to the element of picture-thinking, viz. 
that absolute Spirit qua individual, or· rather qua particular, 
Spirit, presents the nature of Spirit in its [natural] existence, 
is here shifted into self-consciousness itself, into knowledge that 
preserves itselfin its otherness. This self-consciousness therefore 
does not actually die, as the particular self-consciousness is 
pictured as being actually dead, but its particularity dies away 
in its universality, i.e. in its knowledge, which is essential Being 
reconciling itself with itself. The immediately preceding ele­
ment of picture-thinking is, therefore, here explicitly set aside, 
or it has returned into the Self, into its Notion ; what was in 
the former merely in the element of being has become a Subject. 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G IO N  
By this very fact, the first element too, pure thinking and the 
eternal Spirit therein, is no longer beyond the picturing con­
sciousness or beyond the Self; on the contrary, the return into 
itself of the whole is just this, to contain within itself all the 
moments. The death of the Mediator as grasped by the Self 
is the supersession of his objective existence or his particular 
being-for-self: this particular being-for-self has become a uni­
versal self-consciousness. On the other side, the universal has 
become self-consciousness, just because of this, and the pure or 
non-actual Spirit of mere thinking has become actual. The death 
of the Mediator is the death not only of his natural aspect or 
of his particular being-for-self, not only of the already dead husk 
stripped of its essential Being, but also of the abstraction of the 
divine Being. For the Mediator, in so far as his death has not 
yet completed the reconciliation, is the one-sidedness which 
takes as essential Being the simple element of thought in contrast 
to actuality : this one-sided extreme of the Self does not as yet 
have equal worth with essential Being ; this it first has as Spirit. 
The death of this picture-thought contains, therefore, at the 
same time the death of the abstraction of the divine Being which 
is not posited as Self. That death is the painful feeling of the 
Unhappy Consciousness that God Himself is dead. This hard say­
ing is the expression of innermost simple self-knowledge, the 
return of consciousness into the depths of the night in which 
'1' = '1', a night which no longer distinguishes or knows any­
thing outside of it. This feeling is, in fact, the loss of substance 
and of its appearance over against consciousness ; but it is at 
the same time the pure subjectivity of substance, or the pure 
certainty of itself which it lacked when it was object, or the im­
mediate, or pure essence. This Knowing is the inbreathing of 
the Spirit, whereby Substance becomes Subject, by which its 
abstraction and lifelessness have died, and Substance therefore 
has become actual and simple and universal Self-conscious­
ness. 
786. In this way, therefore, Spirit is self-knowing Spirit ; it 
knows itself; that which is object for it, is, or its picture-thought 
is the true, absolute content; as we saw, it expressed Spirit itself. 
It is at the same time not merely the content of self-conscious­
ness, and not merely object for it, but it is also actual Spirit. This 
it is because it runs through the three elements of its nature ; 

T H E  R EV E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
477 
the movement through its own phases constitutes its actuality. 
What moves itself, that is Spirit ; it is the Subject of the move­
ment and is equally the moving itself, or the substance through 
which the Subject moves. The Notion of Spirit which had 
emerged for us as we entered the sphere of religion, viz. as the 
movement of self-certain Spirit which forgives evil and in so 
doing abandons its own simple unitary nature and rigid un­
changeableness ;- or as the movement in which what is in an 
absolute antithesis recognizes itself as the same as its opposite, 
this recognition bursting forth as the affirmative between these 
extremes-this Notion is intuitively apprehended by the religious 
consciousness to which the absolute Being is revealed, and 
which overcomes the difference between its Self and what it 
intuitively apprehends ; just as it is Subject, so also it is sub­
stance, and hence it is itself Spirit just because and in so far 
as it is this movement. 
787. But the community is not yet perfected in this its self­
consciousness ; in general, its content exists for it in the form 
of picture-thinking, and the duality in this thinking still attaches 
even to the actual spirituality ofthe community, to its return out 
ofi ts picture-thinking; just as the element of pure thought itself 
was burdened with it. The community also does not possess the 
consciousness of what it is ; it is spiritual self-consciousness which 
is not an object to itself as this self-consciousness, or which does 
not unfold itself to a consciousness of itself; but rather, in so far 
as it is consciousness, it has those picture-thoughts which we 
have considered. We see self-consciousness at its last turning­
point become inward to itself and attain to a knowledge of its in­
wardness ; we see it divest itself of its natural existence and 
acquire pure negativity. But the positive meaning, viz. that this 
negativity or pure inwardness of knowledge is just as much the 
self-identical essence--or in other words, that substance has 
here succeeded in becoming absolute self-consciousness-this 
is an 'other' for the devotional consciousness. It grasps this 
aspect, viz. that the pure inwardization of knowledge is in itself 
absolute simplicity or substance, as the picture-thought of 
something which is so, not in virtue of its Notion, but as the 
deed of an alien satisfaction. In other words, it does not. grasp 
the fact that this depth of the pure Self is the power by which 
the abstract divine Being is drawn down from its abstraction and 

C .  ( C C . )  R E L I G ION 
raised to a Self by the power of this pure devotion. The action 
of the Self retains towards it this negative meaning because the 
externalization, the kenosis of substance, is taken by the Sel( 
to be an action implicit in the nature of substance ; the Self 
does not grasp and truly comprehend it, or does not find it in 
its own action as such. This unity of essence and the Self having 
been implicitly achieved, consciousness, too, still has this picture­
thought of its reconciliation, but as a picture-theught. It obtains 
satisfaction by externally attaching to its pure negativity the posi­
tive meaning of the unity of itself with the essential Being; its 
satisfaction thus itself remains burdened with the antithesis of 
a beyond. Its own reconciliation therefore enters its conscious­
ness as something distant, as something in the distantfuture, just 
as the reconciliation which the other Self achieved appears as 
something in the distant past. Just as the individual divine Man 
has a father in principle and only an actual mother, so too the 
universal divine Man, the community, has for its father its own 
doing and knowing, but for its mother, eternal love which it 
only feels, but does not behold in its ईonsciousness as an actual, 
immediate object. Its reconciliation, therefore, is in its heart, but 
its consciousness is still divided against itself and its actual world 
is still disrupted. What enters its consciousness as the in-itself, 
or the side of pure mediation, is a reconciliation that lies in the 
beyond : but what enters it as present, as the side of immediacy 
and existence, is the world which has still to await its transfigura­
tion. The world is indeed implicitly reconciled with the divine 
Being; and regarding the divine Being it is known, of course, 
that it recognizes the object as no longer alienated from it but 
as identical with it in its love. But for self-consciousness, this 
immediate presence still has not the shape of Spirit. The Spirit 
of the community is thus in its immediate consciousness divided 
from its religious consciousness, which declares, it is true, that 
in themselves they are not divided, but this merely implicit unity 
is not realized, or has not yet become an equally absolute being­
for-self. 

( D D . )  A B S O L U T E  K N O W I N G  
V I I I .  ABSO L U T E  K N O W I N G  
788. The Spirit of the revealed religion has not yet sur­
mounted its consciousness as such, or what is the same, its actual 
self-consciousness is not the object of its consciousness ; Spirit 
itself as a whole, and the self-differentiated moments within it, 
fall within the sphere of picture-thinking and in the form of 
objectivity. The content of this picture-thinking is absolute 
Spirit ; and all that now remains to be done is to supersede this 
mere form, or rather, since this belongs to consciousness as such, 
its truth must already have yielded itself in the shape of con­
sciousness. This surmounting of the object of consciousness is 
not to be taken one-sidedly to mean that the object showed itself 
as returning into the Self, but is to be taken more specifically 
to mean not only that the object as such presented itself to the 
Self as vanishing, but rather that it is the externalization of self­
consciousness that posits the thing hood [of the object] and that 
this externalization has not merely a negative but a positive 
meaning, a meaning which is not only for us or in itself, but 
for self-consciousness itself. The negative of the object, or its 
self-supersession, has a positive meaning for self-consciousness, 
i.e. self-consciousness knows the nothingness of the object, on 
the one hand, because it externalizes its own self-for in this 
externalization it posits itself as object, or the object as itself, 
in virtue of the indivisible unity of being-for-self On the other 
hand, this positing at the same time contains the other moment, 
viz. that self-consciousness has equally superseded this external­
ization and objectivity too, and taken it back into itself so that 
it is in communion with itself in its otherness as such. This is 
the movement of consciousness, and in that movement conscious­
ness is the totality of its moments. Equally, consciousness must 
have related itself to the object in accordance with the totality 
of the latter's determinations and have thus grasped it from the 
standpoint of each of them. This totality of its determinations 
establishes the object as an implicitly spiritual being, and it does 

C .  ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
truly become a spiritual being for consciousness when each of 
its individual determinations is grasped as a determination of 
the Self, or through the spiritual relationship to them that was 
just mentioned. 
789. Thus the object is in part immediate being or, in general, 
a Thing-corresponding to immediate consciousness ; in part, 
an othering of itself, its relationship or being-jor-an-other, and 
being-for-itself, i.e. determinateness--corresponding to percep­
tion ; and in part essence, or in the form of a universal--corre­
sponding to the Understanding. It is, as a totality, a syllogism 
or the movement of the universal through determination to in­
dividuality, as also the reverse movement from individuality 
through superseded individuality, or through determination, 
to the universal. It is, therefore, in accordance with these three 
determinations that consciousness must know the object as 
itself. However, this Knowing of which we are speaking is not 
Knowing as pure comprehension of the object [i.e. in terms of 
the Notion] ; here, this Knowing is to be indicated only in its 
process of coming-to-be, or in the moments of that aspect of 
it which belongs to consciousness as such, the moments of the 
Notion proper or of pure Knowing in the form of shapes of con­
sciousness. For this reason the object does not yet appear in con­
sciousness as such as the spiritual essentiality we have just 
affirmed it to be ; and the relationship of consciousness to it is 
not the consideration of it in this totality as such nor in its pure 
form as Notion ; but it is from one side a shape of consciousness 
as such, and from the other side a number of such shapes which 
we bring together, in which the totality of the moments of the 
object and of the relation of consciousness to it can be indicated 
only as resolved into its moments. 
790. For this aspect of the apprehension of the object, i.e. 
as it exists in the shape of consciousness, we have only to recall 
the earlier shapes of consciousness already encountered. Thus, 
in regard to the object so far as it is an immediacy, i.e. is an 
indiferent being, we saw Observing Reason seeking and finding 
itself in this indifferent thing, i.e. we saw it equally conscious 
ofits action being external to it, as it was conscious of the object 
only as an immediate object. And we saw Observing Reason 
at its peak express its specific character in the infinite judgement 
that the being of the 'I' is a Thing, and, moreover, a sensuous 

ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
immediate Thing. When the 'I' is called soul, it is true that it 
is also represented as a Thing, but as something invisible, in­
tangible, etc., and therefore in fact not as an immediate being 
and not as what is meant by a Thing. That judgement, taken 
just as it stands, is non-spiritual or rather is the non-spiritual 
itself. In its Notion, however, it is in fact the most richly spirit­
ual, and this inner significance of what is not yet apparent is what 
is expressed in the two other moments to be considered. 
791 .  The Thing is '1' ; in point of fact, in this infinite judge­
ment the Thing is superseded ; in itself it is nothing ; it has mean­
ing only in the relation, only through the ' 1' and its connection with 
it. This moment manifested itself for consciousness in pure in­
sight and enlightenment. Things are simply useful and to be con­
sidered only from the standpoint of utility. The cultivated self­
consciousness which has traversed the world of self-alienated 
Spirit has, through its self-alienation, produced the Thing as 
its own self; therefore, it still retains its own selfiri it and knows 
that the Thing lacks self-subsistence, that it is essentially only 
a being-for-an-other ; or, to give complete expression to the rela- 1 
tionship, i.e., to what alone constitutes the nature of the object 
here, the Thing counts for it as something that exists on its own 
account; it declares sense-certainty to be absolute truth, but this 
being-for-self is itself declared to be a moment that merely 
vanishes and passes over into its opposite, into a being that is 
at the disposal of an 'other'. 
792. However, at this stage, knowledge of the Thing is still 
not complete ; it must be known not only from the standpoint 
of the immediacy of being and of determinateness, but also as 
essence or inner being, as Self. This occurs in moral self-consciousness. 
This is aware that its knowledge is a knowledge of what is abso­
lutely essential, it knows that being is simply and solely pure wil­
ling and knowing ; it is nothing else but this willing and know­
ing ; anything else has only unessential being, i.e. not, intrinsic 
being, only its empty husk. In the same measure that moral 
self-consciousness lets determinate being go free from the Self, so 
too, in its conception of the world it takes it back again into 
itself. Finally, as conscience, it is no longer this continual 
alternation of existence being placed in the Self, and vice versa ; 
jt knows that its existence as such is this pure certainty of itself. 
The objective element into which it puts itself forth, when 

C .  ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
it acts, IS nothing other than the Self's pure knowledge of 
itself. 
793· These are the moments of which the reconciliation of 
Spirit with its own consciousness proper is composed ; by them­
selves they are single and separate, and it is solely their spiritual 
unity that constitutes the power of this reconciliation. The last 
of these moments is, however, necessarily this unity itself and, 
as is evident, it binds them all into itself. The Spirit that, in 
its existence, is certain of itself, has for the element of existence 
nothing else but this knowledge of itself; when it declares that 
what it does it does out of a conviction of duty, this utterance 
is the validating of its action. Action is the first implicit sundering 
ofthesim ple unity of theN otion and the return out of this divided­
ness. This first movement changes round into the second, since 
this element of recognition posits itself, as simple knowledge of 
duty, in antithesis to the distinction and dichotomy that lie in 
action as such and so constitute a stubborn actuality confront­
ing action. But in forgiveness, we saw how this obstinacy sur­
renders and renounces itself. Here, therefore, actuality as well 
as immediate existence has for self-consciousness no other sig­
nificance than that of being a pure knowing; similarly, 
as determinate existence or as relation, what is self-opposed 
is a knowing, partly of this purely individual Self, partly of 
knowledge as universal. In this is posited at the same time 
that the third moment, the universality or essence, counts only as 
knowledge for each of the two sides that stand over against 
each other; and finally these latter equally resolve the empty 
antithesis still remaining and are the knowledge of 'I' = 'I' ; 
this individual Self which is immediately a pure knowing or a 
universal. 
794· This reconciliation of consciousness with self-conscious­
ness thus shows itself as brought about from two sides ; on one 
side, in the religious Spirit, and on the other side, in conscious­
ness itself as such. The difference between them is that in the 
former this reconciliation is in the form of being-in-itself or 
implicit being, and in the latter in the explicit form of being­
for-self In our consideration of them they at first fall apart. In 
the other in which the shapes of consciousness came before us, 
consciousness reached the individual moments of those shapes 
and their unification long before ever religion gave its object 

ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
the shape of actual self-consciousness. The unification of the two 
sides has not yet been exhibited ; it is this that closes the series 
of the shapes of Spirit, for in it Spirit attains to a knowledge 
ofitselfnot only as it is in itself or as possessing an absolute content, 
rior only as it isfor itself as a form devoid of content, or as the 
aspect of self-consciousness, but as it is both in essence and in actu­
ality, or in and for itself. 
795· This unification has, however, already occurred in prin­
ciple and that, too, in religion, in the return of picture-thinking 
into self-consciousness, but not according to the proper form, 
for the religious aspect is the aspect of the in-itself which stands 
over against the movement of self-consciousness. Consequently, 
the unification belongs to this other aspect which, in the con­
trast of the two sides, is the aspect of reflection into self, and 
therefore the one that contains both its own self and its opposite, 
and not only implicitly or in a universal sense, but explicitly or 
in a developed and differentiated way. The content, as well as 
the other aspect of self-conscious Spirit so far as it is the 
other aspect, has been exhibited and is before us in its com­
pleteness ; the unification that is still lacking is the simple unity 
of the Notion. The Notion, too, is itself already present on the 
side of self-consciousness. But as it has come before us thus far, 
i't,has to be a particular shape of consciousness like all the other 
moments. It is, therefore, that aspect of the shape of self-assured 
Spirit that abides within its Notion and was called the 'beautiful 
soul'. The 'beautiful soul'. is its own knowledge of itself in its 
pure, transparent unity-the self-consciousness that knows this 
pure knowledge of pure inwardness as Spirit. It is not only the 
intuition of the Divine but the Divine's intuition of itself. Since 
this Notion holds itself firmly opposed to its realization, it is 
the one-sided shape which we saw vanish into thin air, but also 
positively externalize itself and move onward. Through this 
realization, this objectless self-consciousness ceases to cling to 
the determinateness of the Notion as against itsfulfilment; its self­
consciousness gains the form of universality and what remains 
to it is its true Notion, or the Notion that has attained its realiza­
tion ; it is the Notion in its truth, viz. in unity with its external­
ization ; it is the knowing of pure knowledge, not as an abstract 
essence such as duty is, but of knowledge as an essential being 
which is this knowledge, this pure self-consciousness which is, 

C .  ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
therefore, at the same time a genuine object, for the Notion is 
the Self that is for itself. 
796. This Notion fulfilled itself on one side in the self-assured 
Spirit that acted, and on the other, in religion : in religion it won 
for consciousness the absolute content as content or, in the form 
of picture-thinking, the form of otherness for consciousness ; on 
the other hand, in the prior shape the form is that of the Self 
itself, for it contains the self-assured Spirit that acts ; the Self 
accomplishes the life of absolute Spirit. This shape is, as we have 
seen, that simple Notion which, however, surrenders its eternal 
essence, it is there [in the real world] , or it acts. The self-sundering 
or stepping-forth into existence stems from the purity of the 
Notion, for this is absolute abstraction or negativity. Similarly, 
the Notion gets the element of its actuality or the being it con­
tains in pure knowledge itself, for this is simple immediacy, which 
is as much being and existence as it is essence ; the former, nega­
tive thought, the latter, positive thought itself. Finally, this ex­
istence, both as existence and as duty, is just as much the reflec­
tedness into self out of pure knowledge-or the state of evil. 
This withdrawal into itself constitutes the antithesis of the Notion, 
and is thus the emergence of the pure knowledge of the essence, 
the knowing that does not act and is not actual. But this emergence 
in the antithesis is participation in it ; the pure knowledge of 
essence has in principle renounced its simple unity, for it is the 
self-sundering, or the negativity which the Notion is ; so far as 
this self-sundering is the process of becoming for itself, it is evil ; 
so far as it is the in-itself, it remains good. Now, what at first 
happens in principle is at the same time explicitly for constious­
ness, and is thus double : it is both for consciousness and also is 
its being-for-self or its very own act. The same thing that is 
already posited in principle now therefore repeats itself as con­
sciousness's knowledge of it and conscious act. Each in relation 
to the other lets go of the independent determinateness with 
which it comes forth against it . .  This letting-go is the same 
renunciation of the one-sidedness of the Notion that in itself 
constituted the beginning ; but it is now its own act of ren uncia­
tion, just as the Notion which it renounces is its own Notion. 
That in-itself [i.e. the immediacy] of the beginning is in truth, 
as negativity, no less mediated; what it is in truth, it now also 
makes explicit, and the negative is, as determinateness of each both 

ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
for the other and in itself, self-suspending. One of the two parts 
of the antithesis is the disparity between the Notion's being 
within itself in its individuality, and universality ; the other, the 
disparity between its abstract universality and the Self. The 
former dies to its being-for-self, disowns itself, makes confession ; 
the latter renounces the obstinacy of its abstract universality, 
and in so doing dies to its lifeless Self and to its unmoved uni­
versality ; the former has thus completed itself through the 
moment of universality which is essence, and the latter through 
the universality which is Self. Through this movement of action, 
Spirit has come on the scene as a pure universality of knowing, 
which is self-consciousness, as self-consciousness that is the 
simple unity of knowing. It is only through action that Spirit 
is in such a way that it is really there, that is, when it raises its 
existence into Thought and thereby into an absolute antithesis, 
and returns out of this antithesis, in and through the antithesis 
itself. 
797· Thus, what in religion was content or a form for present­
ing an other, is here the Self's own act; the Notion requires the 
content to be the Self's own act. For this Notion is, as we see, 
the knowledge of the Self's act within itself as all essentiality 
and all existence, the knowledge of this subject as substance 
and of the substance as this knowledge of its act. Our own act 
here has been simply to gather together the separate moments, 
each of which in principle exhibits the life of Spirit in its en­
tirety, and also to stick to the Notion in the form of the Notion, 
the content of which would already have yielded itself in those 
moments and in the form of a shape of consciousness. 
798. This last shape of Spirit-the Spirit which at the same 
time gives its complete and true content the form of the Self 
and thereby realizes its Notion as remaining in its Notion in 
this realization-this is absolute knowing; it is Spirit that knows 
itself in the shape of Spirit, or a comprehensive knowing [in terms 
of the Notion]. Truth is not only in itself completely identical 
with certainty, but it also has the shape of self-certainty, or it 
is in its existence in the form of self-knowledge. Truth is the 
content, which in religion is still not identical with its certainty. 
But this identity is now a fact, in that the content has received 
the shape of the Self. As a result, that which is the very essence, 
viz. the Notion, has become the element of existence, or has 

C. ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
become the form of objectivity for consciousness. Spirit, manifesting 
or appearing in consciousness in this element, or what is the same 
thing, produced in it by consciousness, is Science. 
799· The nature, moments and movement of this knowing 
have, then, shown themselves to be such that this knowing is a 
pure being-for-self of self-consciousness ; it is 'I', that is this and no 
other 'I', and which is no less immediately a mediated or super­
ieded universal ' I'. It has a content which it di.Jferentiates from itself; 
for it is pure negativity or the dividing of itself, it is consciousness. 
This content is, in its difference, itselfthe 'I', for it is the move­
ment of superseding itself, or the same pure negativity that the 
'I' is. In it, as differentiated, the 'I' is reflected into itself; it 
is only when the 'I' communes with itself in its otherness that 
the content is comprehended [i.e. in terms of the Notion]. Stated 
more specifically, this content is nothing else than the very 
movementjust spoken of; for the content is Spirit that traverses 
its own self and does so for itself as Spirit by the fact that it has 
the 'shape' of the Notion in its objectivity. 
Boo. But as regards the existence of this Notion, Science does 
not appear in Time and in the actual world before Spirit has 
attained to this consciousness about itself. As Spirit that knows 
what it is, it does not exist before, and nowhere at all, till after 
the completion of its work of compelling its imperfect 'shape' 
to procure for its consciousness the 'shape' of its essence, and 
in this way to equate its self-consciousness with its consciousness. 
Spirit that is in and for itself and differentiated into its moments 
is a knowing that isfor itself, a comprehension in general that, as 
such, substance has not yet reached, i.e. substance is not in 
its own self an absolute knowing. 
801 .  Now, in actuality, the substance that knows exists 
earlier than its form or its Notion-determined 'shape'. For sub­
stance is the as yet undeveloped in-itself, or the Ground and 
Notion in its still unmoved simplicity, and therefore the inward­
ness or the Self of the Spirit that does not yet exist. What is there, 
exists as the still undeveloped simple and immediate, or as the 
object of the picture-thinking consciousness in general. Cognition, 
because it is the spiritual consciousness for which what is in itself 
only is, in so far as it is a being for the Self and a being of the 
Self or Notion, has for this reason at first only a meagre object, 
in contrast with which substance and the consciousness of this 

ABSOLUTE KNOWING 
substance are richer. The disclosure or revelation which sub­
stance has in this consciousness is in fact concealment, for sub­
stance is still self-less being and what is disclosed to it is only the 
certainty of itself. At first, therefore, only the abstract moments 
of substance belong to self-consciousness ; but since these, as 
pure movements, spontaneously impel themselves onward, self­
consciousness enriches itself till it has wrested from conscious­
ness the entire substance and has absorbed into itself the entire 
structure of the essentialities of substance. And, since this nega­
tive attitude to objectivity is just as much positive, it is a posit­
ing, it has produced them out of itself, and in so doing has at 
the same time restored them for consciousness. In the Notion 
that knows itself as Notion, the moments thus appear earlier than 
the .filled [ orfulfilleriJ whole whose coming-to-be is the movement 
of those moments. In consciousness, on the other hand, the whole, 
though uncomprehended, is prior to the moments. Time is the 
Notion itself that is there and which presents itself to conscious­
ness as empty intuition ; for this reason, Spirit necessarily 
appears in Time, and it appears in Time just so long as it has 
not grasped its pure Notion, i.e. has not annulled Time. It is 
the outer, intuited pure Self which is not grasped by the Self, the 
merely intuited Notion ; when this latter grasps itself it sets aside 
its Time-form, comprehends this intuiting, and is a compre­
hended and comprehending intuiting. Time, therefore, appears 
as the destiny and necessity of Spirit that is not yet complete 
within itself, the necessity to enrich the share which self-con­
sciousness has in consciousness, to set in motion the immediacy 
if the in-itself, which is the form in which substance is present 
in consciousness ; or conversely, to realize and reveal what is 
at first only inward (the in-itself being taken as what is inward) , 
i.e. to vindicate it for Spirit's certainty of itself. 
8o2. For this reason it must be said that nothing is known 
that is not in experience, or, as it is also expressed, that is not 
felt to be true, not given as an inwardly revealed eternal verity, as 
something sacred that is believed, or whatever other expressions 
have been used. For experience is just this, that the content­
which is Spirit-is in itself substance, and therefore an object 
of consciousness. But this substance which is Spirit is the process 
in which Spirit becomes what it is in itself; and it is only as this 
process of reflecting itself into itself that it is in itself truly Spirit. 

C. ( D D . )  ABS O L U T E  KNOW I N G  
It is in itself the movement which is cognition-the transform­
ing of that in-itself into that which is for itself, of Substance into 
Subject, of the object of consciousness into an object of self-con­
sciousness, i.e. into an object that is just as much superseded, 
or into the Notion. The movement is the circle that returns into 
itself, the circle that presupposes its beginning and reaches it 
only at the end. Hence, so far as Spirit is necessarily this 
immanent differentiation, its intuited whole appears over 
against its simple self-consciousness, and since, then, the former 
is what is differentiated, it is differentiated into its intuited pure 
Notion, into Time and into the content or into the in-itself. Sub­
stance is charged, as Subject, with the at .first only inward neces­
sity of setting forth within itself what it is in itself, of exhibiting 
itself as Spirit. Only when the objective presentation is complete 
is it at the same time the reflection of substance or the process 
in which substance becomes Self. Consequently, until Spirit has 
completed itself in itself, until it has completed itself as world­
Spirit, it cannot reach its consummation as self-conscious Spirit. 
Therefore, the content of religion proclaims earlier in time 
than does Science, what Spirit is, but only Science is its true 
knowledge of itself. 
803. The movement of carrying forward the form of its self­
knowledge is the labour which it accomplishes as actual His­
tory. The religious community, so far as. it is at first the sub­
stance of absolute Spirit, is the uncultivated consciousness 
whose existence is all the harsher and more barbarous the 
deeper its inner Spirit is, and the deeper its Spirit is, the harder 
the task that its torpid Self has with its essence, with the alien 
content ot Its consciousness. Not until consciousness has given 
up hope of overcoming that alienation in an external, i.e. alien, 
manner does it turn to itself, because the overcoming of that 
alienation is the return into self-consciousness ; not until then 
does it turn to its own present world and discover it as its prop­
erty, thus taking the first step towards coming down out of the 
intellectual world, or rather towards quickening the abstract ele­
ment of that world with the actual Self. Through Observation 
it finds, on the one hand, existence in the shape of Thought 
and comprehends it, and, conversely, in its thinking it compre­
hends existence. When, to begin with, it has thus expressed the 
immediate unity of Thought and Being, the unity of abstract 

ABSO LUTE K N O W I N G  
essence and the Self, abstractly ; and when it has expressed the 
primal Light in a purer form, viz. as unity of extension and 
being-for extension is the simple unity which more nearly 
resembles pure thought than light does-and in so doing has 
revived in thought the Substance of the Orient, Spirit at once 
recoils in horror from the abstract unity, from this self-less sub­
stantiality, and against it affirms individuality. But only after 
it has externalized this individuality in the sphere of culture, 
thereby giving it an existence, and establishing it throughout 
the whole of existence--only after Spirit has arrived at the 
thoughtofutility, and in its absolute freedom has grasped exist­
ence as its will, only then does it turn the thought of its inmost 
depths outwards and enunciate essence as 'I' = 'I'. But this 'I' = 
'I' is the movement which reflects itself into itself; for since this 
identity, being absolute negativity, is absolute difference, the 
self-identity of the 'I' stands over against this pure difference 
which, as pure and at the same time objective to the self-know­
ing Self, has to be expressed as Time. So that, just as previously 
essence was declared to be the unity of Thought and Extension, 
it would now have to be grasped as the unity of Thought and 
Time. But the difference left to itself, unresting and unhalting 
Time, collapses rather within itself; it is the objective repose 
of extension, while extension is pure identity with itself, the 'I'. 
In other words, the 'I' is not merely the Self, but the identity 
of the Self with itself; but this identity is complete and immediate 
oneness with Self, or this Subject is just as much Substance. Sub­
stance, just by itself, would be intuition devoid of content, or 
the intuition of a content which, as determinate, would be only 
accidental and would lack necessity. Substance would pass for 
the Absolute only in so far as it was thought or intuited as abso­
lute unity ; and all content would, as regards its diversity, have 
to fall outside of it into Reflection ; and Reflection does not per­
tain to Substance, because Substance would not be Subject, 
would not be grasped as reflecting on itself and reflecting itself 
into itself, would not be grasped as Spirit. If a content were 
to be spoken of anyway, it would, on the one hand, only be 
spoken of in order to cast it into the empty abyss of the Absolute, 
and on the other, it would be a content picked up in external 
fashion from sense-perception. Knowledge would seem to have 
come by things, by what is different from itself, and by the dif-

C .  ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE KNOW I N G  
ference of a variety of things, without comprehending how and 
whence they came. 
804. Spirit, however, has shown itself to us to be neither 
merely the withdrawal of self-consciousness into its pure in­
wardness, nor the mere submergence of self-consciousness into 
substance, and the non-being of its [moment of] difference ; but 
Spirit is this movement of the Self which empties itself of itself 
and sinks itself into its substance, and also, as Subject, has gone 
out of that substance into itself, making the substance into an 
object and a content at the same time as it cancels this difference 
between objectivity and content. That first reflection out of 
immediacy is the Subject's differentiation of itself from its sub­
stance, or the Notion's separation of itself from itself, the with­
drawal into itself and the becoming of the pure 'I'. Since this 
difference is the pure act of 'I' = 'I', the Notion is the necessity 
and the uprising of existence, which has substance for its essence 
and subsists on its own account. But this subsistence of existence 
on its own account is the Notion posited in determinateness and 
is thus also its immanent movement, that of going down into the 
simple substance, which is Subject only as this negativity and 
movement. The 'I' has neither to cling to itself in the form of 
self-consciousness as against the form of substantiality and objec­
tivity, as if it were afraid of the externalization of itself: the 
power of Spirit lies rather in remaining the selfsame Spirit 
in its externalization and, as that which is both in itself and 
for itself, in making its being-for-self no less merely a 
moment than its in-itself; nor is Spirit a tertium quid that casts 
the differences back into the abyss of the Absolute and declares 
that therein they are all the same ; on the contrary, knowing 
is this seeming inactivity which merely contemplates how what 
is differentiated spontaneously moves in its own self and returns 
into its unity. 
8os. In this knowing, then, Spirit has concluded the move­
ment in which it has shaped itself, in so far as this shaping was 
burdened with the difference of consciousness [i.e. of the latter 
from its object], a difference now overcome. Spirit has won the 
pure element of its existence, the Notion. The content, in ac­
cordance with the freedom of its being, is the self-alienating Self, 
or the immediate unity of self-knowledge. The pure movement 
of this alienation, considered in connection with the content, 

ABSOLUTE K N O W I N G  
constitutes the necessity of the content. The distinct content, as 
determinate, is in relation, is not 'in itself ; it is its own restless 
process of superseding itself, or negativity ; therefore, negativity 
or diversity, like free being, is also the Self; and in this self­
likeform in which existence is immediately thought, the content 
is the Notion. Spirit, therefore, having won the Notion, displays 
its existence and movement in this ether of its life and is Science. 
In this, the moments of its movement no longer exhibit them­
selves as specific shapes of consciousness, but-since consciousness's 
difference has returned into the Self-as specific Notions and as 
their organic self-grounded movement. Whereas in the pheno­
menology ofSpirit each moment is the difference of knowledge 
and Truth, and is the movement in which that difference is 
cancelled, Science on the other hand does not contain this dif­
ference and the cancelling of it. On the contrary, since the 
moment has the form of the Notion, it unites the objective form 
of Truth and of the knowing Self in an immediate unity. The 
moment does not appear as this movement of passing back and 
forth, from consciousness or picture-thinking into self-con­
sciousness, and conversely : on the contrary, its pure shape, 
freed from its appearance in consciousness, the pure Notion and 
its onward movement, depends solely on its pure determinateness. 
Conversely, to each abstract moment of Science corresponds 
a shape of manifest Spirit as such. Just as Spirit in its existence 
is not richer than Science, so too it is not poorer either in con­
tent. To know the pure Notions of Science in this form of shapes 
of consciousness constitutes the side of their reality, in accord­
ance with which their essence, the Notion, which is posited in 
them in its simple mediation as thinking, breaks asunder the 
moments of this mediation and exhibits itself in accordance 
with the inner antithesis. 
8o6. Science contains within itself this necessity of external 
lizing the form of the Notion, and it contains the passage of 
the Notion into consciousness. For the self-knowing Spirit, just 
because it grasps its Notion, is the immediate identity with itself 
which, in its difference, is the certainty of immediacy, or sense-con­
sciousness-the beginning from which we started. This release 
of itself from the form of its Self is the supreme freedom and 
assurance of its self-knowledge. 
8o7. Yet this externalization is still incomplete ; it expressed 

492 
C .  ( D D . )  ABSOLUTE K N OW I N G  
the connection of its self-certainty with the object which, just 
because it is thus connected, has not yet won its complete free­
dom. The self-knowing Spirit knows not only itself but also the 
negative of itself, or its limit : to know one's limit is to know 
how to sacrifice oneself. This sacrifice is the externalization in 
which Spirit displays the process of its becoming Spirit in the 
form of free contingent happening, intuiting its pure Self as Time 
outside of it, and equally its Being as Space. This last becoming 
ofSpirit, Nature, is its living immediate Becoming ; Nature, the 
externalized Spirit, is in its existence nothing but this eternal 
externalization of its continuing existence and the movement 
which reinstates the Subject. 
8o8. But the other side of its Becoming, History, is a conscious, 
self-mediating process-Spirit emptied out into Time ; but this 
externalization, this kenosis, is equally an externalization of 
itself; the negative is the negative of itself. This Becoming 
presents a slow-moving succession ofSpirits, a gallery of images, 
each of which, endowed with all the riches of Spirit, moves thus 
slowly just because the Self has to penetrate and digest this 
entire wealth of its substance. As its fulfilment consists in per­
fectly knowing what it is, in knowing its substance, this knowing 
is its withdrawal into itselfin which it abandons its outer existence 
and gives its existential shape over to recollection. Thus 
absorbed in itself, it is sunk in the night of its self-consciousness ; 
but in that night its vanished outer existence is preserved, and 
this transformed existence-the former one, but now reborn of 
the Spirit's knowledge-is the new existence, a new world and 
a new shape of Spirit. In the immediacy of this new existence 
the Spirit has to start afresh to bring itself to maturity as if, 
for it, all that preceded were lost and it had learned nothing 
from the experience of the earlier Spirits. But recollection, the 
inwardizing, of that experience, has preserved it and is the inner 
being, and in fact the higher form of the substance. So 
although this Spirit starts afresh and apparently from its own 
resources to bring itself to maturity, it is none the less on a higher 
level that it starts. The realm of Spirits which is formed in this. 
way in the outer world constitutes a succession in Time in which 
one Spirit relieved another of its charge and each took over the 
empire of the world from its predecessor. Their goal is the 
revelation of the depth of Spirit, and this is the absolute Notion. 

ABSOLUTE KNOW I N G  
493 
This revelation is, therefore, the raising-up of its depth, or its 
extension, the negativity of this withdrawn 'I', a negativity which 
is its externalization or its substance ; and this revelation is also 
the Notion's Time, in that this externalization is in its own self 
externalized, and just as it is in its extension, so it is equally 
in its depth, in the Self. The goal, Absolute Knowing, or Spirit 
that knows itself as Spirit, has for its path the recollection ot 
the Spirits as they are in themselves and as they accomplish 
the organization of their realm. Their preservation, regarded 
from the side of their free existence appearing in the form of con­
tingency, is History ; but regarded from the side of their [philo­
sophically] comprehended organization, it is the Science of 
Knowing in the sphere of appearance :1 the two together, com­
prehended History, form alike the inwardizing and the Calvary 
of absolute Spirit, the actuality, truth, and certainty of his 
throne, without which he would be lifeless and alone. Only 
from the chalice of this realm of spirits 
foams forth for Him his own infinitude.2 
1 Phenomenology. 
2 Adaptation of Schiller's Die Freundschaft, adfin. 


A N A L Y S I S  O F  T H E T E X T  
P R E F A C E  
1 .  It is impossible to begin a philosophical work with a clear state­
ment of the kind of view it hopes to establish, or of its relation to what 
others have written. For philosophy aims at a universality which will 
embrace and sum up particulars, and cannot be expressed till those 
particulars have been gone through, and have yielded up the uni­
versality in question. It cannot be anatomized in advance, without 
seeing how its parts function in the whole. 
2. To state the relation of a philosophical work to others is also 
misleading, in that it suggests that previous works were false, and have 
now been cancelled out in truth. But philosophical systems do not 
replace falsehood by truth : they represent the ever clearer develop­
ment of truth, which is as much present in earlier forms as in later, 
and which is only complete in a total development which includes 
all earlier stages. 
3· A statement of philosophical aims and results is only legitimate 
if it is seen as being initial and superficial, and is not regarded as 
revealing the essence of the matter in hand. For this essence is not 
exhausted by aims, but by the way in which they are carried out. 
It is not concerned with mere results, but with the manner in which 
they emerge. To state results without saying how one arrives at them 
is to present the corpse of a system, whereas merely to differentiate 
a system from others is to remain resolutely on its fringes . 
. 4· General principles and points of view belong only to the begin­
nings of the life of thought. Once one's mind has become deeply 
immersed in its subject-matter, they will be relegated to surface-talk. 
5· Philosophical truth can only exist in the form of a fully-worked­
out scientific system. Philosophy must show up the inner necessity that 
drives knowledge towards Science, and it must itself embody this drive 
when the appropriate moment arrives. 
6. The true shape of truth is conceptual and notional. This can 
at present only be asserted as a counter to views like those of Jacobi 
(Studies inSpinoza, I 779) , Navalis, Schlegel, etc., which make direct, un­
reasoning intuition ( Anschauung) and feeling and central in philc­
sophy, and the very being of the Absolute itself. 
7. These latter views arise from the disillusioned desire to return 
to the peace and security of unquestioning faith which philosophical 
thinking has rudely shattered. They demand a suppression of thought-

ANALY S I S  
distinctions, not their further clarification. They aim at edification 
and enthusiasm rather than cool insight. 
a: Such views are an attempt to return to the heaven-directed gaze 
of earlier eras of thought, which has been succeeded by a gaze directed 
only to empirical detail, which now stultifies and starves the Spirit. 
g. True Science cannot, however, be satisfied to see all detail vanish 
in an insubstantial, edifying mist. 
1 0. The complacency which spurns as finite the exactly defined 
concepts and necessary connections of Science, is not above but below 
the level of Science. Its would-be profundities are empty, its sweeping 
assertions superficial, its prophetic pronouncements arbitrary and 
superficial. 
1 1 .  Our own time is obviously ripe for a major intellectual and 
spiritual advance. This has been 'in the womb' for a long time, and 
is now about to achieve birth. Its birth-pangs are felt in a widespread 
sense of disillusion and frivolity, and in the vague foreboding of some­
thing unknown at hand. 
1 2. A new scientific spirit is at first only present in general, notional 
germ. It is the product of an extensive, laborious transformation of 
previous cultural forms, and their resumption into a new simplicity. 
It must, to be fully actual, redevelop these forms out of this simple 
unity. 
13. Science, in its new, notional form, as yet ill worked out and 
ill connected with the rich detail of past thinking, seems to be the 
obscure possession of an esoteric sect. To be generally intelligible and 
exoteric, it must connect all this past detail with its new position. To 
understand is to make familiar material one's own by incorporating 
it in a new scientific structure. 
14. When Science first emerges, it has on the one hand a tendency 
to stress simple intuitive rationality and a relation to what is divine, 
but also on the other hand to develop this insight into an organized 
wealth of detail. The second tendency may be held in check by the 
first, but continues with justification to demand satisfaction. 
1 5. The tendency towards detail may try to satisfy itself by merely 
running through familiarly organized material, adding to this much 
that is extraordinary and curious, and then mechanically applying 
the same 'absolute idea' to all such detail without the least modifica" 
tion to suit special cases. This is a monotonous formalism, applicable 
only to ready-made differences. 
1 6. The false absolutism just sketched fails to develop difference 
and detail out of itself, but thinks it has done its task when it has said 
of anything specific that it is not to be found in the Absolute, since 
there we have only the Absolute's identity with self. Such an Absolute 
is the night in which every cow is black. As opposed to such a false 

PREFACE, §§ 8-22 
497 
absolutism, it will be helpful to give a sketch of a true one. (Aimed 
at Schelling, but obviously applying to others as well.) 
I 7. In my view, which the full exposition of my system alone can 
justify, the true Absolute must not merely be thought of as a Sub­
stance, i.e. something immediately there, whether this be a knower 
or something known. It must be thought of as a Subject. We think 
in terms of Substance if we think in terms of undifferentiated uni­
versality, whether this be that of what merely is, or of what merely 
thinks, or of what (a Ia Schelling) combines both in a single 
intellectual intuition. 
I 8. True Substance is a being that truly is Subject, i.e. which only is 
itself in so far as it alienates itself from itself, and is then able to posit 
itself in and through what is thus alien. It cannot exist as a simple, 
positive starting-point, but only as part of a self-departing, self-return­
ing movement, which both negates itself in indifferent, external 
otherness, and then reasserts itself as the negation of all such otherness. 
I g. The life and self-knowledge of the Absolute may well be de­
scribed as that of the divine Love disporting itself with itself, but such 
an image readily becomes insipid, or sinks into edification, since it 
fails to emphasize the seriousness, the anguish, and the patient effort 
involved in thus negating the negation. The essence of the Absolute 
cannot be separated from its execution, nor its form from the full con­
tent of its carrying-out. 
20. The true Absolute can only be seen as the whole of a self-realiz­
ing act or process, and is also the result or outcome of such an act 
or process. What is present at its beginning can only be emptily uni­
versal, and can only achieve specific content through connection with 
what appears to be other than itself, but what can then be seen to 
be not really other. 
2 I .  There is a horror of mediate connection which stems from a 
misunderstandingofthe role of mediation in absolute knowledge. For 
mediation is merely the self-negation, and the negation of this nega­
tion, involved in the self-identification of the Subject. The Subject 
only becomes an immediate unity through the denial of its mediate 
connection with something else. Reflection, or the going from one 
thing to another, should not be abhorred : it is essential to the return 
to self which annuls it. 
22. What has been said amounts to saying that Reason is purposive 
activity. External purpose has rightly been banished from natural 
philosophy, but not so the self-moving purposiveness which is indist­
inguishable from subjectivity. For in purpose the result or outcome 
is one with its moving cause, which in departing from self realizes 
self, and in which even the process of departing from self is a fulfilment 
of self. 

ANALYSIS 
23. Philosophical sentences, e.g. God is the moral order of the 
world, illustrate the nature of the Absolute. For while they appear 
to have fixed subjects to which predicates accrue externally, these sub­
jects merely anticipate what is to be predicated of them, and only 
acquire concrete significance when the predication is completed. 
Predications analytically anticipated in the meaning of their subjects 
make predication quite vacuous. 
24. Philosophical knowledge is essentially systematic, and a philo­
sophical first principle therefore at once refutes itself by being merely 
a first princii?le. Being merely universal, merely initial, its further de­
velopment is in a sense its own refutation, the clear exhibition of its 
merely initial character. 
25. That philosophical truth is necessarily systematic, that Sub­
stance must be Subject, can be expressed by saying that the Absolute 
is essentially Spirit, both in and for itself. It is at first only in and 
for itself to philosophical reflection, and is then spiritual Substance, 
or Spirit in itself. It must become in itself for itself, must come to know 
Spirit, and itself as Spirit, i.e. must become its own object both imme­
diately and reflectively. Spirit thus fully self-conscious is Science, i.e. 
Spirit fully constituted for itself in its own element. 
26. To know itself and be at home with itself in what is absolutely 
other than itself, is the true 'Aether' of Science. But for the ordinary 
consciousness, which always opposes itself to its objects, life in such 
an Aether seems topsy-turvy and unreal. The thinking spirit must 
gradually accustom itself to such topsy-turvy unreality. 
27. The genesis of Science is the theme of the Phenomenology of 
Spirit. This genesis starts from Spirit immediate or spiritless Spirit, 
i.e. from the consciousness of sense, and must tread a long road before 
it can become true Science, can give birth to its true concept or ele­
ment. Such a genesis will not be a fancied illumination of the road 
to science, nor yet an actual founding of science, nor yet a pistol-shot 
of illumination aiming straight at absolute knowledge. 
28. The task of proceeding from the uncultured to the knowing 
mind is really performed by the universal individual, i.e. self-con­
scious Spirit as such. The particular individual is merely a one-sided, 
partial expression of this Spirit, an expression in which one trait is 
emphatic and the rest underscored. The particular individual must, 
however, run through and repossess itself of all the phases of the uni­
versal individual's past development. They will now be seen as part 
of the environing scene, not requiring the deep research that was pre­
viously demanded. 
29. It is impossible to state the scientific outcome of all this cultural 
development without running through it patiently stage by stage. 
Each stage on the route has been necessary, and has incarnated the 

499 
sense of the whole movement in one of its special phases. But such 
a running-through is eased and abbreviated by the reduction of past 
stages to explicit thoughts from being merely implicit existences. 
30. Past stages have lost the immediacy of existence, but this loss 
of existence is only a first negation which still retains the immediacy 
of the mere presentation, the idea that is familiar, and has as such 
been set aside. This first negation must itself be negated, and the fam­
iliar idea brought back into the purview of the thinking self. 
3 1 .  What is merely familiar is not as such properly known. To build 
upon familiar concepts of subjectivity, objectivity, God, Nature, etc., 
without allowing these ideas to develop, is and remains irremediably 
superficial. 
32. The analysis of an idea is the removal of its familiarity, its re­
duction to elements that are the true possessions of the thinking self. 
In such reduction the idea itself changes and renders itself unreal. 
The force which effects analysis is that of the Understanding, the most 
remarkable and absolute of powers, the power of the thinking self 
and also of death. It is above all marvellous that this thinking self 
should be able to isolate, and to look at apart, what can only exist 
as an aspect or 'moment' in a living whole. Thinking Spirit can, how­
ever, only grasp such a whole by first tearing it into parts, each of 
which it must look at separately for a while, before putting them back 
in the whole. The thinking self must destroy an immediate, existent 
unity in order to arrive at a unity which includes mediation, and is 
in fact mediation itself. 
33· Ancient thought differs from ours in that it built directly on 
the natural consciousness, and reached out to the universal from it, 
whereas our thought finds the universal lying ready to hand, in hard, 
fixed form, which it then has to revitalize and restore to fluidity. So 
vitalized, fixed ideas become self-moving notions, spiritual essentiali­
ties. 
34· Such a movement of pure essentialities is Science as such, whose 
content is nothing but their necessary expansion into an organic 
whole. The notion of Science does not arise out of contingent philoso­
phizing on these or those themes, relations or common ideas, nor from 
logical manipulations of these or those definite thoughts, but from 
the rounding-itself-out of the self-moving concept into cosmic com­
pleteness. 
35· The exposition to be given in the present work is thertfore the 
first part of Science, in that Spirit's first existence is merely the begin­
ning in which it has not yet returned to self. Existential immediacy 
distinguishes this part of the system. This leads us on to comment on 
certain fixed ideas which occur in this context. 
36. Consciousness, the immediate existence of Spirit, always em-

soo 
ANALYSIS 
braces two opposed factors : the element of knowledge and that of 
objectivity. Together these constitu,te the experience of Spirit, and 
there is nothing in theobjectiveSubstancegivenin experience but what 
falls within such experience. Spirit, however, itself underlies the objec­
tivity which at first confronts it as alien, and which is then repossessed 
and seen as its own. 
37· The disparity between the self and the objective Substance is 
the void which inspires their movement towards one another. The 
ancients rightly made the void a principle of motion. The disparity 
between self and object is at once an inadequacy of the self in under­
standing the object, and an inadequacy of the object to itself. When 
the object is fully itself, i.e. fully revealed, the subject-object dis­
tinction vanishes and Phenomenology yields place to Logic. 
38. There is a temptation to think that, since the standpoint of 
Phenomenology is superseded as false in the standpoint of Logic, it 
would have been better to have dispensed with it, and have gone 
straight to Logic. This argues a false view of truth and of its relation 
to what is false. 
39· Falsehood is not simply the slag or dross which must be rejected 
to arrive at truth : it is the unshaped metal which must be reshaped 
and refined into truth, and which is necessarily present in the final 
shape of such truth. 
40. The philosophical dogmatist thinks we can pro!!ounce defini­
tively on a philosophical issue as we can pronounce on the date of 
Caesar's birth or on the equality of the square on a triangle's hypo­
tenuse to the two squares on its other two sides. 
4 1 .  The truths of history, to the extent that they are contingent, 
and concern particular existents, are indeed naked matters of fact, 
which nothing renders necessary. Even here, however, there are 
grounds for and against, so that error becomes part of truth. 
42. Mathematical truths are not thought ·to be known unless 
proved true. Their demonstrations are not, however, kept as parts 
of what they prove, but are only our subjective means towards know­
ing the latter. In philosophy, however, consequences always form part 
of the essence made manifest in them, which returns to itself in such 
expressions. 
43· Mathematical insights, employing constructions and proofs, 
have to that extent always something false about them. We depart 
from the triangle in incorporating its parts into other figures, and we 
only come back to it in the end. 
44· Mathematical knowledge is defective in that lines of proof and 
constructions have to be blindly tried out till we hit on one that leads 
to the desired conclusion. They are not consequences of the notional 
content of the theorem to be established. 

PREFACE, §§ 37-50 
501 
45· Mathematics may plume itself on its self-evidence, but this self­
evidence rests on the poverty of its aim and the defectiveness of its 
material, in which philosophy should be ashamed to follow it. Mathe­
matics only seeks to establish quantitative relations which belong ex­
clusively to the surface of things. Its materials are space and the unit, an­
empty, lifeless, repetitive element, set forth in fixed, dead propositions, 
linked together only by equational identities, and never progressing 
through opposition to some qualitatively different outcome. The in­
commensurability of the different dimensions, which for mathematics 
constitutes a problem, is a luminous necessity to the philosopher. 
46. Mathematics is wholly unsuccessful in its treatment of time, 
which it does not see as standing in a relation of necessary opposition 
and complementarity to space. Its proofs of the equalization of 
moments in the lever, and of the relations of time and space in gravita­
tion, are pitifully empirical. Time with its essential, living self-dif­
ferentiatiQn, is the very Notion present in actual existence. The 
notionless quantities and equations of mathematics are unable to 
capture its essence. 
47· Philosophy does not move in the inert, abstract, unreal medium 
of mathematics, but in an actual, living progression of distinct 
notional phases, some of which negate what went before, and are 
themselves negated in what follows, but are all necessary steps in the 
progression, and are recalled in its final conclusion. Philosophical 
truth is like a Bacchanalian riot where the drunken participants fall 
down as they try to stand up, but it is also like the enlaced final sleep 
in which all have collapsed on to the floor. 
48. The method of philosophy must be set forth by Logic, and is 
in fact Logic itself. It is not the .method of mathematics, with its defini­
tions, axioms, theorems, proofs, grounds pro and contra etc., which 
deals externally with its materials, and does not seek to develop their 
inner content. Mathematical methods are suited to their abstract 
materials, and to the fixed identities of concrete sensuous things, 
which do not change as we consider them. 
49· But if philosophy steers clear of the loose methods of ordinary 
argument and the exact methods of rna them a tics, it must not therefore 
let itself sink back into prophetic divinations and enthusiasms which 
are not scientific at all. 
50. Kant has brought back into philosophy the dialectical triplicity 
which is the essential form ofScience. But neither he nor his successors 
have been able to give it life. They have treated it as an inert schema, 
and have applied it to the most heterogeneous materials, sometimes 
grossly empirical, sometimes categorial and notional. Such applica­
tions are as void of deep sense as are the category-headings of ordinary 
chatter. 

502 
A N A L Y S I S  
51. Such unthinking application of the same schema to quite dif­
ferent materials is a pure formalism, though it may call itself a con­
struction. It makes use throughout of a wild series of analogical identi­
fications. The Understanding is linked to electricity, the animal to 
nitrogen, and so on. There is an appearance of conceptual connection 
where none is really present. The procedure resembles that of a poor 
painter who depicts everything in two colours, or, worse still, in one. 
52. It is, however, only because dialectical triplicity is felt to be 
the essential form of Science that it is thus devitalized and abused. 
։3· True Science is nothing but the self-development of the Notion, 
which first confronts its own-simple universality with a specific, objec­
tive other, then takes back the sense of that other into its own sim­
plicity, thereby becoming more determinate. The schematizing 
Understanding merely catalogues and tables the stages of such self­
development, without knowing what they amount to, nor the prin­
ciple of their growth. 
54· Every qualitative nuance of being has its own abstracted self­
identity, which is one with the abstract self-identity of a distinct 
thought. This self-identical, qualitative nuance necessarily brings 
about its own dissolution, and becomes a mere moment in a wider 
whole. But this dissolution is not brought about by some alien process 
of reflection, but is cunningly contrived by the objective content itself, 
which to preserve itself must move beyond itself. The thought that 
sees this does not progress by a retreat into subjectivity, but by 
immersing itself in its object's own development. 
55· The abstractive Understanding is not only an aspect of self­
conscious subjectivity, but also of existent being. Existence means dis­
tinction in quality : this is the Understanding of existence, what An ax­
agoras called its Nous, and what later thinkers raised to the status 
of an Eidos or Idea or sort. But such a self-identical, distinct sort in­
volves its own dissolution : it may seem to be destroyed by alien vio­
lence, but is in fact destroyed by the negation, the reference to 
another, which it bears within itself. In such becoming the Under­
standing-aspect of being passes over into its Reason. 
56. The being of anything is one with its Notion, and this Notion 
is at once the necessity of its rhythmic development and the specula­
tive concept which enables us to know it. It is not necessary to apply 
speculative categories to what concretely is, since the latter already 
embodies such categories in itself. 
57· The scientific method of speculative philosophy will show itself 
to be at once determined by the contents it studies and by its own 
inherent rhythms. If it is described as we have just described it, resist­
ance will be aroused from the standpoint both of sound common sense 
and of mystical insight. This is the standard response to what seems an 

PREFACE, §§ 5 1--65 
503 
alien dogma : men prefer to be revolutionary in their own time and 
manner. 
58. To think in pure Notions, e.g. self-identity, being-in-itself, 
being-for-֌elf, is tiresome and difficult, both to the thought that prefers 
to think in pictures, in which what is universal is not clearly 
abstracted, and to merely argumentative thought, which does not im­
merse itself in its thought-content at all, but satisfies its vanity by 
pronouncing upon it rather than by allowing it to develop. 
59· Argumentative thinking delights in refuting a conceptual con­
tent and reducing it to nothing. Such negative reflection is as vain 
and empty as the content it refutes. It is quite different from the con­
structive negation which always has a positive outcome. 
6o. Argumentative thinking connects the content it thinks of with 
its own self as judging Subject. The determination of subject by predi­
cate seems to it to be its own free doing. But the thought which 
achieves grasp of its subject only does so when its round of predication 
is complete. It discovers its subject only in being forced to enlarge 
its predications, and not in its original reference. But picture-thought, 
concerned only with points of reference and with what is accidental, 
resents having to revise its content as it goes along. The revision of 
the logical subject, however, means the emergence of the thinking 
Subject, which finds itself in developing the content of the logical sub­
ject through various predications, and not in some arbitrary 
reference-point of which arbitrary predications are made. (Paragraph 
very difficult owing to identification-in-distinction of the conscious 
with the logico-grammatical subject.) 
6 1 .  The conflict we have here is that of the superficial view of the 
proposition of judgement, which treats it as an external connection 
of independently significant elements, and of the speculative view 
which sees it as the self-development, through complementary dif­
ferences, of a single significant content. 
62. It is hard for an argumentative thinker to realize that, until 
he has decided what has to be said of a given logical subject, e.g. God 
in his relation to being, he is not truly concerning himself with subject 
of reference nor with any subject at all. 
63. From this springs the objection to philosophical statements that 
they have to be read over many times before they can be understood. 
A comfortable enlargement of a familiar subject by the mere addi-tion 
of predicates has ceased to be possible. 
64. To mix argumentative thinking with speculative dialectic can 
never succeed, since the fixed points of reference necessary for the 
former are lacking in the latter. 
65. Speculative dialectic does not merely dispense with the fixed 
distinctions of argumentative thought in some high flight of insight. 

ANALYSIS 
It shows them breaking down as it reflects on the intrinsic sense of 
propositions. 
66. Speculative dialectic must itself be expounded in propositions, 
and this might seem to expose it to the same objections as argumenta­
tive thought, and to open the way to a critique of speculation. But 
the propositional form is a mere shell in speculation, since its predica­
tions are not meant to be externally added to an already fixed subject 
of reference. For this reason names like 'God' with a conventionally 
fixed content are best avoided in philosophy. 
67. It is not thought necessary to have a preliminary training 
before one philosophizes : ordinary information, skills, methods are 
thought sufficient. But since nothing can be taken for granted until 
tested by philosophy, philosophy involves its own skills and standards 
which have to be learnt and practised. 
68. Thought incapable of considering abstract propositions or their 
mutual relations should not be confused with tolerance and freedom 
of mind, much less with inspired genius. Inexact, undisciplined think­
ing has all the defects of poetry without its merits. 
6g. To be a naturalist or a common-sense philosopher is to revert 
to trivialities that it requires no philosopher to utter. Such trivialities 
always lead on to antinomies which are neither sophistical nor 
visionary. To refuse to engage in justifications and analyses is to abdi­
cate human rationality. 
70. To rely on common sense supplemented by a little reading of 
philosophical prefaces and reviews is an easy road to Science. Science, 
however, requires that truth should be won by the labour of the 
Notion developing itself in its own medium. 
7 I .  Though there have been many who value Plato for his literary 
myths, there have been times when his Parmenides has been seen to 
be the supreme work of art of the ancient dialectic, and the positive 
expression of the divine life. There have been times, too, when the 
philosophy of Aristotle was valued for its speculative depth. We may 
hope that our system will penetrate public attention, since it has had 
to wait till its time was ripe and its public in existence. This public 
does not consist of the soi-disant representatives of public opinion. 
72. In our age the universal aspect of Spirit has been strengthened, 
while its individual expressions are less significant. In such an age 
the individual must forget his individuality and must do what he can, 
while less should also be demanded of him by society. 

I N TRODUCTION, §§ 66--78 
sos 
I N T R O D U C T I O N  
73· I t  is a natural idea that before engaging in philosophical in­
quiry one should first examine the instrument or medium of such 
knowledge (Locke, Kant) . Perhaps it is a good or a bad instrument, 
perhaps no good at all for knowledge of what absolutely is, since it 
modifies or distorts its object. It is quite vain, however, to try to elimi­
nate the refracting and transforming powers of the instrument and 
so arrive at the intrinsic notion of the thing. For if what absolutely 
is cannot be reached by our faculty ofknowledge, with all its refracting 
and transforming power, there is no sense in supposing that it can 
be reached by dispensing with or discounting the work of this faculty 
and the course it has to take. Remove the way truth affects us and 
nothing at all remains. 
74· Butifwedoubt theabilityofknowledge to reach what absolutely 
is, why not doubt the doubt and so on? It may be pointed out, further, 
that the notion ofknowledge as a medium or instrument which stands 
in an external relation to what absolutely is, which is quite separate 
from it, is a wholly questionable notion which makes knowledge im­
possible from the start. In our fear of error we are excluding the possi­
bility of knowledge. 
75· That we might have knowledge of a sort, e.g. of phenomena, 
but not of what absolutely is, is a wholly obscure notion to which 
no one has managed to give any clear meaning. (Even knowledge 
of Schein or Ersc.heinung, Hegel is later to insist, is knowledge of how 
things really appear to be or manifestly are.) 
76. All these confused conceptions which make knowledge in­
herently impossible must be dismissed : the actual development of 
knowledge itself sets them aside. But knowledge in its first appearance 
is itself merely apparent and so defective. Science cannot merely claim 
to be better than such apparent knowledge, for this is to put itself 
on the level of the latter, and to rely on its mere existence. Nor can 
it appeal to its own rudimentary presence in apparent knowledge, for 
this is not, in apparent knowledge, specially distinctive. We must 
accordingly say what apparent knowledge really is. 
77· Apparent knowledge in all its varied forms is the path taken 
by the natural consciousness till it reaches true knowledge. Along this 
path Soul becomes purified into Spirit : by a complete experience of 
itself it comes to know what it in itself is. 
78. In philosophy fundamental beliefs are always being shaken and 
are not restored in the same form as in the case of ordinary doubt. 
We are not merely trained thinkers who are now trying to think for 
themselves : we are people who for the first time are really learning 

so6 
ANALYSIS 
how to think, for whom the results of all training are in question. 
Philosophical scepticism is radical and not piecemeal. 
J9· But in philosophy scepticism does not merely doubt : it always 
arnves at a determinate positive result, a position whose positive truth 
i֊volves, and is involved by, the negation of the position just con­
Sidered before. Purely negative scepticism is a delusive form of con­
sciousness which is passed on the way. 
So. The goal of knowledge is a situation where there is no longer 
an apparent element to be discounted and transcended, but where 
Notion and object are mutually adequate. Consciousness by its very 
nature presses on to this goal, though it sometimes retreats in terror 
from this endless self-transcendence, and affects to regard all posi­
tions of thought as vain and empty, or as good in their own kind, 
thereby increasing its own vain self-importance. 
8 r .  Toprogressinself-criticism it seems that there must be a criterion 
which knowledge can apply to itself. But knowledge does not seem 
to possess any such criterion wherewith it can test itself. 
82. Knowledge is always given as correlated with an independent, 
self- existent, objective something, the truth. This truth may be for con­
sciousness, but it also is what it is in itself. 
83. This independent, self-existent truth must, however, itself be 
a truth for consciousness, and this seems to make consciousness its own 
criterion, and to point to another self-existent truth with which the first 
truth can be compared, and so on. 
84. In reality, however, both the self-existent truth and the know­
ledge of it fall within consciousness. Or otherwise put, the object as 
it intrinsically is, its essence, on the one hand, and the object as an 
object for consciousness or a Notion, on the other, both fall within 
consciousness, and the latter has to be made to conform to the former. 
Or if we identify Notion and essence, and the object is what this is 
for us, then we have to see if the object conforms to the Notion. Both 
these processes are the same and in them consciousness only applies 
its own criterion to itself. (This paragraph seems pure subjective ideal­
ism-consciousness in testing its ideas, its immanent contents, merely 
confronts them with other ideas, other immanent contents. But it can 
also be interpreted as saying that what objects 'in themselves' are is 
always more or less adequately there in and for consciousness, and 
in knowledge it has merely to replace an inadequate by a more 
adequate revelation.) 
85. Consciousness itself tests itself and compares itselfwith its own 
object : we, the philosophical observers, can only observe it at work. 
Consciousness itself constantly changes its view of the object. What 
the object was intrinsically [an sich] becomes merely what it is for 
consciousness, and a new Ansich develops. We may say that conscious-

I .  S ENSE-CERTAI NTY, §§ 7!MJ2 
ness is adjusting itself to the reality of being, but it is more correct 
to say that the reality of being is adjusting itself to consciousness. In 
this adjustment the criterion applied by consciousness is itself being 
tested and transformed. 
86. For consciousness to negate what at first seemed absolutely 
objective, and for it to regard this absolute truth as a mere truth­
for-consciousness, is for consciousness to have lived through an experi­
ence [ Erjahrung] in the phenomenological sen֋e, which always in­
volves self-transcendence. 
87. The progress of consciousness can be progress for consciousness ; 
it can also be a progress for the phenomenological observer who is 
considering and commenting on consciousness. The phenomenologi­
cal observer sees the links of negation and the resultant positiveness 
which springs from negation in the successive phases of consciousness, 
whereas for consciousness itself each step involves a surprising transi­
tion to a totally new object. The deep dialectic seen by the pheno­
menological observer goes on behind the back of consciousness itself. 
88. Science includes in its content the road to Science, the account 
of its own essential experience. 
8g. The shapes of consciousness are not fully conscious of them­
selves as shapes of consciousness, nor of their place in a continuous 
conscious history, until the end of the road is reached. 
I .  S E N S E - C E R T A I N T Y  
go. The knowledge from which our phenomenological investiga­
tion starts is absolutely immediate knowledge, which is also know­
ledge ofwhat immediately is, of what just is there. What just is there 
must simply be taken in, registered, we must not try to grasp it notion­
ally, nor add anything to what it lays before us. 
9 1 .  This sort of knowledge appears to be inexhaustibly rich in con­
tent and also in extent. What it lays before us seems to be infinitely 
divisible and to stretch away infinitely in time and space. It also 
appears to be the truest knowledge we can possess, since it omits no 
detail of the object. But this kind of knowledge also shows itself up 
(to the phenomenological observer) as the poorest and most abstract 
possible :  it merely acknowledges the being of the object. The con­
sciousness which is aware of what to us merely is there, is likewise 
denuded of content :  it does no thinking work, it connects nothing 
with nothing, it simply registers. It is just I, this consciousness, con­
fronting this immediate content. 
92. When scrutinized, however, sense-consciousness reveals itself 
as less purely immediate than it at fir$t seemed. It involves two typical 

A NALY S I S  
factors, an indefinite registered content and an indefinite registering 
self, and these constitute a necessary form or structure. There is a regis­
tering self only because there is an immediate content to register, and 
there is a registered content only because there is a self to register it. 
We are dealing with a general pattern of experience, not merely with 
a singular fact of existence. (A tendency to self-correction is inherent 
in consciousness and this distinguishes its subjectivity from its objec­
tivity.) 
93· Not only does sense-certainty embody this subject-object pat­
tern, it also involves a claim, something gesetzt, posited, that one factor 
is more true and essential than the other. The object comes before it 
as the True, the essential, that which is there whether there is know­
ledge or not. Knowledge, contrariwise, is given as secondary, unessen­
tial : it presupposes, depends on, is mediated by the object, which is 
truly immediate and does not presuppose or depend on it. (Realism 
is thus not an imposed theory but part and parcel of our most elemen­
tary experiences. We are dealing with something whose deeper nature 
will come out as we examine it, but is not exhaustively and finally 
given.) 
94· Sense-certainty seems, however, to involve an inherent conflict. 
Its object as given in it does not match what that object is given out 
as being. This content is not introduced by a reflective observer, but 
is part and parcel of sense-certainty itself. (It is because sense-certainty 
feels itself not to be the rich thing it on the surface claims to be, that 
it tries to make out, to perceive, what it has before it.) 
95· The immediate 'This' of sense-certainty involves the two con­
nected forms of the 'Now' and the 'Here'. lfwe try to pin the 'Now' 
down bygivingitdefinitecontent, thatcontentis quite inconstant. What 
now obtains is night, but (a little later) what now obtains is not night, 
but noon. (Since what is, always changes its appearance, we never 
get at it: it is the complete thing which underlies changing appear­
ances.) 
96. The now of sense-certainty reveals itself as inherently universal, 
i.e. it cannot be identified with any one definite state of things, though 
it can also indifferently be any one such state or another. (Universals 
obey a different logic from their instances. Not only the characters of 
what is are universals, but its general form is itself universal, i.e. the con-
crete reality behind changing appearances.) 
· 
97. In the use of demonstrative words there is a conflict between 
what we really say and what we mean to say (our Meinung, was wir 
meinen). We mean to express what is ultimately individual, but this 
is inexpressible : all we succeed in expressing is what is universal. 
98. The demonstrative 'Here' behaves exactly like the demonstra­
tive 'Now', and always changes its application. It is therefore a case 

I .  S E N S E- C E RTA I NTY, §§93-1 10 
509 
of pure universality. We cannot pin down the individual position qua 
individual, only individuality in general. 
gg. The universality of pure being which has revealed itself as the 
essence of sense-certainty involves abstraction, but it is not, as it 
seemed to be, real abstraction from rich contents, but abstraction from 
the mere meaning or claim to have rich contents. (Individuality on 
Hegel's view is a mere moment of living, concrete universality.) 
100. Since the object of sense-certainty is not the definite contentful 
thing it claimed to be, the phenomenological emphasis shifts to the Sub­
ject. My experience becomes the rich, colourful thing. What I mean 
is important because it stems from me [Meinen and mein]. (Like 
Descartes, Hegel shifts to the individual Subject as that of which we 
are certain.) 
101 . But in the flux of experience the me which experiences always 
has different successive contents to its experience, and cannot there­
fore be identified with such contents. The me of the moment may mean 
to be definite in content, but it cannot express this definiteness. It 
is in a sense as much a plurality as a single me. 
102. The me also stands essentially opposed to other mes and cannot 
say how this me differs from another. Each man is, as an experient, 
every man. (The individual as such cannot be understood or 
deduced.) 
1 03. We now move to a position where not the mere object, nor 
the mere subject, is the rich, contentful thing, but the whole structured 
subject-object situation. 
1 04-7. The whole structured subject-object situation is as essenti­
ally fluctuating as the mere subject or object considered before. The 
wholly definite time-situation we try to pin down at once becomes 
a matter of the past : the only present that can survive is a universal 
present which remains what it is despite variation of content, and 
which has subordinate presents within it. From the many 'Nows' 
which arise and pass away we come to a 'Now' which always is, no 
matter how long a happening may b'e. This is of course a universal. 
(The substantial, the permanent is the Universal not the particular.) 
108. The wholly definite 'Here', the point, cannot be seized. Every 
real 'Here' breaks up into 'Heres', or points to 'Heres' beyond itself. 
But in all these 'Heres' the universal 'Here' persists. (We cannot get 
parts, but strictly speaking only the whole of Reality, and the whole 
of Reality is a universal present in all its so-called parts.) 
1 09. Sense-certainty never grasps definite particulars but always 
deludes itself into thinking that it does. In the Mysteries bread and 
wine are consumed to show the nullity of the solid things of sense, 
and hungry animals reveal the same mystical wisdom. 
1 1 0. Language, being divine and rational, frustrates the attempt 

A NALYS I S  
of sense-certainty to grasp surd particulars : it only expresses uni­
versals. The truth of sense-certainty is taking-for-true, i.e. perception. 
(The dialectic is much influenced by arguments in Plato's Theaetetus, 
where the impossibility of reconciling knowledge with radical subject­
objectfluxis maintained, and the unchanging universal ideas are shown 
to be necessary. Wittgenstein would regard Hegel's treatment as rest­
ing on a misunderstanding of demonstratives, which are unique lin­
guistic instruments, and neither name nor describe.) 
I I .  PE R C E PT I O N  
I I I .  Immediate certainty's true object is the universal, but it wants 
to deal with the immediate 'This'. Perception acknowledges the uni­
versal, the general pattern, to be its object, but it does not yet see 
this to be the essential element in its object : it is we, the phenomeno­
logical observers, who see this to be the essential element and the 
necessary outcome of what has gone before. For perception itself, the 
essen tialelemen tis again the object, as in the sense-certainty. The object 
is the essential, constant, independent element, while perception is 
given as unessential, variable, dependent. Perception does not see that 
subject and object are equally the unessential forms in which a uni­
versal pattern is cast. 
I I 2. The object can, however, only be a universal pattern in so 
far as it unites many distinct elements, i.e. properties, in its pattern. 
The perceptual object is really given with the interior richness which 
the object of sense is only taken to have. (Universality is meaningless 
without specificity.) 
I I 3· The thing of perception is sense-given, but its sensuousness 
is universal, i.e. appears in the form of a property. Sense is aufgehoben 
(destroyed yet preserved) in the perceptual thing. But the universality 
of perception necessarily dirempts itself into a number of mutually 
exclusive properties which at the same time it brings together. Its 
structure involves an inherent conflict. From one point of view it is 
an absolute unity, that of a space-time region, which brings the prop­
erties indifferently together, so that where the one is the other is also, 
while from another point of view it breaks up into the many distinct 
properties, each of which can be considered in and for itself. 
I I 4. The more loose 'Also' of a medium points, however, to some 
more absolute kind of unity which excludes otherness rigidly from 
itself. This absolute unity can be attributed to the several properties, 
or it can be attributed to the thing as such. We have the alternatives, 
it would seem, of having either a bundle of properties or a metaphysi­
cal peg to hang them on or both. (Very uncertain of interpretation.) 

I I .  PERC E PT I O N ,  §§ 1 1 1-1 21 
I I5. The perceived Thing represents a difficult compromise of (a) 
a set of properties loosely together and supplementing each other in 
the Thing ; (b) the Thing as the space-time location or medium in 
which the properties are brought together ; (c) the properties treated 
as pure universals having a status outside of the particular Thing. 
I I 6. The dialectic now takes a new turn. The perceptual object 
being this curious mixture of internal togetherness and apartness, the 
subject regards it as essentially constant and selfsame. All departures 
from Sichselbstgleichheit are attributed to the subject, are its illusions, 
and are not to be found in the object. 
I 1 7. Consciousness now becomes aware of the contradictions in the 
object which only we, the phenomenological observers, have seen in 
it. The object first presents itself as a pure unity, but the properties 
are all universal and could exist outside of it. The unity of the object 
is therefore my confusion or mistake, and the object is really only an 
association of universals. But in such a loose association the properties 
are not effectively brought together so as to exclude one another: the 
object is therefore again a pure unity, and the properties mere sides 
of it. But the properties are often mutually indifferent, so that the 
object's unity again vanishes. The properties now become so wholly 
detached that they no longer contrast with anything, and no longer 
are properties. We are back at the blank being of sense-certainty. 
I I8. Consciousness now repeats the whole circle somewhat dif­
ferently. It becomes conscious of the essential untruth of all percep­
tion, and attributes this untruth to itself, being at the same time made 
aware ofits power to correct perception and arrive at the naked reality 
behind perception, which corrected picture it again recognizes as its 
own. 
I I g. The doctrine of primary and secondary qualities is now de­
veloped. The object itself is conceived as profoundly simple, but it 
is perceived with a variety of properties because it affects various 
bodily organs, eye, ear, etc. The conscious Ego now becomes the com­
mon medium in which all the Thing's sense-aspects are brought 
together. 
I 20. By a new shift in the dialectic it is made plain that, if the Thing 
is conceived as absolutely One, it will be no longer possible to distin­
guish it from other things : all will be wholly blank unities and so indis­
tinguishable. A Thing must be what it is only by having its own prop­
erties, those proper and peculiar to itself. Since each of these properties 
has its own separate being, the Thing again becomes a loose associa­
tion of properties : it is A and also B and also C, etc. 
I 2 I .  Consciousness now, instead of attributing the plurality of the 
Thing's properties to itself, and making the thing intrinsically One, 
makes the Thing intrinsically an assemblage of properties, of free 

.)12 
ANALYS I S  
'matters'-the physics of Hegel's day spoke of electrical, calorific, 
chromatic matters-while the object's unity is a sort of fiction for 
which consciousness alone is responsible. 
I 22. Consciousness now gets tired of attributing such diverse errors 
to itself, and simply recognizes that the Thing itself (as reflected into 
itself) has this diversity of opposing aspects in it. It at one moment 
shows itself as a profound unity, at another moment as a loose assem­
blage of properties. 
I 23. Consciousness no longer attributes the object's oscillation 
between profound unity and dirempted multiplicity to consciousness, 
but to the object. But a new device occurs to it. The object is put 
forth as profoundly One, while its diversity of aspects are due to its 
relations, not with consciousness, but with other objects, which as it 
were call forth different responses from it. 
I 24. It seems absurd, however, that Things without intrinsic dif­
ferences should be coaxed into showing difference by their mere rela­
tions with other Things without intrinsic difference. We are therefore 
forced to postulate an internal distinctiveness [ Unterschied] which is 
essential to the object, and an external diversity [ Verschiedenheit] from 
other objects, which is an unessential consequence of this. It is because 
Things are intrinsically distinctive that they are also extrinsically 
diverse. 
1 25. We are, however, unable to distinguish this internal dis­
tinctiveness from the external diversity. The Thing's absolute charac­
ter seems the same as its relatedness to other Things and vice versa. 
I 26. Same point restated. The Thing's absolute self-relation, 
which negates all otherness, also shows itself up as being no more than 
thoroughgoing relation to others. 
1 2 7. Same point. The extrinsic which is none the less quite neces­
sary is really intrinsic. 
1 28. We cannot draw subtle distinctions between 'the object as it 
intrinsically is' and 'the object as it is in relation to other Things'. 
The former is the latter and the latter the former: we have a dis­
tinction without a difference (i.e. a merely meant, intended, verbal 
distinction) . 
I 29. The Thing is therefore essentially overcome as it was previ­
ously overcome on its sensuous side. The latter revealed itself as pure 
universality, but as a universality infected with several conflicts : that 
of the universal and the individual, that of the unity of the properties 
in the Thing and their isolation as 'free matters', that of being intrinsic­
ally this or that and that of being something only in relation to other 
Things. The nature of the Thing is therefore simply the nature of the 
Understanding which constitutes it, and in which all these tensions 
are always present. 

I l l .  F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D ER STA N D I N G , §§ 122-1 35 
513 
I 30. The sophistry of perception tries to save itself by a device of 
aspects and 'in so fars'. It talks of the perceived object in so far as 
it is one object, in so Jar as it is many properties, in so far as it has 
self-existence, in so far as it is related to other things, etc. This sort 
of device must be abandoned. It is the pure universality of the Begrijf, 
of the Notion, which emerges, which involves in inseparable union 
the universal, the specific and the singular, the separate and the inter­
related. 
I 3 I .  Perceptual understanding is dominated by the empty abstrac­
tions of individuality and universality, of the essential and the un­
essential, etc. It despises philosophy for concerning itself with Gedan­
kendinge, but in effect deals with nothing else itself, and merely oscil­
lates from one crude abstract thought to another. If it could realize 
that it is dealing with thoughts, concepts, it would be their master, 
and shape them as it wills, but it imagines that it is dealing with real 
matters, substances, etc. In its vain wanderings the perceptual under­
standing fails to arrive at the truth of things though it plainly reveals 
its own untruth. 
I I I .  F O R C E  A N D  T H E  U N D E R S TAN D I N G  
I 32. The Thing of perception has passed away into a universal 
which is unconditioned since it includes what is specific and individual 
in itself, and is not merely an essence set over against the unessential. 
Consciousness has implicitly grasped the notional character of its 
object, but, not having itself become purely notional, fails to recognize 
itself in the object before it, which is still treated as an object, alien 
to itself. 
I 33· The object of consciousness is consciousness's own notional 
object, but the consciousness of this notional character, its Fursichsein, 
is lacking. Hence it comes before consciousness as freely active in inde­
pendence of consciousness ; consciousness merely watches it in action. 
It is we, the phenomenological observers, who must transform the 
object for consciousness till consciousness can see and grasp itself in 
the object. 
I 34· Consciousness has thoroughly identified its object's being-for­
selfand its being-for-another. This is not merely the object's form but 
its content as well : it is the sort of object that in being for itself is for 
another, and vice versa. And this unity of the two aspects is all that 
the object has become. 
I 35· None the less, since the aspects are identified, they are also 
distinguished, and consciousness therefore has before it the contrast 
of a number ofloosely arrayed elements, on the one hand, and a pro-

ANALY S I S  
found unity on the other. But these aspects are no longer given as 
rival views which merely oust one another, but each is given as essenti­
ally and necessarily passing over into the other. 
I 36. The process of Force is precisely the process in which dis­
persed, independent elements come out from a unity in which they 
were lost, and again lose themselves in this unity. The dispersed ele­
ments are the expression or manifestation of Force, while Force 
proper, or Force unexpressed, is the unity out of which these mani­
festations issue. For thought the distinctions may have no substance, 
but the thought has to be carried out in the stuff of perception, and 
for perception Force unmanifest is obviously different from Force 
manifest. The two forms ofForce are always vanishing into each other, 
for Force exists in so far as they keep up this mutual vanishing. 
I 37· Though it is Force itself which by its nature passes from its 
unexpressed to its expressed form, these forms appear to be mutually 
external. Not only is this so, but the passage from one to the other 
necessarily appears as an external incitation or solicitation. Some­
thing external to the unmanifest Force provokes it to manifest itself, 
and something external to the manifest Force provokes it to retreat 
into unmanifest latency. This external solicitation is only in appear­
ance external, and is really an inseparable aspect of the Force itself. 
I 38. A Force is thus seen as essentially breaking up, dirempting 
itselfinto two Forces, one that is solicited to express itself (or withdraw 
itself from expression) and the other which solicits it to do just this. 
On examination, however, the soliciting Force is itself solicited into 
soliciting by the Force it solicits, and hence both Forces solicit and 
are solicited by one another. 
I 39· These two Forces solicit and are solicited by one another, each 
appearing in relation to the other as medium in which properties are 
distinguished, and as a merely latent power. Each may be said to work 
upon the other, or to be worked on by it, because that other is not 
really distinct from its own self. 
I 4o. The difference of the two Forces or aspects of Force is both 
a difference in content (medium of properties and latent power) and 
form (soliciting and solicited) . The distinction ofform is given as in­
trinsic, while that of content exists merely for the observer. But in 
the actual process ofForce both these differences are eliminated. The 
active solicitor turns into the passive object of solicitation and vice 
versa. For the phenomenological observer, too, the notional unity of 
the two extremes is evident : the solicitor is also the solicited, and the 
realized content is also the latent form and vice versa. 
I 4I . Each aspect of Force is a reality on its own, but its being con­
sists essentially in a movement towards, a vanishing into the other 
aspect. Its being consists in a Gesetztsein, a positedness or being posited 

I I I .  FORCE A N D  THE UNDERSTA N D I N G , §§ 136--1 50 
515 
by the other aspect. There is nothing fixed and substantial in either 
aspect by itself: the Notion of both is found in their essential unity. 
The true being of Force is not the reality it seems to gain or lose by 
being expressed or unexpressed, but the universal, the thought, which 
is present in both these states. 
142. Force therefore appears in two guises, as a substantial entity 
active in the world of phenomena, and as a pure Notion behind or 
beneath phenomena. The latter is the truer view. 
143. Consciousness now sees itself as penetrating beneath the sur­
face show [Schein] of things, with its perpetual vanishing of factors 
and forces, to a true background of which the surface show is the 
appearance [Erscheinung]. In the surface play of Forces everything 
negates and cancels everything, but the true background is wholly 
positive. This whole background consists essentially of pure Notions 
which are part of the Subject's innermost self-consciousness. The Sub­
ject does not, however, as yet realize their subjective, notional charac­
ter, and sees them as an inner essential depth in the objects themselves. 
1 44. The Understanding therefore at this stage conceives of a true, 
supersensible, permanent world, a Jenseits which lies essentially 
beyond the Diesseits of this vanishing world of appearances. This world 
is a world of notional contents inadequately conceived as alien to the 
mind. 
1 45· The conscious sphere of appearances is the middle term 
through which the Understanding penetrates inferentially to the in­
ner, essential nature of things. 
146. The inner, essential nature of things is readily conceived as 
a mere void, a region in which nothing positive can be known. (Kant's 
thing-in-itself.) Even subjective fancies are better than notions so 
wholly void of content. 
147. But the inner, essential is essentially the truth of appearance, 
the truth in which immediate sense-certainty and perception are over­
come, notionally transformed. It stands in a negative, but not merely 
negative, relation to the world of appearance. 
148. Since Force and its expression are through and through dia­
lectical, the soliciting being also the solicited, and the medium of prop­
erties also the latent force, the Understanding is driven beyond the 
play of Forces to the principle present in them all. This is no other 
than the law which governs all the manifestations of one Force: 
149. A law is an abiding image of restless appearances, a principle 
which, in governing change and revealed in change, is itself unchang­
ing. The supersensible world is a tranquil kingdom of laws. 
150. The kingdom of laws has an ever varying actual existence in 
the world under ever varying circumstances. It tends to be thought 
of in an ever more abstract way and so becomes refined into the mere 

ANALY S I S  
empty form of law as such. Hegel thinks that the law of universal 
gravitation has this empty character : it merely says that everything 
has a law-determined relation to everything else. This is important 
only as setting bounds to chance and sensuous independence. 
1 5 1 .  Hegel thinks that beyond specific laws is the bare conception 
oflaw, which transcends specific laws and even law as such. It reduces 
all distinctions of content and form which occur in laws into an abso­
lute unity, a pure necessity. 
I 52. The duplicity of Force and expression reappears in the case 
oflaws. Laws have both an explicit specification in which all the dif­
ferences to which they apply have a distinct expression : they also 
occur as pure universalities in which all such specification is somehow 
absorbed and nullified. Simple electricity, e.g., is the absolute unity· 
behind positive and negative electricity and the laws connecting 
them, simple gravity is the absolute unity behind the factors of mass, 
distance, velocity, etc., and the laws connecting them. Wherever there 
are laws there is a deep underlying unity expressed in them, and every 
deep unity expresses itself in characteristic laws. 
I 53· In the common representation of the deep nature behind laws, 
a law is readily thought of as a mere by-product of the relation of 
the factors present in the law, e.g. motion is an accidental relation 
between the independent variables of distance and time, etc. This is 
a deeply wrong way of conceiving the matter. Motion is in reality 
the whole which distance and time alike presuppose, and in which 
alone they make sense, and so on in other similar cases, e.g. gravita­
tion. There can be no laws except where there is a common deeper 
nature behind the laws. 
I 54· The Understanding is now tempted to regard the deeper unity 
behind the law as something that we postulate and which is not prop­
erly to be attributed to the thing. The nature behind the law is merely 
the law otherwise expressed. The process of tautologization, of reduc­
ing the same to the same, is what we call 'explanation' .  Various elec­
trical phenomena arise in a law-governed manner because Electricity 
is their common ground. 
I55· We are, however, brought to realize that the distinction 
between the law and the unitary nature behind the law cannot be 
regarded as merely a distinction that we draw. The thing itself involves 
the distinction which has therefore a position in the supersensible 
background of things. 
I 56. The very nature of the intelligible world is thus to draw dis­
tinctions which turn out to be no distinctions. It is the selfsame which 
repels itself from itself, and this element repelled is in consequence 
attracted to what has repelled it, for it is the same 'at bottom'. (Passage 
illustrates the essential peculiarities of Hegelian logic.) 

I I I .  FORCE AND T H E  U ND E RSTAN D I NG, §§ 15 1-162 
51 7  
I 57· Hegel now passes to the difficult conception that, in addition 
to the first intelligible world which is a tranquil kingdom oflaws, there 
must also be a second intelligible world which embodies all the dis­
tinctions and exclusions which we find in the phenomenal world. 
There must not only, to use Platonic language, be single Ideas of 
essences multiply instantiated, there must also be Ideas of Instances 
qua Instances, and of Instantiation as such. This second intelligible 
world will be the inverse of the first one. 
I58. The inversion is now rather fancifully worked out by Hegel 
in the statement that what is sweet in the first intelligible world is 
sour in the second, what is a north pole in the first is a south pole 
in the second, what is revenge here is punishment there, what is 
honoured here is dishonoured there, what is a disgrace here is a saving 
grace there, and so on. The inversions of the Sermon on the Mount 
are used to illuminate the inversions of physical explanation. 
I 59· On examination, however, the inverted world shows itself to 
be indistinguishable from the sense-world of which it purports (at a 
second remove) to be the essence. Everything in the sense-world is there 
only with a nuance of difference that really amounts to nothing. It 
is quite as one-sided in its way as the sense-world and the first intelli­
gible world are one-sided. All it embodies is in fact present in the 
tensions and oppositions of the actual sense-world, where there is a 
real north pole lying side by side with the real south pole, and so on. 
I 6o. We progress to a true view of the relation of essential. nature 
to outward manifestation if we see both the profound opposition of 
the two, which must not be ignored, and the fact that each factor 
is the opposite of its opposite, and so includes the whole opposition 
and its opposite in itself. The supersensible world, in particular, in 
being the inverse of the sensible world, includes the sensible world 
in itself. (Cf. Plotinus : Everything that is yonder is also here.) Such 
a distinction within a profound identity is called by Hegel 'infinity', 
since the thing is not bounded by an opposite alien and external to 
itself. 
I6I. 'Infinity' means that we have (a) a unitary nature, e.g. 
motion, electricity, which dirempts itself into (b) a number of distinct, 
interconnected factors, space, time, positive electricity, negative elec­
tricity etc. which none the less (c) show themselves as overcome, can­
celled in their common unity. They are inseparable aspects of the 
common unity in question. 
I 62. There is no problem in the self-diremption of an absolute 
unity. It can only be an absolute unity if it also dirempts itself and 
is itself in such diremption. If it merely stood opposed to diremption, 
it would not be the absolute unity, but be itself dirempted from some­
thing else. 

ANALYS I S  
I 63. The truth of all these convolutions lies in the self-conscious 
Understanding which is in all this merely discovering itself and its 
varied aspects and internal tensions. (This need not be interpreted 
in a purely subjective manner. The Understanding has not manu­
factured the natural world. But both are sides of the Absolute Idea 
whose function it is to realize itself in self-conscious Spirit.) 
I64. The Understanding does not, however, realize that all these 
dissolving distinctions are merely the internal manreuvres of its own 
self-consciousness ; only we, the phenomenological observers, realize 
this. 
I65. The two extremes of the Understanding gazing into the inner 
world of essence, and this inner realm itself, are now merged together. 
The curtain of appearance is drawn aside, and the Ego, qua expression 
of the Absolute Idea, will come to see only itself beyond. But for it 
to realize that it is seeing itself, it must itself go behind the curtain, 
and to do this requires several prior steps and stages. 
I V .  T H E  T R U T H  O F  S E L F- C E R T A I NTY 
I 66. So far certainty has always been outward-turned. It has 
affirmed the truth of something other than itself. But this reference 
to sheer otherness has shown itself up as empty and untrue, and a 
certainty has arisen which measures up to its truth : certainty is certain 
of certainty, and consciousness has its own truth in consciousness. A 
residual distinction remains, but it is also a distinction overruled : a 
distinction between a concept as an act or cognitive motion, and the 
tranquil content which is itself, or between the concept as the mere 
self-being of the object and the object as there-for-another. The con­
scious Ego is both the related subject-object terms and the relation 
between them : it has an Other which it overreaches and sees as itself. 
I 67. In the new state of self-consciousness the features of the pre­
vious other-consciousness are summed up and preserved, but only as 
insubstantial, vanishing phases. There must be a trace in it of the im­
mediate separate being of the sense-given world, which is, however, 
given as a mere appearance, and devoid of genuine substance. Self­
consciousness feels the unity of this seeming other world with itself 
in the form of a desire to abolish this seeming otherness and to discover 
itself in this alien content. (The nature of Desire : to abolish the other­
ness of the Other.) 
I68. To desire in the subject, there corresponds in the object life, 
which, like desire, seeks to achieve infinity and to be itself (without 
knowing itself) in its other. The living object has implicitly the same 

I V .  T H E  TRUTH O F  S ELF-CERTAINTY, §§ I64-1 75 
519 
self-transcendent completeness which is explicitly realized in self-con­
sciousness. 
169. The essence of life is infinity as the supersession of all dis­
tinctions, tranquilly seated at the centre of axial rotation, the moving 
essence of time congealed into spatial solidity. All distinctions in the 
living organism pass away in flux, but must have a momentary solidity 
and separateness in order to pass away in this manner. Fluidity, pure 
movement, is the essence of the living. 
1 70. The independent members of the living organism have their 
limited self-existence which, however, is nothing but their relation to 
the total flux ofliving, and which itself in its truth is nothing beyond 
a constant diremption into independent shapes. The unity of life is 
constantly dirempted, because only as dirempted can it continue to 
be a unity. Shapes pass away and are superseded by other shapes, 
because their real Substance is the flux which is constantly being 
dirempted in them. 
1 7 1 .  As fluidity, life always involves a gamut of independent forms, 
each asserting itself against the others, and against the whole flux 
itself. Either can be regarded as the Ansich, the inner self of life, while 
the other is merely the other side of this. Life constantly consumes 
and dissolves its solid structures, and therefore has general dissolution 
as its constant essence, but again it regenerates such structures out 
of such consumption and dissolution, and therefore has articulate 
diremption as its constant essence. This turning and twisting is the 
essence of life :  life indeed is absolute turning and twisting. It is an 
ever developing, ever dissolving whole which, in development and 
dissolution, simply maintains its being. 
1 72. Life proceeds from immediate unity through articulation and 
process back to a like unity, which, however, being repeated, is a 
generic unity. The constant simple genus which is maintained in life 
points to consciousness, for which alone such a genus exists qua genus. 
' 73· Self-consciousness which contemplates genera, and which is 
itself purely generic, is at first aware of itself as a pure Ego, an extreme 
abstraction which will however, enrich and differentiate itself. 
' 74· The pure Ego is the simple universal which seeks (at this stage) 
to assert itself by abolishing the articulate forms which stand or seem 
to stand opposed to it. It is essentially desire, need. 
' 75· The object which the pure Ego of self-consciousness seeks 
essentially to abolish is, however, essential to its being as an abolishing 
activity, and is therefore always regenerated as much as abolished. 
Self-consciousness can therefore only achieve satisfaction in so far as 
the object abolishes itself, shows itself to self-consciousness as really 
being self-consciousness. Self-consciousness can only achieve satisfac­
tion in another self-consciousness. 

520 
ANALYS I S  
1 76. The manner in which the living organism abolishes articulate 
otherness and in which ordinary desire does so, are merely undevel­
oped versions of the abolition of otherness which occurs in the mutual 
recognition of two self-conscious persons. 
I 77· Only in a self-consciousness for a self-consciousness do we have 
a true, accomplished case of self-consciousness, where the object of 
consciousness is also its subject. Animal desire is only universal sub­
stance pursuing universal substance : here subject pursues and also 
finds subject. We have now risen to the level of Spirit, the I which 
is a We, and the We which is an I. We have moved from the coloured 
show of this-world sense, and the empty notional night of Understand­
ing, into the spiritual daylight of what is completely present. (Hegel 
holds that the understanding of other minds, far from being more 
obscure than the understanding of things, is the model and paradigm 
in terms of which intercourse with things can assume a limited clarity. 
In all intercourse with things we are striving towards the complete 
penetration and lucidity of social intercourse.) 
L O R D S H I P  A N D  B O N D A G E  
1 78. Self-consciousness exists in and for itself inasmuch, and only 
inasmuch, as it exists in and for itself for another, i.e. inasmuch as 
it is acknowledged. It is therefore essentially one only in duplication, 
and reveals itself in a number of traits which have to be kept firmly 
apart, and yet reveal themselves as always melting into one another, 
and dissolving this apartness. 
1 79· Self-consciousness lives outside of itself in another self-con­
sciousness, in which it at once loses and also finds itself. 
1 8o. Self-consciousness is intrinsically set to eliminate this alien 
selfbood, but, in being so set, it iև both set to eliminate the other in 
order to achieve its own self-certainty, and also to eliminate itself in 
the process, since it is itself that other. 
181 . This dual elimination involves, however, a return to self, since 
what is eliminated is its own other-being, while it at the same time 
permits the other to be other, since it removes its own being from the 
other. 
I 82. The process just outlined in 1 78-8 I is not, however, carried 
out solely by one consciousness on the other, but by both con­
sciousnesses on each other. It can only be successfully carried out by 
either consciousness because it sees the other doing to it just what it 
does to the other : each in fact demands that the other should treat 
it just as it treats the other. 
I 83. Each consciousness then acts on itself as much as it acts on 
the other, and what it does is as much done by the other to it, as 
by it to the other consciousness. 

I V .  T H E  TRUTH O F  S ELF- C E RTAI NTY, §§ 1 76-Igo 
521 
I 84. Separate consciousnesses re-enact at a higher level the action 
of mutually soliciting forces which, in soliciting each other, in effect 
only put themselves forth. Each uses the other as the means by which 
it achieves self-consciousness. To mutual solicitation mutual recogni­
tion here corresponds, as well as the recognition of mutual recogni­
tion. 
I 85. The recognition ofself in its other at first presents itself in a 
one-sided form in which only the one side does the recognizing, and 
the other side is merely recognized. 
I 86. Self-consciousness is at first simple being-for-self which is 
attached to an immediate individuality which excludes all others from 
itself. Self at first confronts self, not as an infinite negation of the nega­
tion making all its own, but as a simple case of natural being facing 
another such case, both deeply absorbed in the business ofliving. Each 
is conscious only of its own being, and so has no true certainty of 
itself, since the being of the self is essentially a socially acknowledged 
being. 
I 8]. Self-consciousness must, however, express itself as the nega­
tion of all mere objectivity and particularity. This initially takes the 
form of desiring the death of the other at the risk of its own life. Self­
consciousness must be willing to sacrifice everything concrete for its 
own infinite self-respect and the similar respect of all others. A life­
and-death struggle therefore ensues between the two rival self-con­
sCiousnesses. 
I 88. For both members to die in the life-and-death struggle would 
not, however, resolve the tension between them. (Nor would the death 
of one of them do it.) Death certainly eliminates all opposition, 
but only for others, or in a 'dead' manner. Death does not preserve 
the struggle that it eliminates in and for the parties in question. 
For preservation, it is essential that the parties in question should 
live. 
I 8g. The demotion of another self-consciousness so that it does not 
really compete with my self-consciousness, now takes the new form of 
making it thing-like and dependent, the self-consciousness of a bonds­
man as opposed to that of a lord. That the two self-consciousnesses 
are at bottom the same becomes deeply veiled. 
1 go. The self-consciousness of the lord is essentially related to the 
being of the mere things he uses and uses up, and these he enjoys 
through the bondsman's self-consciousness. The bondsman prepares 
and arranges things for the enjoyment of the lord. The self-conscious­
ness of the lord is likewise essentially related to the self-consciousness 
of the bondsman through the various punitive, constraining, and re­
warding instruments which keep the bondsman in thrall. The bonds­
man working on things does not completely overcome their thingness, 

522 
A NALYSIS 
since they do not become what he wishes them to be, or not for him­
self. It is the lord who reaps the enjoyment from the bondsman's 
labours. 
1 9 1 .  We thus achieve an essentially unbalanced relationship in 
which the bondsman altogether gives up his being-for-self in favour 
of the lord. The lord uses him as an instrument to master the thing 
for his own (the lord's) purposes, and not for the bondsman's, and 
the bondsman acquiesces in the situation, and becomes in fact part 
and parcel of the total objective situation. This means, however, that 
the lord cannot get the reciprocal recognition that his self-conscious­
ness demands from a consciousness so degraded and distorted. What 
the lord sees in the bondsman, or what the bondsman sees in the lord, 
is not what either sees in himself. 
1 92. The lord therefore paradoxically depends for his lordship on 
the bondsman's self-consciousness, and entirely fails of the fully real­
ized independence of status which his self-consciousness demands. 
193. The truth of independent self-consciousness is therefore to be 
found rather in the bondsman's self-consciousness than in the lord's. 
Each is therefore the inverse of what it immediately and superficially 
is given as being. 
1 94. The bondsman in his boundless quaking respect for the lord 
becomes shaken out of his narrow self-identifications and self-interest 
and rises to the absolute negativity, the disinterested all-embracing­
ness of true self-consciousness. He becomes the ideal which he con­
templates in his lord. 
195. The bondsman has the further advantage that in working on 
the object he as it were preserves his labour, makes the outward thing 
his own and puts himself into it, whereas the lord's dealings with the 
object end in vanishing enjoyments. The bondsman overcomes the 
otherness and mere existence of material thing hood more thoroughly 
than the lord, and so achieves a more genuine self-consciousness. 
1 96. The bondsman in overcoming the mere existence of material 
thinghood also rises above the quaking fear which was his first reaction 
to absolute otherness as embodied in the lord. Then he achieved self­
consciousness in opposition to such otherness, now he achieves a self­
consciousness not opposed to otherness, but which discovers itself in 
otherness. In shaping the thing creatively, he becomes aware of his 
own boundless originality. Hegel thinks that the discipline of service 
and obedience is essential to self-consciousness : mere mastery of things 
alone would not yield it. Only the discipline of service enables the 
conscious being to master himself, i.e. his finite, contingent, natural 
self. Without this discipline formative ability would degenerate into 
a narrow cleverness placed at the service of personal self-will. (Hegel 
suggests that a period of subjection to others is essential to the highest 

I V .  TH E TRUTH OF S ELF-CERTAI NTY, §§ t91-202 
523 
magisterial rationality. Not to have undergone such discipline results 
in a trivialization of self-consciousness which never rises above petty 
finite interests. It would seem that the permissive bringing-up of child­
ren is implicitly condemned, and that 'imperialism' and 'colonialism' 
at certain stages of development are given a justification.) 
F R E E D O M  O F  S E L F - C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
1 97. In the servile self-consciousness we have the moments of pure, 
universal being-for-self projected on to the lord, and its own implicit 
self-existence projected on to the particular contentual things it elab­
orates. These moments are not united in the servile consciousness, 
but for us, the observers, they are identical, and we are therefore 
brought to think of an essentially infinite, free, thinking self-conscious­
ness which preserves its selfsameness in the various purely conceptual 
contents that it envisages. At first, however, its content is not unfolded 
nor set in motion, and it appears as merely the unfettered universality 
of thought. 
· 
1 98. The form of self-consciousness now before us can be identified 
with that historical Stoicism which makes of consciousness a purely 
thinking essence to which nothing can be of moment except to the 
extent that it puts its own thinking being into it. 
1 99. In this form of self-consciousness all detailed content of con­
sciousness, natural existences, feelings, desires, aims (whether our own 
or other people's) becomes unessential ; only the pure conscious 
thought that we put into them counts. The Stoic self-consciousness 
is indifferent to the master-slave distinction : whether on the throne 
of the world like Marcus Aurelius, or in the slave's chains ofEpictetus, 
it withdraws into the solitary sovereignty, the pure universality of 
thought. Such a withdrawal is characteristic of a period in which high 
culture goes with universal fear and bondage. 
200. The pure Ego of Stoicism, though not devoid of content, is 
inward-turned whatever its content, and has therefore an abstract in­
difference to natural being which it leaves to take its own course. The 
freedom of such Stoicism is not, therefore, a living, contentful free­
dom, but the mere idea of such freedom, drawn away from life and 
things into itself. This means that unless content is externally given 
to this consciousness, it cannot by itself determine the True and the 
Good. It has no criterion other than the wholly empty, abstract one 
of the reasonable, a notion as tedious as it is superficially elevated. 
20 1 .  The Stoic consciousness may negate particular content, but 
it altogether fails to negate this negation, i.e. to appropriate such con­
tent to itself. The specificity of its contents still falls outside of its think­
ing essence. 
202. Scepticism carries into realization what Stoicism merely 

ANA LYS I S  
notionally thinks. I t  explicitly negates the rich determinate content 
of life and action. All tasks and all desires become for it vanishing 
quantities. 
203. Scepticism carries to the limit the dialectic which has been 
sapping Sense-certainty, Perceptual acquaintance, Understanding, 
and the master-serf relationship, a dialectic which has steadily elimi­
nated determinateness from our thinking and left us with empty scien­
tific abstractions from the last of which we now withdraw our cre­
dence. 
204. Scepticism does not regretfully see the solid world of reality 
going up in the flames, nor even its own perception of that world, it 
does not even repine at the sacrifice of its professional sophistries 
which have framed the bonfire. In seeing all this vanish, it has become 
confirmed in the consciousness of its own freedom from conviction, 
in the simple negativity of its own thinking. 
20!'). This sceptical freedom from determinate conviction is also, 
however, a giddy whirl of disorderly, ever dissolving, ever reinstated, 
personal beliefs. The sceptic in fact confesses that, as a finite, contin­
gent, empirical person, he is everlastingly subject to many definite, 
unjustifiable convictions. He has to continue with the business of ordi­
nary living, acting and speaking. He oscillates continually between 
the high detachment of universal scepticism and a welter of unreason­
able beliefs. Even his pure scepticism is a thesis for which doubtful 
arguments are adduced, and he must in practice rely on the deli­
verances of the senses and the conventions of morality. The sceptical 
self-consciousness is in fact deeply self-contradictory, and its reason­
ings and counter-reasonings are like the arguments of children con­
cerned to contradict one another and always to have the last word. 
206. Scepticism is self-contradictory but unaware of its inner self­
contradiction. Its 'truth' is a consciousness which makes self-con­
tradiction its explicit principle, which is always conscious of itself 
both as selfsame, unchangeable, and free, and as confused, variable, 
and distorted. In it both the magisterial and the servile elements are 
present in uneasy unity. This new emergent consciousness is called 
the Unhappy Consciousness. 
207. This Unhappy Consciousness essentially moves towards the 
accomplished goal of Spirit, which involves the vision of one self-con­
sciousness in another. For the Unhappy Consciousness, however, this 
goal is remote and implicit : its two sides are always being forced 
together in unity, only to fall painfully apart. 
208. The Unhappy Consciousness separates its unchangeableness 
from its variability, and regards the former as exclusively essential, 
the latter as wholly unessential. Being an unhappy, divided conscious­
ness, it identifies itselfwith the unessential, changeable element, but 

I V .  THE TRUTH O F  S ELF-CERTA I N TY, §§ 2o3-21 7 
525 
it cannot help having the unchangeable element as its true essence. 
It is therefore in the paradoxical position of having its true essence 
outside of itself, and for ever trying to be what, from another point 
of view, it essentially is. 
209. The Unhappy Consciousness cannot unite itself with its un­
changeable essence without importing changeableness into that 
essence and so starting a fresh cycle of struggle and misery. 
2 1 0. In this movement various identifications and separations of 
unchangeable essence and variable non-essence occur, which suggest 
the triune Persons of Christian theology. There is a consciousness, 
suggestive of the infinitely transcendent Father, which rejects the vari­
able non-essence from the unchangeable essence. There is also a con­
sciousness, suggestive of the Son, which accepts something in the 
realm of unessential variability as an embodiment, an outer shape 
of the unchangeable essence. There is also a consciousness of the Spirit 
as reconciling the eternal essence with the changeable non-essence 
in a deeply joyful manner. 
2 I I .  These identifications and separations are for us part and 
parcel of the unchangeable essence itself, which is not dirempted as the 
Unhappy Consciousness sees it. But for the Unhappy Consciousness 
itself they are merely appearances which it attributes to the unchange­
able consciousness, and which are all hopelessly beyond itself. 
2 I 2-I 3· For the Unhappy Consciousness, having thus turned a 
necessary relationship into a contingent coincidence, forgets its own 
relation to the Unchangeable, and only considers its relation to the 
remote past specification of the eternal essence. It is with this remote 
past specification (the historic Christ) that it must become united. 
2 I 4· The unessential consciousness strives to unite itself to its 
embodied Transcendent in threefold fashion : (a) as a pure conscious­
ness ; (b) as an individual with wants and work to perfcrm ; (c) as 
conscious of its being-for-self. 
2 I 5 .  As regards (a) the embodied Transcendent seems to the pure 
consciousness to be posited as it is for itself. But its transcendence 
means that its present revelation is necessarily imperfect, and refers 
a perfect revelation to the distant future. 
2 I 6. The Unhappy Consciousness is itself the bridge between the 
unchangeable and the changeable consciousness. But it does not as 
yet see itself as such a bridge. 
2 I 7. Its relation to the Unchangeable is therefore not one of 
explicit thought [Denken] but of impiicit thought or devotion [An­
dacht] .  It thinks of its Unchangeable musically, or by way of clouds 
ofincense, as a saving union of pure thought with individuality which 
lies for ever beyond itself, and which it can only yearn towards. Its 
feeling essence lies for ever outside the notional essence it adores, and 

ANALYS I S  
it can only lay hold of its unessential externals. Only the grave of the 
divinity can be penetrated : the divinity itself eludes it. Only by giving 
up the search for the ideal in the actual world (our non-Hegelian use 
of 'actual') can it hope to find it. 
2 1 8. The Unhappy Consciousness's relation to its embodied Trans­
cendent appears further as its own self-feeling connected with its 
desires and the work it performs. This desire and this work do not, 
however, give its existence positive meaning, make it confident of 
itself, enable it to enjoy the Transcendent. All that they bring to light 
are the Unhappy Consciousness's infinite remoteness and separation 
from its ideal. 
2 1 9. What the Unhappy Consciousness works upon is given as hav­
ing two sides like the Consciousness itself. In one of them it belongs 
to the Unchangeable, in another to the realm of variability. 
220. For the Unhappy Consciousness its abilities are not really its 
own, nothing whose exercise can give it personal satisfaction : all are 
gratuitous gifts from the Unchangeable. 
22 1 .  The activities of the Unhappy Consciousness are given as 
being as much products of the Unchangeable's free grace as are the 
passive reactions of the things it works upon. 
222. The Unhappy Consciousness only feels one with the Un­
changeable when it adopts an attitude of boundless gratitude towards 
it. But even this attitude separates it from the Unchangeable, and 
confirms it in its unhappy distance. 
223-4. Consciousness must, however, return to itself out of its feel­
ing and its work, and in this return it is conscious of itself as simply 
nought and null in the sight of its Transcendent. 
225. The Unhappy Consciousness affirms its nullity by discovering 
'sin', alienation from the Unchangeable, in its most trivial activities, 
and in brooding continually on its own sinfulness. 
226. But in its sinfulness it is always necessarily directed to the Un­
changeable, and would not otherwise feel itself as sinful. 
227. Its relation to the Unchangeable is therefore necessarily medi­
ated for it by a third (priestly) consciousness which brings it into har­
mony with its ideal. 
228. The Unhappy Consciousness surrenders all the fruits of its 
personal work and enjoyment, and accepts the direction of this 
mediating priestly consciousness in all things. 
229. Only by the complete sacrifice of all decisions and under­
standing to this mediating consciousness can the Unhappy Conscious­
ness achieve union with the Unchangeable. 
230. It is the absolving act of the intermediary consciousness that 
must release the Unhappy Consciousness from its sinful schism, estab­
lish its oneness with the Unchangeable. This absolution still has a 

V T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF REAS ON, §§ 2 18-233 527 
tinge of unhappy externality but it is in principle a consciousness of 
the universal, positive, rational mind overcoming and superseding the 
alienated personal one. Implicitly, though not fully, it has now the 
consciousness ofbeing, in all its particularity, inherently and essenti­
ally absolute, of being all reality. 
(Hegel's three exemplary states of Stoicism, Scepticism, and the 
Unhappy Consciousness need not be given the philosophical or reli­
gious content that he gives them. One might, for instance, illustrate 
them by (a) the empty self-satisfaction of a mechanist who believes 
that all organic and psychic action can be mechanistically explained, 
without attempting to show how this is possible ; (b) the equally empty 
self-satisfaction of a theoretical mechanist who also believes that it 
will never be actually possible to give an adequate explanation of 
organic and psychic action in mechanistic terms, or who thinks that 
a non-mechanistic explanation is equally feasible ; (c) the tormented 
state of one who believes that a mechanistic explanation of life and 
consciousness is possible but despairs of ever finding it, who always 
dreams ( Andacht) of an unattainable mechanistic explanation, who 
always treats non-mechanistic explanations as a pis alter for mechan­
istic ones (Freud) , and who drags in the priestly scientist to validate 
his philosophical and moral opinions.) 
V. T H E  C E R TA I N TY AND TR U TH O F  R E A S O N  
23 1 .  Consciousness i n  the experience of absolution has risen to the 
realization that the individual consciousness is implicitly one with the 
Absolute Essence which is, however, still placed essentially beyond 
itself. In this realization self-consciousness has been projected into the 
world of objects, into the realm of being, and it has also identified 
itself with the universal. It has become the middle term in a syllogism 
which reconciles the individual with the unchangeable universal, and 
which thereby sees itself as all truth. 
232. Hitherto (in Stoicism, etc.) consciousness has adopted a 
purely negative attitude to the world and to its own actuality in it, 
and has sought to save its pure essence from both. Now, as Reason 
sure of itself, it tranquilly sees all reality, objective and subjective, 
as no other than itself. It has achieved the position of idealism. Having 
done away with graves and abolished abolitions, it sees the world as 
its own new actual world, as its own truth and presence, which it 
wishes to see maintained in being and not vanish away. 
233· Reason is consciousness's certainty of being all reality : this 
is the essential Notion of idealism. For Reason, the Ego's object is 
neither emptily general nor one object among others : it is an Ego which 

ANALY S I S  
excludes anything taken as other than itself. It can, however, only 
be all reality for and in itself, in so far as it shows itself to be such, 
and this it has done in the dialectical development from sense-cer­
tainty to the Unhappy Consciousness. Only in the light of this history, 
this experience, is the liquidation of other-being and the pure cer­
tainty ofReason intelligible. For the reasonable consciousness this cer­
tainty is a fact, but it is not an explicitly formulated or comprehended 
fact. 
234· An idealism which merely asserts this certainty (All the world 
is my idea) without going through the relevant dialectical preparation 
can neither explain nor understand itself. Its certainty always stands 
over against other certainties that the dialectical journey abolishes. 
The certainty of my rational ego always stands over against the cer­
tainty of something else existing alongside myself. The dialectical 
preparation establishes idealism as the only truth, but only in a 
general, abstract form which will have to be given concreteness in 
various actual sorts of confrontation. 
235· The rational consciousness here considered is merely the cate­
gory, i.e. the wholly general, formal certainty that what is, is for 
thought, and what is for thought, is ; self-consciousness and being are 
given as being one and the same essence. It is a mere confusion when 
another being-in-itself (the Kantian noumenon) is postulated as being 
beyond being-for-thought. The categorial consciousness in question 
must, however, be such as intrinsically to specify itself in a number 
of distinct categories, forming a complete system (as in the Logic) : to 
derive these categories from an external source, e.g. the forms of judge­
ment, is a disgrace to philosophy. 
236. The categorial certainty in question not only specifies itself 
in a system of categories but also includes in itself a pure or schematic 
reference to individuals ; though individual things are no part of the 
categorial framework, individual thinghood is part of it. 
237· Consciousness essentially moves around among its various 
moments, seeing the universal from the angle of the species and vice 
versa. Consciousness is this perambulation and what it sees on this 
course. 
238--g. The first simple form of the idealistic consciousness is the 
consciousness that all I deal with is mine, my own idea. Such an 
empty appropriation leaves all detailed content to experience and 
f0reign intervention. It passes to and from its empty proclamation 
of ownership to foreign material, and in fact oscillates like the con­
sciousness of scepticism. It has no power to generate specific content 
in and by itself, and thereby condemns itself to the perpetual pheno­
menalism of Kantianism. Such an Idealism is self-contradictory 
because abstract. It says Reason is all reality but does not show it 

V. T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§ 234-246 529 
concretely at work in the world : it requires a further carrying out 
to be a true idealism. 
O BSERVING REASON 
240. The consciousness for which what is, is its own, now turns to 
sense-certainty, perception, etc., not to deal with something merely 
other, but in the certainty of being that other. Formerly it happened 
to notice and experience much, now it actively determines what it shall 
observe and experience. It seeks in the world only its rational, con­
ceptual self, its own infinitude. 
24I .  At first it merely divines its presence in the world, but proceeds 
thereupon to take possession of its inheritance, to plant the ensign 
of its sovereignty on every height and depth. There must be no dif­
ferentiation of the real in which it does not discover itself, and its idea 
of itself must develop as it proceeds in such discovery. 
242. The observant consciousness professes to be finding out the 
essence of things, not of itself: while it is Reason, it does not clearly 
know itself to be Reason. To do so it must plumb its own depths, see 
itself as through and through conceptual, notional. It can then, in 
transforming the superficial, sensuous being of things into Notions, 
recognize itself in such Notions. 
243· Observation is concerned with Nature, with Spirit, and with 
the relation between them. These three must be studied in turn. 
OBSERVATION O F  NATURE 
244· The unthinking consciousness treats observation and experi­
ence as the source of truth, but forgets that the object of observation 
is as important as the mere act of seeing, hearing, etc., and that not 
every perceived content counts as observed, e.g. that this penknife 
is next to this snuff-box. What is observed must be more than a mere 
particular : it must instantiate a universal. 
245· The universal of observation at first merely stays the same : 
its movement is a mere recurrence of selfsameness. The Understand­
ing must try to bring difference into this selfsameness through descrip­
tion, a procedure never short of material. But it encounters a check 
when it begins to wonder whether it is not describing something 
merely accidental, unworthy of description and lacking in generic 
meaning. 
246. Observation and description are now urged by an obscure 'in­
stinct of reason' to distinguish between the essential and the accidental 
characters of objects, and to make of the former, not merely marks 
through which we distinguish them, but marks through which they 
distinguish themselves. This is successfully done in zoology, where 
claws, teeth, etc. are the very organs through which specific being 

530 
ANALYS I S  
is sustained, less successfully in botany, and still less successfully in 
the case of inorganic substances, whose description changes in 
changed circumstances. 
24 7. The difficulties ofborder-line vagueness and confusion are en­
demic to the interrelations of species and threaten to reduce observa­
tion to unthinking description. 
248. An instinct ofReason, however, drives the observing conscious­
ness to look for a law governing the transitions between specific de­
scriptions. 
249· The observing consciousness sees such laws as sensuously 
present in the particulars it observes, which would, however, make 
them merely contingent and not genuine laws at all. A universal of 
Reason will, however, retain its notional universality even if it de­
scends into the being of sensuous thinghood. Those thinkers (e.g. 
Fichte) are wrong, who make laws merely patterns to which things 
ought to conform. 
250. The observing consciousness does not take a law to be a uni­
versal of Reason, but sees in it something external and foreign. But 
it denies this foreignness when it refuses, e.g., to identify gravitation 
with the actual falling behaviour of all bodies. It is content to observe 
bodies falling in a large number of cases, and to infer analogically 
that this must happen in others. What is inferred remains probable, 
and never becomes an observed fact. It is only when falling is made 
part of the Notion of a heavy body in its relation to the earth that 
a law enters the field of the observable. 
25 1 .  Since a law is a Notion implicit, an instinct of Reason seeks 
to purify it into a Notion explicit. It sets up ex-periments which elimi­
nate the irrelevant and highlight the essential. While seeming to sink 
deeper into sensuous particularity, such experiments really cut off the 
Notion from the latter. We soon arrive at free-standing 'matters', e.g. 
positive and negative electricity, which are neither bodies nor proper­
ties of bodies. 
252. A 'matter', e.g. heat or calorie, is not an existent thing, but 
an existent universal or instance of notional being. An instinct of 
Reason rightly draws us to such 'matters', since laws, being general 
and non-sensuous, necessarily connect universals, things, not sen­
suous, though given in what is sensuous, and incorporeally present 
in bodies. 
253· The truth of the observable is accordingly something present 
in sensuous being, but also free to move about in it, and in all change 
preserving its notional simplicity. What is implicit in such a Notion 
then renders itself explicit in a new sort of object, whose observation 
constitutes a new sort of observation. 
254· An object explicitly embodying the Notion's shifting sim-

V .  T H E  CERTA I NTY AND TRUTH OF R EASON, §§ 247-262 531 
plicity is an organic object. Such an object embodies an absolute fluid­
ity in which all external relations vanish. Inorganic objects depend 
on other objects to bring out and to complete what they are, and get 
lost in their ramifying relations towards such objects. But organic 
objects, despite their openness to external influence, are not essentially 
related to what is external and in all relations preserve their unity 
and simplicity. 
255· An instinct of Reason seeks to discover laws connecting 
features in the organism with features in the inorganic environment, 
thereby reducing the externality and contingency in which such 
features stand to one another. Such laws do not, however, explain 
the richness of organic being, and never pass beyond talk of 'great 
influences' to exc4">tionless necessities. Their teleological explanations 
remain external, and are therefore the very antithesis of laws. 
256. The observing consciousness never goes beyond external 
teleology to the true teleology of organic nature, which is Nature's 
embodiment of the Notion. In true teleology we do not have one factor 
passively produced by another, but a single nature realizing itself and 
sustaining its own reality. 
257. Teleological processes may seem to be provoked by in­
different, external circumstances, which therefore seem to have 
explanatory priority. In reality, however, the circumstances make no 
difference to the outcome, of which the true ground is the End itself. 
This End feels itself in the final satisfaction. 
258. The relation of the teleological organism to external circum­
stance is analogous to the relation of self-consciousness to external 
reality. As the hungry animal assimilates its food, so self-consciousness 
understands external objectivity, and makes it its own. But since it 
first does so instinctively, its satisfaction seems doubled : it is felt by 
itself, but is also referred to a sort of blind understanding in the object. 
259· An organism conceals the relation of its manifest actions to 
their immanent aim, and so seems to have been constructed by an 
outside intelligence. Just so Reason conceals the inner necessity of 
its own proceedings, and locates it in the objects that it is studying. 
In both cases there is a distinction which is really no distinction : teleo­
logy is in the organism, and Reason in the thing studied. 
260. The individual performances of an organism in furtherance 
of its own maintenance and that of its species are not observed to 
have a necessary relation to these purposes, though they in fact 
have it. 
261 .  The self-differentiating unity of organic teleology is not obser­
vationally, but notionally, grasped. Observation therefore converts 
it into the interplay of distinct factors which suits its thought-style. 
262. The organism therefore appears to observation to have an in-

ANALYS I S  
ner, teleological core and an outer, actual crust, the latter being the 
expression of the former. The Notion here expires in a picture. 
263. Neither inner purpose, nor outer expression, nor their unity 
of essence, are more than formally distinct : we do not have a conֈ 
nection between genuinely distinct terms. Observation recognizes this 
in talking of a mere expression. 
264. Observational picture-thought must none the less externalize 
its formal distinction of outer and inner. 
265. Observation finds internal teleology in the unresting fluidity 
of the soul, while its outer actuality is found in the quiescent, external 
organism. It conceives of the relations between these two factors in 
three basic organic properties, at once essences and patterns of inter­
action. These are the sensibility, irritability, and reproduction only 
fully found among animals. 
266. Sensibility is simply the organism's reference of all to itself, 
its taking of all into its own fluidity, while irritability is its answering 
reaction to what invades it, a reaction which affects what is external 
as much as itself. Reproduction, finally, is the organism's maintenance 
of its own pattern in the constant renewal of parts by the individual 
and in the generation of ever new individuals. All three functions stem 
from the organism's concern with itself as its own sole End. 
267. The outwardly actual form of sensibility is the nervous system, 
that of irritability the muscular system, that of reproduction the 
viscera. 
268. There are peculiar organic laws connecting our three func­
tions, both as regards external structure and fluid, inner character. 
The latter also has its external side. 
26g. The laws connecting the outer and inner aspects of the organ­
ism elude observation, not because the latter is short-sighted, but 
because such laws lack all truth. 
270. Sensibility is not a function confined to the nervous system 
nor separable from reactivity or irritability. The latter is inseparable 
from sensibility, and both enter into organic self-maintenance or re­
production. Hence laws connecting such factors must be spurious. 
2 7 1 .  Sensibility, etc. are qualitatively distinct aspects. When made 
into the terms of an empirical law, they are credited with quantitative 
differences, and are said to vary inversely or directly. It is as if one 
made a law of the tautology that a hole increases as its filling 
diminishes, or as more and more stuff is removed from it. 
272. Such laws have nothing to do with sensibility and irritability, 
but are mere cases of a logical truism. 
273. Since reproduction is not opposed to either sensibility or irrit­
ability there is even less reason to look for a law connecting it with 
either. 

V .  T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF R EASON, §§ 263-285 533 
274· The laws in question are really tautologies, which have been 
given a false appearance of actual existence. Their outward shapes 
do not really differ from their inward presence. 
275. Organic functions studied as observable existences obey no 
governing laws, but range over every chance magnitude, e.g. the X's 
greatly prefer this sort of food to that, they have this or that number 
of offspring so many times a year, etc. 
276. There are no clear relations between vague functions like sen­
sibility, etc. and the structured systems revealed by anatomy, which 
are much more numerous than the functions in question. Anatomy 
reveals only dead structures, never their living use. 
277. The various functions distinguished in organic being cannot 
be regarded as distinct existents externally related. They are pervasive 
aspects of one life-process. 
278. There is therefore no place for laws in the treatment of organ­
isms : they cannot be broken into separate determinations united by 
bonds which determine each differently. Organic being is always dis­
solving all separate determinations. 
279. When the Understanding discovers laws connecting existent 
aspects of Nature, it is itself the connecting factor among those sides : 
it does not as yet see them as part of the object. But in the observation 
of life the interconnection of aspects is itself objective. We no longer 
have the merely existent aspects between which a law could be found 
to hold. 
280. If we seek to consider organic existence in and for itself, it 
loses all precise character, and becomes almost indefinitely variable. 
The necessity of the Notion vanishes altogether. 
. 281 .  The observational consciousness, while rising above mere 
Understanding in its treatment oflife, always relapses into the manner 
of the Understanding, treating aspects as fixed determinations, and 
relating them quantitatively in what it would like to consider as laws. 
282. The observational consciousness tries to rise above perceived, 
sensuous differences by using germanized Latin names for potencies 
and faculties, to which varying degrees are then attributed. It does 
not thereby genuinely rise above the senses. 
283. We have now to consider the organism's outer aspects. 
284. The organism externalizes itself into structures essentially 
related to the inorganic environment-the object opposed to its being­
for-self-but in ways not capable of being brought under strict laws. 
285. The actual organism is at once turned towards the being-in­
itself ofthe object and also towards its own being-for-self. In the latter 
respect it is free, self-determining, and indifferent to the definite 
shapes it assumes : it is a stream which does not care what mills it 
drives. This inner side of the actual organism can be expressed only 

534 
ANALYS I S  
in the non-sensuous determinateness of number : sensuous qualities, 
the life-style of the organism, are the outer aspect of such number. 
286. The inner side of the actual organism has therefore itself an. 
inner and an outer aspect, the former the restless variability of the 
essentially abstract, the latter the non-sensuous determinateness of 
number, in which all movement and relation to the sensuous have 
been eliminated. 
287. Such an abstract treatment of the organism, however, reduce$ 
it to the inorganic, which has its essence outside of itself in the self· 
conscious thinker. We must treat the organism in its own concrete 
sphere. 
288. Specific gravity is, in the concrete, the internal aspect of the in­
organic thing, expressible in terms of numerical measures, revealed 
by comparing observations, and underlying the thing's colour, hard­
ness, and other sensuous properties. 
289. Specific gravity is not, however, self-differentiating, and so 
not involved in process except quantitatively. It is therefore only con­
tingently connected with the multitude of properties that it underlies. 
In this respect it falls short of cohesion, which involves differences of 
state and consequent transitions from one state to another. Cohflsion, 
however, only abstractly achieves self-differentiation in the imperfect 
form of changes in specific gravity : degree of specific gravity is not 
systematically connected with degree of cohesion. 
290. The many other properties of inorganic bodies have no neces­
sary connection with their specific gravity or cohesion, and can only 
be classified in numerical terms, i.e. unessentially. We cannot discover 
general quantitative principles underlying the various types of prop­
erty, whether severally or as a whole. 
29 1 .  The relation of inner to outer is, however, quite different in 
the case of organisms. In the inorganic what is internal is a definite 
numerical measure, quite indifferent to sensuous manifestations, but 
the organism contains a principle of sensuous differentiation within 
itself. Its internality takes the form of a natural genus or kind which 
has the power to determine itself in various alternative ways, whereas 
the internality of specific gravity has one definite property corre­
sponding to each of its degrees. 
292. The universality of the genus is inherently such as to reveal 
itself in alternative individual ways. But between the universal and 
the individual the determinate universal or species necessarily has its 
place. When a process from the universal to the individual via the 
species takes place we have a case of consciousness : in an inorganic 
being it does not occur as a process but only as an outcome. In this 
outcome the universal is represented by a series of numbers over which 
the individual freely varies. Only if an individual could transcend the 

V. T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH O F  R EASON, §§ 286-3oo 535 
limits of such individuality, could he achieve consciousness. (Being 
conscious is only logically different from being a case of a species or 
genus : in a case of consciousness universality moves through specificity 
towards individuality, in unconscious individuality there is no 
detached universality, and no movement toWards individuality, only 
the sort of fusion which might have been the outcome of such a move­
ment.) 
293. Generic universality, diHerentiated specificity, and individual 
singularity are the three syllogistic terms which, by their inter­
relations, explain organic and inorganic being. (Hegel's dynamic Pla­
tonism.) 
294· The pure genus specifies itself into a set of sorts systematically 
ordered by quantitative differences. But the individuation of these 
species is determined in part by the universal individual, the Earth, 
which contingently determines just where, and to what extent, par­
ticular species will be individually instantiated. 
295· In the case of self-conscious man the specific forms of con­
sciousness constitute an ordered line of development, a necessary spiri­
tual history. Organic nature has no such history : it falls straight from 
pure universality into the brute singularity of existence. 
296. Organic Nature only actualizes such of its specific forms as 
the individuality of Earth permits. 
297· Observing Reason dealing with organic Nature can therefore 
never rise above mere opinions, which at best predicate 'great influ­
ences', and never achieve the necessity of laws. 
O B SERVATION O F  SELF-CONSCIO USNESS I N  ITS PURITY A N D  IN 
ITS RELATION TO EXTERNAL A C T UA LITY ; LOGICAL A N D  
PSYCHO LOGICAL LAWS 
298. The observation of inorganic Nature finds the Notion split 
into a plurality of things which are nowhere bent back into simplicity 
or unity. Organic Nature involves such a simplicity, which does not, 
however, distinguish its moments clearly. Only in self-consciousness 
is singularity held apart from universality, yet absolutely held fast in 
the latter. 
299· The 'Laws of Thought' are the first discoveries of obser­
vational consciousness turned inward on itself. They are formal 
expressions of the relations between aspects of the Notion. Being 
formal, they are not set over against the content which would give 
them truth and reality, but their form none the less includes an in­
trinsic reference to such content. 
300. The 'Laws of Thought' are given to observational conscious­
ness as a set of existent contents which it merely finds there. As so 
conceived, they are not so much empty forms as unformed materials, 

ANALY S I S  
whose role in thought is not as yet determined. This role will be 
studied in our speculative system. 
gor .  The observational consciousness does not closely connect the 
'Laws of Thought' with the action of consciousness of real materials. 
It therefore fails to identify the principles immanent in thinking with 
the same principles used to overcome the otherness of the materials 
thinking deals with. 
go2. The varying reactions of consciousness to what it sees as a 
merely other, found reality are the theme of a new set of laws, those 
of psychology. These laws concern the effort of consciousness to 
accommodate· its individuality to the ways of objective things, but 
also to accommodate objective things to its own needs and passions, 
and thereby to sacrifice its detached universality. The former, 'cogni­
tive' laws merely give reality the universality of consciousness, 
whereas the latter, 'practical' laws show us reality modified to suit 
the personal self, and that perhaps in a criminal or revolutionizing 
manner. 
gog. Observational psychology never gets past regarding mental 
faculties, dispositions, etc. as a rag-bag of disconnected items wonder­
fully churning about in a single container. 
go4. In treating all these items separately, or as united only in the 
actual individual, it fails to notice the overarching universality of 
Spirit. Its pronouncements regarding differences in intelligence, 
propensities, etc., are for that reason even less valuable than 
enumerations of the contingent differences of mosses, insects, etc. 
go5. The laws looked for by observation involve some specific 
individual, on the one hand, and the environing natural and social 
circumstances, on the other, both of which are conceived as given 
particulars. 
go6. But such an endeavour forgets that the individual, having the 
universal in him, can freely take up different stances towards circum­
stances and influences, and that he reflects as if in an inner gallery 
thesamegeneralarrayofcircumstances that play upon him in the world. 
go7. What the world is for the individual depends on his own active 
or passive response to it. Hence no clear meaning can be given to 
the psychological necessity that the world imposes on him. 
go8. Since environing world and responding individual cannot be 
neatly separated, there can be no laws connecting one with the other. 
O BSERVATION O F  T H E  RELATION O F  SELF-CONSCIO USNESS TO 
ITS IMMED IATE ACTUALITY : PHYSIOGNOMY AND 
P H R E N O L OGY 
gog. Since the environing world has been made part of self-con­
scious individuality, observation must now make the latter its object. 

V .  T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH O F  REASON, §§301-320 537 
3 I o. In such individuality the existent body is the individuality's 
being-in-self, just as its activity is its being-for-self. The body cannot, 
however, be merely external to the individual's activity, but must in 
some manner express its determining character. 
3I r .  The law-governed relation of individuality to environment 
has now been transferred into the expressive relation of a man's bodily 
shape to his consciousness and movement. We have now to elucidate 
this 'expressive' relation. 
3I 2. An expression at once goes beyond what it expresses by fulfil­
ling and completing it, but it also falls short of it, by lending itself 
to distortion by circumstances, by an individual's clumsiness, or by 
his intention to deceive. We must therefore look for some more reliable 
sign of an individual's inwardness than the use of his bodily organs. 
3 I 3· Such a sign must be neither an organ nor an action, but some 
quiescent feature of bodily structure, arbitrarily and contingently 
related to some inward individual peculiarity. 
3I4. The would-be science of physiognomy wants to make such 
a contingent relation into a law connecting inner with outer, and 
claims in this to be superior to astrology and palmistry which merely 
connect one external thing with another. 
3 I 5· Palmistry can, however, claim to use the hand, in which, after 
the tongue, a man's individuality is above all manifest, as the in-itself 
of a man, on which his fate and fortune depend. 
3I6. Though the condition of a man's organs of speech, manipula­
tion, etc. is in a sense external to his inward disposition, yet it is less 
external than the actions its brings about, and is in fact the middle 
term from which these follow as conclusions. 
3 I 7. This middle term covers not only what is done by the organ 
mainly involved, but by other expressive movements and stances 
which reveal the individual's inwardness to himself and others. 
3 I 8. Expressive movements differ from deeds, and can be used to 
test the seriousness of the latter. But they too are contingently related 
to the inwardness of which they are the sign, and can, like a mask, 
be laid aside and replaced. 
3I9. Observation identifies what is inner with a man's intentions 
rather than his actions : the latter are for it the inessential expressions 
of the former. It then looks for something observable which will corre­
spond to these inward intentions. 
320. Physiognomy does not differ in principle from the unscientific 
gauging of a man's character from the way he looks and acts. It makes 
little difference that it speaks in terms of capacities and propensities, 
and does not merely call someone a murderer or a thief. The indivi­
dual's inexhaustible nature cannot be set forth in terms of such capaci­
ties and propensities. 

ANALY S I S  
32 1 .  The 'laws' which such a science enunciates are based on per­
sonal associations and opinions, like the housewife's 'law' that it 
always rains when the washing is out to dry. 
322. Whenever deeds conflict with physiognomic expressions, they 
answer the questions raised by such expressions. What we do stamps 
us as murderers, heroes, etc. Deeds can of course go awry or fail of 
their purpose, but where they are on target, and persist uncorrected, 
they are not mere signs but the thing itself. 
323. Physiognomy improves psychology by substituting for the. 
provocative environment the individual's own expressive movements. 
Physiognomy must now be improved by substituting for such move­
ments something fixed, thing-like, and immobile. 
324. Since both inward and outward have their own being-in-self, 
their relation to each other must now take the form of an external 
causal action. 
325. The inward conceived as self-related, yet active in, and not 
indifferent to, its outgoing manifestations, must ·have an actual 
existent organ, not merely instrumental, which is active in such mani­
festations. 
326. The heart, the liver, etc. are frequently conceived as the active 
centres and sources of certain manifestations. They are not, however, 
first sources, but rather half-way stations. 
327. The brain and spinal cord (minus the nerves) represent the 
organism's pure self-consciousness, not as such outgoing, but at rest 
in itself, a fluid pool in which disturbances die away. The diversity 
of bodily movements having their source in this consciousness must, 
however, be represented in this fluid pool, which must accordingly 
be articulated into zones or regions. 
328. In the head, the being-for-self of the organism appropriately 
comes to a head, and that in two extreme forms, the caput vivens or 
brain, and the caput mortuum or skull. The skull is the being-for-self 
of the organism made into a fixed, inert thing. The spinal cord merely 
conducts action to and from the head, and there are other channels 
for this as well. 
329. Since brain and skull are both expressions of the organism's 
being-for-self, there is necessarily an accommodation of the shape of 
the one to that of the other, which we may or may not like to conceive 
in terms of causal action of either on the other, or both on one another. 
330. There is no intelligible connection between the strength or 
weakness of spiritual faculties and the bulging or contracted size of 
regions of the skull. 
33 1 .  For observation the brain only counts as the existent form of 
self-conscious individuality, while the skull-bones count as its exist­
ence-for-another or as a mere thing. 

V. T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH O F  R EASON, §§ 321-342 539 
332. The many-sidedness of Spirit necessarily expresses itself in a 
geography of skull-regions of differing significance. 
333· Skull-bones do not express mental states in the way changes 
of countenance do, nor are they even signs of such mental states. They 
reduce all reference to self to the purest immediacy. 
334· Vaguely localized feelings in the head could possibly show 
what skull-regions corresponded to what psychic tendencies, e.g. mur­
derous, poetic, thieving, etc. Such diagnoses would, however, be quite 
ambiguous and indefinite. 
335· The propensities and capacities of the mind have to be pared 
down to a few ossified differences to be arbitrarily correlated with 
the bumps and hollows of the skull. In such correlations a collection 
of mental dry bones is correlated with an equally dry physical collec­
tion. 
336. Anything in a man's disposition can be correlated with a 
bump or hollow on his skull, even, as in the case of a cuckold, with 
a bump or hollow on someone else's skull. Such conceptions are pic­
torial, without genuine notional possibility. 
337· If an individual does not behave as his bumps and hollows 
suggest, one can always attribute such deviations to his exercise of 
free will. Bumps and hollows are only the foundation for empty possi­
bilities. They never justify definite predictions. 
338. Such subterfuges make the skull-bones a sign of everything 
or nothing. 
339· Self-consciousness cannot be made to depend on bone-forma­
tions, since such inert existences are everything of which self-con­
sciousness is the negation. A man might prove the absurdity of such 
a reduction by simply smashing in someone's skull. 
340. Observation finds it harder to see through such a gross 
absurdity as mind-skull identity as to see through much less flagrant 
absurdities. But the limit of the absurd is here reached, and Reason 
must do an about-turn in the opposite direction. 
34 1 .  Retracing our path, we see how we moved from observing 
inorganic Nature to postulating non-sensible laws behind it : this pure 
universality, conftated with existent, sensible objectivity, became a 
new object, the organism. Such existent, sensible objectivity could 
not, however, be a true expression of such universality, which accord­
ingly became a detached, purposive universality, i.e. self-conscious­
ness as an observed object. 
342. Self-consciousness as an observed object at first specified itself 
in the 'Laws of Thought' ,  treated as existent contingencies. These dif­
ferentiations, fused into a unit, became the individual self-conscious­
ness, which necessarily contained and related an outward-turned 
aspect of will and action to an inward-turned self-conscious aspect, 

ANALY S I S  
of which i t  was the sign. These two aspects were externally and con­
tingently related. 
343· Recognizing the relation of inner and outer to be contingent, 
observation ceased to look for an organ, a symbol of Spirit, and pinned 
down its external immediacy in a dead Thing. The reality of Spirit 
was thereby made into a thing, and inert being given the significance 
of Spirit. To treat Spirit as a merely existent, objective thing is cer­
tainly to make it into something like a bone. 
344· This result had a twofold sense. On the one hand it completed 
the previous self-extrusion of self-consciousness which we saw in the 
Unhappy Consciousness, its self-projection into a mere object, which, 
though embodying a categorial unity stemming from its own con­
scious selfhood, was seen as having a rationality that self-consciousness 
could have rather than be. Such merely had rationality was typical of 
the observer : he saw his Reason out there in the Thing. Such self­
projection ofReason could not, however, be sustained. Self-conscious­
ness necessarily felt its gaze reverting from the rationalized object to 
its own rational activity. ( In this difficult paragraph the ordering uni­
versality which can lead a detached life as the self-conscious Ego is seen 
stretching out towards a specificity and individuality which seems to lie 
beyond itself, and in relation to which it appears as a set of objective 
categories. From this self-separation it comes to the realization that 
this ordering universality, ca tegorially projected in to o bjects, is the same 
as the ordering universality at work in its own conscious efforts.) 
345· On the other hand, our outcome is simply the identification 
of self-consciousness with a sensible, objective thing. Self-conscious­
ness only becomes real in a bone. (Self-consciousness, in other words, 
despite its systematic elusiveness, must have a foothold somewhere 
in the crust of material thinghood.) 
346. What emerges from the observational experience is that the 
pure universality of the Notion is the ordering principle of the Thing, 
that thinghood and Notion are the same. This cannot be understood 
as long as we treat Notion and Thing as independent, self-subsistent 
realities, and do not see the former as self-dirempted in the latter, 
and so constituting an infinite judgement. ('The Notion is no Thing' 
is an infinite judgement which, in opposing Notion to Thing, makes 
their whole being consist in their mutual relevance.) As long as we 
look on them as sundered, their opposition remains gross and crass : 
it is like the union of urination and orgasm in a single organ. 
THE ACTUALIZATION OF RATIONAL SELF-CONSCIO USNESS 
T H R O U G H  ITS OWN ACTIVITY 
3 4  7. The true significance of self-consciousness's self-recognition In 
the external, observed thing, is its self-recognition in another self-cq,n-

V .  T H E  C ERTA I NTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§ 343-357 541 
sciousness, which, though a duplicate of itself, has the surface 
separateness from itself characteristic of a thing 'out there'. 
348. Observational Reason categorized the observed thing in ways 
corresponding to its own development from sense-certainty, through 
perception, to Understanding. It went, that is, from description 
through classification to lawlike explanation. Reason must now reca­
pitulate its further development from individualistic self-assertion and 
conflict to the ethical self-consciousness which unites all self-con­
sciousnesses. (This recapitulation is to take place within the social 
medium only implicit in Master and Slave etc., and remote and alien 
in the Roman and medieval worlds.) 
349· The stage of self-consciousness towards which we are now 
moving is essentially ethical, governed by unwritten laws and social 
customs, a framework within which the individual lives and moves, 
and from which he does not think to disassociate himself. 
350. The members of an organized social whole not only resemble 
the differentiated modes of a single substance : they are also more 
or less conscious of their common membership, of the sacrifice of their 
individual, to a generic identity. 
35 r .  The individual in an organized social whole works for himself 
in ways practised and sanctioned by all, and performed for others 
as much as for himself. His most independent efforts are sanctioned 
and approved for all, and entail a thoroughgoing reciprocity in his 
relation to others. 
352. The customs of an organized society have both the opacity 
of external thinghood and the transparent self-identity of self-con­
sciousness. One realizes oneself most perfectly by being the perfect 
embodiment of one's community's social norms. 
353· To live as a mere individual in an organized social whole is 
not, however, to be explicitly conscious of one's identity with it. One 
may either have forgotten it in a mere taking for granted, or may 
not as yet have fully achieved it. 
354· The immediacy of ethical life is not critical of established laws 
and customs. Much less does it consciously align itself with them, and 
assert their absolute standing. 
355· When self-conscious individuality arises, the bond of trust 
which links it with the social unity is destroyed. The individual 
opposes himself to social laws and customs. 
356. The self-conscious individual, withdrawing from the social 
medium, seeks to make his own mark in the world through his practi­
cal efforts. He seeks to fulfil himself, to achieve personal happiness. 
357· The fulfilment which the individual at this stage pursues is 
the fulfilment of his own immediate will and natural impulses, not 
the welfare of society. This individualistic pursuit of satisfaction may 

ANALYS I S  
either precede or follow the full development of the ethical conscious­
ness. In the former case, crude impulses are subordinated to the ethi­
cal life of custom, in the latter case there is a conscious abandonment 
of the life of mere impulse, and an advance to the acceptance of an 
ethic made to fit the individual's own inward sense of morality. Since 
the individualism most rampant in our own day is of the latter sort, 
it is this that we shall now consider. 
358. Self-consciousness, which has risen to the Notion of Spirit, 
now seeks to realize itself in an individual's mind or person. 
359· Self-consciousness, pledged 
to individual self-realization, 
necessarily negates the self-realization of other individuals, and seeks 
to impose on all the negation of all ends but its own. This universally 
imposed self-realization assumes three forms : the undisciplined pur­
suit of pleasure, the undisciplined law of the heart, and the more disci­
plined cult of virtue. These lead ultimately to the one-pointed self­
dedication to the matter or task on hand. 
PLEASURE A N D  NECESSITY 
360. Self-consciousness sees the existent, objective thing that con­
fronts it as implicitly itself. It seeks to make what is implicit explicit, 
and to reshape the objective thing to satisfy its individual self. All 
the higher intellectual and ethical ends of the community are spurned 
and set aside. 
36 1 .  It expresses its individuality in iŇmediate, active living, cul­
ling delights where it finds them, rather than creating them for itself. 
It makes no use of laws and general principles. 
362 . It does not seek to transform existence practically, but to 
savour its surface. I ts enjoyment centres principally on another self­
consciousness, an embodiment of rational categories and laws, which 
it does not, however, treat as such, but as made for its own gratifica­
tion, thereby destroying the other's rationality. 
363. Pleasure taken in another's person for one's own gratification 
is essentially self-destroying. The rational categories essential to per­
sonality are bypassed, and there is therefore nothing to hold one to 
an individual object. There is therefore a blind necessity driving one 
on to seek ever new objects in unending self-frustration. This necessity 
is nothing but the expression of the sheer emptiness of what is merely 
individual. 
364. The pursuit of one's own satisfaction therefore passes over 
from sheer individualism to an absolute universalism in which all in­
dividuality is shattered. 
365. What is now pursued by the individual assumes the form of 
a necessity, a law, which he cannot understand, but to which he must 
unconditionally submit. 

V .  T H E  C ERTA I N TY A N D  TRUTH OF REASON, §§sss-377 543 
366. To surrender to a law is, however, to remove its alien charac­
ter. It will become the individuals' own law. 
THE LAW O F  THE H EART AND THE FRENZY O F  SELF-CONCEIT 
367. The individual's satisfaction seen in the form of a law becomes 
the law of the individual's own heart. 
368. The individual must see whether his true essence lies in such 
a law of the heart. 
369. The law of the heart necessarily opposes itself to the law of 
this world, under which the individual and humanity live oppressed. 
To the individual the positive, worldly law is something actual and 
found, whereas we phenomenologists see it as the shadow cast by the 
law of the heart. 
370. The heart-ruled individual necessarily sees his undisciplined 
personal dictates as pleasing to all, and himself as noble in carrying 
them out. 
37 1 .  Oppressed humanity does not seem to the heart-ruled individ­
ual to be aware of its oppression by this-world ordinances, or of its 
nobility in transgressing them. This deference to external authority 
must be broken down. It is merely accidental if authority and the 
heart agree. 
372. To the extent that the law of the heart becomes an actual 
ordinance, the heart-ruled individual must cease to find satisfaction 
in it. It is no longer the law of his heart, but something alien and 
actual, against which his heart must rebel. To fulfil the heart's law 
is therefore also to frustrate it. 
373· Whatever the individual chooses to do will, through such 
choice, conform to the law of his heart. But not every individual's 
heart will concur with the chosen course. Other individuals will con­
demn what a man's heart dictates, and will therefore become horrible 
in his sight. 
374· The individual who erects the dictates of his heart into a law 
for all comes to see that the actual law for all is not alien and dead, 
but a genuine law for all hearts, even though the individual failed 
to realize this. 
375· The heart-ruled individual therefore becomes a living con­
tradiction, and recognizes as a universally valid order one that he, 
as an individual, does not wish to recognize. 
376. To be thus torn between the recognition of a universally 
instituted, and a personally chosen law, is to be self-alienated or in­
sane. 
377· The heart thus torn madly fulminates against the priests and 
despots who have imposed their alien laws on humanity. But since 

544 
ANALYS I S  
i t  itself wishes to be just such a priest and despot, i t  comes to see itself 
as being as perverse and perverting as these are. 
378. It comes to see that a universal law is itself perverted if it is 
merely seen as a law of all hearts, as satisfying everyone's selfish indivi­
duality. 
379· A law for all hearts necessarily becomes a law that all indivi­
duals fight over, a way of the world that never achieves a stable, 
agreed form. 
380. But to such a fluctuating way the ideal of a fixed, agreed way 
of life necessari_ly opposes itself: the ideal of virtue as opposed to the 
way of this world. 
V I R T U E  A N D  T H E  WAY O F  T H E  W O R L D  
38 1 .  Both virtue and the way of the world involve a compromise 
between disinterested universality and individuality. Only, in virtue, 
individuality sacrifices itself to standards that it has itself set up, 
whereas, in the way of the world, disinterested universality is realized 
through the interaction and attrition of individuals. 
382. The way of the world is the disinterested order which arises 
out of the interested actions of countless individuals. Though con­
demned from the emptily universal standpoint of virtue, it is really 
what virtue seeks to compass. It is not, however, a blind drift, but 
one that consciousness can understand and accept, · even though 
it springs from the mad self-assertion of individuals. (Hegel extends 
the principles of laissez-faire economics to all human and social 
action.) 
383. Virtue, however, attempts to reverse the way of the world, 
and to arrive at a disinterested order through individual effort. 
384. Virtue makes its direct aim, what the way of the world 
achieves by indirection. The aim of virtue is a poor abstraction from 
what is actually achieved by the way of the world. 
385. From the standpoint of virtue there are gifts and powers, of 
which there is a right and noble use, but which are abused and per­
verted by the way of the world. 
386. But these gifts and powers are precisely the substantive con­
tent to which virtue and vice add an insubstantial nuance of dif­
ference. One cannot transform the vicious into the virtuous without 
damaging such content. Hence the whole fight between virtue and 
vice becomes a mock combat. 
387. The way of the world, having no sacred cause to defend, 
always achieves great richness of content, while virtue, with its special 
preferences, remains always in jeopardy. 
388. Virtue cannot overcome the way of the world by making a 

V. T H E  C ERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF R EASON, §§ 378-396 545 
cunning use of the latent good in it. For the way of the world vigilantly 
fences off such interference. This latent good is either something 
that virtue dare not interfere with, or is as lacking in reality as are 
the gifts and powers that can be used in its service. It is no more 
than an imagined higher consciousness behind the actual natures of 
men. 
389. Virtue is overcome by the way of the world, since virtue aims 
absurdly at abolishing the individuality which is the very principle 
of actuality. The ideal of disinterested virtue is either an empty word, 
or it must achieve actuality by accepting actual men and their inter­
ests. 
390. Virtue, therefore, as opposed to the way of the world, is an 
emptily rhetorical, unconstructive form of edification, which may 
minister to men's vanity, but is ultimately boring. It is not like the 
virtue of antiquity which accepted ethical existence, and only sought 
to improve it. 
39 I .  When boredom sets in, men drop an ideal of virtue which 
uproots the individuality and interest essential to practical realiza­
tion. 
392. The way of the world is by the same movement brought to 
vanish. Self-interest is better than it thinks it is : in realizing itself, 
it realizes Ends that are universal. 
393· The universal End of,self-conscious life cannot be separated 
from the private, personal acts and ends of individuals. 
I N D I V I D U A L I T Y  W H I C H  T A K E S  I T S E L F  TO B E  R E A L  I N  A N D  F O R  
I T S E L F  
394· Self-consciousness has now ceased to oppose universal gifts 
and powers to the individual employment of them. It is subjectively 
certain of itself in and through its individual acts, which are its objec­
tive truth : alternatively, its acts provide the subjective certainty of 
which its aims are the objective truth. It has become, in active form, 
the categorial consciousness of Kantianism, in which consciousness 
of self amounts to consciousness oflaw-governed objectivity, and vice 
versa. 
395· Self-consciousness no longer observes an apparently indepen­
dent reality nor takes up practical attitudes towards it. This reality 
and its responses to it are transparently distinguished in its own practi­
cal activity, which is the genus under which its actions fall. 
396. All that self-consciousness now aims at is to display itself in 
the daylight of actual existence, turning an act merely intended into 
one actually performed. 

ANALYS I S  
T H E  S P I R I T U A L  A N I M A L  K I N G D O M  A N D  D E C E I T ,  O R  
T H E  ' MA TTE R I N  H A N D ' I T S E L F  
397· Real individuality i s  a t  first definite and simple, but with no 
specific content to differentiate its universality. It is the pure thought 
of a category, rather than its actual application. 
398. Such real individuality involves an original given nature with 
definite qualitative limitations, which do not, however, limit the free 
action of consciousness. 
399; All that the individual does springs from this original given 
nature, which it would not wish to transgress. But its negativity is 
not a passive being thus and thus and nothing else, but an active im­
position of its whole character on what lies arovnd it. 
400. Action involves a subjective object or end, opposed to what 
is given as actual, then an instrumental transition in which the end 
achieves the full form of reality, and lastly a realized end which exists 
apart from the subject and his ends. In such action, the end, the origi­
nal nature, the original situation, the means, the transition, and the 
resultant reality, are all only moments in a transparent identity. 
401 .  Original nature, whether considered as special aptitude, 
talent, or character, is the first aspect of all action. This original nature 
is as much reflected in the external situation, which seems to evoke 
and shape a man's aims, as in those aims themselves. It is, moreover, 
only in action, in given circumstances, that consciousness becomes 
aware of its aims : its aims, as formed in thought, are merely move­
ments towards action, and only become fully definite in action. The 
circumstances which evoke action, and the means used in it, are like­
wise parts of action, and the individual's inner nature is also a sort 
of means to it. None of the features distinguishable in action is really 
independent :  all count as moments in a single conscious performance. 
402. The universal character of a man's active nature can, how­
ever, be distinguished from a single, specific performance, and can 
be compared in respect of such characters as inventiveness, persist­
ence, range, etc. 
403-4. A man's actions cannot be judged as good or bad except 
in a wholly external, comparative manner. Whatever a man does, 
corresponds to his active nature, and is to that extent neither good nor 
bad, and neither to be admired nor lamented. 
405. The product of a man's action makes explicit what lay in the 
man's nature, and makes this explicit for the universal consciousness. 
In this product circumstances, aims, means, procedures are all dis­
solved, and have become part of an actuality foreign to the agent, 
and open to all individuals. But it represents what is transitory , rather 
than what is permanent, in the individual concerned in it. 

V. T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF R EASON, §§ 397-415 547 
406. Consciousness in such work experiences the gulf between 
doing and being. Being precedes doing as the original nature behind 
action, and being succeeds doing as the work which results from 
action. It is in its work that consciousness achieves full reality, and 
gets rid of its emptiness. 
407. The elements involved in work--original nature, aim, per­
formance, and result-will, however, at times fall apart, thus con­
tradicting their essential unity. The aim may not express the original 
nature, nor issue in an appropriate performance, nor yield the desired 
result. 
408. This element of contingent failure in work is itself contingent. 
The different aspects of action hang together in their Notion, even 
if they at times fall apart in reality. 
409. When a work vanishes, its contingent success or failure also 
vanishes. What persists in self-consciousness is the attempted perform­
ance in which doing and being, intention and execution, are united. 
It is irrelevant that reality sometimes fails to fulfil a work's intention. 
When a work is conceived as indifferent to contingent failure it 
becomes a task as such or 'matter in hand' itself. 
41 o. The 'matter in hand' is the unit, the 'thing' , of practical life. 
It combines aim with execution, circumstances and means with result. 
In it self-consciousness becomes real in a single performance. 
4 1 1 .  The 'matter in hand' unites subjective individuality with 
objectivity, and puts self-consciousness before itself in the role of a 
substance. The 'matter in hand' has end, means, procedure and result 
as its dependent modes or moments : it is the genus which they all 
specify. But it remains abstractively universal, rather than truly a sub­
ject, since it does not generate such dependent moments. 
4 1 2 .  Honesty of consciousness demands that the 'matter in hand' 
should express the agent's best endeavours, no matter what the cir­
cumstances or outcome may be. Whatever happens, he will have 
coped well with the 'matter in hand'. 
4 1 3. If the agent has not realized his aim, he has at least tried to 
realize it, and in so doing has dealt effectively with the 'matter in 
hand'. He has dealt with it, even if others bring his work to nought, 
or if he can in fact do nothing about things. He has dealt with it even 
if he has merely approved of something, or taken an interest in it. 
4 1 4. These emphases on the honest coping with the 'matter in 
hand' shift their ground from case to case. Sometimes a mere aim 
suffices, sometimes an act which fails of effect. All attempt to turn 
an ineffective or bad performance into one that is successful. 
4 1 5. The honest agent is not as honest as he seems. Being con­
cerned only with his own performance, or with some 'matter in hand', or 
with some reality, he is not really in earnest about achieving something. 

ANALYS I S  
4 1 6. The honest performer necessarily moves towards being a 
deceiver. For what others see him doinl{ never fully embodies what 
he means to do, and so admits of differing interpretations, from which 
he may derive advantage. 
4 1 7· A man appears in his actions to be disinterestedly realizing 
some 'matter in hand' , but may disappoint others by showing that 
he only cares for this task if done by himself and not by them. Such 
disappointment, however, shows their own concern to be with their 
own performance and not with the 'matter in hand'. And if they mag­
nanimously leave each man to do his own tasks, they still interfere 
with these through comments and criticisms. They care, not for the 
'matter in hand', but for their own pronouncements upon it. And 
those who say that they care nothing for what others do or say, con­
tradict this by submitting their work to the daylight of publicity. 
418. A 'task in hand' is essentially such that all feel themselves 
entitled to share in it, and to make it their own, whether directly or 
indirectly. Its being a 'matter in hand' does not mean that it is not 
interesting to individuals : it is disinterestedly pursued only because 
it is interesting to everyone. The 'matter in hand' therefore becomes 
the category or categorical imperative, the sort of being demanded 
by self-consciousness. (Hegel here shows how the practical egoism, 
in which a man undertakes something to give himself something to 
do, necessarily expands into universal moral egoism, where the task 
is set by Everyman for Everyman.) 
R E A S O N  AS L A W G I V E R  
4 1 9. Self-consciousness has now ceased to be the consciousness of 
a particular individual, and has become a consciousness shared by 
all individuals, and conceived by all as thus shared. Being thus cate­
gorial, it is at once the form and the matter of self-consciousness. 
420. Self-consciousness now identifies itself with the absolute 'mat­
ter in hand', the task which is of self-consciousness's essence, and 
which it neither can nor will question. This task is the absolute ethical 
task or substance, and its consciousness the ethical consciousness. But 
it differentiates itself into a number of distinct tasks or prescriptions. 
42 1 .  No justification can be given or sought for these absolute ethi­
cal imperatives, the pure deliverances of self-consciousness. 
422 .  The imperatives in question are immediately given as the deli­
verances of sound reason, and such soundness must be immediately 
and unquestioningly accepted. 
423. But just as the immediate deliverances of sense-certainty 
become articulate in perception, so the deliverances of moral sense 
become articulate in various well-known precepts. 
424. 'Everyone ought to speak the truth.' This rule has to be quali" 

V .  T H E  CERTAI NTY AND TRUTH OF R EASON, §§416-436 549 
fied in many ways, e.g. ifhe believes or knows it to be true. An impera­
tive so qualified loses all definite force. 
425. 'Love thy neighbour as thyself.' This rule says, if it says any­
thing, that we should try to do what is for the good of others, a Notion 
at once involved in immense obscurity. 
426. It becomes clear that the most we can demand of an ethical 
precept is not that it should have definite content, but that it should 
be free from internal contradiction. 
427. All that the ethical consciousness can therefore prescribe, as 
our task itself, is that we should do whatever we usually do. 
428. All that it can warn us against is self-contradiction in ethical 
use and wont. It therefore becomes only the critic of existing or pro­
posed ethical laws. 
R E A S O N  AS TEST I N G  L A W S  
429. Self-consciousness now applies to ethical precepts the sort of 
criticism which we as phenomenologists applied to them. But these 
precepts are no longer taken to be the authoritative deliverances of 
self-consciousness, and they are only criticized in regard to self-con­
sistency. 
430. Such criticism is, however, nugatory, since any and every con­
tent can be made formally self-consistent, e.g. neither the institution 
nor the non-institution of private property need be formally in­
consistent. And both involve conflicts when we descend to the level 
of specific rulings, e.g. that each should receive as much as he needs. 
43 1 .  Private property and communism are alike free from con­
tradiction if treated as simple abstractions : in the concrete both in­
volve infinite contradictions. It is ridiculous to think that the mere 
absence of contradiction, so useless in theory, could provide guidance 
in practice. 
432. Precepts and criticisms of precepts are alike vanishing 
moments in the ethical consciousness, whose substantial content they 
never succeed in providing. 
433· These moments enter into our consciousness of the ethical 
task, and are aspects of the honest endeavour to gain clarity and in­
sight into what we should do. 
434· But there is in fact no validity in the dehnite laws they pre­
scribe nor in their arbitrary criticisms of the same. 
435· The spiritual essence or substance of a l.iving community gives 
all the validity that can be given to such one-sided precepts and criti­
cisms. 
436. Ethical law is implicit in communal living. It is not grounded 
on arbitrary individual decrees, which can simply be disregarded. It 
is what all men in the community accept as their standard, and that 

ANALY S I S  
without question, and what they do not i n  any way see as foreign 
or alien. 
437· True ethical law is the unwritten, inerrant, unalterable divine 
law spoken of in the Antigone. It is not anxthing that an individual 
can hope either to criticize or to justify, arid certainly not in terms 
of mere self-consistency. 
V I .  S P I R I T  
438. Reason becomes Spirit when it achieves the full consciousness 
ofitselfas being all reality. In the previous stage of Observing Reason 
it merely found itself in an existent object. From this it rose to a stage 
in which it no longer passively perceived itself in an object, but 
imposed itself more actively on the world, a stage as one-sided as the 
previous one. Finally, it rose to an as yet abstract identification of 
itself with reality in the vocational dedication of itself to the 'task 
itself' ,  or in the arbitrary institution of moral canons, or in the per­
sonal pronouncement upon such canons. 
439· The essence of Spirit has already been recognized as the ethi­
cal substance, the customs and laws of a society. Spirit, however, is 
the ethical actuality which, when it confronts itself in objective social 
form, has lost all sense of strangeness in what it has before it. The 
ethical substance of custom and law is the foundation and source of 
everyone's action and the aim towards which it tends : it is the com­
mon work which men's co-operative efforts seek to bring about. The 
ethical substance is as it were the infinite self-dispensing benevolence 
on which every individual draws. It is of the essence of this substance 
to come to life in distinct individuals and to act through and in them. 
440. Spirit is the absolutely real being of which all previous forms 
of consciousness have represented falsely isolated abstractions, which 
the dialectical development has shown them to be. In the previous 
stages of observational and active Reason, Spirit has rather had Reason 
than been Reason : it has imposed itself as a category on material not 
intrinsically categorized. When Spirit sees itself and its world as being 
Reason it becomes ethical substance actualized. 
44r .  Spirit in its immediacy is the ethical life of a people, of indivi­
duality at one with a social world. But it must advance to the full 
consciousness of what it immediately is through many complex stages, 
stages realized in a total social world and not merely in a separate 
individual consciousness. 
442-3. The living ethical world is Spirit in its truth, its abstract 
self-knowledge being the formal generality of law. But it dirempts 
itself on the one hand into the hard reality of a world of culture, and 

V I .  SPIRIT, §§437-449 
551 
on the other hand in to the inner reality of a world of faith and insight. 
The conflict between these two modes of experience is resolved in 
Spirit-sure-of-itself, i.e. in morality. Out of all these attitudes the 
actual self-consciousness of absolute Spirit will make its appearance. 
T H E  T R U E  S P I R I T .  T H E  E T H I C A L  O R D E R  
444· Spirit is a consciousness which intrinsically separates its 
moments, whether in its substance or in its consciousness. In its con­
sciousness the individual moral act and the accomplished work are 
separated from the general moral substance or essence : the term 
which serves as middle term between them is the individual conscious 
agent. 
445· The ethical substance, i.e. the system of laws and customs, 
itself reflects the distinction between the individual action or agent, 
on the one hand, and the moral substance or essence, on the other. 
It splits up into a human and a divine law. The individual harried 
by these contradictory laws both knows and does not know the wrong­
ness of his acts, and is tragically destroyed in the conflict. Through 
such tragic instances, individuals learn to advance beyond blind 
obedience to law and custom. They achieve the ability to make con­
scientious decisions to obey or disobey. 
T H E  E T H I C A L  W O R L D  
446. Spirit is essentially self-diremptive. But just as bare being 
dirempts itself into the Thing with its many properties, so the ethical 
life dirempts itself into a web of ethical relations. And just as the many 
properties of the Thing concentrate themselves into the contrast 
between individuality and universality, so too do ethical laws resolve 
themselves into individual and universal laws. 
447· The ethical substance, as individual reality, is the com­
monalty which realizes itself in a plurality of existent consciousnesses 
in all C>f which it is consciously reflected, but which also underlies them 
as substance and contains them in itself. As actual substance it is 
a people, as actual consciousness the օitizens of that people. Such a 
people is not anything unreal : it exists and prevails. 
448. This Spirit can be called the human law since it is a completely 
self-conscious actuality. It is present as the known law and as the pre­
vailing custom. It shows itself in the assurance of individuals gener­
ally, and of the government in particular. It has a daylight sway, and 
lets individuals go freely about their business. 
449· The ethical substance reveals itself, however, in another law, 
the Divine Law, which springs from the immediate, simple essence 
of the ethical, and is opposed to the fully conscious dimension of 
action, and extends down to the inner essence of individuals. 

552 
ANALYSI S 
450. The Divine Law has its own self-consciousness, the immediate 
consciousness of self-in-other, in a natural ethical community, the 
Family. The Family is that elementary, unconscious ethical being 
which is opposed to, and yet is also presupposed by, the conscious 
ethical being of the people and their devotion to common ends. 
45 1 .  In the Family natural relations carry universal ethical mean­
ings. The individual in the Family is primarily related to the Family 
as a whole, and not by ties of love and sentiment to its particular 
members. The Family, further, is not concerned to promote the well­
being of its individual members, nor to offer them protection. It is 
concerned with individuality raised out of the unrest and change of 
life into the universality of death, i.e. the Family exists to promote 
the cult of the dead. 
452. The individuality by dying achieves peace and universality 
through a merely natural process. As regards its timing it is only acci­
dentally connected with the services he performs to the community, 
even though dying is in a sense the supreme service to the community 
that a man can perform, in furnishing the Family with its ancestral 
pantheon, its household Lares. In order, however, that the indivi­
dual's taking up into universality may be effective, it must be helped 
out by a conscious act on the part of the Family members. This act 
may indifferently be regarded as the saving of the deceased individual 
from destruction, or as the conscious effecting of that destruction, so 
that the individual becomes a thing of the past, a universal meaning. 
The Family resists the corruption of worms and of chemical agencies 
by substituting their own conscious work in its place, by consigning 
the dead individual solemnly to the imperishable elementary indivi­
dual, the earth. It thereby also makes the dead person an imperishable 
presiding part of the Family. 
453· All living relations to the individual Family members, while 
yet in the realm of actuality, are matters of the human law. The Divine 
Law only concerns individuals no longer actual who have become 
universal meanings still efficacious in a people's and a Family's life. 
454· There are in both laws differences and gradations. In discuss­
ing these we shall see them in active operation, enjoying their own 
self-consciousness and also interacting with one another. 
455· The human law has its living seat in the government in which 
it atֆo assumes individual form. The government is the actual Spirit 
which reflects on itself, and is the self of the whole ethical substance. 
It may accord a limited independence to the families under its sway, 
but is always ready to subordinate them to the whole. It may likewise 
accord a limited independence to individuals promoting their own 
gain and enjoyment, but it has to prevent such individual interests 
from becoming overriding. From time to time it must foster wars to 

V I .  SPI R I T, §§45o-462 
553 
prevent individual life from becoming a mere case of natural being, 
and ceasing to serve the freedom and power of the social whole. The 
daylight, human law, however, always bases its authority on the 
deeper authority of the subterranean Divine Law. 
456. The Divine Law governs three different family-relationships, 
that of husband to wife, of parents to children, and of siblings to one 
another. The husband-wife relation is a case of immediate self­
recognition in another consciousness which has also a mainly natural 
character : its reality lies outside of itself, in the children, in which 
it passes away. 
457· A relationship unmixed with transience or inequality of status 
is that of brother and sister. In them identity of blood has come to 
tranquillity and equilibrium. As sister, a woman has the highest in­
timations of ethical essence, not yet brought out into actuality or full 
consciousness : she manifests internal feeling and the divinity that is 
raised. above the actual. As daughter, a woman must see her parents 
pass away with resigned tenderness, as mother and wife there is some­
thing natural and replaceable about her, and her unequal relation 
to her husband, in which she has duties where he mainly has 
pleasures, means that she cannot fully be aware of herself in another. 
In brother and sister there are none of the inequalities due to desire 
nor any possibility of replacement: the loss of a brother is irreparable 
to a sister, and her duty to him is the highest. 
458. The brother represents the family-spirit at its most individual 
and therefore turned outwards towards a wider universality. The 
brother leaves the immediate, elemental, negative ethical life of the 
Family to achieve a self-conscious, actual ethical life. 
459· The brother passes from the suzerainty of the divine to that 
of the human law : the sister or wife remains the guardian of the Divine 
Law. They have each a different natural vocation, a sequel of the 
vocation considered above in the 'task itself', a vocation which has 
its outer expression in the distinction of sex. 
460. The human and ethical orders require one another. The 
human law has its roots in the divine order, whereas the Divine Law 
is only actual in the daylight realm of existence and activity. 
461 .  The ethical system in its two branches fulfils all the imperfect 
categories that have led up to it. It is rational in that it unites self­
consciousness and objectivity. It observes itself in the customs which 
surround it. It has pleasure in the family life and necessity in the wider 
social order. It has the law of the heart at its root which is also the 
Ia w of all hearts. It exhibits virtue and the devotion to the 'task itself'. 
It provides the criterion by which all detailed projects and acts are 
tested. 
462. The ethical whole is a tranquil equilibrium of parts in which 

554 
ANALYSI S 
each finds its satisfaction in this equilibrium with the whole. Justice 
is the agency which restores this equilibrium whenever it is disturbed 
by individuals or classes. The communal spirit avenges itself on 
wrongs done to its members, wrongs which have the mechanical 
character of the merely natural, by equally natural expedients of 
revenge. 
463. Universal self-conscious Spirit is chiefly manifest in the man, 
unconscious individualized Spirit in the woman : both serve as middle 
terms in what amounts to the same syllogism uniting the divine with 
the human law. 
E T H I C A L  A C TION 
464. In the opposition of the two laws we have not yet considered 
the role of the individual and his deed. It is the individual's deed 
which brings the two laws into conflict. A dreadful fate (Schicksal) 
here enters the scene and makes action come out on one side or the 
other. 
465. The individual's self-alignment with one law does not, how­
ever, involve internal debate and arbitrary choice, only immediate, 
unhesitant, dutiful self-commitment. There is no quarrel of duty with 
passion, much less any ridiculous seeming conflict of duty with duty. 
It is one's sex, Hegel suggests, which decides which law one will obey. 
466. In self-consciousness the two laws are explicit, not merely 
implicit as in ordinary ethical life. The individual's character commits 
him to one law. The other seems to him only an unrighteous actuality 
or a case of human obstinacy or perversity. 
467. The ethical consciousness cannot (like the consciousness that 
preceded it) draw any distinction between an objective order and 
its own subjective order : it cannot doubt that the law it obeys has 
absolute authority. Nor is there any taint of individuality left over 
that can deflect it from the path of duty. It cannot conceive that 
its duty could be other than what it knows it to be. 
468. None the less the ethical consciousness cannot divest itself of 
allegiance to both laws, and so cannot escape guilt when it opts for 
the one as opposed to the other. Only an inert, unconscious stone can 
avoid incurring guilt. The guilt is, however, not individual, but collec­
tive. It is the guilt of a whole class or sex. 
469. The law violated by an individual's act necessarily demands 
vindication, even though its voice was not at the time heard by the 
violator. Action brings the unconscious into the daylight, and forces 
consciousness to bow to its offended majesty. 
4 70. The ethical consciousness is most truly guilty when it wittingly 
rejects the behests of one law and holds them to be violent and wrong. 

555 
Its action denies the demand for real fulfilment which is part of the 
law, and so involves real guilt. 
47 1 .  The individual cannot survive the tragic conflict in him of 
the two laws, neither of which he can repudiate. He cannot merely 
have a sentiment ( Gesinnung) for the one. His whole being is consumed 
in pathos, which is part of his character as an ethical being. 
472. In the fateful conflict of two laws in different individuals both 
individuals undergo destruction. Each is guilty in the face of the law 
he has violated. It is in the equal subordination of both sides that 
absolute right is first carried out. 
473· A young man leaves the unconscious natural medium of ethi­
cal life to become ruler of the community and administer the human 
law. But the natural character of his origins may show itself in a 
duplicity of existence, e.g. Eteocles and Polynices. The community 
is bound to honour the one who actually possesses power, and to dis­
honour the mere claimant to state power who takes up arms against 
the community. This dishonour involves deprivation of burial rights. 
474· The family-spirit, backed by the Divine Law, and with its 
roots in the underworld waters offorgetfulness, is affronted by these 
human arrangements. The dead man finds instruments of vengeance 
by which the representatives of the human law are in their turn de­
stroyed. 
475· The battle of laws, with its inherent pathos, is carried on by 
human agents, which gives it an air of contingency. The atomistic 
family has to be liquidated in the continuity of communal life, but 
the latter continues to have its roots in the former. Womankind, that 
eternal source of irony, reduces to ridicule the grave deliberations of 
the state elders, and asserts the claims of youth. The communal spirit 
then takes its revenge on feminine anarchy by impressing youth into 
war. In war the ethical substance asserts its negativity, its freedom 
from all existent arrangements. But since victory depends on fortune 
and strength, this sort of ethical community breaks down, and is 
superseded by a soulless, universal ethical community, based on limit­
less individualism. 
476. The-destruction of the ethical world of custom lies in its mere 
naturalness, its immediacy. This immediacy breaks down because it 
tries to combine the unconscious peace of nature with the self-con­
scious, unresting peace of Spirit. An ethical system of this natural sort 
is inevitably restricted, and gets superseded by another similar system. 
Spiritual communal life necessarily detaches itself from such tribal­
ism, and erects itself into a formally universal 'open society' (term 
not used by Hegel) dispersed among a vast horde of separate indivi­
duals. 

556 
ANALYSIS 
LE G A L  S TA T U S  
477· The universality into which the ethical substance has now de­
veloped is the soulless commonalty which has ceased to be the self­
conscious substance of its members. These latter alone, in their atom­
istic multiplicity, are real and substantial. All are equal and all count 
as persons. The abstract individuality of the dead person in the tribal 
state has become the abstract 'I' of self-consciousness, the spirit of the 
new community. 
478. Individual personality is now the acknowledged substantial 
principle. But it is an abstract principle instantiated in disjoined selves 
which lack a common substance. (Use of concept of Spriidigkeit, brittle­
ness, diremptiveness, non-cohesion.) 
479· The world of abstract atomic persons carries out in reality 
what in Stoicism is a mere abstraction. The abstract right of the indivi­
dual person depends merely on his being a person, not on any superior 
inner richness or power. 
480. The world of right-endowed persons develops dialectically as 
does Stoicism. Since it gives no content to personality and personal 
right, it has to relate it to senseless, external things. Persons become 
property-owners, and so trivial and contemptible, and their rights are 
all rights to property. (Stress on property in Roman law.) 
48I .  Since empty individuality is the guiding principle of the right­
state, it naturally incarnates itself in an arbitrarily selected individual, 
an emperor or living god, whose universal ownership can only express 
itself in monstrous excess. 
482. Since legal personality is devoid of content, the abstract in­
dividuality that incarnates its principle is such as to destroy it and 
also itself. 
483. In legal personality the person is meant to be absolutely essen­
tial, but its abstraction makes it completely unessential, the prey of 
unlimited caprice. The absolute unessentiality of the individual 
becomes the heart of a new phase of experience, that of the self­
estranged person in a world of 'culture'. 
S E L F - A L I E N A T E D  S P I R I T .  C U L T U R E  
484. The ethical substance has, in the state of mere right, put its 
ethical being outside of itself. As an abstract individual, it confronts 
the world ordered by law and custom as something alien, from which 
it feels estranged. The world is its own world, but not seen as its own 
world, and accordingly becomes objectively different. Ruined is the 
atomistic assertion of personal rights, it acquiesces in a social order 
which seems deeply foreign. 
485. The ethical substance then opposes to the real ethical order, 

V I .  S P I R I T ,  §§477-4-92 
557 
which seems deeply alien, a pure, essential order representative of its 
inward thoughts and ideals. The real order is this-world and strange, 
the essential order is an other-world in which it would feel at home. 
486. The ethical Spirit thereby comes to inhabit two worlds, an 
actual world of'culture' and civilization, and an unreal world, posited 
by faith, and more truly in harmony with itself. But just as the divine 
and human laws vanish in the atomistic legal person, so do both 
worlds vanish in the pure insight of the Enlightenment, with its un­
knowable god at one pole and its pure utility at the other. This pure 
insight refines itself into the nullity of revolutionary freedom, from 
which it must return to repossess itself of its alienated content in the 
new phase of morality. 
T H E  W O R L D  O F  S E LF-A L I E N A T E D  S P I R I T  
487. Spirit now lives in two worlds, one of self-alienation a.nd 
the other offaith, where, however, in fleeing from the former world, 
it is involved in another form of the same self-alienation. The prin­
ciple of the former world, not being aware of its Notion, has the false 
limitation of being opposed to faith. 
T H E  R E A L M  O F  E N L I G H T E N M E N T  
488. The world we are about to consider is one in which conscious­
ness externalizes itself, which accordingly seems strange to it, and 
which it has to master. Only by mastering the world can self-con­
sciousness have the universality which is its validity and its reality. 
This universality involves conformity to general patterns, and is not 
to be confused with the merely formal universality of the realm of 
right. 
489. In the world we are about to consider the individual counts 
and is real on account ofhis Bildung, his culture. He is actual, powerful 
only to the extent that he is cultivated. His natural being and 
endowment in all its forms is utterly unimportant: only as cultivated 
are they better or worse. 
490. The cultured individual exercises his ability and talents in a 
cultured world. In 'making his mark in the world' he in effect helps 
to make the world in which he makes his mark, though he is not con­
scious of doing so. 
491 .  In the world each man has a place and an opening for his 
talents, and this place goes with seemingly fixed judgements of good 
and bad. Since he is part of the world, such judgements always stand 
over against other seemingly just as definite judgeme.nts. . 
. 
492. As Nature dirempts itselfinto the elements ofAu, Water, F1re, 

ANALYS I S  
and Earth so the social milieu dirempts itself into ( r) a spirit of over­
all uniformity, (2) a spirit ofindividual diversification, and (3) a spirit 
which embodies both aspects and unites them in its self-consciousness. 
There is nothing here analogous to the element of fate which embodies 
the conflicts of family and state : self-consciousness embodies both. 
493· The spirit of uniformity in a society comes before the pure 
and detached consciousness on the one hand, and the involved actual 
consciousness on the other, as the good element in that society, whereas 
the spirit of divergent individualism comes before them as the bad ele­
ment. 
494· The good element in the society, considereq as a reality, is 
the state power in which all individual endeavours are integrated, 
while the bad element is represented by the riches aimed at by their 
personal, self-aggrandizing efforts. But the quest for wealth is in 
reality as much for the good of the whole as the state power, and both 
are the same at bottom. 
495· Self-consciousness sees its substance, content, and End in two 
spiritual powers. Its being-in-self is the state power, its being-for-self 
riches. Self-consciousness necessarily judges these two powers, and sees 
the former as good, and the latter as bad. But because both involve 
their opposites, this judgement can always be reversed. 
496. What things intrinsically are is what self-consciousness finds 
them to be, and so the prima facie judgements of self-consciousness 
will necessarily be reversed on deeper reflection. 
497· This reversal makes the state power be an oppressive, interfer­
ing, evil thing in which self-consciousness fails to recognize itself, 
whereas riches becomes a good thing to it, which only harms certain 
individuals accidentally. 
498. This reversed judgement is, however, itself reversible on still 
deeper reflection. State power is seen as realizing the enduring good 
of individuals and organizing their activities, whereas riches only 
ministers to their vanishing enjoyments. 
499· Self-consciousness now judges its own judgements, finding 
goodness in judgements which recognize themselves in state power 
or riches, badness in judgements which regard either as bad. 
500. If a man judges state power in a good manner, he takes up 
a noble-minded attitude towards it, and becomes intent on political 
and social service. If he judges riches aright, he is grateful towards 
it and the dispensers of it. 
501 .  To judge badly of either of these powers is to adopt a base­
minded attitude, one which secretly rebels against all rulers and uses, 
while it despises wealth. 
502. Both these judgements are immediate and one-sided : they are 
not brought together in consciousness as they are for us philosophers. 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§ 493-5 1 5  
But this immediacy generates a demand for a reasoned, syllogistic 
demonstration by way of a middle term which will suffice to bring 
them together. 
503. The noble-minded consciousness, positively disposed towards 
state power and negatively to its own selfish purposes, achieves the 
heroism of service. 
504. The heroism of service endows consciousness with self-respect 
and exacts respect fro in others. But it also is the real, ultimate source 
of state power. 
505. At first self-consciousness only gives the state power an imper­
sonal legislative status, not an individual one. The haughty vassal 
retains his individuality and offers advice, counsel to the state 
powers. 
506. The relation of the haughty vassal to the state power is osten­
sibly noble and loyal, even unto death, but is none the less always 
ready secretly to conspire against the state for personal ends. 
507. A true self-surrender to the state power gives the latter its own 
individual will, makes it a monarch. 
508. In all cases of self-alienation language plays an operative 
role. Through language the individual makes himself universal and 
impersonal, and transcends his immediate, changing self. (Cf. the 
'divine' universality of language in sense-certainty.) 
509. Spirit is essentially such as to be one in and through separated 
sides, each of which treats the other as an object excluded from itself. 
As such it will itself express itself as an existent object (i.e. a monarch) 
distinct from its many sides. 
5 I O. The 'universal best' is a poor expression of the profound unity 
underlying the various 'sides' in a society. An individual, monarchical 
will is a better, truer expression. 
5 I I .  The noble-minded consciousness now develops a language of 
flattery to reconcile itself with the supreme monarchical will. The 
monarch becomes unlimited and absolute, and is spoken of by his 
proper name. The monarch identifies himself with the state power 
( L' etat c' est moi). 
5 I 2. The flattery of the subjects really creates the monarchical self­
consciousness. But the nobility in practising flattery retains its inner 
conscious independence, and turns the monarch into a mere dispenser 
of wealth. 
5 I 3. The noble-minded consciousness, through its unscrupulous 
use of flattery, becomes indistinguishable from the base conscious­
ness. 
5 I 4. For the base self-consciousness the monarch becomes a fount 
of wealth for which he becomes boundlessly grateful. 
5 I 5. Wealth represents individual satisfaction but not the satisfac-

ANALY S I S  
tion of a definite individual. It is a form of intrinsic being [ Ansichsein] 
in which being-for-self is negated. 
516. In the pursuit of wealth the noble-minded individual comes 
under the sway of an alien power. 
51 7· In the pursuit of wealth an individual's personality becomes 
enslaved to the chance personality of another. What he personally 
is becomes utterly impersonal, a commodity like others to be bought 
and sold. Feeling that everything essential is reduced to unessentiality, 
the individual becomes profoundly rebellious. 
5 1 8. The self, seeing itself thus superseded and rejected, supersedes 
this supersession and rejects this rejection. It is consciously for itself 
in and through them. 
51 g. In its inner independence the self rises above the distinction 
of the noble- and base-minded : both become a single attitude. Wealth 
in being universally dispensed gives self-conscious independence and 
freedom of choice to all, put these are exercised at the expense of 
others. An arrogance of wealth arises which generates unbounded 
resentment. 
520. Self-consciousness uses a language of noble flattery in dealing 
with state power: it employs a language of ignoble flattery in dealing 
with wealth. But the language which truly expresses its Zerrissenheit, 
its torn state, is one which makes diremption its essence, which in 
all its judgements unites terms in an utterly irrelevant, external 
fashion. Its only reason for dealing with things together is that they 
have nothing to do with each other. 
52 1 .  The absolute, universal inversion of reality and thought, their 
mutual estrangement, is the final product of culture. Everything 
becomes void of substance and confounded with its opposite. All 
values become transvalued. Spirit in this phase of culture speaks a 
language of utter disintegration, which takes the novel form of 
wit. 
522. Wit runs the whole gamut of the serious and the silly, the 
trivial and the profound, the lofty and the infamous, with complete 
lack of taste and shame (see Diderot's Nephew of Rameau). 
523. Plain sense and sound morality can teach this disintegrated 
brilliance nothing that it does not know. It can merely utter some 
of the syllables the latter weaves into its piebald discourse. In conced­
ing that the bad and good are mixed in life, it merely substitutes dull . 
platitude for witty brilliance. 
524. The disintegrated consciousness can be noble and edifying but 
this is for it only one note among others. To ask it to forsake its dis­
integration is merely, from its own point of view, to preach a new 
eccentricity, that of Diogenes in his tub. 
525. The disintegrated consciousness is, however, on the way to 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§5 1ǳ536 
transcending its disintegration. It sees the vanity of treating all things 
as vain, and so becomes serious. 
526. Wit really emancipates the disintegrated consciousness from 
finite material aims and gives it true spiritual freedom. In knowing 
itself as disintegrated it also rises above this, and achieves a truly posi­
tive self-consciousness. 
F A I TH A N D  P U R E  I N S I G H T  
527. Beyond the alienated world of culture seems to stand the un­
real world of pure insight or thought. Consciousness does not, how­
ever, recognize that it is its own thought that occupies the transcen­
dental medium, but rather fills it with Vorstellungen, picture-thoughts. 
The world beyond is a religious picture-world, unreal but conceived 
as real. 
528. Religious faith, with its simple affirmation of a real beyond, 
is distinct from the religious phases considered before, i.e. the 
anguished squirmings of the Unhappy Consciousness, or the family­
centred cult of the dead. 
529. Since consciousness in religious belief flees the world, it con­
tinues to carry something which represents the worldly consciousness 
in itself. This accompanying voice is that of the never resting critical 
negativity which has emerged out of the realm of culture, and which 
destroys all positivity and all objectivity. This negative consciousness 
is without definite content of its own, but it fastens itself on the pic­
torial content of religious belief and devours the latter. 
530. Both faith and pure insight represent consciousness returning 
to itself from the dispersed world of culture. Each presents three sides 
for examination : (a) what it is in and for itself; (b) how it stands -to 
reality ; (c) how it stands to its sister mode of transcendence. 
53 1 .  For faith its absolute object is a pictorial reflection of the real 
world with the historical character of that real world. 
532. In its relation to the real world, the object offaith articulates 
itself into the Absolute Father, the self-offering Son, and the Holy 
Spirit in which it returns to its original simplicity. 
533· Since the Son and Holy Spirit bring the transcendent religious 
object into relation with reality, they also bring the believing self­
consciousness into relation with the transcendent. 
534· The spirit of religious faith lives in the world of culture, but 
tries to rise above its vanity to the transcendent religious object. It 
practises acts of devotion which bring it no nearer to its goal which 
it locates in a remote region of time and space. 
535· For pure insight the Notion or concept alone has reality. 
536. It seeks to overthrow every type of independence other than 
that of self-consciousness. 

ANALYS I S  
537· I n  its first appearance the Notion of pure insight is not fully 
realized. It refers everything to the future, in the form of an aim to 
be realized. All is to be given a rational reduction which will be valid 
for everyone. Differences between individuals do not count :  they are 
differences of degree, not of kind. Pure insight is something that all 
can exercise and possess. 
E N L I G H T E N M E N T  
538-40. Pure insight is essentially opposed to religious faith. It is 
also opposed to the real world and fights against its impure intentions 
and perverted· insights. 
T H E  S T R U G G L E  O F  E N L I G H T E N M E N T  W I T H  S U P E R S T I T I O N  
541 .  Enlightenment unites all the destructive, negative poses of 
consciousness in one. It is the same as religious faith, but seems utterly 
opposed to it, since it denies all the pictorial content of religious faith. 
What content it has, it borrows from religious faith, and causes it all 
to disappear. 
542. To enlightenment religious faith is, in the main mass of the 
people, unconscious error and superstition. But it also attributes a self­
consciousness to this error in the person of deceiving priests and 
despots. 
543· Enlightenment appeals to the insight latent in all to free them­
selves from the impostures of religion. 
544· Enlightenment is essentially ambivalent in its relation to the 
na·ive consciousness, which it sees as a ready prey to imposture, yet 
capable of achieving insight. 
545· Enlightenment thinks that it will win its way to men's minds 
without a painful struggle, and by a simple infection. One fine day 
the false idols of religion will simply lie flat on the floor before it. ( The 
Nephew of Rameau.) 
' 
546. But it also engages in various noisy combats with religious 
superstition. 
547· Pure insight gives a false reality to the superstition that con­
fronts it, and pretends that it is something that it has to defeat. 
548. The 'other' of pure insight can only be pure insight: it can 
only condemn what it is, since beyond itself nothing is admitted to 
have substance. But it maintains itself by confusedly finding an other 
in the objects of religion (another form of itself for us, but not for 
it) which it condemns as irrational lies leading to bad purposes. 
549· The object of religion is rightly declared by enlightenment 
to be a product of the religious man's thought, but it is wrongly sup­
posed that this means that this object is a mere fabrication. The reli­
gious man's trust in God is a recognition of the identity of God with 

V I . S P I R I T, §§ 537-558 
his own rational being. The worship of the religious community is 
likewise something in which God comes to be as the spirit of that com­
munity, and does not remain blandly beyond it. 
550. For the religious consciousness talk of priestly deception, etc. 
is absurd, since its object corresponds to the inmost nature of con­
sciousness. The lie lies rather in enlightenment which makes the object 
of religion something entirely different from what it essentially is. 
There can in fact be no delusion regarding the inmost reality in which 
consciousness finds the direct certainty of itself. 
551 .  Pure insight misinterprets the various aspects of religious 
belief, i.e. its view of the absolute essence, the grounds of this belief, 
and the nature of its service to this essence. 
552. Pure insight wrongly supposes that religious belief adores a 
sensuous object, a lump of wood or stone, a wafer made of paste, etc. 
553· But religious belief is not really oriented towards a temporal, 
sensuous thing. It goes beyond this towards a thought-object which 
alone is self-existent. 
554· Pure insight regards religion as basing itself on contingent, 
historical matters offact, whose evidence is inferior to that of the news­
papers, and which has passed through many distorting media, e.g. 
inadequate translations. The religious consciousness, however, bases 
itself solely on internal grounds of certainty. Only when corrupted 
by enlightenment does it look for historical support. 
555· Religious acts really consist in cancelling the individual's par­
ticularity, which makes them appear senseless, without definite objec­
tive, to pure insight. 
556. To pure insight the religious consciousness is foolish when it 
seeks union with its ideal by foregoing natural enjoyments, etc. For 
pure insight the religious consciousness is likewise foolish in rising 
above isolated individualism and renouncing private property. To the 
charge of foolishness it adds the further charge of moral wrongness, 
thereby making finite ends the sole ends of action, and being untrue 
even to its own transcendence of these. 
55 7. The role of enlightenment is to make religious faith a ware of 
what it intrinsically is. What, however, is the positive truth which 
enlightenment opposes to religious superstition? It removes from 
absolute being all sensuous properties, and so turns it into a mere 
vacuum to which no predicate can be attributed. 
558. Over against absolute reality stands the individual, whose pri­
mary awareness is sense-certainty, which has become the absolute 
truth through the destruction of all sense-transcending forms of con­
sciousness. Sense-experience is supposed to involve certainty as to the 
reality of the sensitive person and of other things external to himself, 
all of which exist absolutely. 

ANALYS I S  
559-60. Enlightenment can indifferently place featureless intrinsic 
being beyond sensible things or in them. It can further combine these 
two ways of regarding sensible things in which they come to have 
their whole being in their usefulness for other finite things beyond 
themselves. Reason is the function which prevents immoderate self­
assertion and makes everything continue to be truly useful to every­
thing else. 
561 . The mutual serviceableness of all things is for pure insight a 
reflection of their derivation from the absolute essence, which is itself 
the supremely useful, profitable thing. 
562. Faith finds the positive outcome of enlightenment abomin­
able, its empty absolute, its goodness present in everything, its sum­
ming-up of religion in utility. It sees in enlightenment nothing but 
self-confessed banality. 
563. Faith has a divine right against enlightenment by which it 
feels itself utterly wronged. The enlightenment too has a divine right 
against faith, based on the self-consciousness which it expresses, and 
which is such as to absorb its opposite. 
564. Enlightenment does not attack faith with principles peculiar 
to itself but with those that faith itself acknowledges. It merely 
reminds faith of certain sides of itself which in certain situations it 
tends to forget. What it brings before faith is as much an essential 
part of it as the aspects that it opposes. 
· 
565. In regarding faith as its sheer opposite, enlightenment fails 
to recognize its own self. It does not see that the thought it condemns 
in faith is its own. Against faith insight is the power of the Notion, 
relating distinct moments to one another and bringing out their con­
tradiction. It has right against faith because faith contains both con­
tradictory elements in itself. 
566. If faith errs in making its object something alien, quite 
beyond its own devotional activities, insight reminds it of its error 
in stressing that its object is its own creation. But insight errs in 
making the object of faith a contingent fiction. It also itself 
believes in an unattainable, unsearchable Absolute, and is therefore 
on a level with faith, which combines the cognate with the unsearch­
able. 
567. Both faith and insight wrongly isolate the sensuous from the 
notional, the former in looking at both this world and its other-world 
in incompatible ways which it fails to combine, the latter in seeing 
this world as abandoned by Spirit and playing no part in the essential 
process of Reason. 
568. As regards the ground of knowledge, faith acknowledges that 
its knowledge of the Absolute involves an element of the contingent, 
but forgets this in its face-to-face confrontation with the absolute 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§ 559-578 
essence. Enlightenment, however, remembers only the former and 
forgets the latter. 
· 
569. Enlightenment regards the sacrifice of property and en­
joyment by faith as wrong and inexpedient. Faith, however, recog­
nizes, the merely symbolic character of such sacrifices. 
5 70. Enlightenment sees it as absurd to sacrifice a particular, con­
crete source of pleasure (e.g. by fasting) if one's aim is to be rid of 
sensual desire altogether. 
57 1 .  But enlightenment is here wrongly abstract in seeing the 
essential element in mere intention or thought, and not in the carry­
ing-out of the latter in the instinctive realm. 
5 72. Enlightenment has irresistible power over faith since it brings 
into play moments present in faith itself. It seems to destroy the 
beautiful unity of trust and immediate certainty, to sully spirituality 
with sensuousness, to disturb calm certainty with the idle play of 
understanding and self-will. But in reality enlightenment enables 
faith to overcome its split-mindedness, its dreaming life among 
notionless thoughts, on the one hand, and its waking life among the 
realities of sense, on the other. 
573· The effect of enlightenment is to empty faith of its imagina­
tive content, and to turn it into a pure yearning for an empty beyond. 
Its object is the same as the empty Absolute of enlightenment, except 
that it is not satisfied with this object, whereas enlightenment is 
satisfied. But enlightenment's satisfaction is, even as such, merely par­
tial, as is shown in its further turning towards this-world utility. 
T H E  T R U T H  O F  E N L I G H T E N M E N T  
574· Pure insight in its ultimate development frames an object to 
fit itself, pure thought in the form of a Thing, an Absolute without 
determinations, in which all distinctions are without a difference. This 
empty Absolute is the same as the object to which faith sank back 
when disillusioned of sense-content by enlightenment. The self­
alienated Notion does not, however, see the identity of these two Abso­
lutes with each other, and with the self-consciousness which draws 
these distinctions. 
575--8. The fight with faith reproduces itself within enlightenment 
in the form of a dual Absolute, on the one hand, the pure predicateless 
supreme being or first cause, and, on the other hand, an Absolute 
which especially involves the negation of all sensuous quality, and 
so becomes invisible, intangible, etc., underlying matter. Both are 
essentially, the same concept, different only in their starting-point 
What the one regards as horror, and the other despises as folly, are 
altogether the same. Thought is being, the copula is here a separatior 
as well as a connection, so that thought becomes opposed to its own 

566 
ANALY S I S  
shadow, matter. But matter as purely negative is indistinguishable 
from thought. The Cartesian Cogito ergo sum establishes the overriding 
identity which enlightenment fails to perceive. 
579· The universal present in the contracted forms of God and mat­
ter is an eternal abstract oscillation within self or the pure thought 
of self. The oscillation within self is the simple Notion of utility. 
580. Utility is a bad word to faith, sentiment, and speculation, but 
it expresses the ultimate truth of enlightenment--endless restless 
oscillation from one thing to another. Pure insight is the existent 
Notion whose being-in-self is not abiding being, but a perpetual 
being-for-another. 
58r .  Summary. The world of culture ends in the consciousness of 
its own emptiness and vanity : self-consciousness retreats into self, pass­
ing into the two forms of faith and anti-faith (or enlightenment) . 
Faith's imaginative pictures perish in the onslaught of pure insight, 
which circles between the two empty poles of the supreme being 
(negative) and matter (positive) .  Craving the reality which these 
abstractions exclude, self-consciousness turns to the real world it has 
forsaken and finds its own reflection in the universal usefulness of 
everything to everything. The three worlds traversed by Spirit are 
therefore (a) the dispersed world of culture in all its rich specificity 
and its hidden basic genus ; (b) the genus behind this world seen as 
faith and insight ; (c) the reconciliation of the genus with the specific 
forms in utility. In utility the rational universal is united with the 
individual and his satisfaction, and heaven is brought down to earth. 
A B S O L U T E  F R E E D O M  A N D  T E R R O R  
582. Consciousness has seen its very Notion in utility, which is, 
however, still envisaged as a predicate of the object of consciousness 
or as End of its pursuit, and not as its veritable being-for-self. There 
is, however, an implicit withdrawal from objectivity in the Notion 
of the useful, and when this withdrawal becomes more explicit we 
have as a new form of consciousness-absolute freedom. 
583. In utility all that intrinsically matters in objects is their use 
for some self, i.e. their use for a subject inherently universal which 
sees itself in the superficially alien being of the objects it uses. When 
the seeming distinction of subject, object, and interaction between 
them is overcome, absolute self-knowledge results. 
584. Spirit knowing itself in all its uses is absolute freedom, which 
sees nothing sensuous or supersensuous beyond itself. The world is 
its will, and this will is a general will, the will which is a real will 
and not capable of being mediated by a representative. This general 
will is the true will, the self-conscious essence of any and every person, 
so that each does what all do and vice versa (Rousseau) . 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§ 579-592 
585. This general will puts itself on the throne of the world without 
resistance. Since self-consciousness is the principle behind all separ­
ately organized social 'masses', all these masses collapse into the uni­
tary will which expresses self-consciousness. What gave the self-think­
ing Notion existence was its dirempti?n into sepaրցted s?cial masses : 
when the thinking Notion becomes Its own explicit object, all such 
masses go. Each individual consciousness rises above the accidents of 
its class and place, and desires only to perform the work of the whole. 
All differences of rank and function are annihilated. 
586. Utility as a predicate of a real object vanishes when self-con­
sciousness is its own only object. In this phase of experience there is 
no room for the distinction between the individual and the general 
will. The £tre supreme is reduced to a gaseous phantasm floating above 
the wrecked world of culture and faith. 
587. In the new fusion of individual with social will, the individual 
can do nothing but enact laws and public resolutions and decrees. 
588. Consciousness thus exalted and universal in aim can achieve 
nothing positive, either legislatively or executively. Its absolute nega­
tivity excludes a differentiation into groups having different state 
functions (legislature, executive, judiciary) or into the variously 
aligned groups in the world of culture. Being committed only to do 
the work of the whole, the individual can do nothing at all. 
589. But all deeds, however universal their source, are necessarily 
the deeds of definite individuals, and not of everyone. Only purely 
negative, destructive work can therefore be the• common work of 
wholly free consciousnesses. 
590. Self-consciousness, being self-consciousness, cannot avoid the 
differentiation which self-consciousness involves. If it abolishes all 
groups, it still keeps the distinction between the inflexible universal 
and the dirempted individual atoms. The only relation between these 
two extremes can be one of pure negation : the universal will must 
seek the death of its individual instances, and this in the most brutal 
and direct and senseless way. 
591 .  The government is necessarily individual, since only so can 
it will anything definite. But an individual structure necessarily 
departs from its own ideal of being the universal will, and becomes 
the will of a faction which may readily be replaced by another faction. 
It cannot escape the guilt of violating its own principles. Such guilt, 
being devoid of any objective principle, is indistinguishable from mere 
suspicion, and its only fit punishment is simple annihilation. 
592. In the work of destruction absolute freedom discovers what 
it is. Implicitly it is the abstract self-consciousness which uproots all 
distinctions within itself. The terror of death is the intuition of the 
negative essence, quivering between its empty absolute poles (God 

ANALYS I S  
and Matter) . The universal will pursuing nothing becomes the elimi­
nation of self-thinking self-consciousness. 
593· The absolute negativity cannot help generating class- and 
position-differences within itself which it ruthlessly keeps in their 
place by sheer terror. 
594· From this reign of terror Spirit is unable to return to the con­
creteness of the realms of culture and faith. It is universal will which 
in its ultimate abstractness has nothing positive left in it. The un­
fulfilled negativity of the self, with its senseless pursuit of death, is, 
however, such ւs to swing over into absolute positivity in so far as 
the individual becomes, not something to be destroyed by the uni­
versal will, but to be taken up into it as pure knowledge and pure 
will, the Kantian formal a priori. 
595· Absolute freedom has as its positive outcome a purely formal 
moral will, universal as much as individual. The Kantian Categorical 
Imperative is the other side of revolutionary destruction. 
S P I R I T  C E R T A I N  O F  I T S E L F .  M O R A L I T Y  
596. We have advanced to a position where the individual person, 
at first alienated from its own 'concept' in the worlds of culture, faith, 
and enlightenment, and swamped by that universal meaning in the 
stage of revolutionary freedom, has achieved unity with its own in­
herent universality. 
597· The individual's relation to his own spiritual universality is 
both immediate and mediate. It is immediate in that the individual 
simply knows his duty and does it. But it is mediate in that the indivi­
dual does not do his duty as an unreflecting member of the total ethical 
sփbstance, nor as an alien prescription of an external authority, but 
in that he understands and sees why he should do as he should do. 
This deep rational understanding abolishes all otherness, and 
becomes the whole being of the ethical world. 
598. At the moral level only what is known and present to the con­
scious agent makes any sense or has any reality. The world as an un­
known external set of facts of Nature has been transformed into the 
world as a known spring-board for action. 
T H E  M O R A L  V I E W  OF T H E  W O R L D  
599· Self-consciousness in this phase makes duty the absolute sub­
stance and essence, which is also its own substance and essence, and 
which cannot assume the form of anything alien. To this substance 
an other-being must stand opposed, a Nature morally meaningless, 
governed by laws that have nothing to do with morality. 
6oo. A moral outlook develops in which the intrinsic being and 
self-consciousness of morality stands in a relation of stark indifference 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§593--{)04 
s6g 
to the intrinsic being and self-consciousness of Nature. The moral and 
natural orders are for it given as mutually independent and irrelevant. 
From another point ofview, however, only duty counts, the natural 
order being dependent and unessential. The moral life develops the 
conflict of these two points of view. 
601 .  From the former point of view, the moral consciousness is 
satisfied by the mere performance of duty : the natural setting merely 
provides the occasion for this performance, and it may or may not 
reward the performance with complete success and happiness. From 
the latter point of view, which is not purely moral, it is a matter of 
complaint and regret that the natural order so often fails to match 
the demands of duty and the requirements of justice. 
6o2. The moral consciousness cannot satisfy itself in the fulfilment 
of an impersonal, universal purpose : it necessarily demands also that 
the individual person be satisfied. Nature, it is felt, must come into 
line with morality, and reward the moral individual with personal 
satisfaction. From the strictly moral point of view, Nature has no true 
self to oppose to the demands of morality, and its conformity to these 
demands is accordingly postulated. This postulation goes beyond 
present actualities, but is not a contingent, personal demand. It is 
a necessary demand of Reason. 
603. The moral consciousness not merely demands Nature as some­
thing completely external and alien in which it operates, but as some­
thing also present in itself in the form of contingent, sensuous urges 
and tendencies directed to specific and individual ends. These urges 
and tendencies constitute an internal opposition to the purposes of 
the pure will. The moral consciousness remains one consciousness, 
however, and in virtue of this unity is obliged to terminate the conflict 
between its pure self and its contingent, sensuous urges : its essence 
lies in ending such a conflict. But the conflict cannot be ended by 
uprooting the sensuous urges, since they are the real element in 
morality. It must accordingly be ended by making the urges conform 
to moral requirements. This harmony of urge with morality is a postu­
lated harmony, not as before in the nature of things, but as a harmony 
consciousness must itself bring about in an endless moral progress. 
The harmony itself is placed at infinity, since if it came about it would 
terminate morality. It is not really what we want to achieve, though 
it must be absolutely carried out : it is a task that must be carried 
out without ever ceasing to be a task. Infinity is a good place for such 
contradictory accommodations. 
6o4. Our first postulate was that of an inherent harmony of 
morality with external Nature, our second that of a self-conscious har­
mony of morality with internal nature or sensuous impulse. These 
two harmonies are brought together in the actual movement of action, 

570 
ANALYS I S  
and each appears required by the other. We have a harmony both 
inherent and for consciousness. 
605. The moral consciousness has to function in relation to an actu­
ality that presents many distinct 'cases' : in relation to these it breaks 
up into a variety of laws and duties presupposing different objective 
and subjective situations. These laws of detail have not the sacrosanct­
ness of morality as such, and have to be referred to another conscious­
ness than the one that prescribes the moral ideal as such. 
6o6. There are therefore two moral consciousnesses, one prescrib­
ing a law of duty indifferent to special content, and the other particu­
larizing this law into special rules. This second moral consciousness 
also has the task of harmonizing morality with happiness. What we 
here necessarily have is the concept of a moral world-ruler who plural­
izes duty and connects it with happiness. 
6o7. In actual conduct, however, the agent is always an individual 
concerned to achieve a result in the real world. He refers the unplural­
ized law of duty to another consciousness, that of a sacred lawgiver. 
(This is a strain of the dialectic opposed to 6o6.) 
6o8. The moral agent, since he places the pure law of duty beyond 
himself in a perfect lawgiver, necessarily thinks of himself as imperfect 
in knowledge and will, and a victim to the contingent and the sen­
suous. He is unworthy to receive happiness and can receive it only 
through the operation of Grace. 
6og. The Notion of a full conformity to duty is necessarily postu­
lated by the imperfect moral agent, and he thinks of such a perfection 
as meting ·out desert according to merit. 
610. The moral consciousness locates its moral ideal in another 
being, partly as a mere representation in its own mind, partly as some­
thing which in its perfection would transcend morality. 
61 1 .  The moral consciousness does not see its own Notion in the 
divine lawgiver, nor does it recognize itself as the concept which links 
all these opposed moments with one another. It operates with picture­
thoughts rather than pure Notions. Its object is treated as something 
merely existent which irrupts upon it in picture-presentation. 
6 1 2. The moral consciousness also sees its own intrinsic Notion in 
a quasi-temporal perspective as an original state of perfection to 
regain which is the aim of the world. 
613. The result of these transcendent projections is that the moral 
consciousness is one of infinite imperfection. There is for it no moral 
actuality. 
614. The accomplished moral actuality is for it merely something 
'beyond'. 
615. Both the imperfect individual and the perfection it aims at 
thus become mere presentations, each valid only from the point of 

V I .  S P I R I T, §§ 6o5--622 
571 
view of the other. The complete moral self-consciousness is and is not, 
since it exists only in idea. There is and can be no transcendent moral 
perfection, but an ideal of a moral transcendence is treated as if it 
were such a perfection. 
M O R A L  D U P L I C I T Y  
6 I 6. In the moral view of the world consciousness consciously pro­
duces its object, i.e. the realm of duty. This it does even if it attributes 
some aspects of its ideal to a transcendent, divine self-consciousness. 
6r 7· The moral view of the world now develops its basic contradic­
tion in several directions. It constantly regards one side of its being 
as a mere mask for the other, while the latter in its turn merely masks 
the former. It is, moreover, profoundly conscious of its shifting 
duplicity and pretence, and its basic lack of seriousness. 
6 r 8. This masking can be studied in the postulated harmony of 
morality and Nature. This is not given as actual now, but as to be 
actualized through moral action. But in so far as it is brought about 
and the result enjoyed by the agent, there ceases to be the transcen­
dently postulated harmony, and the postulation thereof is therefore 
shown up as insincere. We only postulate the ultimate harmony to 
inspire present action. 
6rg. If our postulation of ultimate harmony is insincere, our im­
mersion in action must be sincere. But the End of action is not the 
individual act but the total betterment of the world, to which the 
act makes only a negligible contribution. But to place the End in 
world-betterment is also insincere, since the performance of duty is 
the essence of action and the only really worthwhile thing in the world. 
But again the performance of duty essentially relates to the world of 
Nature : moral laws must become laws of Nature. 
620. If, however, the highest good is taken to be a Nature which 
conforms to morality, morality itself vanishes from this good, since 
it presupposes a non-conforming Nature. Moral action, being the 
absolute purpose, seems to look to the elimination of moral action. 
62 r .  Morality presumes that morality and reality are in harmony, 
but not seriously, since it proceeds to bring them into harmony. But 
it is not serious in doing this, since its action is a mere means to the 
highest good. But it is not serious with this good, since it involves the 
destruction of moral action. 
622. Morality posits its End as freedom of the pure will from the 
misleading power of sensuous impulses and tendencies. But in doing 
so it cuts its connection with reality, since impulses and tendencies 
alone relate us to reality. It therefore postulates a mere conformity 
of these impulses to morality. But morality cannot prescribe a direc­
tion to the impulses, which alone can give a definite content and direc-

572 
A NA LY S I S  
tion to morality. We have therefore to make the harmony of impulses 
and morality an idea of lteason located in the infinite distance. But 
this again is not serious, since it would involve the elimination of 
morality in the struggle with the impulses and contingent desires. The 
non-seriousness is shown in the introduction of the Notion of infinity. 
623. It would seem that a state of moral progress is the true moral 
goal. But progress towards a condition where morality ceases would 
be moral decay rather than progress. The Notion of an increase or 
decrease in morality is, moreover, inadmissible. Either one acts duti­
fully or one violates duty (Stoicism) . 
624. Since morality is always incomplete, happiness can never be 
deserved, only granted by grace. Hence happiness is an independent 
End having nothing to do with morality. 
625. Since morality is always incomplete, it is a mere expression 
of envy when people complain that the wicked flourish while the good 
suffer. There are no good and no wicked, and happiness should simply 
be as widely spread as possible. 
626. Pure morality inheres only in a divine legislator, who plural­
izes duty. But nothing can pluralize duty if our moral insight does 
not do so. Not even a holy being can sanctify what is not intrinsically 
holy. Nor can an arbitrary being be holy. 
627. The perfection of moral insight has to be located in a divine 
legislator untroubled by sensuous impulses. 
628. But in such a being the moral struggle would vanish and hence 
all genuine moral goodness. 
62g. In God all the contradictions of morality come to a head. The 
moral consciousness has to abandon God and retreat into itself. 
630. The whole valid morality of God is a mere thing of thought 
and therefore without moral validity. It is opposed to reality and yet 
ought to be real. 
63 1 .  Consciousness, aware of its deep insincerity in all these posi­
tions, flees to its own inwardness and takes up the position of pure 
conscience, indifferent to all these transcendent questions. 
C O N S C I E N C E .  T H E  ' B E A U T I F U L  S O U L ' . E V I L  A N D  I T S  
F O R G I V E N E S S 
632. The antinomy of the moral world-view has given us duty 
located in the beyond but also demanded down here. It has solved 
moral contradictions by displacing them into some other, trans­
cendent self-consciousness. Now, however, the moral self-conscious­
ness has reabsorbed this transcendent being into itself, and recognizes 
itself as absolutely valid in its contingency. Its immediate particular 
existence is the true reality and harmony. 
633. The self of conscience is to He contrasted with its predecessors : 

573 
(a) the self of the legal person whose existence consists in being ack­
nowledged by others ; (b) the absolutely free self which is the end­
product of the realm of culture ; (c) the moral self involved in the 
oscillating displacements of universality and individuality. In con­
science we for the first time give content to the empty pattern of duty, 
right, and the pure will, and lend it authentic existence. 
634. Conscience heals the various breaches across which moral dis­
placement has woven its dialectic, the breach between what is in­
trinsic and what is a matter of myself, between the pure End and 
the opposed factors of Nature and sensibility. Conscience is morality 
become complete, which never submits its decisions to the empty 
arbitrament of some general standard. 
635. For coo1science [Gewissen] the intrinsically right is what it is 
inwardly sure of[gewiss]. It converts the given case before it into some­
thing which consciousness itself has produced. It does not dirempt 
the case before it into a variety of pre-existent duties between which 
it must decide : it alone can determine its duty in the concrete, making 
short work of conflicting prima facie claims. 
636. Conscience does not consider itself as impure in relation to 
a transcendent morality, nor does it refer the pluralization of the pure 
principles of duty to a transcendent consciousness. 
637. It abandons all positions which contrast duty with reality. It 
recognizes duty as concrete action, not as a pure abstraction encapsu­
lated in what is not duty. It is immediately certain of itself, this cer­
tainty being its own conviction regarding its own self, and not meant 
to hold for other persons. 
638. The moral consciousness only grasps the underlying essence 
of the moral, whereas in conscience it is self-conscious. Conscience 
does not oppose to itself an alien Nature subject to independent laws. 
As absolute negativity it can identify itself with, and so confer validity 
on, a finite content. 
639. Conscience gives universal validity to the actions of the indivi­
dual self. This validity is derivatively a validity for others, who recog­
nize its validity for the self in question. 
640. Anyone's conscientious action is recognized as absolutely 
right by the whole community of conscientious persons. Such uni­
versal recognition is not found in the moral realm, where the rightness 
of acts is always in doubt. In the realm of conscience absolute con­
viction of rightness is absolute rightness. At this level there can be 
no question of good intentions which have gone astray or of mis­
fortunes which attend upon the good. What the individual thinks is 
admitted as right for that individual by all. 
641 .  At the threshold of the sphere of 'Spirit' we were concerned 
with the 'honest consciousness' absorbed in the 'cause itself', which 

574 
ANALY S I S  
was a predicate of the subject rather than the subject itself. I n  con­
science the 'task' or 'cause itself' is the subject. It includes in itself 
the aspect of social substantiality derived from the ethical sphere, the 
aspect of external authorization derived from the sphere of culture, 
and the self-knowing essentiality of morality. In conscience the subject 
sees all these moments in and as himself, and seeing them as his 
moments, he has power and sovereignty over them all. 
642. Conscience tries in some measure to consider the circum­
stances and consequences of action in all their detail. But it also knows 
and is not dismayed by the fact that these circumstances and con­
sequences ramify infinitely in all directions, and that it is wholly futile 
to attempt to take account of them all in one's action. It is for others 
to pursue the investigation of circumstances ever further : conscience 
must act on its own incomplete knowledge which, because it is its 
own, is sufficient and complete. 
643. Conscience has to consider all the prima facie duties which 
come up in concrete cases, but none of them has authority for it. It 
must determine which is overriding. In doing so its own naturalness, 
its impulses and inclinations, must play a part. Only this can break 
through the circle of inauthentic prescriptions derived from others. 
Conscience must exercise its arbitrament, and this must rest ultimately 
ori its own impulsive and emotional make-up. 
644. It is the arbitrament of the individual subject which alone 
determines the content of duty in given cases. Other individuals might 
regard this determination as a fraud, since they consider other aspects 
of the matter. An action that seems violently unjust to others 
may be an act of justified self-assertion to the person concerned, an 
action that others see as cowardly may be a prudent conservation of 
oneself and one's usefulness to the man in question. Since morality 
consists merely in the consciousness of having done one's duty, 
any content can be moral and must be recognized as such by 
others. 
645. It is no good saying that the content of conscience should have 
been otherwise. Its essence is arbitrariness. One cannot say that it 
should have been directed to the general rather than the individual 
good, for the general good only has definite meaning if one brings in 
the social laws which override individual conviction, and these con­
science will not admit. And any act the individual does for his own 
good can be plausibly defended as for the good of all. The balancing 
of goods against goods is moreover something that conscience by its 
essence cuts short. 
646. Conscience is Spirit sure of itself, fully possessed and apprised 
of its duty. Anything which exists an sich is demoted to a mere moment: 
it is only in so far as it knows of it that it counts. Conscience has no 

V I . SPI R I T, §§ 642--658 
575 
content : it must decide whether to obey or disobey any law. It has 
the power to bind or loose. 
647. Conscientious acts exist as such for others. They are acknow­
ledged as conscientious by other conscientious persons, and are put 
on a level with their conscientious acts. 
648. There is, however, always some doubt whether other con­
sciences will endorse the determinations of the individual conscience. 
Conscience therefore oscillates hopelessly between self-doubt derived 
from the reactions of others and its own self-certainty. 
649. Conscientious people, trusting the integrity of their own con­
sciences, cannot help impugning the soi-disant conscientious deliv­
erances of others, and thinking that they are products of morally 
bad consciences. 
650. Only if an act is truly conscientious must it be acknowledged 
as morally right by all : otherwise it counts as a mere expression of 
personal preference. 
65 1 .  Only a man's consciousness of situations, not the real result 
of his acts, is morally relevant and acknowledged as such by others. 
652. Language is the medium in which Spirit or social subjectivity 
exists. Through language one personal Ego recognizes the Ego-statw 
of another personal Ego, and so transcends its separate individuality. 
653. In moral discourse the moral consciousness loses its dumbness 
and becomes universal. One man utters his conviction of duty which 
is understood as such by others. Nothing counts except that others 
are assured that the man himself is assured of doing his duty. 
654. The conscientious agent cannot admit questions as to whether 
or not he is acting from a true sense of duty, since he admits no dis­
tinctions of absolute duty from the individual's conscious determina­
tion of it. If a man says he is acting conscientiously, he is. 
655· Conscience in its sublime majesty can put what content it wills 
into its knowing and its willing. It is the moral genius which knows 
the voice of its inner intuition to be divine. It is likewise the creativity 
that can make any action to be right. To follow conscience is to prac­
tise a religion of self-worship. 
656. This lonely religion is also communal, and holds for all who 
speak the language of conscience and are conscientiously pure in pur· 
pose. 
657. This sort of pure conscientiousness is wholly empty. One is 
assured of always being right without regard to what one is right 
about. Consciousness, the relation of mind to something objective, has 
vanished into empty self-consciousness, and what we have is really 
the untruth of the moral consciousness rather than its truth. 
658. What emerges out of this emptying of morality is the 'beautiful 
soul', which is too fine to commit itself to anything. It lacks force to 

ANALYS I S  
externalize itself and endure existence. It does not want to stain the 
radiance ofits pure conscientiousness by deciding to do anything par­
ticular. It keeps its heart pure by fleeing from contact with actuality 
and preserving its impotence. Its activity consists in yearning, and it 
is like a shapeless vapour fading into nothingness. 
659. Conscience has yet to be considered as acting. It gives empty 
universal duty a determinate content drawn from its own self, and 
from that self as a natural individuality. 
66o. Self-certainty is the primary fact for conscience : the universal 
Ansich takes a second place. For the universal consciousness repre­
sented by other people the absolute certainty of conscience is essenti­
ally evil and hypocritical. 
661 .  The universal moral consciousness represented by 'the others' 
tries to unmask the hypocrisy of the individual conscience. It tries 
to show that the universal, impersonal language of morality is both 
used by the conscientious person, and also serves to disguise his per­
sonal contempt for that universality. 
662. There is an inherent incompatibility between the impersonal 
universality of conscious utterances and the claim to obey one's own 
private standards. To be impersonal about confessedly personal stan­
dards is to abuse others. 
663. But when the impersonal moralist condemns private con­
scientiousness as hypocritical, base, etc., he merely sets up one arbi­
trary personal standard against another. He in fact legitimizes the 
conscience he attacks by taking issue with it. 
664. The judgement of universal morality is unwilling to enter the 
arena of action, and remains snug within the universality of thought. 
It thereby itself exhibits hypocrisy, since it wishes its impeccable 
judgements to do duty for hazardous deeds. 
665. Thejudgement ofuniversal morality is itself a mode of action, 
and its main concern is to denigrate men's conscientious acts by 
explaining them by interested motives like ambition, desire for happi­
ness, moral vanity, etc. No act can escape judgement in such denigra­
tory terms : no hero can be a hero to his valet, because the latter is 
a valet. 
666. The exalted consciousness which judges the active individual 
can itself be convicted of hypocrisy. It is afraid to act, and it passes 
off its cowardice as a wonderful piece of insight. The man of action 
sees his judge correctly as but another agent, and humbly confesses 
his imperfections to him. 
667. But this confession of moral inadequacy is not met by a similar 
confession on his judge's part: the judge remains stiff-necked and 
hard-hearted. Such a retention of uncommunicating being-for-self in 
the face of the other's renunciation of the same, denies the very nature 

V I  I .  R E L I G I O N ,  §§ 659-677 
577 
of Spirit, which is master and lord over every deed and reality, and 
can make any of them as if it had never been. 
668. The 'beautiful soul' represents no accommodation of the clash 
here considered. It simply passes away in yearning. It does not insist 
on its own being-for-self, and merely sinks down to unassertive, soul­
less being. 
66g. The true accommodation of the two sides just mentioned 
occurs when the moralist drops his attitude of stiff-necked judgement 
and matches the confession of inadequacy of the practical man. 
670. The recognition of himself, the moralist, in the erring practi­
cal agent involves an act of reconciliation and forgiveness which 
simply is Absolute Spirit showing itself between the two antagonists. 
67 1 .  The Notion of pure duty and tainted individual practice are 
two sides of the same Notion in seeming opposition. They are the ' I =  
I '  where the Ego knows itself in its absolute other, another Ego. This 
is the first full appearance of God, the object of religion, on the pheno­
menological stage. 
V I I .  R E L I G I O N  
672. Hitherto in Consciousness, Self-consciousness, Reason, and 
Spirit there have been manifold consciousnesses of the Absolute. The 
Absolute Being has not, however, been aware of itself in them. 
673. The supersensible inner essence postulated by the scientific 
understanding was the Absolute, but certainly not a case of Spirit 
aware of Spirit. The Unhappy Consciousness yearned towards the 
Absolute, but did not recognize the Absolute as itself. Reason missed 
the Absolute because it found itself in what was immediately before 
itself. 
674. In the religion of the ethical order fate was an impersonal fac­
tor distinct from all selves-they could not recognize themselves in 
it. The spirits of the dead, on the other hand, may have put off imme­
diate particularity, but had not yet achieved true universality. 
675. The religion of the Enlightenment had an empty Absolute 
quite beyond the -.yholly satisfactory present. It emphatically failed 
to see itself in its Etre supreme. 
676. The religion of morality and conscience involved an aware­
ness of the inner universal self, but as having all differentiation and 
all actuality outside of itself. 
677. In religion Spirit is self-conscious, as it is not in the phases 
outlined above. It sees itself objectively as a universal Spirit compre­
hending all essence and all actuality. It may have an objective natural 
shape, but this is also wholly transparent. 

ANALYS I S  
678. Religion does not, however, completely unify the actual world 
with the self of which it is conscious, but seems to have only a partial 
connection with that world, to be clothed by worldly forms as an outer 
garment. It does not yet see those worldly forms, in all their indepen­
dent actuality, as simply Spirit itself. 
679. Religion presupposes all the previous 'shapes' of Conscious­
ness, Self-consciousness, Reason, and Spirit. But though it contains 
them all in unity, and not successively, yet, as individually realized 
in the world, it must realize them in succession. 
68o. The stages which lead up to religion recur in religion as spe­
cifically religious phases, out of which religion in its fullest realization 
arises. 
68I .  In religion the principles of the pre-religjous stages no longer 
occur in isolation. We do not have a set oflinear advances punctuated 
by nodes, but each node sums up all the advances which occur at 
other nodes and so is the centre of a radiating system. We have always, 
i.e., the whole progression, but with one phase emphatic. 
682-3. In developed religion consciousness is self-consciousness, 
but not so at less developed stages. There Spirit first contemplates 
itself in an immediate natural form, into which it then puts its own 
creative life, i.e. the Art-Religion of Greece. In Revealed Religion, 
finally, Spirit is itself given to itself, but only in a form suitable to 
picture-thought. From this it must rise to a self-consciousness in the 
pure medium of thought. 
N A T U R A L  R E L I GI O N  
684. Religion is existence embraced in thought, o r  thought which 
is there for itself. Only in the specific way in which this pattern is 
realized does one religion differ from another. All are phases in the 
development of religion as such. In this development picture-thinking 
is steadily reduced. In all stages of religious development there are 
rudiments or residues of what is present at other stages, e.g. the unity 
of universality with individuality fully realized in a Christian incarna­
tion is rudimentarily prefigured in the incarnations of other religions. 
But though all religions contain all sides of religion, we must not con­
fuse rudiments or residues with the full expressions. Only when Spirit 
is at a certain stage does the religious presentation of that stage have 
full truth. 
T H E  G O D  O F  L I G H T  ( P E R S I A) 
685. Spirit at first has the consciousness of itself as being all truth 
and all reality in the form of a mere concept, a dark night of essence 
opposed to its daylight forms, a creative secret of birth. This secret 
must be externalized, seen in and through all daylight forms. 

V I I .  R E L IG I O N ,  §§ 678-6g5 
579 
686. In its first immediate diremption, absolute Spirit appears to 
itself in the manner of sense-certainty. It appears as a being pervaded 
by Spirit, but Spirit in the form oflordship or mastery, the immediate 
as opposed to the inwardly withdrawn form of self-consciousness. Its 
shape is in fact shapelessness, the all-embracing light of the morning, 
which shows itself in the forms of Nature, but continues to play un­
committedly over them. 
687. This life of uncommitted surface-play never truly returns to 
self, nor makes its manifestations truly its own : these latter are merely 
its attributes, its myriad names, its selfless surface-ornaments. 
688. This incoherent life must rise to self-consciousness and give 
firm subsistence to its vanishing forms. It must come to know itself 
as itself. Firm subsistence must be dissolved in the gamut of forms 
it lays before the individual. 
PLANT A N D  A N IMAL (IN DIA) 
689. Religion goes on from seeing itself in the immediacies of sense­
certainty to perceiving itself in a variety of independent forms, first 
blameless and vegetable, then vicious and animal. These animal spirits 
become locked in a combat unto death with one another. 
690. Out of the self-cancelling attrition of the various animal 
spirits, Spirit sees itself in a new guise, that of an artificer behind 
objects. Spirit does not as yet see itself in the material it works upon : 
this material is already determinate and pre-existent and Spirit 
merely works upon it. 
THE ARTIFICER (EGYPT) 
691 .  Spirit now appears as an artificer, which puts itself into its 
product, without knowing that it is itself that it is thus producing. 
It works instinctively like a bee building its cells. 
692. The first products ofSpirit are products of the Understanding, 
obelisks, etc. in which the straight predominates and the round is 
shunned. Spirit imprisoned in these forms is as it were dead, external 
to itself, not presented as Spirit. 
693. Spirit now moves to a better representation of itself in which 
soul is clothed by body and not merely working on it ab extra. At the 
same time it sees this union externally, and so remains hidden from 
itself. 
694. Spirit takes plant forms and stylizes their freedom into the 
straight and the round, the severe universals of thought and the 
elements of free architecture. 
695. Spirit mirrors its own individuality in animal forms, which 
are, however, also hieroglyphs of thought and not given as endowed 
with language. Even when they rise to the human shape they are still 

sao 
ANALYS I S  
inarticulate and require the breath of morning to draw from them 
a tone, not a significant word. ('As morning from the lips of Memnon 
drew rivers of melodies'.) 
6g6. The artificer himself lingers darkly in the background : when 
he does represent himself it is in the shapelessness of a black stone. 
6g7. The artificer, conscious of the conflict between his withdrawn 
self and the outer product, expresses this conflict in a sphinx, half­
animal and half-human, articulate but only in wise riddles. 
6g8. Spirit now brings itself explicitly into the product it creates, and 
becomes an artist instead of an artificer. It creates a product in which 
its own self-consciousness is manifest. 
T H E  R E L I G I O N  OF A R T  ( G R E E C E ) 
6gg. Spirit puts itself into a shape which is that of self-conscious 
Spirit : it no longer goes in for incongruous mixtures of the natural 
and the thinking. 
700. The religion of Art is closely connected with the ethical Spirit. 
Not a blind adoration of mastering light, nor an attrition of warring 
castes, inspires it, but the life of a free people whose customs are also 
the will of all. 
70 1 .  In the ethical stage, however, Spirit has not as yet retreated 
inwardly from its contented acceptance of its position in a society 
where all have different duties. It must come to detach itself from 
this happy life of custom, and must come to mourn over the loss of 
happiness and security, before it can rise to true art. 
702. Absolute art is a product of the break-up of merely customary 
society. Previous art was merely instinctive, not a product of free 
Spirit. 
703. Spirit as artist banishes all that is colourful and substantial 
from its expression. It wants only to express itself, the fathomless night 
of self-consciousness in which the ethics of custom is betrayed (Geth­
semane). All that it is interested in is form alone. (White marble 
conception of Greek art due to their loss of colour.) 
704. Spirit as artist chooses an individual subject-matter, and there 
is pathos in such a choice. The universality of Spirit is dominated 
by the exigencies of the individual, but these in their turn dominate 
unformed matter. In the end we have Spirit presented in breathing 
individuality and sensuous presence. 
T H E  A B S T R A C T  W O R K  O F  A R T  
705. The first work of art is abstractly individual, because imme­
diate. It must move away from such individualized art towards self­
consciousness, which, in the religious cult, overcomes the otherness 
of its religious object. 

V I I .  R EL I G I O N ,  §§6g6-7 14 
706. The artistic product (the statue of the god) stands out as an 
individual on the universal background that surrounds it and houses 
it. It has a form which avoids the straight lines of the Understand­
ing and the incongruous imitative mixture of straight and curved 
derived from vegetable shapes (in Egyptian art). It rejoices in the 
incommensurability of the straight line and the curve, and uses 
both. 
707. The typical form produced by the art-religion is an idealized 
human form whose semblance of animal functions stops at the form's 
surface. Such an idealized human form unites natural existence with 
self-conscious Spirit. It may contain residues of old untamed forces­
the Titans, etc.-but all is dominated by a spirit which is also that 
of a free, self-conscious people. 
708. The restless variety of actual individuals is brought to peace 
in the idealized individuality of the sculptured god. In this, however, 
the artist expresses none of his own tortured individuality. But the 
work of the artist or the onlooker is as essential to the aesthetic situa­
tion as the mere art-object. 
709. The artist's creative efforts are inadequately shown forth in 
the art-object. When others admire his creation and even kneel before 
it, the artist recognizes his superiority to it and to them. 
7IO. Self-conscious Spirit therefore seeks a more adequate artistic 
expression than the mere art-object. This it finds in language, which 
is simply self-conscious existence in its immediacy, where production 
is one with product. The hymn is the essential art-form into which 
spirit puts its self-consciousness, and it is a self-consciousness shared 
by all who join in the singing. 
7 I I .  We may, however, observe that oracular utterance is an even 
more primitive religious expression of Spirit than the hymn. Spirit 
has in it, however, not risen to universal self-consciousness, and so 
takes the oracular sayings to spring from an alien self-consciousness. 
Oracles tend to match the stage of spiritual evolution achieved, e.g. 
in the ancient east they utter sublime generalities which seem trivial 
to developed consciousnesses. 
7 I 2. In the religion of Art universal truths are not proclaimed in 
oracular fashion, but are discovered by each man's reflection. Oracles 
utter the contingencies, whether of fact or practice, that cannot be 
effectively discovered. (Socrates' daemon only told him trivial mat­
ters, leaving him to think out the great generalizations.) 
7 I 3. After the digression of 7 I  I. and 7 I 2., the hymn is contrasted 
with the statue, the latter being extruded from the self and reposefully 
'out there', while the hymn forms part of the life of the self and has 
the vanishing character of that life. 
7 I4. In the religious cult the god loses his immobile 'out-thereness', 

ANALY S I S 
and the worshippers cease to be humble suppliants before their gods. 
The god comes down from his pedestal and the worshippers actively 
commune with him. 
7 I 5· The abstract cult makes the soul into the temple of the 
divinity, not merely someone striking attitudes before a divinity which 
he contemplates from without. The Greeks were not, however, suffi­
ciently conscious of their remoteness from divinity, their sinfulness, 
and thought a change into white garments and a few penances could 
purify them. 
7 I 6. The rt"ligious cult involves an actual rite and cannot be carried 
out on the plane of mere thought. In this rite the divine essence comes 
down into actuality and becomes one with the self. 
7 I 7. In the cult natural objects, bread and wine, are given a divine 
meaning and a divine meaning is given concreteness and actuality. 
7 I 8. The cult begins with the sacrifice of objects which represent 
a man's own personality and possession. But the god also makes a 
sacrifice, firstly in creating the sacrificial object, and secondly in enter­
ing the sacrificer as he eats the sacrificial elements. 
7 I g. A cult is most fully and abidingly realized in the construction 
of a great temple, which is not only a dwelling for the divinity and 
its treasures but for the use and enjoyment of the citizens. 
T H E  L I V I N G  W O R K  O F  A R T  
720. In the art-religion the self-consciousness of the individual is 
one with that of the national Spirit, not, as in the light-religion, wholly 
subordinate and lost in the latter. 
72 I .  Self-consciousness in the art-religion does not involve the 
strain of the artist, his dark struggle for expression. His self-conscious­
ness is not the dark, but the peaceful night, the night after sunset, 
not before dawn. The fruits of Nature have been quietly consumed 
and appropriated by self-consciousness. 
722. In the various religious mysteries of Demeter and Dionysus 
bread and wine mediate a full communion and revelation of Spirit 
to Spirit. 
723. In these mysteries the absolute Spirit unites with the self-con­
sciousness of his worshippers, or the self-consciousness of the latter is 
lost in the absolute Spirit. 
724. The Absolute in these mysteries is not, however, completely 
revealed. The mystery of the bread and wine is not the mystery of 
flesh and blood. 
725. At this level the Absolute as artist seeks a more adequate living 
embodiment, not merely 'out there' and unmoving like the sculptured 
god. This it finds in the athlete's matchless body displaying his powers 
at one or other of the great athletic festivals. 

V I I .  R ELIGION ,  §§ 7 1Ǵ>-735 
726. In the mysteries and the athletic games self-consciousness has 
been made one with the absolute essence, but not in a balanced man­
ner. In Bacchic revels the self has been rapt out of its body, in athletic 
beauty spirit has become corporealized. In language alone can there 
be a perfect balance of interior and exterior. This balanced language 
is not the charged speech of hymns and oracles, but the luminous 
language of literature, open to all the members of a contemporary 
culture. 
T H E  S P I R I T U A L  W O R K  O F  A R T  
727. Language unites the various distinct national spirits into a 
single pantheon, in which, however, there is considerable looseness 
and independence, not subjected to an overriding unity. 
728. The gods preside over all Nature and society : their chief is 
merely primus inter pares. They represent various aspects and powers 
of self-consciousness. Their essential unity is masked by an external 
camaraderie. 
729. In the epic these various sides of self-consciousness engage in 
a dialectic which takes the form of a pictorial narrative. The minstrel 
is the real power which unites the whole picture, bringing all together 
through the might of his muse. Though not present in the narrative 
he projects himself into the heroes who occur in it. 
730. The various aspects of self-consciousness appear in the epic 
as separate individuals and forces (including the dead) , all spurred 
into activity by someone's deed. Gods and men repeat each other's 
work, the divine participants being redundant individuals instead of 
acti.ve universals. 
73 1 .  The gods thus individualized quarrel with one another in a 
comic fashion. All that presides over them and over men is the unintel­
ligible power of necessity. 
732. Necessity really represents the power of the Notion operating 
through all these seemingly independent realities. It lurks in the back­
ground just like the minstrel. Both must, however, be brought into 
the picture. 
733· This is what happens in tragedy where language ceases to be 
narrative and where self-conscious human beings are the spokesmen, 
behind whose mask actual actors are present. 
734· The general commentary of the epic reappears in the dis­
course of the chorus of elders. These never reveal profound reftectimք 
or reaction, but practise only general observations, vague wishes, and 
feeble comfort. Before necessity they are blindly resigned and show 
only ineffective horror and pity. 
735· In tragedy individuals are raised to heroic universality, while 

ANALY S I S  
a vaguer commentatorial universality surrounds them in the chorus 
and spectators. 
736. The divine forces in tragedy muster about the two poles of 
the ethical order, the feminine, family pole, on the one hand, and 
the masculine, governmental pole on the other. 
737· The heroic agents in tragedy live divided between knowledge 
and ignorance. Even the powers of light which give them knowledge 
deceive them with ambiguous utterances which they completely trust. 
(Hamlet and Macbeth are more cautious.) 
738. There are in tragedy two standards of right, the daylight stan­
dards of Apollo and the underworld standards of the Furies. 
739· Zeus is presented as the ultimate reconciler and unity of the 
two standards. 
740. Both forces are equally right and wrong, and their struggle 
ends in the death of the individual concerned, or his absolution from 
guilt. Both then vanish in the calm balance of the ethical order. 
741 .  Even in tragedy Zeus tends to predominate over the separate 
ethical powers, which become demoted to passions in the individual, 
not impersonal principles which pathetically crush him. 
742. Zeus and necessity become more and more the central figures 
in tragedy, on whom the chorus looks with terrified awe as on some­
thing quite alien. 
743· The self-consciousness of the heroes is gradually passing beyond 
their supposed limitations of vision and becoming deeply critical. 
744· In comedy the actor doffs his mask, and the individual self­
consciousness reduces everything to mockery, even the solemn pro­
ceedings of the gods. 
745· In comedy the common man asserts himself in his revolu­
tionary disrespect for everything. But he also makes a mock of his 
own self-assertion. 
746. The dialectic of the Sophists and Socrates is a continuation 
of the dissolving irony of comedy. For conventional opinions and pre­
scriptions it substitutes cloudy notions of goodness and beauty. 
747· The truth of comedy is that all the great big essential fixtures 
that stand over against self-consciousness are really products of, and 
at the mercy of, self-consciousness. The individual knows himself in 
his individuality as the Absolute. 
R E V E A L E D  R E L I G I O N  
7 48. The religion of art has made the great step of making its Abso­
lute a Subject instead of a Substance. It has expressed itself in forms 
(that of the statue) emblematic of self-consciousness, and in the comic 
consciousness it has reached a pitch where all, including itself, is at 
the mercy of the individual self-consciousness. 

V I I .  R E L I GI O N ,  §§ 736-756 
749· Spirit has inverted the view of the self as a mere apanage of 
the absolute essence to making the latter, in the comic consciousness, 
a mere apanage of the former. It now inverts that inversion but with­
out returning to the original priority of mere Substance set over 
against self-consciousness. Since it consciously gives priority to the abso­
lute essence, the absolute essence continues to be itself, i.e. self-con­
sciousness, of which it is in another form conscious. We have therefore 
two coequal sides of self-consciousness instead of situations in which 
one of these sides takes precedence over the other. 
750. The art-religion and the comic consciousness are the spirit of 
a time in which the ethical spirit is being eroded, and pure individual­
ism is beginning to run riot. This is a period of abstract right like 
that of the early Roman Empire, when religion has lost its meaning 
and a man lives unto himself alone. 
75 1 .  Abstract right is, however, an empty abstraction, and soon 
passes over into yearning for a new Absolute. The Roman Empire, 
the seat of Stoic strength of mind, becomes a prey to the Unhappy 
Consciousness. 
752. What is to the comic consciousness a vast joke is to the Un­
happy Consciousness a vast misery. Its own abstract self-consciousness 
is a miserable refuge, and it cries with Luther (not yet born) that 
'God is dead'. 
753· The Unhappy Consciousness has lost all reason for respecting 
itself, whether as legal person or as a rational thinking being. All the 
religious and artistic expressions of its culture-statues, rites, etc.­
have become deeply meaningless, as they are for modern scholars who 
study them in a merely external, lifeless way, and build up pictorial 
views of their background. Really, however, our reinterpretation of 
antiquity is more important than antiquity itself, if we will but truly 
remember and interiorize it [ Erinnern] .  Image of the maiden and the 
fruits. 
754· All the spiritual attitudes engendered in the classical world, 
from the sculptural to the stoical and the sceptical, can be pictured 
as in wait about the true birthplace of self-consciousness, half in hope 
and half in despair. 
755· Spirit may be thought of (a) as Substance going out of itself 
and becoming self-consciousness ; (b) as self-consciousness going out 
of itself and making itself Substance. Spirit, we may say, has a real 
mother, self-consciousness, and a merely dispositional father, Sub­
stance. 
756. Spirit is at first one-sidedly conscious of itself as (b) . As such 
it fantastically imposes subjective interpretations on nature, history, 
and past religions, interpretations that are really not warranted. (The 
cults of Isis, Mithras, etc.) 

5a6 
ANALY S I S  
757· But Spirit must be aware of (a) as much as of (b) , i.e. it must 
see what immediately is before it taking on the lineaments of Spirit. 
This will happen at a certain stage in world-history when Spirit sees 
itself in the objective necessity of external things. 
758. At a certain favourable moment in history the belief arises 
(note stress on belief rather than event) that absolute Spirit has taken 
on actual, sensuous form. God is taken to exist before the yearning, 
conscious mind, and not to be merely a projection of it. And God 
is believed to exist as an individual self-consciousness. 
759· God's being made man is the simple content of absolute reli­
gion. Spirit is knowledge of self in self-abandonment, and absolute 
religion knows God as Spirit. Absolute religion is revealed religion 
because in it God is revealed, and revealed as essentially self-con­
scious. We do not achieve absolute religion as long as the object of 
religion is other than the Subject, is thought of merely as the abso­
lutely good, creator of heaven and earth, etc. God must know God 
in religion : he must know himself in the religious person. 
760. To be conscious of himself in a finite, sensuous, human indivi­
dual does not represent a descent for God but the consummation of 
his essence. For God is not merely an abstract being, remote from 
concrete sensuous instantiation : he is only fully and completely him­
self in an instance. 
761 .  Revealed religion is one with speculative knowledge : both 
attain to the knowledge of the universal as essentially in the individual. 
This is the message for which all previous ages were thirsting. 
762. The individuation of the absolute essence is, however, 
pictured as achieved only in one case (Jesus) , not equally in all, i.e. 
it is not truly a universal, notional self-consciousness which is every­
one's equally. Men are conceived as a lot of perceptible individuals, 
not as a single concept. 
763. But the single exemplification of the absolute essence must die 
in time in order to become something in which all men can share. 
If Christ does not go, the Holy Ghost cannot come to the worshipping 
community. 
764. The passing of Christ's life into the remote past merely 
pictures its translation to the plane of universal meanings. 
765. The religious consciousness thinks the truth in pictures which 
give a false independence to the various sides of what it believes in. 
These pictures have to be given a notional reinterpretation. 
766. The religious consciousness goes astray when it substitutes for 
its own rich life the brooding upon a historical figure and particular 
events in the past. 
767. Spirit is essentially a process which starts from pure thought 
(logic) , goes on into otherness and pictorial presentation (Nature), and 

V I I .  R E L I G I ON, §§ 757-778 
returns from Nature to complete self-consciousness (Spirit proper) . It 
is also essentially the synthetic connection of these three phases. 
768. In the unhappy and believing consciousnesses there was a par­
tial self-copsciousness of Spirit. Spirit, however, mistakenly referred 
itself to a sphere beyond the conscious subject. 
769. Spirit conceived in the element of pure thought is meaningless 
unless it also becomes manifest in something other than its pure self 
and returns to itself out of such otherness. 
770. God is there manifest firstly as the Essence (the Father) , 
secondly as the Being-for-selffor whom the Essence is (the Logos or 
Word which made the realm of Nature) , and thirdly as the Being­
for-self which knows itself in the other (the Spirit or principle of self­
consciousness) .  
7 7  I .  Pictorial religion turns the necessary relations of essential 
moments within the Absolute into external generative relations of 
paternity and sonship. 
772. The relation of the Absolute's moments in the pure thought 
of the Absolute is a relation of pure love in which the sides we distin­
guish are not really distinct. But it is of the essence of Spirit not to 
be a mere thing of thought, but to be concrete and actual. 
773· Since the element of pure thought is abstract, it necessarily 
passes over into the realm of intuitive picture-thought, i.e. the realm 
of Nature. There one has a plurality of substantial things and a 
plurality of thinking subjects. 
774· This passing over into the world of intuitive picture-thought 
is what is pictorially called 'creation'. The absolute universality 
requires instantiation to be what it is, and it is this logical requirement 
which is misleadingly pictured as a temporal requirement. 
775· Spirit not only instantiates itself in objects but also in subjects. 
These are at first not conscious of themselves as spiritual, and hence 
are innocent rather than good. Their first self-consciousness is as 
capable of evil as of good. This first self-consciousness is pictorially 
misrepresented as a historical 'fall'. 
776. Evil is the first actual expression of the dirempted self-con­
sciousness, but it is the one that self-consciousness as it deepens must 
more and more repudiate. Pictorially, therefore; it is referred back 
to an infinitely remote date, to the fall from heaven of Lucifer, son 
of the morning. The angelic hosts enter the picture as a valuable 
pluralization of the being-for-self of the Word. If we add them to the 
Trinity we get a quaternity, and if we add the fallen angels we get 
a quinity. Counting in theology is, however, a bad practice. (Note 
Hegel's incorporation of Evil into the Absolute.) 
777-8. Pictorial religious thought tends to extrude evil from God 
except in so far as, with great difficulty, it credits God with a wrathful 

ANALYS I S  
side. The activity of God can be nothing but a bringing-together of 
the dirempted world with his simple essence, each of which is one­
sided without the other. 
779· Pictorial religion treats the redemption of the alienated world 
as an act of arbitrary free will. But in reality the absolute essence 
would be abstract and unreal if it did not exercise itself redemptively, 
if it did not enter the sphere of alienation and overcome the alienation. 
This it does by living and then dying, accepting the burden of sensuous 
instantiation and rising above it to pure universality. 
780. That God becomes alienated from himself in angelic and 
human evil does not mean that such evil really lies outside of God. 
To be distant from God is to be distantly God : nothing can lie outside 
of the Absolute Being. The self-centredness, the Insichgehen, which is 
the root of evil, is an essential moment in the life of the Absolute. 
This religion recognizes in making God redeem the alienated, self­
centred beings. Evil is in a deep sense the same being-for-self as abso­
lute good, yet, in a deeper sense, it is not the same, since in fully 
developed being-for-self evil will be set aside and overcome. The 
true selfishness will drive out the untrue. It is above all mistaken in 
this sphere to speak in terms of fixed identity and diversity, and to 
fail to recognize the dialectical movement which makes everything 
turn into something else. Nature is and is not God, and God is God 
only by departing from himself in Nature, and returning to himself 
in Spirit. 
781 .  Spirit is most essentially itself in the religious community 
where the Divine Man or Human God is transformed into the 
members' universal, inward, chastening self-consciousness. 
782. Evil lies not so much in an abuse of natural existence as in 
the very conception of it as other than, remote from, Spirit. It is only 
for picture-thought that Nature is at first good, then fallen. In the 
Absolute there is no such history of phases, only moments which entail 
one another. 
783. Evil is nothing but the going-into-self out of the immediacy 
of nature and is accordingly the first step in the direction of good. 
To be evil one must be conscious of the norms one rebels against, 
and will ultimately obey. There is no element of chance in the going­
into-self which leads to evil : it is the essential movement of self-con­
sciousness. 
784. Instead of seeing the redemption of the alienated world as in­
herently necessary the religious consciousness sees it as due to a special 
event, God's incarnation and death. But it also realizes that death 
to be a resurrection, the universal life of Spirit among the individuals 
in a religious community. 
785. What is really meant by the passion and resurrection is the 

V I I I .  ABSOLUTE KNOWI N G ,  §§ 779-792 
s8g 
elimination of pictorial particularity and its supersession by the life 
ofthought. An existent entity has become a Subject, a universal self­
consciousness. The mere idea of self-consciousness has likewise become 
a concrete reality. God as a picture must die in order that God as 
a thought may live, one with every man's deepest self-consciousness. 
786. Spirit is the mover, the moved, and the motion. It is its nature 
to forgive and pardon evil, to reconcile it with itsel£ But the religious 
community sees this all in pictures. 
787. The religious consciousness never fully identifies itself with the 
object of its devotion, but at best pictures itself as coming together 
with thatobjectatan indefinitely future date. The religious community 
has an actual father (its own action and knowledge) but a merely 
felt mother, eternal love which will one day unite it with God. 
V I I I . ABS O L U T E  K N O W I N G  
788. I n  revealed religion self-consciousness is aware of itself in pic­
torial objective form, not as yet as self-consciousness. It must cancel 
this form and become aware of itself in all the forms it has hitherto 
taken up. They must not merely be forms of self-consciousness for us, 
the phenomenological observers, but for self-consciousness itself. It 
must see how it has externalized itself in various objects, and in seeing 
tqis- also cancelled the externalization. It must see all its objective 
forms as itsel£ 
789. The object of religion is at first an immediate existence (given 
in sensation) ,  a determinate existence (given in perception) , and a 
notion given as behind the immediate (to the scientific Understand­
ing) . Consciousness must now grope forward to an understanding of 
objects in the form of sel£ But it does so by gradual stages, and 
dirempts itself into a number of distinct mental postures in which 
separate sides of the object are gradually brought together. 
790. Consciousness assuming the form of observation reaches the 
point of seeing itself, the Ego, as an external thing given to sense­
perception, the bones of the skull. 
79 1 .  This view of the Ego as sensuous externality is, however, also 
the view of external things as nothing but the Ego. The full develop­
ment of this realization arises at the stage of enlightenment or pure 
insight, when things are considered solely from the point of view of 
their utility to the subject. 
792. A further spiritualization of objective thing hood occurs in the 
moral self-consciousness, where the Ego's self-certainty extends to the 
whole of essential being, everything else being a mere husk. As the 

590 
ANALYS I S  
oscillation of moral duplicity vanishes, all objective ends are absorbed 
in a man's own conscientiousness. 
793· Spirit certain of itself in its objective existence takes as the 
element of its existence nothing but the knowledge of self. That what 
it does is in accord with its ideas of duty makes them its duty. There 
is still, however, an opposition between pure duty and the external 
world and what men in it do. But with the act of forgiving another, 
this last opposition vanishes, and in all human action the Ego only 
encounters the Ego. 
794· In religion this knowledge of Ego by Ego becomes explicit 
(in the Incarnation) .  Ego is known both in and for itself (and by 
itself) . 
795· In religion, however, the identification of Ego with Ego is still 
only achieved in the medium of picture-thought. A less pictorial 
identification was achieved in the case of the beautiful soul, whose 
pure inwardness really amounts, not merely to an intuition of the 
Divine, but to the Divine intuiting itself. Only the opposition to real­
ization makes this last form defective. We must progress to a know­
ledge of self, not as ·a floating universal, but in its particular external­
ization. 
796. This knowledge must somehow unite the religious conscious­
ness, with its pictorial otherness, and the moral spirit, which is simply 
the self in action facing the two possibilities of the evil and the good. 
The religious spirit and the moral spirit must both abandon their rigid 
distinction from one another. The hard-edged, abstract, out-thereness 
of religion, its presentative character, must blend with the personal 
inwardness of the moral spirit. They must in fact both lose themselves 
in a new spirit. 
797· In this new spirit the content of religion must become the 
action of the self, must be seen by the self as expressing phases of its 
own interior drama. 
798. We now reach comprehending knowledge (begreifendes 
Wirsen) , or time and knowledge in the form of self. Spirit has reduced 
all its objective materials to pure concepts which are merely specifica­
tions of its own conceptual activity. Purely conceptual knowledge of 
knowledge in the form of self is Wirsenschajt, Systematic Science. 
799· What we now have, therefore, is a pure knowledge of self, even 
of this individual self, which is also the knowledge of all the moments 
of content which self distinguishes from self, and in comprehending 
brings back into self. 
Boo. Systematic Science only appears when Spirit has achieved a 
purely conceptual self-consciousness and can reduce all objectivity to 
Notions, and so see itself in them. 
8or .  Consciousness must go through a long process of first enrich-

V I I I .  A BSOLUTE K N O W I N G ,  §§ 793-808 
591 
ing its object, poor and abstract in its first appearance, and then 
appropriating and conceptually reabsorbing all that it has thus 
enriched. The pure Notion presupposes all these stages that lead up 
to it, but consciousness embraces them all in implicit non-notional 
form. Time is the Notion itself when presented to consciousness as 
an empty intuition, and Spirit appears to itself in time till it achieves 
full notional grasp and thereby abolishes time. Time is the destiny 
and the necessity of the as yet not perfected Spirit, i.e. until it has 
overcome the externality of objective Substance. 
802. Everything we know must come before us in a living phase 
of experience (Erfahrung) . The substantial, the solidly out there, must 
slowly be transmuted into the notional, the subjective. Time simply 
is the form of this self-realizing process. Until Spirit reaches the end 
of the requisite temporal process it cannot achieve complete self-con­
sciOusness. 
8og. The final conceptualization and reduction to self of all objec­
tivity began when the religious world-view of the Middle Ages made 
way for the post-Renaissance philosophers. These ran through an 
observational phase in Cartesianism, a unified, oriental, religion-of­
light phase in Spinozism, an individualistic, monadistic form in Leib­
niz. Everything became further subjectivized in the utility of the 
Enlightenment and in the pure rational, noumenal will of Kant. The 
subjectivization became more absolute in the Ego-positing-the-Ego 
of Fichte, and the dependent construction of both time and space. 
This leads on to the imperfectly carried out subjectivization of the 
substantial natural world in Schelling, the natural being externally 
and imperfectly integrated with the Ego in one Absolute. 
804. The Ego must not, however, be afraid of the substantial world 
of objective Nature : this is its foil and therefore itself. The power of 
Spirit lies in remaining one with itself while it externalizes itself in 
Nature, and that without paring down the elaborate distinction of 
natural being. It must understand Nature in all its variety as necessary 
to itself. 
8o5. Spirit is all the phases of content in which it externalizes itself, 
and the process of leading these phases back to a full consciousness 
of self. It unfolds its existence and develops its processes in the pure 
ether of its life and is Systematic Science. In Systematic Science the 
distinction between subjective knowledge and objective truth is elimi­
nated : each phase always has both aspects. 
8o6-7. Systematic Science cannot, however, remain a pure con­
ceptual development :  it must step out of itself and see Spirit developed 
in space and time and in nature. 
8o8. It must then study Spirit returning to itself in time, i.e. m 
the long procession of historical cultures and individuals. 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1

I N D E X  
Absolute, 9, 1 1 ,  1 2, 46f. 
acknowledgement, see recognition 
age and youth, 288 
almsgiving, 339 
analogy, 1 52 
analysis, 18 
Anaxagoras, 34 
angels, 419f. 
Antigone, 261 ,  284 
appearance and surface show, 87 
apperception, 144 
argumentation ( raisonnement), 35f. 
Aristophanes, 451 ,  452 
Aristotle, 12, 44 
artist, 429 
asceticism, 1 35f., 339 
astrology, 188 
Aurelius, Marcus, 523 
autarky, 393 
Bacchanalian revel, 27 
Bacchus, 65, 434, 438 
'beautiful soul', 383f. 
beauty and the Understanding, 19 
Bethlehem, 456 
beyond, the, 87f. 
brain, 196, 210 
bread and wine, mystery of, 438, 451 
brother and sister, 274f. 
Brownianism, 3on. 
category, 1 42f., 2o8f., 236, 252, 260, 263 
Ceres, 65, 434, 438 
character, 239, 280, 285 
chorus (Greek), 444f. 
Christ, 525 
cohesion, 1 73 
comedy, 450f. 
common sense philosophy, 42 
conscience, 383ff., 392ff., 41 1 ,  481 
contradiction, 99 
creation, 467 
crime, 182, 282 
cult, 432f., 435L 
custom, 212, 214 
daimon (of Socrates), 43 1 
daughter, 274 
death, 27of., 308, 360 
Democritus, 21 
demos, 45 1 
Descartes, 35 2 
devotion, 1 3 1 ,  430, 433 
dialectic, 1 24 
Diderot, 318n., 332n. 
Diogenes, 319 
disposition, 204 
dissemblance, 374ff. 
dogmatism, 23, 33 
duty, 279f., 365f., 37of., 376, 383f., 402, 
4o8, 482 
earnestness, 375f., 380 
Earth, the, 1 78, 300 
ecstasy, 5, 44 
edification, sf. 
Eidos, Idea, -34 
electricity, 92f., 1 53 
elements, universal, 1 55, 300 
Eleusinian mysteries, 65 
empiricism, 1 44 
Enlightenment, the, 328ff. 
enthusiasm, 44n. 
environment, influence of, 155, 1 79 
epic poetry, 441f., so7f. 
Epictetus, 523 
Erinyes, 277, 447 
esoteric and exoteric, 7 
espice, 298 
Eteocles, 28 5 
Euclid, 24 
Eumenides, 410, 474 
experience, ssf. 
experiment, 152f. 
explanation, 94, 101 
faction, 360 
Fall, the, 468, 47 1 

594 
I N D E X  
falsehood, falsity, 2 ,  22f. 
familiar, the (not cognitively under-
stood), 18 
family, 268f. 
Fate, 446, 448, 455f. 
Faust, 218n. 
feeling, appeal to, 43 
festival (Greek), 437f. 
Fichte, 3m. 
flattery, 310, 3I5 
forgiveness, 407 
formalism, g, 30 
Furies, 44 7, 449f. 
genus and species, 1 76ff. 
good and evil, 4 72f. 
grace, 371 
gravity, specific, 1 72ff. 
Hamlet, 201 ,  446n. 
handwriting, I89 
hero, 404 
history, 488, 492 
husband and wife, 273 
hypocrisy, 40I , 405 
idealism, 33, 142ff. 
'in-itself' and 'for-itself', 1 7 
incarnation, 459, 475 
innocence, 467 
interest, 240, 243, 248 
intuition, IO, 63, 489 
justice, 277 
Kant, 29 
kenosis, 457, 465 
labour, 1 1 8, 2I3 
ladder to standpoint of Science, 14 
language, 66, 3o8ff., 395ff. 
Lavater, 193n. 
Laws of Thought, I 8off. 
Lethe, 287, 448, 474 
Leucippus, 2 1  
Lichtenberg, 191 ,  193 
Logic is speculative philosophy, 22, 28 
Logos (the Word), 465 
love, 255, 466f., 478 
Lucifer, 468 
Macbeth, 446n. 
madness, 225 
marriage, 273 
mathematical knowledge, 24ff. 
matter, 1 54, 35I ,  36I 
'matters', 153 
mediation, 1 1f. 
mediator, I 36, 138, 476 
method, philosophical, 28, 52 
minstrel, 440ff. 
monarch, 3 1  1 
motion, law of, 93f. 
mystery and the mystical, 437 
naivety of Nature, 21 o 
necessity, 217, 2I9 
negativity, 51 
Notion (Begrijf), 20, 53, 104, 344, 356, 
485, 490 
Nous, 34 
number, 1 72, 1 74 
Oedipus, 446n. 
oracles, 430f., 446 
Orestes, 446n. · 
organism, 154ff. 
Origen, 348 
'ought' and 'is', I5l 
palmistry, 188 
parents and children, 273 
Parmenides, 44 
'pathos', 284, 285 
Penates, 274, 287 
Phoebus, 446 
phrenology, 185ff. 
physiognomy, 185ff. 
Plato, 44, I96 
pleasure, 21 7ff. 
Polynices, 285f. 
priesthood, 330 
probability and truth, 152 
property, 257 
propositional form, 38ff. 
psychology, 182 
purpose and purposiveness, see teleology 
quality, 33, 34 
quantity, see mathematics 
raisonnement, see argumentation 
recognition, 1 1  1 ff. 
revelation, 461 
sacrifice, 1 37ff. 
Schiller, 493n. 
self-will, 1 19, I 2 I 

show, surface, 87 
skull, 197 
Socrates, 43 1 
Solon, 1 88f. 
sophistry, 1 24, 261 
soul, 16o 
space, 93, 106 
specific gravity, 1 72ff. 
Sphinx, 446 
state power, 301 ff. 
subject and predicate, 3 7ff. 
subject and substance, 10 
syllogism, 1 77 
synsomaties, 153 
talent, 239f. 
teleology, 156ff. 
Thing, thinghood, 6gff. 
time, 27, 93, 106, 476 
tragedy, 443ff. 
triadic form, 29 
Trinity, 325 
truth and falsity, 2, 22ff. 
I N D EX 
truth and probability, 152 
truth and system, 3, 13 
Unchangeable, the, 1 27ff. 
Understanding, the, 18 
Unhappy Consciousness, 158ff., 
utility, 343, 353ff. 
valet, moral, 404 
vanity, 3 19f. 
vassal, 307 
virtue, 228ff. 
virtue, ancient, 234 
war, 288f. 
'way of the world', 227ff. 
wealth, 301 ff. 
Winter!, 153n. 
wit, 317 
wrath (of God), 470 
Zeus, 446ff. 
595 

