
....... 
,,.·"·•:·:· ::.,o,•, •
•. ., .. :. -,·! . •  ; ! •.•
•
 
• .... . . 
'·· 
:· 
H,,., .. 1. 
• .• t '' • • • .. fh •••· · · '' • .·lt,l- 
·,,.,,.,,,,. •ll•u·,ltu·..;· 1o 
Cl; 1•:":0.'\i., \l.u,,l., " 

AESTilETICS 
LECTt:R[S ON FINF ART 
BY 
G. W. F. HEGI:L 
Trtmslnlcd by 1'. M. Knnx 
vo:.t'I\.IF. I 
CLAREƔJDON PH ESS 
· OX FORO 

Oxford University Press, Walton Street, Oxford OXZ 6DP 
Oxford New York Toronto 
Delhi Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi 
Petaling Jaya Singapore Hong Kong Tokyo 
Nairobi Dar es Salaam Cape Town 
Melbourne Auckland 
and associated companies in 
Berlin lbadan 
Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press 
Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press, New York 
ISBN 0 19 824498 3 
©Oxford University Press 1975 
First published 1975 
Reprinted 1988 q / • ! t'.i 
All rights reserved, No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without 
the prior permission of Oxford Univem'ty Press 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Antony Rowe Lid, 
Chippenham 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
HEGEL's lectures on Aesthetics have long been regarded as the 
most attractive of all the lectures which were published after his 
death, mainly from transcripts made by members of his audience. 
Their great strength and interest lies not in their main philo­
sophical and historical thesis, but in what constitutes the bulk of 
these two volumes, namely the examples and illustrations drawn 
from India, Persia, Egypt, Greece, and the modern world, and in 
Hegel's comments on this detail. These comments on art, perhaps 
especially on painting and literature, must be fascinating to a 
student of art, however much he may wish to dissent from them. 
Consequently, although Hegel professes to be lecturing on the 
philosophy of Fine Art, and although the lectures have a philo­
sophical background (explicitly expressed here and there, and 
especially in Part I), it is lovers of art and historians of art whom 
primarily they ought to interest. (Professional philosophers al­
ready have the dry bones of Hegel's philosophy of art in§§ 556-63 
of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences-Eng. tr. by 
W. Wallace in Hegel's Philosophy of Mind.) If a reader finds points 
laboured with tedious prolixity, and if he is annoyed by repetitions, 
he must remember that he has in front of him something composed 
mainly from transcripts of lectures, and not something which 
Hegel had himself prepared for publication. 
Apart from their philosophical background, the lectures have 
a historical framework (Symbolic, Classical, and Romantic Art) 
which may be disputable, especially because Hegel says himself 
that elements of the later forms appear in the earlier and vice 
versa. But what is still more difficult is Hegel's main thesis that not 
only has art a meaning but that we can now state in plain prose 
what that meaning is. That art has a meaning and that it reveals 
something transcending our everyday experience may be granted. 
But what that meaning and revelation, is cannot be expressed 
otherwise than by the work of art itself. By professing to extract 
the meaning, Hegel is bound to conclude that art in the last 
resort is superfluous. If, as he thinks, Romantic art has the doctrines 
of the Christian religion as its content, then these are known 

vi 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
independently of art, and their expression by art is unnecessary 
Although Hegel did feel that a new artistic development was 
heralded in Germany by Goethe and Schiller, this does not seem 
to have shaken his conviction that 'art for us is a thing of the past'. 
His attempt, towards the end of vol. i, to show that art is after all 
necessary may seem weak. He died in 1831 and, despite the closing 
sentence of his Introduction, he had no inkling of the wonderful 
efflorescence of European Art in the remainder of the nineteenth 
century. If he had written a century later his pessimism might 
have been more justifiable. 
These lectures were edited by H. G. Hotho and appeared for the 
first time in 1835 in three volumes of Hegel's collected works. A 
second and revised edition appeared in 1842. Hotho's materials 
were some of Hegel's own manuscript notes for his lectures and 
transcripts of his lectures in 1823, 1826, and 1828--9. These Hotho 
worked into a whole with great skill. He kept as close as possible 
to Hegel, he says, but his aim was to produce a continuous text, 
and this means that we cannot be sure in detail whether some of 
the phraseology is his (rather than Hegel's), or whether incon­
sistencies are due to Hegel's changes of mind after 1823. 
In 1931 Georg Lasson began to publish what was to be a com­
pletely new edition of the lectures. Owing to his death, the first 
volume, Die Idee und das Ideal (Leipzig, 1931), had no successor. 
It contains what in this translation is the Introduction and Part I. 
Lasson's desire was to preserve every possible word of Hegel's; 
he was dissatisfied with what he regarded as Hotho's modifications 
of Hegel's ipsissima verba. His book (referred to below and else­
where as 'Lasson') is based primarily on a reproduction of the 
1826 lectures, supplemented occasionally by those of 1823, and 
frequently by extracts from Hotho's printed edition. It does pro­
vide some material which Hotho had omitted, and I have included 
in footnotes one or two extracts from it. In the main, however, the 
impression left on the mind by this book is that Hotho did his 
work brilliantly. 
Lasson (p. 393) lamented the fact that Glockner had included 
Hotho's first edition, and not the second, in his reprint of the 
collected works. This determined me to make this translation from 
Hotho's second edition. This edition is scarce, but it has now been 
reprinted (Berlin and Weimar, 2 vols., 1965), edited by F. Bassenge 
who has made some alterations and provided a truly magnificent 

TRANSLATOWS PREFACE 
vii 
index to which I am much indebted. About his text, however, I 
have some misgivings. He never indicates his departures from the 
text of Hotho's second edition and sometimes even prints errors 
in the first edition although they were corrected in the second. 
And while he does correct some of the misprints in the second 
edition, he does not correct them all. For an ample bibliography 
of editions and translations of these lectures, and of studies on 
them, see Hegel-Studien 5 (Bonn, 1969), pp. 379-427. 
These lectures were first translated by Ch. Benard (5 vols., 
Paris, 184-o-52). Although he omits some difficult passages, his 
version is faithful and often illuminating. I am in debt to it. 
I cannot say so much for the more recent French translation by 
S. Jankelevitch (4 vols., Paris, 1944), because while some of 
Benard's omissions are made good, there are fresh ones. The 
translator resorts too often to paraphrase, and in general his 
version is too free to be faithful to Hegel. English translations 
began with W. M. Bryant who produced (New York, 1879) 
a translation of Part II of the lectures, partly from Benard's 
French, and partly from Hotho' s second edition. His work is not 
to be despised. In 1905 Bosanquet published a translation of 
Hegel's Introduction, superseding a partial translation by W. 
Hastie (1886). This is a model translation of Hegel and it has 
valuable footnotes. A complete English translation was made for 
the first time by F. P. B. Osmaston (4 vols., London, 1916-zo). 
My aim has been to supersede Osmaston's version. He seems to 
me to have made a large number of mistakes and to have been 
quite unnecessarily verbose. Moreover there are oddities, e.g. 
'modern Platonists' for Neo-Platonists, and when Hegel mentions 
medieval portraits we do not expect to find them described as 
'portraits of middle-aged men', and we may be surprised to read 
of Ariosto's 'raging Roland' or 'the correspondence of Horace'. 
However, I live in a glass house, and my own version cannot be 
beyond cavil. If others have paraphrased too much, I may have 
paraphrased too little, and some may think that I ought to have 
preserved more of Hotho's italics than I have. Errors I have doubt­
less made, but I have not omitted anything, so far as I know. At 
times my English may be more Hegelian than felicitous, because of 
my wish to be faithful to Hegel and to be as literal as possible; and 
where Hegel's enthusiasm leads to mixed metaphors, I have not 
unmixed them. 

viii 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
All the footnotes, and everything in square brackets in the text, 
are the translator's. 
There are no notes to speak of in either the German texts or 
the French translations, but Bassenge's index does provide some 
material for annotation. Osmaston has notes, but all too often 
they are either unnecessary, or wrong, or unintelligible. My own 
notes will come in for criticism. I know that some of them must 
be amateurish where the subject matter is beyond the scope of my 
scholarship. The personal note audible in a few of them must be 
put down to my occasional need for some relief. One critic will 
complain that there are too many notes, while another will com­
plain that there are too few. The former critic must reflect that 
not everyone can claim (I certainly cannot) to have at his com­
mand the range of knowledge evidenced in these lectures, and so, 
e.g., the notes on Greek and Latin literature, superfluous to a 
classical scholar, may not be unwelcome to another whose exper­
tise is different. With the latter critic I have much sympathy, for 
while I have tried to identify all Hegel's references, some have 
escaped me. Moreover, what is required, and it is no credit to 
German scholarship that it has not yet been forthcoming, is 
annotation to place Hegel's discussion in the context of aesthetic 
discussions by his contemporaries and immediate seniors, and to 
identify far more of his allusions to German literature than I have 
been able to do. 
Whatever the deficiencies in my notes, they would have been 
multiplied if I had not had the help of many scholars who have so 
generously come to my aid. One or two are mentioned in the notes, 
but I am especially indebted to Mr. Huntington Cairns, Professors 
B. Ashmole, A. J. Beattie, C. T. Carr, K. J. Dover, E. H. Gom­
brich, T. B. L. Webster, W. Witte, and T. E. Wright. 
My debt is greatest to Professor Witte, not only for notes but 
also for help in many passages of the translation. For other passages 
in vol. i I am indebted also to Mr. T. J. Reed of St. John's College, 
Oxford, who went over several pages with meticulous care and 
saved me from many mistakes. 
All errors and failures in the notes and the translation are to be 
laid to my charge alone. All these scholars are guiltless. 
Hegel's terminology, however forbidding, is precise and rigid 
in his later published works, though not here. Those who take the 
trouble to understand it have little difficulty in following his 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
ix 
thought. But it does create formidable difficulties for a translator. 
Some day, perhaps, someone who thinks in English will re-think 
Hegel's philosophy and its terminology and put it all into English­
if indeed it be possible to put into a language framed by and for 
empiricism what Hegel calls 'speculative', i.e. really philosophical, 
thinking-but, until that day comes, some attempt must be made 
to accept and then explain Hegel's terminology and the outlook 
expressed in it. Therefore the following notes on (a) Hegel's 
fundamental outlook, and (b) some of his terms and their transla­
tion, may assist a reader unfamiliar with his work. It is unfortunate 
that his own introductory passages are so often obscure, because 
many things mentioned in them are clarified by the examples and 
illustrations which follow. 
(a) Hegel's philosophy is a form of idealism. (Terms often used 
in the translation are italicized here.) In his view, what is ulti­
mately real (or, in his terminology, what is actual) is the self­
knowing spirit. This is not to deny reality to the world in which we 
live or to ourselves as sensuous beings, but, although these are real, 
they are not, taken in and by themselves, actual. What is actual is 
not the real, but the ideal, and Hegel's point might be put, in his 
own paradoxical manner, by saying that the ideal is more really 
real than the real. The ideal is the synthesis of concept and reality, 
or, in art, of meaning and shape. This synthesis is what Hegel calls 
the Idea. 'The Idea existent in sensible form is the Ideal, i.e. 
beauty, which itself is truth implicit' (G. R. G. Mure: The 
Philosophy of Hegel, London, 1965, p. r85). A deformed man is 
real, but, being deformed, is not an adequate 'embodiment' or 
'realization' or 'existence' of the Concept or essential nature of man, 
and therefore is not 'actual'. Hegel's Idea is ultimately derived 
from the Platonic 'form' or 'idea', but it differs from Plato's by 
being a combination of concept with reality. It is not just an 'ideal', 
because, as Hegel would say, it is not so impotent as not also 
to exist. 
The complete correspondence of concept and reality is not to be 
found anywhere in nature, or even in human beings in so far as 
they are bodies or sensuous beings. This is because things external 
to one another cannot completely correspond with concepts or 
categories which, as thoughts, form a whole internally inter­
connected. It is when man's mind has risen to self-consciousness 
as spirit that in spirit and its productions the oppositions between 

X 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
universal and particular, subject and object, ideal and real, divine 
and human, are ultimately reconciled in a concrete unity. Know­
ledge and fact may, at the intellectual level of natural science, be 
opposed to one another as universal to particular, but, when the 
fact known is man's spiritual self, knower and known become 
a unity in which the difference between the two is not expunged 
but retained and mediated or reconciled. 
It is important to notice that the one essential route to man's 
knowledge of himself as spirit is through his knowledge of what 
is other than his true self, i.e. through knowledge and experience 
of living in what is opposite to him as man (i.e. in nature) or oppo­
site to him as an individual (i.e. ultimately, in the state), and 
through being reflected back into himself out of this opposite or 
object. Hegel is fond of this metaphor. The eye does not see itself 
except through its reflection in a mirror. Consciousness becomes 
aware of itself by being aware of objects and then by being re­
flected back into itself from them. 
The background of all this is theological (whatever may be 
thought of Hegel's theology): At first God thinks the thoughts or 
concepts which, particularized, or given embodiment or shape, are 
nature and man. In coming to know these concepts, man comes to 
know his own essence and so to consciousness of himself as self­
conscious and self-knowing spirit. This is at the same time a con­
sciousness of being united with God in a concrete unity, not 
vanished in him as happens, according to Hegel's interpretation, 
in some Eastern religions. 
This logico-theological process is figurated in the characteris­
tics of religion which Hegel regards as peculiarly Christian: God, 
the infinite spirit, is spirit only because he particularizes or em­
bodies himself in a man (the Incarnation). As man, he endures all 
the pains of an earthly lot, even unto the 'infinite grief' of the 
Crucifixion, but he is raised from death in the Resurrection, and 
then elevated to glory in the Ascension. Before the infinite spirit 
can commune with itself as spirit it must become embodied or 
particularized in the finite, endure the pain of self-diremption 
(the harshness of the finite spirit's death), and then, and only then, 
rise to being self-conscious and infinite spirit. 
From this it follows that the negative, the finite as the opposite 
md cancellation of the infinite, is a necessary factor or 'moment' 
in the infinite spirit itself. The Incarnation is necessary. In order 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
xi 
to become infinite spirit, which it implicitly is from the start, the 
spirit must negate itself, posit itself as finite, and then, negating 
this negation (i.e. as 'infinite negativity') rise through Resurrection 
and Ascension to a concrete infinity, concrete because achieved 
through becoming particular and being enriched through it and 
arising out of it, while still comprehending it in itself. 
This vision of the necessity of contradiction (or the negative), 
and the equal necessity of transcending this bare opposition and 
reconciling the negative with the positive, is the prerogative of 
reason as distinct from the Understanding. Where this Kantian 
distinction is clearly implied, Verst and and its derivatives are 
translated by 'Understanding' with a capital letter. Elsewhere 
Verst and is 'intellect' and verstiindig is even translated 'mathe­
matical' in some architectural contexts. 
For Hegel, the outlook of the Understanding, or the scientific 
intellect, is one for which oppositions and contradictions are 
absolute. The universal (e.g. a natural species) is indifferent to 
and outside the particulars (the universal 'apple' is an abstraction 
from and indifferent to all real apples), and this is an essential 
characteristic of all science. ('Science' here is used in the modern 
English sense in which 'science' is distinguished from 'arts'. In 
Hegel's Wissenschaft there is no such distinction, but unless the 
context indicates otherwise, he means by 'science' 'philosophy' or 
the procedure of reason instead of that of the Understanding.) 
Reason is not concerned with genera and species in a Linnaean 
classification, but only with the categories in which the concept or 
essence of natural life is particularized. These categories Hegel 
expounds in his Philosophy of Nature. 
Everything in nature is finite, bounded by something else. But 
spirit is infinite. This conception of the infinite occurs frequently 
in these lectures, and it may need some explanation. A straight 
line prolonged indefinitely is an image of what Hegel calls the 
'bad' infinite; the true infinite is better imaged as a circle, i.e. as 
a line which does not go on indefinitely but returns into itself. The 
infinite, for Hegel, is not the boundless, but the self-bounded. 
Spirit as self-conscious, is infinite because in self-consciousness 
subject and object coincide. Mere consciousness is limited by the 
objects of which it is conscious and therefore is finite. In self­
consciousness this limitation vanishes. The stones forming a cairn 
have a unity in the cairn, but this is only an abstract and finite 

xii 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
unity; the stones are indifferent to one another and are unaltered 
whether they are collected into a cairn or remain scattered on the 
hillside. The unity of lovers is quite different; it is a concrete and 
infinite unity because each of them is necessary to the other and 
is what he is because the other is ; the unity of their love is con­
stitutive of their very being. 
(b) Hegel prided himself on having taught philosophy to speak 
German. He tries to use ordinary German words and to avoid 
technical and Latin terminology. It might seem, therefore, that 
ordinary German words could be translated directly into ordinary 
English. But this is not always so. Hegel imposes a technical sense 
of his own on some ordinary German words (e.g. das Moment, or 
gesetzt), but then he uses these words sometimes in his technical 
sense and sometimes in their ordinary sense. The translator must 
make up his mind whether one of these words is being used 
technically or ordinarily and adapt his translation accordingly. 
The same English word will not always suffice to render the same 
German word. This must be premissed to the following notes on 
some of the terms commonly used in these lectures. 
Begrif is translated here by 'Concept' in technical passages, 
but I have often tried to bring out the meaning in English by 
writing 'essential nature', or even 'nature' or 'essence'. Hegel him­
self sometimes uses 'essence' as a synonym for 'Concept'. But his 
idealism must be kept in mind: for him, the essential nature of 
everything is a concept or thought. Other translators prefer 'notion' 
in English instead of 'Concept', but that is no more intelligible in 
English, and moreover it carries the suggestion of being something 
arbitrary or something not thought out, and this is the reverse of 
Hegel's meaning. 'Concept' does at least preserve, in its derivation, 
the idea of gripping together, on which Hegel insists in his use of 
Begrif. 
Idee is translated 'Idea', with a capital letter; 'idea' without 
a capital is Vorstellung, i.e. 'whatsoever is the object of the under­
standing when a man thinks'. 
Moment. In the neuter, this means feature, or factor, or element. 
But, following other translators (of Kant as well as Hegel), I have 
translated it by 'moment' in passages where I think that Hegel 
has in mind his technical use of the word to mean a stage essential 
in the development of the Concept or the Idea. Here the stages 
follow one another (logically, not temporally) in a necessary order, 

TRANSLATOWS PREFACE 
xiii 
and the earlier are not left behind but retained in the later. An 
example is the series 'universal, particular, individual'. The second 
is the negative of the first; the third negates the second and so is 
positive (the negation of the negation or what Hegel calls 'infinite 
-or absolute--negativity') and a return to the first which is now 
thus given a content, i.e. is enriched by its particular. 'Phasal con­
dition', one of Osmaston's renderings of Moment, seems to me to 
be neither German nor English. 
Dasein and Existenz. Hegel distinguishes between these in his 
Logic, but since the distinction could be preserved in English only 
by circumlocution (and is not preserved in these lectures), I have 
translated both by 'existence'. It must be remembered, however, 
that 'existence' or 'existent' here always means an embodiment, 
something determinate or 'real' as opposed to 'ideal'. When some 
modern theologians say that 'God is beyond existence' etc., they 
appear to be using the word in this sense, as well as remember­
ing Plato. 
Realitiit-reality, in much the same sense as 'existence'. In the 
Philosophy of Right, for example, Hegel clearly distinguishes it 
from Wirklichkeit, which there means 'actuality'. But in these 
lectures this distinction is seldom used, and Wirklichkeit has its 
ordinary German sense of 'reality', and it has been so translated. 
Moralitiit and Sittlichkeit. When Hegel is writing technically 
he distinguishes between these, though both words mean 'morality'. 
So distinguished, the first is 'morality' as something subjective or 
personal, i.e. conscientiousness, while the second is 'ethical life', 
objective and social, i.e. living conscientiously in accordance with 
custom or established institutions. This distinction is made in 
these lectures, but only rarely. Almost everywhere Hegel uses 
sittlich to mean what in English is covered by the blanket term 
'moral', and it has been so translated. 
unmittelbar, frequently used, is generally translated 'immediately' 
or 'directly'. In any case, this has nothing to do with time but 
means 'without an intermediary', or 'without the interposition of 
anything', or what something is at the start before its implicit 
nature becomes explicit through the negative process already 
described above. 
gesetzt is one of Hegel's favourite words. It ordinarily means 
'put' or 'set' or 'laid down', but sometimes I have had to follow 
other translators by adopting the awkward word 'posited'. Hegel 

xiv 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
uses it to mean 'given reality', in the sense of 'reality' mentioned 
above. It is sometimes in a way analogous to the English use of 
'cashed' when, e.g., plain sense has to be given to what a metaphor 
is supposed to convey. 
sinnlich-'sensuous' represents Hegel's meaning, but it is un­
natural English in many contexts, and therefore 'perceptible' has 
been used occasionally. 'Sensuous' is opposed to 'intellectual'. A 
sensuous man, in Hegel's meaning, is simply a man who uses his 
five senses, or who 'perceives' rather than 'thinks'. 
Absolut-in English 'Absolute', with a capital when it is a 
noun. 'Absolute', 'absolute Idea', 'absolute meaning', 'absolute 
Concept', all appear in these lectures, and they are best regarded, 
at least in most contexts, as synonyms for God. 
Geist means both 'mind' and spirit'. I have kept 'spirit' almost 
everywhere, except where the context cries out for 'mind', and 
where that cannot be misleading. 'Spirit' has the religious over­
tones to which Hegel attached importance in his use of this word. 
For him the 'mind' of man is the spirit which is the 'candle of 
the Lord'. 
I am deeply grateful both to the Librarian and Staff of the 
St. Andrews University Library for answering many queries, and 
to the Leverhulme Trustees for awarding me an Emeritus Fellow­
ship in 1972 to enable me to complete my work for publication. 
T. M.KNOX 
Grief!, January I97 3 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE 
Silenus with the Infant Bacchus 
frontispiece 
INTRODUCTION 
1. Prefatory Remarks 
I 
2. Limitation and Defence of Aesthetics 
1 
3· Refutation of Objections 
3 
4· Scientific Ways of Treating Beauty and Art 
14 
S· Concept of the Beauty of Art 
22 
6. Common Ideas of Art 
25 
(i) The Work of Art as a Product of Human Activity 
25 
(ii) The Work of Art, as being for Apprehension by Man's 
Senses, is drawn from the Sensuous Sphere 
32 
(iii) The Aim of Art 
41 
7· Historical Deduction of the True Concept of Art 
55 
(i) The Kantian Philosophy 
s6 
(ii) Schiller, Winckelmann, Schelling 
61 
(iii) Irony 
64 
8. Division of the Subject 
69 
(i) The Idea of the Beauty of Art or the Ideal 
73 
(ii) Development of the Ideal into the Particular Forms of 
the Beauty of Art 
75 
(iii) The System of the Individual Arts 
82 
PART I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY, OR 
THE IDEAL 
91 
INTRODUCT ION. Position of Art in Relation to the Finite 
World and to Religion and Philosophy 
91 
Division of the Subject 
105 
Chapter I. CONCEPT OF THE BEAUT IFUL AS 
SUCH 
I̱ 
x. The Idea 
106 
2. The Idea in Existence 
I xo 
3· The Idea of the Beautiful 
I I 1 

ni 
CONTENTS 
Chapter II. THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
A. NATURAL BEAUTY AS SUCH 
I. The Idea as Life 
2. Life in Nature as Beautiful 
3· Ways of Considering Life in Nature 
L THE 
EXTERNAL 
BEAUTY 
OF 
THE 
ABSTRACT 
FORM 
AND 
n6 
u6 
u6 
I23 
I29 
THE ABSTRACT UNITY 
OF 
THE 
SENSUOUS MATERIAL 
I3J 
I. Beauty of Abstract Form 
I 34 
(a) Regularity and Synunetry 
134 
(b) Conformity to Law 
IJ8 
(c) Harmony 
I40 
2. Beauty as Abstract Unity of the Sensuous Material 
I4I 
C .  DEFICIENCY OF  NATURAL BEAUTY 
I4J 
I. The Inner in Immediacy as only the Inner 
I45 
2. The Dependence of Immediate Individual Existence 
I47 
3· The Restrictedness of Immediate Individual Existence 
I 50 
Chapter III. THE BEAUTY OF ART OR T HE IDEAL 
I53 
A. THE IDEAL AS SUCH 
I53 
I. Beautiful Individuality 
I53 
2. The Relation of the Ideal to Nature 
I6o 
B. THE DETERMINACY OF THE IDEAL 
I74 
r. Ideal Determinacy as such 
I75 
I. The Divine as Unity and Universality 
I75 
2. The Divine as a Group of Gods 
I75 
3· Repose of the Ideal 
I76 
II. Action 
I77 
1. The General State of the World 
179 
(a) Individual Independence-Heroic Age 
179 
(b) Prosaic States of Afairs in the Present 
193 
(c) The Reconstitution of Individual Independence 
195 
2. The Situation 
I 96 
(a) Absence of Situation 
200 
(b) The Specific Situation in its Harmlessness 
200 
(c) Collision 
204 

CONTENTS 
xvii 
3· Action 
217 
(a) The Universal Powers over Action 
220 
(b) The Individual Agents 
225 
(c) Character 
236 
11 I. The External Determinacy of the Ideal 
244 
I. Abstract Externality as such 
246 
2. Correspondence of the Concrete Ideal with its Exter-
nal Reality 
252 
3. The Externality of the Ideal [Work of Art] in Relation 
to the Public 
263 
C. THE ARTIST 
280 
I. Imagination (Phantasie), Genius, and Inspiration 
281 
2. Objectivity of the Representation 
289 
3· Manner, Style, and Originality 
291 
PART II. DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEAL INTO 
THE PARTICULAR FORMS OF ART 
299 
INTRODUCTION 
2 
SECTION I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
303 
INTRODUCTION. The Symbol in general 
303 
Division of the Subject 
314 
Chapter I. U NCO N SC IOUS SYMBOL I SM 
323 
A. IMMEDIATE UNITY OF MEANING AND SHAPE 
323 
I. The Religion of Zoroaster 
325 
2. The Non-symbolic Character of Zoroastrianism 
329 
3· Non-artistic 
Interpretation and Presentation 
of Zoro-
astrianism 
330 
B. FANTASTIC SYMBOLISM 
332 
1. The Indian Conception of Brahma 
335 
:z. Sensuousness, Boundlessness, and the Activity of Per-
sonifying 
336 
3· View of Purification and Penance 
346 

xviii 
CONTENTS 
C. SYMBOLISM PROPER 
347 
1. Egyptian View and Representation of the Dead: Pyramids 
354 
2. Animal Worship and Animal Masks 
357 
3· Complete Symbolism-Memnons, 
Isis and Osiris, the 
Sphinx 
357 
Chapter I I. SYMBOLISM OF THE SUBLIME 
362 
A. THE PANTHEISM OF ART 
364 
I. Indian Poetry 
366 
2. Mohammedan Poetry 
368 
3· Christian Mysticism 
371 
B. THE ART OF THE SUBLIME 
37I 
I. God as Creator and Lord of the World 
373 
2. The Finite World Bereft of God 
374 
3· The Human Individual 
375 
Chapter III. CON SCIOUS 
SYMBOL I S M  OF THE 
COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
378 
A. COMPARISONS 
ORIGINATING FROM 
THE 
EXTERNAL 
OBJECT 
38I 
I. Fable 
383 
2. Parable, Proverb, Apologue 
390 
(a) Parable 
390 
(b) Proverbs 
392 
(c) Apologue 
392 
3· Metamorphoses 
393 
B. COMPARISONS WHICH START FROM THE MEANING 
395 
1. Riddle 
397 
2. Allegory 
398 · 
3· Metaphor, Image, Simile 
402 
(a) Metaphor 
403 
(b) Image 
408 
(c) Simile 
410 
C. DISAPPEARANCE OF THE SYMBOI.IC FORM OF ART 
421 
I. Didactic Poetry 
422 
2. Descriptive Poetry 
424 
3· The Ancient Epigram 
424 

CONTENTS 
̲x 
SECTION II. THE CLASSICAL FORM OF ART 
427 
INTRODUCTION. The Classical Type in General 
427 
1. Independence of the Classical as Interpenetration of Spirit 
and its Shape in Nature 
431 
2. Greek Art as the Actual Existence of the Classical Ideal 
436 
3· Position of the Productive Artist in Classical Art 
438 
4· Division of the Subject 
441 
Chapter I. THE PROCESS OF SHAP ING THE 
CLA S SICAL FORM OF ART 
443 
1. The Degradation of the Animal 
445 
(a) Animal Sacrifices 
445 
(b) Hunts 
447 
(c) Metamorphoses 
447 
2. The Battle between the Old Gods and the New 
453 
(a) Oracles 
456 
(b) The Old Gods in Distinction from the New 
458 
(c) The Conquest of the Old Gods 
465 
3· Afirmative Retention of the Negatived Features 
468 
(a) The Mysteries 
468 
(b) Preservation of the Old Gods in Artistic Representation 
469 
(c) Natural Basis of the New Gods 
471 
Chapter II. THE IDEAL OF THE CLASS ICAL 
FORM OF ART 
476 
1. The Ideal of Classical Art in General 
477 
(a) The Ideal as Originated by Free Artistic Creation 
477 
(b) The New Gods of the Classical Ideal 
481 
(c) The Sort of External Representation 
485 
2. The Group of Particular Gods 
486 
(a) Plurality of Individual Gods 
487 
(b) Lack of a Systematic Arrangement 
487 
(c) Fundamental Character of the Group of the Gods 
488 
3. The Individuality of the Gods seriatim 
490 
(a) Material for Individualization 
491 
(b) Preservation of the Moral Basis 
499 
(c) Advance to Grace and Attractiveness 
500 

XX 
CONTENTS 
Chapter III. THE D I S SO LUTION OF THE CLASSI-
CAL FORM OF ART 
502 
I. Fate 
502 
2. Dissolution of the Gods through their Anthropomorphism 
503 
(a) Deficiency in Inner Subjectivity 
504 
(b) The Transition to Christianity is only a Topic of 
Modern Art 
5o6 
(c) Dissolution of Classical Art in its own Sphere 
509 
3· Satire 
5 12 
(a) Difference between the Dissolution of Classical Art and 
that of Symbolic Art 
5 12 
(b) Satire 
5 12 
(c) The Roman World as the Soil where Satire Flourishes 
514 
SECTION III. THE RO MANTIC FORM OF ART 
5I7 
INTRODUCTION. Of the Romantic in General 
5 I7 
I. The Principle of Inner Subjectivity 
5 I8 
2. The more Detailed Features of the Content and Form of the 
Romantic 
519 
3· Relation of the Subject-matter to the Mode of Representation 
524 
4· Division of the Subject 
528 
Chapter I. THE RELIGIOU S DOMAIN OF 
ROMANTIC ART 
530 
I. The Redemptive History of Christ 
534 
(a) Apparent Superfluity of Art 
535 
(b) Necessary Emergence of Art 
535 
(c) The Details of the External Appearance are Accidental 536 
2. Religious Love 
539 
(a) Concept of the Absolute as Love 
539 
(b) The Heart [or Soul] 
540 
(c) Love as the Romantic Ideal 
540 
3· The Spirit of the Community 
543 · 
(a) Martyrs 
544 
(b) Repentance and Conversion 
548 
(c) Miracles and Legends 
550 

CONTENTS 
xxi 
Chapter II. CHIVALRY 
552 
I. Honour 
557 
(a) The Concept of Honour 
558 
(b) Vulnerability of Honour 
s6o 
(c) Reconstitution of Honour 
561 
2. Love 
562 
(a) Concept of Love 
562 
(b) Love's Collisions 
565 
(c) Love's Contingency 
566 
3. Fidelity 
s68 
(a) Fidelity in Service 
569 
(b) Fidelity's Subjective Independence 
570 
(c) Fidelity's Collisions 
570 
Chapter III. THE FORMAL INDEPENDENCE OF 
INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERS 
573 
I. The Independence of the Individual Character 
576 
(a) Formal Firmness of Character 
577 
(b) Character as Inner but Undeveloped Totality 
580 
(c) What the Substantial Interest is in the Presentation of 
Formal Character 
585 
2. Adventures 
586 
(a) The Contingency of Aims and Collisions 
586 
(b) The Comic Treatment of Contingency 
590 
(c) Romantic Fiction 
592 
3. Dissolution of the Romantic Form of Art 
593 
(a) The Subjective Artistic Imitation of the Existent 
Present 
595 
(b) Subjective Humour 
6oo 
(c) The End of the Romantic Form of Art 
602 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME TWO 
PART III. THE SY STEM OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
ARTS 
613 
SECTION I. ARCHITECTURE 
6JO 
SECTION I I. SCULPTURE 
701 
SECTION I I I. THE ROMANTIc ARTS 
792 
INDEX 
1239 

INTRODUCTION 
[ 1 Prefatory Remarks] 
THESE lectures are devoted to Aesthetics. Their topic is the 
spacious realm of the beautiful; more precisely, their province is 
art, or, rather, fine art. 
For this topic, it is true, the word Aesthetics, taken literally, is 
not wholly satisfactory, since 'Aesthetics' means, more precisely, 
the science of sensation, of feeling. In this sense it had its origin 
as a new science, or rather as something which for the first time 
was to become a philosophical discipline,' in the school of Wolff 
at the period in Germany when works of art were treated with 
regard to the feelings they were supposed to produce, as, for 
instance, the feeling of pleasure, admiration, fear, pity, and so on. 
Because of the unsatisfactoriness, or more accurately, the super­
ficiality of this word, attempts were made after all to frame others, 
e.g. 'Callistics'. But this too appears inadequate because the 
science which is meant deals not with the beautiful as such but 
simply with the beauty of art. We will therefore let the word 
'Aesthetics' stand; as a mere name it is a matter of indifference to 
us, and besides it has meanwhile passed over into common speech. 
As a name then it may be retained, but the proper expression for 
our science is Philosophy of Art and, more definitely, Philosophy 
of Fine Art. 
[ 2] Limitation and Defence of Aesthetics 
By ·adopting this expression we at once exclude the beauty of 
nature. Such a limitation of our topic may appear to be laid down 
arbitrarily, on the principle that every science has authority to 
demarcate its scope at will. But this is not the sense in which we 
should take the limitation of aesthetics to the beauty of art. In 
ordinary life we are of course accustomed to speak of a beautiful 
colour, a beautiful sky, a beautiful river; likewise of beautiful 
flowers, beautiful animals, and even more of beautiful people. We 
will not here enter upon the controversy about how far the attribute 
1 fn Baumgarten's Aesthetica, 1750. 

INTRODUCTION 
of beauty is justifiably ascribed to these and the like, and how far, 
in general, natural beauty may be put alongside the beauty of art. 
But we may assert against this view, even at this stage, that the 
beauty of art is higher than nature. The beauty of art is beauty 
born of the spirit and born again, 1 and the higher the spirit and its 
productions stand above nature and its phenomena, the higher too 
is the beauty of art above that of nature. Indeed, considered 
formally [i.e. no matter what it says], even a useless notion that 
enters a man's head is higher than any product of nature, because 
in such a notion spirituality and freedom are always present. Of 
course, considered in its content, the sun, for example, appears as 
an absolutely necessary factor [in the universe] while a false notion 
vanishes as acddental and transitory. But, taken by itself, a natural 
existent like the sun is indifferent, not free and self-conscious in 
itself; and if we treat it in its necessary connection with other 
things, then we are not treating it by itself, and therefore not as 
beautiful. 
Now if we said in general that spirit and its artistic beauty stands 
higher than natural beauty, then of course virtually nothing is 
settled, because 'higher' is a quite vague expression which de­
scribes natural and artistic beauty as still standing side by side in 
the space of imagination and differing only quantitatively and 
therefore externally. But what is higher about the spirit and its 
artistic beauty is not something merely relative in comparison with 
nature. On the contrary, spirit is alone the true, comprehending 
everything in itself, so that everything beautiful is truly beautiful 
only as sharing in this higher sphere and generated by it. In this 
sense the beauty of natureƄ only as a reflection ofihe b.eamy_ 
that b]tƅspmt, Ɔsan imperfect incomplete mode [of beauty], 
a" mode which 1iiTts substance is contained in the spirit itself.­
Besides we shall find that a limitation to fine art arises very natur­
ally, since, however much is said about the beauties of nature (less 
by the ancients than by us), it has not yet entered anyone's head to 
concentrate on the beauty of natural objects and make a science, 
a systematic exposition, of these beauties. A treatment from the 
point of view of utility has indeed been made and, for example, 
1 This is obscure. Bosanquet, in his translation of Hegel's Introduction 
(London, 1905) p. 39, suggests an allusion to 'born of water and the spirit', but 
this must be wrong. Hegel means that we have beauty originated by man's mind 
and also what is reproduced by his mind in his natural world. See below p. 29, 
and Part I, ch. III, c ad init., and Part II, ch. III ad init. 

INTRODUCT I ON 
3 
a scientific account of natural objects useful against diseases has 
been composed, a materia medica, a description of the minerals, 
chemical products, plants, or animals, which are useful for cures. 
But the realms of nature have not been classified and examined 
from the point of view of beauty. In [discussing] natural beau1 
we feel ourselves too much in a vague sphere, without a criterion, 
and therefore such a classification would provide too little interes 
for us to undertake it. 
/ 
These preliminary remarks on beauty in nature and art, on the 
relation of the two, and the exclusion of the former from the scope 
of our proper subject, should dispose of the idea that the limitation 
is due merely to caprice and arbitrariness. The proof of this rela­
tion should not come here yet, since its consideration falls within 
our science itself and is therefore not to be further explained and 
proved until later [see Part I, ch. II]. 
But if we now limit ourselves provisionally to the beauty of art, 
this first step brings us at once up against new difficulties. 
[3 Refutation of Objections] 
The first that we may encounter is the doubt whether fine art 
shows itself deserving of a scientific treatment. Beauty and art does 
indeed \P_ervade all the business of life like a friendly geniu\and 
brightly adorns all our surroundings whether inner or <!uter, 
mitigating the seriousness of our circumstances and the complexi­
ties of the actual world, extinguishing idleness in an entertaining 
way, and, where there is nothing good to be done, filling the place 
of evil always better than evil itself. Yet even though art inter­
sperses with its pleasing forms everything from the war-paint of 
the savages to the splendour of temples with all their riches of 
adornment, these forms themselves nevertheless seem to fall out­
side the true ends and aims of life. Even if artistic creations are not 
detrimental to these serious purposes, if indeed they sometimes 
even seem to further them, at least by keeping evil away, still, art 
belongs rather to the indulgence and relaxation of the spirit, 
whereas substantial interests require its exertion. Thus it may look 
as if it would be inappropriate and pedantic to propose to treat with 
scientific seriousness what is not itself of a serious nature. In any 
case, on this view, art appears as a superfluity, even if the softening 
of the heart which preoccupation with beauty can produce does 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
not altogether become exactly deleterious as downright effeminacy. 
From this point of view, granted that the fine arts are a luxury, 
it has frequently been necessary to defend them in their relation 
to practical necessities in general, and in particular to morality and 
piety, and, since it is impossible to prove their harmlessness, at 
least to give grounds for believing that this luxury of the spirit may 
afford a greater sum of advantages than disadvantages. With this 
in view, serious aims have been ascribed to art itself, and it has 
frequently been recommended as a mediator between reason and 
sense, between(!_nclination and duty, as a reconciler of these col­
liding elements in their grim strife and oppositio But it may be 
maintained that in the case of these aims of art, admittedly more 
serious, nothing is gained for reason and duty by this attempt at 
mediation, because by their very nature reason and duty permit of 
no mixture with anything else; they could not enter into such 
a transaction, and they demand the same purity which they have 
in themselves. Besides, it may be argued, art is not by this means 
made any worthier of scientific discussion, since it always remains 
a servant on both sides [between which it is supposed to mediate], 
and along with higher aims it all the same also promotes idleness 
and frivolity. Indeed, to put it simply, in this service, instead of 
being an end in itself, it can appear only as a means.-If, finally, 
art is regarded as a means, then there always remains in the form 
of the means a disadvantageous aspect, namely that even if art 
subordinates itself to more serious aims in fact, and produces more 
serious effects, the means that it uses for this purpose is deception. 
The beautiful [Schone] has its being in pure appearance [Schein).! 
But an inherently true end and aim, as is easily recognized, must 
not be achieved by deception, and even if here and there it may 
1 Schein is frequently used in what follows. Hegel is following Kant (Critique 
of Judgment, part i) who held that the beautiful was the pleasing, without our 
having before us any concept or interest, e.g. in the purpose or utility of the 
object portrayed, so that what counted was the pure appearance of the object. 
To put the point in modern terms, if we look at a photograph of a shop, what 
strikes us is the utility of the shop, or the interest the picture may have for us 
if we are contemplating a purchase. But a work of art is different from a photo­
graph. Even if it portrays a shop, it is the appearance (Schein) which pleases us 
and is the essential thing, without our having any interest in the shop or what it 
sells. Consequently, with this Kantian doctrine in mind, I translate Schein as 
a rule by 'pure appearance'. 'Semblance', which other translators use, gives 
a false impression. Hegel has in mind not only Kant but also Schiller's Aesthetic 
Letters which had a considerable influence on the development of his view of 
art. See below in [7]. 

INTRO DUCTION 
5 
be furthered by this means, this should be only in a limited way; 
and even in that case deception will be unable to count as the right 
means. For the means should correspond to the dignity of the end, 
and not pure appearance and deception but only the truth can 
create the truth, just as science too has to treat the true interests of 
the spirit in accordance with the true mode of actuality and the 
true mode of envisaging it. 
In these respects it may look as if fine art is unworthy of scientific 
treatment because [it is alleged] it remains only a pleasing play, 
and, even if it pursues more serious ends, it still contradicts their 
nature ; but [the allegation proceeds] in general it is only a 
servant both of that play and of these ends, and alike for the 
element of its being and the means of its effectiveness it can avail 
itself of nothing but deception and pure appearance. 
But, secandly, it is still more likely to seem that even if fine art in 
general is a proper object of philosophical reflection, it is yet no 
appropriate topic for strictly scientific treatment. For the beauty 
of art presents itself to sense, feeling, intuition, imagination ;  it has 
a different sphere from thought, and the apprehension of its 
activity and its products demands an organ other than scientific 
thinking. Further, it is precisely the freedom of production and 
configurations that we enjoy in the beauty of art. In the production 
as well as in the perception of works of art, it seems as if we escape 
from every fetter of rule and regularity. In place of the strictness 
of conformity to law, 1 and the dark inwardness of thought, we 
seek peace and enlivenment in the forms of art; we exchange the 
shadow realm of the Idea for bright and vigorous reality. Finally, 
the source of works of art is the free activity of fancy which in its 
imaginations is itself more free than nature is. Art has at its com­
mand not only the whole wealth of natural formations in their 
manifold and variegated appearance ; but in addition the creative 
imagination has power to launch out beyond them inexhaustibly 
in productions of its own. In face of this immeasurable fullness of 
fancy and its free products, it looks as if thought must lose courage 
to bring them completely before itself, to criticize them, and arrange 
them under its universal formulae.2 
1 On Hegel's distinction between regularity (Regelmiissigkeit) and conformity 
to law (Gesetzmiissigkeit), see Part I, ch. II, B. 
• In this paragraph we have the first occurrence of Phantasie and Einbildungs­
krajt, translated here, and sometimes later, as 'fancy' and 'imagination', and we 
may be inclined at first to recall Coleridge's distinction between these two 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
Science on the contrary, the objectors admit, has, in its form, to 
do with the thinking which abstracts from a mass of details. The 
result is that, on the one hand, imagination with its whim and 
caprice, the organ, i.e., of artistic activity and enjoyment, remains 
excluded from science. On the other hand, they say that while art 
does brighten and vivify the unillumined and withered dryness of 
the Concept, does reconcile its abstractions and its conflict with 
reality, does enrich the Concept with reality, a purely intellectual 
treatment [of art] removes this means of enrichment, destroys it, 
and carries the Concept back to its simplicity without reality and 
to its shadowy abstractness. Further, in its content, science is 
occupied with what is inherently necessary. If aesthetics leaves 
natural beauty aside, we have in this respect apparently not only 
not gained anything, but rather have removed ourselves still 
further from the necessary. For the very word 'nature' already 
gives us the idea of necessity and conformity to law, and so of a 
state of affairs which, it can be hoped, is nearer to scientific treat­
ment and susceptible of it. But in the sphere of the spirit in 
general, especially in the imagination, what seems, in comparison 
with nature, to be peculiarly at home is caprice and the absence 
of law, and this is automatically incapable of any scientific 
explanation. 
In all these respects, therefore [the argument runs], fine art, 
alike in its origin, its effect, and its scope, instead of showing itself 
fitted for scientific endeavour, seems rather in its own right to 
resist thought's regulating activity and not to be suitable for 
scientific discussion. 
These scruples, and others like them, against a truly scientific 
preoccupation with fine art are derived from common ideas, points 
of view, and considerations; their more prolix elaboration you can 
English words. Although Hegel does distinguish between the two German 
words when he writes about The Artist in Part I, ch. III, c, he usually treats 
them as synonyms, and I have generally translated both words by 'imagination'. 
It is a trick of Hegel's style not to repeat the same word in the same sentence, or, 
often, in a succeeding one, and in order to avoid repetition, he uses two different 
words as synonyms, even if they are not exactly synonymous. Until this is 
realized, a translator may perplex himself unnecessarily to find two different 
English words, in fact synonymous, to render the two different words used by 
Hegel synonymously. Frequent examples of this Hegelianism occur in his use 
of Inhalt and Gehalt; and the use of 'Poseidon' in one sentence and 'Neptune' 
in the next is perhaps the reductio ad absurdum of this stylistic purism. 'Athcne', 
'Pallas', and 'Minerva' within two or three lines all mean the same goddess. 

I NTRODUCTI ON 
7 
read ad nauseam in older books, especially French ones,I about 
beauty and the fine arts. And in part they contain facts that are 
right enough, and, in part too, argumentation is derived from them 
which at first sight seems plausible as well. Thus, for example, 
it is a fact that the shapes that beauty takes on are as multifarious 
as its occurrence is universal. If you like, you can infer from this 
a universal bent in human nature for the beautiful, and then go on 
to the further inference that because the ideas of the beautiful are 
so infinitely various, and, therefore, at first sight, something par­
ticular, there cannot be any universal laws of beauty and taste. 
Now before we can turn away from such considerations to our 
proper subject, our next task must consist in a short introductory 
discussion of the scruples and doubts that have been raised. 
[i] As regards the worthiness of art to be treated scientifically, it 
is of course the case that art can be used as a fleeting play, affording 
recreation and entertainment, decorating our surroundings, giving 
pleasantness to the externals of our life, and making other objects 
stand out by artistic adornment. Thus regarded, art is indeed not 
independent, not free, but ancillary. But what we want to consider 
is art which is free alike in its end and its means. The fact that art 
in general can serve other ends and be in that case a mere passing 
amusement is something which it shares equally with thought. For, 
on the one hand, science may indeed be used as an intellectual 
servant for finite ends and accidental means, and it then acquires 
its character not from itself but from other objects and circum­
stances. Yet, on the other hand, it also cuts itself free from this 
servitude in order to raise itself, in free independence, to the truth 
in which it fulfils itself independently and conformably with its 
own ends alone. 
Now, in this its freedom alone is fine art truly art, and it only 
fulfils its supreme task when it has placed itself in the same sphere 
as religion and philosophy, and when it is simply one way of 
bringing to our minds and expressing the Divine, the deepest 
interests of mankind, and the most comprehensive truths of the 
spirit. In works of art the nations have deposited their richest inner 
intuitions and ideas, and art is often the key, and in many nations 
the sole key, to understanding their philosophy and religion. Art 
shares this vocation with religion and philosophy, but in a special 
way, namely by displaying even the highest [reality] sensuously, 
1 e.g. the works of Batteux, see below, p. 16, note 2. 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
bringing it thereby nearer to the senses, to feeling, and to nature's 
mode of appearance. What is thus displayed is the depth of a supra­
sensuous world which thought pierces and sets up at first as a 
beyond in contrast with immediate consciousness and present 
feeling; it is the freedom of intellectual reflection which rescues 
itself from the here and now, called sensuous reality and finitude. 
But this breach, to which the spirit proceeds, it is also able to heal. 
It generates out of itself works of fine art as the first reconciling 
middle term between pure thought and what is merely external, 
sensuous, and transient, between nature and finite reality and the 
infinite freedom of conceptual thinking. 
[ii] So far as concerns the unworthiness of the element of art in 
general, namely its pure appearance and deceptions, this objection 
would of course have its justification if pure appearance could be 
claimed as something wrong. But appearance itself is essential to 
essence. Truth would not be truth if it did not show itself and 
appear, if it were not truth for someone and for itself, as well as 
for the spirit in general too. Consequently, not pure appearance in 
general, but only the special kind of appearance in which art gives 
reality to what is inherently true can be the subject of reproof. 
If in this connection the pure appearance in which art brings its 
conceptions into existence is to be described as 'deception', this 
reproof first acquires its meaning in comparison with the pheno­
mena of the external world and its immediate materiality, as well 
as in relation to our own world of feeling, i.e. the inner world of 
sense. To both these worlds, in our life of experience, our own 
phenomenal life, we are accustomed to ascribe the value and name 
of actuality, reality, and truth, in contrast to art which lacks such 
reality and truth. But it is precisely this whole sphere of the em­
pirical inner and outer world which is not the world of genuine 
actuality; on the contrary, we must call it, in a stricter sense than 
we call art, a pure appearance and a harsher deception. Only 
beyond the immediacy of feeling and external objects is genuine 
actuality to be found. For the truly actual is only that which has 
being in and for itself, the substance of nature and spirit, which 
indeed gives itself presence and existence, but in this existence 
remains in and for itself and only so is truly actual. It is precisely 
the dominion of these universal powers1 which art emphasizes and 
reveals. In the ordinary external and internal world essentiality 
I See below, Part I, ch. III, B, II 3(a). 

INTRO D U CTION 
9 
does indeed appear too, but in the form of a chaos of accidents, 
afflicted by the immediacy of the sensuous and by the capricious­
ness of situations, events, characters, etc. Art liberates the true 
content of phenomena from the pure appearance and deception of 
this bad, transitory world, and gives them a higher actuality, born 
of the spirit. Thus, far from being mere pure appearance, a higher 
reality and truer existence is to be ascribed to the phenomena of 
art in comparison with [those of] ordinary reality. 
Neither can the representations of art be called a deceptive 
appearance in comparison with the truer representations of 
historiography. For the latter has not even immediate existence 
but only the spiritual pure appearance thereof as the element of 
its portrayals, and its content remains burdened with the entire 
contingency of ordinary life and its events, complications, and 
individualities, whereas the work of art brings before us the eternal 
powers that govern history without this appendage of the im­
mediate sensuous present and its unstable appearance. 
But if the mode in which artistic forms appear is called a decep­
tion in comparison with philosophical thinking and with religious 
and moral principles, of course the form of appearance acquired 
by a topic in the sphere of thinking is the truest reality; but in 
comparison with the appearance of immediate existence and of 
historiography, the pure appearance of art has the advantage that 
it points through and beyond itself, and itself hints at something 
spiritual of which it is to give us an idea, whereas immediate 
appearance does not present itself as deceptive but rather as the 
real and the true, although the truth is in fact contaminated and 
concealed by the immediacy of sense. The hard shell of nature and 
the ordinary world make it more difficult for the spirit to penetrate 
through them to the Idea than works of art do. 
But while on the one hand we give this high position to art, it is 
on the other hand just as necessary to remember that neither in 
content nor in form is art the highest and absolute mode of bring­
ing to our minds the true interests of the spirit. For precisely on 
account of its form, art is limited to a specific content. Only one · 
sphere and stage of truth is capable of being represented in the 
element of art. In order to be a genuine content for art, such truth 
must in virtue of its own specific character be able to go forth into 
[the sphere of] sense and remain adequate to itself there. This is 
the case, for example, with the gods of Greece. On the other hand, 

IO 
I N TRODUCTION 
there is a deeper comprehension of truth which is no longer so akin 
and friendly to sense as to be capable of appropriate adoption and 
expression in this medium. The Christian view of truth is of this 
kind, and, above all, the spirit of our world today, or, more par­
ticularly, of our religion and the development of our reason, ap­
pears as beyond the stage at which art is the supreme mode of our 
knowledge of the Absolute. The peculiar nature of artistic produc­
tion and of works of art no longer fills our highest need. We have 
got beyond venerating works of art as divine and worshipping 
them. The impression they make is of a more reflective kind, and 
what they arouse in us needs a higher touchstone and a different 
test. Thought and reflection have spread their wings above fine 
art. Those who delight in lamenting and blaming may regard this 
phenomenon as a corruption and ascribe it to the predominance 
of passions and selfish interests which scare away the seriousness 
of art as well as its cheerfulness; or they may accuse the distress of 
the present time, the complicated state of civil and political life 
which does not permit a heart entangled in petty interests to free 
itself to the higher ends of art. This is because intelligence itself 
subserves this distress, and its interests, in sciences which are use­
ful for such ends alone, and it allows itself to be seduced into 
confining itself to this desert. 
However all this may be, it is certainly the case that art no longer 
affords that satisfaction of spiritual needs which earlier ages and 
nations sought in it, and found in it alone, a satisfaction that, at 
least on the part of religion, was most intimately linked with art. 
The beautiful days of Greek art, like the golden age of the later 
Middle Ages, are gone. The development of reflection in our life 
today has made it a need of ours, in relation both to our will and 
judgement, to cling to general considerations and to regulate the 
particular by them, with the result that universal forms, laws, 
duties, rights, maxims, prevail as determining reasons and are the 
chief regulator. But for artistic interest and production we demand 
in general rather a quality of life in which the universal is not 
present in the form of law and maxim, but which gives the im­
pression of being one with the senses and the feelings, just as the 
universal and the rational is contained in the imagination by being 
brought into unity with a concrete sensuous appearance. Conse­
quently the conditions of our present time are not favourable to 
art. It is not, as might be supposed, merely that the practising 

I NTRODUCTIO N  
I I  
artist himself is infected by the loud voice of reflection all around 
him and by the opinions and judgements on art that have become 
customary everywhere, so that he is misled into introducing more 
thoughts into his work; the point is that our whole spiritual culture 
is of such a kind that he himself stands within the world of reflec­
tion and its relations, and could not by any act of will and decision 
abstract himself from it; nor could he by special education or 
removal from the relations of life contrive and organize a special 
solitude to replace what he has lost. 
In all these respects art, considered in its highest vocation, is 
and remains for us a thing of the past. Thereby it has lost for us 
genuine truth and life, and has rather been transferred into our 
ideas instead of maintaining its earlier necessity in reality and 
occupying its higher place. What is now aroused in us by works of 
art is not just immediate enjoyment but our judgement also, since 
we subject to our intellectual consideration (i) the content of art, 
and (ii) the work of art's means of presentation, and the appro­
priateness or inappropriateness of both to one another. The 
philosophy of art is therefore a greater need in our day than it was 
in days when art by itself as art yielded full satisfaction. Art invites 
us to intellectual consideration, and that not for the purpose of 
creating art again, but for knowing philosophically what art is. 
But as soon as we propose to accept this invitation, we are met 
by the suspicion, already touched upon [pp. 3-5], that while art 
may well be a suitable subject for philosophical reflection in a 
general way, it may not be suitable for strictly systematic and 
scientific treatment. But this implies at once the false idea that 
a philosophical discussion can also be unscientific. On this point 
I can only say in brief that, whatever ideas others may have about 
philosophy and philosophizing, my view is that philosophizing is 
throughout inseparable from scientific procedure. Philosophy has 
to consider an object in its necessity, not merely according to 
subjective necessity or external ordering, classification, etc. ; it 
has to unfold and prove the object, according to the necessity of 
its own inner nature. It is only this unfolding which constitutes 
the scientific element in the treatment of a subject. But in so far 
as the objective necessity of an object lies essentially in its logical 
and metaphysical nature, the treatment of art in isolation may, 
and indeed must, be exempt from absolute scientific rigour; art 
has so many preconditions both in respect of its content and in 
8243715 
B 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
respect of its material and its medium, 1 whereby it always simul­
taneously touches on the accidental; and so it is only in relation 
to the essential inner progress of its content and means of expres­
sion that we may refer to its necessary formation. 
[iii] But what of the objection that works of fine art are not 
susceptible of a scientific and intellectual treatment because they 
have their origin in the heart and unregulated imagination, and, 
incalculable in number and variety, exercise their effect only on 
feeling and imagination ? This is a perplexity which even now still 
seems to carry some weight. For the beauty of art does in fact 
appear in a form which is expressly opposed to thought and which 
thought is compelled to destroy in order to pursue its own charac­
teristic activity. This idea hangs together with the view that the 
real in general, the life of nature and spirit, is marred and killed 
by comprehension; that instead of being brought nearer to us by 
conceptual thinking, it is all the more removed from us, with the 
result that, by using thinking as a means of grasping what the live 
phenomenon is, man defeats his own purpose. At this point we 
cannot deal with this matter exhaustively; we can only indicate 
the point of view from which this difficulty or impossibility or 
unadaptability can be removed. 
This much at least will be granted at once, that the spirit is 
capable of considering itself, and of possessing a consciousness, 
a thinking consciousness, of itself and of everything originating in 
itself. Thinking is precisely what constitutes the inmost essential 
nature of spirit. In this thinking consciousness of itself and its 
products, however much freedom and caprice these may always 
have, the spirit is acting in accordance with its essential nature, 
provided that it be genuinely in them. Now art and works of art, 
by springing from and being created by the spirit, are themselves 
of a spiritual kind, even if their presentation assumes an appearance 
of sensuousness and pervades the sensuous with the spirit. In this 
respect art already lies nearer to the spirit and its thinking than 
purely external spiritless nature does. In the products of art, the 
spirit has to do solely with its own. And even if works of art are not 
thought or the Concept, but a development of the Concept out of 
itself, a shift of the Concept from its own ground to that of sense, 
still the power of the thinking spirit lies in being able not only 
to grasp itself in its proper form as thinking, but to know itself 
I Colours, sounds, etc., are the element in which art is at home, or its medium. 

INTRODUCTION 
1 3  
again just as much when it has surrendered its proper form to 
feeling and sense, to comprehend itself in its opposite, because it 
changes into thoughts what has been estranged and so reverts to 
itself. And in this preoccupation with its opposite the thinking 
spirit is not false to itself at all as if it were forgetting and abandon­
ing itself thereby, nor is it so powerless as to be unable to grasp 
what is different from itself; on the contrary, it comprehends both 
itself and its opposite. For the Concept is the universal which 
maintains itself in its particularizations, overreaches itself and its 
opposite, and so it is also the power and activity of cancelling again 
the estrangement in which it gets involved. Thus the work of art 
too, in which thought expresses itself, belongs to the sphere of 
conceptual thinking, and the spirit, by subjecting it to philosophic 
treatment, is thereby merely satisfying the need of the spirit's 
inmost nature. For since thinking is the essence and Concept of 
spirit, the spirit in the last resort is only satisfied when it has 
permeated all products of its activity with thought too and so only 
then has made them genuinely its own. But art, far removed, as we 
shall see more definitely later, 1 from being the highest form of 
spirit, acquires its real ratification only in philosophy. 
Nor does art elude philosophical treatment by lawless caprice, 
since, as has been already hinted [p. 9 above], its true task is to 
bring the highest interests of spirit to our minds. From this it 
follows at once that, so far as content is concerned, fine art cannot 
range in wild unfettered fancy,Z since these spiritual interests set 
firm stopping-places to it for its content, no matter how multi­
farious and inexhaustible its forms and configurations. The same 
holds good for the forms themselves. They too are not left to pure 
chance. Not every artistic configuration is capable of expressing and 
displaying those interests, of absorbing and reproducing them; on 
the 'Contrary, by a definite content the form appropriate to it is 
also made definite. 
And so, after all, seen from this angle, we are able to orientate 
ourselves by process of thought in what seemed the impossibly 
vast mass of works and forms of art. Thus we have now stated, in 
relation to our science, the content to which we propose to restrict 
ourselves and we have seen that neither is fine art unworthy of 
1 See p. 71 below, and also p. 9 above. 
• Cf. Kant : Prolegometta, § 35 : 'The Understanding is our only support in 
setting bounds to the fantasies of the imagination.' 

I N TRODUCTION 
philosophical treatment, nor is philosophical treatment incapable 
of descrying the essence of fine art. 
[4] Scientific Ways of Treating Beauty and Art 
If we now ask about the kind of scientific treatment [of art] we 
meet here again two opposed ways of treating the subject; each 
appears to exclude the other and not to let us reach any true result. 
On the one hand we see the science of art only busying itself 
with actual works of art from the outside, arranging them into 
a history of art, setting up discussions about existing works or 
outlining theories which are to yield general considerations for 
both criticizing and producing works of art. 
On the other hand, we see science abandoning itself on its own 
account to reflections on the beautiful and producing only some­
thing universal, irrelevant to the work of art in its peculiarity, in 
short, an abstract philosophy of the beautiful. 
( 1) As for the first mode of treatment, which has the empirical 
for its starting-point, it is the indispensable route for anyone who 
thinks of becoming a scholar in the field of art. And just as, at the 
present day, everyone, even if not a devotee of physics, still likes 
to be equipped with the most essential physical facts, so it has 
been more or less necessary for a cultured man to have some 
acquaintance with art, and the pretension of proving oneself a 
dilettante and a connoisseur of art is almost universal. 
(a) But if acquaintance of this sort with art is to be recognized 
as real scholarship, it must be of many kinds and of wide range. 
For the first requirement is a precise acquaintance with the im­
measurable realm of individual works of art, ancient and modern, 
some of which (c.:) have already perished in reality, or (ft) belong to 
distant lands or continents and which the unkindness of fate has 
withdrawn from our own inspection. Further, every work of art 
belongs to its own time, its own people, its own environment, and 
depends on particular historical and other ideas and purposes; 
consequently, scholarship in the field of art demands a vast wealth 
of historical, and indeed very detailed, facts, since the individual 
nature of the work of art is related to something individual and 
necessarily requires detailed knowledge for its understanding 
and explanation. Finally, scholarship demands here not only, as in 
other fields, a memory of the facts, but also a keen imagination to 

INTRODUCTION 
15 
retain pictures of artistic forms in all their varied details, and 
especially to have them present to the mind for comparison with 
other works of art. 
(b) Within this primarily historical treatment there arise at once 
different considerations which must not be lost sight of if we are 
to derive judgements from them. Now these considerations, as in 
other sciences which have an empirical basis, form, when extracted 
and assembled, general criteria and propositions, and, by still 
further generalization, theories of the arts. This is not the place to 
go through the literature of this kind, and it must therefore be 
enough to cite just a few works in the most general way. Thus, for 
example (or:) Aristotle's Poetics-its theory of tragedy is even now 
of interest, and (fJ) more particularly, Horace's Ars Poetica and 1 
Longinus On the Sublime provide, among the classics, a general 
idea of the manner in which this theorizing has been handled. The 
general characteristics abstracted by these authors were supposed 
to count in particular as prescriptions and rules in accordance with 
which works of art had to be produced, especially in times when 
poetry and art had deteriorated. Yet the prescriptions which these 
art-doctors wrote to cure art were even less reliable than those of 
ordinary doctors for restoring human health. 
On these theories of art I will only mention that, although in 
single instances they contain much that is instructive, still their 
remarks were drawn from a very restricted range of works of art 
which happened to be accounted genuinely beautiful [at the time] 
yet which always constituted only a small extent of the sphere of 
art. On the other hand, such characteristics are in part very trivial 
reflections which in their universality make no advance towards 
establishing the particular, which is principally what is at issue ; 
for example, the Horatian Epistle that I have mentioned is full of 
such reflections and therefore is a book for everybody, but for that 
reason contains much that is vapid : omne tulit punctum, etc.1 This 
is just like so many proverbial instructions : 'Dwell in the land and 
thou shalt be fed' ,z which are right enough thus generally ex­
pressed, but which lack the concrete specifications necessary for 
action. 
Another kind of interest consisted not in the express aim of 
producing genuine works of art directly but in the intention of 
1 Ars Poetica, 343 : 'He gets all applause who has mingled the useful with 
the pleasant' etc. 
2 Ps. 37 :  3· 

x6 
I NTROD UCTION 
developing through such theories a judgement on works of art, 
in short, of developing taste. As examples, Home's Elements of 
Criticism,1 the works of Batteux, and Ramler's Einleitung in die 
schiinen Wissenschaften2 were books much read in their day. Taste 
in this sense concerns the arrangement and treatment, the aptness 
and perfection of what belongs to the external appearance of a work 
of art. Moreover they drew into the principles of taste views which 
were taken from t.he old psychology and had been derived from 
empirical observations of mental capacities and activities, passions 
and their probable intensification, sequence, etc. But it remains 
ever the case that every man apprehends works of art or characters, 
actions, and events according to the measure of his insight and his 
feʧlings; and since the development of taste only touched on what 
was external and meagre, and besides took its prescriptions likewise 
from only a narrow range of works of art and a limited training of 
the intellect and the feelings, its scope was unsatisfactory and 
incapable of grasping the inner [meaning] and truth [of art] and 
sharpening the eye for detecting these things. 
In general, such theories proceed in the same kind of way as the 
other non-philosophical sciences. What they take as their subject 
matter is derived from our perception as something really there; 
[but] now a further question arises about the character of this 
perception, since we need closer specifications which are likewise 
found in our perception and, drawn thence, are settled in defini­
tions. But thus we find ourselves at once on uncertain and disputed 
ground. For at first it might seem that the beautiful was a quite 
simple idea. But it is soon obvious that several sides may be found 
in it, and so one author emphasizes one and another author another, 
or, if the same considerations are kept in view, a dispute arises about 
the question which side is now to be treated as the essential one. 
In this regard it is a part of scientific completeness to cite and 
criticize the different definitions of the beautiful. We will not do 
this either in historical completeness in order to get to know all the 
various subtleties of definition, or for the sake of historical interest ; 
we will only pick out as an example some of the more recent and 
1 1762. By Henry Home, Lord Kames, x698-x78z. 
• Charles Batteux (1713-8o) was a prolific writer, mostly about classical 
authors. But Hegel is doubtless referring to Les Beaux Arts reduits a un meme 
principe (1746). See also K. W. Ramler, 171.5-98. His Introduction to the Beaux 
Arts is his translation of part of Batteux's Cours de belles-/ettres, amplified and 
annotated by himself (1762). 

I NTRO D U CT I O N  
I7 
more interesting ways of looking at beauty which are aimed more 
precisely at what is in fact implied in the Idea of the beautiful. 
To this end we must give pride of place to Goethe's1 account of 
the beautiful which [J. H.] Meyer [176o-I832] has embodied in 
his Geschichte der bildenden Kunste in Griechenland2 where without 
naming Hirt he quotes his view too. 
[A. L.] Hirt, one of the greatest genuine connoisseurs in our 
time, wrote an essay on the beauty of art in Die Horen,3 1797, 
pt. 7, in which, after writing about the beautiful in the different 
arts, he sums up in conclusion that the basis for a just criticism of 
beauty in art and for the formation of taste is the concept of the 
characteristic; i.e. he lays it down that the beautiful is 'the perfect 
which is or can be an object of eye, ear, or imagination'. He then 
further defines the perfect as 'what corresponds with its aim, what 
nature or art intended to produce in the formation of the object 
within its genus and species'. It follows then that, in order to form 
our judgement of beauty, we must direct our observation so far 
as possible to the individual marks which constitute the essence of 
a thing [ein Wesen] , since it is just these marks which constitute 
its characteristic. By 'character' as a law of art Hirt understands 
'that specific individuality whereby forms, movement and gesture, 
mien and expression, local colour, light and shade, chiaroscuro, and 
bearing are distinguished, and indeed, as the previously envisaged 
object demands'. This formulation is already more significant than 
other definitions, for if we go on to ask what 'the characteristic' is, 
we see at once that it involves (i) a content, as, for example, a 
specific feeling, situation, occurrence, action, individual, and 
1 Since this is the first of Hegel's many mentions of Goethe in these lectures, 
it may be as well to recall that Goethe (I749-I832) was Hegel's senior by eleven 
years and outlived him by a year. Hegel knew him well and often visited him in 
Weimar. Goethe thought highly of Hegel but wished that he could express 
him8elf more clearly. Others have had a similar wish. 
• 1824-36-History of the bildenden arts in Greece. Bosanquet, op. cit., p. 67, 
tentatively suggests 'formative' as a translation of bildenden. But all the arts are 
'formative' in one way or another. Hegel refers often to the bildenden arts, and 
he means by them architecture, sculpture, and painting, as distinct from music 
and poetry. These three arts are collectively referred to in English as the 'visual' 
arts, and I have therefore used this word to render bildenden. E. Panofsky, 
Meaning in the Visual Arts (Peregrine Books, 1970), does not mention Hegel, 
but the book contains a good deal of material which illuminates Hegel's discus­
sion of these arts. 
l A periodical conducted by Schiller, 179s-8. Hirt, (I759-I839), who is often 
mentioned below in Part II I, was a professor of archaeology in Berlin, and Hegel 
was friendly with him. 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
(ii) the mode and manner in which this content is presented. It 
is on this manner of presentation that the artistic law of 'the 
characteristic' depends, since it demands that everything particular 
in the mode of expression shall serve towards the specific designa­
tion of its content and be a link in the expression of that content. 
The abstract category of 'the characteristic' thus refers to the 
degree of appropriateness with which the particular detail of the 
artistic form sets in relief the content it is meant to present. If we 
wish to explain this conception in a quite popular way, the follow­
ing is the limitation which it involves. In a dramatic work, for 
example, an action constitutes the content; the drama is to display 
how this action happens. Now people do all sorts of things; they 
join in talk, eat occasionally, sleep, put on their clothes, say this 
and that, and so on. But whatever of all this does not stand im­
mediately in relation to that specific action (which is the content 
proper) should be excluded, so that, in that content, nothing 
remains without significance. In the same way, in a picture, which 
seizes on only one phase of that action, there could be included­
such are the wide ramifications of the external world-a mass of 
circumstances, persons, situations, and other incidents which 
have no relation to the specific action in that phase and contribute 
nothing to its distinctive character. But according to the principle 
of 'the characteristic', nothing is to enter the work of art except 
what belongs to the appearance and essentially to the expression 
of this content alone; nothing is to be otiose or superfluous. 
This is a very important principle which may be justified 
in certain respects. Yet Meyer in the book mentioned above 
thinks that this view has been superseded without trace and, as he 
maintains, to the benefit of art, on the ground that this idea would 
probably have led to something like caricature. This judgement 
immediately implies the perversity of supposing that such a defini­
tion of the beautiful would have to do with leading to something. The 
philosophy of art has no concern with prescriptions for artists; on 
the contrary, it has to determine what the beautiful is as such, and 
how it has displayed itself in reality, in works of art, without wishing 
to provide rules for their production. Now, apart from this, in 
respect to this criticism, it is of course true that Hirt's definition 
does cover caricature and the like too, for after all what is cari­
catured may be a characteristic; only one must say at once on the 
other side that in caricature the specific character is exaggerated 

INTRODUCTION 
19 
and is, as it were, a superfluity of the characteristic. But the super­
fluity is no longer what is strictly required for the characteristic, 
but a troublesome repetition whereby the 'characteristic' 
itself may be made unnatural. Moreover, caricature and the like 
may also be the characterizing of the ugly, which is certainly 
a distortion. Ugliness for its part is closely related to the subject­
matter, so that it may be said that the principle of the characteristic 
involves as a fundamental feature an acceptance of the ugly and 
its presentation. On what is to be 'characterized' in the beauty of 
art, and what is not, on the content of the beautiful, Hirt's defini­
tion of course gives us no more precise information. In this respect 
he provides only a purely formal prescription which yet contains 
something true, even if in an abstract way. 
But now the further question arises of what Meyer opposes to 
Hirt's artistic principle. What does he prefer ? In the first place he 
deals only with the principle in the works of art of antiquity, which 
must however contain the definition of the beautiful as such. In 
this connection he comes to speak of Mengs' and Winckelmann's1 
definition of [beauty asJ the ideal and says that he neither rejects 
this law of beauty nor wholly accepts it; on the other hand he has 
no hesitation in agreeing with the opinion of an enlightened judge 
of art (Goethe) since it is definitive and seems to be nearer solving 
the riddle. Goethe says: 'The supreme principle of antiquity was 
the significant, but the supreme result of a successful treatment 
was the beautiful.'z If we look more closely at what this expression 
implies, we again find in it two things: (i) the content, the thing, 
and (ii) the manner and mode of presentation. In a work of art 
we begin with what is immediately presented to us and only then 
ask what its meaning or content is. The former, the external 
appearance, has no immediate value for us; we assume behind it 
something inward, a meaning whereby the external appearance is 
endowed with the spirit. It is to this, its soul, that the external 
points. For an appearance that means something does not present 
itself to our minds, or what it is as external, but something else. 
Consider, for example, a symbol, and, still more obviously, a fable 
the meaning of which is constituted by its moral and message. 
1 A. R. Mengs, 1728-79. ]. J. Winckelmann, 1717--68, frequently mentioned 
below. 
2 The usual works of reference give no clue to the source of this quotation. 
Probably it comes from Meyer's book (see p. 17 above). 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
Indeed any word hints at a meaning and counts for nothing in 
itself. Similarly the spirit and the soul shine through the human 
eye, through a man's face, flesh, skin, through his whole figure, 
and here the meaning is always something wider than what shows 
itself in the immediate appearance. It is in this way that the work 
of art is to be significant and not appear exhausted by these lines, 
curves, surfaces, carvings, hollowings in the stone, these colours, 
notes, word-sounds, or whatever other material is used ; on the 
contrary, it should disclose an inner life, feeling, soul, a content 
and spirit, which is just what we call the significance of a work 
of art. 
With this demand for meaningfulness in a work of art, therefore, 
little is said that goes beyond or is different from Hirt's principle 
of the 'characteristic'. 
According to this view, to sum up, we have characterized as the 
elements of the beautiful something inward, a content, and some­
thing outward which signifies that content; the inner shines in 
the outer and makes itself known through the outer, since the outer 
points away from itself to the inner. But we cannot go further into 
detail. 
(c) This earlier manner of theorizing has after all been already 
violently cast aside in Germany, along with those practical rules, 
principally owing to the appearance of genuinely living poetry. 
The right of genius, its works and their effects, have been made to 
prevail against the presumptions of those legalisms and the watery 
wastes of theories. From this foundation of a genuine spiritual art, 
and the sympathy it has received and its widespread influence, 
there has sprung a receptivity for and freedom to enjoy and 
recognize great works of art which have long been available, 
whether those of the modern world or the Middle Ages, or even of 
wholly foreign peoples in the past, e.g. the Indian. These works, 
because of their age or foreign nationality, have of course some­
thing strange about them for us, but they have a content which 
outsoars their foreignness and is common to all mankind, and only 
by the prejudice of theory could they be stamped as products of 
a barbarous bad taste. This general recognition of works of art 
which lie outside the circle and forms which were the principal 
basis for the abstractions of theory has in the first place led to the 
recognition of a special kind of art-Romantic Art, and it has be­
come necessary to grasp the Concept and nature of the beautiful 

I NTRODUCTION 
in a deeper way than was possible for those theories. Bound up 
with this at the same time is the fact that the Concept, aware of 
itself as the thinking spirit, has now recognized itself on its side, 
more deeply, in philosophy, and this has thereby immediately 
provided an inducement for taking up the essence of art too in 
a profounder way. 
Thus then, simply following the phases of this more general 
development, the mode of reflecting on art, the theorizing we have 
been considering, has become out of date, alike in its principles and 
its achievements. Only the scholarship of the history of art has 
retained its abiding value, and must do so all the more, the more 
the growth of spiritual receptivity, which I mentioned, has ex­
tended people's intellectual horizons in every direction. Its task 
and vocation consists in the aesthetic appreciation of individual 
works of art and in a knowledge of the historical circumstances 
which condition the work of art externally; it is only an appreci­
ation, made with sense and spirit, and supported by the historical 
facts, which can penetrate into the entire individuality of a work 
of art. Goethe, for example, has written a great deal in this way 
about art and works of art. This mode of treating the subject does 
not aim at theorizing in the strict sense, although it may indeed 
often concern itself with abstract principles and categories, and 
may fall into them unintentionally, but if anyone does not let this 
hinder him but keeps before his eyes only those concrete presenta­
tions, it does provide a philosophy of art with tangible examples 
and authentications, into the historical particular details of which 
philosophy cannot enter. 
This is then the first mode of treating art, the one that starts 
from particular and existent [works]. 
(z) From this it is essential to distinguish the opposite side, 
namely the purely theoretical reflection which labours at under­
standing the beautiful as such out of itself and fathoming its Idea. 
We all know that Plato, in a deeper way, began to demand of 
philosophical inquiry that its objects should be understood not in 
their particularity, but in their universality, in their genus, in their 
essential reality, because he maintained that it was not single good 
actions, true opinions, beautiful human beings or works of art, 
that were the truth, but goodness, beauty, and truth themselves. 
Now if in fact the beautiful is to be understood in its essence and 
its Concept, this is possible only through the conceptual thinking 

zz 
INTRODUCTION 
whereby the logico-metaphysical nature of the Idea in general, as 
well as of the particular Idea of the beautiful, enters conscious 
reflection. But this treatment of the beautiful by itself in its Idea 
may itself turn again into an abstract metaphysics. Even if Plato 
in this connection be taken as foundation and guide, still the 
Platonic abstraction, even for the logical Idea of the beautiful, 
can satisfy us no longer. We must grasp this Idea more concretely, 
more profoundly, since the emptiness, which clings to the Platonic 
Idea, no longer satisfies the richer philosophical needs of our spirit 
today. It is indeed the case that we too must begin, in the philo­
sophy of art, with the Idea of the beautiful, but we ought not to be 
in the position of clinging simply to Platonic Ideas, to that abstract 
mode with which philosophizing about art first began. 
(3) The philosophical Concept of the beautiful, to indicate its 
true nature at least in a preliminary way, must contain, reconciled 
within itself, both the extremes which have been mentioned, 
because it unites metaphysical universality with the precision of 
real particularity. Only so is it grasped absolutely in its truth: for, 
on the one hand, over against the sterility of one-sided reflection, 
it is in that case fertile, since, in accordance with its own Concept, 
it has to develop into a totality of specifications, and it itself, like 
its exposition, contains the necessity of its particularizations and 
of their progress and transition one into another; on the other 
hand, the particularizations, to which a transition has been made, 
carry in themselves the universality and essentiality of the Con­
cept, as the proper particularizations whereof they appear. The 
previously mentioned modes of treating the subject lack both these 
characteristics,' and for this reason it is only this full Concept 
which leads to substantial, necessary, and complete principles. 
[5] Concept of the Beauty of Art 
After these preliminary remarks, we now come closer to our proper 
subject, the philosophy of the beauty of art, and, since we are 
undertaking to treat it scientifically, we have to make a beginning 
with its Concept. Only when we have established this Concept 
can we lay down the division, and therefore the plan, of the whole 
of this science. For a division, if not undertaken in a purely external 
' i.e. finding particulars in the universal, and the universal diversified in the 
particu Ia rs. 

I NTRO DUCTION 
23 
manner, as it is in a non-philosophical inquiry, must find its 
principle in the Concept of the subject-matter itself. 
Confronted with such a requirement, we are at once met with 
the question 'whence do we derive this Concept ?' If we start 
with the Concept itself of the beauty of art, it at once becomes 
a presupposition and a mere assumption; mere assumptions, how­
ever, philosophical method does not allow; on the contrary, what 
is to pass muster has to have its truth proved, i.e. has to be shown 
to be necessary. 
About this difficulty, which affects the introduction to every 
philosophical discipline considered independently and by itself, 
we will come to an understanding in a short space. 
In the case of the object of every science, two things come at 
once into consideration: (i) that there is such an object, and (ii) 
what it is. 
On the first point little difficulty usually arises in the ordinary 
[i.e. physical] sciences. Why, it would at once be ridiculous to 
require astronomy and physics to prove that there are a sun, stars, 
magnetic phenomena, etc.! In these sciences which have to do 
with what is present to sensation, the objects are taken from 
experience of the external world, and instead of prooing them, it 
is thought sufficient to point to them. Yet even within the non­
philosophical disciplines, doubts may arise about the existence of 
their objects, as, for example, in psychology, the science of mind, 
there may be a doubt whether there is a soul, a spirit, i.e. an 
explicitly independent subjective entity distinct from what is 
material; or in theology, a doubt whether there is a God. If, more­
over, the objects are of a subjective sort, i.e. present only in the 
mind and not as things externally perceptible, we know that in 
mind there is only what its own activity has produced. Hence 
there arises at once the chance that men may or may not have 
produced this inner idea or intuition in themselves, and, even if 
the former is really the case, that they have not made such an 
idea vanish again, or at least degraded it to a purely subjective idea 
whose content has no independent reality of its own. Thus, for 
example, the beautiful has often been regarded as not being 
absolutely necessary in nur ideas but as a purely subjective plea­
sure, or a merely accidental sense. Our intuitions, observations, 
and perceptions of the external world are often deceptive and 
erroneous, but this is even more true of our inner ideas, even if 

24 
I NTRODUCT I O N  
they have in themselves the greatest vividness and could carry us 
away into passion irresistibly. 
Now the doubt whether an object of our inner ideas and general 
outlook is or is not, like the question whether subjective conscious­
ness has generated it in itself and whether the manner and mode in 
which it has brought it before itself was also in correspondence 
with the object in its essential nature, is precisely what arouses in 
men the higher scientific need which demands that, even if we 
have a notion that an object is or that there is such an object, 
nevertheless the object must be exhibited or proved in accordance 
with its necessity. 
With this proof, provided it be developed really scientifically, 
the other question of what an object is, is sufficiently answered at 
the same time. However, to expound this fully would take us too 
far afield at this point, and only the following indications can be 
given. 
If the necessity of our subject, the beauty of art, is to be ex­
hibited, we would have to prove that art or the beautiful was a 
result of an antecedent which, considered according to its true 
Concept, was such as to lead on with scientific necessity to the 
Concept of fine art. But since we begin with art and wish to treat 
of its Concept and the realization thereof, not of its antecedent in 
its essential character (the antecedent pursuant to its own Con­
cept), art has for us, as a particular scientific subject-matter, 
a presupposition which lies outside our consideration and, handled 
scientifically as a different subject-matter, belongs to a different 
philosophical discipline. Thus the only course left to us is to take 
up the Concept of art lemmatically,1 so to say, and this is the case 
with all particular philosophical sciences if they are to be treated 
seriatim. For it is only the whole of philosophy which is knowledge 
of the universe as in itself that one organic totality which develops 
itself out of its own Concept and which, in its self-relating neces­
sity, withdrawing into itself to form a whole, closes with itself 
to form one world of truth. In the circlet of this scientific necessity 
each single part is on the one hand a circle returning into itself, 
while on the other hand it has at the same time a necessary connec­
tion with other parts. It has a backward ʨhence it is itself derived, 
and a forward to which it ever presses itself on, in so far as it is 
fertile, engendering an 'other' out of itself once more, and issuing 
1 i.e. assume that it has been demonstrated. 

INTROD UCTION 
25 
it for scientific knowledge. Thus it is not our present aim, but the 
task of an encyclopedic development of the whole of philosophy 
and its particular disciplines, to prove the Idea of the beautiful 
with which we began, i.e. to derive it necessarily from the pre­
suppositions which antecede it in philosophy and out of the womb 
of which it is born. For us the Concept of the beautiful and art is 
a presupposition given by the system of philosophy. But since we 
cannot here expound this system and the connection of art with 
it, we have not yet got the Concept of the beautiful before us 
scientifically. What is before us is only elements and aspects of it 
as they occur already in the different ideas of the beautiful and art 
held by ordinary people, or have formerly been accepted by them. 
From this point we intend to pass on to a deeper consideration of 
these views in order to gain the advantage, in the first place, of 
acquiring a general idea of our subject, as well as, by a brief 
critique, a preliminary acquaintance with the higher determina­
tions with which we will have to do in the sequel. In this way our 
final introductory treatment of the subject will present, as it were, 
an overture to the lectures on the matter at issue and will tend [to 
provide] a general collection and direction [of our thoughts] to 
our proper subject. 
[6] Common Ideas of Art 
What we are acquainted with at the start, as a familiar idea of the 
work of art, falls under the three following heads: 
(i) The work of art is no natural product; it is brought about by 
human activity; 
(ii) it is essentially made for man's apprehension, and in par­
ticular is drawn more or less from the sensuous field for apprehen­
sion by the senses; 
(ii) it has an end and aim in itself. 
(i) The Work of Art as a Product of Human Activity 
(a) As for the first point, that a work of art is a product of human 
activity, this view has given rise to the thought that this activity, 
being the conscious production of an external object, can also be 
known and expounded, and learnt and pursued by others. For what 
one man makes, another, it may seem, could make or imitate too, 
if only he were first acquainted with the manner of proceeding; 

I NTRODUCTI ON 
so that, granted universal acquaintance with the rules of artistic 
production, it would only be a matter of everyone's pleasure to 
carry out the procedure in the same manner and produce works 
of art. It is in this way that the rule-providing theories, mentioned 
above [p. 15], with their prescriptions calculated for practical 
application, have arisen. But what can be carried out on such 
directions can only be something formally regular and mechanical. 
For the mechanical alone is of so external a kind that only a purely 
empty exercise of will and dexterity is required for receiving it into 
our ideas and activating it; this exercise does not require to be 
supplemented by anything concrete, or by anything not prescribed 
in universal rules. This comes out most vividly when such pre­
scriptions do not limit themselves to the purely external and 
mechanical, but extend to the significant and spiritual activity of 
the artist. In this sphere the rules contain only vague generalities, 
for example that 'the theme should be interesting, every character 
should speak according to his standing, age, sex, and situation'. 
But if rules are to satisfy here, then their prescriptions should have 
been drawn up at the same time with such precision that they 
could be observed just as they are expressed, without any further 
spiritual activity of the artist's. Being abstract in content, however, 
such rules reveal themselves, in their pretence of adequacy to fill 
the consciousness of the artist, as wholly inadequate, since artistic 
production is not a formal activity in accordance with given 
specifications. On the contrary, as spiritual activity it is bound to 
work from its own resources and bring before the mind's eye a 
quite other and richer content and more comprehensive individual 
creations [than formulae can provide]. Therefore, in so far as such 
rules do actually contain something specific and therefore of 
practical utility, they may apply in case of need, but still can 
afford no more than specifications for purely external circumstances. 
(b) Thus, as it turns out, the tendency just indicated has been 
altogether abandoned, and instead of it the opposite one has been 
adopted to the same extent. For the work of art was no longer 
regarded as a product of general human activity, but as a work of 
an entirely specially gifted spirit which now, however, is supposed 
to give free play simply and only to its own particular gift, as if 
to a specific natural force; it is to cut itself altogether loose from 
attention to universally valid laws and from a conscious reflection 
interfering with its own instinctive-like productive activity. Indeed 

INTRODUCTION 
2') 
it is supposed to be protected from such reflection, since its pro­
ductions could only be contaminated and spoiled by such awareness. 
From this point of view the work of art has been claimed as a pro­
duct of talent and genius, and the natural element in talent and 
genius has been especially emphasized. In a way, rightly, since 
talent is specific and genius universal capability, which man has 
not the power to give to himself purely and simply through his 
own self-conscious activity. On this topic we shall speak at greater 
length later [in Part I, ch. Ill, c]. 
Here we have only to mention the false aspect of this view, 
namely that in artistic production all consciousness of the artist's 
own activity is regarded as not merely superfluous but even 
deleterious. In that case production by talent and genius appears 
as only a state and, in particular, a state of inspiration. To such 
a state, it is said, genius is excited in part by an object, and in part 
can transpose itself into it by its own caprice, a process in which, 
after all, the good services of the champagne bottle are not for­
gotten. In Germany this notion became prominent at the time of 
the so-called Period of Genius which was introduced by Goethe's 
first poetical productions and then sustained by Schiller's. In their 
earliest works1 these poets began afresh, setting aside all the rules 
then fabricated; they worked deliberately against these rules and 
thereby surpassed all other writers. However, I will not go further 
into the confusions which have been prevalent about the concept 
of inspiration and genius, and which prevail even today about the 
omnicompetence of inspiration as such. All that is essential is to 
state the view that, even if the talent and genius of the artist has 
in it a natural element, yet this element essentially requires de­
velopment by thought, reflection on the mode of its productivity, 
and practice and skill in producing. For, apart from anything else, 
a main feature of artistic production is external workmanship, 
since the work of art has a purely technical side which extends 
into handicraft, especially in architecture and sculpture, less so 
in painting and music, least of all in poetry. Skill in technique is 
not helped by any inspiration, but only by reflection, industry, 
and practice. But such skill the artist is compelled to have in 
order to master his external material and not be thwarted by its 
intractability. 
1 For further discussion of these see Part I, ch. III, B 11 Ilc), as well as sections 
on Mohammedan Poetry and the end of the Romantic Form of Art. 

z8 
INTRODUCTI ON 
Now further, the higher the standing of the artist, the more 
profoundly should he display the depths of the heart and the 
spirit; these are not known directly but are to be fathomed only 
by the direction of the artist's own spirit on the inner and outer 
world. So, once again, it is study whereby the artist brings this 
content into his consciousness and wins the stuff and content of his 
conceptions. 
Of course, in this respect, one art needs more than another the 
consciousness and knowledge of such content. Music, for example, 
which is concerned only with the completely indeterminate move­
ment of the inner spirit and with sounds as if they were feeling 
without thought, needs to have little or no spiritual material pre­
sent in consciousness. Therefore musical talent announces itself 
in most cases very early in youth,1 when the head is empty and the 
heart little moved, and it may sometimes attain a very considerable 
height before spirit and life have experience of themselves. Often 
enough, after all, we have seen very great virtuosity in musical 
composition and performance accompanied by remarkable barren­
ness of spirit and character. 
In poetry, on the other hand, it is quite different. In it all 
depends on the presentation, full of content and thought, of man, 
of his deeper interests, and of the powers that move him; and 
therefore the spirit and heart must be richly and deeply educated 
by life, experience, and reflection before genius can bring into 
being anything mature, of sterling worth, and complete in itself. 
The first productions of Goethe and Schiller are of an immaturity, 
yes even of a crudity and barbarity, that can be terrifying. It is this 
phenomenon, that in most of these attempts there is an over­
whelming mass of elements through and through prosaic, partly 
cold and flat, which principally tells against the common opinion 
that inspiration is bound up with the fire and time of youth. It was 
only in their manhood that these two geniuses, our national poets, 
the first, we may say, to give poetical works to our country, 
endowed us with works deep, substantial, the product of true 
inspiration, and no less perfectly finished in form; just as it was 
only in old age that Homer was inspired and produced his ever 
\1ndying songs. 
1 Hegel may be thinking of Mozart. But see below, p. 41. He could have 
mentioned Mendelssohn but he was blind to contemporary composers as others 
have been and perhaps are. 

I NTROD UCTION 
(c) A third view concerning the idea of the work of art as a pro­
duct of human activity refers to the placing of the work of art in 
relation to the external phenomena of nature. Here the ordinary 
way of looking at things took easily to the notion that the human 
art-product ranked below the product of nature; for the work of 
art has no feeling in itself and is not through and through enlivened, 
but, regarded as an external object, is dead; but we are accustomed 
to value the living higher than the dead. That the work of art has 
no life and movement in itself is readily granted. What is alive in 
nature is, within and without, an organism purposefully elaborated 
into all its tiniest parts, while the work of art attains the appearance 
of life only on its surface; inside it is ordinary stone, or wood and 
canvas, or, as in poetry, an idea expressed in speech and letters. 
But this aspect-external existence-is not what makes a work 
into a product of fine art; a work of art is such only because, 
originating from the spirit, it now belongs to the terri.t<>ry of the 
spirit; it has received the baptism of the spiritual and SctSforth 
only what has been formed in harmony with the spirit. Human 
interest, the spiritual value possessed by an event, an individual 
character, an action in its complexity and outcome, is grasped in 
the work of art and blazoned more purely and more transparently 
than is possible on the ground of other non-artistic things. There­
fore the work of art stands higher than any natural product which 
has not made this journey through the spirit. For example, owing 
to the feeling and insight whereby a landscape has been represented 
in a painting, this work of the spirit acquires a higher rank than 
the mere natural landscape. For everything spiritual is better than 
any product of nature. Besides, no natural being is able, as art is, 
to present the divine Ideal. 
Now on what the spirit draws from its own inner resources in 
works of art it confers permanence in their external existence too ;  
on the other hand, the individual living thing in nature is transient, 
vanishing, changeable in outward appearance, while the work of 
art persists, even if it is not mere permanence which constitutes 
its genuine pre-eminence over natural reality, but its having made 
spiritual inspiration conspicuous. 
But nevertheless this higher standing of the work of art is 
questioned by another idea commonly entertained. For nature 
and its products, it is said, are & work of God, created by his 
goodness and wisdom, whereas the art-product is a purely human 

JO 
I NTRODU C T I ON 
work, made by human hands according to human insight. In 
this contrast between natural production as a divine creation and 
human activity as something merely finite there lies directly the 
misunderstanding that God does not work in and through men at 
all, but restricts the sphere of his activity to nature alone. This false 
opinion must be completely rejected if we are to penetrate to the 
true nature of art. Indeed, over against this view we must cling 
to the opposite one, namely that God is more honoured by what 
the spirit makes than by the productions and formations of nature. 
For not only is there something divine in man, but it is active in 
him in a form appropriate to the being of God in a totally different 
and higher manner than it is in nature. God is spirit, and in man 
alone does the medium, through which the Divine passes, have 
the form of conscious and actively self-productive spirit; but in 
nature this medium is the unconscious, the sensuous, and the 
external, which stands far below consciousness in worth. Now in 
art-production God is just as operative as he is in the phenomena 
of nature; but the Divine, as it discloses itself in the work of art, 
has been generated out of the spirit, and thus has won a suitable 
thoroughfare for its existence, whereas just being there in the un­
conscious sensuousness of nature is not a mode of appearance 
appropriate to the Divine. 
(d) Now granted that the work of art is made by man as the 
creation of his spirit, a final question arises, in order to derive 
a deeper result from the foregoing (discussion], namely, what is 
man's need to produce works of art? On the one hand, this produc­
tion may be regarded as a mere play of chance and fancies which 
might just as well be left alone as pursued; for it might be held 
that there are other and even better means of achieving what art 
aims at and that man has still higher and more important interests 
than art has the ability to satisfy. On the other hand, however, art 
seems to proceed from a higher impulse and to satisfy higher needs, 
-at times the highest and absolute needs since it is bound up 
with the most universal views of life and the religious interests of 
whole epochs and peoples.-This question about the non-con­
tingent but absolute need for art, we cannot yet answer completely, 
because it is more concrete than an answer could turn out to be 
at this stage. Therefore we must content ourselves in the meantime 
with making only the following points. 
The universal and absolute need from which art (on its formal 

I N TRODUCTION 
J I  
side) springs has its origin in the fact that man is a thinking con­
sciousness, i.e. that man draws out of himself and puts before 
himself what he is and whatever else is. Things in nature are only 
immediate and single, while man as spirit duplicates himself, in 
that (i) he is as things in nature are, but (ii) he is just as much for 
himself; he sees himself, represents himself to himself, thinks, and 
only on the strength of this active placing himself before himself 
is he spirit. This consciousness of himself man acquires in a two­
fold way: first, theoretically, in so far as inwardly he must bring 
himself into his own consciousness, along with whatever moves, 
stirs, and presses in the human breast; and in general he must see 
himself, represent himself to himself, fix before himself what 
thinking finds as his essence, and recognize himself alone alike in 
what is summoned out of himself and in what is accepted from 
without. Secondly, man brings himself before himself by practical 
activity, since he has the impulse, in whatever is directly given to 
him, in what is present to him externally, to produce himself and 
therein equally to recognize himself. This aim he achieves by 
altering external things whereon he impresses the seal of his inner 
being and in which he now finds again his own characteristics. 
Man does this in order, as a free subject, to strip the external world 
of its inflexible foreignness and to enjoy in the shape of things 
only an external realization of himself. Even a child's first impulse 
involves this practical alteration of external things; a boy throws 
stones into the river and now marvels at the circles drawn in the 
water as an effect in which he gains an intuition of something that 
is his own doing. This need runs through the most diversiform 
phenomena up to that mode of self-production in external things 
which is present in the work of art. And it is not only with external 
things that man proceeds in this way, but no less with himself, 
with his own natural figure which he does not leave as he finds it 
but deliberately alters. This is the cause of all dressing up and 
adornment, even if it be barbaric, tasteless, completely disfiguring, 
or even pernicious like crushing the feet of Chinese ladies, or 
slitting the ears and lips. For it is only among civilized people that 
alteration of figure, behaviour, and every sort and mode of external 
expression proceeds from spiritual development. 
The universal need for art, that is to say, is man's rational need 
to lift the inner and outer world iato his spiritual consciousness as 
an object in which he recognizes again his own self. The need for 

32 
I NTROD UCTION 
this spiritual freedom he satisfies, on the one hand, within by 
making what is within him explicit to himself, but correspondingly 
by giving outward reality to this his explicit self, and thus in this 
duplication of himself by bringing what is in him into sight and 
knowledge for himself and others. This is the free rationality of 
man in which all acting and knowing, as well as art too, have their 
basis and necessary origin. The specific need of art, however, in 
distinction from other action, political and moral, from religious 
portrayal and scientific knowledge, we shall see later [in the Intro­
duction to Part I]. 
(ii) The Work of Art, as being for Apprehension by Man's Senses, 
is drawn from the Sensuous Sphere 
So far we have considered in the work of art the aspect in which 
it is made by man. We have now to pass on to its second charac­
teristic, namely that it is produced for apprehension by man's senses 
and therefore is more or less derived from the sensuous sphere. 
(a) This reflection has given rise to the consideration that fine 
art is meant to arouse feeling, in particular the feeling that suits 
us, pleasant feeling. In this regard, the investigation of fine art 
has been made into an investigation of the feelings, and the 
question has been raised, 'what feelings should be aroused by art, 
fear, for example, and pity ? But how can these be agreeable, how 
can the treatment of misfortune afford satisfaction ?' Reflection on 
these lines dates especially from Moses Mendelssohn's times' and 
many such discussions can be found in his writings. Yet such 
; investigation did not get far, because feeling is the indefinite dull 
region of the spirit; what is felt remains enveloped in the form of 
the most abstract individual subjectivity, and therefore differences 
between feelings are also completely abstract, not differences in 
the thing itself. For example, fear, anxiety, alarm, terror are of 
course further modifications of one and the same sort of feeling, 
but in part they are only quantitative intensifications, in part just 
forms not affecting their content, but indifferent to it. In the case 
of fear, for example, something is present in which the subject has 
an interest, but at the same time he sees the approach of the nega­
tive which threatens to destroy what he is interested in, and now 
1 1729-86. Ober die Empfindungen (1755) or Betrachtungen iiber das Erhabene 
u.s.w. (1757). 

INTRODUCTION 
33 
he finds directly in himself the interest and the negative, both as 
contradictory affections of his subjectivity. But such fear cannot 
by itself condition any content; on the contrary, it is capable of 
receiving into itself the most varied and opposite contents.1 
Feeling as such is an entirely empty form of subjective affection. 
Of course this form may be manifold in itself, as hope, grief, joy, 
pleasure; and, again, in this variety it may encompass different 
contents, as there is a feeling for justice, moral feeling, sublime 
religious feeling, and so on. But the fact that such content [e.g. 
justice] is present in different forms of feeling [e.g. hope or grief] is 
not enough to bring to light its essential and specific nature. Feeling 
remains a purely subjective emotional state of mind in which the 
concrete thing vanishes, contracted into a circle of the greatest 
abstraction.2 Consequently the investigation of the feelings which 
art evokes, or is supposed to evoke, does not get beyond vagueness; 
it is a study which precisely abstracts from the content proper and 
its concrete essence and concept. For reflection on feeling is satis­
fied with observing subjective emotional reaction in its par­
ticular character, instead of immersing itself in the thing at issue 
i.e. in the work of art, plumbing its depths, and in addition re­
linquishing mere subjectivity and its states. But in the case of 
feeling it is precisely this empty subjectivity which is not only 
retained but is the chief thing, and this is why men are so fond of 
having feelings. But this too is why a study of this kind becomes 
wearisome on account of its indefiniteness and emptiness, and 
disagreeable by its concentration on tiny subjective peculiarities. 
(b) But since the work of art is not, as may be supposed, meant 
merely in general to arouse feelings (for in that case it would have 
this aim in common, without any specific difference, with oratory, 
historical writing, religious edification, etc.), but to do so only in 
so far as it is beautiful, reflection on the beautiful hit upon the idea 
of looking for a peculiar feeling of the beautiful, and finding a 
· 
specific sense of beauty. In this quest it soon appeared that such 
a sense is no blind instinct, made firmly definite by nature, capable 
from the start in and by itself of distinguishing beauty. Hence 
education was demanded for this sense, and the educated sense of 
1 'You can be afraid of all sorts of things, but being afraid does not determine 
what you are afraid of' (Bosanquet's note, op. cit., p. 98). 
• This is obscure, but the meaning would seem to be that morality, justice, 
etc., vanish when contracted into the circle of my private feeling which is 
abstract or ill defined in comparison with their concreteness. 

34 
INTRODUCTION 
beauty was called taste which, although an educated appreciation 
and discovery of beauty, was supposed to remain still in the guise 
of immediate feeling. We have already [p. 16] touched on how 
abstract theories undertook to educate such a sense of taste and 
how it itself remained external and one-sided. Criticism at the 
time of these views was on the one hand deficient in universal 
principles; on the other hand, as the particular criticism of indivi­
dual works of art, it aimed less at grounding a more definite 
judgement-the implements for making one being not yet available 
-than at advancing rather the education of taste in general. Thus 
this education likewise got no further than what was rather vague, 
and it laboured only, by reflection, so to equip feeling, as a sense 
of beauty, that now it could find beauty wherever and however it 
existed. Yet the depths of the thing remained a sealed book to 
taste, since these depths require not only sensing and abstract 
reflections, but the entirety of reason and the solidity of the spirit, 
while taste was directed only to the external surface on which 
feelings play and where one-sided principles may pass as valid. 
Consequently, however, so-called 'good taste' takes fright at all 
the deeper effects [of art] and is silent when the thing at issue 
comes in question and externalities and incidentals vanish. For 
when great passions and the movements of a profound soul are 
revealed, there is no longer any question of the finer distinctions 
of taste and its pedantic preoccupation with individual details. 
It feels genius striding over such ground, and, retreating before its 
power, finds the place too hot for itself and knows not what to do 
with itself. 
(c) For this reason the study of works of art has given up keeping 
in view merely the education of taste and proposing only to 
exhibit taste. The connoisseur has taken the place of the man of 
taste or the judge of artistic taste. The positive side of connoisseur­
ship, in so far as it concerns a thorough acquaintance with the 
whole sweep of the individual character of a work of art, we have 
already [pp. 14 ff.] described as necessary for the study of art. 
For, on account of its nature, at once material and individual, the 
work of art issues essentially from particular conditions of the most 
varied sort, amongst them especially the time and place of its 
origin, then the specific individuality of the artist, and above all 
the technical development of his art. Attention to all these aspects 
is indispensable for a distinct and thorough insight into, and 

INTRODUCTION 
35 
acquaintance with, a work of art, and indeed for the enjoyment of 
it; with them connoisseurship is principally preoccupied, and what 
it achieves in its way is to be accepted with gratitude. Now while 
such scholarship is justly counted as something essential, it still 
may not be taken as the single and supreme element in the relation 
which the spirit adopts to a work of art and to art in general. For 
connoisseurship, and this is its defective side, may stick at acquain­
tance with purely external aspects, the technical, historical, etc., 
and perhaps have little notion of the true nature of the work of 
art, or even know nothing of it at all; indeed it can even disesteem 
the value of deeper studies in comparison with purely positive, 
technical, and historical information. Yet connoisseurship, if it be 
of a genuine kind, does itself strive at least for specific grounds 
and information, and for an intelligent judgement with which 
after all is bound up a more precise discrimination of the different, 
even if partly external, aspects of a work of art and the evaluation 
of these. 
(d) After these remarks on the modes of study occasioned by 
that aspect of the work of art which, as itself a sensuous object, 
gave it an essential relation to men as sensuous beings, we propose 
now to treat this aspect in its more essential bearing on art itself, 
namely (o:) in regard to the work of art as an object, and ({3) in 
regard to the subjectivity of the artist, his genius, talent, etc., yet 
without our entering upon what in this connection can proceed 
only from the knowledge of art in its universal essence. For here 
we are not yet really on scientific ground and territory; we are still 
only in the province of external reflections. 
(o:) Of course the work of art presents itself to sensuous appre­
hension. It is there for sensuous feeling, external or internal, for 
sensuous intuition and ideas, just as nature is, whether the external 
nature that surrounds us, or our own sensitive nature within. 
After all, a speech, for example, may be addressed to sensuous 
ideas and feelings. But nevertheless the work of art, as a sensuous 
object, is not merely for sensuous apprehension; its standing is of 
such a kind that, though sensuous, it is essentially at the same t
ime 
for spiritual apprehension; the spirit is meant to be affected by · 
and to find some satisfaction in it. 
Now the fact that this is what the work of art is meant t be 
explains at once how it can in no way be a natural product or have 
in its natural aspect a natural vitality, whether a natural product is 

Ă6 \r 
ră · 
INTRODUCTION 
supposed to have a higher or a lower value than a mere work of art, 
as a work of art is often called in a depreciatory sense. 
For the sensuous element in a work of art should be there only 
in so far as it exists for the human spirit, regardless of its existing 
independently as a sensuous object. 
If we examine more closely in what way the sensuous is there 
for man, we find that what is sensuous can be related in various 
ways to the spirit. 
(o:o:) T˔orest mode of apprehension, the least adequate to 
spirit, is purely sensuous aprehension. It consists, in the first 
place, oT" merely looking on, hearing, feeling, etc., just as in hours 
of spiritual fatigue (indeed for many people at any time) it may be 
an amusement to wander about without thinking, just to listen 
here and look round there, and so on. Spirit does not stop at the 
mere apprehension of the external world by sight and hearing; it 
makes it into an object for its inner being which then is itself 
driven, once again in the form of sensuousness, to realize itself in 
things, and relates itself to them as desire. In this appetitive relation 
to the external world, man, as a sensuous individual, confronts 
things as being individuals ; likewise he does not turn his mind to 
them as a thinker with universal categories; instead, in accord with 
individual impulses and interests, he relates himself to the objects, 
individuals themselves, and maintains himself in them by using 
and consuming them, and by sacrificing them works his own self­
satisfaction. In this negative relation, desire requires for itself not 
merely the superficial appearance of external things, but the things 
themselves in their concrete physical existence. With mere pictures 
of the wood that it might use, or of the animals it might want to 
eat, desire is not served. Neither can desire let the object persist 
in its freedom, for its impulse drives it just to cancel this indepen­
dence and freedom of external things, and to show that they are 
only there to be destroyed and consumed. But at the same time 
the person too, caught up in the individual, restricted, and nuga­
tory interests of his desire, is neither free in himself, since he is not 
determined by the essential universality and rationality of his will, 
nor free in respect of the external world, for desire remains 
essentially determined by external things and related to them. 
Now this relation of desire is not the one in which man stands to 
the work of art. He leaves it free as an object to exist on its own 
account; he relates himself to it without desire, as to an object 

INTRODUCTION 
37 
which is for the contemplative side of spirit alone. Consequently 
the work of art, though it has sensuous existence, does not require 
in this respect a sensuously concrete being and a natural life; 
indeed it ought not to remain on this level, seeing that it is meant 
to satisfy purely spiritual interests and exclude all desire from itself. 
Hence it is true that practical desire rates organic and inorganic 
individual things in nature, which can serve its purpose, higher 
than works of art which show themselves useless to serve it and 
are enjoyable only by other forms of the spirit. 
({3{3) A second way in which what is externally present can be 
for the spirit is, in contrast to individual sense-perception and 
practical desire, the purely theoretical relation to intelligence. The 
theoretical study of things is not interested in consummg them 
in their individuality and satisfying itself and maintaining itself 
sensuously by means of them, but in coming to know them in their 
universality, finding their inner essence and law, and conceiving 
them in accordance with their Concept. Therefore theoretical 
interest lets individual things alone and retreats from them as 
sensuous individualities, since this sensuous individualism is not 
what intelligence tries to study. For the rational intelligence does 
not belong to the individual person as such in the way that desires 
do, but to him as at the same time inherently universal. Inasmuch 
as man relates himself to thin s in accordance with his unǖ, 
it is his umversa reason which stnves o n ttse 
1 
and 
thereby to re-estabhsh that inner essence of things which sensaus 
existencǗ, though that eene is its b.[sis;: • 3"' 
* imfiediately 
display. This iheorehcat'interest, ·nie satisfaction of which is the 
<wor:K of science, art does not share, however, in this scientific form, 
nor does it make common cause with the impulses of purely 
practical desires. Of course science can start from the sensuous in 
its individuality and possess an idea of how this individual thing 
comes to be there in its individual colour, shape, size, etc. Yet in 
that case this isolated sensuous thing has as such no further bearing 
on the spirit, inasmuch as intelligence goes straight for the univer­
sal, the law, the thought and concept of the object; on this account 
not only does it turn its back on the object in its immediate 
individuality, but transforms it within; out of something sensuously 
concrete it makes an abstraction, something thought, and so some­
thing essentially other than what that same object was in its 
sensuous appearance. This the artistic interest, in distinction from 

INTRODUCTION 
science, does not do. Just as the work of art proclaims itself qua 
external object in its sensuous individuality and immediate de­
terminateness in respect of colour, shape, sound, or qua a single 
insight, etc., so the consideration of art accepts it like this too, with­
out going so far beyond the immediate object confronting it as to 
endeavour to grasp, as science does, the concept of this object as 
a universal concept. 
From the practical interest of desire, the interest of art is dis­
tinguished by the fact that it lets its object persist freely and on its 
own account, while desire converts it to its own use by destroying 
it. On the other hand, the consideration of art differs in an opposite 
way from theoretical consideration by scientific intelligence, since 
it cherishes an interest in the object in its individual existence and 
does not struggle to change it into its universal thought and concept. 
(yy) Now it follows from this that the sensuous must indeed be 
present in the work of art, but should appear only as the surface 
and as a pure appearance of the sensuous. For in the sensuous 
aspect of a work of art the spirit seeks neither the concrete material 
stuff, the empirical inner completeness and development of the 
organism which desire demands, nor the universal and purely ideal 
thought. What it wants is sensuous presence which indeed should 
remain sensuous, but liberated from the scaffolding of its purely 
material nature. Thereby the sensuous aspect of a work of art, 
in comparison with the immediate existence of things in nature, 
is elevated to a pure appearance, and the work of art stands in 
the middle between immediate sensuousness and ideal thought. It 
· is not yet pure thought, but, despite its sensuousness, is no longer 
a purely material existent either, like stones, plants, and organic 
life; on the contrary, the sensuous in the work of art is itself some­
thing ideal, but which, not being ideal as thought is ideal, is still 
at the same time there externally as a thing. If spirit leaves the 
objects free yet without descending into their essential inner being 
(for if it did so they would altogether cease to exist for it externally 
as individuals), then this pure appearance of the sensuous presents 
itself to spirit from without as the shape, the appearance, or the 
sonority of things. Consequently the sensuous aspect of art is 
related only to the two theoretical senses of sight and hearing, 
while smell, taste, and touch remain excluded from the enjoyment 
of att. For smell, taste, and touch have to do with matter as such 
and its immediately sensible qualities-smell with material vola-

I NTROD UCTION 
39 
tility in air, taste with the material liquefaction of objects, touch 
with warmth, cold, smoothness, etc. For this reason these senses 
cannot have to do with artistic objects, which are meant to main­
tain themselves in their real independence and allow of no purely 
sensuous relationship. What is agreeable for these senses is not 
the beauty of art. Thus art on its sensuous side deliberately pro­
duces only a shadow-world of shapes, sounds, and sights; and 
it is quite out of the question to maintain that, in calling works of 
art into existence, it is from mere impotence and because of his 
limitations that man produces no more than a surface of the 
sensuous, mere schemata. These sensuous shapes and sounds 
appear in art not merely for the sake of themselves and their im­
mediate shape, but with the aim, in this shape, of affording satis­
faction to higher spiritual interests, since they have the power to 
call forth from all the depths of consciousness a sound and an 
echo in the spirit. In th׾׿w؀ensuous aspect of art is spiritu-
alized, since.J;be spiti apeats tfl aa-
؁aae sensuous. 
-
-(fJ) But recisel 
· 
-
؂!.iؔؕ!tlY there in 
so far 
· 
its pas::;؃g؄Jht:<>,U[؅_!_h؆ trit and has arisen 
from spiriس.ؓ.J?.roductivc;_ activity. This leas onto the other 
question which webave to answer, namely in what way the neces­
sary sensuous side of art is operative in the artist as his subjective 
productive activity.-This sort and manner of production contains 
in itself, as subjective activity, just the same characteristics which 
we found objectively present in the work of art; it must be a 
spiritual activity which yet contains at the same time the element 
of sensuousness and immediacy. Still, it is neither, on the one 
hand, pur؇_!y __ guXTUYZi.VW!. --؈()؉؊·-- _a_ ؋-،elY. .. l.lýC:O.!lþÿĄL!Āi!!ā 
sensuous manipulation or a formal ؒctivity accorcling_!؍.fu.؎؏ !lles 
m--ne·tearnt by heart, norؐ. on . the other hand, is it a scieni1f1c 
-production ·which passes-over ·.fr.om:the senSUOUS· to· abStraet ideas-­
and thoughts or is active entirely in the element of pure thinking. 
'in-artistic production thû--sü and'the sensnmlS aspects must 
be as one. For example, sؑne might propose to proceed in 
poetic composition by first apprehending the proposed theme as 
a prosaic thought and then putting it into poetical images, rhyme, 
and so forth, so that now the image would simply be hung on to 
the abstract reflections as an ornament and decoration. But such 
a procedure could only produce bad poetry, because in it there 
would be operative as separate activities what in artistic production 

40 
I NTRODUCTION 
has validity only as an undivided unity. This genuine mode of 
production constitutes the activity of artistic imagination. 
This activity is the rational element which exists as spirit only 
in so far as it actively drives itself forth into consciousness, yet 
what it bears within itself it places before itself only in sensuous 
form. Thus this activity has a spiritual content which yet it con­
figurates sensuously because only in this sensuous guise can it gain 
knowledge of the content. This can be compared with the charac­
teristic mentality of a man experienced in life, or even of a man of 
quick wit and ingenuity, who, although he knows perfectly well 
what matters in life, what in substance holds men together, what 
moves them, what power dominates them, nevertheless has neither 
himself grasped this knowledge in general rules nor expounded it 
to others in general reflections. What fills his mind he just makes 
clear to himself and others in particular cases always, real or 
invented, in adequate examples, and so forth ; for in his ideas 
anything and everything is shaped into concrete pictures, de­
termined in time and space, to which there may not be wanting 
names and all sorts of other external circumstances. Yet such 
a kind of imagination rests rather on the recollection of situations 
lived through, of experiences enjoyed, instead of being creative 
itself. Recollection preserves and renews the individuality and the 
external fashion of the occurrence of such experiences, with all 
their accompanying circumstances, but does not allow the universal 
to emerge on its own account. But the productive fancy of an 
artist is the fancy of a great spirit and heart, the apprehension and 
creation of ideas and shapes, and indeed the exhibition of the pro­
foundest and most universal human interests in pictorial and 
completely definite sensuous form. 
Now from this it follows at once that, on one side, imagination 
rests of course on natural gifts and talent in general, because its 
productive activity requires sensuousness [as a medium]. We do 
indeed speak of 'scientific' talent too, but the sciences presuppose 
only the universal capacity for thinking, and thinking, instead of 
proceeding in a natural way, like imagination, precisely abstracts 
from all natural activity, and so we are righter to say that there is 
no specifically scientific talent, in the sense of a merely natural gift. 
On the other hand, imagination has at the same time a sort of 
instinct-like productiveness, in that the essential figurativeness 
and sensuousness of the work of art must be present in the artist 

INTRO D UC T I O N  
as a natural gift and natural impulse, and, as an unconscious 
operation, must belong to the natural side of man too. Of course 
natural capacity is not the whole of talent and genius, since the 
production of art is also of a spiritual, self-conscious kind, yet its 
spirituality must somehow have in itself an element of natural 
picturing and shaping. Consequently almost anyone can get up 
to a certain point in an art, but to get beyond this point, where 
art proper only now begins, an inborn, higher talent for art is 
indispensable. 
As a natural gift, this talent declares itself after all in most cases 
in early youth, 1 and it shows itself in the driving restlessness to 
shape a specific sensuous material at once in a lively and active 
way and to seize this mode of expression and communication as the 
only one, or as the most important and appropriate one. And after 
all an early technical facility, which up to a certain point is effort­
less, is a sign of inborn talent. For a sculptor everything turns into 
shapes, and from early years he lays hold of clay in order to model 
it. In short, whatever ideas such talented men have, whatever 
rouses and moves them inwardly, turns at once into figure, draw­
ing, melody, or poem. 
(y) Thirdly, and lastly, the subject-matter of art is in a certain 
respect also drawn from the sensuous, from nature; or, in any case, 
even if the subject is of a spiritual kind, it can still only be grasped 
by displaying spiritual things, like human relationships, in the 
shape of phenomena possessed of external reality. 
(iii) The Aim of Art 
Now the question arises of what interest or end man sets before 
himself when he produces such subject-matter in the form of 
works of art. This was the third point which we adduced [p. 25] 
with regard to the work of art, and its closer discussion will lead 
us on at last to the true concept of art itself. 
If in this matter we cast a glance at what is commonly thought, 
one of the most prevalent ideas which may occur to us is 
(a) the principle of the imitation of nature. According to this 
view, imitation, as facility in copying natural forms just as they 
are, in a way that corresponds to them completely, is supposed to 
constitute the essential end and aim of art, and the success of this 
• Hegel either changed his mind on this subject or did not make himself clear. 
See p. 28 above and the section on Talent and Genius below. 

42 
INTRODUCTION 
portrayal in correspondence with nature is supposed to afford 
complete satisfaction. 
1 (ex) This definition contains, prima facie, only the purely formal 
;aim that whatever exists already in the external world, and the 
manner in which it exists there, is now to be made over again as 
a copy, as well as a man can do with the means at his disposal. But 
this repetition can be seen at once to be 
(cxcx) a superfluous labour, since what pictures, theatrical produc­
tions, etc., display imitatively-animals, natural scenes, human 
affairs-we already possess otherwise in our gardens or in our 
own houses or in matters within our narrower or wider circle of 
acquaintance. And, looked at more closely, this superfluous labour 
may even be regarded as a presumptuous game 
({3/3) which falls far short of nature. For art is restricted in its 
means of portrayal, and can only produce one-sided deceptions, 
for example a pure appearance of reality for one sense only, and, 
in fact, if it abides by the formal aim of mere imitation, it provides 
not the reality of life but only a pretence of life. After all, the Turks, 
as Mahommedans, do not, as is well known, tolerate any pictures 
or copies of men, etc. James Bruce in his journey to Abyssinia1 
showed paintings of a fish to a Turk; at first the Turk was asto­
nished, but quickly enough he found an answer: 'If this fish shall 
rise up against you on the last day and say: "You have indeed given 
me a body but no living soul", how will you then justify yourself 
against this accusation ?' The prophet too, as is recorded in the 
fSunna,z said to the two women, Ommi Habiba and Ommi Selma, 
who had told him about pictures in Ethiopian churches: 'These 
pictures will accuse their authors on the day of judgment.' 
Even so, there are doubtless examples of completely deceptive 
copying. The grapes painted by Zeuxis have from antiquity on­
ward been styled a triumph of art and also of the principle of the 
imitation of nature, because living doves are supposed to have 
pecked at them. To this ancient example we could add the modern 
one of Buttner's monkeyJ which ate away a painting of a cock-
1 Travels to Discover thfl Source of the Nile (3rd edn., London, r813, vol. vi, 
pp. 526-7). Hegel quotes from memory, and usually inaccurately, but here he 
has given the gist of the story accurately enough for his purpose. 
1 The Sunna is a body of traditions incorporating the history of l\lahomet's 
life and so is a sort of supplement to the Koran. 
• For Zeuxis see, e.g., Pliny, Natural History, xxxv. 36. (J. F.) Blumenbach 
(1752-!840) told a story of an old fellow-student of Linnaeus (1707-78) called 

I NTROD U CTION 
43 
chafer in Rosel's lnsektbelustigungen [Amusements of Insects] and 
was pardoned by his master because it had proved the excellence 
of the pictures in this book, although it had thus destroyed 
the most beautiful copy of this expensive work. But in such ex­
amples and others it must at least occur to us at once that, instead 
of praising works of art because they have deceived even doves and 
monkeys, we should just precisely censure those who think of ex­
alting a work of art by predicating so miserable aa effect as this as 
its highest and supreme quality. In sum, however, it must be said 
that, Smitatin, art canQpt stand in CO_!!I)etition with nature, 
and, if it tؖ it looks Jig a worm t:ying to ct:aWTafteranetepliant. 
(yy) rr we have regard to the continual, though comparative, 
failure of the copy compared with the original in nature, then there 
remains over as an aim nothing but taking pleasure in the conjur­
ing trick of producing something like nature. And of course a man 
may enjoy himself in now producing over again by his own work, 
skill, and assiduity what otherwise is there already. But this enjoy­
ment and admiration become in themselves the more frigid and 
cold, the more the copy is like the natural original, or they may 
even by perverted into tedium and repugnance. There are portraits 
which, as has been wittily said, are 'disgustingly like', and Kant,1 
in relation to this pleasure in imitation as such, cites another 
example, namely that we soon get tired of a man who can imitate 
to perfection the warbling of the nightingale (and there are such 
men) ; as soon as it is discovered that it is a man who is producing 
the notes, we are at once weary of the song. We then recognize in 
it nothing but a trick, neither the free production of nature, nor 
a work of art, since from the free productive power of man we 
expect something quite different from such music which interests 
us only when, as is the case with the nightingale's warbling, it 
gushes forth purposeless from the bird's own life, like the voice of 
human feeling. In general this delight in imitative skill can always 
be but restricted, and it befits man better to take delight in what 
he produces out of himself. In this sense the discovery of any 
insignificant technical product has higher value, and man can be 
prouder of having invented the hammer, the nail, etc., than of 
BUttner [ ? C. W., 1716-t8oi, professor in Gottingen] who put all his money into 
books and acquired a copy of Rosel's book with coloured plates, 'the most 
beautiful thing he had ever seen' etc. (Lasson, p. 30). A. ]. Rosel, 1705-59, 
published his book in parts, 1746-55. 
1 Critique of Judgment, part i, § 42. 
824371!> 
c 

INTRODUCTION 
manufacturing tricks of imitation. For this enthusiasm for copying 
merely as copying is to be respected as little as the trick of the man 
who had learnt to throw lentils through a small opening without 
missing. He displayed this dexterity before Alexander, but Alex­
ander gave him a bushel of lentils as a reward for this useless and 
worthless art.1 
(ŷ) Now further, since the principle of imitation is purely 
formal, objective beauty itself disappears when this principle is 
made the end of art. For if it is, then there is no longer a question 
of the character of what is supposed to be imitated, but only of the 
correctness of the imitation. The object and content of the beauti­
ful is regarded as a matter of complete indifference. Even if, apart 
from this, we speak of a difference between beauty and ugliness 
in relation to animals, men, localities, actions, or characters, yet 
according to that principle this remains a difference which does not 
properly belong to art, to which we have left nothing but imitation 
pure and simple. So that the above-mentioned lack of a criterion 
for the endless forms of nature leaves us, so far as the choice of 
objects and their beauty and ugliness are concerned, with mere 
subjective taste as the last word, and such taste will not be bound 
by rules, and is not open to dispute. And indeed if, in choosing 
objects for representation, we start from what people find beautiful 
or ugly and therefore worthy of artistic representation, i.e. from 
their taste, then all spheres of natural objects stand open to us, and 
none of them is likely to lack an admirer. For among us, e.g., it may 
not be every husband who finds his wife beautiful but he did 
before they were married, to the exclusion of all others too, and 
the fact that the subjective taste for this beauty has no fixed rule 
may be considered a good thing for both parties. If finally we look 
beyond single individuals and their capricious taste to the taste of 
nations, this too is of the greatest variety and contrariety. How 
often do we hear it said that a European beauty would not please 
a Chinese, or a Hottentot either, since the Chinese has inherently 
a totally different conception of beauty from the negro's, and his 
again from a European's, and so on. Indeed, if we examine the 
works of art of these non-European peoples, their images of the 
gods, for example, which have sprung from their fancy as sublime 
and worthy of veneration, they may present themselves to us as 
the most hideous idols; and while their music may sound in our 
' The source of this story I have been unable to trace. 

I NTROD UCTION 
45 
ears as the most detestable noise, they on their side will regard our 
sculptures, pictures, and music, as meaningless or ugly. 
(y) But even if we abstract from an objective principle for art, 
and if beauty is to be based on subjective and individual taste, we 
soon nevertheless find on the side of art itself that the imitation of 
Rwhich indeed appeared to be a universal principle and one 
confirmed by high authority, is not to be adopt:d, at least in this 
general and wholly abstract form. For if we look at the different 
arts, it will be granted at once that, even if painting and sculpture 
portray objects that appear to be like natural ones or whose type is 
essentially drawn from nature, on the other hand works of architec­
ture, which is also one of the fine arts, can as little be called imita­
tions of nature as poetical works can, in so far as the latter are not 
confined, e.g., to mere description. In any case, if we still wanted 
to uphold this principle in relation to these latter arts, we would 
at least find ourselves compelled to take a long circuitous route, 
because we would have to attach various conditions to the proposi­
tion and reduce the so-called 'truth' of imitation to probability at 
least. But with probability we would again encounter a great 
difficulty, namely in settling what is probable and what is not, and, 
apart from this, we would not wish or be able to exclude from 
poetry all purely arbitrary and completely fanciful inventions. 
/' The .ai,m gf.art must therefore lie in something still other than 
the purely mechanical imitation of what is there, which in every 
case can bring to birth only technical tricks, not works, of art. It is 
true that it is an essential element in a work of art to have a natural 
shape as its basis because what it portrays it displays in the form 
of an external and therefore also natural phenomenon. In painting, 
e.g., it is an important study to get to know and copy with precision 
the colours in their relation to one another, the effects of light, 
reflections, etc., as well as the forms and shapes of objects down 
to the last detail. It is in this respect, after all, that chiefly in 
recent times the principle of the imitation of nature, and of 
naturalism generally, has raised its head again in order to bring 
back to the vigour and distinctness of nature an art which had 
relapsed into feebleness and nebulosity; or, on the other hand, 
to assert the regular, immediate, and explicitly fixed sequences of 
nature against the manufactured and purely arbitrary conven­
tionalism, really just as inartistic as unnatural, into which art had 
strayed. But whatever is right enough from one point of view in this 

INTRODUCTION 
endeavour, still the naturalism demanded is as such not the sub­
stantial and primary basis of art, and, even if external appearance 
in its naturalness constitutes one essential characteristic of art, still 
neither is the given natural world the rule nor is the mere imitation 
of external phenomena, as external, the aim of art. 
(b) Therefore the further question arises: what, then, is the 
content of art, and why is this content to be portrayed ? In this 
matter our consciousness confronts us with the common opinion 
that the task and aim of art is to bring home to our sense, our 
feeling, and our inspiration everything which has a place in the 
human spirit. That familiar saying 'nihil humani a me alienum 
puto'1 art is supposed to make real in us. 
Its aim therefore is supposed to consist in awakening and 
vivifying our slumbering feelings, inclinations, and passions of 
every kind, in filling the heart, in forcing the human being, 
educated or not, to go through the whole gamut of feelings which 
the human heart in its inmost and secret recesses can bear, ex­
perience, and produce, through what can move and stir the human 
breast in its depths and manifold possibilities and aspects, and to 
deliver to feeling and contemplation for its enjoyment whatever 
the spirit possesses of the essential and lofty in its thinking and in 
the Idea-the splendour of the noble, eternal, and true: moreover 
to make misfortune and misery, evil and guilt intelligible, to make 
men intimately acquainted with all that is horrible and shocking, 
as well as with all that is pleasurable and felicitous; and, finally, to 
let fancy loose in the idle plays of imagination and plunge it into 
the seductive magic of sensuously bewitching visions and feelings. 
According to this vie,. this universal wealth of subject-matter art 
is, on the one hand,!!. embrace in order to complete the natural 
experience of our exc;cK:and,fn the other hand, to 
-arouse these passionlwt at th experiences of hte do 
no-t leave us unmoved and so that we mtght now acqmre a recepti­
v!::or :. penomen But [on Qfits vʩew] such a stimulus Is not 
g 
tn 
rs eid by 'l ual expenence Itself, but only through the 
pure appearance of it, since art deceptively substitutes its produc­
tions for reality. The possibility of this deception through the pure 
appearance of art rests on the fact that, for man, all reality must 
come through the medium of perception and ideas, and only 
1 Terence : Heauton Timorumenos, 1. i. 25. 'I count nothing human indifferent 
to me.' As usual, Hegel quotes inaccurately. 

INTRODUCTION 
47 
through this medium does it penetrate the heart and the will. Now 
here it is a matter of indifference whether a man's attention is 
claimed by immediate external reality or whether this happens in 
another way, namely through pictures, symbols, and ideas con­
taining in themselves and portraying the material of reality. We 
can envisage things which are not real as if they were real. There­
fore it remains all the same for our feelings whether it is external 
reality, or only the appearance of it, whereby a situation, a relation, 
or, in general, a circumstance of life, is brought home to us, in 
order to make us respond appropriately to the essence of such 
a matter, whether by grief or rejoicing, whether by being touched 
or agitated, or whether by making us go through the gamut of the 
feelings and passions of wrath, hatred, pity, anxiety, fear, love, 
reverence and admiration, honour and fame. 
( This arousing of all feelings in us, this drawing of the heart 
;through all the circumstances of life, this actualizing of all these 
\f·nner movements by means of a purely deceptive externally pre-
ented object is above all what is regarded, on the view we have 
been considering, as the proper and supreme power of art. 
But now since, on this view, art is supposed to have the vocation 
of imposing on the heart and the imagination good and bad alike, 
strengthening man to the noblest ideals and yet enervating him 
to the most sensuous and selfish feelings of pleasure, art is given 
a purely formal task ; and without any explicitly fixed aim would 
thus provide only the empty form· for every possible kind of 
content and worth. 
(c) In fact art does have also this formal side, namely its ability 
to adorn and bring before perception and feeling every possible 
material, just as the thinking of ratiocination can work on every 
possible object and mode of action and equip them with reasons 
and justifications. But confronted by such a multiple variety of 
content, we are at once forced to notice that the different feelings 
and ideas, which art is supposed to arouse or confirm, counteract 
one another, contradict and reciprocally cancel one another. In­
deed, in this respect, the more art inspires to contradictory 
[emotions) the more it increases the contradictory character of 
feelings and passions and makes us stagger about like Bacchantes 
or even goes on, like ratiocination, to sophistry and scepticism. 
This variety of material itself compels us, therefore, not to stop at 
so formal a definition [of the aim of art], since rationality penetrates 

INTRODUCTION 
this jumbled diversity and demands to see, and know to be 
attained, even out of elements so contradictory, a higher and 
inherently more universal end. It is claimed indeed similarly that 
the final end of the state and the social life of men is that all human 
capacities and all individual powers be developed and given 
expression in every way and in every direction. But against so 
formal a view the question arises soon enough: into what unity are 
these manifold formations to be brought together, what single aim 
must they have as their fundamental concept and final end ? As 
with the Concept of the state, so too with the Concept of art there 
arises the need (a) for a common end for its particular aspects, but 
(b) also for a higher substantial end. As such a substantial end, 
the first thing that occurs to reflection is the view that&rt has the 
capacity and the vocation to mitigate the ferocity of desire 
' (a) In respect of this first idea, we have only to discover m what 
feature peculiar to art there lies the capacity to cancel rudeness and 
to bridle and educate impulses, inclinations. and passions. Rude­
ness in general is grounded in a direct selfishness of the impulses 
which make straight away precisely and exclusively for the satisfac­
tion of their concupiscence. But desire is all the ruder and im­
perious the more, as single and restricted, it engrosses the whole 
man, so that he loses the power to tear himself free, as a universal 
being, from this determinateness and become aware of himself as 
universal. And if the man says in such a case, as may be supposed, 
'The passion is stronger than I', then for consciousness the ab­
stract 'I' is separated from the particular passion, but only in 
a purely formal way, since all that is pronounced with this cleavage 
is that, in face of the power of the passion, the 'I' as a universal is 
of no account whatever. Thus the ferocity of passion consists in 
the unity of the 'I' as universal with the restricted object of his 
desire, so that the man has no longer any will beyond this single 
passion. Now such rudeness and untamed force of passion is prima 
facie mitigated by art, in that it g!yes a man ap idea of what he feels 
and ach!ؗYر-JtLs_uch.ؘ 
_ _s.itJiation. And even if art restricts itself to 
setting up pictures of passions for contemplation, even if indeed it 
were to flatter them, still there is here already a power of mitigation, 
since thereby a man is at least made aware of what otherwise he 
only immediately is. For then the man contemplates his impulses 
and inclinations, and \Vhilؙ pn:yiously they carried him reflection­
less away, he now sees them outside-himself and already begins 

INTRODUCTION 
49 
to be free from them because they confront him as something 
. objective. 
For this reason it may often be the case with an artist that, over­
\taken by grief, he mitigates and weakens for himself the intensity 
(of his own feeling by representing it in art. Tears, even, provide 
some comfort; at first entirely sunk and concentrated in grief, 
a man may then in this direct way utter this purely inward feeling. 
But still more of an alleviation is the expression of one's inner state 
in words, pictures, sounds, and shapes. For this reason it was 
a good old custom at deaths and funerals to appoint wailing women 
in order that by its expression grief might be contemplated. Even 
by expressions of condolence the burden of a man's misfortune is 
brought before his mind; if it is much spoken about he has to 
reflect on it, and this alleviates his grief. And so to cry one's eyes 
out and to speak out has ever been regarded as a means of freeing 
oneself from the oppressive burden of care or at least of relieving 
the heart. The mitigation of the power of passions therefore has 
its universal ground in the fact that man is released from his im­
mediate imprisonment in a feeling and becomes conscious of it 
as something external to him, to which he must now relate himself 
in an ideal way. Art by means of its representations, while remain­
ing within the sensuous sphere, liberates man at the same time 
from the power of sensuousness. Of course we may often hear 
favourite phraseology about man's duty to remain in immediate 
unity with nature; but such unity, in its abstraction, is purely and 
simply rudeness and ferocity, and by dissolving this unity for man, 
art lifts him with gentle hands out of and above imprisonment in 
nature. For man's preoccupation with artistic objects remains 
purely contemplative, and thereby it educates, even if at first 
only an attention to artistic portrayals in general, later on an 
attention to their meaning and to a comparison with other subjects, 
and it opens the mind to a general consideration of them and the 
points of view therein involved. 
({1) Now on this there follows quite logically the second charac­
teristic that has been attributed to art as its essential aim, namely 
the purification of the passions, instruction, anؚ moral improve­
ment. For the theory that art Was to curb rudeness and educate the 
passions, remained quite formal and general, so that it has become 
again a matter of what specific sort of education this is and what is 
its essential aim. 

so 
INTRODUCTION 
( tXtX) It is true that the doctrine of the purification of passion still 
suffers the same deficiency as the previous doctrine of the mitiga­
tion of desires, yet it does at least emphasize more closely the fact 
that artistic representations needed a criterion for assessing their 
worth or unworthiness. This criterion [on this view] is just their 
effectiveness in separating pure from impure in the passions. This 
effectiveness therefore requires a content which can exercise this 
purifying force, and, in so far as producing such an effect is sup­
posed to constitute the substantial aim of art, the purifying con­
tent will have to be brought into consciousness in accordance with 
its universality and essentiality. 
(/3/3) From this latter point of view, the aim of art has been pro­
nounced to be that it should instruct. On this view, on the one 
hand, the special character of art consists in the movement of 
feelings and in the satisfaction lying in this movement, lying even 
in fear, in pity, in grievous emotion and agitation, i.e. in the satis­
fying enlistment of feelings and passions, and to that extent in 
a gusto, a pleasure, and delight in artistic subjects, in their 
representation and effect. But, on the other hand, this aim of art 
is supposed to have its higher criterion only in its instructiveness, 
in fabula docet, 1 and so in the useful influence which the work of art 
may exert on the individual. In this respect the Horatian aphorism 
Et prodesse volunt et delectare poetae2 contains, concentrated in 
a few words, what later has been elaborated in an infinite degree, 
diluted, and made into a view of art reduced to the uttermost 
extreme of shallowness.-Now in connection with such instruc­
tion we must ask at once whether it is supposed to be contained in 
the work of art directly or indirectly, explicitly or implicitly. If, in 
general, what is at issue is a universal and non-contingent aim, 
then this end and aim, in view of the essentially spiritual nature of 
art, can itself only be a spiritual one, and moreover one which is 
not contingent but absolute. This aim in relation to teaching could 
only consist in bringing into consciousness, by means of the work 
of art, an absolutely essential spiritual content. From this point of 
view we must assert that the more highly art is ranked the more it 
has to adopt such a content into itself and find only in the essence 
of that content_the criterion of whether what is expressed is appro­
priate or not. Prt has in fact been the first instrĎss of peopleS] 
1 See below, Part II, ch. III, A I .  
£ 
1 Ars pocfica, 333· 'Poets wish alike to benefit and\o please.' 

INTROD U C T I O N  
51 
If, however, the aim of instruction is treated as an aim in such 
a way that the universal nature of the content represented is 
supposed to emerge and be explained directly and explicitly as 
an abstract proposition, prosaic reflection, or general doctrine, 
and not to be contained implicitly and only indirectly in the con­
crete form of a work of art, then by this separation the sensuous 
pictorial form, which is precisely what alone makes a work of art 
a work of art, becomes a useless appendage, a veil and a pure 
appearance, expressly pronounced to be a mere veil and a mere 
pure appearance. But thereby the nature of the work of art itself is 
distorted. For the work of art should put before our eyes a content, 
not in its universality as such, but one whose universality has been 
absolutely individualized and sensuously particularized. If the 
work of art does not proceed from this principle but emphasizes 
the universality with the aim of [providing] abstract instruction, 
then the pictorial and sensuous element is only an external and 
superfluous adornment, and the work of art is broken up internally, 
form and content no longer appear as coalesced. In that event the 
sensuously individual and the spiritually universal have become 
external to one another. 
Now, further, if the aim of art is restricted to this usefulness for 
instruction, the other side, pleasure, entertainment, and delight, is 
pronounced explicitly to be inessential, and ought to have its 
substance only in the utility of the doctrine on which it is atten­
dant. But what is implied here at the same time is that art does not 
carry its vocation, end, and aim in itself, but that its essence lies 
in something else to which it serves as a means. In that event art 
is only one amongst several means which are proved useful for and 
applied to the end of instruction. But this brings us to the boundary 
at which art is supposed to cease to be an end in itself, because it is 
reduced either to a mere entertaining game or a mere means of 
instruction. 
(yy) This boundary is most sharply marked if in turn a question 
is raised about a supreme aim and end for the sake of which 
passions are to be purified and men instructed. As this aim, moral 
betterment has often been adduced in recent times, and the end 
of art has been placed in the function of preparing inclinations and 
impulses for moral perfection and of leading them to this final end. 
This idea unites instruction with purification, inasmuch as art, by 
affording an insight into genuinely moral goodness and so by 

INTRODUCTION 
instruction, at the same time incites to purification and only so is 
to accomplish the betterment of mankind as its utility and its 
highest aim. 
Now as regards art in relation to moral betterment, the same 
must be said, in the first place, about the aim of art as instruction. 
It is readily granted that art may not take immorality and the 
intention of promoting it as its principle. But it is one thing to 
make immorality the express aim of the presentation, and another 
not to take morality as that aim. From every genuine work of art 
a good moral may be drawn, yet of course all depends on interpreta­
tion and on who draws the moral. I We can hear the most immoral 
presentations defended on the ground that one must be acquainted 
with evil and sins in order to act morally; conversely, it has been 
said that the portrayal of Mary Magdalene, the beautiful sinner 
who afterwards repented, has seduced many into sin, because art 
makes repentance look so beautiful, and sinning must come before 
repentance. But the doctrine of moral betterment, carried through 
logically, is not content with holding that a moral may be pointed 
from a work of art; on the contrary, it would want the moral 
instruction to shine forth clearly as the substantial aim of the work 
of art, and indeed wOUld expressly permit the presentation of none 
but moral subjects, moral characters, actions, and events. For art 
can choose its subjects, and is thus distinct from history or the 
sciences, which have their material given to them. 
In order, in this aspect of the matter, to be able to form a 
·thorough estimate of the view that the aim of art is moral, we must 
first ask what specific standpoint of morality this view professes. 
If we keep more clearly in view the standpoint of the 'moral' as we 
have to take it in the best sense of the word today, it is soon 
obvious that its concept does not immediately coincide with what 
apart from it we generally call virtue, conventional life, respecta­
bility, etc. From this point of view a conventionally virtuous man 
is not ipso facto moral, because to be moral needs reflection, the 
specific consciousness of what accords with duty, and action on this 
preceding consciousness. Duty itself is the law of the will, 
a law which man nevertheless freely lays down out of himself, 
1 e.g., for one reader the moral of Goethe's Elective Affinities is approval of 
marriage, while for another reader it is disapproval (G. H. Lewes, Life of 
Goethe, bk. VII, ch. iv). In a work of art, as in life, the greater a man's character 
the more are different interpretations put on it by different people. 

INTRODUCTION 
53 
and then he ough to determine himself to this duty for the 
sake of duty and its fulfilment, by doing good solely from the 
conviction he has won that it is the good.1 But this law, the duty 
chosen for duty's sake as a guide out of free conviction and inner 
conscience, and then carried out, is by itself the abstract universal 
of the will and this has its direct opposite in nature, in sensuous 
impulses, selfish interests, passions, and everything grouped to­
gether under the name of feeling and emotion. In this opposition 
one side is regarded as cancelling the other, and since both are 
present in the subject as opposites, he has a choice, since his 
decision is made from within, between following either the one or 
the other. But such a decision is a moral one, from the standpoint 
we are considering, and so is the action carried out in accordance 
with it, but only if it is done, on the one hand, from a free convic­
tion of duty, and, on the other hand, by the conquest not only 
of the particular will, natural impulses, inclinations, passions, etc., 
but also of noble feelings and higher impulses. For the modern 
·moralistic view starts from the fixed opposition between the will 
i in its spiritual universality and the will in its sensuous natural 
: particularity; and it consists not in the complete reconciliation of 
these opposed sides, but in their reciprocal battle against one 
another, which involves the demand that impulses in their con­
flict with duty must give way to it.2 
' 
Now this opposition does not arise for consciousness in the 
restricted sphere of moral action alone; it emerges in a thorough­
going cleavage and opposition between what is absolute and what 
. is external reality and existence. Taken quite abstractly, it is the 
'opposition of universal and particular, when each is fixed over 
against the other on its own account in the same way; more con-
/ cretely, it appears in nature as the opposition of the abstract law 
to the abundance of individual phenomena, each explicitly with 
its own character; in the spirit it appears as the contrast between 
the sensuous and the spiritual in man, as the battle of spirit against 
flesh, of duty for duty's sake, of the cold command against particu-
. lar interest, warmth of heart, sensuous inclinations and impulses, 
1 With this Kantian passage compare my article 'Hegel's attitude to Kant's 
Ethics' (Kant-Studien, 1957-8, 70 ff.). 
• Here Hegel's interpretation of Kant, like Schiller's, is based on a measure of 
misunderstanding. See, e.g., translation of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (Oxford, 
1942), § 124, of his Early Theological Writings (Chicago, 1948), p. ZI I, and H. ]. 
Paton: The Categorical Imperative (London, n.d.), pp. 48 and 84. 

54 
INTRODU CTION 
against the individual disposition in general; as the harsh oppo­
sition between inner freedom and the necessity of external nature, 
further as the contradiction between the dead inherently empty 
concept, and the full concreteness of life, between theory or sub­
jective thinking, and objective existence and experience. 
These are oppositions which have not been invented at all by 
the subtlety of reflection or the pedantry of philosophy; in numerous 
forms they have always preoccupied and troubled the human 
consciousness, even if it is modern culture that has first worked 
them out most sharply and driven them up to the peak of harshest 
contradiction. Spiritual culture, the modern intellect, produces this 
opposition in man which makes him an amphibious animal, 
because he now has to live in two worlds which contradict one 
,another. The result is that now consciousness wanders about in 
this contradiction, and, driven from one side to the other, cannot 
find satisfaction for itself in either the one or the other. For on the 
one side we see man imprisoned in the common world of reality 
and earthly temporality, borne down by need and poverty, hard 
pressed by nature, enmeshed in matter, sensuous ends and their 
enjoyment, mastered and carried away by natural impulses and 
passions. On the other side, he lifts himself to eternal ideas, to 
a realm of thought and freedom, gives to himself, as will, universal 
laws and prescriptions, strips the world of its enlivened and 
flowering reality and dissolves it into abstractions, since the spirit 
now upholds its right and dignity only by mishandling nature and 
denying its right, and so retaliates on nature the distress and 
violence which it has suffered from it itself. But for modern culture 
and its intellect this discordance in life and consciousness involves 
the demand that such a contradiction be resolved. Yet the intellect 
cannot cut itself free from the rigidity of these oppositions; there­
fore the solution remains for consciousness a mere ought, and the 
present and reality move only in the unrest of a hither and thither 
which seeks a reconciliation without finding one. Thus the 
question then arises whether such a universat and thoroughgoing 
opposition, which cannot get beyond a mere ought and a postu­
lated solution, is in general the absolute truth and supreme end. 
If general culture has run into such a contradiction, it becomes the 
task of philosophy to supersede the oppositions, i.e. to show that 
neither the one alternative in its abstraction, nor the other in the 
like one-sidedness, possesses truth, but that they are both self-dis-

INTRODUCTION 
55 
solving; that truth lies only in the reconciliation and mediation 
of both, and that this mediation is no mere demand, but what 
is absolutely accomplished and is ever self-accomplishing. This 
insight coincides immediately with the ingenuous faith and will 
which does have precisely this dissolved opposition steadily 
present to its view, and in action makes it its end and achieves 
it. Philosophy affords a reflective insight into the essence of the 
opposition only in so far as it shows how truth is just the dissolving 
of opposition and, at that, not in the sense, as may be supposed, 
that the opposition and its two sides do not exist at all, but that 
they exist reconciled. 
Now since the ultimate end, moral betterment, has pointed to 
a higher standpoint, we will have to vindicate this higher stand­
point for art too. Thereby the false position, already noticed, is at 
once abandoned, the position, namely, that art has to serve as 
a means to moral purposes, and the moral end of the world in 
general, by instructing and improving, and thus has its substantial 
aim, not in itself, but in something else. If on this account we now 
continue to speak of a final end and aim, we must in the first place 
get rid of the perverse idea which, in the question about an end, 
clings to the accessory meaning of the question, namely that it 
is one about utility. The perversity lies here in this, that in that 
case the work of art is supposed to have a bearing on something 
else which is set before our minds as the essential thing or as what 
ought to be, so that then the work of art would have validity only 
as a useful tool for realizing this end which is independently valid 
on its own account outside the sphere of art. Against this we must 
maintain that art's vocation is to unveil the truth in the form of 
sensuous artistic configuration, to set forth the reconciled opposi­
tion just mentioned, and so to have its end and aim in itself, in 
this very setting forth and unveiling. For other ends, like instruc­
tion, purification, bettering, financial gain, struggling for fame and 
honour, have nothing to do with the work of art as such, and do 
not determine its nature. 
[7] Historical Deduction of the True Concept of Art 
Now, starting from this point of view in which consideration of 
the matter by the Understanding's abstract reflection is dissolved, 
we must proceed to grasp the concept of art in its inne.r necessity, 

s6 
INTRODUCTIO N 
as after all it was from this view too that the true reverence and 
understanding of art arose historically. For that opposition on 
which we touched, asserted itself not only in the abstract reflection 
of general culture, but even in philosophy as such, and only now, 
when philosophy has thoroughly understood how to overcome 
this opposition, has it grasped its own essence and therefore at the 
same time the essence of nature and art. 
So this point of view is not only the reawakening of philosophy 
in general, but also the reawakening of the science of art; indeed 
it is this reawakening alone that aesthetics proper, as a science, 
has really to thank for its genuine origin, and art for its higher 
estimation. 
I will therefore touch briefly on the history of the transition 
which I have in mind, partly for the sake of the history itself, 
partly because in this way there are more closely indicated the 
views which are important and on which as a foundation we will 
build further. This foundation in its most general character con­
sists in recognizing that the beauty of art is one of the means which 
dissolve and reduce to unity the above-mentioned opposition and 
contradiction between the abstractly self-concentrated spirit and 
nature-both the nature of external phenomena and that of inner 
subjective feeling and emotion. 
(i) The Kantian Philosophy 
It is the Kantian philosophy which has not only felt the need for 
this point of union, but has also clearly recognized it and brought 
it before our minds. In general, as the foundation alike of in­
telligence and will, Kant took self-related rationality, freedom, 
self-consciousness finding and knowing itself as inherently infinite. 
This recognition of the absoluteness of reason in itself, which has 
occasioned philosophy's turning-point in modern times, this abso­
lute starting-point, must be recognized, and, even if we pronounce 
Kant's philosophy to be inadequate, this feature in it is not to be 
refuted. But since Kant fell back again into the fixed opposition 
between subjective thinking and objective things, between the 
abstract universality and the sensuous individuality of the will, 
he it was above all who emphasized as supreme the afore-mentioned 
opposition in the moral life, since besides he exalted the practical 
side of the spirit above the theoretical. Having accepted this fixity 
of opposition recognized by the thinking of the Understanding, 

I NTRO D U C T I O N  
57 
he was left with no alternative but to express the unity purely 
in the form of subjective Ideas of Reason, for which no adequate 
reality could be demonstrated, and therefore as postulates, which 
indeed are to be deduced from the practical reason, but whose 
essential inner character remained unknowable by thinking and 
whose practical fulfilment remained a mere ought steadily deferred 
to infinity. And so Kant had indeed brought the reconciled con­
tradiction before our minds, but yet could neither develop its true 
essence scientifically nor demonstrate it as what is truly and alone 
actual. It is true that Kant did press on still further in so far as he 
؛Nound the required unity in what he called the intuitive understand­
Ong; but even here he stopped again at the opposition of the sub­
jective to objectivity, so that while he does affirm the abstract 
dissolution of the opposition between concept and reality, universal 
and particular, understanding and sense, and therefore the Idea, 
he makes this dissolution and reconciliation itself into a purely 
subjective one again, not one absolutely true and actual. 
,It In this connection his Critique of the Power of Judgment, in 
which he deals with the aesthetic and teleological powers of 
judgement, is instructive and remarkable. The beautiful objects 
of nature and art, the purposeful products of nature, through which 
Kant comes nearer to the concept of the organic and living, he 
treats only from the point of view of a reflection which judges them 
subjectively. And indeed Kant defines the power of judgement in 
general as 'the ability to think the particular as contained under the 
universa1',1 and he calls the power of judgement reflective 'when 
it has only the particular given to it and has to find the universal 
under which it comes'. To this end it needs a law, a principle, 
which it has to give to itself, and as this law Kant propounds 
'purposiveness' or teleology. In the concept of freedom in the 
Critique of Practical Reason, the accomplishment of the end does 
not get beyond a mere ought, but, in the teleological judgement of 
living things, Kant comes to the point of so regarding the living 
organism that in it the concept, the universal, contains the par­
ticular too, and, as an end, it determines the particular and 
external, the disposition of the limbs, not from without but from 
within, and in such a way that the particular corresponds to the 
end of its own accord. Yet, once again, with such a judgement the 
' These quotations from the Critique of Judgment are from § iv of the 
Introduction. 

ss 
INTROD U CT I ON 
objective nature of the object is not supposed to be known; all 
that is expressed is a subjective mode of reflection. Similarly, 
Kant interprets the aesthetic judgement as proceeding neither 
from the Understanding as such, as the capacity for concepts, nor 
from sensuous intuition and its manifold variety as such, but from 
the free. play of Understanding and imagination. In this concord 
of the faculties of knowledge, the object becomes related to the 
subject and his feeling of pleasure and complacency. 
(a) Now, in the first place, this complacency is to be devoid of 
all interest, i.e. to be without any relation to our appetitive faculty. 
If we have an interest, curiosity for example, or a sensuous interest 
on behalf of our sensuous need, a desire for possession and use, 
then the objects are not important to us on their own account, but 
only because of our need. In that event what exists has a value only 
in respect of such a need, and the situation is such that, on the 
one side, there is the object, and, on the other, a determinate need 
distinct from it, to which we yet relate it. If, for example, I con­
sume an object for the sake of nourishment, this interest resides 
solely in me and is foreign to the object itself. Now the situation 
with the beautiful, Kant maintains,1 is not of this kind. The 
aesthetic judgement lets the external existent subsist free and 
independent, and it proceeds from a pleasure to which the object 
on its own account corresponds, in that the pleasure permits the 
object to have its end in itself. This, as we saw already above 
[pp. 36 ff.], is an important consideration. 
(b) Secondly, the beautiful, Kant says,2 should be that which is 
put before us without a concept, i.e. without a category of the 
fUnderstanding, as an object of universal pleasure. To estimate the 
beautiful requires a cultured spirit; the uneducated man has no 
judgement of the beautiful, since this judgement claims universal 
validity. True, the universal is as such prima facie an abstraction; 
but what is absolutely true carries in itself the demand for, and 
the characteristic of, universal validity. In this sense the beautiful 
too ought to be universally recognized, although the mere con­
cepts of the Understanding arc not competent to judge it. The 
good or the right, for example, in individual actions is subsumed 
under universal concepts, and the action counts as good if it can 
correspond with these concepts. The beautiful, on the other hand, 
is to invoke a universal pleasure directly without any such relation 
1 Critique of Judgment, book I, § 2.. 
• Ibid., book I ,  § 6. 

INTRO D U C T I O N  
59 
[or correspondence]. This only means that, in considering the 
beautiful, we are unaware of the concept and subsumption under 
it, and that the separation between the individual object and the 
universal concept, which elsewhere is present in judgement, is 
impermissible here. 
(c) Thirdly, the beautiful is to have the form of purposiveness1 in 
so far as the purposiveness is perceived in the object without any 
presentation of a purpose. At bottom this repeats what we have 
just discussed. Any natural product, a plant, for example, or an 
animal, is purposefully organized, and in this purposiveness it is 
so directly there for us that we have no idea of its purpose ex­
plicitly separate and distinct from its present reality. In this 
way the beautiful too is to appear to us as purposiveness. 
In finite purposiveness, end and means remain external to one 
another, since the end stands in no inner essential relation to the 
material of its realization. z In this case the idea of the end is 
explicitly distinguished from the object in which the end appears 
as realized. The beautiful, on the other hand, exists as purposeful 
in itself, without means and end showing themselves separated 
as different aspects of it. The purpose of the limbs, for example, of 
an organism is the life which exists as actual in the limbs them­
selves; separated they cease to be limbs. For in a living thing 
purpose and the material for its realization are so directly united 
that it exists only in so far as its purpose dwells in it. Looked at 
from this side, the beautiful should not wear purposiveness as an 
external form; on the contrary, the purposeful correspondence of 
inner and outer should be the immanent nature of the beautiful 
object. 
(d) Fourthly, and lastly, Kant in treating of the beautiful holds 
firmly that it is recognized, without a concept, as the object of 
a necessary delight.J Necessity is an abstract category and it indi­
cates an inner essential relation of two sides ; if and because the 
1 Throughout this passage Hegel is dealing with Kant and indicating his 
connection between artistic and teleological judgement. Zweck I have to translate 
as 'purpose' instead of 'end', and Zweckmiissigkeit as 'purposiveness'. Bosan­
quet translates the latter by 'teleology', but he does sometimes translate Zweck 
by 'purpose'. This first sentence is a quotation from Kant, op. cit., § 17 ad fin. 
2 We make (finite) things for a purpose, e.g. a knife for cutting, but there is 
no essential relation between means and end. Cutting can be done with a razor. 
But in an organism limbs and life, means and end, are related essentially. 
3 Critique of Judgment, § 22 ad fin. 

6o 
INTRODUCTION 
one is, so also the other is. The one in its specific character con­
tains the other at the same time, as, for example, cause is meaning­
less without effect. Such anecessityof giving pleasure the beautiful 
has in itself without any relation whatever to concepts, i.e. to the 
categories of the Understanding. So, for example, regularity,1 
which is produced according to a category of the Understanding, 
does please us, although Kant requires for pleasure still more 
than the unity and equality belonging to such a category of the 
Understanding. 
Now what we find in all these Kantian propositions is an in­
separability of what in all other cases is presupposed in our con­
sciousness as distinct. This cleavage finds itself cancelled in the 
beautiful, where universal and particular, end and means, concept 
and object, perfectly interpenetrate one another. Thus Kant sees the 
beauty of art after all as a correspondence in which the particular 
itself accords with the concept. Particulars as such are prima facie 
accidental, alike to one another and to the universal; and precisely 
this accidental element-sense, feeling, emotion, inclination-is 
now not simply, in the beauty of art, subsumed under universal 
categories of the Understanding, and dominated by the concept of 
freedom in its abstract universality, but is so bound up with the 
universal that it is inwardly and absolutely adequate to it. Therefore 
thought is incarnate in the beauty of art, and the material is not 
determined by thought externally, but exists freely on its own 
account-in that the natural, the sensuous, the heart, etc., have 
in themselves proportion, purpose, and harmony; and intuition 
and feeling are elevated to spiritual universality, just as thought 
not only renounces its hostility to nature but is enlivened thereby; 
feeling, pleasure, and enjoyment are justified and sanctified ; so 
that nature and freedom, sense and concept, find their right and 
satisfaction all in one. But this apparently perfect reconciliation is 
still supposed by Kant at the last to be only subjective in respect 
of the judgement and the production [of art], and not itself to be 
absolutely true and actual. 
These we may take to be the chief results of Kant's Critique of 
Judgment in so far as they can interest us here. His Critique con­
stitutes the starting point for the true comprehension of the 
beauty of art, yet only by overcoming.J<.ant's deficiencies could 
this comprehension assert itself as theMigher grasp of the true 
I See below, Part r, ch. n, B J(a). 

INTROD U C T I O N  
6r 
unity}f necessity and freedom, particular and universal, sense and 
reason. 
(ii) Schiller, Winckelmann, Schelling 
Therefore it has to be admitted that the artistic sense of a 
profound and philosophic mind has demanded, and expressed, 
totality and reconciliation (earlier than philosophy as such had 
recognized them) as against that abstract endlessness of ratiocina­
tion, that duty for duty's sake, that formless intellectualism, which 
apprehends nature and actuality, sense and feeling, as just a 
barrier, just contradicting it and hostile. It is Schiller [1759-ISos] 
who must be given great credit for breaking through the Kantian 
subjectivity and abstraction of thinking and for venturing on an 
. 
r 
'attempt to get beyond this byli_ntellectually grasping the unity and 
reconciliation as the truth and by actualizing them in artistic 
productioL For Schiller in his aesthetic writings has not merely 
taken good note of art and its interest, without any regard for its 
relation to philosophy proper, but he has also compared his 
interest in the beauty of art with philosophical principles, and only 
by starting from them and with their aid did he penetrate into the 
deeper nature and concept of the beautiful. Even so, one feels that 
at one period of his work he busied himself with thought more 
even than was advantageous for the naive beauty of his works of 
art. Deliberate concentration on abstract reflections and even an 
interest in the philosophical Concept is noticeable in many of his 
poems. For this he has been reproached, and especially blamed 
and depreciated in comparison with Goethe's objectivity and his 
invariable naivete, steadily undisturbed by the Concept. But in 
this respect Schiller, as a poet, only paid the debt of his time, and 
what was to blame was a perplexity which turned out only to the 
honour of this sublime soul and profound mind and only to the 
advantage of science and knowledge. 
At the same period this same scientific impulse withdrew Goethe 
too from his proper sphere-poetry. Yet, just as Schiller immersed 
himself in the consideration of the inner depths of the spirit, so 
Goethe pursued his own proper genius into the natural side of art, 
into external nature, to the organisms of plants and animals, to 
crystals, the formation of clouds, and colours. To this scientific 
research Goethe brought his great genius which in these subjects 
had altogether thrown to the winds the outlook of the mere 

6z 
I NTROD UCTION 
Understanding with its error, just as Schiller, on the other side, 
had succeeded in asserting, against the Understanding's treatment 
of willing and thinking, the Idea of the free totality of beauty. 
A number of Schiller's writings is devoted to this insight into the 
nature of art, especially his Letters on Aesthetic Education.1 
In these Letters the chief point from which Schiller starts is that 
every individual man bears within himself the capacity for ideal 
manhood. This genuine man, he holds, is represented by the 
State which he takes to be the objective, universal, and as it were 
canonical, form in which the diversity of individual persons aims 
at collecting and combining itself into a unity. Now he thought 
that there were two ways of presenting how man, living in time, 
might correspond with man in the Idea: on the one hand, the State, 
as the genus of ethics, law, and intelligence, might cancel indivi­
duality; on the other hand, the individual might raise himself 
to the genus, and the man of time ennoble himself into the man of 
the Idea. Reason, he thinks, demands unity as such, what accords 
with the genus, while nature demands multiplicity and indivi­
duality; and both these legislatures make equal claims on man. 
Now in the conflict of these opposite sides, aesthetic education is 
precisely to actualize the demand for their mediation and re­
conciliation, since, according to Schiller, it proceeds by so de­
veloping inclination, sensuousness, impulse, and heart that they 
become rational in themselves; and in this way reason too, freedom, 
and spirituality emerge from their abstraction and, united with 
the natural element, now rationalized, acquire flesh and blood in 
it. The beautiful is thus pronounced to be the mutual formation 
of the rational and the sensuous, and this formation to be the 
genuinely actual. In general this view of Schiller's can be recog­
nized already in his Anmut und Wiirde [Grace and Dignity, 1793], 
as well as in his poems, because he makes the praise of women his 
special subject matter, for in their character he recognized and 
emphasized just that spontaneously present unification of spirit 
and nature. 
This unity of universal and particular, freedom and necessity, 
spirit and nature, which Schiller grasped scientifically as the 
principle and essence of art and which he laboured unremittingly 
to call into actual life by art and aesthetic education, has now, as 
1 First published in his periodical, Die Horen, later in a collection of his prose 
writings (Leipzig, 18o1, part 3). 

I NTROD U CT I O N  
the Idea itself, been made the principle of knowledge and existence, 
and the Idea has become recognized as that which alone is true 
and actual. Thereby philosophy has attained, with Schelling,1 its 
absolute standpoint; and while art had already begun to assert its 
proper nature and dignity in relation to the highest interests of 
mankind, it was now that the concept of art, and the place of art in 
philosophy was discovered, and art has been accepted, even if in 
one aspect in a distorted way (which this is not the place to discuss), 
still in its high and genuine vocation. Likewise Winckelmann2 at 
an earlier date was inspired by his insight into the ideals of the 
Greeks in a way whereby he opened up a new sense for considering 
art; he rescued it from ways of regarding it as serving common ends 
or merely imitating nature, and has powerfully encouraged the 
discovery of the Idea of art in works of art and the history of art. 
For Winckelmann is to be regarded as one of the men who, in the 
field of art, have opened up for the spirit a new organ and totally 
new modes of treatment. Still, on the theory and philosophical 
knowledge of art his view has had less influence. 
To touch briefly on the course of the further development of 
the subject, alongside the reawakening of the philosophical Idea, 
A. W. and Friedrich von Schlegel,J greedy for novelty in the search 
for the distinctive and extraordinary, appropriated from the philo­
sophical Idea as much as their completely non-philosophical, but 
essentially critical natures were capable of accepting. For neither 
of them can claim a reputation for speculative thought. Neverthe­
less, it was they who, with their critical talent, put themselves near 
the standpoint of the Idea, and with great freedom of speech and 
boldness of innovation, even if with miserable philosophical in­
gredients, directed a spirited polemic against the views of their 
predecessors. And thus in different branches of art they did intro­
duce a new standard of judgement and new considerations which 
were higher than those they attacked. But since their criticism was 
not accompanied by a thoroughly philosophical knowledge of their 
standard, this standard retained a somewhat indefinite and vacillat­
ing character, so that they sometimes achieved too much, some­
times too little. It must also be put to their credit that they brought 
to light again and lovingly exalted things that were antiquated and 
1 1775-I854· See his System of Transcendental Idealism (18oo). 
2 His History of Art in Antiquity appeared in 1764. 
3 1769-184·5 and 1772-1829 respectively. 

64 
I NTRODUCTION 
too little valued at the time, as, for instance, the older Italian and 
Dutch painting, the Nibelungenlied, etc., and that they endeavoured 
with enthusiasm to learn and teach things little known, like Indian 
poetry and mythology. But however high their credit is for this, 
they set too high a value on these epochs, and sometimes fell 
into the error of admiring the mediocre, e.g. Holberg's1 comedies, 
of ascribing universal worth to what was only relatively valuable, 
or even having the audacity to show themselves enthused by a 
perverse tendency and a subordinate standpoint, as if it were 
something supreme. 
(iii) Inmy 
From this tendency, and especially from the convictions and 
doctrines of F. von Schlegel, there was further developed in diverse 
shapes the so-called 'irony' .2 This had its deeper root, in one of its 
aspects, in Fichte's philosophy, in so far as the principles of this 
philosophy were applied to art. F. von Schlegel, like Schelling, 
started from Fichte's standpoint, Schelling to go beyond it alto­
gether, Schlegel to develop it in his own way and to tear himself 
loose from it. Now so far as concerns the closer connection of 
Fichte's propositions with one tendency of irony, we need in this 
respect emphasize only the following points about this irony, 
namely that [first] Fichte sets up the ego as the absolute principle 
of all knowing, reason, and cognition, and at that the ego that 
remains throughout abstract and formal. Secondly, this ego is 
therefore in itself just simple, and, on the one hand, every par­
ticularity, every characteristic, every content is negated in it, since 
everything is submerged in this abstract freedom and unity, while, 
on the other hand, every content which is to have value for the ego 
is only put and recognized by the ego itself. Whatever is, is only by 
the instrumentality of the ego, and what exists by my instrumen­
tality I can equally well annihilate again. 
Now if we stop at these absolutely empty forms which originate 
from the absoluteness of the abstract ego, nothing is treated in and 
for itself and as valuable in itself, but only as produced by the sub­
jectivity of the ego. But in that case the ego can remain lord and 
master of everything, and in no sphere of morals, law, things 
1 Baron L. Holberg, r684-1754. Danish dramatist and historian . 
• See Philosophy of Right, § I40(f), Eng. tr. (Oxford, 1942), pp. IOI-J, zs8. 
Also see below, p. 69, note, and index, s.v. 

INTRODUCTION 
6s 
human and divine, profane and sacred, is there anything that would 
not first have to be laid down by the ego, and that therefore could 
not equally well be destroyed by it. Consequently everything 
genuinely and independently real becomes only a show, not true 
and genuine on its own account or through itself, but a mere 
appearance due to the ego in whose power and caprice and at 
whose free disposal it remains. To admit or cancel it depends 
wholly on the pleasure of the ego, already absolute in itself simply 
as ego. 
Now thirdly, the ego is a living, active individual, and its life con­
sists in making its individuality real in its own eyes and in those of 
others, in expressing itself, and bringing itself into appearance. For 
every man, by living, tries to realize himself and does realize him­
self. Now in relation to beauty and art, this acquires the meaning 
of living as an artist and forming one's life artistically. But on this 
principle, I live as an artist when all my action and my expression 
in general, in connection with any content whatever, remains for 
me a mere show and assumes a shape which is wholly in my power. 
In that case I am not really in earnest either with this content 
or, generally, with its expression and actualization. For genuine 
earnestness enters only by means of a substantial interest, some­
thing of intrinsic worth like truth, ethical life, etc.,-by means of 
a content which counts as such for me as essential, so that I only 
become essential myself in my own eyes in so far as I have im­
mersed myself in such a content and have brought myself into 
conformity with it in all my knowing and acting. When the ego 
that sets up and dissolves everything out of its own caprice is the 
artist, to whom no content of consciousness appears as absolute 
and independently real but only as a self-made and destructible 
show, such earnestness can find no place, since validity is ascribed 
only to the formalism of the ego. 
True, in the eyes of others the appearance which I present to 
them may be regarded seriously, in that they take me to be really 
concerned with the matter in hand, but in that case they are simply 
deceived, poor limited creatures, without the faculty and ability 
to apprehend and reach the loftiness of my standpoint. Therefore 
this shows me that not everyone is so free (i.e. formally free)1 as to 
see in everything which otherwise has value, dignity, and sanctity 
for mankind just a product of his own power of caprice, whereby 
' i.e. not even merely capricious enough. 

66 
INTRODUCTION 
he is at liberty either to grant validity to such things, to determine 
himself and fill his life by means of them, or the reverse. Moreover 
this virtuosity of an ironical artistic life apprehends itself as a 
divine creative genius for which anything and everything is only 
an unsubstantial creature, to which the creator, knowing himself 
to be disengaged and free from everything, is not bound, because 
he is just as able to destroy it as to create it. In that case, he who 
has reached this standpoint of divine genius looks down from 
his high rank on all other men, for they are pronounced dull and 
limited, inasmuch as law, morals, etc., still count for them as 
fixed, essential, and obligatory. So then the individual, who lives 
in this way as an artist, does give himself relations to others: he 
lives with friends, mistresses, etc. ; but, by his being a genius, this 
relation to his own specific reality, his particular actions, as well 
as to what is absolute and universal, is at the same time null; his 
attitude to it all is ironical. 
These three points comprise the general meaning of the divine 
irony of genius, as this concentration of the ego into itself, for 
which all bonds are snapped and which can live only in the bliss 
of self-enjoyment. This irony was invented by Friedrich von 
Schlegel, and many others have babbled about it or are now 
babbling about it again. 
The next form of this negativity of irony is, on the one hand, the 
vanity of everything factual, moral, and of intrinsic worth, the 
nullity of everything objective and absolutely valid. If the ego 
remains at this standpoint, everything appears to it as null and 
vain, except its own subjectivity which therefore becomes hollow 
and empty and itself mere vanity.1 But, on the other hand, the ego 
may, contrariwise, fail to find satisfaction in this self-enjoyment 
and instead become inadequate to itself, so that it now feels a 
craving for the solid and the substantial, for specific and essential 
interests. Out of this comes misfortune, and the contradiction that, 
on the one hand, the subject does want to penetrate into truth and 
longs for objectivity, but, on the other hand, cannot renounce his 
isolation and withdrawal into himself or tear himself free from this 
unsatisfied abstract inwardness. Now he is attacked by the yearning 
which also we have seen proceeding from Fichtean philosophy. 
The dissatisfaction of this quiescence and impotence-which may 
not do or touch anything for fear of losing its inner harmony and 
1 Eitelkeit. Hegel is playing on its two meanings, vacuity and conceit. 

INTRODUCTION 
which, even if pure in itself, is still unreal and empty despite its 
desire for reality and what is absolute-is the source of yearning 
and a morbid beautiful soul. For a truly beautiful soul acts and is 
actual. That longing, however, is only the empty vain subject's 
sense of nullity, and he lacks the strength to escape from this 
vanity and fill himself with a content of substance. 
But in so far as irony has been made into a form of art, it has 
not stopped at giving artistic form merely to the personal life 
and particular individuality of the ironical artist; apart from the 
artistic work presented in his own actions, etc., the artist was 
supposed to produce external works of art also as the product of his 
imagination. The principle of these productions, which can emerge 
for the most part only in poetry, is now over again to represent the 
Divine as the ironical. But the ironical, as the individuality of 
genius, lies in the self-destruction of the noble, great, and excel­
lent; and so the objective art-formations too will have to display 
only the principle of absolute subjectivity, by showing forth what 
has worth and dignity for mankind as null in its self-destruction. 
This then implies that not only is there to be no seriousness about 
law, morals, and truth, but that there is ·nothing in what is lofty 
and best, since, in its appearance in individuals, characters, and 
actions, it contradicts and destroys itself and so is ironical about 
itself. 
This form, taken abstractly, borders nearly on the principle of 
the comic; yet in this kinship the comic must be essentially dis­
tinguished from the ironic. For the comic must be restricted to 
showing that what destroys itself is something inherently null, a 
false and contradictory phenomenon, a whim, e.g., an oddity, a 
particular caprice in comparison with a mighty passion, or even 
a supposedly tenable principle and firm maxim. But it is a totally 
different thing if what is in fact moral and true, any inherently 
substantial content, displays itself in an individual, and by his 
agency, as null. In such an event the individual is null in character 
and contemptible, and his weakness and lack of character is 
brought into his portrayals also. Therefore in this difference 
between the ironic and the comic what is essentially at issue is the 
content of what is destroyed. There are bad, useless people who 
cannot stick to their fixed and important aim but abandon it again 
and let it be destroyed in themselves. Irony loves this irony of 
loss of character. For true character implies, on the one hand, 

68 
I NTRODUCTION 
essentially worthy aims, and, on the other hand, a firm grip of 
such aims, so that the whole being of its individuality would be 
lost if the aims had to be given up and abandoned. This fixity and 
substantiality constitutes the keynote of character. Cato can live 
only as a Roman and a republican. But if irony is taken as the key­
note of the representation, then the most inartistic of all principles 
is taken to be the principle of the work of art. For the result is to 
produce, in part, commonplace figures, in part, figures worthless 
and without bearing, since the substance of their being proves in 
them to be a nullity; in part, finally, there appear attached to them 
those yearnings and unresolved contradictions of the heart [which 
we mentioned above]. Such representations can awaken no genuine 
interest. For this reason, after all, on the part of irony there are 
steady complaints about the public's deficiency in profound sensi­
bility, artistic insight, and genius, because it does not understand 
this loftiness of irony; i.e. the public does not enjoy this mediocrity 
and what is partly wishy-washy, partly characterless. And it is 
a good thing that these worthless yearning natures do not please; 
it is a comfort that this insincerity and hypocrisy are not to people's 
liking, and that on the contrary people want full and genuine 
interests as well as characters which remain true to their important 
intrinsic worth. 
As an historical remark it may be added that it was especially 
Solger and Ludwig Tieck1 who adopted irony as the supreme 
principle of art. 
Of Solger this is not the place to speak at the length he deserves, 
and I must confine myself to a few observations. Solger was not 
content, like the others, with superficial philosophical culture; on 
the contrary; his genuinely speculative inmost need impelled him 
to plumb the depths of the philosophical Idea. In this process he 
came to the dialectical moment of the Idea, to the point which 
I call 'infinite absolute negativity', to the activity of the Idea in 
so negating itself as infinite and universal as to become finitude and 
particularity, and in nevertheless cancelling this negation in turn 
and so re-establishing the universal and infinite in the finite and 
particular. To this negativity Solger firmly clung, and of course it is 
1 K. W. F. Solger, 178o-r8 I 9. See Philosophy of Right (Eng. tr. cit., pp. IOI­
z). Tieck, 1773-1853· See below, section on The Ancient Epigram. Hegel dealt 
at some length with Solgcr and Tieck in a review of Solger's posthumous 
writings in I 828. 

I NTRODUCTION 
6g 
one element in the speculative Idea, yet interpreted as this purely 
dialectical unrest and dissolution of both infinite and finite, only 
one element, and not, as Solger will have it, the whole Idea. Un­
fortunately Solger's life was broken off too soon for him to have 
been able to reach the concrete development of the philosophical 
Idea. So he got no further than this aspect of negativity which has 
an affinity with the ironic dissolution of the determinate and the 
inherently substantial alike, and in which he also saw the principle 
of artistic activity. Yet in his actual life, having regard to the firm­
ness, seriousness, and stoutness of his character, he was neither 
himself an ironic artist of the kind depicted above, nor was his 
profound sense for genuine works of art, nurtured by his persistent 
study of art, in this respect of an ironical nature. So much in 
justification of Solger, who in his life, philosophy, and art deserves 
to be distinguished from the previously mentioned apostles of 
irony. 
As regards Ludwig Tieck, his culture too dates from that period 
in which J ena was for some time the cultural centre. Tieck and 
others of these distinguished people are indeed very familiar with 
such expressions as 'irony', but without telling us what they mean. 
So Tieck does always demand irony; yet when he goes on himself 
to judge works of art, while it is true that his recognition and 
description of their greatness is excellent, if we hope to find here 
the best opportunity of showing what the irony is in such a work 
as, e.g., Romeo and Juliet, we are deceived. We hear no more about 
irony.1 
[8] Division of the Subject 
Mter the foregoing introductory remarks it is now time to pass 
on to the study of our subject itself. But the introduction, where 
we still are, can in this respect do no more than sketch for our 
apprehension a conspectus of the entire course of our subsequent 
1 The term 'Romantic Irony' seems to be derived from F. von Schlegel and 
it is generally understood to mean that the writer, while still creative and 
emotional, should remain aloof and self-critical. What Hegel says of Tieck is 
correct. In Tieck's critical essays, especially on Shakespeare, he seldom, if ever, 
has anything to say about irony. Hegel may have in mind the preface to volume 6 
of Tieck's collected Works; it appeared in 18z8 and mentions Solger. (I owe 
this note to Professor James Trainer.) For a full treatment of Romantic Irony 
and Hegel's attitude to it, see 0. Poggeler, Hegels Kritik der Romantik (Bonn, 
1956). 

INTRODUCTION 
scientific studies. But since we have spoken of art as itself proceed­
ing from the absolute Idea, and have even pronounced its end to 
be the sensuous presentation of the Absolute itself, we must pro­
ceed, even in this conspectus, by showing, at least in general, how 
the particular parts of the subject emerge from the conception of 
artistic beauty as the presentation of the Absolute. Therefore we 
must attempt, in the most general way, to awaken an idea of this 
conception. 
It has already been said that the content of art is the Idea, while 
its form is the configuration of sensuous material. Now art has to 
harmonize these two sides and bring them into a free reconciled 
totality. The first point here is the demand that the content which 
is to come into artistic representation should be in itself qualified 
for such representation. For otherwise we obtain only a bad 
combination, because in that case a content ill-adapted to figura­
tiveness and external presentation is made to adopt this form, 
or, in other words, material explicitly prosaic is expected to find 
a really appropriate mode of presentation in the form antagonistic 
to its nature. 
The second demand, derived from the first, requires of the con­
tent of art that it be not anything abstract in itself, but concrete, 
though not concrete in the sense in which the sensuous is con­
crete when it is contrasted with everything spiritual and intellectual 
and these are taken to be simple and abstract. For everything 
genuine in spirit and nature alike is inherently concrete and, despite 
its universality, has nevertheless subjectivity and particularity in 
itself. If we say, for example, of God that he is simply one, the 
supreme being as such, we have thereby only enunciated a dead 
abstraction of the sub-rational Understanding. Such a God, not 
apprehended himself in his concrete truth, will provide no content 
for art, especially not for visual art. Therefore the Jews and the 
Turks have not been able by art to represent their God, who does 
not even amount to such an abstraction of the Understanding, in 
the positive way that the Christians have. For in Christianity God 
is set forth in his truth, and therefore as thoroughly concrete in 
himself, as person, as subject, and, more closely defined, as spirit. 
What he is as spirit is made explicit for religious apprehension as 
a Trinity of Persons, which yet at the same time is self-aware as 
one. Here we have essentiality or universality, and particulariza­
tion, together with their reconciled unity, and only such unity is 

INTRODUCTION 
71 
the concrete. Now since a content, in order to be true at all, must 
be of this concrete kind, art too demands similar concreteness, 
because the purely abstract universal has not in itself the deter­
minate character of advancing to particularization and pheno­
menal manifestation and to unity with itself in these. 
Now, thirdly, if a sensuous form and shape is to correspond with 
a genuine and therefore concrete content, it must likewise be 
something individual, in itself completely concrete and single. 
The fact that the concrete accrues to both sides of art, i.e. to both 
content and its presentation, is precisely the point in which both 
can coincide and correspond with one another; just as, for instance, 
the natural shape of the human body is such a sensuously concrete 
thing, capable of displaying spirit, which is concrete in itself, and 
of showing itself in conformity with it. Therefore, after all, we 
must put out of our minds the idea that it is purely a matter of 
chance that to serve as such a genuine shape an actual pheno­
menon of the external world is selected. For art does not seize 
upon this form either because it just finds it there or because there 
is no other; on the contrary, the concrete content itself involves 
the factor of external, actual, and indeed even sensuous manifesta­
tion. But then in return this sensuous concrete thing, which bears 
the stamp of an essentially spiritual content, is also essentially for 
our inner (apprehension] ; the external shape, whereby the con­
tent is made visible and imaginable, has the purpose of existing 
solely for our mind and spirit. For this reason alone are content 
and artistic form fashioned in conformity with one another. The 
purely sensuously concrete-external nature as such-does not 
have this purpose for the sole reason of its origin. The variegated 
richly coloured plumage of birds shines even when unseen, their 
song dies away unheard ; the torch-thistle, which blooms for only 
one night, withers in the wilds of the southern forests without 
having been admired, and these forests, jungles themselves of the 
most beautiful and luxuriant vegetation, with the most sweet­
smelling and aromatic perfumes, rot and decay equally unenjoyed. 
But the work of art is not so naively self-centred; it is essentially 
a question, an address to the responsive breast, a call to the mind 
and the spirit. 
Although illustration by art is not in this respect a matter of 
chance, it is, on the other hand, not the highest way of apprehend­
ing the spiritually concrete. The higher way, in contrast to 

INTRODUCTION 
representation by means of the sensuously concrete, is thinking, 
which in a relative sense is indeed abstract, but it must be concrete, 
not one-sided, if it is to be true and rational. How far a specific 
content has its appropriate form in sensuous artistic representa­
tion, or whether, owing to its own nature, it essentially demands 
a higher, more spiritual, form, is a question of the distinction 
which appears at once, for example, in a comparison between the 
Greek gods and God as conceived by Christian ideas. The Greek 
god is not abstract but individual, closely related to the natural 
[human] form. The Christian God too is indeed a concrete 
personality, but is pure spirituality and is to be known as spirit and 
in spirit. His medium of existence is therefore essentially' inner 
knowledge and not the external natural form through which hte can 
be represented only imperfectly and not in the whole profundity of 
his nature. 
But since art has the task of presenting the Idea to immediate 
perception in a sensuous shape and not in the form of thinking and 
pure spirituality as such, and, since this presenting has its value 
and dignity in the correspondence and unity of both sides, i.e. 
the Idea and its outward shape, it follows that the loftiness and 
excellence of art in attaining a reality adequate to its Concept will 
depend on the degree of inwardness and unity in which Idea and 
shape appear fused into one. 
In this point of higher truth, as the spirituality which the artistic 
formation has achieved in conformity with the Concept of spirit, 
there lies the basis for the division of the philosophy of art. For, 
before reaching the true Concept of its absolute essence, the spirit 
has to go through a course of stages, a series grounded in this 
Concept itself; and to this course of the content which the spirit 
gives to itself there corresponds a course, immediately connected 
therewith, of configurations of art, in the form of which the spirit, 
as artist, gives itself a consciousness of itself. 
This course within the spirit of art has itself in turn, in ac­
cordance with its own nature, two sides. First, this development is 
itself a spiritual and universal one, since the sequence of definite 
conceptions of the world, as the definite but comprehensive con­
sciousness of nature, man, and God, gives itself artistic shape.• 
1 i.e. the art expressive of one world-view differs from that which expresses 
another : Greek art as a whole differs from Christian art as a whole. The sequence 
of different religions gives rise to a sequence of different art-forms. 

INTROD U C T I O N  
73 
Secondly, this inner development of art has to give itself immediate 
existence and sensuous being, and the specific modes of the 
sensuous being of art are themselves a totality of necessary dit­
ferences in art, i.e. the particular arts. Artistic configuration and its 
differences are, on the one hand, as spiritual, of a more universal 
kind and not bound to one material [e.g. stone or paint], and sen­
suous existence is itself differentiated in numerous ways; but 
since this existence, like spirit, has the Concept implicitly for its 
inner soul, a specific sensuous material does thereby, on the other 
hand, acquire a closer relation and a secret harmony with the 
spiritual differences and forms of artistic configuration. 
However, in its completeness our science is divided into three 
mainl sections : 
First, we acquire a universal part. This has for its content and 
subject both the universal Idea of artistic beauty as the Ideal, and 
also the nearer relation of the Ideal to nature on the one hand 
and to subjective artistic production on the other. 
Secondly, there is developed out of the conception of artistic 
beauty a particular part, because the essential differences contained 
in this conception unfold into a sequence of particular forms of 
artistic configuration. 
Thirdly, there is a final part which has to consider the indivi­
dualization of artistic beauty, since art advances to the sensuous 
realization of its creations and rounds itself off in a system of single 
arts and their genera and species. 
(i) The Idea of the Beauty of Art or the I deal 
In the first place, so far as the first and second parts are con­
cerned, we must at once, if what follows is to be made intelligible, 
recall again that the Idea as the beauty of art is not the Idea as 
such, in the way that a metaphysical logic has to apprehend it as the 
Absolute, but the Idea as shaped forward into reality and as 
having advanced to immediate unity and correspondence with this 
reality. For the Idea as such is indeed the absolute truth itself, but 
the truth only in its not yet objectified universality, while the Idea 
as the beauty of art is the Idea with the nearer qualification of 
being both essentially individual reality and also an individual 
configuration of reality destined essentially to embody and reveal 
the Idea. Accordingly there is here expressed the demand that the 
Idea and its configuration as a concrete reality shall be made 

74 
INTRODUCTION 
completely adequate to one another. Taken thus, the Idea as 
reality, shaped in accordance with the Concept of the Idea, is the 
Ideal. 
The problem of such correspondence might in the first instance 
be understood quite formally in the sense that any Idea at all 
might serve, if only the actual shape, no matter which, represented 
precisely this specific Idea. But in that case the demanded truth 
of the Ideal is confused with mere correctness which consists in 
the expression of some meaning or other in an appropriate way 
and therefore the direct rediscovery of its sense in the shape pro­
duced. The Ideal is not to be thus understood. For any content 
can be represented quite adequately, judged by the standard of its 
own essence, without being allowed to claim the artistic beauty of 
the Ideal. Indeed, in comparison with ideal beauty, the representa­
tion will even appear defective. In this regard it may be remarked 
in advance, what can only be proved later, namely that the de­
fectiveness of a work of art is not always to be regarded as due, as 
may be supposed, to the artist's lack of skill ; on the contrary, 
defectiveness of form results from defectiveness of content. So, for 
example, the Chinese, Indians, and Egyptians, in their artistic 
shapes, images of gods, and idols, never get beyond formlessness 
or a bad and untrue definiteness of form. They could not master 
true beauty because their mythological ideas, the content and 
thought of their works of art, were still indeterminate, or deter­
mined badly, and so did not consist of the content which is 
absolute in itself. Works of art are all the more excellent in 
expressing true beauty, the deeper is the inner truth of their con­
tent and thought. And in this connection we are not merely to 
think, as others may, of any greater or lesser skill with which 
natural forms as they exist in the external world are apprehended 
and imitated. For, in certain stages of art-consciousness and 
presentation, the abandonment and distortion of natural forma­
tions is not unintentional lack of technical skill or practice, but 
intentional alteration which proceeds from and is demanded by 
what is in the artist's mind. Thus, from this point of view, there is 
imperfect art which in technical and other respects may be quite 
perfect in its specific sphere, and yet it is clearly defective in 
comparison with the concept of art itself and the Ideal. 
Only in the highest art are Idea and presentation truly in con­
formity with one another, in the sense that the shape given to the 

I NTROD U C T I O N  
75 
Idea is in itself the absolutely true shape, because the content of 
the Idea which that shape expresses is itself the true and genuine 
content. Associated with this, as has already been indicated, is the 
fact that the Idea must be determined in and through itself as 
a concrete totality, and therefore possess in itself the principle and 
measure of its particularization and determinacy in external ap­
pearance. For example, the Christian imagination will be able to 
represent God in human form and its expression of spirit, only 
because God himself is here completely known in himself as 
spirit. Determinacy is, as it were, the bridge to appearance. Where 
this determinacy is not a totality emanating from the Idea itself, 
where the Idea is not presented as self-determining and self­
particularizing, the Idea remains abstract and has its determinacy, 
and therefore the principle for its particular and solely appropriate 
mode of appearance, not in itself, but outside itself. On this 
account, then, the still abstract Idea has its shape also external 
to itself, not settled by itself. On the other hand, the inherently 
concrete Idea carries within itself the principle of its mode of 
appearance and is therefore its own free configurator. Thus the 
truly concrete Idea alone produces its true configuration, and this 
correspondence of the two is the Ideal. 
(ii) Development of the Ideal into the Particular Forms of the 
Beauty of Art 
But because the Idea is in this way a concrete unity, this unity 
can enter the art-consciousness only through the unfolding and 
then the reconciliation of the particularizations of the Idea, and, 
through this development, artistic beauty acquires a totality of 
particular stages and forms. Therefore, after studying artistic 
beauty in itself and on its own account, we must see how beauty 
as a whole decomposes into its particular determinations. This 
gives, as the second part of our study, the doctrine of the forms of 
art. These forms find their origin in the different ways of grasping 
the Idea as content, whereby a difference in the configuration in 
which the Idea appears is conditioned. Thus the forms of art are 
nothing but the different relations of meaning and shape, relations 
which proceed from the Idea itself and therefore provide the true 
basis for the division of this sphere. For division must always be 
implicit in the concept, the particularization and division of 
which is in question. 
8243715 
D 

INTRODUCTION 
We have here to consider three relations of the Idea to its con­
figuration. 
(a) First, art begins when the Idea, still in its indeterminacy and 
obscurity, or in bad and untrue determinacy, is made the content 
of artistic shapes. Being indeterminate, it does not yet possess in 
itself that individuality which the Ideal demands; its abstraction 
and one-sidedness leave its shape externally defective and arbi­
trary. The first form of art is therefore rather a mere search for 
portrayal than a capacity for true presentation ;  the Idea has not 
found the form even in itself and therefore remains struggling and 
striving after it. We may call this form, in general terms, the sym­
bolic form of art. In it the abstract Idea has its shape outside 
itself in the natural sensuous material from which the process of 
shaping starts1 and with which, in its appearance, this process is 
linked. Perceived natural objects are, on the one hand, primarily 
left as they are, yet at the same time the substantial Idea is im­
posed on them as their meaning so that they now acquire a voca­
tion to express it and so are to be interpreted as if the Idea itself 
were present in them. A corollary of this is the fact that natural 
objects have in them an aspect according to which they are capable 
of representing a universal meaning. But since a complete corres­
pondence is not yet possible, this relation can concern only an 
abstract characteristic, as when, for example, in a lion strength is 
meant. 
On the other hand, the abstractness of this relation brings home 
to consciousness even so the foreignness of the Idea to natural 
phenomena, and the Idea, which has no other reality to express it, 
launches out in all these shapes, seeks itself in them in their unrest 
and extravagance, but yet does not find them adequate to itself. 
So now the Idea exaggerates natural shapes and the phenomena of 
reality itself into indefiniteness and extravagance; it staggers round 
in them, it bubbles and ferments in them, does violence to them, 
distorts and stretches them unnaturally, and tries to elevate their 
phenomenal appearance to the Idea by the diffuseness, immensity, 
and splendour of the formations employed. For the Idea is here 
still more or less indeterminate and unshapable, while the natural 
objects are thoroughly determinate in their shape. 
1 An unknown block of stone may symbolize the Divine, but it does not 
represent it. Its natural shape has no connection with the Divine and is therefore 
external to it and not an embodiment of it. When shaping begins, the shapes 
produced are symbols, perhaps, but in themselves are fantastic and monstrous. 

INTRODUCTION 
77 
In the incompatibility of the two sides to one another, the re­
lation of the Idea to the objective world therefore becomes a 
negative one, since the Idea, as something inward, is itself un­
satisfied by such externality, and, as the inner universal substance 
thereof, it persists sublime above all this multiplicity of shapes 
which do not correspond with it. In the light of this sublimity, the 
natural phenomena and human forms and events are accepted, it 
is true, and left as they are, but yet they are recognized at the same 
time as incompatible with their meaning which is raised far above 
all mundane content. 
These aspects constitute in general the character of the early 
artistic pantheism of the East, which on the one hand ascribes 
absolute meaning to even the most worthless objects, and, on the 
other, violently coerces the phenomena to express its view of the 
world whereby it becomes bizarre, grotesque, and tasteless, or 
turns the infinite but abstract freedom of the substance (i.e. the 
one Lord] disdainfully against all phenomena as being null and 
evanescent. By this means the meaning cannot be completely 
pictured in the expression and, despite all striving and endeavour, 
the incompatibility of Idea and shape still remains unconquered.­
This may be taken to be the first form of art, the symbolic form 
with its quest, its fermentation, its mysteriousness, and its 
sublimity. 
(b) In the second form of art which we will call the classical, the 
double defect of the symbolic form is extinguished. The symbolic 
shape is imperfect because, (i) in it the Idea is presented to con­
sciousness only as indeterminate or determined abstractly, and, 
(ii) for this reason the correspondence of meaning and shape is 
always defective and must itself remain purely abstract. The 
classical art-form clears up this double defect; it is the free and 
adequate embodiment of the Idea in the shape peculiarly appro­
priate to the Idea itself in its essential nature. With this shape, 
therefore, the Idea is able to come into free and complete harmony. 
Thus the classical art-form is the first to afford the production 
and vision of the completed Ideal and to present it as actualized 
in fact. 
Nevertheless, the conformity of concept and reality in classical 
art must not be taken in the purely formal sense of a correspon­
dence between a content and its external configuration, any more 
than this could be the case with the Ideal itself. Otherwise every 

I NTRODUCT I O N  
portrayal of nature, every cast of features, every neighbourhood, 
flower, scene, etc., which constitutes the end and content of the 
representation, would at once be classical on the strength of such 
congruity between content and form. On the contrary, in classical 
art the peculiarity of the content consists in its being itself the 
concrete Idea, and as such the concretely spiritual, for it is the 
spiritual alone which is the truly inner [self]. Consequently, to 
suit such a content we must try to find out what in nature belongs 
to the spiritual in and for itself. The original Concept1 itself it must 
be which invented the shape for concrete spirit, so that now the 
subjective Concept-here the spirit of art-has merely found this 
shape and made it, as a natural shaped existent, appropriate to free 
individual spirituality. This shape, which the Idea as spiritual­
indeed as individually determinate spirituality-assumes when it 
is to proceed out into a temporal manifestation, is the human form. 
Of course personification and anthropomorphism have often been 
maligned as a degradation of the spiritual, but in so far as art's task 
is to bring the spiritual before our eyes in a sensuous manner, 
it must get involved in this anthropomorphism, since spirit appears 
sensuously in a satisfying way only in its body. The transmigration 
of souls is in this respect an abstract idea, 2 and physiology should 
have made it one of its chief propositions that life in its develop­
ment had necessarily.to proceed to the human form as the one and 
only sensuous appearance appropriate to spirit. 
But the human body in its forms counts in classical art no longer 
as a merely sensuous existent, but only as the existence and natural 
shape of the spirit, and it must therefore be exempt from all the 
deficiency of the purely sensuous and from the contingent fini­
tude of the phenomenal world. While in this way the shape is 
purified in order to express in itself a content adequate to itself, 
on the other hand, if the correspondence of meaning and shape is 
to be perfect, the spirituality, which is the content, must be of such 
a kind that it can express itself completely in the natural human 
form, without towering beyond and above this expression in 
1 Bosanquet (op. cit., p. 185) seems to be right in suggesting that 'original 
Concept' means 'God', and that he invented man as an expression of spirit; art 
finds him as appropriate to express the individual spirit. Hegel is fond of the 
play on words between erfinden (invent) and finden (find). 
• Bosanquet points out that the idea is abstract because it represents the soul 
as independent of an appropriate body-the human soul as capable of existing 
in a beast's body (op. cit., p. r86). 

INTR O D U C T I O N  
79 
sensuous and bodily terms. Therefore here the spirit is at once 
determined as particular and human, not as purely absolute and 
eternal, since in this latter sense it can proclaim and express itself 
only as spirituality. 
This last point in its turn is the defect which brings about the 
dissolution of the classical art-form and demands a transition to 
a higher form, the third, namely the romantic. 
(c) The romantic form of art cancels again the completed 
unification of the Idea and its reality, and reverts, even if in a 
higher way, to that difference and opposition of the two sides which 
in symbolic art remained unconquered. The classical form of art 
has attained the pinnacle of what illustration by art could achieve, 
and if there is something defective in it, the defect is just art itself 
and the restrictedness of the sphere of art. This restrictedness lies 
in the fact that art in general takes as its subject-matter the spirit 
(i.e. the universal, infinite and concrete in its nature) in a sensuously 
concrete form, and classical art presents the complete unification 
of spiritual and sensuous existence as the correspondence of the two. 
But in this blending of the two, spirit is not in fact represented in 
its true nature. For spirit is the infinite subjectivity of the Idea, 
which as absolute inwardness cannot freely and truly shape itself 
outwardly on condition of remaining moulded into a bodily exist­
ence as the one appropriate to it. 1 
Abandoning this [classical] principle, the romantic form of art 
cancels the undivided unity of classical art because it has won a 
content which goes beyond and above the classical form of art and 
its mode of expression. This content-to recall familiar ideas­
coincides with what Christianity asserts of God as a spirit, in 
distinction from the Greek religion which is the essential and most 
appropriate content for classical art. In classical art the concrete 
content is implicitly the unity of the divine nature with the human, 
a unity which, just because it is only immediate and implicit, is 
adequately manifested also in an immediate and sensuous way. 
The Greek god is the object of naive intuition and sensuous 
imagination, and therefore his shape is the bodily shape of man. 
The range of his power and his being is individual and particular. 
' In other words, thought is 'inwardness' in the sense that thoughts are not 
outside one another in the way that the parts of a body are. This is why the 
spirit cannot find an adequate embodiment in things but only in thoughts, or 
at least only in the inner life. 

So 
I NTRODUCTION 
Contrasted with the individual he is a substance and power with 
which the individual's inner being is only implicitly at one but 
without itself possessing this oneness as inward subjective know­
ledge. Now the higher state is the knowledge of that implicit unity 
which is the content of the classical art-form and is capable of 
perfect presentation in bodily shape. But this elevation of the 
implicit into self-conscious knowledge introduces a tremendous 
difference. It is the infinite difference which, for example, separates 
man from animals. Man is an animal, but even in his animal 
functions, he is not confined to the implicit, as the animal is; he 
becomes conscious of them, recognizes them, and lifts them, as, 
for instance, the process of digestion, into self-conscious science. 
In this way man breaks the barrier of his implicit and immediate 
character, so that precisely because he knows that he is an animal, 
he ceases to be an animal and attains knowledge of himself as 
spirit. 
Now if in this way what was implicit at the previous stage, the 
unity of divine and human nature, is raised from an immediate to a 
known unity, the true element for the realization of this content is 
no longer the sensuous immediate existence of the spiritual in the 
bodily form of man, but instead the inwardness of self-consciousness. 
Now Christianity brings God before our imagination as spirit, not 
as an individual, particular spirit, but as absolute in spirit and in 
truth. For this reason it retreats from the sensuousness of imagina­
tion into spiritual inwardness and makes this, and not the body, 
the medium and the existence of truth's content. Thus the unity 
of divine and human nature is a known unity, one to be realized 
only by spiritual knowing and in spirit. The new content, thus won, 
is on this account not tied to sensuous presentation, as if that 
corresponded to it, but is freed from this immediate existence 
which must be set down as negative, overcome, and reflected into 
the spiritual unity. In this way romantic art is the self-transcen­
dence of art but within its own sphere and in the form of art 
itself. 
We may, therefore, in short, adhere to the view that at this third 
stage the subject-matter of art is free concrete spirituality, which is 
to be manifested as spirituality to the spiritually inward. In con­
formity with this subject-matter, art cannot work for sensuous 
intuition. Instead it must, on the one hand, work for the inward­
ness which coalesces with its object simply as if with itself, for 

INTRO D U CTION 
BI 
subjective inner depth, for reflective emotion, for feeling which, 
as spiritual, strives for freedom in itself and seeks and finds its 
reconciliation only in the inner spirit. This inner world constitutes 
the content of the romantic sphere and must therefore be repre­
sented as this inwardness and in the pure appearance of this depth 
of feeling. Inwardness celebrates its triumph over the external and 
manifests its victory in and on the external itself, whereby what 
is apparent to the senses alone sinks into worthlessness. 
On the other hand, however, this romantic form too, like all art, 
needs an external medium for its expression. Now since spirituality 
has withdrawn into itself out of the external world and immediate 
unity therewith, the sensuous externality of shape is for this reason 
accepted and represented, as in symbolic art, as something 
inessential and transient; and the same is true of the subjective 
finite spirit and will, right down to the particularity and caprice of 
individuality, character, action, etc., of incident, plot, etc. The 
aspect of external existence is consigned to contingency and 
abandoned to the adventures devised by an imagination whose 
caprice can mirror what is present to it, exactly as it is, just as 
readily as it can jumble the shapes of the external world and distort 
them grotesquely. For this external medium has its essence and 
meaning no longer, as in classical art, in itself and its own sphere, 
but in the heart which finds its manifestation in itself instead of in 
the external world and its form of reality, and this reconciliation 
with itself it can preserve or regain in every chance, in every 
accident that takes independent shape, in all misfortune and grief, 
and indeed even in crime. 
Thereby the separation of Idea and shape, their indifference and 
inadequacy to each other, come to the fore again, as in symbolic 
art, but with this essential difference, that, in romantic art, the 
Idea, the deficiency of which in the symbol brought with it 
deficiency of shape, now has t9 appear perfected in itself as spirit 
and heart. Because of this higher perfection, it is not susceptible of 
an adequate union with the external, since its true reality and 
manifestation it can seek and achieve only within itself. 
This we take to be the general character of the symbolic, 
classical, and romantic forms of art, as the three relations of the 
Idea to its shape in the sphere of art. They consist in the striving 
for, the attainment, and the transcendence of the Ideal as the true 
Idea of beauty. 

8:z 
INTR O D U C T I O N  
(iii) The System of the Individual Arts 
Now the third part of our subject, in contradistinction from the 
two just described, presupposes the concept of the Ideal and also 
the three general forms of art, since it is only the realization of 
these in specific sensuous materials. Therefore we now no longer 
have to do with the inner development of artistic beauty in its 
general fundamental characteristics. Instead we have to consider 
how these characteristics pass into existence, are distinguished from 
one another externally, and actualize every feature in the concep­
tion of beauty independently and explicitly as a work of art and 
not merely as a general form. But since it is the differences im­
manent in the Idea of beauty, and proper to it, that art transfers 
into external existence, it follows that in this Part III the general 
forms of art must likewise be the fundamental principle for the 
articulation and determination of the individual arts; in other 
words, the kinds of art have the same essential distinctions in 
themselves which we came to recognize in the general forms of art. 
Now the external objectivity into which these forms are introduced 
through a sensuous and therefore particular material, makes these 
forms fall apart from one another independently, to become dis­
tinct ways of their realization, i.e. the particular arts. For each 
form finds its specific character also in a specific external material, 
and its adequate realization in the mode of portrayal which 
that material requires. But, on the other hand, these art-forms, 
universal as they are despite their determinateness, break the 
bounds of a particular realization through a specific kind of art and 
achieve their existence equally through the other arts, even if in 
a subordinate way. Therefore the particular arts belong, on the 
one hand, specifically to one of the general forms of art and they 
shape its adequate external artistic actuality, and, on the other 
hand, in their own individual way of shaping externality, they 
present the totality of the forms of art.1 
1 The forms of art are the symbolic, classical, and romantic. The kinds of art 
are sculpture, painting, etc. There is a sense in which one kind of art (e.g. 
sculpture) is the adequate mode in which one form of art (e.g. the classical) is 
actualized. But no form of art is wholly actualized in one kind of art alone ; it 
requires the others, even if they take a subordinate place. Thus while one kind of 
art may belong par excellence to one form of art, it also appears to some extent 
in the other forms and may be said to present them all. This whole section on the 
kinds of art is not easily intelligible except in the light of Hegel's full discussion 
in Part HI of these lectures. 

INTRODUCT I O N  
In general terms, that is to say, in Part III of our subject we 
have to deal with the beauty of art as it unfolds itself, in the arts 
and their productions, into a world of actualized beauty. The con­
tent of this world is the beautiful, and the true beautiful, as we saw, 
is spirituality given shape, the Ideal, and, more precisely, absolute 
spirit, the truth itself. This region of divine truth, artistically 
represented for contemplation and feeling, forms the centre of 
the whole world of art. It is the independent, free, and divine 
shape which has completely mastered the externality of form and 
material and wears it only as a manifestation of itself. Still, since 
the beautiful develops itself in this region as objective reality and 
therefore distinguishes within itself its single aspects and factors, 
granting them independent particularity, it follows that this centre 
now arrays its extremes, realized in their appropriate actuality, 
as contrasted with itself. One of these extremes therefore forms 
a still spiritless objectivity, the merely natural environment of God. 
Here the external as such takes shape as something having its 
spiritual end and content not in itself but in another. 
The other extreme is the Divine as inward, as something known, 
as the variously particularized subjective existence of the Deity: 
the truth as it is effective and living in the sense, heart, and spirit 
of individual persons, not remaining poured out into its external 
shape, but returning into the subjective individual inner life. 
Thereby the Divine as such is at the same time distinguished from 
its pure manifestation as Deity, and thereby enters itself into the 
particularity characteristic of all individual subjective knowledge, 
emotion, perception, and feeling. In the analogous sphere of 
religion, with which art at its highest stage is immediately con­
nected, we conceive this same difference as follows. First, earthly 
natural life in its finitude confronts us on one side ; but then, 
secondly, our consciousness makes God its object wherein the 
difference of objectivity and subjectivity falls away, until, thirdly, 
and lastly, we advance from God as such to worship by the com­
munity, i.e. to God as living and present in subjective conscious­
ness. These three fundamental differences arise also in the world 
of art in independent development. 
(a) The first of the particular arts, the one with which we have to 
begin in accordance with this fundamental characterization of them, 
is architecture as a fine art. Its task consists in so manipulating 
external inorganic nature that, as an external world conformable to 

I NTRODUCTION 
art, it becomes cognate to spirit. Its material is matter itself in its 
immediate externality as a mechanical heavy mass, and its forms 
remain the forms of inorganic nature, set in order according to 
relations of the abstract Understanding, i.e. relations of sym­
metry. In this material and in these forms the Ideal, as concrete 
spirituality, cannot be realized. Hence the reality presented in 
them remains opposed to the Idea, because it is something external 
not penetrated by the Idea or only in an abstract relation to it. 
Therefore the fundamental type of the art of building is the 
symbolic form of art. For architecture is the first to open the way 
for the adequate actuality of the god, and in his service it slaves 
away with objective nature in order to work it free from the jungle 
of finitude and the monstrosity of chance. Thereby it .levels a 
place for the god, forms his external environment, and builds 
for him his temple as the place for the inner composure of the 
spirit and its direction on its absolute objects. It raises an enclosure 
for the assembly of the congregation, as protection against the 
threat of storm, against rain, tempest, and wild animals, and it 
reveals in an artistic way, even if in an external one, the wish to 
assemble. This meaning it can build into its material and the 
forms thereof with greater or lesser effect, in proportion as the 
determinate character of the content for which it undertakes its 
work is more significant or insignificant, more concrete or abstract, 
more profoundly plumbing its own depths, or more obscure and 
superficial. Indeed in this respect architecture may itself attempt 
to go so far as to fashion in its forms and material an adequate 
artistic existence for that content; but in that event it has already 
stepped beyond its own sphere and is swinging over to sculpture, 
the stage above it. For its limitation lies precisely in retaining the 
spiritual, as something inner, over against its own external forms 
and thus pointing to what has soul only as to something distinct 
from these. 
(b) But by architecture, after all, the inorganic external world 
has been purified, set in order symmetrically, and made akin to 
spirit, and the god's temple, the house of his community, stands 
there ready. Then into this temple, secondly, the god enters himself 
as the lightning-flash of individuality striking and permeating the 
inert mass, and the infinite, and no longer merely symmetrical, 
form of spirit itself concentrates and gives shape to something 
corporeal. This is the task of sculpture. 

INTRO D U C T I O N  
ss 
In so far as in sculpture the spiritual inner life, at which architec­
ture can only hint, makes itself at home in the sensuous shape and 
its external material, and in so far as these two sides are so mutually 
formed that neither preponderates, sculpture acquires the classical 
art-form as its fundamental type. Therefore, no expression is left 
to the sensuous which is not an expression of spirit itself, just as, 
conversely, for sculpture no spiritual content can be perfectly 
represented unless it can be fully and adequately presented to 
view in bodily form. For through sculpture the spirit should stand 
before us in blissful tranquillity in its bodily form and in immediate 
unity therewith, and the form should be brought to life by the 
content of spiritual individuality. So the external sensuous material 
is no longer processed either according to its mechanical quality 
alone, as a mass possessing weight, or in forms of the inorganic 
world, or as indifferent to colour, etc., but in the ideal forms of the 
human figure and in all three spatial dimensions too. In this last 
respect we must claim for sculpture that in it the inward and the 
spiritual come into appearance for the first time in their eternal 
peace and essential self-sufficiency. To this peace and unity with 
itself only that external shape corresponds which itself persists 
in this unity and peace. This is shape according to its abstract 
spatiality.1 The spirit which sculpture presents is spirit compact 
in itself, not variously splintered into the play of accidents and 
passions. Consequently sculpture does not abandon spirit's ex­
ternal form to this variety of appearance, but picks up there­
in only this one aspect, abstract spatiality in the totality of its 
dimensions. 
(c) Now when architecture has built its temple and the hand of 
sculpture has set up within it the statues of the god, this sensuously 
present god is confronted, thirdly, in the wide halls of his house, 
by the community. The community is the spiritual reflection into 
itself of this sensuous existent, and is animating subjectivity and 
inwardness. With these, therefore, it comes about that the deter­
mining principle, alike for the content of art and for the material 
that represents it outwardly, is particularization and individualiza­
tion and their requisite subjective apprehension. The compact 
unity in itself which the god has in sculpture disperses into the 
plurality of the inner lives of individuals whose unity is not 
' i.e. shape taken simply as an object occupying space (Bosanquet, op. cit., 
p. 199). 

86 
INTRODUCTION 
sensuous but purely ideal.1 And so only here is God himself truly 
spirit, spirit in his community, God as this to-and-fro, as this 
exchange of his inherent unity with his actualization in subjective 
knowing and its individualization as well as in the universality 
and union of the multitude. In the community God is released 
alike from the abstraction of undeveloped self-identity and from 
his sculptural representation as immediately immersed in a bodily 
medium; and he is raised to spirituality and knowledge, i.e. to 
spirit's mirror-image which essentially appears as inward and as 
subjectivity. Consequently the higher content is now the spiritual, 
the spiritual as absolute. But at the same time, owing to the 
dispersal mentioned just now, the spiritual appears here as par­
ticular spirituality, an individual mind. And it is not the self­
sufficient peace of the god in himself, but appearance as such, being 
for another, that manifestation of the self, which comes to the fore 
here as the chief thing; so now what becomes on its own account 
an object of artistic representation is the most manifold subjec­
tivity in its living movement and activity as human passion, action, 
and adventure, and, in general, the wide range of human feeling, 
willing, and neglect. 
Now in conformity with this content the sensuous element in 
art has likewise to show itself particularized in itself and appro­
priate to subjective inwardness. Material for this is afforded by 
colour, musical sound, and finally sound as the mere indication 
of inner intuitions and ideas. And as modes of realizing the content 
in question by means of these materials we have painting, music, 
and poetry. Here the sensuous medium appears as particularized 
in itself and posited throughout as ideal. Thus it best corresponds 
with the generally spiritual content of art, and the connection of 
spiritual meaning with sensuous material grows into a deeper 
intimacy than was possible in architecture and sculpture. N cver­
theless this is a more inner unity which lies entirely on the sub­
jective side, and which, in so far as form and content have to 
particularize themselves and posit themselves as ideal, can only 
come about at the expense of the objective universality of the 
content and its fusion with the immediately sensuous element. 
Now in these arts form and content raise themselves to ideality, 
r The unity of the members of a church is not visible, but exists in their 
common belief and in the recognition of their community (Bosanquet, op. cit., 
p. zoo). 

INTRO D UC T I O N  
and thus, since they leave behind symbolic architecture and the 
classical idea of sculpture, they acquire their type from the 
romantic form of art on whose mode of configuration they are 
adapted to impress themselves in the most appropriate manner. 
But they are a totality of arts, because the romantic is in itself the 
most concrete form of art. 
The inner articulation of this third sphere of the individual arts 
may be established as follows: 
(ex} The first art, standing next to sculpture, is painting. It 
uses as material for its content, and its content's configuration, 
visibility as such, in so far as this is at the same time particularized, 
i.e. developed into colour. True, the material of architecture and 
sculpture is likewise visible and coloured, but it is not, as in paint­
ing, the making visible as such; it is not the simple light which, 
differentiating itself in its contrast with darkness, and in combina­
tion therewith, becomes colour.1 This quality of visibility in­
herently subjectivized and posited as ideal, needs neither the 
abstract mechanical difference of mass operative in heavy matter, 
as in architecture, nor the totality of sensuous spatiality which 
sculpture retains, even if concentrated and in organic shapes. 
On the contrary, the visibility and the making visible which belong 
to painting have their differences in a more ideal way, i.e. in the 
particular colours, and they free art from the complete sensuous 
spatiality of material things by being restricted to the dimensions 
of a plane surface. 
On the other hand, the content too attains the widest par­
ticularization. Whatever can find room in the human breast as 
feeling, idea, and purpose, whatever it is capable of shaping into 
act, all this multiplex material can constitute the variegated content 
of painting. The whole realm of particularity from the highest 
ingredients of spirit right down to the most isolated natural objects 
finds its place here. For even finite nature in its particular scenes 
and phenomena can come on the stage in painting, if only some 
allusion to an element of spirit allies it more closely with thought 
and feeling. 
(ŷ) The second art through which the romantic form is actualized 
is, as contrasted with painting, music. Its material, though still sen­
suous, proceeds to still deeper subjectivity and particularization. 
1 An obvious reference to Goethe's theory of colour, one of Hegel's favourite 
topics. 

88 
INTRODUCTION 
I mean that music's positing of the sensuous as ideal is to be 
sought in the fact that it cancels, and idealizes into the individual 
singularity of one point, the indifferent self-externality of space, 
the total appearance of which is accepted by painting and 
deliberately simulated. But as this negativity, the point is concrete 
in itself and an active cancellation within the material by being a 
movement and tremor of the material body in itself in its relation 
to itself. This incipient ideality of matter, which appears no longer 
as spatial but as temporal ideality, is sound: the sensuous set down 
as negated with its abstract visibility changed into audibility, since 
sound releases the Ideal, as it were, from its entanglement in 
matter.1 
Now this earliest inwardness and ensouling of matter affords the 
material for the still indefinite inwardness and soul of the spirit, 
and in its tones makes the whole gamut of the heart's feelings and 
passions resound and die away. In this manner, just as sculpture 
stands as the centre between architecture and the arts of romantic 
subjectivity, so music forms the centre of the romantic arts and 
makes the point of transition between the abstract spatial sen­
suousness of painting and the abstract spirituality of poetry. Like 
architecture, music has in itself, as an antithesis to feeling and 
inwardness, a relation of quantity conformable to the mathematical 
intellect; it also has as its basis a fixed conformity to law on the part 
of the notes and their combination and succession. 
(y) Finally, as for the third, most spiritual presentation of 
romantic art, we must look for it in poetry. Its characteristic 
peculiarity lies in the power with which it subjects to spirit and 
its ideas the sensuous element from which music and painting 
began to make art free. For sound, the last external material which 
poetry keeps, is in poetry no longer the feeling of sonority itself, 
but a sign, by itself void of significance, a sign of the idea which 
has become concrete in itself, and not merely of indefinite feeling 
and its nuances and gradations. Sound in this way becomes a word 
as a voice inherently articulated, the meaning of which is to indi­
cate ideas and thoughts. The inherently negative point to which 
music had moved forward now comes forth as the completely 
1 For this section on sound and music, see Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, i.e. 
Enc. of the Phil. Sciences §§ 300-:z. Eng. tr. by A. V. Miller (Oxford, 1970), 
pp. 136-47, by M. J. Petry (London, 1970), vol. :z, pp. 69-82.. Also the whole 
section on music in part iii. 

I NTRODUCTION 
concrete point, as the point of the spirit, as the self-conscious 
individual who out of his own resources unites the infinite space of 
his ideas with the time of sound. Yet this sensuous element, which 
in music was still immediately one with inwardness, is here cut 
free from the content of consciousness, while spirit determines this 
content on its own account and in itself and makes it into ideas. 
To express these it uses sound indeed, but only as a sign in itself 
without value or content. The sound, therefore, may just as well 
be a mere letter, since the audible, like the visible, has sunk into 
being a mere indication of spirit. Therefore the proper element of 
poetical representation is the poetical imagination and the illustra­
tion of spirit itself, and since this element is common to all the 
art-forms, poetry runs through them all and develops itself 
independently in each of them. Poetry is the universal art of the 
spirit which has become free in itself and which is not tied down 
for its realization to external sensuous material; instead, it launches 
out exclusively in the inner space and the inner time of ideas and 
feelings. Yet, precisely, at this highest stage, art now transcends 
itself, in that it forsakes the element of a reconciled embodiment 
of the spirit in sensuous form and passes over from the poetry of 
the imagination to the prose of thought. 
This we may take to be the articulated totality of the particular 
arts: the external art of architecture, the objective art of sculpture, 
and the subjective art of painting, music, and poetry. Of course 
many other classifications have been attempted, since the work of 
art presents such a wealth of aspects that, as has often happened, 
now this one and now that can be made the basis of classification. 
Consider, for example, the sensuous material. In that case archi­
tecture is the crystallization, sculpture the organic configuration, 
of matter in its sensuous and spatial totality; painting is the 
coloured surface and line; while, in music, space as such passes 
over into the inherently filled point of time; until, finally, in 
poetry the external material is altogether degraded as worthless. 
Alternatively, these differences have been considered in their 
totally abstract aspect of space and time. But such abstract 
characteristics of the work of art may of course, like its material, 
be consistently pursued in their special features, but they cannot 
be carried through as the final basis of classification, because any 
such aspect derives its origin from a higher principle and therefore 
has to be subordinate thereto. 

I NTRODUCTION 
As this higher principle we have found the art-forms of the 
symbolical, the classical, and the romantic, which are themselves 
the universal moments of the Idea of beauty. 
The concrete form of their relation to the individual arts is of 
such a kind that the several arts constitute the real existence of the 
art-forms. Symbolic art attains its most appropriate actuality and 
greatest application in architecture, where it holds sway in accord­
ance with its whole conception ar.d is not yet degraded to be the 
inorganic nature, as it were, dealt with by another art. For the 
classical form, on the other hand, sculpture is its unqualified 
realization, while it takes architecture only as something surround­
ing it, and it cannot yet develop painting and music as absolute 
forms for its content. Finally, the romantic art-form masters 
painting and music, and poetic representation likewise, as modes 
of expression in a way that is substantive and unqualified. But 
poetry is adequate to all forms of the beautiful and extends over all 
of them, because its proper element is beautiful imagination, and 
imagination is indispensable for every beautiful production, no 
matter to what form of art it belongs. 
Now, therefore, what the particular arts realize in individual 
works of art is, according to the Concept of art, only the universal 
forms of the self-unfolding Idea of beauty. It is as the external 
actualization of this Idea that the wide Pantheon of art is rising. 
Its architect and builder is the self-comprehending spirit of beauty, 
but to complete it will need the history of the world in its develop­
ment through thousands of years. 

PART I 
THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY, 
OR THE IDEAL 
INTROD UCTION 
P OS I T I O N  O F  ART I N  RELA T I O N  T O  T H E  
F I N I T E  W O RLD A N D  T O  REL I G I O N  
AND PHILOS OPHY 
Since we are now moving out of the Introduction and entering 
upon the scientific treatment of our subject, our first task is to 
indicate briefly the general place of artistic beauty in the realm of 
reality as a whole and of aesthetics in relation to other philosophical 
disciplines. Our object is to settle the point from which a true 
science of the beautiful must start. 
To this end, therefore, it might seem useful to begin by giving 
an account of the various attempts to grasp the beautiful in 
thought, and by dissecting and assessing these attempts. But, for 
one thing, this has already been done in the Introduction, and, 
for another, it cannot possibly be the business of a truly scientific 
study merely to investigate what others have done, rightly or 
wrongly, or merely to learn from them. On the other hand, it may 
be better to say a prefatory word once again on the fact that many 
are of opinion that the beautiful as such, just because it is the 
beautiful, cannot be grasped in concepts and therefore remains for 
thought a topic which is not conceivable. To this allegation it may 
be briefly retorted here that, even if today everything true is 
pronounced to be beyond conception while only phenomena in 
their finitude, and temporal events in their accidentality, are con­
ceivable, it is just precisely the true alone which is conceivable, 
because it has the absolute Concept and, more closely stated, th؜ 
؝dea as its founda؞ion. Kllt. b_؟auty iؠ oءlX Ɠ s13ecjtic W}\YW آress­
mg and rt:.,pأؤإnئ _the 'tMe,اth'eYeror-t s't-a'nب6ةn 'throi'rgh­
Mf"M ''-every · respect'-t'تnceptual thinking, so long as that 

92 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
thinking is actually equipped with the power of the Concept. True, 
in modern times, no concept has come worse off than the Concept 
itself, the Concept implicit and explicit for itself; for by 'concept' 
people have commonly understood an abstract determinacy and 
one-sidedness of our ideas or of the thinking of the Understanding, 
with which, naturally, neither the totality of the true nor the in­
herently concrete beautiful can be brought thoughtfully into con­
sciousness. For beauty, as was said already [Introduction, 8] and as 
is to be expounded further later [ch. I, r(a)] is no such abstraction 
of the Understanding but the inherently concrete absolute Con­
cept and, more specifically, the absolute Idea in its appearance in 
a way adequate to itself. 
-
If we wish to indicate briefly what the absolute Idea 1s in its 
genuine actuality, we must say that it is spirit, not, as may be sup­
posed, spirit in its restrictedness and involvement with the finite, 
but the universal infinite and absolute spirit which out of itself 
_determines what is genuinely the true. If we ask our ordinary 
consciousness only, the idea of spirit that presses on us is certainly 
that it stands over against nature, to which in that case we ascribe 
a like dignity. But in thus putting nature and spirit alongside one 
another and relating them to one another as equally essential 
realms, spirit is being considered only in its finitude and restric­
tion, not in its infinity and truth. That is to say, nature does not 
stand over against spirit, either as possessing the same value or 
as spirit's limitation; on the contrary, it acquires the standing of 
having been posited by spirit, and this makes it a product, de­
prived of the power of limiting and restricting. At the same time, 
absolute spirit is to be understood only as absolute activity and 
therefore as absolutely self-differentiating within. Now this other, 
as spirit's self-differentiation, is precisely nature, and spirit is the 
bounty which gives to this opposite of itself the whole fullness 
of its own being. Nature, therefore, we have to conceive as itself 
carrying the absolute Idea implicitly, but nature is the Idea in the 
form of having been posited by absolute spirit as the opposite of 
spirit. In this sense we call nature a creation. But its truth is there­
fore the creator itself, spirit as ideality and negativity; as such, 
spirit particularizes itself within and negates itself, yet this par­
ticularization and negation of itself, as having been brought about 
by itself, it nevertheless cancels, and instead of having a limitation 
and restriction therein it binds itself together with its opposite in 

INTRODUCTION 
93 
lfree universality. This ideality and infinite negativity constitutes 
the profound concept of the subjectivity of spirit. 
But, as subjectivity, spirit is, to begin with, only implicitly the 
truth of nature, since it has not yet made its true Concept explicit 
to itself. Thus at this stage nature stands over against spirit, not as 
spirit's opposite, set down by spirit itself, in which spirit reverts 
into itself, but as a restricting otherness, not overcome. Spirit as 
subjective, existent in knowing and willing, remains related to this 
otherness as to an object just found, and it can form only the 
opposite of nature. In this sphere [of spirit's mere subjectivity] 
there falls the finitude of both theoretical and practical spirit, 
restriction in knowing, and the mere 'ought' in the pursuit of 
realising the good. Here too, as in nature, spirit's appearance is 
inadequate to its true essence; and we still get the confusing 
spectacle of skills, passions, aims, views, and talents, running after 
and flying away from one another, working for and against one 
another, at cross purposes, while their willing and striving, their 
opining and thinking, are advanced or deranged by an intermixture 
of the greatest diversity of sorts of chance. This is the standpoint 
of the spirit which is purely finite, temporal, contradictory, and 
therefore transient, unsatisfied, and unblessed. For the satisfactions 
afforded in this sphere are themselves in their finite shape always 
still restricted and curtailed, relative and isolated. Therefore 
discernment, consciousness, willing, and thinking lift themselves 
above them, and seek and find their true universality, unity, and 
satisfaction elsewhere-in the infinite and the true. This unity 
and satisfaction to which the driving rationality of the spirit raises 
the material of its finitude is then and only then the true unveiling 
of what the world of appearance is in its essential nature. Spirit 
apprehends finitude itself as its own negative and thereby wins its 
infinity. This truth of finite spirit is the absolute spirit. 
But in this form spirit becomes actual only as absolute negativity; 
it puts its finitude into itself and cancels it. Thereby, in its highest 
realm, it explicitly makes itself the object of its knowing and willing. 
The Absolute itself becomes the object of the spirit, in that the 
spirit reaches the stage of consciousness and distinguishes itself 
within itself as knowing and, over against this, as the absolute 
object of knowledge. From the earlier standpoint of the finitude 
of spirit, which knows of the Absolute as an infinite object stand­
ing over against it, spirit is therefore characterized as the finite, 

94 
I. THE I D E A  O F  A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
distinguished therefrom. But, looked at in a higher speculative 
way, it is the absolute spirit itself which, in order explicitly to be 
knowledge of itself, makes distinctions within itself, and thereby 
establishes the finitude of spirit, within which it becomes the ab­
solute object of the knowledge of itself. Thus it is absolute spirit 
in its community,1 the actual Absolute as spirit and self-knowledge. 
This is the point at which we have to begin in the philosophy of 
art. For the beauty of art is neither the Idea as conceived in Logic, 
i.e. absolute thought as it is developed in the pure element of 
thinking, nor yet, on the other hand, the Idea as it appears in 
Nature; on the contrary, it belongs to the sphere of spirit, though 
without stopping at the knowledge and deeds of the finite spirit. 
\The realm of fine art is the realm of the absolute spirit. That this 
is the case we can only indicate here; the scientific proof devolves 
on the preceding philosophical disciplines, namely logic, the 
content of which is the absolute Idea as such, and the philosophy 
of nature as the phiiosophy of the finite spheres of the spirit. For 
it is the task of these sciences to show how the Idea in logic has, 
in accordance with its own Concept, to transpose itself into natural 
existence and then, out of this externality, into spirit; and finally 
to free itself from the finitude of spirit again to become spirit in 
its eternity and truth.z 
-=- From this point of view, which pertains to art in its highest and 
true dignity, it is at once clear that art belongs to the same pro­
vince as religion and philosophy. In all the spheres of absolute 
-spirit, spirit liberates itself from the cramping barriers of its 
existence in externality, by opening for itself a way out of the 
contingent affairs of its worldly existence, and the finite content of 
its aims and interests there, into the consideration and completion 
of its being in and for itself. 
This position of art in the entire sphere of natural and spiritual 
life we can expound more concretely in the following way, with 
a view to understanding it better. 
If we glance over the whole field of our existence, we find al­
ready in our ordinary way of looking at things an awareness of the 
I See below, Part I I, ch. r. 
• Hegel is referring to the three parts of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences. The first part (Logic) and the third (Mind, Art, Religion, Philosophy) 
have been translated by W. Wallace. The second part (Nature) has appeared 
in two translations, one by A. V. Miller and the other by M. J. Petry, both 
in 1970, 

INTROD U C T I O N  
95 
greatest multiplicity of interests and their satisfaction. First, the 
wide system of physical needs for which the great spheres of 
business work in their broad operation and connection, e.g. trade, 
shipping, and technologies; then higher is the world of jurispru­
dence, law, family life, class divisions, the whole comprehensive 
scope of the State; next the need of religion which every heart 
feels and which finds its contentment in the life of the church l 
finally, the variously divided and complicated activity of science, 
the entirety of observation and knowledge, which comprehends 
everything. Now among these spheres artistic activity also arises, 
an interest in beauty and a spiritual satisfaction in artistic crea­
tions. Hence a question is raised about the inner necessity of such 
a need in connection with the other realms of life and the world. 
Initially we find these spheres simply present as such. But, accord­
ing to the demands of science, the matter at issue is insight into 
their essential inner connection and their reciprocal necessity. For 
they do not stand only, as might be supposed, in a relation of mere 
utility to one another; on the contrary they complement one 
another, because in one sphere there are higher modes of activity 
than there are in the other. Consequently the subordinate one 
presses on above itself, and now, by the deeper satisfaction of 
wider-ranging interests, what in an earlier province can find no 
termination is supplemented. This alone provides the necessity of 
an inner connection. 
If we recall what we have already established about the Concept 
of the beautiful and art, we find two things: first, a content, an 
aim, a meaning; and secondly the expression, appearance, and 
realization of this content. But, thirdly, both aspects are so pene­
trated by one another that the external, the particular, appears 
exclusively as a presentation of the inner. In the work of art 
nothing is there except what has an essential relation to the content 
and is an expression of it. What we called the content, the meaning, 
is something in itثelf simple (the thing itself reduced to its simplest 
yeج-comprehensive characteristics) in distinction from execu:­
«<>0. So, for example, the content of a book may be indicated in 
il few words or sentences, 1 and nothing else should be found in the 
book beyond the universal aspect of its content which has already 
1 Perhaps Hegel was never asked by a publisher to summarize the content 
)f one of his books in a 'few sentences'. The 'few sentences' are apt to be either 
mintelligible or misleading, or both. 

96 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTI S T I C  B EAUTY 
been stated. This simple thing, this theme, as it were, which forms 
the basis for the execution of the work, is the abstract; the con­
crete comes only with the execution. 
But the two sides of this opposition have not been given the 
character of remaining indifferent and external to one another­
in the way that for instance the external appearance of a mathe­
matical figure (triangle, ellipse), i.e. its specific size, colour, etc., 
is indifferent to the figure itself which is the inherently simple 
content. On the contrary, the meaning, abstract in form by being 
the content pure and simple, is destined in itself to be actually 
expressed and thereby to be made concrete. Accordingly there 
essentially enters an aught. Whatever validity a content may have 
in itself, we are still not satisfied with this abstract validity and 
crave for something further. At first this is only an unsatisfied 
need, and for the conscious subject it is something inadequate 
which strives to go beyond itself and advance to satisfaction. In 
this sense we may say that the content is at first subjective, some­
thing purely inward, with the objective standing over against it, so 
that now this gives rise to a demand that the subjective be objecti­
fied. Such an opposition between the subjective and the objective 
contrasted with it, as well as the fact that it ought to be trans­
cended, is simply a universal characteristic running through every­
thing. Even our physical life, and still more the world of our spiritual 
aims and interests, rests on the demand to carry through into ob­
jectivity what at first was there only subjectively and inwardly, and 
then alone to find itself satisfied in this complete existence. Now since 
the content of our interests and aims is present at first only in the 
one-sided form of subjectivity, and the one-sidedness is a restriction, 
this \deficiency shows itself at the same time as an unrest, a grief, as 
1.somحing negativJhis, as negative, has to cancel itself, and there­
fore, in order to remedy this felt deficiency, struggles to overcome 
the restriction which is known and thought. And this does not mean 
at all that the other side, the objective, just quits the subjective; 
on the contrary it means that they have a more specific connection 
-i.e. this defect in the subjective itself, and felt by itself, is a 
deficiency and a negation in the subjective which it struggles to 
negate again. In itself, that is to say, the individual in his essential 
nature is the totality, not the inner alone, but equally the realiza­
tion of this inner through and in the outer. If now he exists 
one-sidedly only in one form, he therefore falls at once into the 

I NTROD UCTION 
97 
contradiction of being, in essence, the whole, but in his existence, 
only one side. Only by the cancellation of such a negation in itself 
does life become affirmative. To go through this process of opposi­
tion, contradiction, and the resolution of the contradiction is the 
higher privilege of living beings; what from the beginning is and 
remains only affirmative is and remains without life. Life proceed; 
to negation and its grief, and it only becomes affirmative in its1 
own eyes by obliterating the opposition and the contradiction. It 
is true that if it remains in mere contradiction without resolving 
it, then on contradiction it is wrecked. 
_] 
These we may take to be the points, considered in their abstrac­
- tion, which we require at this stage. 
, 
Now the highest content which the subject can comprise in 
1himself is what we can point-blank call freedom. Freedom is the 
highest destiny of the spirit. In the first place, on its purely formal 
Side, it consists in this, that in what confronts the subject there is 
nothing alien and it is not a limitation or a barrier; on the con­
trary, the subject finds himself in it. Even under this formal defini.=-­
tion of freedom, all distress and every misfortune has vanished, the 
subject is reconciled with the world, satisfied in it, and every 
opposition and contradiction is resolved. But, looked at more _ 
closely, freedom has the rational in general as its content: for 
example, morality in action, truth in thinking. But since freedom 
at first is only subjective and not effectively achieved, the subject 
is confronted by the unfree, by the purely objective as the necessity 
of nature, and at once there arises the demand that this opposition 
be reconciled. 
On the other side a similar opposition is found within the sub­
jective sphere itself. On the one hand, whatever is universal and 
independent, the universal laws of the right, the good, the true, 
etc., all belong to freedom; while, on the other hand, there are the 
impulses of mankind, feelings, inclinations, passions, and every­
!}ling comprised in the concrete heart of man as an individual. 
This opposition too goes on to a battle, a contradiction, and in this 
strife there then arise all longings, the deepest grief, torment, and 
loss of satisfaction altogether. Animals live in peace with themselves 
and their surroundings, but in the spiritual nature of man duality 
and inner conflict burgeon, and in their contradiction he is tossed 
about. For in the inner as such, in pure thought, in the world of 
laws and their universality man cannot hold out; he needs also 

98 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTI STIC BEAUTY 
sensuous existence, feeling, the heart, emotion, etc. The opposi­
tion, which therefore arises, philosophy thinks as it is in its 
thoroughgoing universality, and proceeds to the cancellation of the 
same in a similarly universal way; but man in the immediacy of 
life presses on for an immediate satisfaction. Such a satisfaction 
through the resolving of that opposition we find most readily in 
the system of sensuous needs. Hunger, thirst, weariness; eating, 
drinking, satiety, sleep, etc., are in this sphere examples of such 
a contradiction and its resolution. Yet in this natural sphere of 
human existence the content of its satisfactions is of a finite and 
restricted kind; the satisfaction is not absolute, and so a new want 
arises continually and restlessly: eating, satiety, sleeping, are no 
help ; hunger and weariness begin again on the morrow. · 
Consequently, man strives further in the realm of spirit to 
_Ebtain satisfaction and freedom in knowing and willing, in learning 
and actions. The ignorant man is not free, because what confronts 
him is an alien world, something outside him and in the offing, 
on which he depends, without his having made this foreign world 
for himself and therefore without being at home in it by himself 
as in something his own. The impulse of curiosity, the pressure 
for knowledge, from the lowest level up to the highest rung of 
philosophical insight arises only from the struggle to cancel this 
situation of unfreedom and to make the world one's own in one's 
ideas and thought. Freedom in action issues in the opposite way, 
from the fact that the rationality of the will wins actualization. 
This rationality the will actualizes in the life of the state. In a state 
which is really articulated rationally all the laws and organizations 
are nothing but a realization of freedom in its essential characteris-
_!ics. When this is the case, the individual's reason finds in these 
institutions only the actuality of his own essence, and if he obeys 
these laws, he coincides, not with something alien to himself, but 
simply with what is his own. Caprice, of course, is often equally 
called 'freedom'; but caprice is only non-rational freedom, choice 
and self-determination issuing not from the rationality of the will 
but from fortuitous impulses and their dependence on sense and 
the external world. 
Now man's physical needs, as well as his knowing and willing, 
do indeed get a satisfaction in the world and do resolve in a free 
way the antithesis of subjective and objective, of inner freedom 
and externally existent necessity. But nevertheless the content of 

INTRODUCTION 
̰ 
this freedom and satisfaction remains restricted, and thus this 
freedom and self-satisfaction retain too an aspect of finitude. But 
where there is finitude, opposition and contradiction always break 
out again afresh, and satisfaction does not get beyond being rela­
tive. In law and its actualization, for example, my rationality, my 
will and its freedom, are indeed recognized; I count as a person 
and am respected as such; I have property and it is meant to 
remain mine; if it is endangered, the court sees justice done to me. 
But this recognition and freedom are always solely confined to 
single relative matters and their single objects: this house, this sum 
of money, this specific right, this specific law, etc., this single 
action and reality. What confronts consciousness here is single 
circumstances which indeed bear on one another and make up 
a totality of relations, but only under purely relative categories and 
innumerable conditions, and, dominated by these, satisfaction 
may as easily be momentary as permanent. 
Now, at a higher level, the life of the state, as a whole, does form 
a perfect totality in itself: monarch, government, law-courts, the 
military, organization of civil society, and associations, etc., rights 
and duties, aims and their satisfaction, the prescribed modes of 
action, duty-performance, whereby this political whole brings 
about and retains its stable reality-this entire organism is rounded 
off and completely perfected in a genuine state. But the principle 
itself, the actualization of which is the life of the state and wherein 
man seeks his satisfaction, is still once again one-sided and in­
herently abstract, no matter in how many ways it may be articu­
lated without and within. It is only the rational freedom of the will 
which is explicit here; it is only in the state-and once again only 
this individual state-and therefore again in a particular sphere of 
existence and the isolated reality of this sphere, that freedom is 
actual. Thus man feels too that the rights and obligations in these 
regions and their mundane and, once more, finite mode of existence 
are insufficient; he feels that both in their objective character, and 
also in their relation to the subject, they need a still higher confirma­
tion and sanction. 
What man seeks in this situation, ensnared here as he is in 
finitude on every side, is the region of a higher, more substantial, 
truth, in which all oppositions and contradictions in the finite 
can find their final resolution, and freedom its full satisfaction. 
This is the region of absolute, not finite, truth. The highest truth, 

t oo  
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
truth as such, is the resolution of the highest opposition and con­
tradiction. In it validity and power are swept away from the 
opposition between freedom and necessity, between spirit and 
nature, between knowledge and its object, between law and im­
pulse, from opposition and contradiction as such, whatever forms 
they may take. Their validity and power as opposition and con­
tradiction is gone. Absolute truth proves that neither freedom by 
itself, as subjective, sundered from necessity, is absolutely a true 
thing nor, by parity of reasoning, is truthfulness to be ascribed to 
necessity isolated and taken by itself. The ordinary consciousness, 
on the other hand, cannot extricate itself from this opposition and 
either remains despairingly in contradiction or else casts it aside 
and helps itself in some other way. But philosophy enters into the 
heart of the self-contradictory characteristics, knows them in their 
essential nature, i.e. as in their one-sidedness not absolute but 
self-dissolving, and it sets them in the harmony and unity which is 
truth. To grasp this Concept of truth is the task of philosophy. 
Now philosophy recognizes the Concept in everything, and 
only thereby is it conceptual and genuine thinking. Nevertheless 
the Concept, truth implicit, is one thing, and the existence which 
does or does not correspond with truth, is another. In finite 
reality the determinate characteristics of truth appear as outside 
one another, as a separation of what in its truth is inseparable. So, 
for example, the living being is an individual, but, by being 
subject, it comes into an opposition with an environment of 
inorganic nature. Now of course the Concept contains these two 
sides, but as reconciled; whereas finite existence drives them 
asunder and is therefore a reality inadequate to the Concept and 
to truth. In this sense the Concept is indeed everywhere; but the 
point of importance is whether the Concept is truly actual even in 
this unity in which the separate sides and their opposition persist 
in no real independence and fixity over against one another but 
count still as only ideal factors reconciled into a free harmony. The 
only actuality of this supreme unity is the region of truth, freedom, 
and satisfaction. In this sphere, in this enjoyment of truth, life as 
feeling is bliss, as thinking is knowledge, and we may describe it 
in general as the life of religion. For religion is the universal sphere 
in which the one concrete totality comes home to the consciousness 
of man as his own essence and as the essence of nature. And this 
one genuine actuality alone evinces itself to him as the supreme 

INTRO D U C T I O N  
IOI 
power over the particular and the finite, whereby everything 
otherwise separated and opposed is brought back to a higher and 
absolute unity. 
- Now, owing to its preoccupation with truth as the absolute 
object of consciousness, art too belongs to the absolute sphere of 
the spirit, and therefore, in its content, art stands on one and the 
same ground with religion (in the stricter sense of the word) and 
_philosophy. For, after all, philosophy has no other object but God 
and so is essentially rational theology and, as the servant of truth, 
a continual divine service. 
Owing to this sameness of content the three realms of absolute 
spirit differ only in the forms in which they bring home to con­
sciousness their object, the Absolute. 
The differences between these forms are implied in the nature 
of absolute spirit itself. The spirit in its truth is absolute. There­
fore it is not an essence lying in abstraction beyond the objective 
world. On the contrary, it is present within objectivity in the 
finite spirit's recollection or inwardization of the essence of all 
things-i.e. the finite apprehends itself in its own essence and so 
itself becomes essential and absolute. Now the first form [art] of 
this apprehension is an immediate and therefore sensuous knowing, 
a knowing, in the form and shape of the sensuous and objective 
itself, in which the Absolute is presented to contemplation and 
feeling. Then the second form [religion] is pictorial thinking, while 
the third and last [philosophy] is the free thinking of absolute 
spirit. 
(a) Now the form of sensuous intuition is that of art, so that it is 
art which sets truth before our minds in the mode of sensuous con­
figuration, a sensuous configuration which in this its appearance 
has itself a loftier, deeper sense and meaning, yet without having 
the aim of making the Concept as such in its universality compre­
hensible by way of the sensuous medium; for it is precisely the 
unity of the Concept with the individual appearance which is the 
essence of the beautiful and its production by art. Now of course 
this unity achieved in art is achieved not only in sensuous exter­
nality but also in the sphere of imagination, especially in poetry; 
but still in this too, the most1 spiritual of the arts, the union of 
meaning with its individual configuration is present, even if for 
the imaginative consciousness, and every content is grasped m 
' The superlative is the reading of Hotho's Ist edn. 

102 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
anfunmediate way and brought home to the imaginatioخدIIn general, 
we must state at once that while art has truth, i.e. tli'e spirit, as 
its proper subject-matter, it cannot provide a vision of the same 
by means of particular natural objects as such, i.e. by means of the 
sun, for example, the moon, the earth, stars, etc. Such things are 
visible existents, it is true, but they are isolated and, taken by 
themselves, cannot provide a vision of the spiritual. 
Now in giving art this absolute position we are expressly reject­
ing the above-mentioned [Introduction, 6(iii)] idea which assumes 
that art is useful for some varied ulterior subject-matter or other 
interests foreign to itself. On the other hand, religion makes use of 
art often enough to bring religious truth home to people's feelings 
or to symbolize it for the imagination, and in that event of course 
art stands in the service of a sphere different from itself. Yet when 
art is present in its supreme perfection, then precisely in its figura­
tive mode it contains the kind of exposition most essential to and 
most in correspondence with the content of truth. Thus, for 
example, in the case of the Greeks, art was the highest form in 
which the people represented the gods to themselves and gave 
themselves some awareness of truth. This is why the poets and 
artists became for the Greeks the creators of their gods, i.e. the 
artists gave the nation a definite idea of the behaviour, life, and 
effectiveness of the Divine, or, in other words, the definite content 
of religion. And it was not as if these ideas and doctrines were 
already there, in advance of poetry, in an abstract mode of con­
sciousness as general religious propositions and categories of 
thought, and then later were only clothed in imagery by artists 
and given an external adornment in poetry; on the contrary, the 
mode of artistic production was such that what fermented in these 
poets they could work out only in this form of art and poetry. 
At other levels of the religious consciousness, where the religious 
content is less amenable to artistic representation, art has in this 
respect a more restricted field of play. 
This is the original true standing of art as the first and im­
mediate satisfaction of absolute spirit. 
But just as art has its 'before' in nature and the finite spheres 
of life, so too it has an 'after', i.e. a region which in turn transcends 
art's way of apprehending and representing the Absolute. For art 
has still a limit in itself and therefore passes over into higher forms 
of consciousness. This limitation determines, after all, the position 

INTRODUCTION 
103 
which we are accustomed to assign to art in our contemporary life. 
For us art counts no longer as the highest mode in which truth 
fashions an existence for itself. In general it was early in history 
that thought passed judgement against art as a mode of illustrating 
the idea of the Divine ; this happened with the Jews and Moham­
medans, for example, and indeed even with the Greeks, for Plato 
opposed the gods of Homer and Hesiod starkly enough. With the 
advance of civilization a time generally comes in the case of every 
people when art points beyond itself. For example, the historical 
elements in Christianity, the Incarnation of Christ, his life and 
death, have given to art, especially painting, all sorts of opportuni­
ties for development, and the Church itself has nursed art or let 
it alone ; but when the urge for knowledge and research, and the 
need for inner spirituality, instigated the Reformation, religious 
ideas were drawn away from their wrapping in the element of 
sense and brought back to the inwardness of heart and thinking. 
Thus the 'after' of art consists in the fact that there dwells in the 
spirit the need to satisfy itself solely in its own inner self as the true 
form for truth to take. Art in its beginnings still leaves over some­
thing mysterious, a secret foreboding and a longing, because its 
creations have not completely set forth their full content for 
imaginative vision. But if the perfect content has been perfectly 
revealed in artistic shapes, then the more far-seeing spirit rejects 
this objective manifestation and turns back into its inner self. This 
is the case in our own time. We may well hope that art will always 
rise:_ higher and come to perfection, but the form of art has ceased 
to be the supreme need-"Orthe spmt. No matter how excffiemwe 
fimt the statues of the 'Greek gods, no Þ-see--God 
thn aßJler1 'C1lr1^t; aridìry-so eitif!iH1JTiIQP:e!Rctypomayea: 
itls -Go help ; . w.e. J?.ow àhá. _knâã . .  ll«? .. JQ!l.g,äLLåfg_ié3fiê;æ:çr{iètic 
portrayals]. 
*-- (bTNOW the next sphere, which transcends the realm of art, is 
religion. Religion has pictorial thinking as its form of conscious­
ness, for the Absolute has removed from the objectivity of art into 
the inwardness of the subject and is now given to pictorial thinking 
in a subjective way, so that mind and feeling, the inner subjective 
life in general, becomes the chief factor. This advance from art to 
religion may be described by saying that for the religious con­
sciousness art is only one aspect. If, that is to say, the work of art 
presents truth, the spirit, as an object in a sensuous mode and 

104 
I. THE I D EA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
adopts this form of the Absolute as the adequate one, then religion 
adds to this the worship given by the inner self in its relation to 
the absolute object. For worship does not belong to art as such. 
Worship only arises from the fact that now by the subject's agency 
the heart is permeated with what art makes objective as externally 
perceptible, and the subject so identifies himself with this content 
that it is its inner presence in ideas and depth of feeling which 
becomes the essential element for the existence of the Absolute. 
Worship is the community's cult in its purest, mmذt inward, most 
subjective form-a cult in which objectivity is, as it were, con­
sumed and digested, while the objective content, now stripped of 
its objectivity, has become a possession of mind and feeling. 
(c) Finally, the third form of absolute spirit is philosophy. For in 
religion God, to begin with, is an external object for consciousness, 
since we must first be taught what God is and how he has revealed 
and still reveals himself; next, religion does work in the element of 
the inner life, and stirs and animates the community. But the 
inwardness of the heart's worship and our pictorial thinking is not 
the highest form of inwardness. As this purest form of knowledge 
we must recognize untrammelled thinking in which philosophy 
brings to our minds the same content [as in religion] and thereby 
attains that most spiritual worship in which thinking makes its 
own and knows conceptually what otherwise is only the content of 
subjective feeling or pictorial thinking. In this way the two sides, 
art and religion, are united in philosophy: the objectivity of art, 
which here has indeed lost its external sensuousness but therefore 
has exchanged it for the highest form of the objective, the form of 
thought, and the subjectivity of religion which has been purified 
into the subjectivity of thinking. For thinking on one side is the 
most inward, closest, subjectivity-while true thought, the Idea, 
is at the same time the most real and most objective universality 
which only in thinking can apprehend itself in the form of its 
own self. 
With this indication of the difference between art, religion, and 
philosophy we must here be content. 
The sensuous mode of consciousness is the earlier one for man, 
and so, after all, the earlier stages of religion were a religion of art 
and its sensuous representation. Only in the religion of the spirit 
is God now known as spirit in a higher way, more correspondent 
with thought; this at the same time makes it plain that the 

I NTRODUCTION 
IOS 
manifestation of truth in a sensuous form is not truly adequate to 
the spirit. 
Division of the Subject 
Now that we know the position which art has in the domain of 
spirit and which the philosophy of art has amongst the particular 
philosophical disciplines, we have first of all to consider in this 
general section the general Idea of artistic beauty. 
In order to reach this Idea in its completeness we must once 
more go through three stages: 
the first is concerned with the Concept of the beautiful as such; 
the second with the beauty of nature, the deficiencies of which 
will make it evident that the Ideal necessarily has the form of 
artistic beauty; 
the third stage has as its topic for consideration the Ideal in its 
actualization by being artistically represented in the work of art. 

Chapter I 
CONCEPT O F  THE B EAUTIFUL AS SUCH 
1 .  The Idea 
We called the beautiful the Idea of the beautiful. This means that 
the beautiful itself must be grasped as Idea, in particular as Idea in 
a determinate form, i.e. as Ideal. Now the Idea as such is nothing 
but the Concept, the real existence of the Concept, and the unity 
of the two. For the Concept as such is not yet the Idea, although 
'Concept' and 'Idea' are often used without being distinguished. 
But it is only when it is present in its real existence and placed in 
unity therewith that the Concept is the Idea. Yet this unity ought 
not to be represented, as might be supposed, as a mere neutraliza­
tion of Concept and Reality, as if both lost their peculiar and 
special qualities, in the way in which caustic potash and acid 
interact to form a salt, and, combining, neutralize their con­
trasting properties.' On the contrary, in this unity the Concept is 
predominant. For, in accordance with its own nature, it is this 
identity implicitly already, and therefore generates reality out of 
itself as its own; therefore, since this reality is its own self-develop­
ment, it sacrifices nothing of itself in it, but therein simply realizes 
itself, the Concept, and therefore remains one with itself in its 
objectivity. This unity of Concept and Reality is the abstract 
definition of the Idea. 
However often use is made of the word 'Idea' in theories of art, 
still vice versa extremely excellent connoisseurs of art have shown 
themselves particularly hostile to this expression. The latest and 
most interesting example of this is the polemic of [Karl F.] von 
Rumohr in his Italienische Forschungen.2 It starts from the practical 
interest in art and never touches at all on what we call the Idea. 
For von Rumohr, unacquainted with what recent philosophy calls 
'Idea', confuses the Idea with an indeterminate idea and the 
1 This translation I owe to Dr. David Trail!. 
2 Italian Studies (3 vols., Berlin and Stettin, I 827-3 I). Since Hegel did not 
lecture on Aesthetics aft.:r 1828 he may have used only the first volume. Below 
he quotes no other. Rumohr lived from I785 to I843. 

CONCEPT OF THE B E A U T I F U L  A S  S UCH 
107 
abstract characterless ideal of familiar theories and schools of art­
an ideal the very opposite of natural forms, completely delineated 
and determinate in their truth; and he contrasts these forms, to 
their advantage, with the Idea and the abstract ideal which the 
artist is supposed to construct for himself out of his own resources. 
To produce works of art according to these abstractions is of course 
wrong-and just as unsatisfactory as when a thinker thinks in 
vague ideas and in his thinking does not get beyond a purely vague 
subject-matter. But from such a reproof what we mean by the 
word 'Idea' is in every respect free, for the Idea is completely 
concrete in itself, a totality of characteristics, and beautiful only 
as immediately one with the objectivity adequate to itself. 
According to what he says in his book (i, pp. 145-6) von Rumohr 
has found 'that beauty, as understood in the most general way and, 
if you like, in terms of the modern intellect, comprises all those 
properties of things which stir the sense of sight satisfyingly or 
through it attune the soul and rejoice the spirit'. These properties 
are further to be divided into three kinds 'of which the first works 
only on mere seeing, the second only on man's own presupposedly 
innate sense for spatial relationships, and the third in the first 
place on the understanding and then, and then only, through 
knowledge, on feeling'. This third most important point is sup­
posed (p. 144) to depend on forms 'which quite independently of 
what pleases the senses and of the beauty of proportion, awaken 
a certain ethical and spiritual pleasure, which proceeds partly from 
the enjoyment derived from the ideas' (but query: the ethical and 
spiritual ideas) 'thus aroused, and partly also precisely from the 
pleasure which the mere activity of an unmistakable knowing 
unfailingly brings with it'. 
These are the chief points which this serious connoisseur lays 
down for his part in relation to the beautiful. For a certain level 
of culture they may suffice, but for philosophy they cannot possibly 
be satisfying. For in essentials his treatment of the matter amounts 
simply to this, that the sense or spirit of sight, and the understand­
ing too, is rejoiced, that feeling is excited, and that a delight has 
been aroused. The whole thing revolves round this awakening of 
joy. But Kant1 has already made an end of this reduction of 
1 The Critique of Judgment is never far from Hegel's mind throughout this 
whole section. Many of his topics come from Kant. It would be superfluous to 
give precise references in view of the excellent indexes in the translation of the 
Critiqut> of Aesthetic Judgment by ]. C. Meredith (Oxford, 191 1). 
H24371ą 
E 

to8 
I. THE I D E A  OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
beauty's effect to feeling, to the agreeable, and the pleasant, by 
going far beyond the feeling of the beautiful. 
If we turn back from this polemic to the Idea that was left 
unimpugned thereby, we find in the Idea, as we saw, the concrete 
unity of Concept and objectivity. 
(a) Now, as regards the nature of the Concept as such, it is not 
in itself an abstract unity at all over against the differences of 
reality; as Concept it is already the unity of specific differences and 
therefore a concrete totality. So, for example, ideas like man, blue, 
etc., are prima facie not to be called 'concepts', but abstractly 
universal ideas, which only become the Concept when it is clear 
in them that they comprise different aspects in a unity, since this 
inherently determinate unity constitutes the Concept: for example, 
the idea 'blue' as a colour has the unity, the specific unity, of light 
and dark for its Concept, 1 and the idea 'man' comprises the opposi­
tions of sense and reason, body and spirit; though man is not just 
put together out of these two sides as constituent parts indifferent 
to one another; in accordance with his Concept he contains them 
in a concrete and mediated unity. 
But the Concept is so much the absolute unity of its specifica­
tions that these do not remain independent and they cannot be 
realized by separating themselves from one another so as to become 
independent individuals, or otherwise they would abandon their 
unity. In this way the Concept contains all its specifications in the 
form of this its ideal unity and universality, which constitutes its 
subjectivity in distinction from real and objective existence. So, for 
example, gold has a specific weight, a determinate colour, a 
particular relation to acids of various kinds. These are different 
specifications, and yet they are all together in one. For each 
tiniest little particle of gold contains them in inseparable unity. 
In our minds they stand apart from one another, but in themselves, 
by their own nature, they are there in unseparated unity. The same 
identity and lack of independence belongs to the differences which 
the true Concept has in itself. A closer example is afforded by our 
own ideas, by the self-conscious ego as such. For what we call 'soul' 
and, more precisely, ego is the Concept itself in its free existence. 
The ego contains a mass of the most different ideas and thoughts, it 
is a world of ideas; yet this infinitely varied content, by being in 
the ego, remains entirely immaterial and without body and, as it 
1 Another allusion to Goethe's theory of colours. 

CONCEPT O F  THE BEAUT I F U L  A S  SUCH 
109 
were, compressed in this ideal unity, as the pure, perfectly trans­
parent shining of the ego into itself. This is the way in which the 
Concept contains its different determinations in an ideal unity. 
The more precise determinations which belong to the Concept in 
virtue of its own nature are the universal, the particular, and the 
individual. Each of these determinations, taken by itself, is a purely 
one-sided abstraction. But they are not present in the Concept 
in this one-sidedness, because it is their ideal unity. Consequently 
the Concept is the universal, which on the one hand negates itself 
by its own activity into particularization and determinacy, but on 
the other hand once again cancels this particularity which is the 
negative of the universal. For the universal does not meet in the 
particular with something absolutely other; the particulars are only 
particular aspects of the universal itself, and therefore the universal 
restores in the particular its unity with itself as universal. In this 
returning into itself the Concept is infinite negativity; not a nega­
tion of something other than itself, but self-determination in 
which it remains purely and simply a self-relating affirmative unity. 
Thus it is true individuality as universality closing only with itself 
in its particularizations. As the supreme example of this nature of 
the Concept, we can reckon what was briefly touched upon above 
[in the Introduction to this Part] as the essence of spirit. 
Owing to this infinity in itself the Concept is already implicitly 
a totality. For in the being of its other it is still a unity with itself 
and therefore is the freedom for which all negation is only self­
determination and not an alien restriction imposed by something 
else. But by being this totality the Concept already contains every­
thing that reality as such brings into appearance and that the Idea 
brings back into a mediated unity. Those who suppose that they 
have in the Idea something totally other than the Concept, some­
thing particular in contrast with it, do not know the nature of 
either the Idea or the Concept. But at the same time the Concept 
is distinguished from the Idea by being particularization only 
in abstracto, since determinacy, as it exists in the Concept, re­
mains caught in the unity and ideal universality which is the 
Concept's element. 
But, that being so, the Concept remains one-sided and it is 
afflicted with the defect that, although itself implicitly totality, it 
allows only to the side of unity and universality the right of free 
development. But because this one-sidedness is incommensurate 

no 
I. THE IDEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
with the Concept's own essence, the Concept cancels it in accord­
ance with its own Concept. It negates itself as this ideal unity and 
universality and now releases to real independent objectivity what 
this unity shut in within itself as ideal subjectivity. By its own 
activity the Concept posits itself as objectivity. 
(b) Objectivity, taken by itself, is therefore nothing but the 
reality of the Concept, but the Concept in the form of independent 
particularization and the real distinguishing of all the factors of 
which the Concept as subjective was the ideal unity. 
But, since it is only the Concept which has to give itself existence 
and reality in objectivity, objectivity will have to bring the Concept 
to actuality in objectivity itself. Yet the Concept is the mediated 
ideal unity of its particular factors. Therefore, although the dif­
ference of the particulars is real, their ideal conceptually adequate 
unity must all the same be restored within them ; they are particu­
larized in reality but their unity, mediated into ideality, must also 
exist in them. This is the power of the Concept which does not 
abandon or lose its universality in the dispersed objective world, but 
reveals this its unity precisely thro!lgh and in reality. For it is its 
own Concept to preserve in its opposite this unity with itself. Only 
so is the Concept the actual and true totality. 
(c) This totality is the Idea, i.e. it is not only the ideal unity 
and subjectivity of the Concept, but likewise its objectivity-the 
objectivity which does not stand over against the Concept as 
something merely opposed to it but, on the contrary, the objec­
tivity in which the Concept relates itself to itself. On both sides, 
subjective and objective, of the Concept, the Idea is a whole, but 
at the same time it is the eternally completing and completed 
correspondence and mediated unity of these totalities. Only so is 
the Idea truth and all truth. 
2. The Idea in Existence 
Everything existent, therefore, has truth only in so far as it is an 
existence of the Idea. For the Idea is alone the genuinely actual. 
Appearance, in other words, is not true simply because it has an 
inner or outer existence, or because it is reality as. such, but only 
because this reality corresponds with the Concept. Only in that 
event has existence actuality and truth. And truth not at all in the 
subjective sense that there is an accordance between some existent 
and my ideas, but in the objective meaning that the ego or an 

CONCEPT OF THE BEAU T I FUL A S  S UC H  
I I I  
external object, an action, an event, a situation in its reality is itself 
a realization of the Concept. If this identity is not established, then 
the existent is only an appearance in which, not the total Concept, 
but only one abstract side of it is objectified; and that side, if it 
establishes itself in itself independently against the totality and 
unity, may fade away into opposition to the true Concept. Thus 
it is only the reality which is adequate to the Concept which is 
a true reality, true indeed because in it the Idea itself brings itself 
into existence. 
3· The Idea of the Beautiful 
Now we said that beauty is Idea, so beauty and truth are in one 
way the same. Beauty, namely, must be true in itself. But, looked 
at more closely, the true is nevertheless distinct from the beautiful. 
That is to say, what is true is the Idea, the Idea as it is in accordance 
with its inherent character and universal principle, and as it is 
grasped as such in thought. In that case what is there for thinking 
is not the Idea's sensuous and external existence, but only the 
universal Idea in this existence. But the Idea should realize itself 
externally and win a specific and present existence as the objec­
tivity of nature and spirit. The true as such exists also. Now when 
truth in this its external existence is present to consciousness im­
mediately, and when the Concept remains immediately in unity 
with its external appearance, the Idea is not only true but beautiful. 
herefore the beautiful is characterized as the pure appearance of 
he Idea to sense. For the sensuous and the objective as such 
reserve in beauty no independence in themselves; they have to 
sacrifice the immediacy of their being, since this being is only the 
existence and objectivity of the Concept; and it is posited as a 
reality which presents the Concept as in unity with its objectivity 
and thus also presents the Idea itself in this objective existent 
which has worth only as a pure appearance of the Concept. 
(a) For this reason, after all, it is impossible for the Under­
standing to comprehend beauty, because, instead of penetrating to 
this unity, the Understanding clings fast to the differences exclu­
sively in their independent separation, by regarding reality as 
something quite different from ideality, the sensuous as quite 
different from the Concept, the objective as quite different from 
the subjective, and thinks that such oppositions cannot be [recon­
ciled and] unified. Thus the Understanding steadily remains in 

1 12 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
the field of the finite, the one-sided, and the untrue. The beautiful, 
on the other hand, is in itself infinite and free. For even if there can 
be a question too of a particular content, and therefore, once more, 
of a restricted one, still this content must appear in its existence 
as a totality infinite in itself and as freedom, because the beautiful 
throughout is the Concept. And the Concept does not set itself 
against its objectivity by opposing to it a one-sided finitude and 
abstraction; on the contrary, it closes together with what confronts 
it and on the strength of this unity and perfection is infinite in 
itself. In the same way, the Concept ensouls the real existence which 
embodies it, and therefore is free and at home with itself in this 
objectivity. For the Concept does not allow external existence in 
the sphere of beauty to follow its own laws independently; on the 
contrary, it settles out of itself its phenomenal articulation and 
shape, and this, as the correspondence of the Concept with itself 
in its outward existence, is precisely what constitutes the essence of 
beauty. But the bond and the power which keeps this correspon­
dence in being is subjectivity, unity, soul, individuality. 
(b) Therefore if we consider beauty in relation to the subjective 
spirit, it is not present either to the unfree intelligence which 
persists in its finitude or to the finitude of the will. 
As finite intelligences, we sense inner and outer objects, we 
observe them, we become aware of them through our senses, we 
have them brought before our contemplation and ideas, and, 
indeed, before the abstractions of our thinking understanding 
which confers on them the abstract form of universality. The 
finitude and unfreedom of this attitude lies in presupposing things 
to be independent. Therefore we direct our attention to things, we 
let them alone, we make our ideas, etc., a prisoner to belief in 
things, since we are convinced that objects are rightly understood 
only when our relation to them is passive, and when we restrict 
our whole activity to the formality of noticing them and putting 
a negative restraint on our imaginations, preconceived opinions, 
and prejudices. With this one-sided freedom of objects there is 
immediately posited the unfreedom of subjective comprehension. 
For in the case of this latter the content is given, and instead of sub­
jective self-determination there enters the mere acceptance and 
adoption of what is there, objectively present just as it is. Truth in 
that case is to be gained only by the subjugation of subjectivity. 
The same thing is true, though in an opposite way, with finite 

CONCEPT O F  THE BEAUT I FUL AS S U C H  
I I J 
willing. Here interests, aims, and intentions lie in the subject who 
wills to assert them in face of the being and properties of things. 
For he can only carry out his decisions by annihilating objects, or 
at least altering them, moulding them, forming them, cancelling 
their qualities, or making them work upon one another, e.g. water 
on fire, fire on iron, iron on wood, and so on. Thus now it is things 
which are deprived of their independence, since the subject brings 
them into his service and treats and handles them as useful, i.e. 
as objects with their essential nature and end not in themselves 
but in the subject, so that what constitutes their proper essence is 
their relation (i.e. their service) to the aims of the subject. Subject 
and object have exchanged their roles. The objects have become 
unfree, the subjects free. 
But, as a matter of fact, in both these relations, both sides are finite 
and one-sided, and their freedom is a purely supposititious freedom. 
In the field of theory the subject is finite and unfree because the 
independence of things is presupposed ; the same is true in the 
field of practice, owing to the one-sidedness, struggle, and inner 
contradiction between aims and the impulses and passions aroused 
from outside, and owing also to the never wholly eliminated re­
sistance of the objects. For the separation and opposition of the 
two sides, object and subject, is the presupposition in this matter 
and is regarded as its true essence. 
The same finitude and unfreedom affects the object in both 
theoretical and practical matters. In the theoretical sphere, the 
object's independence, although presupposed, is only an apparent 
freedom. For objectivity as such just is, without any awareness of 
its Concept as subjective unity and universality within itself. Its 
Concept is outside it. Therefore, every object, its Concept being 
outside it, exists as mere particularity which with its many­
sidedness is turned outwards and in its infinitely varied relations 
appears at the mercy of origination and alteration by others, sub­
ject to their power, and to destruction by them. In practical matters 
this dependence is expressly posited as such, and the resistance of 
things to the will remains relative, not possessing in itself the power 
of ultimate independence. 
(c) But the consideration and the existence of objects as beautiful 
is the unification of both points of view, since it cancels the one­
sidedness of both in respect of the subject and its object alike, 
and therefore their finitude and unfreedom. 

1 14 
I. THE I D EA O F  A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
For, in its theoretical relation, the object now is not just taken 
as being mert:ly an existent individual thing which therefore has 
its subjective Concept outside its objectivity, and in its particular 
reality scatters and disperses into external relations in many ways 
in the most varied directions; on the contrary, the beautiful thing 
in its existence makes its own Concept appear as realized and 
displays in itself subjective unity and life. Thereby the object 
has bent its outward tendency back into itself, has suppressed 
dependence on something else, and, under our consideration, 
has exchanged its unfree finitude for free infinity. 
But the self in relation to the object likewise ceases to be the 
abstraction of both noticing, sensuously perceiving, and observing, 
and also of dissolving individual perceptions and observations into 
abstract thoughts. In this [beautiful] object the self becomes 
concrete in itself since it makes explicit the unity of Concept and 
reality, the unification, in their concreteness, of the aspects hitherto 
separated, and therefore abstract, in the self and its object. 
In the matter of practice, as we have seen at greater length 
already [in the Introduction, 6(ii)], desire likewise withdraws when 
the beautiful is under consideration, and the subject cancels his 
aims in relation to the object and treats it as independent, an end 
in itself. Therefore there is dissolved the purely finite standing of 
the object in which it served purposes external to it as a useful 
means of fulfilling them, and either, unfree, armed itself against 
their fulfilment or else was compelled to accept the alien purpose 
as its own. At the same time the unfree situation of the active 
agent has disappeared because his consciousness is no longer 
differentiated into subjective intentions, etc., and their sphere and 
the means to their achievement; his relation to the fulfilment of 
his subjective intentions is no longer the finite one of the mere 
'ought' ; he has gone beyond it and what now confronts him is the 
perfectly realized Concept and end. 
Thus the contemplation of beauty is of a liberal kind ; it leaves 
objects alone as being inherently free and infinite; there is no 
wish to possess them or take advantage of them as useful for ful­
filling finite needs and intentions. So the object, as beautiful, 
appears neither as forced and compelled by us, nor fought and 
overcome by other external things. 
For, in virtue of the essence of beauty, what must appear in the 
beautiful object is the Concept with its soul and end, as well as 

CONCEPT O F  THE BEAUT I F U L  AS S U C H  
us 
its external determinacy, many-sidedness, and, in general, its 
reality created by itself and not by something else, since, as we saw 
just now, the object has truth only as the immanent unity and 
correspondence of the specific existent and its genume essence and 
Concept. Now further, since the Concept itself is the concrete, its 
reality too appears as just a complete creation, the parts of which 
are nevertheless revealed as ideally ensouled and unified. For the 
harmony of the Concept with its appearance is a perfect inter­
penetration. Consequently the external form and shape does not 
remain separate from the external material, nor is it stamped on it 
mechanically for some other purposes; it appears as the form 
immanent in the reality and corresponding with the nature of 
that reality, the form giving itself an outward shape. 
But, finally, however much the particular aspects, parts, and 
members of the beautiful object harmonize with one another to 
form an ideal unity and make this unity appear, nevertheless this 
harmony must only be so visible in them that they still preserve 
an appearance of independent freedom over against one another; 
i.e. they must not, as in the Concept as such, have a purely ideal 
unity, they must also present the aspect of independent reality. 
In the beautiful object there must be both (i) necessity, established 
by the Concept, in the coherence of its particular aspects, and 
(ii) the appearance of their freedom, freedom for themselves and 
not merely for the unity of the parts on view. Necessity as such 
is the relation of aspects so essentially interlinked with one another 
that if one is there, the other is immediately there also. Such 
necessity should not be missing in beautiful objects, but it must 
not emerge in the form of necessity itself; on the contrary, it must 
be hidden behind an appearance of undesigned contingency. For 
otherwise the particular real parts lose their standing as existing 
on the strength of their own reality too, and they appear only in 
the service of their ideal unity, to which they remain abstractly 
subordinate. 
Owing to this freedom and infinity, which are inherent in the 
Concept of beauty, as well as in the beautiful object and its sub­
jective contemplation, the sphere of the beautiful is withdrawn 
from the relativity of finite affairs and raised into the absolute 
realm of the Idea and its truth. 

Chapter II 
THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
The beautiful is the Idea as the immediate unity of the Concept 
with its reality, the Idea, however, only in so far as this its unity 
is present immediately in sensuous and real appearance. 
Now the first existence of the Idea is nature, and beauty begins 
as the beauty of nature. 
A. NATURAL BEAUTY A S  S U CH 
1 .  The Idea as Life 
In the world of nature we must at once make a distinction in 
respect of the manner in which the Concept, in order to be as 
Idea, wins existence in its realization. 
(a) First, the Concept immediately sinks itself so completely 
in objectivity that it does not itself appear as subjective ideal 
unity; on the contrary, it has altogether passed over soullessly into 
the material world perceived by the senses. Purely mechanical and 
physical separate and particular bodies are of this kind. A metal, 
for example, is in itself a manifold of mechanical and physical 
qualities; but every tiny part of it possesses them in the same way. 
Such a body lacks the complete articulation which it would have 
if each of its different parts had a particular material existence of its 
own, nor can it have the negative ideal unity of these parts which 
would declare itself as their animation. The different parts are 
only an abstract multiplicity and their unity is only the insignifi­
cant one of the uniformity of the same qualities. 
This is the Concept's first mode of existence. Its distinctions1 
have no independent existence, and its ideal unity does not 
emerge as ideal ; on this account, then, such separated bodies are 
in themselves defective and abstract existents. 
(b) Secondly, on the other hand, higher natural objects set free 
the distinctions of the Concept, so that now each one of them 
outside the others is there for itself independently. Here alone 
appears the true nature of objectivity. For objectivity is precisely 
1 i.e. universal, particular, individual. See ahove, p. 109. 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
I I 7  
this independent dispersal of the Concept's distinctions. Now at 
this stage the Concept asserts itself in this way: since it is the 
totality of its determinacies which makes itself real, the particular 
bodies, though each possesses an independent existence of its own, 
close together into one and the same system. One example of this 
kind of thing is the solar system. The sun, comets, moons, and 
planets appear, on the one hand, as heavenly bodies independent 
and different from one another; but, on the other hand, they are 
what they are only because of the determinate place they occupy 
in a total system of bodies. Their specific kind of movement, as 
well as their physical properties, can be derived only from their 
situation in this system. This interconnection constitutes their 
inner unity which relates the particular existents to one another 
and holds them together. 
Yet at this purely implicit unity of the independently existing 
particular bodies the Concept cannot stop. For it has to make real 
not only its distinctions but also its self-relating unity. This 
unity now distinguishes itself from the mutual externality of the 
objective particular bodies and acquires for itself at this stage, in 
contrast to this mutual externality, a real, bodily, independent 
existence. For example, in the solar system the sun exists as this 
unity of the system, over against the real differences within it.­
But the existence of the ideal unity in this way is itself still of a 
defective kind, for, on the one hand, it becomes real only as the 
relation together of the particular independent bodies and their 
bearing on one another, and, on the other hand, as one body in the 
system, a body which represents the unity as such, it stands over 
against the real differences. If we wish to consider the sun as the 
soul of the entire system, it has itself still an independent persis­
tence outside the members of the system which are the unfolding 
of this soul. The sun itself is only one moment of the Concept, the 
moment of unity in distinction from the Concept's real par­
ticularization, and consequently a unity which remains purely 
implicit and therefore abstract. For the sun, in virtue of its physical 
quality, is the purely identical, the giver of light, the Iight-body as 
such, but it is also only this abstract identity. For light is simple 
undifferentiated shining in itself.-So in the solar system we do 
find the Concept itself become real, with the totality of its distinc­
tions made explicit, since each body makes one particular factor 
appear, but even here the Concept still remains sunk in its real 

n8 
I. THE I DEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
existence; it does not come forth as the ideality and the inner 
independence thereof. The decisive form of its existence remains 
the independent mutual externality of its different factors. 
But what the true existence of the Concept requires is that the 
real diferences (namely the reality of the independent differences 
and their equally independently objectified unity as such) be 
themselves brought back into unity; i.e. that such a whole of 
natural differences should on the one hand make the Concept 
explicit as a real mutual externality of its specific determinations, 
and yet on the other hand set down as cancelled in every particular 
thing its self-enclosed independence; and now make the ideality, in 
which the differences are turned back into subjective unity, emerge 
in them as their universal animating soul. In that event, they are 
no longer merely parts hanging together and related to one another, 
but members; i.e. they are no longer sundered, existing indepen­
dently, but they have genuine existence only in their ideal unity. 
Only in such an organic articulation does there dwell in the 
members the ideal unity of the Concept which is their support and 
their immanent soul. The Concept remains no longer sunk in 
reality but emerges into existence in it as the inner identity and 
universality which constitute its own essence. 
(c) This third mode of natural appearance alone is an existence 
of the Idea, the Idea in natural form as Life. Dead, inorganic 
nature is not adequate to the Idea, and only the living organism is 
an actuality of the Idea. For in life, in the first place, the reality of 
the Concept's distinctions is present as real ; secondly, however, 
there is the negation of these as merely real distinctions, in that 
the ideal subjectivity of the Concept subdues this reality to itself; 
thirdly, there is the soulful qua the affirmative appearance of the 
Concept in its corporeality, i.e. qua infinite form which has the 
power to maintain itself, as form, in its content. 
(ex) If we examine our ordinary view about life, what it implies 
is (a) the idea of the body, and (b) the idea of the soul. To the two 
we ascribe different qualities of their own. This distinction between 
soul and body is of great importance for the philosophical treat­
ment of the subject too, and we must take it up here likewise. But 
knowledge's equally important interest in this matter concerns 
the unity of soul and body which has always posed the greatest 
difficulties to thoughtful study. It is on account of this unity that 
life is precisely a first appearance of the Idea in nature. Therefore 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
119 
we must not take the identity of soul and body as a mere connec­
tion, but in a deeper way, i.e. we must regard the body and its 
members as the existence of the systematic articulation of the Con­
cept itself. In the members of the living organism the Concept 
gives to its determinations an external being in nature, as is already 
the case, at a lower level, in the solar system. Now within this real 
existence the Concept rises nevertheless into the ideal unity of all 
these determinations, and this ideal unity is the soul. The soul is 
the substantial unity and all-pervasive universality which at the 
same time is simple relation to itself and subjective self-awareness. 
It is in this higher sense that the unity of soul and body must be 
taken. Both, that is to say, are not different things which come 
into connection with one another, but one and the same totality 
of the same determinations. And just as the Idea as such can only 
be understood as the Concept aware of itself in its objective reality, 
which implies both the difference and the unity of Concept 
and reality, so life too is to be known only as the unity of soul 
with its body. The subjective as well as the substantial unity 
of the soul within the body itself is displayed, for example, as 
feeling. 
· 
Feeling in the living organism does not belong independently 
to one particular part alone, but is this ideal unity of the entire 
organism itself. It permeates every member, is all over the 
organism in hundreds and hundreds of places, and yet in the 
same organism there are not many thousands of feelers; there is only 
one, one self that feels. Since life in organic nature contains this dif­
ference between the real existence of the members and the soul 
simply aware of itself in them, and yet no less contains this dif­
ference as a mediated unity, the organic is a higher sphere than 
inorganic nature. For only the living thing is Idea, and only the 
Idea is the truth. Of course even in the organic sphere this truth 
can be disturbed in that the body does not completely bring to 
fruition its ideality and its possession of soul, as, for instance, in 
illness. In that event the Concept does not rule as the sole power; 
other powers share the rule. But then such an existent is a bad and 
crippled life, which still lives only because the incompatibility of 
Concept and reality is not absolutely thorough but only relative. 
For if the correspondence of the two were no longer present at all, 
if the body altogether lacked genuine articulation and its true 
ideality, then life would at once change into death which sunders 

uo 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
into independence what the possession of soul holds together in 
undivided unity. 
({3) When we said (i) that the soul is the totality of the Concept, 
as the inherently subjective ideal unity, and (ii) that the articulated 
body is this same totality, but as the exposition and sensuously 
perceived separatedness of all the particular members, and that 
both (i) and (ii) were posited in the living thing as in unity, there is 
here, to be sure, a contradiction. For the ideal unity is not only not 
the perceived separatedness in which every particular member has 
an independent existence and a separate peculiarity of its own; on 
the contrary, it is the direct opposite of such external reality. But 
to say that opposites are to be identical is precisely contradiction 
itself. Yet whoever claims that nothing exists which carries in it­
self a contradiction in the form of an identity of opposites is at the 
same time requiring that nothing living shall exist. For the power 
of life, and still more the might of the spirit, consists precisely in 
positing contradiction in itself, enduring it, and overcoming it. 
This positing and resolving of the contradiction between the ideal 
unity and the real separatedness of the members constitutes the 
constant process of life, and life is only by being a process. 
The process of life comprises a double activity: on the one hand, 
that of bringing steadily into existence perceptibly the real 
differences of all the members and specific characteristics of the 
organism, but, on the other hand, that of asserting in them their 
universal ideality (which is their animation) if they try to persist 
in independent severance from one another and isolate themselves 
in fixed differences from one another. This is the idealism of life. 
For philosophy is not at all the only example of idealism; nature, 
as life, already makes a matter of fact what idealist philosophy 
brings to completion in its own spiritual field.-But only these two 
activities in one-the constant transfer of the specific characteristics 
of the organism into realities, and the putting of these real existents 
ideally into their subjective unity-constitute the complete process 
of life, the detailed forms of which we cannot consider here. 
Through this unity of double activity all the members of the 
organism are constantly upheld and constantly brought to the 
ideality of their animation. After all, the members display this 
ideality forthwith in the fact that their animated unity is not 
indifferent to them, but on the contrary is the substance in which 
and through which alone they can preserve their particular indi-

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
T2I 
viduality. This is precisely what constitutes the essential difference 
between the part of a whole and the member of an organism. 
The particular parts of a house, for example, the individual 
stones, windows, etc., remain the same, whether they together 
form a house or not; their association is indifferent to them and the 
Concept remains for them a purely external form which does not 
live in the real parts in order to raise them to the ideality of a sub­
jective unity. The members of an organism, on the other hand, do 
likewise possess external reality, yet so strongly is the Concept their 
own indwelling essence that it is not impressed on them as a form 
merely uniting them externally; on the contrary, it is their sole 
sustainer. For this reason the members do not have the sort of 
reality possessed by the stones of a building or the planets, moons, 
comets in the planetary system; what they do have is an existence 
posited as ideal within the organism, despite all their reality. For 
example, a hand, if severed, loses its independent subsistence; it 
does not remain what it was in the organism ; its mobility, agility, 
shape, colour, etc., are changed ; indeed it decomposes and 
perishes altogether. It was sustained in existence only as a member 
of an organism, and had reality only as continually brought back 
into the ideal unity. Herein consists the higher mode of reality 
within the living organism; the real, the positive, is continually 
posited negatively and as ideal, while this ideality is at once pre­
cisely the maintenance of the real differences and the element in 
which they are sustained. 
· 
(y) The reality which the Idea gains as natural life is on this 
account a reality that appears. Appearance, that is to say, means 
simply that there is some reality which, instead of having its being 
immediately in itself, is posited negatively in its outer existence at 
the same time. But the negating of the members that are im­
mediately there externally is not just a negative relation, like the 
activity of idealization; on the contrary, affirmative being for 
self [or independence] is present in this negation at the same time. 
Hitherto we have considered particular realities in their complete 
particularization as the affirmative. But in life this independence is 
negated, and only the ideal unity within the living organism acquires 
the power of affirmative relation to self. The soul is to be under­
stood as this ideality which in its negating is also affirmative. 
Therefore when it is the soul which appears in the body, this 
appearance is at the same time affirmative. The soul does indeed 

uz 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
display itself as the power against the independent particularization 
of the members, and yet it also creates it by containing as inward 
and ideal what is imprinted externally on the members and forms 
[of the body]. Thus it is this positive inner itself which appears 
in the outer; the outer which remains purely external would be 
nothing but an abstraction and one-sidedness. But in the living 
organism we have an outer in which the inner appears, since the 
outer displays itself in itself as this inner which is its Concept. 
To this Concept again there belongs the reality in which the Con­
cept appears as Concept. But since in objectivity the Concept as 
such is the self-related subjectivity that in its reality is still con­
fronted by itself, life exists only as a living being, as an individual 
subject. Life alone has found this negative point of unity: the 
point is negative because subjective self-awareness can only emerge 
through positing the real differences as merely real, but therewith 
at the same time the subjective affirmative unity of self-awareness 
is linked.-To emphasize this aspect of subjectivity is of great 
importance. Life is only now actual as individual living subject. 
If we ask further by what indications the Idea of life in actual 
living individuals can be known, the answer is as follows: Life 
must first be real as a totality of a bodily organism, but, secondly, 
as an organism which does not appear as something stubborn, but 
as an inherent continual process of idealizing, in which the living 
soul displays itself. Thirdly, this totality is not determined from 
without and alterable ;  it shapes itself outwardly from within; it is 
in process, and therein is continually related to itself as a subjective 
unity and an end in itself. 
This inherently free independence of subjective life shows itself 
principally in spontaneous movement. The inanimate bodies of 
inorganic nature have their fixed position in space; they are one 
with their place, bound to it, or moved from it only by an external 
force. For their movement does not proceed from themselves, and 
when it is forced on them it appears in consequence as resulting 
from an alien influence against which they struggle and react in 
order to cancel it. And, even if the movement of the planets, etc., 
does not appear as an external propulsion and as foreign to the 
bodies themselves, nevertheless it is tied to a fixed law and its 
abstract necessity. But the living animal in its free spontaneous 
movement negates by its own means this attachment to a determi­
nate place and is the progressive liberation from physical unity 

THE B EAUTY O F  NATURE 
123 
with such determinacy. Similarly in its movement it is the can­
cellation, even if only relative, of the abstraction involved in 
determinate modes of movement, its path, speed, etc. Looked at 
more closely, however, the animal has in its organism by its very 
nature a physical position in space, and its life is spontaneous 
movement within this reality itself, as the circulation of the blood, 
movement of the limbs, etc. 
Movement, however, is not the only expression of life. The free­
sounding of the animal voice, which inorganic bodies do not have 
because they rustle and clang only when impelled from outside, 
is already a higher expression of ensouled subjectivity. But 
idealizing activity is displayed in the most impressive manner in 
the fact that, on the one hand, the living individual separates him­
self off from the rest of reality, and yet, on the other hand, he 
equally makes the external world something for himself: partly 
contemplatively, through seeing, etc., partly practically by subject­
ing external things to himself, using them, assimilating them in the 
process of eating, and so, by means of what is his opposite, he con­
tinually reproduces himself as an individual, and indeed, in stronger 
organisms, by more definitely separated intervals of needing and 
consuming, of satisfaction and satiety [i.e. by mealtimes]. 
All these are activities in which the essential nature of life comes 
into appearance in ensouled individuals. Now this ideality is not 
at all only our reflection on life; it is objectively present in the living 
subject himself, whose existence, therefore, we may style an 
'objective idealism'. The soul, as this ideality, makes itself appear, 
since it steadily degrades into an appearance the purely external 
reality of the body and therefore appears itself objectively in body. 
2. Life in Nature as Beautiful 
Now as the physically objective Idea, life in nature is beautiful 
because truth, the Idea in its earliest natural form as life, is im­
mediately present there in individual and adequate actuality. Yet, 
because of this purely sensuous immediacy, the living beauty of 
nature is produced neither for nor out of itself as beautiful and for 
the sake of a beautiful appearance. The beauty of nature is beauti­
ful only for another, i.e. for us, for the mind which apprehends 
beauty. Hence arises the question in what way and by what means 
life in its immediate existence appears as beautiful. 

124 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
(a) If we consider the living thing first in its practical self­
production and self-maintenance, the first thing that strikes us is 
capricious movement. This, regarded just as movement, is nothing 
other than the purely abstract freedom of changing place from 
time to time, in which the animal proves itself to be wholly capri­
cious and its movement haphazard. On the other hand, music and 
dancing also involve movement; yet this movement is not just 
haphazard and capricious, but in itself regular, definite, concrete, 
and measured-even if we abstract altogether from the meaning 
of which it is the beautiful expression. If we look further at animal 
movement and regard it as the realization of an inner purpose, 
still this purpose is haphazard throughout and wholly restricted 
because it is only an impulse that has been aroused. But if we go 
further still and judge the movement as a purposeful act and the 
working together of all parts of the animal, then this mode of con­
sidering the movement proceeds solely from the activity of our 
intellect.-The same is the case if we reflect on how the animal 
satisfies its needs, nourishes itself, on how it gets its food, consumes 
and digests it, and, in general, how it accomplishes everything 
necessary for its self-preservation. For here too either we merely 
look on from the outside at single desires and their capricious and 
accidental satisfactions-in which case, we may add, the inner 
activity of the organism does not become perceptible at all, or all 
these activities and their modes of expression become an object 
for the intellect, which struggles to understand the purposefulness 
in them, and the correspondence between the inner purposes of 
the animal and the organs realizing them. 
Neither the sensuous perception of single accidental desires, 
capricious satisfactions and movements, nor the intellectual con­
sideration of the purposefulness of the organism makes animal life 
into the beauty of nature for us; on the contrary, beauty has respect 
to the appearance of an individual shape in its rest, as well as in 
its movement, regardless alike of its purposefulness in the satis­
faction of needs, and of the entire separatedness and accidental 
nature of its spontaneous movements. But beauty can devolve only 
on the shape, because this alone is the external appearance in 
which the objective idealism of life becomes for us an object of our 
perception and sensuous consideration. Thinking apprehends this 
idealism in its Concept and makes this Concept explicit in its 
universality, but the consideration of beauty concentrates on the 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
reality in which the Concept appears. And this reality is the external 
shape of the articulated organism, which for us is as much some­
thing purely apparent as it is something existent, since the merely 
real multiplicity of the particular members in the ensouled totality 
of the shape must be posited as purely apparent. 
(b) According to the Concept of life already explained, there 
now arise the following points explanatory of the sort of pure 
appearance involved: The shape is spatially spread out, limited, 
figured, different in forms, colour, movement, etc., and is a mani­
fold of such differences. But if the organism is to manifest itself 
as ensouled, then obviously it does not have its true existence in 
this manifold. This is because the different parts and their modes 
of appearance, which are present to us as sensuously perceptible, 
close together at the same time into a whole and therefore appear 
as an individual which is a unit and has these particular differences, 
even if as different, yet as all harmonious. 
(Ą) But this unity must display itself in the first place as an 
unintended identity and therefore must not assert itself as abstract 
purposefulness. The parts must neither come before our eyes 
merely as means to a specific end and as in service to it, nor may 
they abandon their distinction from one another in construction 
and shape. 
(/I) On the contrary, the members, in the second place, acquire 
in our eyes an appearance of accident, i.e. the specific character 
of one is not posited in the other also. None of them has this or 
that shape because the other has it, as for example is the case in 
a regular system. In this latter some abstract principle of determina­
tion determines the shape, size, etc., of all the parts. For example, 
in a building the windows are of equal size or at least stand in 
one and the same row; similarly, in a regiment the regulars have 
one and the same uniform. Here the particular parts of clothing, 
their cut, colour, etc., are not accidental to one another, but one has 
its specific form on account of the other. Neither the difference of 
forms nor their proper independence gets its due here. But it is 
totally different in the organic and living individual. There each 
part is different, the nose from the forehead, the mouth from the 
cheeks, the breast from the neck, the arms from the legs, and so on. 
Now since in our eyes each member does not have the shape of 
another, but a form of its own which is not absolutely determined 
by another member, the members appear as independent in 

126 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
themselves, and therefore free and accidental to one another. For 
their material interconnection has nothing to do with their form 
as such. 
(y) But thirdly, for our contemplation an inner connection must 
nevertheless become visible in this independence of the members, 
although the unity may not remain abstract and external, as it does 
in mere regularity, but must recall and preserve the individual 
particularizations instead of obliterating them. This identity is 
not perceptible and immediately present to our view, like the 
difference of the members, and it remains, therefore, a secret 
inner necessity and correspondence. But if purely inner, and not 
outwardly visible too, it would be understood by thinking alone, 
and altogether beyond the scope of perception. Yet in that case it 
would lack the look of the beautiful, and by looking at the living 
thing we would not see the Idea as really appearing before us. 
Therefore the unity must also emerge into externality, although, 
because it is the ideally soul-giving thing, it may not remain 
purely physical and spatial. The unity appears in the individual 
as the universal ideality of its members which constitutes the up­
holding and carrying foundation, the substratum of the living 
subject. This subjective unity emerges in the living organic being 
as feeling. In feeling and its expression, the soul manifests itself 
as soul. This is because for the soul the mere juxtaposition of the 
members has no truth, and for the soul's subjective ideality the 
multiplicity of spatial forms does not exist. It is true that the soul 
presupposes the variety, characteristic formation, and organic 
articulation of the bodily parts; but while the soul as feeling, and 
its expression, emerges in these, its omnipresent inner unity 
appears precisely as the annulment of mere independent realities, 
which now no longer present themselves only but their possession 
of soul as feeling. 
(c) But at first the expression of soul-laden feeling affords 
neither the impression of a necessary interconnection of the 
particular members with one another nor the vision of the neces­
sary identity of real articulation with the subjective unity of feeling 
as such. 
(ex) If, however, it is the shape, purely as shape, which is to 
bring this inner correspondence and its necessity into appearance, 
then for us the connection may seem to be the habitual juxta­
position of the members, producing a certain type and repeated 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATU R E  
examples of this type. Habit, however, is itself a purely subjective 
necessity over again. By this criterion we may, for example, find 
animals ugly because they display an organism which deviates 
from our customary observations or contradicts them. For this 
reason we call animal organisms bizarre, if the way their organs 
are connected falls outside what we have already often seen pre­
viously and what therefore has become familiar: an example is 
a fish whose disproportionately large body ends in a short tail and 
whose eyes are together on one side of the head. In the case of 
plants we have long been accustomed to deviations of all sorts, 
although cacti, for example, with their prickles and the even 
straighter growth of their angled stems may seem remarkable.1 
Anyone widely versed and knowledgeable in natural history will, 
in this connection, have the most precise knowledge of the indivi­
dual parts, as well as carrying in his memory the greatest number 
of types and their congruity, so that hardly anything unfamiliar 
comes before his notice. 
(/3) A deeper examination of this correspondence between the 
parts of an organism may, secondly, equip a man with the insight 
and skill that enable him to tell at once from one single member the 
wlwle shape to which it must belong. In this regard Cuvier,z for 
example, was famous, because by seeing a single bone-whether 
fossil or not-he could identify the animal species to which the 
individual bone belonged and was to be allocated. Ex ungue leonem} 
is valid here in the strict sense of the word; from a claw or a 
thigh-bone the conformation of the teeth can be inferred, from the 
teeth, vice versa, the shape of the hip-bone or the form of the 
spinal column. But, in such inference, knowledge of the type is no 
longer a matter of habit alone; there already enter, as guide, 
reflections and individual categories of thought. Cuvier, for 
example, in his identifications had before his mind a concrete 
specification and decisive property which was asserted in all the 
particular and different parts and therefore could be recognized 
1 The translation of this sentence I owe to Professor ]. H. Burnett who thinks 
that Hegel is really referring to euphorbiae and not cacti. Professor H. G. Callan 
informs me that the description of the fish fits a Dover sole. 
2 Georges, Baron de Cuvier, 1769-1 832 :  Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles 
de Quadrupedes (Paris, 181 2), vol. i, pp. 58 ff. Hegel quotes this at length in 
Philosophy of Nature, § 370, Addition. 
' The origin of this familiar phrase seems to be Plutarch, De Dej. Or., 2, 
where he quotes it from Alcaeus. 

128 
I. THE I DE A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
again in them. Such a specific character, for example, is the 
property of being carnivorous which then constitutes the law for 
the organization of all the parts. A carnivorous animal, for example, 
requires different teeth, jaw-bone, etc. ; if it goes hunting it must 
grip its prey and therefore needs claws-hoofs are insufficient. 
Here then one specific characteristic is the guide for the necessary 
shape and interconnection of all the members of the organism. 
Similar universal characteristics are of course also within the scope 
of the plain man's ideas, as for instance the strength of the lion 
or the eagle, and so forth. Now this way of considering the organ­
ism we may certainly call beautiful and ingenious because, as 
consideration, it teaches us to recognize a unity of configuration 
and its forms, although this unity is not uniformly repeated but is 
compatible with the members retaining at the same time their full 
differentiation. Nevertheless it is not perception which prevails in 
this method but a universal guiding thought. From this point of 
view we will therefore not say that we find the object beautiful, 
but that what we will call beauty lies in our subjective considera­
tion of the object. And, looked at more closely, these reflections 
start from a single restricted aspect as a guiding principle, namely 
from the manner of animal nourishment, from the characteristic, 
for example, of being carnivorous or herbivorous, etc. But by such 
a characteristic it is not the connection of the whole, of the Con­
cept, of the soul itself that is brought before our eyes. 
(y) If therefore within this natural sphere we were to bring 
the inner total unity of life to our ken, this could be achieved only 
by thinking and comprehending; for in nature the soul as such 
cannot make itself recognizable, because subjective unity in its 
ideality has not yet become explicit to itself. But if we now appre­
hend the soul, in accordance with its Concept, by thinking, we 
have two things: the perception of the shape, and the intellectual 
concept of the soul as soul. But in the perception of beauty this 
ought not to be the case; the object should neither float before our 
eyes as a thought, nor create, in the interest of thought, a difference 
from and an opposition to perception. Therefore there is nothing 
left but that the object shall be present for sense in general and 
that as the genuine mode of considering beauty in nature, we 
consequently get a sensuous perception of natural forms. 'Sense' 
is this wonderful word which is used in two opposite meanings. 
On the one hand it means the organ of immediate apprehension, 

THE B EAUTY O F  NATURE 
129 
but on the other hand we mean by it the sense, the significance, 
the thought, the universal underlying the thing. And so sense is 
connected on the one hand with the immediate external aspect 
of existence, and on the other hand with its inner essence. Now 
a sensuous consideration does not cut the two sides apart at all; in 
one direction it contains the opposite one too, and in sensuous 
immediate perception it at the same time apprehends the essence 
and the Concept. But since it carries these very determinations in 
a still unseparated unity, it does not bring the Concept as such 
into consciousness but stops at foreshadowing it. If, for example, 
three natural realms are identified, the mineral, the vegetable, the 
animal, then in this series of stages we see foreshadowed an in­
wardly necessary articulation in accordance with the Concept, 
without abiding by the mere idea of an external purposefulness. 
Even in the multiplicity of products within these realms, sensuous 
observation divines a rationally ordered advance, in the different 
geological formations, and in the series of vegetable and animal 
species.1 Similarly, the individual animal organism-this insect 
with its subdivision into head, breast, belly, and extremities-is 
envisaged as an inherently rational articulation, and in the five 
senses, although at first sight they may seem to be just an accidental 
plurality, there is likewise found a correspondence with the Con­
cept. Of this sort was Goethe's observation and demonstration of 
the inner rationality of nature and its phenomena. With great 
insight he set to work in a simple way to examine objects as they 
were presented to the senses, but at the same time he had a com­
plete divination of their connection in accordance with the Con­
cept. History too can be so understood and related that through 
single events and individuals their essential meaning and necessary 
connection can secretly shine. 
3· Ways of Considering Life in Nature 
Consequently, to sum up, nature in general, as displaying to sense 
the concrete Concept and the Idea, is to be called beautiful; this is 
because when we look at natural forms that accord with the Con­
cept, such a correspondence with the Concept is foreshadowed; 
' Hegel lived at a time before the theory of evolution had been scientifically 
established, and it was his rule, in discussing nature, to abide by what the 
scientists told him. But this is one of the passages which show how he foresaw 
that a rational explanation of the facts demanded an evolutionary theory. See, 
e.g., R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of Nature (Oxford, 1945), pp. 122 ff. 

130 
I. THE I D EA O F  ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
and when we examine them with our senses the inner necessity 
and the harmony of the whole articulation is revealed to them at 
the same time. The perception of nature as beautiful goes no 
further than this foreshadowing of the Concept. But the conse­
quence is that this apprehension of nature, for which the parts, 
although appearing to have arisen in free independence from one 
another, yet make visible their harmony in shape, delineation, 
movement, etc., remains purely indeterminate and abstract. The 
inner unity remains inward; for perception it does not emerge in 
a concretely ideal form, and consideration acquiesces in the uni­
versality of some sort of a necessary animating harmony. 
(a) Thus at this point we have primarily before us as the beauty 
of nature only the inherently ensouled harmony within the con­
ceptually appropriate objectivity of natural productions. With this 
harmony the matter is immediately identical ; the form dwells 
directly in the matter as its true essence and configurating power. 
This provides the general characterization for beauty at this stage. 
So, for example, the natural crystal amazes us by its regular 
shape, produced not by any external, mechanical, influence, but 
by an inner vocation and free force of its own, free on the part of 
the object itself. For an activity external to an object could as such 
of course be equally free, but in the crystal the formative activity 
is not foreign to the thing; it is an activating form which belongs 
to this mineral on the strength of its own nature. It is the free 
force of the matter itself which by immanent activity gives itself 
its form and does not acquire its specific character passively from 
without. And so the matter remains free and at home with itself in 
its realized form as its own form. In a still higher, more concrete, 
way a similar activity of immanent formation is displayed in the 
living organism and its outline, shape of limbs, and above all in 
its movement and the expression of feelings. For here it is the 
inner activity itself which emerges vitally. 
(b) Yet even in this indeterminacy of natural beauty as inner 
animation, we make essential distinctions: 
(ex) In the light of our idea of life as well as of the foreshadowing 
of life's true Concept and the customary types of its corresponding 
appearance, we make distinctions according to which we call 
animals beautiful or ugly; for example, the sloth displeases because 
of its drowsy inactivity; it drags itself painfully along and its 
whole manner of life displays its incapacity for quick movement 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
I J I  
and activity. For activity and mobility are precisely what manifest 
the higher ideality of life. Similarly we cannot find beautiful the 
amphibia, many sorts of fish, crocodiles, toads, numerous kinds of 
insect, etc. ; but hybrids especially, which build the transition 
from one specific form to another and intermix their shapes, may 
well astonish us, but they appear unbeautiful, as, for instance the 
duck-bill which is a mixture of a bird and a quadruped. This 
attitude of ours too may seem at first to be mere familiarity, be­
cause we have in our minds a fixed type for animal genera. But still 
in the familiarity there is not inactive the inkling that the con­
struction of a bird, for example, belongs to it necessarily and that, 
because of its essence, it cannot assume forms proper to other 
genera without producing hybrids. Therefore these mixtures prove 
to be odd and contradictory. To the sphere of living natural 
beauty there belong neither the one-sided restrictedness of 
organization, which appears deficient and meaningless and points 
only to limited needs in the external world, nor such mixtures 
and transitions which, though not so one-sided in themselves, 
yet cannot hold fast to the specific characteristics of different 
species. 
(f3) In another sense we talk further about the beauty of nature 
when we have before our minds no organic living creation, for 
example if we look at a landscape. Here we have no organic 
articulation of parts as determined by the Concept and animated 
into its ideal unity, but on the one hand only a rich variety of 
objects and the external linkage of different configurations, organic 
or inorganic: the contours of hills, the windings of rivers, groups 
of trees, huts, houses, towns, palaces, roads, ships, sky and sea, 
valleys and chasms; on the other hand, within this variety there 
appears a pleasing or impressive external harmony which in­
terests us. 
(y) Finally, the beauty of nature gains a special relation to us 
because it arouses emotional moods and because of its harmony 
with them. A relationship like this is produced, for example, by 
the stillness of a moonlit night, the peace of a glen through 
which a burn meanders, the sublimity of the immeasurable and 
troubled sea, the restful immensity of the starry heaven. Here 
significance does not belong to the objects as such, but must be 
sought in the emotional mood which they arouse. Similarly we 
call animals beautiful if they betray an expression of soul which 

13z 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAU TY 
chimes in with human qualities such as courage, strength, cunning, 
good nature, etc. This is an expression which, on the one hand, 
does of course belong to the animals as we see them and displays 
one aspect of their life, but, on the other hand, it belongs to our 
ideas and our own emotions. 
(c) But however far even animal life, as the summit' of natural 
beauty, expresses possession of soul, nevertheless every animal 
life is throughout restricted and tied down to entirely specific 
qualities. The sphere of its existence is narrow and its interests are 
dominated by the natural needs of nourishment and sex, etc. Its 
soul-life, as what is inner and what gains expression in its outward 
shape, is poor, abstract, and worthless. Further, this inner does 
not emerge into appearance as inner; the living thing in nature does 
not reveal its soul on itself, for the thing in nature is just this, that 
its soul remains purely inward, i.e. does not express itself as some­
thing ideal. The soul of the animal, that is to say, is, as we have 
just indicated, not present to itself as this ideal unity; if it were, 
then it would also manifest itself to others in this self-awareness. 
Only the self-conscious ego is the simple ideal which, as ideal in 
its own eyes, knows itself as this simple unity and therefore gives 
itself a reality which is no mere external, sensuous, and bodily 
reality, but itself one of an ideal kind. Here alone has reality the 
form of the Concept itself; the Concept has itself over against 
itself, has itself for its object and in it confronts itself. But animal 
life is only implicitly this unity, in which reality as corporeal has 
a form different from the ideal unity of the soul. But the self­
conscious ego is itself explicitly this unity, the aspects of which 
have the like ideality as their element. As this conscious concrete 
unity, the ego manifests itself too to others. But the animal 
through its form enables our observation only to surmise a soul, 
since it has itself no more than a cloudy appearance of a soul as the 
breath and fragrance which is diffused over the whole, brings the 
members into unity, and reveals in the animal's whole mode of 
living only the beginning of a particular character. This is the 
primary deficiency in the beauty of nature, even when considered 
in its highest configuration, a deficiency which will lead us on to 
the necessity of the Ideal as the beauty of art. But before we come 
1 Hegel had no liking for mountains, for example. (See his Diary of his 
Journey to the Bernese Oberland-in, e.g., Dok. zu H's Ettt:,•ick!ung, hrsg. 
J. Hoffmeister, Stuttgart, 1936.) 

THE B E AUTY O F  NATURE 
133 
to the Ideal, there are two points [B and c below] which are the 
first consequences of this deficiency in all natural beauty. 
We said that the soul appears in the shape of animals only in 
a cloudy way as the connection of the parts of the organism, as 
a unifying point of a possession of soul which lacks any filling 
of substantial worth. Only an indeterminate and wholly abstract 
possession of soul emerges. This abstract appearance we now have 
to consider separately and briefly. 
B. THE EXTERNAL BEAUTY OF THE ABSTRACT 
FORM AND THE AB S TRACT UNITY OF THE 
SENSUOU S MATERIAL 
In nature there is an external reality which externally is deter­
mined, but its inner being does not get beyond indeterminacy and 
abstraction instead of attaining concrete inwardness as unity of 
soul. Consequently neither as being explicitly inward in an ideal 
form nor as ideal content, does this inwardness win an existence 
adequate to itself; on the contrary it appears in the external real 
objects as a unity determining them externally. The concrete 
unity of the inner would consist in this, that, on the one hand, the 
possession of soul would be in and for itself full of content, and, 
on the other hand, the external reality would be permeated by this 
its inner, and so make the real outward shape an obvious manifesta­
tion of the inner. But such a concrete unity beauty has not attained 
at this stage, but has this unity as the Ideal still lying ahead of it. 
Therefore concrete unity can now not yet enter the outward shape, 
but can only be analysed, i.e. the different aspects of the unity can 
only be considered as sundered and separated. Thus at first the 
configurating form and the external reality presented to sense 
fall apart from one another as different from one another, and we 
have two different aspects to consider here. But (a) in this separa­
tion and (b) in its abstraction, the inner unity is itself for the 
external reality an external unity, and therefore it does not appear 
in the external as the simply immanent form of the total inner 
Concept, but as ideality and determinacy dominating from the 
outside. 
These are the matters whose more detailed explanation is our 
business now. 

134 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
I .  Beauty of Abstract Form 
This is the first matter on which we have to touch. 
The form of natural beauty, as an abstract form, is on the one 
hand determinate and therefore restricted; on the other hand it 
contains a unity and an abstract relation to itself. But, regarded 
more closely, it regulates the external manifold in accordance with 
this its determinacy and unity which, however, does not become 
immanent inwardness and a soul-bearing shape, but remains an 
external determinacy and a unity imposed on the external.-This 
sort of form is what is called regularity and symmetry, then 
conformity to law, and finally harmony. 
(a) Regularity and Symmetry 
(tX) Regularity1 as such is in general sameness in something 
external and, more precisely, the same repetition of one and the 
same specific shape which affords the determining unity for the 
form of objects. On account of its initial abstraction such a unity 
is poles apart from the rational totality of the concrete Concept, 
with the result that its beauty is a beauty of the abstract Under­
standing; for the Understanding has for its principle abstract 
sameness and identity, not determined in itself. So, for example, 
among lines the straight line is the most regular, because it has 
only one direction, abstractly continually the same. Similarly, the 
cube is a completely regular figure. On all sides it has surfaces of 
the same size, equal lines and angles, which as right angles cannot 
be altered in size as obtuse or acute angles can. 
(ɩ) Symmetry hangs together with regularity; i.e. form cannot 
1 Hegel's distinction between Regelmiissigkeit (regularity) and Gesetzmiissig­
keit (conformity to law) is not at first sight obvious and it rests on conceptions of 
rule and law expounded elsewhere in his works. Rule as uniformity is explicitly 
distinguished from law in the Science of Logic (Ww. v, 198-9. Eng. tr. by A. V. 
Miller, pp. 724-5). Rule is wholly a matter of undifferenccd uniformity, but law 
involves a synthesis of differences. 'The essence of law consists in an insepar­
able unity, a necessary inner connection, of distinct determinations . . . .  Accord­
ing to the law of planetary motion, the squares of the periods of revolution vary 
as the cubes of the distances, so the law must be grasped as an inner necessary 
unity of distinct determinations' (Enc. § 4ZZ, Zusatz. Cf. the sections on 
Mechanism in the Science of Logic and the Philosophy of Nature.) For quality 
and quantity, and measure as their synthesis, see Enc., esp. § 108. Since Hegel 
goes on to quote Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty (1753), it is interesting to notice 
that ch. 3 of that work is headed 'Of Uniformity, Regularity, or Symmetry'. 
With this whole section it is instructive to compare Kant's Critique of Judgment, 
§ zz, where the conceptions discussed here in (a), (b), and (c) all appear. 

T H E  B EAUTY O F  NATURE 
135 
rest in that extreme abstraction of sameness of character. With 
sameness unlikeness is associated, and difference breaks in to 
interrupt empty identity. This is what brings symmetry in. 
Symmetry consists in this, that a form, abstractly the same, does 
not simply repeat itself, but is brought into connection with 
another form of the same kind which, considered by itself, is like­
wise determinate and self-same, but compared with the first one 
is unlike it. As a result of this connection, there must come into 
existence a new sameness and unity which is still further deter­
minate and has a greater inner diversity. We have a sight of 
a symmetrical arrangement if, for instance, on one side of a house 
there are three windows of equal size and equidistant from one 
another, then there are added three or four higher than the first 
group with greater or lesser intervals between them, and then 
finally three higher once again, the same in size and distance as 
the first group. Therefore, mere uniformity and the repetition of 
one and the same determinate character does not constitute 
symmetry. Symmetry requires also difference in size, position, 
shape, colour, sounds, and other characteristics, but which then 
must be brought together again in a uniform way. Symmetry is 
provided only by the uniform connection of characteristics that 
are unlike one another. 
Now both forms, regularity and symmetry, as purely external 
unity and arrangement, fall principally into the category of size. 
For the characteristic which is posited externally and is not purely 
immanent, is a quantitative one, whereas quality makes a specific 
thing what it is, so that with the alteration of its qualitative 
character it becomes a totally different thing. But size and its 
alteration as mere size is a characteristic indifferent to quality 
unless it asserts itself as measure. Measure, that is to say, is 
quantity in so far as it determines itself again qualitatively, so that 
the specific quality is bound up with a quantitative determination. 
Regularity and symmetry are chiefly restricted to determinations 
of size and their uniformity and arrangement in things that are 
unlike. 
If we ask further where this ordering of sizes has acquired 
its right place, we find shapes, in the organic as well as in the in­
organic world, which are regular and symmetrical in their size and 
form. Our own organism, for example, is, in part at least, regular 
and symmetrical. We have two eyes, two arms, two legs, equal 

136 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
hip-bones, shoulder blades, etc. On the other hand we know that 
other parts are irregular, like the heart, the lungs, the liver, the 
intestines, etc. The question here is: what is the basis of this 
difference ? The place where regularity of size, shape, position, 
etc., manifests itself is, in the organism, its external side as such. 
The regular and symmetrical character appears, in accordance with 
its nature, where the object, conformably with its determinate 
character, is what is external to itself and manifests no subjective 
animation. The reality which remains in this externality is tied up 
with the abstract external unity already mentioned. On the other 
hand, in ensouled life, and higher still in the free world of the 
spirit, mere regularity recedes before living subjective unity. Now 
of course nature in general, contrary to spirit, is existence external 
to itself, yet regularity prevails in it only where externality as such 
remains the predominant thing. 
(a:cx) In more detail, if we go briefly through the chief stages, 
minerals (crystals, for example) as inanimate productions have 
regularity and symmetry as their basic form. Their shape, as has 
already been said, is indeed immanent in them, and not deter­
mined by a purely external influence; the form they acquire in 
accordance with their nature elaborates in secret activity their 
inner and outer structure. But this activity is not yet the total 
activity of the concrete idealizing Concept which posits the sub­
sistence of the independent parts as something negative and 
thereby ensouls them as in animal life; on the contrary, the unity 
and determinacy of the form [of minerals] persists in the abstract 
one-sidedness of the Understanding, and therefore, as a unity in 
what is self-external, attains mere regularity and symmetry, forms 
in which abstractions alone are active as determinants. 
({3{3) The plant, however, sta':lds higher than the crystal. It has 
already developed to the beginning of an articulation and it con­
sumes material in its continually active process of nourishment. 
But even the plant has not a really ensouled life, since, although it 
is organically articulated, its activity is always drawn out into 
externality. It is fixedly rooted without the possibility of inde­
pendent movement and change of place, it grows steadily, and 
its unbroken assimilation and nourishment is not the peaceful 
maintenance of an organism complete in itself, but a continual 
new production of itself outwards. The animal grows too, but it 
stops at a definite point of size, and it reproduces itself as the 

THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
137 
self-maintenance of one and the same individual. But the plant 
grows without ceasing; only when it withers does the increase of its 
branches, leaves, etc., cease. And what is produced in this growth 
is always a new example of the same entire organism. For every 
branch is a new plant and not at all, as in the animal organism, 
just a single member. With this continual multiplication of itself 
into numerous individual plants, the plant lacks ensouled sub­
jectivity and its ideal unity of feeling. On the whole, however 
inner its digestive process, however active its assimilation of 
nourishment, however far it is self-determining through its Con­
cept which is becoming free and is active in matter, still in its 
whole existence and process of life it remains continually caught 
in externality without subjective independence and unity, and its 
self-preservation is being incessantly externalized. This character 
of steadily pushing itself over itself outwards makes regularity 
and symmetry, as unity in self-externality, into a chief feature in 
the construction of plants. True, regularity here does not dominate 
so strictly as it does in the mineral realm and is not formed in 
such abstract lines and angles, but it still remains preponderant. 
The stem usually rises rectilineally, the coronae of the higher 
plants are circular, the leaves approach crystalline forms, and 
the blooms in number of petals, position, and shape bear, in ac­
cordance with their fundamental type, the stamp of a regular and 
symmetrical character. 
(yy) Finally, in the animal living organism there enters the es­
sential difference of a double mode of the formation of the 
members. For in the animal body, especially at higher stages, the 
organism is, on the one hand, a self-related organism, more inner 
and self-enclosed, which, as it were, returns into itself like a 
sphere; on the other hand, it is an external organism, as an ex­
ternal process and a process against externality. The nobler viscera 
are the inner ones-liver, heart, lungs, etc., and life as such is 
bound up with them. They are not determined by mere types of 
regularity. But in the members which are in continual relation 
with the external world, there prevails in the animal organism too 
a symmetrical arrangement. To this category there belong the 
members and organs which are active externally, whether theoretic­
ally or practically. The purely theoretical process is managed by 
the tools of the senses of seeing and hearing; what we see or hear 
we leave as it is. On the other hand, the organs of smell and taste 

138 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
are already the beginnings of a practical relation. For we can smell 
only what is in the process of wasting away, and we can taste only 
by destroying. Now of course we have only one nose but it is 
divided into two nostrils and it is formed regularly in both its 
halves. The same is true of lips, teeth, etc. But regular throughout 
in their position, formation, etc., are eyes and ears, and also legs 
and arms, i.e. the members controlling change of place, and the 
mastery and practical alteration of external objects. 
Thus even in the organic field regularity has its right in ac­
cordance with the Concept, but only in the members which pro­
vide tools for the immediate relation to the external world and are 
not active in connection with the relation of the organism to itself 
as the subjectivity of life returning into itself. These then are the 
chief characteristics of the regular and symmetrical forms and their 
domination in shaping natural phenomena. 
(b) Conformity to Law 
Now, however, in more detail, from the rather abstract form of 
regularity we must distinguish conformity to law, since it stands 
at a higher stage and constitutes the transition to the freedom of 
life, both natural and spiritual. Yet, regarded by itself, conformity 
to law is certainly not the subjective total unity and freedom itself, 
though it is already a totality of essential differences which do 
not simply present themselves as differences and opposit!!S but in 
their totality display unity and connection. A unity like this, with 
its dominance and conformity to law, although still asserting itself 
in the sphere of quantity, is no longer to be referred back to 
extrinsic and purely calculable differences of size alone; it already 
permits the entrance of a qualitative relation between the differ­
ent aspects. Thus in their relatωon what is manifested is neither 
the abstract repetition of one and the same characteristic nor a 
uniform interchange of like and unlike, but the association of 
aspects essentially different. Now if we see these differences associ­
ated in their completeness, we are satisfied. In this satisfaction 
there lies the rational element, the fact that sense is gratified only 
by the totality, and indeed by the totality of differences demanded 
by the essence of the thing. Yet once again the connection remains 
as a secret bond which for the spectator is partly something to 
which he is accustomed, partly the foreshadowing of something 
deeper. 

T H E  BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
I J9 
A few examples will easily clarify in more detail the transition 
from regularity to conformity with law: e.g., parallel lines of the 
same length are abstractly regular.1 But a further step is the simple 
equality of ratios of unlike magnitudes, as occurs, e.g., in similar 
triangles. The inclination of the angles, the ratio of the sides, are 
the same, but the sizes are different.z The circle likewise does not 
have the regularity of the straight line, but nevertheless still falls 
under the category of abstract equality, since all the radii have the 
same length. Thus the circle is still just a curved line of little 
interest. On the other hand, an ellipse and a parabola have less 
regularity and can be understood only by their law. So, e.g., the 
radii vectores of the ellipse are unequal, but they conform to law, 
and similarly the major and minor axes are essentially different, 
and the foci do not fall into the centre as they do in a circle.l Thus 
here there appear qualitative differences, grounded in the law of 
this line, and their interconnection constitutes the law. But if we 
divide the ellipse along its rnajor and minor axes, we have four 
equal parts; thus here too, on the whole, equality prevails. Of 
higher freedom, with inner conformity to law, is the oval. It 
conforms to law, but it has not been possible to discover the law 
and to calculate it mathematically. It is not an ellipse; the upper 
curve differs from the lower one. Yet even · this freer natural 
1 Parallel lines of equal length are uniform both in length and in the distance 
between them, and therefore are simply regular. But lines drawn in a parabola 
parallel to its axis are not of equal length, and this fact is incidental to the laws 
of the parabola, so that such parallels have their length determined by law and 
therefore they are not simply regular. Hegel seems to have the geometry of 
conics in mind. (I owe the material of this note to Dr. M. J. Petry.) 
AB 
A'B' 
BC 
B'C' 
A' 
A =  A', 
B' c' 
D =  fr, 
C = C' 
CA 
C'A' 
but AB does not equal 
A'B' in length 
If F' and F coincide at C, we have a circle. 
As F'P and FP go round the ellipse (the 
radii vectores) they vary in length. 
F 

140 
I. TH E I D EA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
line, if we bisect it along its major axis, still provides two equal 
halves.1 
The final supersession of the purely regular in the case of con­
formity to law occurs in lines similar to ovals, which nevertheless, 
when divided along their major axis, provide unequal sections, in 
that one side is not repeated on the other, but waves otherwise. 
An example of this kind is the so-called 'waving' line which 
Hogarth2 has called the line of beauty. Thus, for example, the 
lines of the arm wave differently on one side from the other. Here 
is conformity to law without mere regularity. This kind of con­
formity to law determines the forms of the higher living organisms 
in a great variety of ways. 
Now conformity to law is the essential quality which settles 
differences and their unity, but, on the one hand, it only dominates 
abstractly and does not let individuality come in any way into free 
movement; and, on the other hand, it lacks the higher freedom of 
subjectivity and therefore cannot bring into appearance the anima­
tion and ideality thereof. 
(c) Harmony 
Therefore at this stage harmony stands higher than mere con­
formity to law, i.e. harmony is a relation of qualitative differences, 
and indeed of a totality of such differences, a totality grounded in 
the essence of the thing itself. This relation advances beyond 
conformity to law, which has in itself the aspect of regularity, and 
rises above equality and repetition. But at the same time the 
qualitative differences assert themselves not merely as differences 
and their opposition and contradiction, but as a congruous unity 
which has set forth all its proper factors while yet containing them 
as a whole inherently one. This congruity is harmony. It consists, 
on the one hand, in the ensemble of essential elements, and, on 
the other hand, in the dissolution of their bare opposition, so that 
in this way their association and inner connection is manifested as 
their unity. In this sense we speak of harmony of shape, colours, 
notes, etc. So, for example, blue, yellow, green, and red are the 
1 It is possible to have ovals (e.g. the oval of Cassini) which are symmetrical 
about the greater axis, and so are ellipses. But Hegel is obviously taking the oval 
as egg-shaped. I owe this note and notes :z and 3 on p. 139 to Professor E. T. 
Copson and Professor W. N. Everitt. 
• Op. cit., ch. 7, 'the waving line . . .  is more productive of beauty than any 
of the former', i.e. straight or circular lines, etc. 

THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
141 
necessary differences of colour belonging to the essence of colour 
itself. In them we have not just unlikenesses put together regularly 
into an external unity, as in symmetry, but direct opposites, like 
yellow and blue, and their neutralization and concrete identity. 
Now the beauty of their harmony consists in avoiding their sharp 
difference and opposition which as such is to be obliterated, so 
that in their differences their unison is manifested. For they belong 
together, since colour is not one-sided, but an essential totality. 
The demand of such a totality can go so far, as Goethe says, that 
even if the eye has before it only one colour as its object, it never­
theless subjectively sees the others equally. Among notes, the 
tonic, mediant, and dominant, e.g., are such essential differences, 
which in their difference harmonize unitedly into one whole. It 
is similarly the case with harmony of [the human] figure, its posi­
tion, rest, movement, etc. Here no difference may come forward 
one-sidedly by itself, or otherwise the harmony is disturbed. 
But even harmony as such is not yet free ideal subjectivity and 
soul. In the latter, unity is not just an association and an accord 
but the positing of differences negatively, whereby alone their 
ideal unity is established. To such ideality harmony cannot attain. 
For example, every melody, although it has harmony as its basis, 
has a higher and more free subjectivity in itself and expresses that. 
Mere harmony does not in general manifest either subjective 
animation as such or spirituality, although it is the highest stage of 
abstract form and already approaches free subjectivity. 
These kinds of abstract form provide the first determinant 
of abstract unity. 
2. Beauty as Abstract Unity of the Sensuous Material 
The second aspect of abstract unity does not now concern form 
and shape, but the material, the sensuously perceptible as such. 
Here unity enters as the concord, entirely undifferentiated in itself, 
of the determinate sensuous material. This is the sole unity of 
which the material, taken by itself as sensuously perceptible stuff, 
is susceptible. In this connection the abstract purity of the stuff, 
in shape, colour, note, etc., is the essential thing at this stage. 
Absolutely straight lines which go on undifferentiated, swerving 
neither hither nor thither, polished surfaces, and the like, satisfy 
us by their fixed determinacy and their uniform homogeneity. The 
purity of the sky, the clarity of the air, a mirror-like lake, smooth 

142 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
seas, delight us from this point of view. The same is true with the 
purity of musical notes. The pure sound of the voice, merely as 
a pure note, is infinitely pleasing and impressive, while an impure 
voice makes the organ of production resound as well and does not 
afford the sound in its relation to itself; and an impure note de­
viates from the note's determinate character. In a similar way 
speech too has pure notes like the vowels a, e, i, o, u, and mixed 
notes like a, ii, o. Popular dialects especially have impure sounds, 
mediants like oa.1 A further point about the purity of notes is that 
the vowels should be associated with such consonants as do not 
blur the purity of the vowel sounds. The northern languages 
frequently weaken the vowel sounds with their consonants, where­
as Italian preserves the purity of the vowel sounds and for that 
reason is so singable. 
A similar effect is produced by pure, inherently simple, un­
mixed colours, a pure red, for example, or a pure blue, which is 
rare because red usually passes over into pink or orange and blue 
into green. Violet too may indeed be pure, [not in itself] but only 
externally, i.e. [in the sense of not being] smudged, because it is 
not in itself simple and is not one of the colour differences deter­
mined by the essence of colour. It is these fundamental colours 
which sensation easily recognizes in their purity, although when 
juxtaposed they are more difficult to bring into harmony, because 
their difference sticks out more glaringly. The subdued, variously 
mixed, colours are less agreeable, even if they harmonize more 
easily, since the energy of opposition is missing in them. Green is 
indeed a colour of blue and yellow mixed, but it is a simple 
neutralization of their opposition, and in its genuine purity as this 
obliteration of the opposition ·is precisely more pleasant and less 
fatiguing than blue and yellow in their fixed difference. 
These are the most important points in connection with the 
abstract unity of form and the simplicity and purity of the sen­
suously perceived material. But both of these are, owing to their 
abstraction, lifeless, and afford no ,truly actual unity; because for 
such unity we require ideal subjectivity which natural beauty 
always lacks, even in its perfect appearance. Now this essential 
deficiency leads us to the necessity of the Ideal, which is not to be 
found in nature, and in comparison with it the beauty of nature 
appears as subordinate. 
1 i.e. o without an umlaut in German, but sounded as oa instead of plain o. 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
143 
C. DEFICIENCY OF NATURAL BEAUTY 
Our topic proper is the beauty of art as the one reality adequate to 
the Idea of beauty. Up to this point the beauty of nature has 
counted as the primary existence of beauty, and now therefore the 
question is how it differs from the beauty of art. 
We could talk abstractly and say that the Ideal is beauty perfect 
in itself, while nature is beauty imperfect. But such bare adjectives 
are no use, because the problem is to define precisely what con­
stitutes this perfection of artistic beauty and the imperfection of 
merely natural beauty. We must therefore pose our question 
thus: why is nature necessarily imperfect in its beauty, and what 
is the origin of this imperfection? Only when this is answered will 
the necessity and the essence of the Ideal be revealed to us in 
more detail. 
Since hitherto we have risen so far as animal life and have seen 
how beauty can be manifested there, the next thing before us is to 
fix our eyes more definitely on this feature of subjectivity and 
individuality in the living organism. 
We spoke [in ch. I, 1] of the beautiful as Idea in the same sense 
as we speak of the good and the true as Idea, in the sense, that is 
to say, that the Idea is the purely substantial and universal, the 
absolute matter (not sensuously perceptible at all), the substratum 
of the world. More specifically, however, as we have seen already 
[at the beginning of this Chapter], the Idea is not only substance 
and universality, but precisely the unity of the Concept with its 
reality, the Concept rebuilt as Concept within its objective 
realization. It was Plato, as we mentioned in the Introduction, who 
emphasized the Idea as alone the truth and the universal, and 
indeed as the inherently concrete universal. Yet the Platonic 
Idea is itself not yet the genuinely concrete; for, although, appre­
hended in its Concept and universality, it does count as the truth, 
still, taken in this universality, it is not yet actualized and, in its 
actuality, the truth explicit to itself. It gets no further than [truth] 
merely implicit. But just as the Concept without its objectivity is 
not genuinely Concept, so too the Idea is not genuinely Idea with­
out and outside its actuality. Therefore the Idea must go forth 
into actuality, and it acquires actuality only through the actual 
subjectivity which inherently corresponds with the Concept and 
through subjectivity's ideal being for itself. So, for example, the 

144 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  B E A U TY 
species is actual only as a free concrete individual ; life exists only 
as a single living thing, the good is actualized by individual men, 
and all truth exists only as knowing consciousness, as spirit con­
fronting itself as spirit. For only concrete individuality is true and 
actual ; abstract universality and particularity are not. This self­
knowing, this subjectivity, is therefore what we have to adhere to 
as essential. But subjectivity lies in the negative unity wherein 
differences in their real subsistence simultaneously evince them­
selves posited as ideal. Thus the unity of the Idea and its actuality 
is the negative unity of the Idea as such and its reality, as the 
positing and superseding of the difference between both these 
sides. Only in this activity is it affirmatively self-knowing, self­
relating, infinite unity and subjectivity. Therefore we have to 
grasp the Idea of beauty too in its actual existence as essentially 
concrete subjectivity, and thus as individuality, since it is Idea 
only as actual and has actuality only in concrete individuality. 
Now here at once we must distinguish between two forms of 
individuality, the immediate natural one and the spiritual one. In 
both forms the Idea gives itself existence, and so in both forms 
their substantial content, the Idea, and, in our sphere of study, 
the Idea of beauty, is the same. In this connection it has to be 
maintained that the beauty of nature has the same content as the 
Ideal. But, on the other hand, the aforesaid twofold character of 
the form in which the Idea acquires actuality, the difference 
between natural and spiritual individuality, introduces an essen­
tial difference into the content itself which appears in the one form 
or in the other. For the question is which form is really correspon­
dent with the Idea; and only in the form genuinely adequate to 
itself does the Idea make explicit the entire genuine totality of its 
content. 
This is the special point which we have to consider now 
because under this difference between the forms of individuality 
there falls the difference between the beauty of nature and the 
Ideal. 
In the first place, so far as immediate individuality is con­
cerned, it belongs to nature as such as well as to the spirit, for {a:) 
spirit has its external existence in body, and ({3) even in spiritual 
relations it at first gains an existence only in immediate reality. We 
may therefore consider immediate individuality here in three 
respects. 

THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
145 
1. The Inner in Immediacy as only the Inner 
(a) We have seen already [on p. 124] that the animal organism 
attains its being for self only through a steady internal process in 
opposition to an inorganic nature which it devours, digests, and 
assimilates; it changes the outer into the inner and thereby alone 
makes its 'insideness' actual. At the same time we found that this 
steady process of life is a system of activities which is actualized 
into a system of organs through which those activities proceed. 
This complete system has as its sole aim the self-preservation of 
the living thing through this process, and animal life therefore 
subsists only in the life of appetite, the course and the satisfaction 
of which is realized in the system of organs mentioned above. 
In this way the living thing is articulated purposefully; all its 
members serve only as means to the one end of self-preservation. 
Life is immanent in them; they are tied to life and life to them. 
Now the result of this process is the animal as ensouled, as having 
a feeling of itself, whereby it acquires enjoyment of itself as an 
individual. If we compare the animal in this respect with the plant, 
it has already been indicated [in the passage on Symmetry] that 
the plant lacks precisely this feeling of itself, this soulfulness, for 
it continually produces in itself new individuals without concen­
trating them to the negative point which constitutes the individual 
self. But what we now see before us in the life of an animal 
organism is not this point of unity of life, but only the variety of 
organs. The living thing still lacks freedom, owing to its inability 
to bring itself into appearance as an individual point, i.e. as a 
subject, in contrast to the display of its members in external 
reality. The real seat of the activities of organic life remains veiled 
from our vision ; we see only the external outlines of the animal's 
shape, and this again is covered throughout by feathers, scales, 
hair, pelt, prickles, or shells. Such covering does belong to the 
animal kingdom, but in animals it has forms drawn from the 
kingdom of plants. Here at once lies one chief deficiency in 
the beauty of animal life. What is visible to us in the organism is 
not the soul; what is turned outwards and appears everywhere is 
not the inner life, but forms drawn from a lower stage than that of 
life proper. The animal is living only within its covering, i.e. this 
'insideness' is not itself real in the form of an inner consciousness 
and therefore this life is not visible over all the animal. Because the 

146 
I. THE I DEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
inside remains just an inside, the outside too appears only as an 
outside and not completely penetrated in every part by the soul. 
(b) The human body, on the contrary, stands in this respect at 
a higher stage, since in it there is everywhere and always repre­
sented the fact that man is an ensouled and feeling unit. The skin 
is not hidden by plant-like unliving coverings; the pulsation of the 
blood shows itself over the entire surface; the beating heart of life 
is as it were present everywhere over the body and comes out into 
appearance externally as the body's own animation, as turgor 
vitae, 1 as this swelling life. Similarly the skin proves to be sensitive 
everywhere, and displays the morbidezza [delicacy], the tints of 
colour in flesh and veins, which are the artist's cross. But how­
ever far the human, in distinction from the animal, body makes 
its life appear outwardly, still nevertheless the poverty of nature 
equally finds expression on this surface by the non-uniformity of 
the skin, in indentations, wrinkles, pores, small hairs, little veins, 
etc. The skin itself, which permits the inner life to shine through 
it, is an external covering for self-preservation, merely a purposeful 
means in the service of the natural needs. Yet the tremendous 
advantage which the appearance of the human body continues to 
enjoy consists in its sensitivity which, even if not altogether actual 
feeling, does at least demonstrate the possibility of that in general. 
But at the same time here again the deficiency arises that this feel­
ing, as inwardly concentrated in itself, does not achieve presence 
in every one of the body's members; on the contrary, in the body 
itself part of the organs and their shape is devoted to purely animal 
functions, while another part more nearly adopts the expression of 
the soul's life, of feelings and passions. From this point of view the 
soul with its inner life here too' does not shine through the entire 
reality of the bodily form. 
(c) In a higher way still, the same deficiency makes itself evident 
likewise in the spiritual world and its organizations if we consider 
it in its immediate life. The greater and the richer this spiritual 
world's productions are, the more does the one aim, which animates 
this whole and constitutes its inner soul, require co-operative 
1 Dr. M. }. Petry informs me that this is a conception originating in the 
antiquated physiology of }. F. Blumenbach (I735-I84o). The power of 'intu­
mescence' is supposed to be a condition displayed in a healthy body by the 
uniform tensing and expanding of pulpy parts. Blumenbach's pupil E. B. G. 
Hebenstreit (173S-I803) wrote Doctrinae physiologicae de turgore vitali brevis 
expositio (Leipzig, 1795), to which the curious may be referred. 

THE BEAUTY O F  NATURE 
147 
means. Now in immediate reality these means of course manifest 
themselves as purposeful organs, and what happens and is pro­
duced comes into being only by means of the will; every point in 
such an organization (e.g. in a state or a family), i.e. every single 
individual, wills, and he manifests himself indeed in connection with 
the other members of the same organization; but the one inner 
soul of this association (the freedom and reason of the one aim) 
does not come forward into reality as this one free and total inner 
animation, and does not make itself obvious in every part. 
The same is the case with particular actions and events which, 
in a similar way, are in themselves an organic whole. The inner, 
from which they spring, does not come out into the superficial 
and external form of their immediate actualization. What appears 
is only a real totality, but whose innermost comprehensive anima­
tion remains in the background, as inner. 
Finally, the single individual gives us in this respect the same 
impression. The spiritual individual is a totality in himself, held 
together on the strength of a spiritual centre. In his immediate 
reality he appears only fragmentarily in life, action, inaction, 
wishing and urging, and yet his character can be known only from 
the whole series of his actions and sufferings. In this series, which 
constitutes his reality, the concentrated point of unity is not visible 
and graspable as a comprehensive centre. 
2. The Dependence of Immediate Individual Existence 
The next important point which arises from this is the following. 
With the immediacy of the individual the Idea enters actual 
existence. But, at the same time, owing to this same immediacy, 
the Idea becomes interwoven with the complexity of the external 
world, with the conditioned character of external circum­
stances, with the relative character of means and ends; in 
short, it is drawn into the entire finitude of appearance. For the 
immediate individual is primarily a self-encircled unit, but conse­
quently, for the same reason, he is shut off from others and nega­
tively related to them; and on account of his immediate isolation in 
which he has only a conditioned existence, he is forced, by the 
power of the totality which is not actual within him, into relation 
with others and into the most multiplex dependence on others. 
In this immediacy the Idea has realized all its sides separately and 

148 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
therefore it remains only the inner power which relates the indivi­
dual existents to one another, natural and spiritual alike. This 
relation is itself external to them and appears too in them as an 
external necessity involving the most diverse reciprocal dependences 
and determination by others. The immediacy of existence is from 
this point of view a system of necessary connections between 
apparently independent individuals and powers, a system in 
which every individual is used as a means in the service of ends 
foreign to himself or else he needs as a means to his own ends just 
what is external to himself. And since here the Idea as such 
realizes itself only on the ground of the external, what appears at 
the same time let loose is the unruly play of caprice and chance, 
and the whole misery of distress. This is the realm of unfreedom 
in which the immediate individual lives. 
(a) The individual animal, for example, is at once tied down to 
a specific natural element, air, water, or land, and this determines 
its whole mode of life, kind of nourishment, and therefore its 
entire plight. This provides the great differences between animal 
species. Of course there do also emerge other species, intermediate 
ones, such as natatorial birds, mammals that live in water, am­
phibia, and transitional stages [in the classificatory scheme]. But 
these are only mixtures, not higher and comprehensive mediations 
[between stages in the classification]. Besides, in its self-preserva­
tion the animal remains steadily in subjection to external nature, 
e.g. to cold, drought, lack of food. Under nature's domination it 
may fail, owing to the parsimoniousness of its environment, to 
achieve fullness of form ; it may lose the bloom of its beauty; it 
may be emaciated, and simply give the impression of this universal 
want. Whether it preserves or loses any share of beauty vouchsafed 
to it is at the mercy of external conditions. 
(b) The human organism in its bodily existence is still subject, 
even if not to the same extent, to a similar dependence on the 
external powers of nature. It is exposed to the same chance, 
unsatisfied natural needs, destructive illnesses, and to every kind 
of want and misery. 
(c) If we go higher up, i.e. to the immediate actuality of spiritual 
interests, we find that this dependence really only appears here 
in the most complete relativity. Here is revealed the whole 
breadth of prose in human existence. This is the sort of thing 
already present in the contrast between the purely physical vital 

THE BEAUTY OF NATURE 
149 
aims and the higher aims of spirit, in that both of these can recipro­
cally hinder, disturb, and extinguish one another. Consequently, 
the individual man, in order to preserve his individuality, must 
frequently make himself a means to others, must subserve their 
limited aims, and must likewise reduce others to mere means in 
order to satisfy his own interests. Therefore the individual as he 
appears in this world of prose and everyday is not active out of 
the entirety of his own self and his resources, and he is intelligible 
not from himself, but from something else. For the individual man 
stands in dependence on external influences, laws, political institu­
tions, civil relationships, which he just finds confronting him, and 
he must bow to them whether he has them as his own inner being 
or not. Furthermore, the individual subject is not in the eyes of 
others such an entirety in himself, but comes before them only 
according to the nearest isolated interest which they take in his 
actions, wishes, and opinions. Men's primary interest is simply 
what is related to their own intentions and aims. 
Even the great actions and events in which a community co­
operates are in this field of relative phenomena confessedly only 
a manifold of individual efforts. This or that man makes his own 
contribution with this or that aim in view; the aim miscarries, or 
it is achieved, and at the end, in fortunate circumstances, some­
thing is accomplished which, compared with the whole, is of a very 
subordinate kind. What most men execute is, in this connection, 
compared with the greatness of the whole event and the total aim 
to which they make their contribution, only a trifle. Indeed even 
those who stand at the head of affairs and feel the whole thing 
as their own, and are themselves conscious of the fact, appear 
entangled in many-sided particular circumstances, conditions, 
obstacles, and relative matters. In all these respects the individual 
in this sphere does not preserve the look of independent and total 
life and freedom which lies at the root of the essence of beauty. 
True, even immediate human affairs and their events and organiza­
tions do not lack a .system and a totality of activities; but the whole 
thing appears only as a mass of individual details; occupations and 
activities are sundered and split into infinitely many parts, so that 
to individuals only a particle of the whole can accrue; and no matter 
how far individuals may contribute to the whole with their own 
aims and accomplish what is in line with their own individual 
interest, still the independence and freedom of their will remains 

150 
I. THE I DE A  OF ARTI S T I C  B E A U TY 
more or less formal, determined by external circumstances and 
chances, and hindered by natural obstacles. 
This is the prose of the world, as it appears to the consciousnes 
both of the individual himself and of others :-a world of finitude 
and mutability, of entanglement in the relative, of the pressure of 
necessity from which the individual is in no position to withdraw. 
For every isolated living thing remains caught in the contradiction 
of being itself in its own eyes this shut-in unit and yet of being 
nevertheless dependent on something else, and the struggle to 
resolve this contradiction does not get beyond an attempt and the 
continuation of this eternal war. 
3· The Restrictedness of Immediate Individual Existence 
But now thirdly, the immediate individual whether in the natural 
or the spiritual world is not only generally dependent on circum­
stances, but also lacks absolute independence because of being 
restricted, or rather because of being inherently particularized. 
(a) Every single animal belongs to a determinate and therefore 
restricted and fixed species, beyond the limits of which it cannot 
step. Before our mind's eye there does float a general picture of life 
and its organization; but in the actual world of nature this universal 
organic species bursts asunder into a realm of particulars, each 
of which has its limited type of form and its particular stage of 
development. Further, within this unsurmountable barrier what 
is expressed in every single individual, in a contingent and par­
ticular way, is only the above-mentioned element of chance in the 
conditions and externals of life, as well as of dependence on these. 
From this point of view too the vision of independence and free­
dom, requisite for genuine beauty, is dimmed. 
(b) Now it is true that the spirit finds the whole Concept of 
natural life completely actualized in its own bodily organism, so 
that, in comparison with this, the animal species may appear as 
imperfect in their life, and indeed, at lower stages, as scarcely 
living at all. Nevertheless, the human organism too is split likewise, 
even in a lesser degree, split into racial differences and their grad­
ation of beautiful formations. Apart from these--of course more 
general-differences, contingency next enters here again nearer 
at hand in the shape of firmly established family idioms and their 
intermixture as specific modes of life, expression, and behaviour; 

T H E  B E A U TY OF NATURE 
ISI 
and to this differentiation which introduces the trait of an in­
herently unfree particularity, there are then added the special 
characteristics of the mode of occupation in the finite circles of 
living activity, in trade, for example, and calling; to which, finally, 
are annexed all the idiosyncrasies of special character and tempera­
ment, with, consequentially, all sorts of weaknesses and troubles. 
Poverty, care, wrath, coldness and indifference, the rage of passions, 
concentration on one-sided aims, inconstancy, schizophrenia, 
dependence on external nature, the whole finitude of human 
existence as such, become specified into the accident of quite 
singular physiognomies and their abiding expression. So there are 
worn faces on which all the passions have left the imprint of their 
destructive fury; others afford only the impression of inner cold­
ness and superficiality; others again are so singular that the general 
type of features has almost entirely disappeared. There is no end 
to the haphazardness of human shapes. Children, therefore, are 
on the whole at the most beautiful age because in them all singu­
larities slumber, as it were, quietly enclosed in germ, because no 
restricted passion has yet tormented their breast, and none of the 
manifold human interests has engraved for ever on these changing 
features an expression of its exigency. But although the child's 
liveliness appears as the possibility of anything, there are neverthe­
less lacking in this innocence all the same the deeper features of the 
spirit which is driven to realize itself within and to spread itself in 
substantial directions and aims. 
(c) This defectiveness of immediate existence, whether physical 
or spiritual, is essentially to be regarded as finitude, more precisely 
as a finitude which does not correspond with its inner essence, and 
through this lack of correspondence just proclaims its finitude. 
For the Concept, and, more concretely still, the Idea, is inherently 
infinite and free. Although animal life, as life, is Idea, it does not 
itself display the infinity and freedom which only appear when the 
Concept so completely pervades its appropriate reality that therein 
it has only itself, with nothing but itself emerging there. In that 
event alone is the Concept genuinely free and infinite individuality. 
But natural life does not get beyond feeling, which remains in itself, 
without completely permeating the entire reality; besides, it is 
immediately conditioned in itself, restricted, and dependent, 
because it has no self-wrought freedom, but is determined by 
something else. The like lot falls to the immediate finite realization 

152 
I. THE I DE A  OF ART I S T I C  B EAU TY 
of the spirit, in its knowing and willing, its adventures, actions, 
and fates. 
For although even here more substantial concentrations are 
formed, they are still only concentrations which have truth in and 
for themselves just as little as particular individualities have; they 
only display truth in their bearing on one another through the 
whole. This whole, taken as such, does correspond with its Con­
cept, yet without manifesting itself in its totality, so that in this 
way it remains something purely inner and therefore is present 
only to the inwardness of intellectual reflection, instead of visibly 
entering external reality as the full expression of itself and sum­
moning back the innumerable individualities out of their dispersal 
in order to concentrate them into one expression and one shape. 
This is the reason why spirit cannot, in the finitude of existence 
and its restrictedness and external necessity, find over again the 
immediate vision and enjoyment of its true freedom, and it is 
compelled to satisfy the need for this freedom, therefore, on other 
and higher ground. This ground is art, and art's actuality is the 
Ideal. 
Thus it is from the deficiencies of immediate reality that the 
necessity of the beauty of art is derived. The task of art must 
therefore be firmly established in art's having a calling to display 
the appearance of life, and especially of spiritual animation (in 
its freedom, externally too) and to make the external correspond 
with its Concept. Only so is the truth lifted out of its temporal 
setting, out of its straying away into a series of finites. At the same 
time it has won an external appearance through which the poverty 
of nature and prose no longer peeps; it has won an existence 
worthy of the truth, an existence which for its part stands there in 
free independence since it has its vocation in itself, and does not 
find it inserted there by something else. 

Chapter III 
THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
In relation to the beauty of art we have three chief aspects to 
consider: 
First, the Ideal as such 
Secondly, the work of art as the determinateness of the Ideal 
Thirdly, the creative subjectivity of the artist. 
A. THE IDEAL AS SUCH 
1. Beautiful Individuality 
The most general thing which can be said in a merely formal way 
about the ideal of art, on the lines of our previous considerations, 
comes to this, that, on the one hand, the true has existence and 
truth only as it unfolds into external reality; but, on the other hand, 
the externally separated parts, into which it unfolds, it can so 
combine and retain in unity that now every part of its unfolding 
makes this soul, this totality, appear in each part. If we take the 
human form as the nearest illustration of this, it is, as we saw 
earlier, a totality of organs into which the Concept is dispersed, and 
it manifests in each member only some particular activity and 
partial emotion. But if we ask in which particular organ the whole 
soul appears as soul, we will at once name the eye; for in the eye 
the 80ul is concentrated and the soul does not merely see through 
it but is also seen in it. Now as the pulsating heart shows itself all 
over the surface of the human, in contrast to the animal, body, so 
in the same sense it is to be asserted of art that it has to convert 
every shape in all points of its visible surface into an eye, which is 
the seat of the soul and brings the spirit into appearance.-Or, as 
Plato cries out to the star in his familiar distich: 'When thou 
lookest on the stars, my star, ohl would I were the heavens and 
could see thee with a thousand eyes',! so, conversely, art makes 
every one of its productions into a thousand-eyed Argus, whereby 
1 Diogenes Laertius, Plato, 23 § 29. Hegel's quotations are nearly always 
inexact. His 'thousand' for Plato's 'many' seems to me to be an improvement, 
if it be not sacrilege to say so. But Hegel's 'when' is an unnecessary addition of 
his own. 

154 
I. THE IDEA O F  ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
the inner soul and spirit is seen at every point. And it is not only 
the bodily form, the look of the eyes, the countenance and posture, 
but also actions and events, speech and tones of voice, and the 
series of their course through all conditions of appearance that art 
has everywhere to make into an eye, in which the free soul is re­
vealed in its inner infinity. 
(a) With this demand for thoroughgoing possession of soul 
there arises at once the further question what this soul is, the eyes 
of which all points in the phenomenal world are to become. More 
precisely still, the question is what sort of soul it is that by its 
nature shows itself qualified to gain its true manifestation through 
art. For people1 speak even of a specific 'soul' of metals, minerals, 
stars, animals, numerously particularized human characters and 
their expressions, using the word 'soul' in an ordinary sense. But, 
for things in nature, such as stones, plants, etc., the word 'soul', 
in the meaning given to it above, can only be used metaphorically. 
The soul of merely natural things is explicitly finite and transitory, 
and should be called 'specific nature' rather than 'soul'. For this 
reason, the determinate individuality of such things is completely 
revealed already in their finite existence. It can display only some 
sort of restrictedness. Elevation to infinite independence and free­
dom is nothing but an appearance which can indeed be imparted 
to this sphere; but if this really happens, the appearance is always 
produced from the outside by art without this infinity's being 
grounded in the things themselves. In the same way the sentient 
soul too, as natural life, is a subjective but purely inner indivi­
duality, present in reality only implicitly, without knowing itself 
as a return into itself and by that means as inherently infinite. 
Its content therefore remains itself restricted. Its manifestation 
achieves, for one thing, only a formal life, unrest, mutability, con­
cupiscence, and the anxiety and fear incident to this dependent 
life, and, for another thing, only the expression of an inwardness 
inherently finite. 
The animation and life of spirit alone is free infinity; as such, the 
spirit in real existence is self-aware as something inner, because 
in its manifestation it reverts into itself and remains(!_t home with 
itsel!]To spirit alone, therefore, is it given to impress the stamp 
of its own infinity and free return into itself upon its exter­
nal manifestation, even though through this manifestation it is 
1 A hit at Schelling and other philosophers of nature. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
I SS 
involved in restriction. Now spirit is only free and infinite when 
it actually comprehends its universality and raises to universality 
the ends it sets before itself; but, for this reason, it is capable by its 
own nature, if it has not grasped this freedom, of existing as 
restricted content, stunted character, and a mind crippled and 
superficial. In a content of such null worth the infinite manifesta­
tion of spirit again remains only formal, for in that case we have 
nothing but the abstract form of self-conscious spirit, and its con­
tent contradicts the infinity of spirit in its freedom. It is only by 
virtue of a genuine and inherently substantial content that {estricted 
and mutable existence acql1ires independence and substantiality, so 
that then both determinacy and ·inherent solidity, content that is 
both substantial and restrictedly exclusive, are actual in one and 
the same thing; and hereby existence gains the possibility of being 
manifested in the restrictedness of its own content as at the same 
time universality and as the soul which is alone with itself.-In 
short, art has the function of grasping and displaying existence, 
in its appearance, as true, i.e. in its suitability to the content 
which is adequate to itself, the content which is both implicit 
and explicit. Thus the truth of art cannot be mere correctness, 
to which the so-called imitation of nature is restricted; on the 
contrary, the outer must harmonize with an inner which is har­
monious in itself, and, just on that account, can reveal itself as it­
self in the outer. 
(b) Now since art brings back into this harmony with its true 
Concept what is contaminated in other existents by chance and 
externality, it casts aside everything in appearance which does not 
correspond with the Concept and only by this purification does it 
produce the Ideal. This may be given out to be flattery by art, 
as, for example, it is said depreciatingly of portrait painters that 
they flatter. But even the portrait-painter, who has least of all to do 
with the Ideal of art, must flatter, in the sense that all the externals 
in shape and expression, in form, colour, features, the purely 
natural side of imperfect existence, little hairs, pores, little scars, 
warts, all these he must let go, and grasp and reproduce the subject 
in his universal character and enduring personality. It is one thing 
for the artist simply to imitate the face of the sitter, its surface and 
external form, confronting him in repose, and quite another to be 
able to portray the true features which express the inmost soul of 
the subject. For it is throughout necessary for the Ideal that the 

156 
I. THE I D EA OF A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
outer form should explicitly correspond with the soul. So, for 
example, in our own time what has become the fashion, namely 
what are called tableaux vivants,1 imitate famous masterpieces 
deliberately and agreeably, and the accessories, costume, etc., they 
reproduce accurately; but often enough we see ordinary faces sub­
stituted for the spiritual expression of the subjects and this pro­
duces an inappropriate effect. Raphael's Madonnas, on the other 
hand, show us forms of expression, cheeks, eyes, nose, mouth, 
which, as forms, are appropriate to the radiance, joy, piety, and 
also the humility of a mother's love. Of course someone might 
wish to maintain that all women are capable of this feeling, but not 
every cast of countenance affords a satisfactory and complete 
expression of this depth of soul. 
(c) Now the nature of the artistic Ideal is to be sought in this 
reconveyance of external existence into the spiritual realm, so 
that the external appearance, by being adequate to the spirit, is 
the revelation thereof. Yet this is a reconveyance into the inner 
realm which at the same time does not proceed to the universal 
in its abstract form, i.e. to the extreme which thinking is, but 
remains in the centre where the purely external and the purely 
internal coincide. Accordingly, t' ,e Ideal is actuality, withdrawn 
from the profusion of details and accidents, in so far as the inner 
appears itself in this externality, lifted above and opposed to 
universality, as living individuality. For the individual subjective 
life which has a substantive content in itself and at the same time 
makes this content appear on itself externally, stands in this centre. 
In this centre the substantiality of the content cannot emerge 
explicitly in its universality in an abstract way; it remains still 
enclosed in individuality and therefore appears intertwined with 
a determinate existent, which now, for its part, freed from mere 
finitude and its conditions, comes together with the inwardness of 
the soul into a free harmony. Schiller in his poem Das Ideal und 
das Leben2 [The Ideal and Life] contrasts actuality and its griefs 
and battles with the 'still shadow-land of beauty'. Such a realm of 
shadows is the Ideal ; the spirits appearing in it are dead to im­
mediate existence, cut off from the indigence of natural life, freed 
1 i.e. beautiful women set in a frame, to imitate some artist's picture. See, 
e.g., O.E.D. s.v. tableau, and L. V. Fildes, Luke Fildes R.A. (London, 1968) 
p. 84. 
• This poem of Schiller's third period appeared first in 1795 in Die Horen. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
157 
from the bonds of dependence on external influences and all the 
perversions and convulsions inseparable from the finitude of the 
phenomenal world. But all the same the Ideal treads into the sen­
suous and the natural form thereof, yet it still at the same time 
draws this, like the sphere of the external, back into itself, since 
art can bring back the apparatus, 1 required by external appearance 
for its self-preservation, to the limits within which the external can 
be the manifestation of spiritual freedom. Only by this process 
does the Ideal exist in externality, self-enclosed, free, self-reliant, 
as sensuously blessed in itself, enjoying and delighting in its own 
self. The ring of this bliss resounds throughout the entire appear­
ance of the Ideal, for however far the external form may extend, the 
soul of the Ideal never loses itself in it. And precisely as a result 
of this alone is the Ideal genuinely beautiful, since the beautiful 
exists only as a total though subjective unity; wherefore too the 
subject who manifests the Ideal must appear collected together 
in himself again into a higher totality and independence out of the 
divisions in the life of other individuals and their aims and efforts. 
(a:) In this respect, amongst the fundamental characteristics of 
the Ideal we may put at the top this serene peace and bliss, this 
self-enjoyment in its own achievedness and satisfaction. The ideal 
work of art confronts us like a blessed god. For the blessed gods 
[of Greek art], that is to say, there is no final seriousness in distress, 
in anger, in the interests involved in finite spheres and aims, and 
this positive withdrawal into themselves, along with the negation 
of everything particular, gives them the characteristic of serenity 
and tranquillity. In this sense Schiller's phrase holds good: 'Life 
is serious, art cheerful.'2 Often enough, it is true, pedants have 
poked fun at this, on the ground that art in general, and especially 
Schiller's own poetry, is of a most serious kind; and after all in 
fact ideal art does not lack seriousness-but even in the seriousness 
cheerfulness or serenity remains its inherent and essential character. 
This force of individuality, this triumph of concrete freedom con­
centrated in itself, is what we recognize especially in the works of 
art of antiquityJ in the cheerful and serene peace of their shapes. 
And this results not at all from a mere satisfaction gained without 
' The 'apparatus' is explained below, p. 265. 
• The last line of Schiller's preface to Wallenstein (1799). 
3 i.e. Greece. It is of the gods of Olympus and some Homeric and tragic 
heroes that Hegel is thinking throughout this passage. See the section on sculp­
ture in Vol. II. 

158 
I. THE IDEA OF A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
struggle, but on the contrary, only when a deeper breach has rent 
the subject's inner life and his whole existence. For even if the 
heroes of tragedy for example, are so portrayed that they succumb 
to fate, still the heart of the hero recoils into simple unity with 
itself, when it says: 'It is so.'1 The subject in this case still always 
remains true to himself; he surrenders what he has been robbed of, 
yet the ends he pursues are not just taken from him; he renounces 
them and thereby does not lose himself. Man, the slave of destiny, 
may lose his life, but not his freedom. It is this self-reliance which 
even in grief enables him to preserve and manifest the cheerfulness 
and serenity of tranquillity. 
(/3) It is true that in romantic art the distraction and dissonance 
of the heart goes further and, in general, the oppositions displayed 
in it are deepened and their disunion may be maintained. So, for 
example, in portraying the Passion, painting sometimes persists in 
expressing the derision in the expressions of the military tormentors 
with the horrible grimaces and grins on their faces; and with this 
retention of disunion, especially in sketches of vice, sin, and evil, 
the serenity of the Ideal is then lost, for even if the distraction does 
not remain so fixedly as this, still something, if not ugly every time, 
at least not beautiful often comes into view. In another school of 
painting, the older Flemish one, there is displayed an inner re­
conciliation of the heart in its honesty and truthfulness to itself 
as well as in its faith and unshakeable confidence, but this firm­
ness does not achieve the serenity and satisfaction of the Ideal. 
Even in romantic art, however, although suffering and grief affect 
the heart and subjective inner feeling more deeply there than is the 
case with the ancients/· there do come into view a spiritual inward­
ness, a joy in submission, a bliss in grief and rapture in suffering, 
even a delight in agony. Even in the solemnly religious music of 
Italy this pleasure and transfiguration of grief resounds through 
the expression of lament. This expression in romantic art generally 
is 'smiling through tears'. Tears belong to grief, smiles to cheerful­
ness, and so smiling in weeping denotes this inherent tranquillity 
amidst agony and suffering. Of course smiling here ought not to be 
a mere sentimental emotion, a frivolous and self-conceited attitude 
of the man to misfortunes and his minor personal feelings; on 
' Cf. Hegel's impression of Swiss mountains-see above, p. 132, note (Doku­
m£nte, p. 236 ). 
2 i.e. the Greeks and Romans. Cf. our own use of 'Classics'. 

THE BEAU TY OF ART O R  THE IDEAL 
159 
the contrary, it must appear as the calmness and freedom of beauty 
despite all grief-as it is said of Chimena in the Romances of the Cid: 
'How beautiful she was in tears.'1 On the other hand, a man's lack 
of self-control is either ugly and repugnant, or else ludicrous. 
Children, e.g., burst into tears- on the most trifling occasions, and 
this makes us smile. On the other hand, tears in the eyes of an 
austere man who keeps a stiff upper lip under the stress of deep 
feeling convey a totally different impression of emotion. 
But laughter and tears may fall apart in abstraction from one 
another and in this abstraction they have been used inappro­
priately as a motif for art, as for instance in the laughter chorus of 
[C. M. F. E.] von Weber's Der Freischiitz [1821]. Laughing as 
such is an outburst which yet ought not to remain unrestrained 
if the Ideal is not to be lost. The same abstraction occurs in the 
similar laughter in a duet from Weber's Oberon [1826] during 
which one may be anxious and distressed for the throat and lungs 
of the prima donna! How differently moving, on the other hand, 
is the inextinguishable laughter of the gods in Homer, which 
springs from the blessed tranquillity of the gods and is only cheer­
fulness and not abstract boisterousness. Neither, on the other side, 
should tears, as unrestrained grief, enter the ideal work of art, as 
when, for example, such abstract inconsolability is to be heard in 
Weber's Der Freischiitz, to mention it again. In music in general, 
song is this joy and pleasure in self-awareness, like the lark's sing­
ing in the freedom of the air. Shrieking, whether of grief or mirth, 
is not music at all. Even in suffering, the sweet tone of lament must 
sound through the griefs and alleviate them, so that it seems to us 
worth while so to suffer as to understand this lament. This is the 
sweet melody, the song in all art. 
(y) In this fundamental principle the modern doctrine of irony 
too has its justification in a certain respect, except that irony, on 
the one hand, is often bare of any true seriousness and likes to 
delight especially in villains, and, on the other hand, ends in mere 
heartfelt longing instead of in acting and doing. Novalis,z for 
example, one of the nobler spirits who took up this position, was 
driven into a void with no specific interests, into this dread of 
1 ·  The quotation is from Herder's poetic version of the Romances of the 
Cid, I. 6. 
2 G. F. P. von Hardenbcrg, 1772-I8ox. He died of a physical decline, i.e. 
tuberculosis. 

16o 
I. THE IDEA OF A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
reality, and was wound down as it were into a spiritual decline. 
This is a longing which will not let itself go in actual action and 
production, because it is frightened of being polluted by contact 
with finitude, although all the same it has a sense of the deficiency 
of this abstraction. True, irony implies the absolute negativity in 
which the subject is related to himself in the annihilation of every­
thing specific and one-sided ; but since this annihilation, as was 
indicated above in our consideration of this doctrine, affects not 
only, as in comedy, what is inherently null which manifests itself 
in its hollowness, but equally everything inherently excellent and 
solid, it follows that irony as this art of annihilating everything 
everywhere, like that heart-felt longing, acquires, at the same time, 
in comparison with the true Ideal, the aspect of inner inartistic 
lack of restraint. For the Ideal requires an inherently substantive 
content which, it is true, by displaying itself in the form and shape 
of the outer as well, comes to particularity and therefore to re­
strictedness, though it so contains the restrictedness in itself 
that everything purely external in it is extinguished and annihi­
lated. Only on account of this negation of pure externality is the 
specific form and shape of the Ideal a manifestation of that sub­
stantive content in an appearance according with artistic vision and 
imagination. 
2. The Relation of the Ideal to Nature 
Now the pictorial and external side, which is just as necessary to 
the Ideal as the inherently solid content, and the manner of their 
interpenetration, brings us to the relation between nature and the 
ideal artistic representation. For this external element and its 
configuration has an association with what in general terms we call 
'nature'. In this connection the old, ever-recurring dispute whether 
art should portray external objects just as they are or whether it 
should glorify natural phenomena and transfigure them is not yet 
settled. The right of nature and the right of the beautiful, the Ideal 
and truth to nature-in such prima facie vague words we can hear 
argument going on unceasingly. For 'the work of art should of 
course be natural', but 'there is also an ordinary ugly nature, and 
this should not be reproduced', 'but on the other hand'-and so 
it goes on without any end or definite result. 
In modern times the opposition of Ideal and nature has been 
raised again and made of importance, especially by Winckelmann. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
161 
His enthusiasm, as I have already indicated earlier, was kindled 
by the works of antiquity and their ideal forms, and he did not 
rest until he had gained an insight into their excellence and reintro­
duced to the world a recognition and a study of these masterpieces 
of art. But out of this recognition there has arisen a mania for ideal 
representation in which people believed they had found beauty, 
but it lapsed into flatness, lifelessness, and superficiality without 
character. It was this emptiness of the Ideal, especially in painting, 
that von Rumohr had in view in his polemic against the Idea and 
the Ideal, to which I have referred already. 
Now it is the task of theory to resolve this opposition. Interest in 
the practical side of art-production, however, we may here again 
leave entirely on one side, for whatever principles are implanted in 
mediocre minds and their talents, the result is always the same: 
what they produce, whether according to a perverse theory or the 
best one, is always but mediocre and feeble. Besides, art in general 
and painting in particular, influenced by other stimuli, has moved 
away from this mania for so-called ideals, and in its progress, 
owing to a freshening of interest in the older Italian and German 
painting, as well as in the later Dutch school, has at least made an 
attempt to acquire livelier forms and a fuller content. 
But we have had more than enough, not only of these abstract 
ideals, but also, on the other hand, of the favourite 'naturalness' 
of art. In the theatre, for example, everyone has got sick and tired 
of commonplace domestic stories and their true-to-life presenta­
tion. A father's moans about his wife and his sons and daughters, 
about income and expenditure, dependence on Ministers, in­
trigues of valets and secretaries, and then the wife's trouble with 
maids in the kitchen, the sentimental love-affairs of daughters in 
the parlour-all this worry and bother everyone gets better and 
truer in his own home.1 
In this opposition between the Ideal and nature, people, so it 
seems, have had one art more than another in view, painting 
especially, for its sphere is precisely particular visible objects. We 
will therefore pose the question of this opposition in more general 
terms as follows: Is art to be poetry or prose ? For the truly poetical 
element in art is just what we have called the Ideal. If it is a matter 
of the mere word 'Ideal', we can readily abandon it. But in that 
• This is a quotation from the last two stanzas of Schiller's satirical poem 
Shakespeares Schatten (Shakespeare's Ghost), which he calls a 'parody'. 

x6:z 
I. THE I D EA OF A RT I S TI C  P.E A U TY 
case the question is: What is poetry and what is prose in art? 
Albeit, too, adherence to what is inherently poetical may lead to 
aberrations in relation to specific arts, and has already done so: 
for what expressly belongs to poetry, especially, as may be supposed, 
to lyric poetry, has also been represented in painting, while after 
all such a subject is certainly of a poetic kind. The present (1828) 
art exhibition, e.g., contains several paintings (aU out of one and 
the same school, the one called Dusseldorf)! which have all 
borrowed subjects from poetry, particularly from that side of 
poetry which is only portrayable as feeling. If you look at these 
pictures oftener and more closely, they will soon enough appear as 
sugary and dull. 
In the opposition between nature and art there are the following 
general points: 
(a) The purely formal ideality of the work of art. Poetry in 
general, as the very word indicates, is something made, produced 
by a man who has taken it into his imagination, pondered it, and 
issued it by his own activity out of his imagination. 
(o:) Here the subject-matter may be quite indifferent to us or 
may interest us, apart from the artistic presentation, only inci­
dentally, for example, or momentarily. In this way Dutch painting/· 
for example, has recreated, in thousands and thousands of effects, 
the existent and fleeting appearance of nature as something gener­
ated afresh by man. Velvet, metallic lustre, light, horses, servants, 
old women, peasants blowing smoke from cutty pipes, the glitter 
of wine in a transparent glass, chaps in dirty jackets playing with 
old cards-these and hundreds of other things are brought before 
our eyes in these pictures, things that we scarcely bother about in 
our daily life, for even if we play cards, drink wine, and chat about 
this and that, we are still engrossed by quite different interests. 
But what at once claims our attention in matter of this kind, when 
art displays it to us, is precisely this pure shining and appearing of 
objects as something produced by the spirit which transforms in its 
inmost being the external and sensuous side of all this material. 
For instead of real wool and silk, instead of real hair, glass, flesh, 
' This school, founded by Wilhelm Schadow, concentrated on religious and 
medieval subjects. Its most important member was Peter von Cornelius (I783-
x867), head of the DUsseldorf Academy of Art from 1819 to x8:zs, and subse­
quently at Munich and Berlin. 
• Hegel studied Dutch paintings in Amsterdam (Briefe, Hamburg, 1953, ii, 
p. 362). 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE I DEAL 
163 
and metal, we see only colours; instead of all the dimensions 
requisite for appearance in nature, we have just a surface, and yet 
we get the same impression which reality affords. 
(/J) In contrast to the prosaic reality confronting us, this pure 
appearance, produced by the spirit, is therefore the marvel of 
ideality, a mockery, if you like, and an ironical attitude to what 
exists in nature and externally. For think what arrangements 
nature and man must make in ordinary life, what countless means 
of the most varied kind they must use, in order to produce things 
like those depicted; what resistance the material exerts here, e.g. 
a metal, when it is to be worked upon! On the other hand, the 
imagination, out of which art creates, is a pliant, simple element 
which easily and flexibly draws from its inner being everything on 
which nature, and man in his natural existence, have to work hard. 
Even so the objects represented and the ordinary man are not of 
an inexhaustible richness, but have their limitations: precious 
stones, gold, plants, animals, etc., have in themselves only this 
bounded existence. But man as creative artist is a whole world of 
matter which he filches from nature and, in the comprehensive 
range of his ideas and intuitions, has accumulated a treasure which 
he now freely disgorges in a simple manner without the far-flung 
.conditions and arrangements of the real world. 
In this ideality, art is the middle term between purely objective 
indigent existence and purely inner ideas. It furnishes us with 
the things themselves, but out of the inner life of mind; it does 
not provide them for some use or other but confines interest to 
the abstraction of the ideal appearance for purely contemplative 
inspection. 
(y) Now, consequently, through this ideality, art at the same 
time exalts these otherwise worthless objects which, despite their 
insignificant content, it fixes and makes ends in themselves; it 
directs our attention to what otherwise we would pass by without 
any notice. The same result art achieves in respect of time, and 
here too is ideal. What in nature slips past, art ties down to perma­
nence: a quickly vanishing smile, a sudden roguish expression 
in the mouth, a glance, a fleeting ray of light, as well as spirit­
ual traits in human life, incidents and events that come and go, 
are there and are then forgotten-anything and everything art wrests 
from momentary existence, and in this respect too conquers nature. 
But in this formal ideality of art it is not the subject-matter which 

164 
I. THE I DEA O F  A RT I S T I C  BEAUTY 
principally makes a claim on us but the satisfaction which comes 
from what the spirit has produced. The artistic presentation must 
appear here as natural, yet it is not the natural there as such but 
that making, precisely the extinction of the sensuous material and 
external conditions, which is the poetic and the ideal in a formal 
sense. We delight in a manifestation which must appear as if nature 
had produced it, while without natural means it has been produced 
by the spirit; works of art enchant us, not because they are so 
natural, but because they have been made so natural. 
(b) Yet another interest, which goes deeper, arises from the fact 
that the subject-matter is not just represented in the forms in 
which it is presented to us in its immediate existence; grasped 
now by the spirit, it is enlarged within those forms and otherwise 
changed. What exists in nature is just a single thing, individualized 
indeed in all its parts and aspects. On the other hand, our imagina­
tive mentality has in itself the character of universality, and what 
it produces acquires already thereby the stamp of universality in 
contrast to the individual things in nature. In this respect our 
imagination has the advantage that it is of wider range and there­
fore is capable of grasping the inner life, stressing it, and making 
it more visibly explicit. Now the work of art is of course not just 
a universal idea, but its specific materialization; but since it has 
been produced by spirit and its imaginative power, it must be 
permeated by this character of universality, even though this 
character has a visible liveliness. This affords the higher ideality 
of the poetic in contrast to the formal ideality of mere making. 
Now here it is the task of the work of art to grasp the object 
in its universality and to let go, in its external appearance, every­
thing that would remain purely external and indifferent for the 
expression of the content. The artist therefore does not adopt 
everything in the forms or modes of expression which he finds 
outside him in the external world and because he finds it there; 
on the contrary, if he is to create genuine poetry, he grasps only 
those characteristics which are right and appropriate to the essence 
of the matter in hand. If he takes, as a model, nature and its pro­
ductions, everything just presented to him, it is not because nature 
has made it so and so, but because it has made it right; but this 
'rightness' means something higher than just being there. 
In the case of the human form, for instance, the artist does not 
proceed, as may be supposed, like a restorer of old paintings who 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
165 
even in the newly painted places reproduces the cracks which, 
owing to the splitting of the varnish and the paint, have covered all 
the other older parts of the canvas with a sort of network. On the 
contrary, the portrait painter will omit folds of skin and, still 
more, freckles, pimples, pock-marks, warts, etc., and the famous 
Denner,1 in his so-called 'truth to nature', is not to be taken as an 
example. Similarly, muscles and veins are indicated indeed, but 
they should not appear in the distinctness and completeness which 
they have in reality. For in all this there is little or nothing of the 
spirit, and the expression of the spiritual is the essential thing 
in the human form. Consequently I cannot find it so thoroughly 
disadvantageous that, in our day, fewer nude statues, for example, 
are made than was the case in antiquity. On the other hand, the 
cut of our clothes today is inartistic and prosaic in comparison with 
the more ideal drapery of the ancients. Both sorts of clothing have 
in common the purpose of covering the body. But the clothing 
portrayed in the art of antiquity is a more or less explicitly form­
less surface and is perhaps only determined by the fact that it needs 
a fastening on to the body, to the shoulder, for example. In other 
respects the drapery remains plastic and simply hangs down freely 
in accordance with its own immanent weight or is settled by the 
position of the body or the pose and movement of the limbs. What 
constitutes the ideal in clothing is the determining principle dis­
played when the outer wholly and entirely subserves the changeable 
expression of spirit appearing in the body, with the result that the 
particular form of the drapery, the fall of the folds, their hanging 
and lifting is entirely regulated from within, and is adapted to 
precisely this pose or movement momentarily only. In our modern 
dress, on the other hand, the whole of the material is fashioned 
once for all, cut and sewn to fit the shape of the limbs, so that the 
dress's freedom to fall exists no longer, or hardly at all. After all, 
the character of the folds is determined by the stitching, and, in 
1 Balthasar Denner, I68s-1749, German portrait painter. See above, pp. 4S. 
I SS· Hegel would not have approved of Cromwell's instructions to Lely. In 
his lectures in 18:z,6 Hegel made his point at greater length : 'What the artist must 
produce is an appearance of the spirit. A portrait must be an expression of 
individual and spiritual character. This nobler element in a man, which the 
artist introduces into the portrait, is not ordinarily obvious in a man's features. 
Therefore, if the artist is to bring out the sitter's character, he must have seen 
him in several situations and actions, in short been well acquainted with him, 
got to know his manner, heard him speak, and noticed his sort of feelings' 
(Lasson, pp. z:z,s-6). 

166 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
general, the cut and fall of the garment is produced technically and 
mechanically by the tailor. True, the build of the limbs regulates 
the form of the clothes generally, but in being formed to suit the 
body the clothes are precisely only a poor imitation or a disfigura­
tion of human limbs according to the conventional fashion and 
accidental whim of the day; once the cut is complete it remains 
always the same, without appearing determined by pose and move­
ment. As, for example, sleeves and trousers remain the same, 
however we may move our arms and legs. The folds do at most 
move variously, but always according to the fixed seams, as for 
example the breeches on the statue of Scharnhorst.1 Thus, to sum 
up, our manner of dress, as outer covering, is insufficiently marked 
out by our inner life to appear conversely as shaped from within; 
instead, in an untruthful imitation of our natural form, it is done 
with and unalterable once it has been cut. 
Something similar to what we have just seen in relation to the 
human form and its clothing holds good too of a mass of other 
externals and needs in human life which in themselves are neces­
sary and common to all men, yet without their being connected 
with the essential characteristics and interests which constitute 
the proper universal element, proper on account of its content, in 
human existence-however variously all these physical conditions, 
as e.g. eating, drinking, sleeping, dressing, etc., may be externally 
interwoven with the actions proceeding from our spirit. 
Things of this sort may of course be adopted as topics of artistic 
representation in poetry, and in this connection it is granted that 
Homer, for example, has the greatest conformity to nature. Yet he 
too, despite all €vapyna, all clarity for our vision, has to restrict 
himself to mentioning such things only in general terms, and it 
would not occur to anyone to demand that in this matter all the 
details afforded by what confronts us in real life should have been 
related and described ; as, e.g., even in the description of the body 
of Achilles, the lofty brow, the well-formed nose, the long strong 
legs may of course be mentioned without bringing into the picture 
the detail of the actual existence of these members, point by point, 
the position and relation of each part to the other, the colour, etc., 
which would alone be the real truth to nature. But, this apart, in 
poetry the manner of expression is always the universal idea in 
distinction from natural singularity; instead of the thing, the poet 
1 He died in 18 IJ. The reference is to a marble statue by C. D. Rauch, 1822. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE I DEAL 
167 
always gives only the name, the word, in which the singular rises 
to a universality, because the word is the product of our ideas, and 
therefore carries in itself the character of the universal. Now 
indeed it is permissible to say that in our ideas and speech it is 
'natural' to use the name, the word, as this infinite abbreviation 
for natural existents, but in that case this naturalness would always 
be the precise opposite of nature proper, and its cancellation. Thus 
the question arises what sort of naturalness is meant when it is 
contrasted with poetry, for 'nature' as such is a vague and empty 
word. Poetry should continually emphasize the energetic, the 
esential, the significant, and this essential expressiveness is pre­
cisely the Ideal and not what is merely at hand; to recite all the 
details of the latter in the case of some event or some scene would 
of necessity be dull, spiritless, wearisome, and intolerable. 
In relation to this kind of universality, however, one art proves 
to be more ideal, while another is more adjusted to the wide range 
of the externally perceptible. Sculpture, for example, is more 
abstract in its productions than painting is, while in poetry the 
epic, in respect of external life, falls behind the actual performance 
of a dramatic work, although, on the other hand, it is superior to 
drama in the fullness of what it can manifest. The epic poet brings 
before us concrete pictures drawn from a vision of what has 
happened, while the dramatist has to content himself with the 
inner motives of action, of their operation on the will, and of its 
inner reaction to them. 
(c) Now further, since it is the spirit which gives reality, in the 
form of external appearance, to the inner world of its own abso­
lute content and its fullness of interest, the question arises here too 
about the meaning of the opposition between Ideal and nature. 
In this connection 'natural' cannot be used in the strict sense of 
the word, for as the external configuration of spirit it has no value 
in simply existing immediately as the life of animals, the natural 
landscape, etc. ; on the contrary, in accordance with its specific 
character of being the spirit which gives itself a body, it appears 
here only as an expression of spirit, and so already as idealized. 
For this assumption into spirit, this forming and shaping on the 
part of spirit, means precisely idealizing. It is said of the dead 
that their face assumes once again the lineaments of their child­
hood; the corporeal fixed expression of passions, habits, and 
strivings, the look characteristic of all willing and doing, has then 

168 
l. THE lDEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
flown away, and the indeterminacy of the child's features has come 
back. In life, however, the features and the whole form derive 
the character of their expression from within; as, after all, the 
different peoples, classes, etc., display in their outward form the 
difference of their spiritual tendencies and activities. In all such 
respects, the external, as penetrated and brought about by spirit, 
is already idealized in contrast to nature as such: Now here alone 
is the properly significant point of the question about the natural 
and the Ideal. For, on the one hand, some maintain that the natural 
forms with which spirit is clothed are already in their actual 
appearance-an appearance not recreated by art-so perfect, so 
beautiful, and so excellent in themselves that there cannot be still 
another beauty evincing itself as higher and, in distinction from 
what is there confronting us, as ideal, since art is not even capable 
of reaching altogether what is already met with in nature. On the 
other hand, there is a demand that there should be found for art 
independently, in contrast to reality, forms and representations of 
another and more ideal kind. In this respect especially the above­
mentioned polemics of von Rumohr are important. While others, 
with the 'Ideal' on their lips, look down on vulgarity and speak 
of it contemptuously, he speaks of the Idea and the Ideal with 
similar superiority and contempt. 
But in fact there is in the world of spirit something vulgarly 
natural both within and without. It is vulgar externally just because 
the inner side is vulgar, and in its action and all its external 
manifestations the latter brings into appearance only the aims of 
envy, jealousy, avarice in trifles and in the sensuous sphere. Even 
this vulgarity art can take as its material, and has done so. But in 
that case either there remains, as was said above [in the Introduc­
tion, 6(iii)], the representation as such, the cleverness of produc­
tion, as the sole essential interest, and in that case it would be 
useless to expect a cultivated man to show sympathy with the 
whole work of art, i.e. with a topic of this kind, or else the artist 
must make something fu_rther and deeper out of it through his treat­
ment of the subject. It is especially the so-called genre painting 
which has not despised such topics and which has been carried 
by the Dutch to the pitch of perfection. Now what has led the 
Dutch to this genre ? What is it that is expressed in these little 
pictures which prove to have the highest power of attraction ?  They 
cannot be called pictures of vulgarity and then be just set aside 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  'I'HE I D EAL 
169 
altogether and discarded. For, if we look at it more closely, the 
proper subject-matter of these paintings is not so vulgar as is 
usually supposed. 
The Dutch have selected the content of their artistic representa­
tions out of their own experience, out of their own life in the 
present, and to have actualized this present once more through art 
too is not to be made a reproach to them. What the contemporary 
world has brought before our vision and our spirit must also belong 
to that world if it is to claim our whole interest. In order to ascer­
tain what engrossed the interest of the Dutch at the time of these 
paintings, we must ask about Dutch history. The Dutch themselves 
have made the greatest part of the land on which they dwell and 
live; it has continually to be defended against the storms of the 
sea, and it has to be maintained. By resolution, endurance, and 
courage, townsmen and countrymen alike threw off the Spanish 
dominion of Philip II, son of Charles V (that mighty King of the 
World), and by fighting won for themselves freedom in political 
life and in religious life too in the religion of freedom. This citizen­
ship, this love of enterprise, in small things as in great, in their own 
land as on the high seas, this painstaking as well as cleanly and neat 
well-being, this joy and exuberance in their own sense that for all 
this they have their own activity to thank, all this is what consti­
tutes the general content of their pictures. This is no vulgar 
material and stuff which, it is true, is not to be approached by 
a man of high society who turns up his nose at it, convinced of 
the superiority of courts and their appendages. Fired by a sense of 
such vigorous nationality, Rembrandt painted his famous Night 
Watch, now in Amsterdam, Van Dyck so many of his portraits, 
Wouwerman1 his cavalry scenes, and even in this category are those 
rustic carousels, jovialities, and convivial merriments. 
To cite a contrast, we have, for example, good genre paintings in 
our exhibition this year too [1828], but in skill of representation 
they fall far below the Dutch pictures of the same kind, and even 
in content they cannot rise to freedom and joyfulness like that of 
the Dutch. For example, we see a woman going into an inn to 
scold her husband. Here we have nothing but a scene of snarl­
ing and vicious people. On the other hand, with the Dutch in 
their taverns, at weddings and dances, at feasting and drinking, 
1 Philips Wouwerman, 1619-68. Rembrandt, 16o6-69. A. van 
Dyck, 
ISS9-I64I. 

170 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTIS T I C  BEAUTY 
everything goes on merrily and jovially, even if matters come to 
quarrels and blows; wives and girls join in and a feeling of free­
dom and gaiety animates one and all. This spiritual cheerfulness in 
a justified pleasure, which enters even pictures of animals and 
which is revealed as satisfaction and delight-this freshly awakened 
spiritual freedom and vitality in conception and execution-consti­
tutes the higher soul of pictures of this kind. 
In the like sense the beggar boys of Murillo (in the Central 
Gallery at Munich) are excellent too. Abstractly considered, the 
subject-matter here too is drawn from 'vulgar nature' : the mother 
picks lice out of the head of one of the boys while he quietly 
munches his bread ;1 on a similar picture two other boys, ragged 
and poor, are eating melon and grapes.2 But in this poverty and 
semi-nakedness what precisely shines forth within and without is 
nothing but complete absence of care and concern-a Dervish 
could not have less-in the full feeling of their well-being and 
delight in life. This freedom from care for external things and 
the inner freedom made visible outwardly is what the Concept of 
the Ideal requires. In Paris there is a portrait of a boy by Raphael:J 
his head lies at rest, leaning on an arm, and he gazes out into the 
wide and open distance with such bliss of carefree satisfaction that 
one can scarcely tear oneself away from gazing at this picture of 
spiritual and joyous well-being. The same satisfaction is afforded 
by those boys of Murillo. We see that they have no wider interests 
and aims, yet not at all because of stupidity; rather do they squat 
on the ground content and serene, almost like the gods of Olympus; 
they do nothing, they say nothing; but they are people all of one 
piece without any surliness or discontent; and since they possess 
this foundation of all excellence, we have the idea that anything 
may come of these youths. These are totally different modes of 
treatment from those we see in that quarrelsome choleric woman, 
or in the peasant who ties up his whip, or the postillion who sleeps 
on straw. 
But such genre pictures must be small and appear, even in the 
whole impression they give to our vision, as something insignifi-
' No. 1 308, Toilette familiere. B. E. Murillo, 1618-82. Osmaston has the 
mother 'scolding' the bo} . 
• No. 1304, Les Enjants a la Grappe. Osmaston is wrong to say that Ruskin 
depreciated these pictures. See C. and W. edition, vii, pp. 494-5. 
3 No. 385, Portrait d'unjeune homme. Hegel visited the Louvre in September 
1827 (Brieje, edn. cit., iii. 186-7). 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
171 
cant which we have got beyond, so far as the external subject­
matter and the content of the painting goes. It would be intolerable 
to see such things worked out life-size and therefore claiming that 
we should really be satisfied with them and their like in their 
entirety. 
In this way what is generally called 'vulgarity' must be inter­
preted if it is to have the right of entry into art. 
Now of course there are higher, more ideal, materials for art than 
the representation of such joy and bourgeois excellence in what are 
always inherently insignificant details. For men have more serious 
interests and aims which enter in through the unfolding and 
deepening of spirit and in which men must remain in harmony 
with themselves. The higher art will be that which has as its 
task the representation of this higher content. Now this at once 
gives rise to the question of whence are to be drawn the forms for 
this material engendered by spirit. Some entertain the opinion 
that, just as the artist first carries in himself these lofty ideas 
which he must create for himself, so he must also shape from his 
own resources correspondingly lofty forms for them, such as, for 
example, the figures of the Greek gods, Christ, the Apostles, saints, 
and so on. Against this view it is von Rumohr above all who has 
entered the field, in that he recognizes that art is on the wrong 
road when artists go in the direction of finding their forms arbi­
trarily instead of finding them in nature, and he has adduced as 
examples in support of his contention the masterpieces of Italian 
and Nether lands painting. In this connection his criticism is that 
(op. cit., i, p. 105) 'the aesthetics of the last sixty years has struggled 
to prove that the aim, or even the chief aim, of art is to improve on 
creation in its individual formations, to produce forms unrelated 
to anything real, forms which should counterfeit creation into 
something more beautiful, and therefore, as it were, should hold 
the human race blameless for nature's failure to make itself more 
beautiful'. Therefore (p. 63) he advises the artist 'to give up the 
titanic intention of "adorning" natural forms, of "transfiguring" 
them, or however else writers on art may describe such arrogance 
on the part of the human spirit'. For he is convinced that, for even 
the highest spiritual matters, satisfactory external forms are al­
ready before our eyes in the world confronting us, and he there­
fore maintains (p. 83) 'that the artistic representation, even where 
its subject-matter is thinkable and most spiritual, never rests on 
G 

172 
I. THE I DEA OF A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
arbitrarily fixed symbols, but throughout on a nature-given sig­
nificance of organic forms'. In saying this, von Rumohr has 
especially in view the ideal forms of antiquity as expounded by 
Winckelmann. But it is the eternal merit of Winckelmann to have 
emphasized and classified these forms, although he may have 
slipped into errors in relation to some particular features; as, for 
instance, von Rumohr (p. I IS, note) seems to think that the 
lengthening of the belly, which Winckelmann (Geschichte der Kunst 
des Altertums, book 5, ch. 4, § 2) distinguishes as a feature in Greek 
ideal forms, is really derived from Roman statuary. Continuing 
his criticism, von Rumohr, in his polemic against the Ideal, now 
demands that the artist should utterly and entirely devote himself 
to the study of natural form, for here alone is beauty proper really 
brought to light. For, he says (p. 144), 'the most important beauty 
rests on a symbolism of forms given in nature and not grounded 
on human caprice. Thereby these forms in specific combinations 
develop into features and signs which, when we see them, neces­
sarily recall to us specific ideas and concepts or make known to us 
more specifically feelings that are slumbering in us.' And so, it 
appears (p. 105), 'a secret spiritual trait, perhaps what is called the 
"Idea", links the artist after all with allied natural phenomena; 
in these he learns little by little to recognize his own intention ever 
more clearly and through them is enabled to express it'. 
Of course, in ideal art, there can be no question of symbols 
settled ·arbitrarily, and, if it has happened that the ideal forms of 
antiquity have been copied, by setting aside the genuine natural 
form, into false and empty abstractions, then von Rumohr was 
right enough to oppose this in the strongest way. 
But concerning this opposition between nature and the artistic 
ideal, the chief point to make is the following. 
The existing natural forms of the spiritual content are in fact to 
be regarded as symbolic in the general sense that they have no 
immediate value in themselves; on the contrary, they are an 
appearance of the inner and spiritual life which they express. This 
already, in their reality outside art, constitutes their ideality in 
distinction from nature as such, which does not display anything 
spiritual. Now in art, at its higher stage, the inner content of 
spirit is to acquire its external form. This content is there in the 
real spirit of man, and so, like man's inner experience in general, it 
has already present there its external form in which it is expressed. 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
173 
However readily this point may be granted, still, from the philo­
sophical point of view, it is superfluous altogether to ask whether 
in existent reality there are such beautiful and expressive shapes 
and countenances which art can use immediately as a portrait for 
representing e.g. Jupiter (his majesty, repose, and power), Juno, 
Venus, Peter, Christ, John, Mary, etc. Of course you can argue for 
and against, but it remains a purely empirical question which, as 
empirical, cannot be settled. For the only way to decide it would 
be actually to exhibit these existing beauties, and for the Greek 
gods, for example, this might be a matter of some difficulty, and 
even at the present day one man might see perfect beauties, let us 
say, where another, a thousand times cleverer, did not. Apart from 
this, however, beauty of form as such does not always afford what 
we have called the Ideal, because the Ideal requires also indivi­
duality of content and therefore also of form. For example, a face 
altogether regular in form and beautiful may nevertheless be cold 
and expressionless. But the ideal figures of the Greek gods are 
individuals which within their universality do not lack determinate 
characteristics of their own. Now the vitality of the Ideal rests 
precisely on the fact that this specific spiritual fundamental mean­
ing which is to be represented is completely elaborated through 
every particular aspect of external appearance, through posture, 
attitude, movement, facial expressions, form and shape of limbs, 
etc. The result is that nothing empty and insignificant remains, 
but everything evinces itself as penetrated by that meaning. For 
example, what we have seen of Greek sculpture in recent years as 
actually attributed to Phidias1 inspires us principally owing to this 
kind of all-pervasive vitality. The Ideal is still preserved in its 
strictness and has not passed over into grace, charm, exuberance, 
and gracefulness, but keeps every form in steady relation to the 
general meaning which was to be given bodily shape. This supreme 
vitality is the distinguishing mark of great artists. 
Such a fundamental meaning has to be called 'abstract' in itself 
in contrast to the rich detail of the phenomenal real world. This 
is especially true of sculpture and painting which bring out only 
one feature, without proceeding to the many-sided development 
in which Homer, for example, could sketch the character of 
Achilles as at once harsh and cruel, kind and friendly, and en­
dowed with so many other qualities of soul. Now in the real world 
1 i.e. the Elgin marbles. 

174 
I. THE I D EA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
confronting us such a meaning may indeed also find its expression; 
as, for example, there is hardly any face which could not give us 
the impression of piety, worship, serenity, etc. ; but these features 
also express besides in thousands of ways as well what either is 
quite unsuited to portray the fundamental meaning to be im­
pressed on them or else is in no nearer relation to it. Thus a por­
trait at once announces itself as a portrait by its very detail. In 
Flemish and old German pictures, for example, we often find the 
man who gave the commission portrayed along with his family, 
wife, sons and daughters. They are all supposed to appear sunk in 
devotion, and piety actually shines out of all their eyes; but never­
theless we see in the men valiant warriors, it may be, men of 
vigorous action, well versed in life and the passion for achievement, 
and in the women we see wives of a similar vigorous excellence. 
If we compare the expressions in these pictures, which are famous 
for their true-to-life likenesses, with Mary or the saints and 
Apostles beside her, then on their faces we read only one expression, 
and on this one expression the whole formation is concentrated, 
the build of the bones, the muscles, the traits of movement or rest. 
It is only the appropriateness of the whole formation which marks 
the difference between the Ideal proper and the portrait. 
Now one might suppose that the artist should select here and 
there the best forms in the world confronting him and collect them 
together, or even as has happened, hunt through collections of 
etchings and wood-cuts for faces, postures, etc. in an endeavour to 
find the genuine forms for his topic. But with this collecting, and 
choosing, nothing is achieved, for the artist must act creatively and, 
in his own imagination and with knowledge of the corresponding 
forms, with profound sense and serious feeling, give form and 
shape throughout and from a single casting to the meaning which 
animates him. 
B. THE DETERMINA CY OF THE IDEAL 
The Ideal as such, which hitherto we have considered in accor­
dance with its general Concept, was relatively easy to grasp. But the 
beauty of art, by being Idea, cannot stop at its purely general 
Concept; even in virtue of this Concept it has determinacy and 
particularity in itself and therefore must advance out of itself into 
actual determinacy. Consequently, from this point of view, the 

THE BEAUTY OF ART O R  THE I DEAL 
175 
question arises in what way, despite exit into externality and fini­
tude and therefore the non-Ideal, the Ideal can still maintain itself, 
and, conversely, in what way finite existence can assume the 
Ideality of artistic beauty. 
In this connection we have the following points to review: 
First, the determinacy as such of the Ideal; 
Secondly, this determinacy in so far as it develops itself through 
its particularity to diferentiatian in itself and to the resolution 
of this difference, a process which in general terms we may call 
action; 
Thirdly, the external determinacy of the Ideal. 
I. I D EAL DETERM I NA C Y  AS S U C H  
1. The Divine as Unity and Universality 
We have seen already [in the Introduction, 8(iii)] that art has above 
all to make the Divine the centre of its representations. But the 
Divine, explicitly regarded as unity and universality, is essentially 
only present to thinking and, as in itself imageless, is not suscep­
tible of being imaged and shaped by imagination; for which reason, 
after all, the Jews and Mahometans are forbidden to sketch a 
picture of God in order to bring him nearer to the vision which 
looks around in the sensuous field. For visual art, which always re­
quires the most concrete vitality of form, there is therefore no room 
here, and the lyric alone, in rising towards God, can strike the note 
of praise of his power and his glory. 
2. The Divine as a Group of Gods 
Nevertheless, on the other hand, however far unity and universality 
are the characteristics of the Divine, the Divine is nevertheless 
essentially determinate in itself, and since it therefore disen­
cumbers itself of abstractness, it resigns itself to pictorial repre­
sentation and visualization. If now it is seized in its determinate 
form and displayed pictorially by imagination, there at once enters 
a multiplicity of determinations, and here alone is the beginning 
of the proper sphere of ideal art. 
For first, the one divine substance is split and broken up into 
a multitude of independent and self-reposing gods, as in the poly­
theistic vision of Greek art; and, even for Christian ideas, God 
appears, over against his purely inherent spiritual unity, as an 

176 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTI S T I C  B E A U TY 
actual man immediately involved with the earthly and worldly 
sphere. Secondly, the Divine is present and active in its determi­
nate appearance and actuality generally in man's senses and heart, 
his will and achievement; and therefore in this sphere men filled 
with the spirit of God, saints, martyrs, holy and pious men in 
general, become an equally appropriate subject for ideal art too. 
But, thirdly, with this principle of the division of the Divine and 
its specific and therefore also mundane existence, there appears the 
detail of real human life. For the whole human heart with every­
thing whereby it is moved in its innermost being, everything which 
is powerful in it-every feeling and passion, every deeper interest 
in the soul-this concrete life forms the living stuff of art, and the 
Ideal is its representation and expression. 
On the other hand, the Divine, as in itself pure spirit, is an 
object of intellectual reflection alone. But the spirit embodied in 
activity, because it always reverberates only in the human breast, 
belongs to art. Yet thereupon there at once come to light here 
particular interests and actions, determinate characters and their 
momentary circumstances and situations-in short, involvements 
with the external world ; and it is therefore necessary to describe, 
at first in general terms, wherein the Ideal lies in relation to this 
field of determinacy. 
3· Repose of the Ideal 
In view of what we have already expounded above, the supreme 
purity of the Ideal will here too be able to consist only in the fact 
that the gods, Christ, Apostles, saints, penitents, and the devout 
are set before us in their blessed repose and satisfaction; therein 
they are untouched by the world with the distress and exigency 
of its manifold complications, struggles, and oppositions. In this 
sense it is especially sculpture and painting which have found forms 
in an ideal way for individual gods, as well as for Christ as Saviour 
of the world, for individual Apostles and saints. Here what is 
inherently true at the heart of existence comes into the work of art 
only as related to itself in its own existence, and not dragged out 
of itself into finite affairs. This self-sufficiency is not indeed lack­
ing in particular character, but the particularization which is dis­
persed in the sphere of the external and the finite is purified here 
into simple determinacy, so that the traces of an external influence 
and relation appear altogether expunged. This inactive, eternal 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
177 
repose in oneself, or this rest-as in the case of Hercules, for 
example-constitutes the Ideal as such even in the field of de­
terminacy. Therefore, if the gods are represented as involved also 
in mundane affairs, they must still retain their eternal and inviolable 
majesty. For Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Mars, for example, are indeed 
determinate but fixed authorities and powers which preserve their 
own independent freedom, even when their activity is directed 
outwards. And so then, within the determinacy of the Ideal, not 
only may an individual particular character appear, but spiritual 
freedom must in itself show itself as a totality and, in this reposing 
on itself, as the potentiality for anything. 
Now further, in this connection, the Ideal proves effective in 
the sphere of the mundane and the human in the sense that any 
more substantial content which preoccupies mankind has power 
to master the purely particular element in subjective life. I mean 
that in this way the particular element in feeling and acting is 
wrested from contingency, and the concrete particular is repre­
sented in greater correspondence with its proper inner truth; just 
as, in short, what we call noble, excellent, and perfect in the human 
soul is nothing but the fact that the true substance of the spiritual, 
moral, and divine declares its mastery in the subject, and man 
therefore places his living activity, will-power, interests, passions, 
etc. in this substantial element alone in order to give satisfaction 
therein to his true inner needs. 
But however far, in the Ideal, spirit's determinacy and its 
external appearance appears simply resumed into itself, still there 
is at the same time immediately bound up with spirit's particu­
larization, turned out from within into external existence, the 
principle of development, and therefore, in this relation to ex­
ternality, the difference and struggle of oppositions. This leads us 
to a more detailed consideration of the inherently differentiated 
and progressive determinacy of the Ideal, which we may formu­
late in general terms as Action. 
I I. A CT I ON 
Characteristic of the Ideal's determinacy as such are rather the 
friendly innocence of an angelic and heavenly bliss, inactive repose, 
the sublimity of an independent and self-reliant power, the excel­
lence and perfection of what is in itself substantial. Yet the inner 

178 
I. THE I DE A  O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
and spiritual element exists nevertheless only as active movement 
and development. But development is nothing without one-sided­
ness and separation. Spirit, complete and whole, spreading itself 
out in its particularizations, abandons its repose vis a vis itself and 
enters the oppositions of this chaotic universe, where in this rift it 
can now no longer escape the misfortune and calamity of the finite 
realm. 
Even the immortal gods of polytheism do not dwell in perpetual 
peace. They get into cliques and into struggles with conflicting 
passions and interests and they must submit to fate. Even the God 
of the Christians was not exempt from passing to the humiliation of 
suffering, yes, to the ignominy of death, nor was he spared the 
grief of soul in which he had to cry: 'My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me ?' His mother suffers a similar agonizing pain, 
and human life as such is a life of strife, struggles, and sorrows. 
For greatness and force are truly measured only by the greatnes 
and force of the opposition out of which the spirit brings itself 
back to unity with itself again. The intensity and depth of sub­
jectivity come all the more to light, the more endlessly and 
tremendously is it divided against itself, and the more lacerating 
are the contradictions in which it still has to remain firm in itself. 
In this development alone is preserved the might of the Idea and 
the Ideal, for might consists only in maintaining oneself within the 
negative of oneself. 
But owing to such a development, the particularization of the 
Ideal involves a relation with externality, and therefore surrenders 
to a world which, instead of displaying in itself the ideal free 
correspondence of the Concept with its reality, manifests rather 
an existence which just is not what it ought to be; for this reason 
we must in considering this relation examine how far the determi­
nate characteristics, into which the Ideal enters, either immediately 
contain ideality explicitly or are more or less capable of doing so. 
In this matter three principal points claim our closer attention: 
(i) the general state of the world, which is the precondition of 
the individual action and its character, 
(ii) the particular character of the situation, the determinacy 
of which introduces into that substantial unity the difference 
and strain which is the instigator of action-the situation and its 
conflicts, 
(iii) the apprehension of the situation by the subject, and his 

THE B E AU TY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
179 
reaction whereby the struggle involved in difference and the dis­
solution of difference appear-action proper. 
I. The General State of the World 
It is characteristic of the living subject, in whom ideal subjectivity 
is enshrined, to act, and in general to bestir and realize himself, 
because this ideal has to carry out and bring to fruition what is 
implicit in it. To this end it requires a surrounding world as the 
general ground for its realizations. When we speak in this con­
nection of the 'state' of something, we understand by it the general 
way and manner in which the substantial element is present which, 
as the truly essential element within spiritual actuality, holds 
together all its manifestations. In this sense we can speak, for 
example, of a 'state' of education, of the sciences, of the religious 
sense, or even of finances, administration of justice, family life, 
and other ways of life. But in that case all these aspects are in fact 
only forms of one and the same spirit and content which makes 
itself explicit and actual in them.-Now here, because we are 
I 
discussing more precisely the state of the world of spiritual reality, 
we must take it up from the side of the will. For it is through the 
will that the spirit as such enters upon existence, and the im­
mediate substantial bonds of reality are displayed in the specific 
manner in which the will's guides, i.e. the concepts of ethics and 
law, and, in short, what, in general terms, we may call justice, are 
activated. 
Now the question is of what charactăr such a general 'state' 
must have in order to evince itself as correspondent to the indi­
viduality of the Ideal. 
(a) Individual Independence-The Heroic Age 
Arising from the foregoing discussion we can first make the 
following points in this matter : 
(o:) The Ideal is inherent unity, a unity of its content, not 
merely a formal external unity but an immanent one. This in­
herently harmonious and substantial self-reliance we have already 
described above as the Ideal's self-enjoyment, repose, and bliss. 
At the stage we have now reached we will bring out this character­
istic as independence, and require [for artistic representation] 
that the general state of the world shall appear in the form of 
independence so as to be able to assume the shape of the Ideal. 

r8o 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
But 'independence' is an ambiguous expression. 
(cxcx) For ordinarily what is inherently substantial is, on account 
of this substantiality and effectiveness, called simply the 'indepen­
dent', and it is usual to describe it as the inherently Divine and 
absolute. But if it is retained solely in its universality and sub­
stance, it is on that account not in itself subjective and therefore 
it at once finds its fixed opposite in the particularity of concrete 
individuality. Yet in this opposition-as in any opposition-true 
independence is lost. 
(/3{3) Conversely, independence is ordinarily ascribed to the 
individual who is self-reliant, even if only formally, in the fixity 
of his subjective character. But every subject who lacks the true 
content of life, because these powers and substances exist on their 
own account outside him and remain something foreign to his 
inner and outer being, falls just the same into an opposition 
against what is truly substantial and thereby loses the state of 
concrete independence and freedom. 
True independence consists solely in the unity and interpene­
tration of individuality and universality. The universal wins con­
crete reality only through the individual, just as the individual and 
particular subject finds only in the universal the impregnable basis 
and genuine content of his actual being. 
(yy) Here therefore in connection with the general state of the 
world we must consider the form of independence only in the 
sense that substantial universality in this state must, in order to 
be independent, have in itself the shape of subjectivity. The first 
mode which can occur to us in which this identity can appear is 
that of thought. For thinking is on the one hand subjective, but 
on the other hand it has the universal as a product of its true 
activity, and so it is both-universality and subjectivity-in a free 
unity. But the universal element in thinking does not belong to 
the beauty of art, and, besides, in the case of thinking, the rest of 
the particular individual in his natural character and shape, as well 
as in his practical action and accomplishment, is not in necessary 
concord with the universality of thoughts. On the contrary, a 
difference enters, or at least may enter, between the subject in his 
concrete reality and the subject as thinker. The same cleavage 
affects the content of the universal itself. If, namely, the genuine 
and the true begins already to be distinguished in the thinking 
subject from the rest of his reality, then the content of the universal, 

THE BEA UTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
181 
as explicitly universal, has already separated itself in objective 
appearance from the rest of existence and acquired against it a 
fixity and power of subsistence. But in the Ideal it is precisely 
particular individuality which should remain in inseparable con­
cord with the substantial, and, just as freedom and the indepen­
dence of subjectivity belong to the Ideal, in the same way the 
surrounding world of situations and circumstances should not 
possess any essential objectivity independent of the subjective 
and individual. The ideal individual must be self-contained; what 
is objective must still be his own and it must not be separated from 
the individuality of men and move and complete itself indepen­
dently, because otherwise the individual retreats, as something 
purely subordinate, from the world as it exists already independent 
and cut and dried. 
Thus in this regard the universal must indeed be actual in the 
individual as his own, his very own; not his own, however, in so 
far as he has thoughts, but his own as his character and heart. 
In other words, we are claiming for the unity of the universal and 
the individual, over against the mediation and distinctions of 
thinking, the form of immediacy, and the independence which we 
demand acquires the shape of immediate independence. But at once 
contingency is bound up with this. For if the universal and decisive 
element in human life is immediately present in the independence 
of individuals only as their subjective feeling, mentality, state of 
character, and should it gain no other form of existence, then it is 
just at once for this reason remitted to the contingency of will and 
accomplishment. In that case it remains only the peculiar charac­
teristic of precisely these individuals and their mental attitude, 
and as their particular property it lacks the power and necessity 
of asserting itself on its own account; on the contrary, instead of 
actualizing itself ever anew in a universal way firmly fixed by its 
own effort, it appears simply as the resolution and performance, and 
equally the arbitrary neglect, of the purely self-dependent subject 
with his feelings, projects, force, ability, cunning, and dexterity. 
In short, this sort of contingency constitutes at this point the 
characteristic feature of the state of affairs which we required as 
the ground and the total manner of the Ideal's appearance [in art]. 
(/3) In order to bring out more clearly the specific form of such 
an actual state of affairs, we will cast a glance at the opposite mode 
of existence. 

r8z 
I. THE I D E A  OF A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
(ctct) This mode is present where the essence of ethical life, i.e. 
justice and its rational freedom, has already been worked out and 
preserved in the form of a legal regime, so that now, alike in itself 
and in the external world, this regime exists as an inflexible 
necessity, independent of particular individuals and their personal 
mentality and character. This is the case in the life of the state 
when political life comes into appearance according to the essential 
nature of the state ; for not every combination of individuals into 
a social community, not every patriarchal union, is to be called 
a state. In the state proper, that is to say, laws, customs, rights are 
valid by constituting the universal and rational characteristics of 
freedom, and, moreover, by being present in this their universality 
and abstraction, no longer conditioned by accidental whims and 
particular personal peculiarities. When regulations and laws have 
been brought to our minds in their universality, they are also 
actual externally as this universal which goes its explicitly orderly 
way and has public power and might over individuals if they 
undertake to oppose and violate the law by their caprice. 
({3{3) Such a situation presupposes an actual cleavage between the 
universals of the legislative intellect and immediate life, if we 
understand by 'life' that unity in which everything substantial and 
essential in ethical life and justice has won actuality only in indivi­
duals as their feeling and disposition, and is administered solely 
by means of these. In the fully developed state, law and justice, 
and even religion and science (or at least provision for education 
in religion and science) are a matter for the public authority and 
are directed and pursued thereby. 
(yy) Therefore the position of separate individuals in the state 
is that they must attach themselves to this regime and its real 
stability, and subordinate themselves to it, since no longer are they 
with their character and heart the sole mode of existence of the 
ethical powers. On the contrary, as happens in genuine states, the 
whole details of their mental attitude, their subjective opinions and 
feelings, have to be ruled by this legislative order and brought into 
harmony with it. This attachment to the objective rationality of 
the state which has no dependence on subjective caprice may 
either be pure subjection, because rights, laws and institutions, by 
being mighty and valid, have the power of compulsion, or it can 
arise from the free recognition and appreciation of the rationality 
of what exists, so that the subject finds himself over again in the 

THE B EA UTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
z83 
objective world. But even in that case separate individuals are and 
always remain only incidental, and outside the reality of the state 
they have no substantiality in themselves. For substantiality is no 
longer merely the particular property of this or that individual, but 
is stamped upon him on its own account and in a universal and 
necessary way in all his aspects down to the tiniest detail. Therefore 
whatever individuals may achieve in the interest and progress of 
the whole by way of right, moral, or legal actions, nevertheless 
their willing and achievement remains always, like themselves, 
when compared with the whole, insignificant and nothing but an 
example. For their actions are always only a quite partial actualiza­
tion of a single case ;  but this is not the actualization of a universal 
as it would be if this action, this case, were thereb) made into 
a law or brought into appearance as law. If this is looked at con­
versely, it does not matter in the least whether individuals as 
individuals want law and justice to prevail or not ; law and justice \ 
prevails in and by itself, and even if they did not want it to, never- \ 
theless it would. Of course it does interest the universal and public 
authority that all individuals should evince their compliance with 
it, but separate individuals do not arouse this interest on the ground 
that law and morals receive their validity precisely by the consent 
of this individual or that ; law and morals do not require this 
individualized consent ; punishment validates them if they are 
transgressed. 
The subordinate position of the individual subject is shown 
finally, in developed states, in the fact that each individual acquires 
only an entirely specific and always restricted share in the whole. 
In the genuine state, I mean, work for the universal [i.e. for the 
general weal], like activity in business, trade, etc., in civil society, 
is subdivided in the most varied possible way, so that now the 
entire state does not appear as the concrete action of one individual, 
nor can it be entrusted to one individual's caprice, force, spirit, 
courage, power, and insight. On the contrary, the innumerable 
businesses and activities of political life must be assigned to an 
equally innumerable mass of agents. The punishment of a crime, 
for example, is no longer a matter of individual heroism and the 
virtue of a single person ; on the contrary, it is split up into its 
different factors, the investigation and estimation of the facts of 
the case, judgement, and execution of the judge's sentence ; indeed 
each of these chief factors has its own more specialized differences, 

184 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
and it falls to individuals to carry out only one side of them. The 
administration of the law therefore does not lie in the hands of ane 
individual but results from many-sided co-operation in a stable 
organization. Besides, each individual has general guides pre­
scribed to him as a standard for his conduct, and what he achieves 
in accordance with these rules is subject over again to the judge­
ment and control of higher officials. 
(y) In all these matters the public authorities in a legally ordered 
state do not themselves appear as individuals; the universal as 
such rules in its universality, in which the life of the individual 
appears as uplifted or as incidental and unimportant. Thus in 
such a state of affairs the independence we required is not to be 
found. Therefore, for the free configuration of individuality we 
have required the opposite state of affairs, in which the authority 
of the ethical order rests on individuals alone, who, by their private 
will and the outstanding greatness and effectiveness of their 
character, place themselves at the head of the real world in which 
they live. In that event justice remains their very own decision, 
and if by their action they transgress what is moral absolutely, 
there is no public authority with powers to call them to account 
and punish them, but only the right of that inner necessity which 
is vitally individualized in particular characters, external con­
tingencies and circumstances etc., and is actual only in this form. 
Herein lies the distinction between punishment and revenge. 
Legal punishment makes the universal and established law prevail 
against crime, and it operates according to universal norms through 
the organs of the public authority, through courts and judges who, 
as persons, are only incidental. Revenge likewise can be just in 
itself, but it rests on the subjectivity of those who take charge of 
the affair and out of the right in their own breast and temper 
wreak revenge for the wrong on the guilty party. The revenge of 
Orestes, for example, became just, but he had pursued it only 
in accordance with his private virtue, not with legal judgement 
and the universal law. 
In short, in the state of affairs which we claimed for artistic 
representation, morals and justice should throughout keep an 
individual shape in the sense that they depend exclusively on 
individuals and reach life and actuality only in and through them. 
Thus, to allude to a further point, in organized states the external 
existence of the people is secured, their property protected, and it 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
r8s 
is only their subjective disposition and judgement that they really 
have on their own account and by their own resources. But when 
there is still no state the security of life and property depends 
entirely on the personal strength and valour of each individual who 
has to provide for his own existence and the preservation of what 
belongs and is due to him. 
Such a state of affairs is the one we are accustomed to ascribe 
to the Heroic Age. Which of these situations, however,-the 
civilized and developed life of the state, or an heroic age-is the 
better, this is not the place to explain; here our only concern is 
with the Ideal of art, and for art the cleavage between universal and 
individual must not yet come on the scene in the way described 
above, no matter how necessary this difference is for other ways 
in which spiritual existence is actualized. For art and its Ideal is 
precisely the universal in so far as the universal is configurated for 
our vision and therefore is still immediately one with particular 
individuals and their life. 
(cxcx) This occurs in the so-called Heroic Age which appears as 
a time in which virtue, in the Greek sense of apen], is the basis of 
actions. In this connection we must clearly distinguish apenj from 
what the Romans called virtus. The Romans already had their city 
and their legal institutions, and, in contrast to the state as the 
universal end, personality had to be sacrificed. To be just a Roman, 
to visualize in his own personal energies only the Roman state, the 
fatherland and its grandeur and power, this is the seriousness and 
dignity of Roman virtue. Heroes, on the other hand, are individuals 
who undertake and accomplish the entirety of an action, actuated 
by the independence of their character and caprice; and in their 
case, therefore, it appears as the effect of individual disposition 
when they carry out what is right and moral. But this immediate 
unity of the substantial with the individuality of inclination, im­
pulses, and will is inherent in Greek virtue, so that individuality is 
a law to itself, without being subjected to an independently sub­
sisting law, judgement, and tribunal. Thus, for example, the Greek 
heroes appear in a pre-legal era, or become themselves the 
founders of states, so that right and order, law and morals, proceed 
from them and are actualized as their own individual work which 
remains linked with them. In this way Hercules was extolled by 
the ancient Greeks and stands for them as an ideal of original 
heroic virtue. His free independent virtue, whereby, actuated by 

r86 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTI STIC BEAUTY 
his personal and private will, he put an end to wrong and fought 
against human and animal monsters, was not an effect of the 
general state of affairs in his day but belonged to him exclusively 
and personally. Incidentally, he was not exactly a moral hero, as 
the story of his relations with the fifty daughters of Thespius in 
a single night shows,1 nor, if we recall the Augean stables, was he 
even genteel; he appears in general as a picture of this completely 
independent force and strength of the right and the just, for the 
actualization of which he underwent countless hardships and 
labours by his own free choice and personal caprice. True, he 
accomplished part of his deeds in the service and at the command 
of Eurystheus, but this dependence is only a purely abstract con­
nection, no completely legal and firm bond which would have 
deprived him of the power of acting independently and on his own 
account as an individual. 
The Homeric heroes are of a similar type. Of course they too 
have an overlord in common, but their bond with him is likewise 
no previously established legal relation which would have com­
pelled their subjection; of their own free will they follow Agamem­
non who is no monarch in the modern sense of the word; and so 
every hero proffers his own advice, the enraged Achilles asserts his 
independence by separating himself from his allegiance, and, in 
general, every one of them comes and goes, fights and rests, just 
as he pleases. In like independence, not bound to any order settled 
once and for all, not as mere tiny constituents of such an order, 
there appear the heroes of the older Arabic poetry, and even the 
Shahnamehz of Firdausi provides us with similar characters. In the 
Christian west, feudalism and chivalry are the basis for free groups 
of heroes and self-reliant individuals. Of this sort are the heroes of 
the Round Table and the circle of heroes of which Charlemagne 
was the centre.3 Like Agamemnon, Charlemagne was surrounded 
by free heroic characters, and therefore he was equally powerless 
to hold them together, because he had continually to draw his 
vassals into council, and he is forced to be a spectator while they 
follow their own passions all the same; and swagger as he may, like 
1 Pausanias, ix. 27, 5 (where Thestius is the father's name). But Apollodorus 
(ii. 4, 10) says that Thespius provided a different daughter for each of fifty 
nights. 
• The Book of Kings. Firdausi = Abu! Karim Mansur, c. 940-rozo. Hegel 
used the translation by J. von Gorres (see Ww., Glockner edn., xx, p. 437). 
J Cf. section on the Romantic Epic in Part I II below. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
187 
Jupiter on Olympus, they can leave him and his undertakings in 
the lurch and go off on adventures of their own. 
Further, the complete exemplar of this sort of thing we find in 
the Cid.1 He too is a partner in a group, an adherent of a king, and 
has to perform his duties as a vassal; but over against this bond 
there stands the law of honour as the dominating mood of his 
individual personality, and the Castilian [the Cid] fights for its 
untarnished lustre, dignity, and fame. And so here too only with 
the counsel and assent of his vassals can the king pronounce judge­
ment, make decisions, or wage war; if they object, they do not 
fight in his service and they do not submit to a majority of votes at 
all; each stands there by himself and draws from his own resources 
his will and his power to act. A similar brilliant picture of indepen­
dent self-reliance is afforded by the Saracen heroes who reveal 
themselves to us in almost a more inflexible form. Even Reynard 
the Fox2 brings to life for us a glimpse of a similar state of affairs. 
The lion is indeed lord and king, but the wolf and the bear, etc., 
likewise sit in council with him; Reynard and the others carry on as 
they like; if there is an outcry the rascal gets out of it by cunning 
and lying, or manages to find some particular interest of the king 
and queen, and puts it to his own use because he is clever enough 
to wheedle his masters into whatsoever he likes. 
(/1{3) But just as, in the Heroic Age, the subject remains directly 
connected with his entire willing, acting, and achieving, so he also 
takes undivided responsibility for whatever consequences arise 
from his actions. On the other hand, when we act or judge actions, 
we insist that we can only impute an action to an individual if he 
has known and recognized the nature of his action and the circum­
stances in which it has been done. If the actual circumstances are 
of a different kind, and the objective sphere of his action has 
characteristics different from those present to the mind of the 
agent, a man nowadays does not accept responsibility for the whole 
range of what he has done; he repudiates that part of his act which, 
through ignorance or misconstruction of the circumstances, has 
turned out differently from what he had willed, and he enters to 
his own account only what he knew, and, on the strength of this 
1 i.e. Rodrigo Diaz, the 'Lord Conqueror', Spanish national hero. He died in 
1099, and his career has been a favourite literary theme since the twelfth century. 
2 In 1794 Goethe published Reineke Fuchs, his version of thirteenth-century 
fables, and it is to this that Hegel is referring. 

r88 
I. THE I D EA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
knowledge, what he did on purpose and intentionally. But the 
heroic character does not make this distinction ; instead he is 
answerable for the entirety of his act with his whole personality. 
Oedipus, for example, on his way to the oracle, meets a man, 
quarrels with him, and kills him. In the days of quarrels like this, 
his act was no crime; the man had shown violence against him. 
But the man was his father. Oedipus marries a queen ; the wife is 
his mother. In ignorance he has contracted an incestuous marriage. 
Yet he passes judgement on himself for the whole of these crimes 
and punishes himself as guilty of parricide and incest, although 
killing his father and mounting the marriage bed with his mother 
was neither within his knowledge nor his intention. The indepen­
dent solidity and totality of the heroic character repudiates any 
division of guilt and knows nothing of this opposition between 
subjective intentions and the objective deed and its consequences, 
while nowadays, owing to the complexity and ramification of 
action, everyone has recourse to everyone else and shuffles guilt 
off himself so far as possible. Our view in this matter is more 
moral, in that in the moral sphere the subjective aspect, i.e. know­
ledge of the circumstances, conviction of the good, and the inner 
intention, constitute for us a chief element in the action. But in the 
Heroic Age, in which the individual is essentially a unity, and the 
objective action, by being his own production, is and remains his 
own, the subject claims that what has been done, has been entirely 
done by him alone and that what has happened is completely his 
own responsibility. 
Neither does the heroic individual separate himself from the 
ethical whole to which he belongs; on the contrary, he has a 
consciousness of himself only as in substantial unity with this 
whole. We, on the other hand, according to our views nowadays, 
separate ourselves, as persons with our personal aims and relation­
ships, from the aims of such a community ; the individual does 
what he does as a person, actuated explicitly by his personality, 
and thus is answerable only for his own action, but not for the 
doings of the substantial whole to which he belongs. Therefore we 
make a distinction, for example, between person and family. Of 
such a separation the Heroic Age knows nothing. There the guilt 
of the ancestor descends to his posterity, and a whole generation 
suffers on account of the original criminal ; the fate of guilt and 
transgression is continually inherited. In our eyes this condemna-

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
189 
tion appears to be unjust by being an irrational submission to a 
blind destiny. Just as, with us, the deeds of ancestors do not en­
noble their sons and posterity, so the crimes and punishments of 
our forebears do not dishonour their descendants and still less can 
they besmirch their private character; indeed, according to our 
attitude today, even the confiscation of a family's property is 
a punishment transgressing the principle of deeper subjective 
freedom. But in the plastic totality of antiquity the individual is not 
isolated in himself; he is a member of his family, his clan. There­
fore the character, action, and fate of the family is every member's 
own affair, and, far from repudiating the deeds and fate of his 
forebears, each member on the contrary voluntarily adopts them 
as his own; they live in him, and so he is what his fathers were, 
suffered, or transgressed. In our view this counts as a hardship, 
but this [modern] responsibility for oneself alone and the greater 
subjective independence thus gained is, from another point of 
view, only the abstract independence of the person, whereas the 
heroic individual is more ideal because he is not content with his 
inherent formal unity and infinity but remains united in steadfast 
immediate identity with the whole substantiality of the spiritual 
relations which he is bringing into living actuality. In that identity 
the substantial is immediately individual and therefore the indivi­
dual is in himself substantial. 
(yy) Now here we can find at once a reason why the ideal 
artistic figures are transferred to the age of myths, or, in general, 
to the bygone days of the past, as the best ground for their actualiza­
tion. I mean that if the artistic subjects are drawn from the present, 
then their own special form, as it actually confronts us, is firmly 
fixed in our minds in all its aspects, and thus the changes in it, which 
the poet cannot renounce, easily acquire the look of something 
purely manufactured and premeditated. The past, on the other 
hand, belongs only to memory, and memory automatically suc­
ceeds in clothing characters, events, and actions in the garment of 
universality, whereby the particular external and accidental details 
are obscured. To the actual existence of an action or a character 
there belong many insignificant interposing circumstances and 
conditions, manifold single happenings and deeds, while in 
memory's picture all these casual details are obliterated. In this 
liberation from the accidents of the external world the artist in his 
mode of artistic composition has a freer hand with the particular 

1 90 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ART ISTIC B E AUTY 
and individual features if the deeds, histories, and characters 
belong to ancient times. True, he also has historical recollections 
from which he must elaborate his topic into the shape of the 
universal ; but the picture of the past, as has been said already, 
has, as a picture, the advantage of greater universality, while the 
manifold threads which tie up conditions and relations with their 
whole environment of finitude provide his hand · at once with the 
means and the checks to prevent the obliteration of the individuality 
required by the work of art. In this way, looked at more closely, 
an Heroic Age retains the advantage over a later and more civilized 
state of affairs, in that the separate character and the individual 
as such does not yet in those days find the substantial, the moral, 
the right, contrasted with himself as necessitated by law, and 
thus far the poet is immediately confronted with what the Ideal 
demands. 
Shakespeare, for example, has drawn much material for his 
tragedies out of chronicles or old romances which tell of a state of 
affairs not yet unfolded into a completely established organization, 
but where the life of the individual in his decision and achieve­
ment is still predominant and remains the determining factor. 
Shakespeare's strictly historical dramas, on the other hand, have, 
as a chief ingredient, purely external historical matter and so they 
are further away from the ideal mode of representation, although 
even here the situations and actions are borne and promoted by 
the harsh independence and self-will of the characters. It is true 
that their independence remains again only a mostly formal self­
reliance, whereas in the independence of the heroic characters 
what must be an essential keynote is the content too which they 
have made it their aim to actualize. 
This last point, after all, in relation to the general ground of 
the Ideal, refutes the idea that the Idyllic is especially suited to 
the Ideal because in the idyllic situation the cleavage between the 
legal and necessary, on the one hand, and living individuality on 
the other, is entirely absent. But however simple and primitive such 
idyllic situations may be, and however far removed they may 
intentionally be kept from the developed prose of spiritual exis­
tence, still their very simplicity has from another point of view too 
little interest, so far as their real content is concerned, for them to 
be able to count as the most proper ground and basis of the Ideal. 
For this ground lacks the most important motifs of the heroic 

THE BEAU TY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
191 
character, i.e. country, morality, family, etc., and their develop­
ment; instead, the whole kernel of its material is altogether con­
fined to the loss of a sheep or a girl's falling in love. So the idyllic 
counts often enough only as a refuge and diversion of the heart, 
with which is conjoined, as in Gessner, 1 for example, a mawkish­
nes and sentimental flabbiness. Idyllic situations at the present 
day, furthermore, have the defect that this simplicity, this domestic 
and rural element, in the feeling of love, or the comfort of a good 
coffee in the open air, etc., is likewise of negligible interest, since 
this country-parson life, etc., is just abstracted from all further 
connection with deeper entanglements in worthier and richer 
aims and circumstances. Therefore in this connection too we 
must marvel at the genius of Goethe (who, in Hermann und 
Dorothea,z concentrates himself on a sphere like this) because he 
picks out of the life of the present a narrowly enclosed particular 
experience, yet at the same time, as the background and atmosphere 
in which this circle moves, he reveals the great interests of the 
French Revolution and his own country, and brings this quite 
restricted material into relation with the widest and most potent 
world events. 
But in general, there are not excluded from the Ideal the evil 
and the bad, war, battles, revenge; they were often the substance 
and ground of the heroic and mythical age, a substance that 
appeared in a harsher and wilder form the further those times 
were removed from a thoroughly developed legal and ethical 
order. In the adventures of chivalry, for example, in which the 
knights-errant moved about to redress evils and wrongs, the 
heroes often enough were themselves guilty of truculence and 
unruliness, and in a similar way the religious heroism of the 
martyrs presupposes a similar condition of barbarity and savagery. 
Yet, on the whole, the Christian ideal, which has its place in the 
inwardness and depth of our inner being, is more indifferent to 
external circumstances. 
Now just as the more ideal state of the world corresponds 
especially with certain specific periods, so for the personalities 
which art chooses to bring on the scene there it selects especially 
1 Swiss author and painter, I7J0-88. His 'idyllic prose pastorals' had an 
extraordinary vogue in their day. 
• For a good account and criticism of this 'idyllic epic' (1796-7), which has 
as its subject French emigres in a village on the right bank of the Rhine, see, e.g., 
G. H. Lewes, Life and Works of Goethe (2nd edn., 1864), book vi, ch. 4· 

192 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ARTISTIC BEAUT Y  
one specific class, the class of Princes. And it does so not, as may 
be supposed, because it is aristocratic and loves the gentry, but 
because of the perfect freedom of will and production which is 
realized in the idea of royalty. So we see in Greek tragedy, for 
example, the chorus as the general background on which the 
specific action is to take place, a background, void of individuality, 
for the dispositions, ideas, and modes of feeling of the characters. 
Then out of this background there arise the individual characters 
who play an active role, and they belong to the rulers of the people, 
the royal families. On the other hand, in the figures drawn from 
the lower classes, if they undertake to act within their restricted 
circumstances, what we see is subjection everywhere; for in 
civilized states indeed they are as a matter of fact in every way 
dependent, straitened, and, with their passions and interests, fall 
continually under the pressure and compulsion of the necessity 
outside them. For behind them stands the invincible might of the 
civil order against which they cannot hold their own, and they 
remain subject even to the whim of their superiors where these 
have legal authority. On this restriction by existing circumstances 
all independence is wrecked. Therefore the situations and characters 
drawn from these spheres are more appropriate for comedy and 
the comical in general. For, in comedy, individuals have the right 
to spread themselves however they wish and can. In their willing 
and fancying and in their idea of themselves, they may claim an 
independence which is immediately annihilated by themselves and 
by their inner and outer dependence. But, above all, this assumed 
self-reliance founders on external conditions and the distorted 
attitude of individuals to them. The power of these conditions is 
on a totally different level for the lower classes from what it is for 
rulers and princes. On the other hand, Don Cesar in Schiller's 
Braut von Messina [1803] can rightly exclaim: 'There is no higher 
judge over me', and when he is to be punished, he must pronounce 
judgement on himself and execute it. For he is not subject to any 
external necessity of right and law, and even in respect of punish­
ment he is dependent on himself alone.1 True, Shakespeare's 
characters do not all belong to the princely class and remain 
partly on historical and no longer on mythical ground, but they 
are therefore transferred to the times of the civil wars in which the 
' Act IV, II. 2636 ff. He has killed his brother and executes judgement on 
himself by suicide. 

THE B EAUTY O F  ART O R  THE I DEAL 
193 
bonds of law and order are relaxed or broken, and therefore they 
acquire again the required independence and self-reliance. 
(b) Prosaic States of Affairs in the Present 
If we look now at all these points, made above, in relation to the 
state of affairs in the world of today, with its civilized, legal, moral, 
and political conditions, we see that nowadays the scope for ideal 
configuration is only of a very limited kind. For the regions in 
which free scope is left for the independence of particular decisions 
are1 small in number and range. A father's care of his household, 
and his honesty, the ideals of decent men and good women, are the 
chief material here, where their willing and acting is restricted to 
spheres in which the human being, as an individual subject, still 
operates freely, i.e. is what he is, and does what he does, in ac­
cordance with his individual choice. Yet even in these ideals there 
is a deficiency of deeper content and so the really most important 
thing remains only the subjective side, the disposition. The more 
objective content is given by the otherwise already existing fixed 
circumstances, and so what must remain the most essential interest 
is the way and manner in which this content appears in indi­
viduals and their inner subjective life, their morality, etc. On the 
other hand, it would be inappropriate to set up, for our time too, 
ideal figures, e.g. of judges or monarchs. If an administrator of 
justice behaves and acts as his office and duty demands, he is 
simply carrying out the specific responsibility prescribed to him 
by jus and lex in accordance with the juridical order. Whatever 
else such public officials then introduce from their own personality 
-clemency in behaviour, sagacity, etc.-is not the chief thing 
and the substance of the matter, but something incidental and 
rather indifferent. So too, monarchs in our day, unlike the heroes 
of the mythical ages, are no longer the concrete heads of the whole, 
but a more or less abstract centre of institutions already inde­
pendently developed and established by law and the constitution. 
The most important acts of government the monarchs of our 
time have renounced; they no longer pronounce judgement them­
selves; finance, civil organization and security, is no longer their 
special business; war and peace are determined by general inter­
national relations which no longer are within their single power or 
1 ist must be an error for sind. 

194 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTISTIC B EAUTY 
conducted by them as individuals. And, even if in all these matters 
the final, supreme, decision is theirs, still what is really decreed is 
not so much a matter of their personal will; it has already been 
settled independently, so that the supremacy of the monarch's own 
subjective will in respect of universal and public affairs is only 
of a formal kind. 1 Likewise, today even a General or a Field 
Marshal has indeed great power; the most essential ends and 
interests are put into his hands, and his discretion, courage, 
determination, and spirit have to decide the most important 
matters; but still what is to be ascribed to his subjective character 
as his own personal share in this decision is only small in scope. 
For one thing, the ends are given to him and have their origin, 
not in his own individual self, but in matters outside the province 
of his power. For another thing, he does not by himself create the 
means for achieving these ends; on the contrary, they are provided 
for him ; they are not subject to him or at his beck and call as a 
person; their position is quite different from that accruing to the 
personality of this military individual. 
To sum up, then, in the world of today the individual subject 
may of course act of himself in this or that matter, but still every 
individual, wherever he may twist or turn, belongs to an established 
social order and does not appear himself as the independent, total, 
and at the same time individual living embodiment of this society, 
but only as a restricted member of it. He acts, therefore, also as 
only involved in it, and interest in such a figure, like the content of 
its aims and activity, is unendingly particular.2 For, at the end of 
the day, this interest is always confined to seeing what happens 
to this individual, whether he happily achieves his aim, what 
hindrances and obstacles he encounters, what accidental or neces­
sary complications obstruct or occasion the outcome, etc. And 
even if now too the modern person is in his own eyes, as subject, 
infinite in his heart and character, and if right, law, moral prin­
ciples, etc., do appear in his acting and suffering, still the existence 
of the right in this individual is just as restricted as the individual 
himself; and he is not, as he was in the Heroic Age proper, the 
embodiment of the right, the moral, and the legal as such. The 
individual is now no longer the vehicle and sole actualization of 
these powers as was the case in the Heroic Age. 
1 Cf. Philosophy of Right, § 280, Addition. 
• i.e. not universal but only trivial. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
195 
(c) The Reconstitution of Individual Independence 
But the interest in and need for such an actual individual totality 
and living independence we will not and cannot sacrifice, however 
much we may recognize as salutary and rational the essential 
character and development of the institutions in civilized civil and 
political life. In this connection we can marvel at the youthful 
poetic genius of Schiller and Goethe, at their attempt to win back 
again within the circumstances existing in modern times the lost 
independence of the [heroic] figures. But how do we see Schiller 
carrying out this attempt in his earliest works ? Only by a revolt 
against the whole of civil society itself. Karl Moor, 1 injured by the 
existing order and by those who misused their authority in it, 
leaves the sphere of legality, and, having the audacity to burst the 
bonds that constrain him, and so creating for and by himself a new 
heroic situation, he makes himself the restorer of right and the 
independent avenger of wrong, injury, and oppression. Yet how 
tiny and isolated must this private revenge turn out to be, owing 
to the insufficiency of the requisite means, and, on the other hand, 
it can only lead to crime, for it incorporates the wrong which it 
intends to destroy. For Karl Moor this is a misfortune, a failure, 
and, even if this is tragic, it is still only boys who can be seduced 
by this robber ideal. So too the individuals in Kabale und Liebe'l 
are tormented by oppressive and vexatious circumstances with 
their tiny details and passions, and only in Fiesco and Don CarlosJ 
do the chief characters appear nobler, in that they make their 
own a more substantial matter, the liberation of their country or 
the freedom of religious conviction, and so, because of their aims, 
became heroes. In a higher way still, Wallenstein4 puts himself at 
the head of his army to become the regulator of the political situa­
tion. The power of this situation on which even his own means, the 
army, is dependent, he knows perfectly well, and therefore is for 
a long time reduced to swithering between will and duty. Scarcely 
had he made his decision before he saw the means, of which he 
thought he was sure, slipping through his fingers, and his tool 
broken. For what in the last resort is binding on the captains and 
the generals is not gratitude for what he has done to deserve their 
thanks owing to their appointment and promotion, nor his fame 
I rn The Robbers, Schiller's first play, I78I. 
' Intrigue and Love, 1 784. 
3 1 783, 1787 respectively. 
4 Schiller's three dramas on Wallenstein were issued in 1799· 

196 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
as commander in the field, but their duty to the universally 
recognized power and government, the oath they have sworn to 
the monarch of the state, the Emperor of Austria. 1 Thus in the end 
he finds himself alone; he is not so much fought and conquered 
by an opposing external power as denuded of all means of achiev­
ing his end. Forsaken by the army, he is lost. 
A similar, even if opposite, starting-point Goethe takes in 
Gotz.2 The time of Gotz and Franz von Sickingen is the interesting 
period in which chivalry with the independence of noble indivi­
duals was passing away before a newly arising objective order and 
legal system. Goethe's great insight is revealed by his choosing as 
his first subject this contact and collision between the medieval 
heroic age and the legality of modern life. For Gotz and Sickingen 
are still heroes who, with their personality, their courage, and their 
upright, straightforward good sense, propose to regulate the states 
of affairs in their narrower or wider scope by their own independent 
efforts; but the new order of things brings Gotz himself into wrong 
and destroys him. For chivalry and the feudal system in the Middle 
Ages are the only proper ground for this sort of independence. 
Now, however, the legal order has been more completely developed 
in its prosaic form and has become the predominant authority, and 
thus the adventurous independence of knights-errant is out of 
relation to the modern world and if it still proposes to maintain 
itself as the sole legitimacy and as the righter of wrong and helper 
of the oppressed in the sense that chivalry did, then it falls into 
the ridiculousness of which Cervantes gave us such a spectacle in 
his Don Quixote. 
But by alluding to such an opposition between different world 
views and to action within this clash, we have already touched on 
what we have indicated above in general terms as the more detailed 
determinacy and differentiation of the general state of world affairs, 
i.e. as the situation as such. 
2. The Situation 
The ideal world situation which, in distinction from prosaic 
actuality, art is called upon to present, constitutes, in accordance 
1 So they murdered \Vallenstein. 
2 Goethe wrote Giitz von Berlichingen in 1771, but he rewrote it and did not 
publish it until 1773. Giitz lived from 1480 to 1 56:l, and Sickingen, who appears 
in the play, from 1481 to I 5:lJ. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
197 
with the foregoing discussion, only spiritual existence in general 
and therefore only the possibility of individual configuration, but 
not this configuration itself. Consequently what we had before us 
just now was only the general basis and ground on which the living 
individuals of art can appear. True, it is impregnated with indivi­
duality and rests on the independence of that, but as a universal 
situation it does not yet display the active movement of individuals 
in their living agency, just as the temple which art erects is not 
yet the individual representation of the god himself but contains 
only the germ for it. Therefore we have to regard that world 
situation primarily as something still unmoved in itself, as a 
harmony of the powers ruling it, and thus far as a substantial 
uniformly valid existence which yet cannot be understood at all 
as a so-called state of innocence. For it is a state in which in its 
fullness and power of ethical life the monster of disunion still only 
slumbered, because for our examination only the aspect of its 
substantial unity exhibited itself, and therefore too individuality 
was present only in its universal guise in which, instead of asserting 
its determinacy, it disappears again without trace and without 
essential hindrance. But, for individuality, determinacy is indis­
pensable, and if the Ideal is to confront us as a determinate shape, 
it is necessary for it not to remain simply in its universality; it 
must express the universal in a particular way and thereby alone 
give it existence and appearance. In this connection, art has thus 
not at all to sketch only a universal world situation but has to 
proceed out of this vague idea to pictures of definite characters and 
actions. 
So · far as individuals are concerned, the general situation is 
therefore indeed the stage presented to them, but it opens out into 
specialized situations, and, with this particularization, into colli­
sions and complications which give the individuals opportunities 
to show what they are and display themselves as possessed of 
a determinate shape. On the other hand, so far as the world­
situation is concerned, this self-revelation of individuals appears 
indeed as the development of that situation's universality into 
a living particularization and individualization, but to a determi­
nate condition in which at the same time the universal powers 
maintain themselves as in control. For the determinate Ideal, 
considered in its essential aspect, has the eternal world-ruling 
powers for its substantial content. Yet the mode of existence which 

1 98 
I. THE I DE A  OF ARTISTIC BEAU TY 
can be gained in the form of mere 'being in a state' is unworthy of 
this content. Being in a 'state', I mean, has, for one thing, habit as 
its form, but habit does not correspond with the spiritual self­
conscious nature of these deepest interests; for another thing, it 
was the arbitrariness and caprice of individuals through whose 
independent activity we were to see these interests come to life; 
but once again neither are inessential accident and caprice corres­
pondent to the substantial universality which constitutes the very 
nature of what is inherently genuine. We have therefore to look for 
both a more specific and also a more worthy artistic manifestation 
for the concrete content of the Ideal. 
This new configuration the universal powers can acquire in their 
existence only because they appear in their essential distinction and 
movement in general, and, more especially, in their opposition to 
one another. Now in the particularity into which the universal 
passes over in this way, there are two factors to be noticed: (i) the 
substance as a group of universal powers through the particulariza­
tion of which the substance is divided into its independent parts; 
(ii) the individuals who come on the scene as the activating realiza­
tion of these powers and provide them with an individual shape. 
But the difference and opposition into which thereby the 
primarily inner harmonious world-situation is placed with its 
individuals is-considered in relation to this world situation-the 
emergence of the essential content of that situation; while, 
conversely, the substantial universal, inherent in it, advances to 
particularity and individuality because this universal brings itself 
into existence, since while it does give itself the appearance of 
accident, disunion, and division, it wipes this appearance out again 
just because it is itself that appears in it. 
But, further, the separation of these powers and their self­
actualization in individuals can occur only under specific circum­
stances and states of affairs, under which and as which their entire 
manifestation reaches existence, or which are the stimulus to this 
actualization. Taken by themselves, such circumstances are without 
interest, and they acquire their meaning only in their relation to 
human beings through whose self-consciousness the content of 
those spiritual powers is to be activated. On this account the ex­
ternal circumstances are to be viewed essentially only in this rela­
tion, for they gain importance only through what they are for the 
spirit, namely through the way they are comprehended by indivi-

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE I DEAL 
199 
duals ; thereby they provide the opportunity for bringing into 
existence the inner spiritual need, the aims, dispositions, and, in 
general, the specific essence of individuals in their various forms. 
AB this closer opportunity, the specific circumstances and states of 
affairs form the situation which is the more particular presupposi­
tion for the proper self-expression and activation of everything at 
first still ·lying hidden and undeveloped in the general world 
situation. Therefore, before treating of action proper we must first 
settle the real nature of the situation. 
( The situation in general is (ex) the state of affairs as such, 
W
articularized so as to have a determinate character, and, in this 
eterminacy, it is (ft) at the same time the stimulus for the specific 
xpression of the content which has to be revealed in existence by 
eans of artistic representation. From this latter point of view 
'especially, the situation affords a wide field for treatment by art, 
since from time immemorial the most important part of art has 
been the discovery of interesting situations, i.e. those that make 
visible the profound and important interests and the true content 
of spirit. In this connection, our demands on the different arts are 
different: sculpture, for example, in respect of the inner variety 
ref situations, is restricted ; painting and music have a wider and 
\ rreer scope ; but poetry is the most inexhaustible. 
But since here we are not yet treading the ground of the par­
ticular arts, we have at this stage to draw attention only to the 
most general points and we can subdivide them on the following 
scale : 
(a) Before the situation has developed to determinacy in itself, 
it still retains the form of universality, and therefore of indetermi­
nacy, so that at first we have before us the situation, as it were, of 
absence of situation. For the form of indeterminacy is itself only 
one form contrasted with another, i.e. determinacy, and thus 
evinces itself as a one-sidedness and a determinacy. 
(b) But the situation emerges from this universality into par­
ticularization and enters a proper determinacy which yet at first is 
harmless, for it still provides no opportunity for opposition and its 
necessary resolution. 
(c) Finally, division and its determinacy constitute the essence 
of the situation, which therefore becomes a collision leading to 
reactions, and forming in this respect our starting-point and the 
transition to action proper. 

zoo 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTISTIC BEA U TY 
For the situation as such is the middle stage between the univer­
sal, inherently unmoved, state of the world and the concrete action, 
inherently opened out into action and reaction, on which account 
the situation has to display in itself the character of both extremes 
and lead us from one to the other. 
(a) Absence of Situation 
The form for the general state of the world, as the Ideal of art 
is to bring it into appearance, is both individual and inherently 
essential independence. Now independence, regarded as such and 
explicitly established, appears to us prima facie as nothing but 
secure resting on its own resources in motionless tranquillity. 
Therefore the specific figure does not issue from itself into relation 
with something else; it remains the inner and outer self-sufficiency 
of unity with itself. This affords the absence of situation in which 
we see, for example, old temple sculptures at the beginnings of 
art. Their character of profound impassive seriousness, of the 
most peaceful, even motionless but grandiose, sublimity, has been 
imitated in later times too in a similar fashion. The Egyptian and 
the oldest Greek sculpture, for example, affords a vision of this 
kind of absence of situation. Further, in Christian visual art, God 
the Father, or Christ, is portrayed in a similar way, especially in 
busts. As after all, in general, the fixed substantiality of the Divine, 
apprehended as a specific particular god or as the inherently 
absolute personality, is suited to such a mode of representation, 
although medieval pictures too betray a similar lack of specific 
situations on which the character of the individual could be 
stamped, and they attempt only to express the entirety of the 
specific character in its inflexibility. 
(b) The Specific Situation in its Harmlessness 
But since the situation as such lies in the field of determinacy, 
the second thing is departure from this stillness and blessed 
tranquillity or from the exclusive severity and power of personal 
independence. The situationless figures, unmoved therefore within 
and without, have to be set in motion and to give up their bare 
simplicity. But the next advance to a more special manifestation in 
a particular expression is the situation, specific indeed, but not yet 
essentially differentiated in itself or pregnant with collisions. 
This first individualized expression remains therefore of such 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
zor 
a kind that it has no further sequel, for it does not set itself in 
hostile opposition to something else and therefore cannot call up 
any reaction; it is finished and perfect in itself on the strength of 
its own naivete. To this sort of thing there belong those situations 
which on the whole are to be considered as play, in so far as 
nothing is presented or done in them which has any real serious­
ness in it; for seriousness in acting or doing springs in general only 
from oppositions and contradictions which press onwards to the 
cancellation and conquest of one side or the other. Therefore 
these situations are neither themselves actions nor do they provide 
the stimulating occasion for action; on the contrary they are partly 
specific but inherently quite simple states of affairs, and partly 
a deed without any inherently essential and serious aim which may 
proceed from conflicts or could lead to them. 
(£X) The first point in this connection is the transition from the 
tranquillity of absence of situation to movement and expression, 
whether as purely mechanical movement or as the original arousing 
and satisfaction of some inner need. While the Egyptians, for 
example, in their sculptures represented the gods with legs closed 
together, unmoved head, and tightly closed arms, the Greeks 
release the arms and legs from the body and give to the body 
a walking position and, in general, one moved in many ways. 
Repose, sitting, a tranquil gaze, are simple situations like this in 
which the Greeks, for example, apprehend their gods-situations 
which do give a determinate appearance to the independent divine 
shape, yet one which does not enter into further relations and 
oppositions, but remains self-enclosed and has its warrant in itself. 
Situations of this simplest kind belong principally to sculpture, 
and the Greeks above all have been inexhaustible in inventing such 
naive situations. Here too they display their great insight, for 
precisely through the. insignificance of the specific situation the 
loftiness and independence of their ideal figures is all the more 
marked, and, through the harmlessness and unimportance of what 
is done or left undone, this insignificance brings all the nearer to 
our vision the blessed peaceful stillness and immutability of the 
eternal gods. In that case the situation indicates the particular 
character of a god or hero only in general, without placing him in 
relation to other gods, still less into a hostile connection and 
dissension with them. 
(/3) The situation goes further towards determinacy when it 

2o2 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTISTIC BEA U TY 
indicates a particular end, the realization of which is complete in 
itself, or some deed which is related to something else and ex­
presses the inherently independent content within such a deter­
minate state of affairs. Even here we have expressions in which the 
tranquillity and serene blessedness of the figures is untroubled but 
which themselves appear only as a consequence and a specific 
mode of this serenity. In such devices too the Greeks were 
extremely ingenious and rich. It is part of the naivete of these 
situations that the activity they contain does not appear simply as 
the beginning of a deed out of which further complications and 
oppositions would have to arise; on the contrary, the whole deter­
minate situation is manifestly complete and finished in this activity. 
In this way, for example, we interpret the situation of the Belvedere 
Apollo:' he is conscious of victory after slaying the serpent Python 
with his arrow, and strides forward in wrathful majesty. This 
situation no longer has the grandiose simplicity of the earlier 
Greek sculpture which revealed the tranquillity and innocence of 
the gods by means of less significant expressions: instead we have, 
for example, Venus arising from the bath,Z conscious of her power, 
quietly looking into the distance; fauns3 and satyrs in playful 
situations which, as situations, neither are meant nor wish to be 
anything beyond, e.g. the satyr who holds the young Bacchus in 
his arms and handles the child ̾ith laughter and infinite sweetness 
and grace ;• Eros in the most varied similar naive activitiess-all 
these are examples of this kind of situation. 
On the other hand, if the deed becomes more concrete, such 
a more complicated situation is less appropriate for the sculptural 
representation of the Greek gods, at least as independent powers, 
because in that case the pure universality of the individual god 
' Well reproduced in, e.g., G. Richter, Handbook of Greek Art (London, 1 959), 
p. 146. 
2 Possibly Praxiteles, Aphrodite in Cnidos (G. Rodenwaldt, DU Kunst der 
Antike (Berlin, 1927), p. 394). 
3 See, e.g., ibid., p. 484 . 
.. Hegel refers four times to this figure. It was a favourite subject in antiquity. 
There are several replicas of what was probably an original fourth -century bron2e 
by Lysippus. Hegel's later references show that he was referring to a figure in 
Munich. As No. 238 it is described and discussed by A. Furtwangler in his 
Beschreibung der Glyptothek .
•
.
 zu Munchen, 1900. Its head is an eighteenth- or 
early nineteenth-century copy of another replica in the Vatican. Hegel did not 
know this, but his remarks, here and later, apply reasonably well to the Vatican 
replica also. 
5 See, e.g., Rodenwaldt, op. cit., p. 481, and G. Richter, op. cit., p. 165. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
203 
cannot shine through the accumulated detail of his specific deed 
to the same extent. For example, the Mercury of Pigalle,1 set up 
[in 1760] in Sans Souci [by Frederick the Great] as a gift of Louis 
XV, is just fixing on his winged sandals. This is an entirely harm­
less occupation. On the other hand, Thorwaldsen'sz Mercury has 
a situation almost too complicated for sculpture: i.e. while going 
on playing his flute, Mercury watches Marsyas, looking at him 
craftily and seeking a chance to kill him, while maliciously he 
snatches at the dagger he has concealed. Conversely, to mention 
still another modern work of art, Rudolf Schadow's Girl binding on 
her Sanda/sJ is of course caught in the same simple occupation as 
Mercury's, but here the harmlessness has not the like interest 
linked with it as when a god is represented in such naivete. When 
a girl fastens her sandals, or spins, there is nothing revealed but 
precisely this fastening or spinning, and this in itself is meaning­
less and unimportant. 
(y) Now, thirdly, the implication of the foregoing is that the 
specific situation as such can be treated as a merely external more 
or less definite stimulus which provides no more than the occasion 
for further expressions more closely or loosely connected with it. 
Many lyric poems, for example, have such an occasional situation. 
A particular mood and feeling is a situation which can be known 
and grasped poetically, and which, in relation too to external 
circumstances, festivals, victories, etc., incites to this or that more 
comprehensive or more restricted expression and configuration of 
feelings and ideas. In the highest sense of the word, Pindar's Odes, 
for example, are such pieces d' occasion. Goethe too has taken many 
lyrical situations of this kind as material; indeed in a wider sense 
we could even describe his Werther [1774] as a poetic piece 
d'occasion, since through Werther Goethe has converted into a 
work of art his own inner distraction and torment of heart, the 
experiences of his own breast; just as any lyric poet disburdens his 
heart and expresses what he is affected by in his personal life. 
Thereby what at first is firmly retained only inwardly is released 
and becomes an external object from which the man has freed 
1 Now in the Louvre. J. B. Pigalle, 1714-Ss. 
2 A. B. Thorwaldsen, I768-1844. This marble statue (1818) is in the Thor­
waldsen Museum in Copenhagen. Mercury is lulling Argus to sleep by playing 
his flute, and duly kills him. Hegel or Hotho confuses this with the story of 
Apollo and Marsyas. 
3 R. Schadow, 1786-x822. This marble starue (1817) is in Munich. 
8243715 
H 

204 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
himself, as tears make it easier when grief weeps itself out. Goethe 
says himself1 that by writing Werther he was freed from the inner 
affliction and distress which he sketches. But the situation repre­
sented here does not belong to this stage because it is developed 
and comprises the most profound oppositions. 
Now in such lyric situations there may of course be obvious 
some objective state of affairs and an activity in relation to the 
external world, but, all the same, the mentality as such, in its 
inner mood, may withdraw into itself from all external connection 
whatever and take its starting-point from the inwardness of its 
states and feelings. 
(c) Collision 
All the situations hitherto considered, are, as has already been 
touched upon, neither actions themselves nor, in general, stimuli 
to action proper. Their determinate character remains more or less 
a purely occasional state of affairs or an action insignificant in 
itself in which a substantial content is so expressed that its deter­
minate character is now revealed as a harmless play2 which cannot 
be taken seriously. The seriousness and importance of the situa­
tion in its special character can only begin when its definiteness 
comes into prominence as an essential difference and, by being in 
opposition to something else, is the basis of a collision. 
In this respect the collision has its basis in a transgression, which 
cannot remain as such but must be superseded ; it is an alteration 
of the state of affairs which was otherwise harmonious and is 
itself to be altered. Nevertheless the collision is still not an action; 
on the contrary, it contains only the beginnings of an action and its 
presuppositions, and therefore, by being merely a stimulus to 
action, it retains the character of situation. Nevertheless, the 
opposition, in which the collision is disclosed, may be the result 
of an earlier action. For example, the trilogies of Greek tragedy 
are continuations, in the sense that out of the end of the first drama 
a collision arises for the second, which demands its resolution in 
the third. 
1 Dichtung und Wahrheit, book xii (18u ff.). 
• Hegel's use of 'play' here and elsewhere is derived especially from Schiller, 
see his Aesthetic Letters, 15, especially 'With the perfect, man is merely serious, 
but with beauty he plays', and 'Man should only play with beauty, and should 
play with beauty alone'. Cf. p. 157, note 2. 

THE BEA UTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
zos 
Now since collision as such requires a solution which follows on 
the battle of opposites, a situation pregnant with collision is above 
all the subject-matter of dramatic art, the privilege of which is 
to represent beauty in its most complete and profound develop­
ment; while sculpture, for example, is in no position to give 
complete configuration to an action which reveals the great spiri­
tual powers in their conflict and reconciliation; and even painting, 
despite its wider scope, can never bring before our eyes more than 
one feature of the action. 
But these serious situations bring with them a difficulty of their 
own already present in their nature. They rest on transgressions 
and give rise to circumstances which cannot subsist but necessitate 
a transforming remedy. But the beauty of the Ideal lies precisely in 
the Ideal's undisturbed unity, tranquillity, and perfection in itself. 
Collision disturbs this harmony, and sets the Ideal, inherently 
a unity, in dissonance and opposition. Therefore, by the representa­
tion of such transgression, the Ideal is itself transgressed, and the 
task of art can lie here only, on the one hand, in preventing free 
beauty from perishing in this difference, and, on the other hand, 
in just presenting1 this disunion and its conflict, whereby out of it, 
through resolution of the conflict, harmony appears as a result, and 
in this way alone becomes conspicuous in its complete essentiality. 
But on the question of to what limit dissonance may be driven, no 
general specifications can be laid down, because in this matter each 
particular art follows its own special character. Our inner ideas, for 
example, can endure far more dissonance than immediate intuition 
can. Poetry therefore has the right to proceed, in describing the 
inner feelings, almost to the extreme torment of despair, and, in 
describing the external world, to downright ugliness. But in the 
visual arts, in painting, and still more in sculpture, the external 
shape stands there fixed and permanent without being superseded 
and without vanishing again fleetingly, like musical notes. Here it 
would be a blunder to cling to the ugly when the ugly cannot be 
resolved. Therefore to the visual arts not everything can be allowed 
which can perfectly well be permitted to dramatic poetry, since 
it lets an ugly thing appear just for a moment and then vanish 
again. 
In examining the kinds of collision in more detail we can cite at 
this stage once again only the most general considerations. 
1 i.e. on the stage, like a pageant. 

206 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTI STIC B E AUTY 
In this connection we must treat three main aspects: 
(i) collisions which arise from purely physical or natural circum­
stances in so far as these are something negative, evil, and therefore 
disturbing; 
(ii) spiritual collisions which rest on natural bases, which, 
although inherently positive, still bear in themselves for the spirit 
the possibility of differences and oppositions; 
(iii) disunions which have their ground in spiritual differences 
and which alone are entitled to appear as the truly interesting 
oppositions, because they proceed from man's own act. 
(a:) As for conflicts of the first kind, they can count only as mere 
occasions for action, because here it is only external nature with 
its illnesses and other evils and infirmities which produces circum­
stances disturbing the original harmony of life and with differences 
as a consequence. In and by themselves such collisions are void 
of interest and are given a place in art only on account of the dis­
unions which may develop out of a natural misfortune as its con­
sequence. So, for example, in the Alcestis of Euripides, which 
provided the material too for Gluck's Alceste, 1 the foundation is 
the illness of Admetus. The illness as such is no material for 
genuine art, and it becomes so, even in Euripides, only owing to 
the individuals for whom this misfortune leads to a further colli­
sion. The oracle proclaims: Admetus must die unless a substitute 
is devoted to the underworld. Alcestis submits to this sacrifice and 
resolves to die in order to avert death from her husband, the 
father of her children, the King. In the Philoctetes of Sophocles 
too, it is a physical evil which is the basis of the collision. In their 
voyage to Troy the Greeks put the patient ashore on Lemnos 
because of his wounded foot, the result of a snake-bite at Chrysa. 
Here the physical misfortune is likewise only the most external 
point of connection and occasion for a further collision. For, 
according to the oracle, Troy is to fall only when the arrows of 
Hercules are in the hands of the besiegers. Philoctetes refuses to 
give them up because he has had to endure the wrong of being 
marooned for nine years full of agony. Now this refusal, like the 
wrong of being marooned in which it originated, could have been 
brought about in all sorts of other ways, and the real interest lies 
not in the illness and its physical distress but in the conflict which 
arises as a result of Philoctetes' decision not to give up the arrows. 
1 C. W. von Gluck, 1714-87. This opera was first produced in 1767. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE I DEAL 
207 
The position is similar with the plague in the Greek camp before 
Troy, which, apart from being already represented as a conse­
quence of earlier transgressions, is also represented as punish­
ment. In general, after all, it pertains to epic poetry rather than 
dramatic to present disturbances and hindrances by means of 
a natural misfortune, a storm, a shipwreck, a drought, etc. But, 
on the whole, art does not represent such an evil as a pure accident, 
but as a hindrance and misfortune, the necessity of which assumes 
precisely this shape instead of another. 
(/3) But in so far as the external power of nature as such is not 
the essential thing in the interests and oppositions of the spiritual 
sphere, so, secondly, when it appears linked with spiritual matters, 
it emerges only as the ground on which collision proper leads to 
breach and disunion. In this class are all conflicts grounded in 
natural birth. Here in general we can distinguish three cases in 
more detail : 
(cxa) First, a right linked to nature, as, for example, kinship, 
right of inheritance, etc., which precisely because it is tied up with 
nature, immediately permits of a number of natural specifications 
while the right, the thing at issue, is unique. In this matter the 
most important example is the right of succession to the throne. 
If this right is to be the occasion for the sort of collisions in question 
here, then it must not be explicitly regulated and established yet, 
because otherwise the conflict at once becomes one of a totally 
diferent sort. I mean that if the succession is not yet established 
by positive laws and their valid organization, then it cannot be 
regarded as absolutely wrong if it is all one whether the elder or the 
younger brother or some other relative of the royal house is to 
rule. Now since ruling is something qualitative, and not quantita­
tive like money and goods which, owing to their nature, can be 
divided with perfect justice, it follows that dissension and strife 
are present at once in the case of such unregulated succession. 
So, for example, when Oedipus leaves the throne without a ruler, 
his sons, the Theban pair, confront one another with the same 
rights and claims ; the brothers adjust the matter by arranging to 
rule in alternate years, but Eteocles broke the agreement and 
Polynices returned to Thebes to fight for his right.1 The enmity 
of brothers as such is a collision which crops up in every period of 
1 See, e.g., Apollodorus 111. v ff. (with Sir ]. G. Frazer's notes in the Loeb 
edition). 

:zo8 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
art: it begins with Cain who slew Abel. Also in the Shahnameh,1 
the earliest Persian hero-book, the starting-point for all sorts of 
battles is a dissension about succession to the throne. Feridu 
divided the earth between his three brothers. Salm received Rum 
and Khavar; Thur's share was Turan and Jin; and Iraj was to rule 
over the land of Iran. But each makes claims over the territory of 
the other and the resulting dissensions and wars are without end. 
In the Christian Middle Ages too the stories of dissensions in 
families and dynasties are without number. But such discords 
appear in themselves as accidental; for it is not absolutely neces­
sary for brothers to be at enmity. Special circumstances and loftier 
causes must be added, as for example the hateful birth of the sons 
of Oedipus, or as too in the Braut von Messina an attempt is made 
[at the end of Act IV] to ascribe the quarrel of the brothers to a 
loftier fate. In Shakespeare's Macbeth the basis is a similar colli­
sion. Duncan is King, Macbeth is his next eldest relative and is 
therefore strictly heir to the throne even in preference to Duncan's 
sons. And so the first inducement to Macbeth's crime is the wrong 
done to him by the King in naming his own son as his successor. 
This justification of Macbeth, drawn from [Holinshed's] Chronicles, 
is altogether omitted by Shakespeare, because his only aim was to 
bring out the dreadfulness of Macbeth's passion, in order to make 
a bow to King James who must have been interested in seeing 
Macbeth represented as a criminal! Thus, according to Shake­
speare's treatment of the subject, there is no reason why Macbeth 
did not murder Duncan's sons too, but let them escape, and why 
none of the nobles thought of them. But the whole collision on 
which Macbeth turns is already beyond the situation-stage which 
was our subject here. 
(f3f3) Now, secondly, the converse within this sphere consists in 
this, that differences of birth, which in themselves involve a wrong, 
are given by custom or law the power of an unsurmountable 
barrier, so that they appear as a wrong that has become natural, as 
it were, and they therefore give rise to collisions. Slavery, serfdom, 
castes, the position of Jews in many states, and, in a certain sense, 
even the opposition between the birth of nobles and commoners, 
are to be reckoned in this group. Here the conflict lies in the fact 
that, while the man has rights, relationships, wishes, aims, and 
1 In what follows I have used a modern transliteration of the proper names, 
instead of Hegel's. 

THE BEAU TY OF ART O R  THE I DEAL 
209 
requirements which belong to him by the nature of man, these are 
stemmed by one or other of the above-mentioned differences of 
birth as a natural force obstructing them or endangering them. On 
this sort of collision the following is to be said. 
Differences between classes, between rulers and ruled, etc., are 
of course essential and rational, for they have their basis in the 
necessary articulation of the whole ·life of the state, and they are 
validated everywhere by the specific kind of occupation, turn of 
mind, disposition, and the whole of spiritual development. But 
it is another thing if these differences in respect of individuals are 
to be so determined by birth that the individual is from the begin­
ning to be relegated, not by his own doing, but by the accident of 
nature, to some class or caste irrevocably. 
In that event these differences prove to be purely natural and 
yet they are invested with a supreme determining might. How this 
fixity and power originated does not matter at present. For the 
nation may originally have been one, and the natural difference 
between free men and serfs, for example, may only have developed 
later, or the difference of castes, classes, privileges, etc., may have 
arisen from differences of nation and race, as has been maintained 
in relation to the caste system in India. For us here this is of no 
consequence; the chief point lies only in the fact that such re­
lationships of life, regulating the whole being of man, are supposed 
to derive their origin from nature and birth. Of course, in the 
nature of the case, difference of class is to be regarded as justified, 
but at the same time the individual should not be deprived of his 
right to align himself of his own free will with this or that class. 
Aptitude, talent, skill and education alone have to lead to a decision 
in this matter and to decide it. But if the right of choice is annulled 
from the very beginning by birth, and if therefore a man is made 
dependent on nature and its fortuitousness, then within this lack 
of freedom a conflict may arise between (a) the position assigned 
to a man by his birth and (b) his different measure of spiritual 
education and its just demands. Thi' is a melancholy and un­
fortunate collision, for it rests entirely 0p a wrong which true free 
art has not to respect. In our contemporary situation, class differ­
ences, a small group excepted, are not tied to birth. The sole 
exception is the ruling dynasty and the peerage, for higher reasons 
grounded in the essential nature of the state itself. This apart, 
birth makes no essential difference in relation to the class which an 

210 
I. THE I D EA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
individual can or wishes to enter. But on this account after all we at 
once link with the demand for this perfect freedom the further 
demand that the individual shall, in education, knowledge, skill, 
and disposition make himself equal to the class to which he aspires. 
But if birth places an unsurmountable obstacle to the claims which 
a man, without this restriction, could satisfy by his own spiritual 
force and activity, then this counts for us not only as a misfortune 
but essentially as a wrong which he suffers. A purely natural and 
in itself unjust wall, over which his spirit, talent, feeling, inner 
and outer education have lifted him, separates him from what he 
was capable of attaining, and something natural, consolidated by 
caprice alone into this legal provision, presumes to set insuperable 
barriers to the inherently justified freedom of the spirit. 
Now in the more detailed appreciation of such a collision, the 
essential points are these: 
First, the individual with his spiritual qualities must already 
have actually overstepped the natural barrier and its power which 
his wishes and aims are meant to surmount, or otherwise his de­
mand is over again just a folly. If, for example, a lackey with only 
a lackey's education and skill falls in love with a princess or a lady 
of high degree, or she with him, such a love affair is only absurd 
and ridiculous, even if the representation of this passion comprises 
all the depth and full interest of the glowing heart. For in this 
instance it is not the difference of birth which really separates the 
parties, but the whole range of higher interests, broader education, 
aims in life, and modes of feeling which cuts a lackey off from 
a woman highly placed in class, means, and social position. If love 
is the one point of union, and does not also draw into itself the 
remaining scope of what a man has to experience in accordance 
with his spiritual education and the circumstances of his class, it 
remains empty and abstract, and touches only the sensuous side of 
life. To be full and entire, it would have to be connected with the 
entirety of the rest of the mind, with the full nobility of disposition 
and interests. 
The second case, in this context, consists in this, that dependence 
on birth is imposed as a legally obstructive shackle on the in­
herently free spirit and its justified aims. This collision too has 
something unaesthetic in itself which contradicts the Concept of 
the Ideal, however popular it may be and however readily art 
may have a notion to make use of it. If, that is to say, differences 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
2 1 1  
of birth are made into a definite wrong by positive laws and their 
validity, as, for example, birth as a pariah, a Jew, etc., it is in a way 
a perfectly correct view if a man in the freedom of his inner being, 
rebelling against such an obstacle, regards these laws as dissoluble 
and knows himself free from them. To fight them seems therefore 
to be absolutely justified. Now in so far as, owing to the power 
of existing circumstances, such barriers become unsurmountable 
and are consolidated into an invincible necessity, this can only 
afford a situation of misfortune and one inherently false. For the 
reasonable man must bow to necessity, when he has not the means 
to subdue its force, i.e. he must not react against it but must bear 
the inevitable calmly and patiently; the interest and need de­
molished by such a barrier he must sacrifice, and so what is in­
superable he must endure with the still courage of passivity and 
tolerance. Where battle is of no avail, a reasonable man is quit of 
it so that he can at least withdraw into the formal independence 
of subjective freedom. In that event the might of wrong has no 
might at all over him, while he at once experiences his utter depen­
dence if he opposes it. Yet neither this abstraction of a purdy 
formal independence nor this futile snatching at victory is really 
beautiful. 
A third case, directly connected with the second, is equally 
remote from the genuine Ideal. It consists in this, that individuals 
whose birth has given them a really valid privilege owing to re­
ligious regulations, positive laws, or social circumstances, uphold 
their privilege and wish to insist on it. For in that event indepen­
dence is there, according to the reality of external and positive law, 
but, as the subsistence of what is inherently unjust and irrational, 
it is a false and purely formal independence, and the Concept of 
the Ideal has vanished. Of course one could suppose that the Ideal 
is preserved, on the ground that even subjective life goes hand in 
hand with the universal and the legal, and remains in consistent 
unity therewith; yet, in this case, on the one hand the universal 
does not have its force and might in this individual, as the Ideal 
of the heroic requires, but only in the public authority of the 
positive laws and their administration; on the other hand, what 
the individual claims is just a wrong and he therefore lacks that 
substantiality which, as we have seen, likewise is implicit in the 
Concept of the Ideal. The concern of the ideal individual must be 
inherently true and justified. What is relevant here is, for example, 

212 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC B E AUTY 
the legal dominion over slaves and serfs, the right to rob foreigners 
of their freedom, or to sacrifice them to the gods, and so on. 
It is true that such a right can be pursued by individuals inno­
cently, in the belief that they are defending their valid right, as 
in India, for example, the higher castes take advantage of their 
privileges, or as Thoas ordered the sacrifice of Orestes, 1 or as in 
Russia the masters rule their serfs; indeed those in authority may 
wish to assert rights of this kind as right and legal because of their 
own interest in them. But in that case their right is only the un­
righteous right of barbarism, and they themselves look, in our 
eyes at least, like barbarians who resolve on and carry out what 
is absolute injustice. The legality on which the subject relies is 
to be respected and justified for his time and its spirit and level of 
civilization, but for us it has through and through been merely 
laid down without validity or power. Now if the legally privileged 
individual just uses his right for his own private ends, from a 
particular passion and selfish intentions, we have before us not 
just barbarism but a bad character into the bargain. 
Through such conflicts attempts have often been made to arouse 
pity, and even fear as well, according to the law of Aristotiez. who 
lays it down that fear and pity are the aim of tragedy; but we 
entertain neither fear nor awe in the presence of the power of such 
rights accruing from barbarism and the misfortune of the times, 
and the pity that we might feel changes at once into repugnance 
and indignation. 
The only true issue of such a conflict can therefore consist solely 
in the fact that these false rights are not finally asserted, as for 
example when neither Iphigenia nor Orestes is sacrificed in Aulis 
and among the Tauri.J 
(yy) Now, finally, a last element in collisions which derive their 
basis from natural conditions is subjective passion when it rests 
on natural foundations of character and temperament. The best 
example of this is Othello's jealousy. Ambition, avarice (and love 
too indeed to some extent) are examples of the same sort. 
But these passions lead to collisions of substance only in so far 
as they induce individuals who are gripped and dominated by the 
1 Euripides, lphigenia in Tauris. 
• What he says is that 'a tragedy is an imitation of an action, serious in itself 
. . .  with incidents arousing pity and fear, wherewith to accomplish the catharsis 
of such emotions'. Poetics, 1449b 23 ff. 
3 i.e. in the two plays of Euripides about lphigenia. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE I DEAL 
213 
exclusive power of such a feeling to turn against what is genuinely 
moral and absolutely justified in human life, and who consequently 
fall into a conflict of a profounder kind. 
This leads us to consider a third chief kind of dissension, namely 
that which has its proper ground in spiritual forces and their 
variance, in so far as this opposition is called up by the deed of 
the man himself. 
(y) It has already been noticed above in relation to purely 
natural collisions that they form only the connecting point for 
further oppositions. The same is rriore or less true of conflicts in 
the second category also considered just now. In works of art of 
more profound interest, none of these stops at the antagonism 
hitherto indicated; they introduce such disturbances and opposi­
tions only as the occasion out of which the absolute spiritual powers 
of life are presented in their difference from one another and their 
struggle with one another. But the spiritual realm can only be 
activated by spirit, and so spiritual differences must ·also win their 
actuality by man's act in order to be able to come on the scene in 
their proper shape. 
Thus now we have, on the one hand, a difficulty, an obstacle, 
a transgression brought about by an actual human deed; on the 
other hand, a transgression of absolutely justified interests and 
powers. Only both of these characteristics taken together are the 
basis of the depth of this final kind of collision. 
The chief cases which can occur in this sphere may be distin­
guished as follows: 
(cxcx) While we are now only just beginning to leave the province 
of those conflicts which have their foundation in nature, the first 
case of this new sort still stands in connection with the earlier ones. 
But if human action is to be the ground of the collision, then the 
natural result produced by man, otherwise than by man as spirit, 
consists in the fact that unknowingly and unintentionally he has 
done something which later proves in his own eyes to have been 
a transgression of ethical powers essentially to be respected. The 
consciousness of his deed, which he acquires later, then drives him 
on, through this previously unconscious transgression, into dis­
sension and contradiction with himself, once he imputes the trans­
gression to himself as caused by him. The antagonism between his 
consciousness and intention in his act and the later consciousness 
of what the act really was constitutes here the basis of the conflict. 

lt4 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
Oedipus and Ajax can count here as examples for us. Oedipus's 
act, so far as his will and knowledge went, consisted in the fact 
that he had slain a stranger in a quarrel ; but it was what was 
unknown that was the actual and essential deed, namely the murder 
of his own father. Ajax, conversely, in a fit of frenzy slaughters 
the cattle of the Greeks, believing them to be the Greek princes. 
Then when, with awakened consciousness, he considers what has 
happened, he is gripped by shame at his deed, and this produces 
collision. What, in a way like this, a man has unintentionally 
transgressed must yet be something which essentially and in 
accordance with his reason he has to honour and regard as sacro­
sanct. If, on the other hand, this reverence and veneration is a mere 
opinion and false superstition, then for us at least such a collision 
can no longer have any deeper interest. 
({3{3) But now since, in the kind of conflict we are concerned with 
at present, a spiritual transgression of spiritual powers is to come 
about through a man's deed, then, secondly, the collision more 
appropriate to this sphere consists in a transgression which is 
known and which issues from this knowledge and the intention 
involved. The starting-point may here too once again be passion, 
violence, folly, etc. The Trojan war, for example, has its beginning 
in the abduction of Helen ; next, Agamemnon proceeds to sacrifice 
Iphigenia [his daughter] and thereby commits a transgression 
against her mother [Clytemnestra his wife] because he kills the 
dearest fruits of her womb ; Clytemnestra therefore slays her 
husband ; Orestes, because she has murdered his father, the King, 
takes revenge by the death of his mother. Similarly, in Hamlet 
the father is treacherously sent to his grave, and Hamlet's mother 
defames the shades of the dead by an almost immediate marriage 
with the murderer. 
Even in the case of these collisions the chief point is still that 
what is fought against is something absolutely ethical, sacrosanct, 
and genuine which the man has roused against himself by his act. 
Were this not so, then for us, in so far as we have a consciousness 
of the genuinely ethical and sacrosanct, such a conflict would 
be without value and substance, as, for instance, in the familiar 
episode in the Mahabharata, Nala and Damayanti. King Nala had 
married Damayanti, the prince's daughter, who had haJ the privi­
lege of choosing of her own accord amongst her suitors. The other 
claimants hover as genii in the air. Nala alone stands on the earth, 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I D EA L  
2 1 5  
and Damayanti had the good taste to select him. Now on this 
account the genii are angered and they keep a watch on King Nala. 
But for many years afterwards they could bring nothing against 
him, because he was not guilty of any offence. But at last they win 
power over him because he commits a great crime by making 
water and treading on the ground thus urine-infected. According 
to Indian ideas this is a serious offence which cannot escape 
punishment. Hereafter the genii have him in their power; one 
instils into him the desire for play; the other provokes his brother 
to be his opponent; and N ala must at last, losing his throne, wander 
unarmed with Damayanti into misery. At length he has to endure 
even separation from her, until in the end, after numerous 
adventures, he is raised once more to his former good fortune. 
The real conflict, on which the whole thing turns, is only for the 
ancient Indians an essential transgression of something sacrosanct. 
In 01r eyes it is nothing but an absurdity.1 
(yy) But, thirdly, the transgression need not be direct, i.e. it is 
not necessary for the deed as such, taken by itself, to be produc­
tive of collision ; it only becomes such owing to the known rela­
tions and circumstances within which it is done and which work 
against it and contradict it. Romeo and Juliet, for example, love 
one another ; in love as such no transgression is inherent ; but 
they know that their families live in hatred and enmity with one 
another, that the parents will never consent to their marriage, and 
1 Hegel's authority for this story may be W. von Humboldt's Ober die unter 
den Namen Bhagavad-Gita bekannte Episode des Mahabharata (Berlin, 18z6), 
reviewed by him in 1827, Ww. xvi, pp. 361 ff. But the review, which provides 
ample. evidence for the thoroughness with which Hegel studied Indian religion, 
quotes so many other works, including translations, German, English, and 
French, that one cannot be sure. In any event, he has not got the story quite 
right. Professor R. C. Zaehner has kindly told me that this passage ought to read 
as follows : 
'Consider the familiar episode in Mahabharata, Nala and Damayanti, the 
prince's daughter, who had the privilege of choosing of her own accord amongst 
the local chieftains. The gods also appear in the shape of Nala as suitors; but 
since only Nala stands firmly on the ground, sweating and thereby proving that 
he is a mortal, Damayanti selects him. The gods are well pleased by this, but 
Kali, an evil genius, is angered and keeps watch on him. But for many years 
afterwards he could bring nothing against him, because he was not guilty of any 
offence. But at last he succeeds in entering into him because he commits the 
technical offence of making water without purifying himself afterwards. Kali 
then incites him to accept his brother's invitation to a game of dice. He is de­
feated and loses his throne and everything. He is forced to wander unarmed with 
Damayanti, whom he deserts, until in the end after numerous adventures he is 
re-united with her and raised once more to his former good fortune.' 

:u6 
I. THE I D EA OF ART I S T I C  B EAUTY 
they get into a collision owing to this presupposed ground of 
antagonism. 
In relation to the specific situation, as contrasted with the 
general state of the world, these most general remarks may suffice. 
If one wished to consider, and go through, all its aspects, shades, 
and nuances, and assess every possible kind of situation, then this 
chapter alone would provide an occasion for discussions of end­
less prolixity. For the invention of different situations has an 
inexhaustible wealth of possibilities, and then the essential ques­
tion always is of their applicability to a specific art, depending on 
its genus and species. To fairy-tales, for example, much is allowed 
which would be forbidden to another mode of treatment and 
representation. But in general the invention of the situation is 
after all an important point which commonly presents great 
difficulty to artists. In particular we hear today the frequent com­
plaint about the difficulty of finding the right material from which 
the situations and circumstances are to be drawn. In this connec­
tion, at first sight it may seem to suit the dignity of a poet better to 
be original and to invent situations by himself. Yet this sort of 
originality is not an essential matter. For the situation does not in 
itself constitute what is spiritual, or the artistic form proper; it 
affects only the external material in which and on which a character 
and temperament is to be unfolded and represented. Only by 
elaborating this external starting-point into actions and characters 
is genuine artistic activity evinced. Therefore we cannot thank the 
poet at all for having manufactured this inherently unpoetic aspect 
by himself; he must remain entitled to create always anew from 
what is already there, from history, saga, myths, chronicles, indeed 
even from materials and situations previously elaborated artistic­
ally; as, in painting, the external element in the situation is drawn 
from legends of the saints and often enough repeated in a similar 
way. In the case of such representation the strictly artistic produc­
tion lies far deeper than in inventing specific situations. 
The same is true too of the wealth of circumstances and com­
plications that have been presented to us. In this connection modern 
art has often enough been praised on the ground that, in compari­
son with antiquity, it displays an infinitely more fruitful imagina­
tion, and in fact in the works of art of the Middle Ages too and 
the modern world there is the maximum variety and diversity 
of situations, incidents, events, and fates. But with this external 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
217 
abundance nothing is achieved. In spite of it, we have only a few 
excellent dramas and epic poems. For the chief thing is not the 
external march and turn of events, as if these, as events and 
histories, exhausted the stuff of the work of art, but the ethical and 
spiritual configuration and the great movements of temperament 
and character which are disclosed and unveiled through the process 
of this configuration. 
If we glance now at the point from which we must proceed 
further, we see that, on the one hand, the external and inner 
specific circumstances, states of affairs, and relations become the 
situation only through the heart, the passion, which views them 
and maintains itself in them. On the other hand, as we saw, the 
situation in its specific character is differentiated into oppositions, 
hindrances, complications, and transgressions, so that the heart, 
moved by circumstances, feels itself induced to react of necessity 
against what disturbs it and what is a barrier against its aims and 
passions. In this sense the action proper only begins when the 
opposition contained in the situation appears on the scene. But 
since the colliding action transgresses an opposing aspect, in this 
difference it calls up against itself the power lying over against it 
which has been assailed, and therefore, with action, reaction is 
immediately linked. At this point only has the Ideal entered into 
full determinacy and movement. For now there stand in battle 
against one another two interests, wrested from their harmony, 
and in reciprocal contradiction they necessarily demand a resolu­
tion of their discord. Now this movement, taken as a whole, 
belongs no more to the province of the situation and its conflicts, 
but leads to the consideration of what we have described above as 
'the action proper'. 
3· Action 
In the series of stages which we have followed up to this point, 
action is the third, succeeding the general state of the world as the 
first and the specific situation as the second. 
We have found already that, in its external relation to the situa­
tion, the action presupposes circumstances leading to collisions, 
to action and reaction. Now in view of these presuppositions, we 
cannot settle with precision where the action must have its begin­
ning. For what from one point of view appears as a beginning, 

218 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
may from another prove to be the result of earlier complications 
which would serve thus far as the real beginning. Yet these them­
selves are once again only an effect of previous collisions, and so 
forth. For example, in the House of Agamemnon, Iphigenia 
among the Tauri1 propitiates the guilt and misfortune of the House. 
Here the beginning may be taken to be lphigenia's rescue by 
Diana who brought her to the Tauri; but this circumstance is 
only the result of events elsewhere, namely the sacrifice at Aulis, 
which again is conditioned by the transgression suffered by 
Menelaus, from whom Paris raped Helen, and so on and so on 
until we come to Leda's famous egg. So also the material treated 
in the Iphigenia in Tauris contains once again as a presupposition 
the murder of Agamemnon and the whole sequence of crimes in 
the House of Tantalus. The same sort of thing occurs in the story 
of the Theban House.:z. Now if an action with this whole series of 
its presuppositions is to be represented, it may be supposed that 
only poetry could discharge this task. Yet, according to the saying,J 
to go through the whole gamut like this has become somewhat 
wearisome; it is regarded as a matter for prose, and instead of 
prose's prolixity, it has been demanded of poetry as a law that it 
shall take the listener at once in medias res. Now the fact that art 
is not interested in making a beginning with the external original 
start of the specific action has a deeper reason, namely that such 
a start has a beginning only in relation to the natural, external,. 
course of events, and the connection of the action with this start 
affects only the empirical unity of its appearance, but can be quite 
a matter of indifference to the proper content of the action itself. 
The like external unity is also present still, when it is only one and 
the same individual who is to provide the connecting thread of 
different events. The totality of the circumstances of life, deeds, 
fates, is of course what shapes the individual, but his proper 
nature, the true kernel of his disposition and capacity, is revealed 
without all these, in one great situation and action, in the course of 
1 i.e. in the Crimea ; Euripides again. 
• At Aulis the Greeks sacrificed to Apollo before embarking for Troy. Leda 
was loved by Zeus in the form of a swan. One of her children by him was Helen. 
Tantalus was a remote ancestor of Agamemnon. The Theban House is that of 
Oedipus and Antigone. 
3 K. F. Wander's Deutsches Sprichworter-Lexikon quotes Er jangt seine 
Geschichte bei Adam an (he begins his history with Adam). But Hegel is quoting 
Horace: Ars Poetica, ii. 147-8, where Horace speaks of not telling of the Trojan 
war ab ovo, but always hurrying in medias res. 

THE BEAU TY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
219 
which he is unveiled as he is, whereas previously he was known 
maybe only by his name and external appearance. 
In other words the start of the action is not to be sought in 
that empirical beginning; what must be envisaged is only those 
circumstances which, grasped by the individual heart and its needs, 
give rise precisely to the specific collision, the strife and resolution 
of which constitute the particular action. Homer, for example, in 
the Iliad, begins at once without hesitation with his matter in 
hand on which everything turns, the wrath of Achilles; he does not 
begin first, as might be expected, by relating the previous events 
or the life story of Achilles, but gives us forthwith the special 
conflict, and indeed in such a way that a great interest forms the 
background of his picture. 
Now the presentation of the action, as in itself a total movement 
of action, reaction, and resolution of their struggle, belongs 
especially to poetry, for it is given to the other arts to seize only 
one feature in the course of the action and its occurrence. True, 
from one point of view, they seem, owing to the wealth of their 
means, to outclass poetry in this connection, since they have at 
their command not only the entire external shape but also expres­
sion through gestures, the shape's relation to surrounding shapes, 
and its reflection besides in other objects grouped around it. But 
al these are means of expression which cannot compare with the 
clarity of speech. Action is the clearest revelation of the indi­
vidual, of his temperament as well as his aims; what a man is at 
bottom and in his inmost being comes into actuality only by his 
action, and action, because of its spiritual origin, wins its greatest 
clarity and definiteness in spiritual expression also, i.e. in speech 
alone. 
When we speak of action in general terms, our usual idea is that 
its variety is quite incalculable. But for art the range of actions 
suitable for representation is on the whole restricted. For it has to 
traverse only that range of actions which is necessitated by the Idea. 
In this connection, in so far as art has to undertake the represen­
tation of action, we must emphasize three principal points derived 
as follows: the situation and its conflict are the general stimulus; 
but the movement itself, the differentiation of the Ideal in its activ­
ity, arises only through the reaction. Now this movement contains: 
(a) the universal powers forming the essential content and end 
for which the action is done ; 

220 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ART I S T I C  BEA UTY 
(b) the activation of these powers through the action of 
individuals; 
(c) these two aspects have to be united into what here in general 
we will call character. 
(a) The Universal Powers O'Ver Action 
(ex) However far in our consideration of action we stand at the 
Ideal's stage of determinacy and difference, still, in the truly 
beautiful [drama] each side of the opposition which the conflicts 
disclose must still bear the stamp of the Ideal on themselves and 
therefore may not lack rationality and justification. Interests of an 
ideal kind must fight one another, so that power comes on the 
scene against power. These interests are the essential needs of the 
human heart, the inherently necessary aims of action, justified and 
rational in themselves, and precisely therefore the universal, 
eternal, powers of spiritual existence; not the absolutely Divine 
itself, but the sons of an absolute Idea and therefore dominant and 
valid; children of the one universal truth, although only determi­
nate particular factors thereof. Owing to their determinateness they 
can of course come into opposition to one another, but, despite 
their difference, they must have essential truth in themselves in 
order to appear as the determinate Ideal. These are the great 
themes of art, the eternal religious and ethical relationships; 
family, country, state, church, fame, friendship, class, dignity, and, 
in the romantic world, especially honour and love, etc. In the 
degree of their validity these powers are different, but all are 
inherently rational. At the same time these are the powers over 
the human heart, which man, because he is man, has to recognize; 
he has to accept their power and give them actualization. Yet they 
should not appear merely as rights in a positive ·legislative order. 
For (a), as we saw in dealing with collisions, the form of positive 
legislation contradicts the Concept and the shape of the Ideal, 
and (b) the content of positive rights may constitute what is 
absolutely unjust, no matter how far it has assumed the form of 
law. But the relationships just mentioned are not something 
merely fixed externally; they are the absolutely substantial forces 
which, because they involve the true content of the Divine and the 
human, remain now precisely also as the impetus in action and 
what is finally the steadily self-realizing. 
Of this kind, for example, are the interests and aims which fight 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
221 
in the Antigone of Sophocles. Creon, the King, had issued, as head 
of the state, the strict command that the son of Oedipus, who had 
risen against Thebes as an enemy of his country, was to be refused 
the honour of burial. This command contains an essential justifica­
tion, provision for the welfare of the entire city. But Antigone is 
animated by an equally ethical power, her holy love for her brother, 
whom she cannot leave unburied, a prey of the birds. Not to fulfil 
the duty of burial would be against family piety, and therefore she 
transgresses Creon's command. 
{/3) Now collisions may be introduced in the most varied ways; 
but the necessity of the reaction must not be occasioned at all by 
something bizarre or repugnant, but by something rational and 
justified in itself. So, for example, in the familiar German poem 
of Hartmann von der Aue-Der artne Heinrich1-the collision is 
repulsive. The hero is afflicted by leprosy, an incurable disease, 
and in search of help he turns to the monks of Salerno. They re­
quire that someone must of his own free will sacrifice himself for 
him, for the necessary remedy can be prepared only out of a 
human heart. A poor girl, who loves the knight, willingly decides 
on death and travels with him to Italy. This is throughout barbaric, 
and the quiet love and touching devotion of the girl can therefore 
not achieve its full affect. True, in the case of the Greeks the wrong 
of human sacrifice comes on the scene as a collision too, as in the 
story of Iphigenia, for example, who at one time is to be sacrificed 
and at another is herself to sacrifice her brother; but (a) this 
conflict hangs together with other matters inherently justified, and 
(b) the rational element, as was remarked above, lies in the fact 
that both I phigenia and Orestes are saved and the force of that 
unrighteous collision is broken-which, it is true, is the case in 
the afore-mentioned poem of Hartmann von der Aue, where 
Heinrich, refusing at last to accept the sacrifice, is freed from 
his disease by God's help, and now the girl is rewarded for her 
true love. 
To the above-mentioned affirmative powers there are at once 
annexed others opposed to them, the powers, namely, of the nega­
tive, the bad and the evil in general. Yet the purely negative should 
not find its place in the ideal presentation of an action as the essen­
tial basis of the necessary reaction. The existence of the negative 
' Poor Henry, late twelfth and early thirteenth century. The poem is the basis 
of Longfellow's Golden Legend. 

zu 
I. THE IDEA OF ART ISTIC BEAUTY 
in reality may well correspond with the essence and nature of the 
negative ; but if the inn.er conception and aim of the agent is null 
in itself, the inner ugliness, already there, still less permits of true 
beauty in that conception's real existence. The sophistry of pas­
sion may, through skilfulness, strength, and energy of character, 
make the attempt to introduce positive aspects into the negative, 
but then, in spite of this, we have only the vision of a whited 
sepulchre. For the purely negative is in itself dull and flat and 
therefore either leaves us empty or else repels us, whether it be 
used as the motive of an action or simply as a means for producing 
the reaction of another motive. The gruesome and unlucky, the 
harshness of power, the pitilessness of predominance, may be held 
together and endured by the imagination if they are elevated and 
carried by an intrinsically worthy greatness of character and aim ; 
but evil as such, envy, cowardice, and baseness are and remain 
purely repugnant. Thus the devil in himself is a bad figure, 
aesthetically impracticable ; for he is nothing but the father of lies 
and therefore an extremely prosaic person.1 So too the Furies of 
hatred, and so many later allegories of a similar kind, are indeed 
powers, but without affirmative independence and stability, and 
are unsuitable for ideal representation ;  nevertheless in this matter 
a great difference must be laid down between what is allowed and 
forbidden to the particular arts and the way and manner in which 
they do, or do not, bring their object immediately home to our 
vision. But evil is in general inherently cold and worthless, because 
nothing comes of it except what is purely negative, just destruction 
and misfortune, whereas genuine art should give us a view of an 
inner harmony. 
Especially despicable is baseness, because it has its source in 
envy and hatred of what is noble, and it does not shrink from 
perverting something inherently justified into a means for its own 
bad or shameful passion. The great poets and artists of antiquity 
therefore do not give us the spectacle of wickedness and de­
pravity. Shakespeare, on the other hand, in Lear, for example, 
brings evil before us in its entire dreadfulness. Lear in old age 
divides his kingdom between his daughters and, in doing so, is so 
mad as to trust the false and flattering words [of Goneril and Regan] 
' See Hegel's Philosophy of Religion (Ww. xii, 261 ) :  'Milton's devil is, in his 
fully characteristic energy, better than many an angel.' He adds that there is 
something affirmative about Milton's devil. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART O R  TH E IDEAL 
zzJ 
and to misjudge the speechless and loyal Cordelia. This is already 
madness and craziness, and so the most outrageous ingratitude and 
worthlessness of the elder daughters and their husbands bring him 
to actual insanity. In a different way again the heroes of French 
tragedy1 often put on fine airs and puff themselves up in a mon­
strous way with the greatest and noblest motives, and make a great 
display of their honour and dignity, but at the same time they 
destroy again our idea of these motives as a result of what they 
actually are and accomplish. But in most recent times what has 
especially become the fashion is the inner unstable distraction 
which runs through all the most repugnant dissonances and has 
produced a temper of atrocity and a grotesqueness of irony in 
which Theodor Hoffmann,1 for example, has delighted. 
(y) Thus the genuine content of the ideal action must be sup­
plied solely by the inherently affirmative and substantive powers. 
Yet when these driving forces come to be represented, they may 
not appear in their universality as such, although within the reality 
of the action they are the essential moments of the Idea; they must 
be configurated as independent individuals. If this does not happen, 
they remain universal thoughts or abstract ideas, and these do not 
belong to the domain of art. However little they may derive their 
origin from mere caprices of imagination, they must still pro­
ceed to determinacy and achievedness and therefore appear as 
inherently individualized. Yet this determinate character must 
not extend to the detail of external existence nor contract into 
subjective inwardness, because otherwise the individuality of the 
universal powers would of necessity be driven into all the complica­
tions of finite existence. Therefore, from this point of view, the 
determinacy of their individuality is not to be taken too seriously. 
As the clearest example of such appearance and domination of 
the universal powers in their independent configuration the Greek 
gods may be cited. However they may come on the scene, they 
are always blessed and serene. As individual and particular gods, 
they do engage in battle, but in the last resort there is no seriousness 
in this strife because they have not concentrated themselves on 
some specific end with the whole consistent energy of their 
character and passion, and, in fighting for this end, found their 
1 Possibly a reference to Corneille. The urbane rhetoric of the siecle d'or 
conceals emotions that are less than civilized. 
• E. T. A. Hoffmann, 1776-tS:zz. 

224 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
defeat at last. They meddle with this and that, make their own 
some specific interest in concrete cases, but all the same they let 
the business stand as it was, and wander back in blessedness to 
the heights of Olympus. So in Homer we see the gods in battle and 
war against one another; this is in virtue of their determinate 
character, but they still remain universal beings and determinate 
characters. The Trojan battle, for example, begins to rage; the 
heroes come on the scene individually, one after another; now the 
individuals are lost in the general hubbub and scuffle; no longer 
are there special particular characters which can be distinguished; 
a universal pressure and spirit roars and fights-and now it is the 
universal powers, the gods themselves, who enter the fray. But 
they always draw back again out of such imbroglio and difference 
into their independence and peace. For the individuality of their 
figures does of course lead them into the sphere of chance and 
accident, still, because what preponderates in them is the divine 
universal element, their individual aspect is only an external 
figure rather than something penetrating the figure through and 
through into genuinely inner subjectivity. Their determinate 
character is an outward shape only more or less closely adapted to 
their divinity. But this independence and untroubled peace gives 
them precisely the plastic individuality which spares them con­
cern and distress in connection with what is determinate. Conse­
quently, even in their action in the concrete real world, there is no 
fixed consistency in Homer's gods, although they do continually 
enter upon diversified and varied activities, since only the material 
and interest of temporal human affairs can give them anything to 
do. Likewise we find in the Greek gods further peculiarities of 
their own which cannot always be referred back to the universal 
essence of each specific god. Mercury, for example, is the slayer 
of Argus, Apollo of the lizard, Jupiter has countless love affairs 
and hangs Juno on an anvil, 1 etc. These and so many other stories 
are just appendages which cling to the gods in their natural aspect 
through symbolism and allegory, and their origin we will have to 
indicate in more detail later. 
In modern art too there is a treatment of specific and yet 
inherently universal powers. But for the most part this amounts 
only to cold and frosty allegories of hatred, for example, envy, 
' Two anvils, according to Iliad, xv. 18 ff. The anvils were tied to her feet 
when she was hung from Olympus. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
225 
jealousy, or, in general, of virtues and vices, faith, hope, love, 
fidelity, etc., in which we cannot believe. For in our view it is 
concrete individuality alone in which, in artistic representations, 
we feel a deeper interest, so that we want to see these abstractions 
before us not on their own account but only as features and aspects 
of the entirety of an individual human character. Likewise angels 
have none of that universality and independence in themselves 
as Mars, e.g., Venus, Apollo, etc. have or as Oceanus and Helios 
have; they are there indeed for our imagination, but as particular 
servants of the one substantial divine essence, which is not split 
into independent individuals like those in the circle of the Greek 
gods. Therefore we do not have the vision of many self-dependent 
objective powers, which could come to be represented explicitly 
as divine individuals; on the contrary, we find their essential 
content actualized either objectively in the one God or, in a particu­
lar and subjective way, in human characters and actions. But the 
ideal representation of the gods has its origin precisely in their 
being made independent and individualized. 
(b) TM Individual Agents 
In the case of the ideal gods that we have just discussed, it is not 
difficult for art to preserve the required ideality. Yet so soon as it is 
a question of coming to concrete action, a special difficulty arises 
for presentation. The gods, I mean, and the universal powers in 
general, are indeed the moving force and stimulus, but, in the real 
world, individual action proper is not to be assigned to them; 
action belongs to men. Therefore we have two separate sides: on 
the one there stand those universal powers in their self-reposing 
and therefore more abstract substantiality; on the other the 
human individuals on whom devolve the resolution, the final 
decision on action, and its actual accomplishment. True, the 
eternal dominant forces are immanent in man's self; they make up 
the substantial side of his character;. but in so far as they are 
apprehended themselves in their divinity as individuals, and 
therefore as exclusive, they come at once into an external relation 
with human beings. This now produces the essential difficulty. 
For in this relation between gods and men there is a direct con­
tradiction. On the one hand in their content the gods are the 
personality, the individual passion, the decision and will of man; 
but on the other hand the gods are viewed and stressed as existing 

226 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
absolutely, not only independent of the individual subject but as 
the forces driving and determining him; the result is that the same 
specific things are represented now in independent divine indivi­
duality and now as the most intimate possession of the human 
breast. Therefore the free independence of the gods as well as the 
freedom of the individual agents is jeopardized. Above all, if the 
power of command is attributed to the gods, then human inde­
pendence suffers as a result, while we have stipulated this inde­
pendence as absolutely and essentially demanded by the Ideal of 
art. This is the same relation which comes into question also in 
our Christian religious ideas. It is said, for example, that the Spirit 
of God leads us to God. But in that case the human heart may 
appear as the purely passive ground on which the Spirit of God 
operates and the human will in its freedom is destroyed, since the 
divine decree of this operation remains for him as it were a sort of 
fate in which his own self does not participate at all. 
(a:) Now if this relation is so put that the man in his activity 
is contrasted externally with the god who is what is substantial, 
then the rapport between the two is wholly prosaic. For the god 
commands and man has but to obey. From this external relation 
between gods and men even great poets have not been able to free 
themselves. In Sophocles, e.g., after Philoctetes has frustrated the 
deception of Odysseus, he abides by his decision not to go with 
him to the Grecian camp, until at last Heracles appears as a deus 
ex machina and orders him to give in to the wish of N eoptolemus. 
The content of this apparition is sufficiently motivated, and it is 
itself awaited, but the denoument itself always remains foreign 
and external. In his noblest tragedies Sophocles does not use this 
kind of presentation through which, if it goes one step further, the 
gods become dead machines, and individuals mere instruments of 
an alien caprice. 
Likewise, in the epic especially, interventions of the gods appear 
as a denial of human freedom. Hermes, e.g., escorts Priam to 
Achilles [Iliad, xxiv] ; Apollo strikes Patroclus between the 
shoulders and puts an end to his life [ibid., xvi]. In a similar way 
mythological traits are often so used as to appear in individuals 
as an external thing. Achilles, e.g., is dipped by his mother in the 
Styx, and thereby made invulnerable and unconquerable except 
in his ankle. If we look at this in an intellectual way, then all 
the bravery vanishes and the whole heroism of Achilles becomes 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE I D EAL 
227 
a purely physical quality instead of a spiritual trait of character. 
But such a kind of representation may be allowed to epic long 
before it can be allowed to drama, because in epic the side of 
inwardness which concerns the intention involved in carrying out 
one's aims falls into the background, and a wider scope is allowed 
to the external in general. That purely intellectual reflection which 
ascribes to the poet the absurdity that his heroes are not heroes at 
all must therefore be advanced with the greatest caution, for even 
in such traits, as we shall see presently [in (,8)], the poetic relation 
between gods and men is preserved. On the other hand, the prosaic 
judgement is valid at once if the powers besides being set up as 
independent, are inherently without substance and belong only to 
fantastic caprice and the bizarrerie of a false originality. 
({3) The genuinely ideal relationship consists in the identity of 
gods and men, an identity which must still gleam through when 
the universal powers are, as independent and free, contrasted 
with the individual agents and their passions. The character 
attributed to the gods, I mean, must at once evince itself in indivi­
duals as their own inner life, so that while the ruling powers 
appear explicitly as individualized, this which is external to man 
is immanent in him as his spirit and character. Therefore it remains 
the business of the artist to harmonize the difference of these two 
sides and to link them by a fine thread; he makes conspicuous the 
beginnings of the action in man's inner spirit, but, even so, 
emphasizes the universal and substantial which rules there, and 
brings it before our eyes as explicitly individualized. Man's heart 
must reveal itself in the gods who are the independent universal 
forms of what rules and drives its inner being. Only in that case 
are the gods at the same time the gods of his own breast. If we 
hear from antiquity that e.g. Venus or Eros has captivated the 
heart, then of course Venus and Eros are prima facie powers 
external to the man, but love is all the same a stimulus and a 
passion which belong to the human breast as such and constitute 
its own centre. The Eumenides1 are often spoken of in the same 
sense. At first we imagine the avenging maidens as Furies who 
pursue the transgressor from without. But this pursuit is equally 
the inner fury which permeates the transgressor's breast. Sophocles 
uses this too in the sense of the man's own inner being, as, e.g., 
in the Oedipus Coloneus (1. 1434), the Furies are called the Erinyes 
1 A propitiatory name for the Furies in the play of Aeschylus. 

228 
I. THE I D E A  O F  A RT I S T I C  B E A UT Y  
[Furies] of Oedipus himself and signify a father's curse, the power 
of his offended heart over his sons.1 Therefore it is both right and 
wrong to interpret the gods in general as always either purely ex­
ternal to man or purely powers dwelling in him. For they are both. 
In Homer, therefore, the action of gods and men goes continually 
criss-cross; the gods seem to bring about what is alien to man and 
yet actually accomplish only what constitutes the substance of his 
inner heart. In the Iliad, e.g., when Achilles in a quarrel is about 
to draw his sword against Agamemnon, Athene comes up behind 
him, and, visible to him alone, grasps his flaxen hair. Hera, con­
cerned equally for Achilles and Agamemnon, sends Athene from 
Olympus, and her appearance seems to be quite independent of 
the heart of Achilles. But on the other hand, it is easy to imagine 
that Athene's sudden appearance, the prudence that checks the 
wrath of the hero, is of an inward kind, and that the whole thing 
is an event which happened in the heart of Achilles. Indeed 
Homer himself indicates this a few lines earlier (Iliad, i. 190 ff.) 
when he describes how Achilles took counsel with himself: 
77 0 YE 6aayavov o'v lpvCJCJclp.EVO7 1Tapd. p.TJpoV, 
TOV7 p.€v avaan]aE,EV, 0 8' l!TpElSTJV lvapl8o' 
9E xo.\ov 1TaVCJEtEV, lpTJTVCJEt€ T€ £Jvp.ov.z 
This inner interruption of wrath, this check, which is a power 
foreign to the wrath, the epic poet is fully justified in representing 
as an external event because Achilles at first appears to be entirely 
full of wrath alone. In a similar way we find Minerva in the Odyssey 
[iii et a/.] as the escort of Telemachus. This escort is more 
difficult to interpret as at the same time within the heart of Tele­
machus, although even here the connection of outer and inner is 
not lacking. What in general constitutes the serenity of the Homeric 
gods and the irony in the worship of them is the fact that their 
independence and their seriousness is dissolved again just in so 
far as they evince themselves as the human heart's own powers 
and therefore leave men alone by themselves in them. 
However, we need not look so far afield for a complete example 
of the transformation of such purely external divine machinery 
1 Oedipus pronounces on his sons, Eteocles and Polynices, the curse that 
each shall die by the other's hand. 
• 'Whether to draw his sword and slay Agamemnon or to give up his wrath 
and restrain his temper' is the substance of the meaning of the Greek. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART O R  THE IDEAL 
2.2.9 
into something subjective, into freedom and ethical beauty. In his 
Iphigenia among the Tauri [1779] Goethe has produced the most 
marvellous and beautiful things possible in this connection. In 
Euripides [in the play with the same title], Orestes and Iphigenia 
take away the image of Diana. This is just a theft. Thoas comes 
along and issues a command to pursue them and take the effigy of 
the goddess from them; then at the end Athene appears in a 
completely prosaic way and orders Thoas to hold his hand, on the 
ground that she has already commended Orestes to Poseidon and 
in deference to her, he has conveyed him far into the sea. Thoas 
obeys forthwith by replying to the admonition of the goddess 
(ll. [1475] ff.) : 'Queen Athene, whoever hears the words of the 
gods and does not obey, is out of his mind . . .  for how can it be 
good to strive against the powerful gods ?'1 
We see in this matter nothing but a dry external command of 
Athene, and an equally empty mere obedience . on the part of 
Thoas. In Goethe, on the other hand, lphigenia becomes a god­
dess and relies on the truth in herself, in the human breast. In this 
sense she goes to Thoas and says [Act v, scene iii] : 'Has only a 
man the right to a deed unheard of? Does he then alone clasp the 
impossible to his powerful heroic heart ?' 
What in Euripides Athene brings about by order, the reversal 
of the attitude of Thoas, Goethe's lphigenia tries to achieve, and 
does achieve in fact, through the deep feelings and ideas which she 
puts before him: 'In my heart a bold enterprise uncertainly stirs. 
I will not escape great reproof or serious evil if it miscarries; but 
still I place it on your knees. If you are true, as you are praised for 
being; then show it through your support, and glorify the truth 
through me.' And when Thoas replies: 'Thou thinkest that the 
crude Scythian, the barbarian, will hear the voice of truth and 
humanity which Atreus in Greece did not discern ?', she answers 
in tenderest purest faith: 'Born under whatever sky, everyone 
hears it through whose bosom the source of life flows pure and 
unhindered.' 
Now she calls on his magnanimity and clemency, trusting on the 
height of his dignity; she touches him, conquers him, and in 
a humanly beautiful way wrings from him permission to return to 
her own folk. For this is all that is necessary. She does not need 
1 Hegel cites lines 1442. ff., but that is Athene 's speech. I have translated the 
Greek directly and not Hegel's translation. Thoas was the King of the Tauri. 

230 
I. T H E  I DE A  OF ART I S T I C  B EA U TY 
the image of the goddess and can go away without cunning and 
treachery, since Goethe explains with infinite beauty, in a human 
reconciling way, the ambiguous1 oracle 'Bringst thou the sister, 
who stays against her will in a shrine on the coasts of the Tauri, 
back to Greece, then the curse will be lifted' as meaning that the 
pure and holy Iphigenia, the sister, is the divine image and protec­
tress of the House. 'Beautiful and sublime in my eyes is the counsel 
of the goddess', says Orestes to Thoas and Iphigenia, 'like a holy 
imagez unto which a secret oracle has bound the city's unalter­
able fortune, Diana took thee away, protectress of thy House, and 
preserved thee in a holy stillness, to be a blessing to thy brother 
and thy kin. Just when rescue seemed nowhere to be found in the 
wide world thou givest us all once more.' 
In this healing, reconciling way, Iphigenia has already revealed 
herself to Orestes through the purity and ethical beauty of her 
deep-feeling heart. In his torn heart he no longer cherishes any 
belief in peace, and recognizing her does drive him into frenzy, 
but the pure love of his sister nevertheless heals him from all the 
torment of his inner furies: 'In thine arms the evil gripped me 
with all its claws for the last time and shook me horribly to the 
very marrow; then it vanished like a snake into its hole. Now 
through thee I enjoy anew the broad light of day.' 
In this, as in every other respect, we cannot marvel enough at the 
deep beauty of the drama. 
Now things are worse with the Christian materials than with 
those of antiquity. In the legends of the saints and generally on 
the ground of Christian ideas, the appearance of Christ, Mary, 
other saints, etc., is of course present in the universal faith; but 
alongside it imagination has built up for itself in related spheres 
all kinds of fantastic beings like witches, spectres, ghostly appari­
tions, and more of the like. If in their treatment they appear as 
powers foreign to man, and man, with no stability in himself, 
obeys their magic, treachery, and the power of their delusiveness, 
the whole representation may be given over to every folly and the 
whole caprice of chance. In this matter in particular, the artist 
must go straight for the fact that freedom and independence of 
1 /phigenia, scene vi, and so the following quotations. The ambiguity led 
Orestes to apply the words to the goddess Diana, whereas Iphigenia was meant. 
• i.e. the Palladium of Troy, given by Zeus to Priam, and carried off by Aeneas 
to Italy. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
23 1 
decision are continually reserved for man. Of this Shakespeare has 
afforded the finest examples. In Macbeth, for instance, the witches 
appear as external powers determining Macbeth's fate in advance. 
Yet what they declare is his most secret and private wish which 
comes home to him and is revealed to him in this only apparently 
external way. Finer and deeper still, the appearance of the ghost 
in Hamlet is treated as just an objective form of Hamlet's inner 
presentiment. With his dim feeling that something dreadful must 
have happened, we see Hamlet come on the scene; now his 
father's ghost appears to him and reveals to him the whole crime. 
After this monitory disclosure we expect that Hamlet will at once 
punish the deed by force and we regard his revenge as completely 
justified. But he hesitates and hesitates. Shakespeare has been 
reproved for this inactivity and has been blamed on the ground 
that the play to some extent never recovers from this flaw. But 
Hamlet's nature is weak in practice; his beautiful heart is indrawn; 
it is hard for him to decide to escape from this inner harmony; he 
is melancholy, meditative, hypochondriacal, and pensive, there­
fore with no inclination for a rash act. After all, Goethe clung to 
the idea that what Shakespeare wished to sketch was a great deed 
imposed on a soul that had not grown enough for its execution. 
And he finds the whole piece worked out in accordance with this 
interpretation : 'Here is an oak tree,' he says, 'planted in a costly 
jar which should only have had lovely flowers blooming in it; the 
roots expand; the jar is destroyed.'1 But Shakespeare in relation 
to the appearance of the ghost brings out a still deeper trait: 
Hamlet hesitates because he does not blindly believe in the ghost: 
The spirit that I have seen 
May be the devil ; and the devil hath power 
To assume a pleasing shape ; yea and perhaps, 
Out of my weakness and my melancholy 
(As he is very potent with such spirits) 
Abuses me to damn me; I'll have grounds 
More relative than this. The play's the thing, 
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.z 
Here we see that the apparition does not command a helpless 
Hamlet; Hamlet doubts, and, by arrangements of his own, will 
get certainty for himself, before he embarks on action. 
I Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, iv. 13. 
2 Act rr, scene ii, ad fin. Hegel quotes the English. 

232 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
(y) Now, lastly, the universal powers which not only come on 
the scene explicitly in their independence but are equally alive 
in the human breast and move the human heart in its inmost being, 
can be described in Greek by the word 1T(i8os,1 pathos. To trans­
late this word is difficult, because 'passion' always carries with it 
the concomitant concept of something trifling and low, for we 
demand that a man should not fall into a passion. 1Pathos' therefore 
we take here in a higher and more general sense without this over­
tone of something blameworthy, froward, etc. So, e.g., the holy 
sisterly love of Antigone is a 'pathos' in the Greek meaning of the 
word. 'Pathos' in this sense is an inherently justified power over 
the heart, an essential content of rationality and freedom of will. 
Orestes, e.g., kills his mother, not at all from an inner movement 
of heart, such as we would call 'passion"; on the contrary, the 
'pathos' which drives him to the deed is well considered and 
wholly deliberate. From this point of view we cannot say that the 
gods have 'pathos'. They are only the universal content of what 
drives human individuals to decision and action. But the gods 
themselves abide as such in their peace and absence of passion, 
and, if it comes to dissension and strife among them, there is 
really no seriousness about it, or their strife has a universal 
symbolic significance as a universal war of the gods. 'Pathos', 
therefore, we must restrict to human action and understand by 
it the essential rational content which is present in man's self and 
fills and penetrates his whole heart. 
(a!a!) Now 'pathos' forms the proper centre, the true domain, of 
art; the representation of it is what is chiefly effective in the work 
of art as well as in the spectator. For 'pathos' touches a chord 
which resounds in every human breast; everyone knows and 
recognizes the valuable and rational element inherent in the 
content of a true 'pathos'. 'Pathos' moves us because in and for 
itself it is the mighty power in human existence. In this regard, 
what is external, the natural environment and its mise en scene, 
should appear only as a subordinate accessory, something to 
1 This means anything that befalls one, whether good or bad. Thus simply to 
transliterate the word as Hegel does may give a wrong impression in English 
where our pathos, with a long a, has nothing to do with Hegel's pAthos. It is 
ٲsed frequently in what follows, and I have put it into inverted commas. Some­
:imes it simply means a strong passion, e.g. of love or hate. See L. and S., s.v. 
But Hegel means by it a 'passionate absorption in fulfilling a one-sided ethical 
mrpose' (Mure, The Philosophy of Hegel, London, 1965, p. 192). 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE I D EAL 
233 
buttress the effect of the 'pathos'. Therefore nature must essentially 
be used as symbolic and must let the 'pathos' re-echo from itself, 
for the 'pathos' is the proper subject of the representation. 
Landscape painting, e.g., is in itself a slighter kind of painting 
than historical painting, but, even where it appears on its own 
account, it must strike the note of a universal feeling and have the 
form of a 'pathos'.-In this sense it has been said that art as such 
must touch us; but, if this principle is to hold good, the essential 
question is how this experience of being touched may be produced 
by art. Being touched is, in general, being moved sympathetically 
as a feeling, and people, especially nowadays, are, or some of them 
are, easily touched. The man who sheds tears sows tears, and they 
grow easily enough. But in art what should move us is only the 
inherently genuine 'pathos'. 
(ftfJ) Therefore neither in comedy nor in tragedy may the 
'pathos' be mere folly and subjective caprice. In Shakespeare, 
e.g., Timon is a misanthrope for purely external reasons ; his friends 
have taken his dinners, squandered his property, and when he 
now needs money for himself, they desert him. This makes him 
a passionate misanthrope. This is intelligible and natural, but not 
a 'pathos' inherently justified. Still more in Schiller's early work, 
Der Menschenfeind, 1 is similar hatred just a modern whim. For 
in this instance the misanthrope is besides a reflective, judicious, 
extremely honourable man, magnanimous to his peasants whom 
he has released from serfdom, and full of love for his daughter who 
is both beautiful and lovable. In a similar way Quinctius Heymeran 
von Flaming, in August La Fontaine's novel,2 torments himself 
with the capriciousness of the human race, and so on. Above all, 
however, the latest poetry has screwed itself up to endless fan­
tasticalness and mendacity which is supposed to make an effect by 
its bizarre character, but it meets with no response in any sound 
heart, because in such refinements of reflection on what is true in 
human life, everything of genuine worth is evaporated.J 
But conversely, whatever rests on doctrine and conviction, and 
1 The Misanthrope-first published in his periodical Thalia (Leipzig, 1791); 
later in a collection of his prose writings (Leipzig, 18oz, part 4). 
• A. H. J. La Fontaine, 1758-ISJ I. The Life and Deeds of Count Q. H. von 
Flaming was published in 1795-6. 
J It is not possible to say to what poets Hegel is referring, even if any of them 
have survived. When he speaks of 'genuinely living poetry' (p. 20 above) he may 
have had Goethe and Schiller in mind. 

234 
I. THE I D E A  O F  A R T I S T I C  B E A U TY 
insight into their truth, in so far as this knowledge is a chief 
requirement, is no genuine 'pathos' for artistic representation. To 
this class belong scientific facts and truths. For science requires 
a special kind of education, a repeated study and manifold know­
ledge of the specific science and its value; but an interest in this 
sort of study is not a universal moving power in the human breast; 
it is restricted always to a certain number of individuals.1 There is 
the same difficulty in the treatment of purely religious doctrines, if, 
that is to say, they are to be unfolded in their inmost character. 
The universal content of religion, belief in God, etc., is of course 
an interest of every deeper mind; yet, granted this faith, it is not 
the concern of art to proceed to the exposition of religious dogmas 
or to a special insight into their truth, and art must therefore 
beware of entering upon such expositions. On the other hand, we 
credit the human heart with every 'pathos', with all the motiva­
tions by ethical powers which are of interest for action. Religion 
affects the disposition, the heaven of the heart, the universal 
consolation and elevation of the individual in himself, rather than 
action proper as such. For the Divine in religion as action is 
morality and the particular powers of the moral realm. But these 
powers affect, not the pure heaven of religion, but, in contrast, 
the world and what is strictly human. In antiquity the essence of 
this worldliness was the character of the gods who therefore, even 
in connection with action, could enter together completely into the 
representation of action. 
If therefore we ask about the scope of the 'pathos' that belongs 
to this discussion, the number of such substantial determinants 
of the will is slight, their scope small. Opera,2 in particular, will 
and must keep to a restricted circle of them, and we hear the 
laments and joys, the fortune and misfortune of love, fame, 
honour, heroism, friendship, maternal love, love of children, of 
spouses, etc., continually, over and over again. 
(yy) Now such a 'pathos' essentially demands representation 
and graphic amplification. And at that it must be a soul inherently 
rich which puts into its 'pathos' the wealth of its inner being and 
does not merely concentrate itself in itself and remain intensive, 
1 It is a pity that this sentence, so incontestably true, has been so unpalatable 
to those who have been busy at enlarging and multiplying universities in this 
country in recent years. 
• Mozart and especially Rossini were Hegel's favourites. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR T H E  I D EAL 
235 
but expresses itself extensively and rises to a fully developed form. 
This inner concentration or outer development makes a great 
difference, and individuals of particular nationalities are in this 
respect too essentially different. Nations with more developed 
reflective powers are more eloquent in the expression of their 
passion. The Greeks, e.g., were accustomed to unfold in its depth 
the 'pathos' which animates individuals without thereby getting 
into cold reflections or blethers. The French too in this respect are 
'pathetic' and their eloquent description of passion is not always 
pure verbiage, as we Germans with our emotional reserve often 
suppose, because the varied expression of feeling seems to us to 
be a wrong done to it. In this sense there was a period in our 
German poetry when especially the young spirits, bored by the 
French rhetorical torrent, yearned for nature and now came to 
a vigour which expressed itself mainly in interjections alone. 
Yet with 'Ochl' and '01' or with the curse of anger, with storming 
and beating about hither and thither, nothing is to be effected. 
The vigour of mere interjections is a poor vigour and the mode of 
expression of a soul uncultured still. The individual spirit, in 
which the 'pathos' is presented, must be one which is full and 
capable of spreading and expressing itself. 
In this matter too Goethe and Schiller provide a striking con­
trast. Goethe is less 'pathetic' than Schiller and has a rather inten­
sive manner of presentation ;  in his lyrics especially he remains 
more self-reserved; his songs, as is appropriate to song, make us 
notice their intention, without fully explaining it. Schiller, on the 
contrary, likes to unfold his 'pathos' at length with great clarity 
and Ilveliness of expression. In a similar way Claudius1 in Wands­
becker Bothe (i, p. 153) contrasts Voltaire with Shakespeare: 'the 
one is what the other brings into appearance. M. Arouet says: "I 
weep", and Shakespeare weeps'. But what art has to do with is 
precisely saying and bringing into appearance, not with actual 
natural fact. If Shakespeare only wept, while Voltaire brings 
weeping into appearance, then Shakespeare is the poorer poet. 
In short, in order to be concrete in itself, as ideal·art requires, 
the 'pathos' must come into representation as the 'pathos' of 
a rich and total spirit. This leads us on to the third aspect of 
action-to the more detailed treatment of character. 
1 M. Claudius, I74o-t8 1 5. The Wandsbeck Messenger was published under 
the pseudonym 'Asmus'. 
8243716 

236 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
(c) Character 
We started from the universal and substantial powers of action. 
They need for their practical proof and actualization human 
individuality in which they appear as the moving 'pathos'. But the 
universal element in these powers must close up in particular 
individuals into a totality and singularity in itself. This totality is 
man in his concrete spirituality and its subjectivity, is the human 
total individuality as character. The gods become human 'pathos', 
and 'pathos' in concrete activity is the human character. 
\ Therefore character is the proper centre of the ideal artistic 
representation, because it unifies in itself the aspects previously 
considered, unifies them as factors in its own totality. For the Idea 
as Ideal, i.e. shaped for sensuous imagination and intuition, and 
acting and completing itself in its manifestation, is in its deter­
minacy self-related subjective individuality. But the truly free 
individuality, as the Ideal requires it, has to evince itself, not only 
as universality, but no less as concrete particularity and as the 
completely unified mediation and interpenetration of both these 
sides which jar themselves are as a unity. This constitutes the 
totality of character, the ideal of which consists in the rich power­
fulness of subjectivity welding itself into one. 
In this matter we have to consider character under three aspects: 
{ll:) as total individuality, as the richness of character; 
(fJ) this totality must at once appear as particularity, and the 
character, therefore, as determinate; 
(y) the character (as in itself one) closes together with this 
determinacy (as with itself) in its subjective independence and 
has thereby to maintain itself as an inherently fixed character. 
These abstract categories we will now explain and bring nearer 
to our apprehension. 
( ll:) Since the 'pathos' is unfolded within a concrete individual, 
it appears in its determinacy no longer as the entire and sole 
interest of the representation but becomes itself only one aspect, 
even if a chief one, of the character in action. For man does not, 
as may be supposed, carry in himself only one god as his 'pathos' ; 
the human emotional life is great and wide; to a true man many 
gods belong; and he shuts up in his heart all the powers which 
are dispersed in the circle of the gods; the whole of Olympus 
is assembled in his breast. In this sense someone in antiquity 

THE BEA UTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
237 
said: '0 man, out of thine own passions thou hast created the 
gods.' 1 And in fact, the more civilized the Greeks became, the 
more gods they had, and their earlier gods were feebler, not con­
figurated into individuality and specific character. 
In this wealth of emotional life, therefore, character must 
show itself too. What precisely constitutes the interest that we 
take in a character is the fact that such a totality comes out 
strongly in it and nevertheless in this fullness it remains itself, 
a subject entire in himself. If the character is not depicted in this 
roundness and subjectivity and is abstractly at the mercy of only 
a single passion, then it seems beside itself, or crazy, weak, and 
impotent. For the weakness and powerlessness of individuals 
consists precisely in this, that the constituents of those eternal 
powers do not come into appearance in them as their very own 
self, as predicates inhering in them qua the subject of the predicates. 
In Homer, e.g., every hero is a whole range of qualities and 
characteristics, full of life. Achilles is the most youthful hero, but 
his youthful force does not lack the other genuinely human 
qualities, and Homer unveils this many-sidedness to us in the 
most varied situations. Achilles loves his mother, Thetis; he 
weeps for Briseis because she is snatched from him, and his 
mortified honour drives him to the quarrel with Agamemnon, 
which is the point of departure for all the further events in the 
Iliad. In addition he is the truest friend of Patroclus and Anti­
lochus, at the same time the most glowing fiery youth, swift of 
foot, brave, but full of respect for the aged. The faithful Phoenix, 
his trusted attendant, is at his feet, and, at the funeral of Patroclus, 
he gives to old Nestor the highest respect and honour. But, even 
so, Achilles also shows himself irascible, irritable, revengeful, and 
full of the harshest cruelty to the enemy, as when he binds the slain 
Hector to his chariot, drives on, and so drags the corpse three 
times round the walls of Troy. And yet he is mollified when old 
Priam comes to him in his tent; he bethinks himself of his own old 
father at home and gives to the weeping King the hand which had 
slain his son. Of Achilles we may say: here is a man; the many­
sidedness of noble human nature develops its whole richness in 
this one individual. And the same is true of the other Homeric 
characters-Odysseus, Diomedes, Ajax, Agamemnon, Hector, 
1 This familiar quotation I cannot identify. Statius, iii. 661, says 'First in the 
world fear made the gods', but I think that Hegel has something Greek in mind. 

238 
I. THE I D E A  OF A RT I S T I C  BEAUTY 
Andromache; each of them is a whole, a world in itself; each is 
a complete living human being and not at all only the allegorical 
abstraction of some isolated trait of character. How pale and 
trumpery in comparison, even if they are powerful individualities, 
are the horny Siegfried, Hagen of Troy, and even Volker the 
minstrel!1 
It is such many-sidedness alone that gives· living interest to 
character. At the same time this fullness must appear as concen­
trated in one person and not as diffusion, freakishness, and mere 
diverse excitability-as children, e.g., take up everything and 
make something of it for a moment, but are without character; 
character, on the contrary, must enter the most varied elements of 
the human heart, be in them, be itself completely filled by them, 
and yet at the same time must not stand still in them but rather, in 
this totality of interests, aims, qualities, traits of character, pre­
serve the subjectivity which is mustered and held together in itself. 
For the presentation of such total characters epic poetry above 
all is suited, dramatic and lyric poetry less so. 
(/3} But at this totality as such art cannot yet stop. For we have 
to do with the Ideal in its determinacy, and therefore the more 
specific demand for particularity and individuality of character 
presses on here. Action, especially in its conflict and reaction, 
should be presented within fixed and determinate limits. Con­
sequently the heroes of drama are for the most part simpler in 
themselves than those of epic. Their firmer definition comes out 
through the particular 'pathos' which is made the essential and 
conspicuous trait of character and which leads to specific aims, 
decisions, and actions. But if the restriction is then carried so far 
that an individual is pared down to a mere inherently abstract 
1 Characters in the Nibelungenlied. My references to this work, which Hegel 
often mentions in the sequel, are drawn from the English translation by A. T. 
Hatto (Penguin Books, 1972), in which there are appendixes discussing such 
points raised by Hegel as the authorship and geography of the poem. After 
bathing in dragon's blood, Siegfried became 'horny' and invulnerable except 
at a spot between his shoulder blades. Volker was a nobleman, called 'minstrel' 
because he was a competent amateur. Hegel writes Hagen 'of Troy', in conformity 
with the practice of medieval German writers who liked to trace the ancestry of 
their heroes back to Trojans or Greeks. Hagen is actually described, however, 
as 'Lord of Troneck', and the location of-this place has been disputed. Trond­
heim has been suggested, but although Hagen is more devoted to Brunhild of 
Iceland than to Chriemhild of Burgundy, he was a Burgundian vassal and 
perhaps unlikely to have his fief at such a distance. Lasson, however (p. 323), 
reads 'Hagen von Tronje'. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
ZJ9 
fonn of a specific 'pathos' like love, honour, etc., then all vitality 
and subjective life is lost, and the presentation becomes, as with 
the French, often in this respect trumpery and poor. In the 
particularized character there must therefore be r:me chief aspect 
which is dominant, but, within this determinacy, complete vitality 
and fullness must remain preserved, so that the individual has an 
opportunity to turn in many directions, to engage in a variety of 
situations, and to unfold in diverse expressions the wealth of 
a developed inner life. Despite their inherently simple 'pathos', 
the characters in the tragedies of Sophocles are examples of this 
quality of life. In their plastic self-sufficiency they may be com­
pared to the figures of sculpture. After all, in spite of its deter­
minateness, sculpture may express a many-sidedness of character. 
In contrast to the tempestuous passion which concentrates with 
all its force on one point alone, sculpture presents in its stillness 
and speechlessness the forceful neutrality which quietly locks up 
all powers within itself; yet this undisturbed unity nevertheless 
does not stop at abstract determinateness but in its beauty fore­
shadows the birthplace of everything as the immediate possibility 
of entering into the most diverse sorts of relation. We see in the 
genuine figures of sculpture a peaceful depth which has in itself 
the ability to actualize all powers out of itself. Even more than 
from sculpture we must require from painting, music, and poetry 
the inner multiplicity of character, and this requirement has been 
fulfilled by genuine artists at all times. For example, in Shake­
speare's Romeo and Juliet, Romeo has love as his chief 'pathos' ; yet 
we see him in the most diverse relations to his parents, to friends 
and his page, in honour-squabbles and his duel with Tybalt, in his 
piety and trust in the Friar, and, even on the edge of the grave, in 
talk with the apothecary from whom he buys the deadly poison, 
and all the time he is dignified and noble and deeply moved. 
Similarly in Juliet there is comprised a totality of relations to her 
father, her mother, her nurse, to Count Paris, and the Friar. And 
yet she is just as deeply sunk in herself as in each of these situations, 
and her whole character is penetrated and borne by only one feel­
ing, the passion of her love which is as deep and wide and 'bound­
less as the sea', so that she may rightly say 'the more I give to thee, 
the more I have, for both are infinite' [Act n, scene ii]. 
Therefore, even. if it be only one 'pathos' which is represented, 
still, because it is a wealth in itself, it must be developed. This is 

2+0 
I. THE I D E A  O F  ARTISTIC B EAUTY 
the case even in lyric poetry where yet the 'pathos' cannot come 
into action in concrete affairs. Even here the 'pathos' must be 
displayed as the inner situation of a full and developed heart which 
can disclose itself in every aspect of situations and circumstances. 
Lively eloquence, an imagination which fastens on everything, 
brings the past into the present, can use the whole exterior sur­
roundings as a symbolic expression of the inner · life and does 
not shun deep objective thoughts but in their exposition betrays 
a noble spirit which is far-reaching, comprehensive, clear and 
estimable-this richness of the character which expresses its inner 
world is in its right place even in lyric. Considered by the Under­
standing, such many-sidedness within a dominant determining 
'pathos' may, it is true, appear to be illogical. Achilles, e.g., in his 
noble heroic character, the man whose youthful force of beauty 
is his fundamental trait, has a tender heart in relation to father 
and friend; now how is it possible, one may ask, for him to drag 
Hector round the walls in his cruel thirst for revenge? Similarly 
illogical are Shakespeare's clowns, almost always clever and full 
of gifted humour; so one may say: How can such clever individuals 
come to such a pass that they behave so clownishly ? The Under­
standing, that is, will emphasize abstractly only one side of the 
character and stamp it on the whole man as what alone rules him. 
What is opposed to such dominance of a one-sidedness appears 
to the Understanding as simply illogical. But in the light of the 
rationality of what is inherently total and therefore living, this 
illogicality is precisely what is logical and right. For man is this: 
not only the bearer of the contradiction of his multiple nature but 
the sustainer1 of it, reȓaining therein equal and true to himself. 
(y) But it follows that the character must combine his particu­
larity with his subjectivity; he must be a determinate figure and 
in this determinacy possess the force and firmness of one 'pathos' 
which remains true to itself. If the man is not thus one in himself, 
the different aspects of his diverse characteristics fall apart and 
in that case are senseless and meaningless. Being in unity with 
oneself constitutes in art precisely the infinite and divine aspect of 
individuality. From this point of view, firmness and decision are 
an important determinant for the ideal presentation of character. 
' The bearer (tragen) and sustainer (ertragen) are inadequate translations of 
the German words. But they cannot be reproduced in English. The French 
have porter and supporter. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
z41 
As has already been touched upon above, this ideal presentation 
appears when the universality of the powers is pervaded by the 
particularity of the individual and, in this unification, becomes 
a subjectivity and individuality which is fully unified in itself and 
self-related. 
Still, by making this demand, we must attack many productions, 
especially of more modern art. 
In Corneille's Cid [1636], e.g., the collision of love and honour 
plays a brilliant part. Such a 'pathos' in different characters can of 
course lead to conflicts; but when it is introduced as an inner 
opposition in one and the same character, this provides an op­
portunity for splendid rhetoric and affecting monologues, but 
the diremption of one and the same heart, which is tossed hither 
and thither out of the abstraction of honour into that of love, and 
vice versa, is inherently contrary to solid decisiveness and unity 
of character. 
It is equally contrary to individual decision if a chief character 
in whom the power of a 'pathos' stirs and works is himself deter­
mined and talked over by a subordinate figure, and now can shift 
the blame from himself on to another-as, e.g., Phedre in Racine's 
[play, 1677] is talked over by Oenone. A genuine character acts 
out of himself and does not allow a stranger to look into his 
conscience and make decisions. But if he has acted out of his own 
resources, he will also take on himself the blame for his act and 
answer for it. 
Another type of instability of character has been developed, 
especially in recent German productions, into an inner weakness 
of sensibility which has ruled long enough in Germany. As the 
nearest famous example [Goethe's] Werther [1774] is to be cited, 
a thoroughly morbid character without the force to lift himself 
above the selfishness of his love. What makes him interesting is the 
passion and beauty of his feeling, his close relationship to nature 
along with the development and tenderness of his heart. More 
recently, this weakness, with ever increasing deepening into the 
empty subjectivity of the character's own personality, has assumed 
numerous other forms. For example, we may include here the 
'beautiful soul' of Jacobi's Woldemar.1 In this novel there is 
' F. H. Jacobi, 1743-1819. The novel was published at Flensburg in 
1779. See Hegel's Philosophy of Right, § 140, and the reference there to his 
Phenomenology. 

242 
I. THE I D E A  OF ART I S T I C  B E AUTY 
displayed in the fullest measure the imposture of the heart's 
splendour, the self-deceptive delusion of its own virtue and 
excellence. There is an elevation and divinity of soul which in 
every way comes into a perverse relation with actuality, and the 
weakness which cannot endure and elaborate the genuine content 
of the existing world it conceals from itself by the superiority in 
which it spurns everything as unworthy of itself: Mter all, to the 
truly moral interests and sterling aims of life such a beautiful 
soul is not open; on the contrary, it spins its own web in itself and 
lives and weaves solely within the scope of its most subjective 
religious and moral hatchings. With this inner enthusiasm for its 
own unbounded excellence, which it makes so much of in its own 
eyes, there is then at once bound up an infinite irritability towards 
everyone else who at every moment is supposed to find out, 
understand, and admire this solitary beauty; if others cannot do 
this, then at once its whole heart is moved to its depths and infi­
nitely injured. Then forthwith it is all up with the whole of mankind, 
all friendship, all love. Inability to endure pedantry and rudeness, 
trifling circumstances and blunders which a greater and stronger 
character overlooks and by which he is uninjured, is beyond all 
imagination, and it is just the most trifling matter which brings 
such a beautiful heart to the depths of despair. Then, therefore, 
mournfulness, worry, grief, bad temper, sickness, melancholy, and 
misery have no end. Thence there springs a torture of reflections on 
self and others, a convulsiveness and even a harshness and cruelty 
of soul, in which at the last the whole miserableness and weakness 
of the inner life of this beautiful soul is exposed.-We cannot 
have any heart for this oddity of heart. For it is a property of 
a genuine character to have spirit and force to will and take hold 
of something actual. Interest in such subjective characters who 
always remain shut into themselves is an empty interest, however 
much they hug the notion that their nature is higher and purer, 
one that has engendered in itself the Divine (which for others is 
entirely clothed in the recesses of the heart) and exposed it entirely 
in undress. 
In another form this deficiency in inner substantial solidity of 
character is also developed when these remarkable higher splen­
dours of heart are hypostatized in a perverse way and treated as 
independent powers. This is the province of magic, magnetism, 
demons, the superior apparitions of clairvoyance, the disease of 

THE B EA UTY O F  ART OR T H E  IDEAL 
243 
somnambulism, etc. The living and responsible individual in 
regard to these dark powers is put into relation with something 
which on the one hand is within himself, but on the other hand is 
a beyond, alien to his inner life, by which he· is determined and 
ruled. In these unknown forces there is supposed to lie an in­
decipherable truth of dreadfulness which cannot be grasped or 
understood. From the sphere of art, however, these dark powers 
are precisely to be banned, for in art nothing is dark ; everything 
is clear and transparent. With these visionary notions nothing 
is expressed except a sickness of spirit ; poetry runs over into 
nebulousness, unsubstantiality, and emptiness, of which examples 
are provided in Hoffmann and in Heinrich von Kleist's1 Prince of 
Homburg. The truly ideal character has for its content and 'pathos' 
nothing supernatural and ghost-ridden but only true interests 
in which he is at one with himself. Clairvoyance especially has 
become trivial and vulgar in recent poetry. In Schiller's Wilhelm 
Tell [1804, Act II, scene i], on the other hand, when old Atting­
hausen, on the point of death, proclaims the fate of his country, 
prophecy of this sort is used in a fitting place. But to have to 
exchange health of character for sickness of spirit in order to 
produce collisions and arouse interest is always unfortunate ; for 
this reason too insanity is to be made use of only with great 
caution. 
To these perversities which are opposed to unity and firmness 
of character we may as well annex the more modern principle of 
irony.2 This false theory has seduced poets into bringing into 
characters a variety which does not come together into a unity, 
so that every character destroys itself as character. [On this theory] 
if an individual comes forward at first in a determinate way, this 
determinacy is at once to pass over into its opposite, and his 
character is therefore to display nothing but the nullity of its 
determinacy and itself. By irony this is regarded as the real height 
of art, on the assumption that the spectator must not be gripped 
by an inherently affirmative interest, but has to stand above it, as 
irony itself is away above everything. 
In this sense it has been proposed, after all, to explain characters 
1 1777-18 J I .  The drama was written in 1 809-10, but not produced until 
1821. 
a See above, Introduction 7(iii), and notes there. Also Philosophy of Right, 
t 140 (f). 

24 
I. THE I DE A  O F  A RT I S T I C  B E A U TY 
in Shakespeare. Lady Macbeth, e.g., is supposed [by Tieck (Lasson, 
p. 331)] to be a loving spouse with a soft heart, although she not 
only finds room for the thought of murder, but also carries it out 
[by her husband's hand]. But Shakespeare excels, precisely owing 
to the decisiveness and tautness of his characters, even in the 
purely formal greatness and firmness of evil. Hamlet indeed is 
indecisive in himself, yet he was not doubtful about what he was 
to do, but only how. Yet nowadays they make even Shakespeare's 
characters ghostly, and suppose that we must find interesting, 
precisely on their own account, nullity and indecision in changing 
and hesitating, and trash of this sort. But the Ideal consists in this, 
that the Idea is actual, and to this actuality man belongs as subject 
and therefore as a firm unity in himself. 
At this point this may suffice in relation to the individual's full­
ness of character in art. The important thing is an inherently 
specific essential 'pathos' in a rich and full breast whose inner 
individual world is penetrated by the 'pathos' in such a way that 
this penetration, and not the 'pathos' alone as such, is represented. 
But all the same the 'pathos' in the human breast must not so 
destroy itself in itself as thereby to exhibit itself as unsubstantial 
and null. 
I I I. T H E  EXTERNAL DETER M I NA C Y  O F  T H E  I D EAL 
In connection with the determinacy of the Ideal, we treated it first 
in general terms, namely how and why the Ideal as such has to 
clothe itself with the form of the particular. Secondly, we found 
that the Ideal must be moved in itself and advance therefore to 
that difference in itself, the totality of which is displayed as action. 
Yet through action the Ideal goes out into the external world, and 
the question arises, thirdly, how this final aspect of concrete 
reality is to be configurated in a way compatible with art. For the 
Ideal is the Idea identified with its reality. Hitherto we have 
pursued this reality only so far as human individuality and its 
character. But man has also a concrete external existence, out of 
which indeed, as subject, he withdraws himself and becomes self­
enclosed, yet in this subjective unity with himself he still remains 
related to externality all the same. To man's actual existence there 
belongs a surrounding world, just as the statues of a god have 
a temple. This is the reason why we must now mention the 

THE B EAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
245 
manifold threads which link the Ideal to externality and are drawn 
through it. 
Thus we now enter upon an almost unreviewable breadth of 
circumstances and entanglement in external and relative matters. 
For, in the first place, nature presses on us at once from outside, 
in locality, time, climate; and in this respect, at our every step, 
wherever we go, a new and always specific picture already con­
fronts us. Further, man avails himself of external nature for his 
needs and purposes; and there come into consideration the manner 
and way that he uses it, his skill in inventing and equipping him­
self with tools and housing, with weapons, seats, carriages, his 
way of preparing food and eating it, the whole wide sphere of the 
comfort and luxury of life, etc. And, besides, man lives also in 
a concrete actual world of spiritual relations, which all equally are 
given an external existence, so that there also belong to the sur­
rounding actual world of human life the different modes of com­
mand and obedience, of family, relatives, possession, country and 
town life, religious worship, the waging of war, civil and political 
conditions, sociability, in short the whole variety of customs and 
usages in all situations and actions. 
In all these respects, the Ideal immediately encroaches on 
ordinary external reality, on the daily life of the actual world, and 
therefore on the common prose of life. For this reason, if one 
keeps in view the modern nebulous idea of the Ideal, it may look as 
if art must cut off all connection with this world of relative things, 
since the aspect of externality is supposed to be something purely 
indifferent, and even, in comparison with the spirit and its inward­
ness, vulgar and worthless. From this point of view, art is regarded 
as a spiritual power which is to lift us above the whole sphere of 
needs, distress, and dependence, and to free us from the intelli­
gence and wit which people are accustomed to squander on this 
field. Furthermore, this is supposed to be a field, mostly purely 
conventional, a field of mere accidents, because it is tied down 
in time, place, and custom, and these, it is thought, art must dis­
dain to harbour. Yet this semblance of ideality is partly only a 
superior abstraction made by that modern subjective outlook which 
lacks courage to commit itself to externality, and partly a sort of 
power which the subject assumes in order by his own effort to put 
himself outside and beyond this sphere, if he has not already been 
absolutely raised above it by birth, class, and situation. As a means 

246 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
for this putting oneself outside and beyond, there remains nothing 
over in that case except withdrawal into the inner world of feelings 
which the individual does not leave, and now in this unreality 
regards himself as a sapient being who just looks longingly to 
heaven and therefore thinks he may disdain everything on earth. 
But the genuine Ideal does not stop at the indeterminate and the 
purely inward; on the contrary; it must also go out in its totality 
into a specific contemplation of the external world in all its aspects. 
For, the human being, this entire centre of the Ideal, lives; he is 
essentially now and here, he is the present, he is individual infinity, 
and to life there belongs the opposition of an environment of 
external nature in general, and therefore a connection with it and 
an activity in it. Now since this activity is to be apprehended, not 
only as such, but in its determinate appearance, by art, it has to 
enter existence on and in material of this [mundane] kind. 
But, just as a man is in himself a subjective totality and therefore 
separates himself from what is external to him, so the external 
world too is a whole, rounded and logically interconnected . in 
itself. Yet in this exclusion from one another both worlds stand in 
essential relationship and constitute concrete reality only in virtue 
of this interconnection, and the representation of this reality 
affords the content of the Ideal. Hence arises the question men­
tioned above: in what form and shape can externality be repre­
sented by art in an ideal way within such a totality ? 
In this connection too we have once more to distinguish three 
aspects in the work of art. 
First, it is the whole of abstract externality as such-space, 
time, shape, colour-which needs a form compatible with art. 
Secondly, the external comes on the scene in its concrete reality, 
as we have just sketched it, and it demands in the work of art an 
harmonization with the subjectivity of man's inner being which 
has been placed in such an environment. 
Thirdly, the work of art exists for contemplation's delight-for 
a public which has a claim to find itself again in the objet d'art in 
accordance with its genuine belief, feeling, imagination, and to be 
able to come into concord with the represented objects. 
I. Abstract Externality as such 
When the Ideal is drawn out of its bare essentiality into external 
existence, it at once acquires a double sort of reality. For one thing, 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
247 
the work of art gives to the content of the Ideal in general the 
concrete shape of reality, since it displays that content as a specific 
state of affairs, a particular situation, as character, event, action, 
and indeed in the form of what is at the same time external fact; 
for another thing, this appearance, already total in itself, art 
transfers into a specific sensuous material, and thereby creates 
a new world of art, visible to the eye and audible to the ear. 
In both these respects art reveals the most remote corners of 
externality, in which the inherently total unity of the Ideal cannot, 
in its concrete sprituality, come into appearance any more. In this 
connection the work of art has also a double external aspect: i.e. 
(a) it remains an external object as such and therefore (b) in its 
configuration as such can also assume only an external unity. Here 
there returns again the same relation which we already had an 
opportunity to discuss in connection with the beauty of nature, 
and so too the same characteristics come into prominence once 
again, and here in relation to art. In other words, the mode of con­
figuration of the external is, on the one hand, regularity, symmetry, 
and conformity to law, and, on the other hand, unity as the sim­
plicity and purity of the sensuous material which art employs as 
the external element for the existence of its productions. 
(a) First, as regards regularity and symmetry, these, as a mere 
lifeless geometrical unity, cannot possibly exhaust the nature of 
a work of art, even on its external side ; they have their place only 
in what is inherently lifeless, in time, spatial forms, etc. In this 
sphere they therefore appear as a sign of mastery and deliberation 
even in the most external things. We see them, therefore, asserting 
themselves in works of art in two ways. Retained in their abstrac­
tion, they destroy the quality of life; the ideal work of art must 
therefore, even on its external side, rise above the purely sym­
metrical. Yet, in this matter, as in musical tunes, for example, 
regularity is not wholly superseded at all. It is only reduced to 
being simply a foundation. But, conversely, this restraint and 
regulation of the unruly and unrestrained is again the sole funda­
mental characteristic which certain arts can adopt in line with the 
material for their representation. In that event, regularity is the 
sole ideal in the art. 
lts1 principal application, from this point of view, is in archi­
tecture, because the aim of an architectonic work of art is to give 
1 i.e. the application of both regularity and symmetry. 

248 
I. THE I D E A  OF ARTI STIC BEAUTY 
artistic shape to the external, inherently inorganic, environment of 
spirit. What therefore dominates in architecture is the straight 
line, the right angle, the circle, similarity in pillars, windows, 
arches, columns, and vaults. For the architectural work of art is 
not just an end in itself; it is something external for something 
else to which it serves as an adornment, dwelling-place, etc. A 
building awaits the sculptural figure of a god or else the group 
of people who take up their home there. Consequently such a 
work of art should not essentially draw attention to itself. In 
this connection regularity and symmetry are pre-eminently ap­
propriate as the decisive law for the external shape, since the 
intellect takes in a thoroughly regular shape at a glance and 
is not required to preoccupy itself with it for long. Naturally 
there is no question here of the symbolic relation which 
architectural forms also assume in relation to the spiritual 
content for which they provide surroundings or an external 
locality. 
The same thing is valid too for that strict kind of gardening 
which can count as a modified application of architectural forms 
to actual nature. In gardens, as in buildings, man is the chief thing. 
Now of course there is another kind of gardening which makes 
variety and its lack of regularity into a rule; but regularity is to 
be preferred. For if we look at the variously complex mazes and 
shrubberies continually diversified in their twistings and windings, 
the bridges over stagnant water, the surprise of gothic chapels, 
temples, Chinese pagodas, hermitages, urns, pyres, mounds, 
statues-despite all their claims to independence we have soon 
had more than enough ; and if we look a second time, we at once 
feel disgust. It is quite different with natural regions and their 
beauty; they are not there for the purpose of use and gratification, 
and may come before us on their own account as an object of 
consideration and enjoyment. On the other hand, regularity in 
gardens ought not to surprise us but to enable man, as is to be 
demanded, to appear as the chief person in the external environ­
ment of nature. 
Even in painting there is a place for regularity and symmetry 
in the arrangement of the whole, in the grouping of figures, 
their placing, movement, drapery, etc. Yet since, in painting, the 
spiritual quality of life can penetrate external appearance in a far 
profounder way than it can in architecture, only a narrower scope 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
249 
is left for the abstract unity of the symmetrical, and we find rigid 
uniformity and its rule for the most part only in the beginnings of 
art, while later the freer lines, 1 which approach the form of the 
organic, serve as the fundamental type. 
On the other hand, in music and poetry regularity and symmetry 
are once again important determinants. In the duration of their 
sounds these arts have an element of pure externality as such 
which is incapable of any other more concrete kind of configura­
tion. Things together in space can comfortably be seen at a glance ; 
but in time one moment has gone already when the next is there, 
and in this disappearance and reappearance the moments of time 
go on into infinity. This indeterminacy has to be given shape by 
the regularity of the musical beat which produces a determinateness 
and continuously recurring pattern and thereby checks the march 
to infinity. The beat of music has a magical power to which we 
are so susceptible that often, in hearing music, we beat time to it 
without being aware of the fact. This recurrence ·of equal time 
intervals is not something belonging objectively to the notes and 
their duration. To the note as such, and to time, to be divided and 
repeated in this regular way is a matter of indifference. The beat 
therefore appears as something purely created by the subject [the 
composer], so that now in listening we acquire the immediate 
certainty of having in this regularization of time something purely 
subjective and indeed the basis of the pure self-identity which the 
subject inherently possesses as his self-identity and unity and their 
recurrence in all the difference and most varied many-sidedness 
of experience. Therefore the beat resounds in the depths of our 
soul and takes hold of us in virtue of this inner subjectivity, a sub­
jectivity at first abstractly self-identical. From this point of view 
it is not the spiritual content, not the concrete soul of feeling, 
which speaks to us in . the musical notes; neither is it the note as 
note that moves us in our inmost being; on the contrary, it is this 
abstract unity, introduced into time by the subject, which echoes 
the like unity of the subject. The same is true of the metre and 
rhyme of poetry. Here too, regularity and symmetry are the 
systematic rule, and throughout are necessary to this external side 
of poetry. The sensuous element is thereby at once drawn out 
of its sensuous sphere and shows in itself already that here what 
is at issue is something other than the pronouncements of the 
1 i.e. as distinct from the rigidity of geometrical shapes. 

:zso 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
ordinary consciousness which treats the duration of the notes 
arbitrarily and with indifference. 
A similar, even if not so strictly determined, regularity now rises 
still further and is mingled, although in a quite external way, with 
the properly living content. In an epic and a drama, e.g., which 
has its specific divisions, cantos, acts, etc., it is important to give 
these separate parts an approximate equality of lerigth; the same 
equality is important in individual groupings in paintings, although 
in this case there should be no appearance of a compulsion in 
respect of the essential subject-matter or of a conspicuous domina­
tion by mere regularity. 
Regularity and symmetry as the abstract unity and determinacy 
of what is inherently external, alike in space and time, govern 
principally only the quantitative, the determinacy of size. What 
no longer belongs to this externality as its proper element therefore 
discards the domination of purely quantitative relations and is 
determined by deeper relations and their unity. Thus the more 
that art fights its way out of externality as such, the less is its mode 
of configuration ruled by regularity, to which it ascribes only a 
restricted and subordinate sphere. 
Having mentioned symmetry, we must at this point mention 
harmony once more. It is no longer related to the purely quantita­
tive but to essentially qualitative differences which do not persist 
as mere opposites over against one another but are to be brought 
into concord. In music, e.g., the relation of the tonic to the mediant 
and dominant is not purely quantitative; on the contrary, these are 
essentially different notes which at the same time coalesce into a 
unity without letting their specific character cry out as a sharp 
opposition and contradiction. Discords, on the other hand, need 
resolution. The case is similar with the harmony of colours. Here 
likewise what art demands is that in a painting the colours shall 
neither appear as a varied and arbitrary confusion nor so that 
their oppositions are simply dissolved, but that they are harmonized 
into the concord of a total and unitary impression. Thus, looked 
at more closely, harmony requires a totality of differences which 
in the nature of the case belong to a determinate sphere: colour, 
e.g., has a determinate range of colours as the so-called funda­
mental colours which are derived from the basic nature of colour 
as such and are not accidental mixtures. Such a totality in its 
concord constitutes harmony. In a painting, e.g., the totality of 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR T H E  IDEAL 
251 
the fundamental colours, yellow, blue, green, and red must be 
present as well as their harmony, and the old masters, even un­
consciously, have attended to this completeness and observed its 
law. Now since harmony begins to disengage itself from the pure 
externality of determinate existence, it is thereby also enabled to 
adopt and express in itself a wider and more spiritual content. The 
old masters gave the fundamental colours in their purity to the 
dress of important people,, while mixed colours were given to their 
retinue. Mary, e.g., generally wears a blue mantle, because the 
gentle peace of blue corresponds to inner serenity and gentleness ; 
more seldom she has a conspicuous red gown. 
(b) The second feature of externality, as we saw, affects the 
sensuous material as such, which art uses for its representations. 
Here unity consists in the simple determinacy and uniformity of 
the material in itself which may not deviate into indefinite variety 
and mere mixture, or, in general, into unclarity. This requirement 
too is related only to space (to the clarity of outlines; for example, 
to the precision of straight lines, circles, etc.) and to the fixed 
determinacy of time, e.g. the strict maintenance of the beat, and, 
further, to the purity of determinate notes and colours. In painting, 
e.g., the colours ought not to be blurred or greyish, but clear, 
definite, and inherently simple. Their pure simplicity on this 
sensuous side constitutes the beauty of colour, and the simplest 
colours in this connection are the most effective : pure yellow, e.g., 
which does not pass over into green, red which has not a dash of 
blue or yellow, etc. Of course it is difficult in that case to maintain 
these colours in harmony at the same time in their fixed simplicity. 
But these inherently simple colours are the foundation which 
should not be entirely shaded down, and, even if mixtures cannot 
be dispensed with, still the colours must not appear as a murky 
confusion, but as clear and simple in themselves, or otherwise 
instead of the luminous clarity of colour there is nothing but 
a smudge. 
The like demand is to be raised too in connection with the 
sound of notes. In the case of strings, e.g., whether of metal or 
catgut, it is the vibration of this material which produces the sound, 
and specifically the vibration of a string of definite tension and 
length ; if the tension is slackened or if the string struck is not of 
the right length, the note no longer possesses this simple deter­
minateness and rings false, since it passes over into other notes. 

zsz 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
The same thing happens if, instead of that pure vibrating and 
quivering, we hear as well the mechanical grating and scraping as 
a noise intermixed with the sound of the note as such. Similarly, 
the note produced by the human voice must develop pure and free 
out of the throat and the chest, without allowing any humming 
interference, or, as is the case with hoarseness, without allowing 
some hindrance, not overcome, to disturb our listening. This free­
dom from any foreign admixture, this clarity and purity in their 
fixed unwavering determinateness, is in this purely sensuous 
connection the beauty of the note, which distinguishes it from 
rustling, screeching, etc. The same sort of thing can be said about 
speech too, especially about the vowels. A language which has 
a, e, i, o, u, definite and pure is, like Italian, melodious and 
singable. Diphthongs, on the other hand, have always a mixed 
note. In writing, the sounds of speech are reduced to a few 
regularly similar signs and appear in their simple determinate 
character; but, in speaking, this determinate character is all too 
often blurred, so that now especially dialects like the South­
German, Swabian, Swiss, have sounds that are so blurred that 
they cannot possibly be written down. But this is not, as may be 
supposed, a deficiency in the written language, but arises rather 
from the dullness of the people. 
For the present this is enough about this external side of the 
work of art, the side which, as mere externality, is only capable of 
an external and abstract unity. 
But the next point is that it is the spiritual concrete individuality 
of the Ideal which enters externality in order to display itself there, 
so that the external must be penetrated by this inwardness and 
totality which it has the function of expressing. For this purpose 
mere regularity, symmetry, and harmony, or the simple deter­
minacy of the sensuous material, are found to be inadequate. This 
leads us on to the second aspect of the external determinacy of 
the Ideal. 
2. Correspondence of the Concrete Ideal with its External Reality 
The general law which in this connection we can assert consists in 
this, that man in his worldly envirqnment must be domesticated 
and at home, that the individual must appear as having his abode, 
and therefore as being free, in nature and all external relations, so 
that both sides, (i) the subjective inner totality of character and the 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
253 
character's circumstances and activity and (ii) the objective totality 
of external existence, do not fall apart as disparate and indifferent 
to one another, but show that they harmonize and belong together. 
For external objectivity, in so far as it is the actuality of the Ideal, 
must give up its purely objective independence and inflexibility 
in order to evince itself as identical with that [subjectivity] of which 
it is the external existence. 
In this matter we have to state three different ways of looking at 
such harmony: 
First, the unity of the two may remain purely implicit and appear 
only as a secret inner bond linking man with his external en­
vironment. 
Secondly, however, since concrete spirituality and its indivi­
duality serves as the starting-point and essential content of the 
Ideal, the harmony with external existence has also to be displayed 
as originating from human activity and as produced thereby. 
Thirdly, and lastly, this world produced by the· human spirit 
is itself again a totality; in its existence this totality forms an 
objective whole with which individuals, moving on this ground, 
must stand in essential connection. 
(a) Now in relation to the first point we may start from the fact 
that since the environment of the Ideal does not yet appear here 
as established by human activity, it is still in the first place what is 
in general external to man, i.e. the external world of nature. Its 
representation in the ideal work of art is therefore the first thing to 
talk about. 
Here too we can emphasize three aspects: 
(a.} In the first place, as soon as external nature is presented in 
its external formation, it is in every direction a reality formed in 
a specific way. Now if it is actually to be given the due which it has 
to claim in respect of the representation, then the representation 
must be drawn up in complete fidelity to nature, although we 
have seen earlier what differences must be respected even here 
between immediate nature and art. But on the whole it is precisely 
characteristic of the great masters to be truly, genuinely, and com­
pletely tied down in regard to the external natural environment. 
For nature is not merely earth and sky in general, and man does not 
hover in the air; he feels and acts in a specific locality of brooks, 
rivers, sea, hills, mountains, plains, woods, gorges, etc. Although 
Homer, e.g., may not give us modern portrayals of nature, he is so 

254 
I. THE IDEA O F  ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
true in his descriptions and lists, and gives us such an accurate 
picture of the Scamander, the Simoeis, the coasts and bays of the 
sea, that even now the same country has been found by geo­
graphers to correspond with his description. On the other hand, 
the crudely sensational poems of fairground entertainers, both in 
characters and descriptions, are poor, empty, and wholly nebulous. 
The Mastersingers1 also, when they put old Bible stories into verse 
and locate them in Jerusalem, e.g., provide nothing but names. 
The same is true in the Heldenbuch:2 Ortnit rides in the pine­
forest, fights with the dragon, without any human surroundings, 
specific locality, etc., so that in this respect we get as good as 
nothing for our vision. Even in the Nibelungenlied there is nothing 
different: we hear indeed of Worms, the Rhine, the Danube, but 
here too we get no further than what is poor and vague. But it is 
perfect determinacy which constitutes the aspect of individuality 
and reality which, without it, is just an abstraction, and that 
contradicts the very conception of external reality. 
(/3) Now with this requirement of determinacy and fidelity to 
nature there is immediately linked a certain fullness of detail 
whereby we acquire a picture, a vision even, of this external 
aspect of nature. It is true that there is an essential distinction 
between the different arts according to the medium in which they 
are expressed. The fullness and detailing of external fact lies 
further away from sculpture because of the peace and universality 
of its figures, and it has externals, not as environment and locality, 
but only as drapery, coiffure, weapons, seat, and the like. Yet many 
figures of ancient sculpture are specifically distinguishable only 
by conventions of drapery, the dressing of the hair, and further 
similar marks. But this is not the place for discussing this con­
ventionality, because it is not to be attributed to the natural as 
such; it cancels precisely the aspect of accident in such matters 
and is the way and means of their becoming permanent and more 
universal. 
Opposed here to sculpture, the lyric displays predominantly the 
inner heart only and therefore when it takes up the external world 
does not need to pursue it to such definite perceptibleness. Epic, 
1 The musical and poetic guilds which flourished in German cities from the 
fourteenth to the sixteenth century. Wagner's opera provides a faithful repre­
sentation of guild practices. 
• Book of the Heroes, a collection of heroic and popular epics of the Middle 
High German period, c. nzs. Ortnit is the eponymous hero of one of them. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE I DEAL 
255 
on the other hand, says what is there, where and how deeds have 
been done, and therefore, of all kinds of poetry, needs the greatest 
breadth and definiteness of the external locality. So too painting 
by its nature enters especially in this respect upon detail more than 
any other art does. But in no art should this definiteness go astray 
into the prose of actual nature and its direct imitation, nor should 
it overtower in partiality and importance the fullness of detail 
devoted to the presentation of the spiritual side of individuals and 
events. In general it should not make itself exclusively indepen­
dent, because here the external should achieve appearance only in 
connection with the inner. 
(y) This is the point of importance here. Namely, for an indivi­
dual to come on the scene as actual, two things, as we saw [in the 
preamble], are required: (i) he himself in his subjective character, 
and (ii) his external environment. Now for this externality to 
appear as his, it is essential that between these two things there 
shall prevail an essential harmony which may be · more or less 
inward and into which of course a great deal of contingency enters 
too, yet without the loss of the fundamental identity. In the whole 
spiritual disposition of epic heroes, e.g., in their mode of life, 
mentality, feeling, and accomplishment, there must be made 
perceptible a secret harmony, a note of concord between the two 
which closes them into a whole. The Arab, e.g., is one with his 
natural surroundings and is only to be understood along with his 
sky, his stars, his hot deserts, his tents, and his horses. For he is at 
home only in such a climate, zone, and locality. Similarly Ossian's 
heroes (according to Macpherson's invention or his modern 
revision) are extremely subjective and turned inward, but in their 
gloom and melancholy they appear throughout tied to their moors 
where the wind whispers through the thistles, to their clouds, 
mists, hills, and dark glens. The face of this whole locality alone 
makes us really completely clear about the inner life of the figures 
living and moving on this ground with their sadness, grief, sorrows, 
battles, and misty apparitions, for they are entirely involved in this 
environment and only there are they at home. 
From this point of view we can now for the first time observe 
that historical material has the great advantage of containing, 
immediately developed, even indeed into detail, such a harmony 
of the subjective and objective sides. A priori this harmony can 
be drawn from the imagination only with difficulty, and yet we 

256 
I. THE I D EA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
should always have an inkling of it, however little it can be de­
veloped conceptually in most parts of a subject-matter. Of course 
we are accustomed to rate a free production of the imagination 
higher than the manipulation of material already available, but the 
imagination cannot go so far as to provide the required harmony so 
firmly and definitely as it already lies before us in actual reality 
where national traits themselves proceed from this harmony. 
This is the general principle for the purely implicit unity of 
subjectivity with its external natural environment. 
(b) A second kind of harmony does not stop at this purely 
implicit unity but is expressly produced by human activity and 
skilfulness, in that man converts external things to his own use 
and puts himself in correspondence with them as a result of the 
satisfaction which he has thus acquired. In contrast to that first 
concord, which only concerned more general matters, this aspect 
is related to the particular, to special needs and their satisfaction 
through the special use of natural objects. This sphere of need and 
satisfaction is one of absolutely infinite variety, but natural things 
are still infinitely more many-sided and acquire a greater simplicity 
only because man introduces into them his spiritual characteristics 
and impregnates the external world with his will. Thereby he 
humanizes his environment, by showing how it is capable of 
satisfying him and how it cannot preserve any power of indepen­
dence against him. Only by means of this effectual activity is he 
no longer merely in general, but also in particular and in detail, 
actually aware of himself and at home in his environment. 
Now the fundamental conception to be stressed in relation to 
art for this whole sphere lies briefly in the following: Man, on the 
particular and finite side of his needs, wishes, and aims, stands 
primarily not only in a general relation to external nature, but more 
precisely in a relation of dependence. This relativity and lack of 
freedom is repugnant to the ideal, and man can become an object 
for art only if he is first freed from this labour and distress, and 
has cast off this dependence. The act of conciliating the two sides, 
furthermore, may take a double starting-point, in that, first, nature 
for its part supplies man in a friendly way with what he needs, 
and instead of putting an obstacle in the way of his interests and 
aims, rather presents them to him itself and welcomes them in 
every way. But, secondly, man has needs and wishes which nature 
is in no position to satisfy directly. In these cases he must work out 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE I D EAL 
:2.57 
his necessary satisfaction by his own activity; he must take 
possession of things in nature, arrange them, form them, strip off 
every hindrance by his own self-won skilfulness, and in such a way 
that the external world is changed into a means whereby he can 
realize himself in accordance with all his aims. Now the purest 
relationship is to be found where both these aspects come together, 
when spiritual skilfulness is so far linked with the friendliness of 
nature that the fully accomplished harmony has come through­
out into appearance instead of the harshness and dependence of 
struggle. 
From the ideal ground of art the distress of life must be banished. 
In so far as possession and affluence afford a situation in which 
poverty and labour vanish, not merely momentarily but entirely, 
they are therefore not only not unaesthetic, but they rather coin­
cide with the Ideal; although it would only betray an untrue 
abstraction to set aside altogether, in modes of representation 
which are compelled to take notice of concrete reality, the relation 
of man to those needs. This sphere of needs belongs of course to 
finitude, but art cannot dispense with the finite; it must not treat 
it as something purely bad; it has to reconcile and link it with 
what is genuine and true, for even the best actions and dispositions, 
taken in their determinate character and regarded in their abstract 
content, are restricted and therefore finite. The fact that I must 
keep myself alive, eat and drink, have a house and clothing, need 
a bed, a chair, and so many appurtenances of other kinds, is of 
course a necessity for the externals of life; but the inner life is so 
greatly involved with these things that man gives clothing and 
weapons even to his gods, and envisages them in manifold needs 
and their satisfaction. Still, as we have said, this satisfaction must 
in that case appear as assured. In the case of knights errant, e.g., 
the removal of external distress in the chance of their adventures 
occurs only as reliance on chance, just as savages rely on nature 
simply as it is. Both are unsatisfactory for art. For the genuine 
ideal consists not only in man's being in general lifted above the 
grim seriousness of dependence on these external circumstances, but 
in his standing in the midst of a superfluitywhich permits him to play 
freely and cheerfully with the means put at his disposal by nature. 
Within these general considerations the following two points 
may now be more precisely distinguished from one another: 
(c.:) The first concerns the use of natural things for purely 

258 
I. THE IDEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
contemplative satisfaction. Under this head comes every adornment 
and decoration which man bestows on himself, in general all the 
splendour with which he surrounds himself. By so bedecking 
himself and his environment he shows that the costliest things 
supplied by nature and the most beautiful things that catch the 
eye-gold, jewels, pearls, ivory, expensive robes-these rarest and 
most resplendent things, have no interest for him in themselves 
and should not count as merely natural, but have to show them­
selves on him or as belonging to his environment, to what he loves 
and venerates, to his monarchs, his temples, his gods. To this end 
he chooses especially what in itself as external already appears as 
beautiful, pure bright colours, the lustre of metals, fragrant woods, 
marble, etc. Poets, especially oriental ones, do not fail to use such 
wealth ; it plays its part too in the Nibclungenlied; and art in general 
does not stop at mere descriptions of this magnificence but equips 
its actual works with the same wealth, where this is possible and 
in place. There was no sparing of gold and ivory on the statue of 
Pallas Athene at Athens and the statue of Zeus at Olympia; the 
temples of the gods, churches, images of the saints, royal palaces, 
afford amongst nearly all peoples an example of splendour and 
magnificence. From time immemorial nations have delighted to 
have their own wealth before their eyes on their divinities, just as 
in the case of the splendour of their monarchs, they were delighted 
that such things were there and drawn from amongst themselves. 
It is true that such delight can be disturbed by so-called moral 
conceptions when one reflects how many poor Athenians could 
have been fed from the mantle of Pallas Athene and how many 
slaves could have been ransomed ; and in times of great national 
distress, even in antiquity, such wealth has been devoted to useful 
ends, and the same thing has happened now amongst us with the 
treasures of monasteries and churches. Further, such miserable 
considerations may be applied not only to single works of art, but 
to the whole of art itself; what sums, it may be asked, has a State 
not expended on an Academy of Arts, or for the purchase of old 
and modern works of art, and the establishment of galleries, 
theatres, museums ? But however many moral and touching emo­
tions may be excited in this connection, this is possible only by 
calling to mind again the distress and poverty which art precisely 
demands shall be set aside, so that it can but redound to the fame 
and supreme honour of every people to devote its treasures to 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
259 
a sphere which, within reality itself, rises luxuriously above all the 
distress of reality. 
(/3) But man has not merely to bedeck himself and the environ­
ment in which he lives; he must also use external things practically, 
for his practical needs and ends. In this area there only now begin 
all man's work and trouble, and his dependence on the prose of 
life, and the chief question here, therefore, is how far even this 
sphere can be represented compatibly with the demands of art. 
(cxcx) The first way in which art has tried to dismiss this whole 
sphere is the idea of a so-called Golden Age or even of an idyllic 
life. Under such conditions on the one hand nature satisfies 
without trouble to man every need that may stir within him, while 
on the other hand in his innocence he is content with what 
meadows, woods, flocks, a little garden and a hut can afford him 
by way of nourishment, housing, and other amenities, because all 
the passions of ambition or avarice, impulses which appear con­
trary to the higher nobility of human nature, are still altogether 
quiescent. Of course at a first glance such a state of affairs has 
a touch of the ideal, and certain restricted spheres of art may be 
content with this kind of presentation. But if we probe it more 
deeply, such a life will soon bore us. Gessner's writings, e.g., are 
little read nowadays, and if we do read them we cannot be at home 
in them. For a restricted mode of life of this kind presupposes an 
insufficient development of spirit also. A full and entire human 
life requires higher urgings, and this closest association with nature 
and its immediate products cannot satisfy it any longer. Man 
may not pass his life in such an idyllic poverty of spirit; he must 
work. What he has an urge for, he must struggle to obtain by his 
own activity. In this sense even physical needs stir up a broad and 
variegated range of activities and give to man a feeling of inner 
power, and, out of this feeling, deeper interests and powers can 
then also be developed. But at the same time even here the 
harmony of inner and outer must still remain the fundamental 
thing, and nothing is more offensive in art than when physical 
distress is displayed exaggerated to an extreme. Dante, e.g., by only 
a few strokes of the pen touchingly presents to us Ugolino's 
death from starvation [Hell, Canto xxxiiiJ. When Gerstenberg, on 
the other hand, in his tragedy of the same name1 gives a prolix 
description of every degree of horror, of how first his three sons 
1 Ugo/ino, by H. W. von Gerstenberg (I7J7-I82J). 

z6o 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
and finally Ugolino himself perish from hunger, this is mat̗rial 
entirely at variance, from this point of view, with artistic 
representation. 
(flfl}l Yet the situation opposed to the idyllic, namely that of 
universal culture, all the same provides, in an opposite way, many 
hindrances to art. In this situation the long and complicated con­
nection between needs and work, interests and their satisfaction, 
is completely developed in all its ramifications, and every indivi­
dual, losing his independence, is tied down in an endless series of 
dependences on others. His own requirements are either not at all, 
or only to a very small extent, his own work, and, apart from this, 
every one of his activities proceeds not in an individual living way 
but more and more purely mechanically according to universal 
norms. Therefore there now enters into the midst of this industrial 
civilization, with its mutual exploitation and with people elbowing 
other people aside, the harshest cruelty of poverty on the one hand; 
on the other hand, if distress is to be removed [i.e. if the standard 
of living is to be raised], this can only happen by the wealth of 
individuals who are freed from working to satisfy their needs and 
can now devote themselves to higher interests. In that event of 
course, in this superfluity, the constant reflection of endless de­
pendence is removed, and man is all· the more withdrawn from all 
the accidents of business as he is no longer stuck in the sordidness 
of gain. But for this reason the individual is not at home even in 
his immediate environment, because it does not appear as his own 
work. What he surrounds himself with here has not been brought 
about by himself; it has been taken from the supply of what was 
already available, produced by others, and indeed in a most 
mechanical and therefore formal way, and acquired by him only 
through a long chain of efforts and needs foreign to himself. 
(yy) Therefore what is most fitted for ideal art proves to be a third 
situation which stands midway between the idyllic and golden ages 
and the perfectly developed universal mediations of civil society. 
This is a state of society which we have already learnt to recognize 
as the Heroic or, preferably, the ideal Age. The Heroic Ages are 
no longer restricted to that idyllic poverty in spiritual interests; 
they go beyond it to deeper passions and aims; but the nearest 
1 The section on Civil Society in Hegel's Philosophy of Right should be com­
pared with this whole passage. By this state of 'universal culture' he means 
precisely what he described there as 'civil society'. See § 187. 

T H E  B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
261 
environment of individuals, the satisfaction of their immediate 
needs, is still their own doing. Their food is still simple and there­
fore more ideal, as for instance honey, milk, wine; while coffee, 
brandy, etc., at once call to our mind the thousand intermediaries 
which their preparation requires. So too the heroes kill and roast 
their own food ; they break in the horse they wish to ride; the 
utensils they need they more or less make for themselves ;  plough, 
weapons for defence, shield, helmet, breastplate, sword, spear, are 
their own work, or they are familiar with their fabrication. In such 
a mode of life man has the feeling, in everything he uses and every­
thing he surrounds himself with, that he has produced it from his 
own resources, and therefore in external things has to do with 
what is his own and not with alienated objects lying outside his 
own sphere wherein he is master. In that event of course the activity 
of collecting and forming his material must not appear as painful 
drudgery but as easy, satisfying work which puts no hindrance 
and no failure in his way. 
Such a form of life we find, e.g., in Homer. Agamemnon's 
sceptre is a family staff, hewn by his ancestor himself, and in­
herited by his descendants [Iliad, ii]. Odysseus carpentered him­
self his huge marriage bed [Odyssey, xxiii] ; and even if the famous 
armour of Achilles was not his own work, still here too the mani­
fold complexity of activities is cut short because it is Hephaestus 
who made it at the request of Thetis [Iliad, xviii]. In brief, every­
where there peeps out a new joy in fresh discoveries, the exuber­
ance of possession, the capture of delight; everything is domestic, 
in everything the man has present before his eyes the power of his 
arm, the skill of his hand, the cleverness of his own spirit, or a 
result of his courage and bravery. In this way alone have the 
means of satisfaction not been degraded to a purely external 
matter; we see their living origin itself and the living consciousness 
of the value which man puts on them because in them he has things 
not dead or killed by custom, but his own closest productions. 
Thus here everything is idyllic, but not in that limited mode where 
earth, rivers, sea, trees, cattle, etc., provide man with his susten­
ance, and where consequently he is visible, in the main, only in his 
restriction to this environment and its enjoyment. On the con­
trary, within this original mode of life deeper interests arise in 
relation to which the whole external world is there only as an 
accessory, as the ground and means for higher ends, yet as a ground 

262 
I. THE I D EA O F  ARTI ST I C  BEAUTY 
and an environment over which that harmony and independence 
is diffused and comes into appearance only because each and 
everything produced and used by human hands is at the same 
time prepared and enjoyed by the very man who needs it. 
But to apply such a mode of representation to materials drawn 
from later completely civilized times always involves great diffi­
culty and danger. Yet Goethe, in this connection; has given us 
a complete masterpiece in Hermann und Dorothea. I will cite only 
a few small points by way of comparison. Voss, 1 in his well-known 
Luise, sketches, in an idyllic way, life and activity in a quiet and 
restricted, though independent, circle. The village parson, the 
tobacco pipe, the dressing gown, the easy chair, and then the 
coffee-pot play a great part. Now coffee and sugar are products 
which could not have originated in such a circle, and they point 
at once to a totally different context, to a strange world with its 
manifold interconnections of trade and factories, in short to the 
world of modern industry. That circle of country life is therefore 
not wholly self-enclosed. On the other hand, in the beautiful 
picture of Hermann and Dorothea we did not need to require 
such a self-containment, for, as has already been indicated on 
another occasion, in this poem-which indeed maintains an idyllic 
tone throughout-an extremely dignified and important part is 
played by the great interests of the age, the battles of the French 
Revolution, the defence of our country. The narrower circle of 
family life in a country village therefore does not keep itself at all 
so self-enclosed that the world deeply involved in most powerful 
affairs is just ignored, as it is by the village pastor in Voss's Luise; 
on the contrary, owing to the association with those greater world­
commotions within which the idyl!ic characters and events are 
portrayed, we see the scene transferred into the broader scope of 
a fuller and richer life ; and the apothecary who lives only in the 
context oflocal affairs, restricting and conditioning him everywhere, 
is represented as a narrow-minded philistine, as good-natured but 
peevish. Still, in respect of the nearest environment of the charac­
ters, the note that we required above is struck throughout. So, 
e.g., to recall just this one thing, the host does not drink coffee, as 
you might expect, with his guests, the parson and the apothecary: 
'With care the gammer brought clear, excellent wine in a cut-glass 
1 J. H. Voss, I7SI-I8z6. Luise (1795) has been called a source of Goethe's 
H. u. D., which appeared a year later and may have been stimulated by it. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART O R  THE IDEAL 
z63 
flask on a shining pewter plate, along with greenish rummers, the 
proper goblets for Rhine wine.' In the cool of the day they drink 
a local growth, 1783, in the local glasses which alone are suitable 
for Rhine wine; 'the flow of the Rhine and its lovely bank' 1 is thus 
equally brought before our imagination and soon we are led into 
the vineyard behind the owner's house, so that here nothing takes 
us out of the proper sphere of a mode of life agreeable in itself 
and productive of its needs within itself. 
(c) Apart from these first two sorts of external environment, 
there is still a third mode in concrete connection with which every 
individual has to live. This consists of the general spiritual rela­
tionships of religion, law, morality, the sort and kind of political 
organization, the constitution, law-courts, family, public and 
private life, sociability, etc. For the ideal character must come 
on the scene satisfied not only in his physical needs but in his 
spiritual interests also. It is true that the substantial, divine, and 
inherently necessary element in these relationships is, in its essen­
tial nature, simply one and the same; but in the objective world 
it assumes manifold shapes of different kinds and enters the sphere 
of the contingency of the particular, the conventional, and what is 
valid only for specific times and peoples. In this form all the 
interests of spiritual life come to have an external reality which 
confronts the individual as custom, usage, and habit, and, at the 
same time, by being a self-enclosed subject, he enters into con­
nection not only with external nature but also with this totality 
which is related to him and belongs to him still more nearly. On 
the whole, we can claim for this sphere the same living harmony, 
with · the indication of which we were concerned just now, and 
here we will therefore pass over its more detailed consideration, 
the chief points of which will be cited immediately in another 
context. 
3· The Externality of the Ideal [Work of Art] in 
relation to the Public 
Art by being the representation of the Ideal must introduce it in 
all the previously mentioned relations to external reality, and 
associate the inner subjectivity of character closely with the 
external world. But however far the work of art may form a world 
inherently harmonious and complete, still, as an actual single 
1 Both quotations are from the first canto of H. u. D., ad fin. 

264 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
object, it exists not for itself, but for us, for a public which sees and 
enjoys the work of art. The actors, for example, in the performance 
of a drama do not speak merely to one another, but to us, and they 
should be intelligible in both these respects. And so every work of 
art is a dialogue with everyone who confronts it. Now the truly 
ideal [work of art] is indeed intelligible to everyone in the universal 
interests and passions of its gods and men; yet since it brings its 
individuals before our eyes within a specific external world of 
customs, usages, and other particular details, there arises the new 
demand that this external world shall come into correspondence 
not only with the characters represented but equally with us too. 
Just as the characters in the work of art are at home in their ex­
ternal surroundings, we require also for ourselves the same 
harmony with them and their environment. Now to whatever age 
a work of art belongs, it always carries details in itself which 
separate it from the characteristics proper to other peoples and 
other centuries. Poets, painters, sculptors, composers choose 
materials above all from past times whose civilization, morals, 
usages, constitution, and religion are different from the whole 
civilization contemporary with themselves. Such a step backward 
into the past has, as has already been remarked [in the section on 
The Heroic Age], the great advantage that this departure from the 
present and its immediacy brings about automatically, owing to 
our memory, that generalization of material with which art cannot 
dispense. Yet the artist belongs to his own time, lives in its customs, 
outlooks, and ideas. The Homeric poems, e.g., whether Homer 
actually lived as the single author of the Iliad and the Odyssey or 
not, are yet separated by four centuries at least from the time of 
the Trojan war; and a twice greater period separated the great 
Grecian tragedians from the days of the ancient heroes from which 
they transferred the content of their poetry into their own time. 
The same is true about the Nibelungenlied and the poet who could 
put together into one organic whole the different sagas which this 
poem contains. 
Now of course the artist is quite at home with the universal 
'pathos', human and divine, but the variously conditioning ex­
ternal form of the ancient period itself, the characters and actions 
of which he presents, has changed essentially and become foreign 
to him. Further, the poet creates for a public, and primarily for 
his own people and age, which may demand ability to understand 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
z6s 
and be at home in the work of art. True, the genuine, immortal 
works of art remain enjoyable by all ages and nations, but even so 
for their thorough understanding by foreign peoples and in other 
centuries there is involved a wide apparatus of geographical, 
historical, and even philosophical, notes, facts, and knowledge. 
Now, given this clash between different ages, the question 
arises of how a work of art has to be framed in respect of the 
external aspects of locality, customs, usages, religious, political, 
social, moral conditions: namely whether the artist should forget 
his own time and keep his eye only on the past and its actual 
existence, so that his work is a true picture of what has gone ; or 
whether he is not only entitled but in duty bound to take account 
solely of his own nation and contemporaries, and fashion his work 
according to ideas which coincide with the particular circumstances 
of his own time. These opposite requirements may be put in this 
way: the material should be handled either objectively, appro­
priately to its content and its period, or subjectively, i.e. assimi­
lated entirely to the custom and culture of the present. To cling 
to either of these in their opposition leads to an equally false 
extreme which we will touch upon briefly so that thereby we can 
ascertain the genuine mode of representation. 
Therefore in this connection we have three points to study: 
(i) the subjective stress on the contemporary civilization, 
(ii) purely objective fidelity in relation to the past, 
(iii) 
true objectivity in the representation and adoption of 
foreign materials distant in time and nationality. 
(a). The purely subjective interpretation in its extreme one-sided­
ness goes so far as to cancel the objective form of the past alto­
gether and put in its place simply the way that the present appears. 
(ex) On the one hand this may arise from ignorance of the past, 
or also from the naivete of not feeling, or not becoming conscious 
of, the contradiction between the topic and such a way of making it 
the artist's own ; thus the basis of such a manner of representation 
is lack of culture. We find this sort of naivete most strongly marked 
in Hans Sachs,1 who with fresh perceptibility, it is true, and joyful 
heart, has made into Niirnbergers, in the strictest sense of the 
word, our Lord God, God the Father, Adam, Eve, and the 
1 1494-1576, leader of the guild of Mastersingers in Niirnberg, and author of 
numerous songs, poems, and dramas. 

:z66 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
Patriarchs. God the Father, for example, once has a kindergarten 
and school for Abel and Cain and Adam's other children in 
manner and tone just like a schoolmaster in Sachs's day; he 
catechizes them on the Ten Commandments and the Lord's 
Prayer; Abel learns everything really piously and well, but Cain 
behaves and answers like a bad and impious boy; when he is 
to repeat the Ten Commandments, he turns· them all upside 
down: thou shalt steal, thou shalt not honour thy father and 
mother, and so on. So too in southern Germany they have repre­
sented the story of the Passion in a similar way (this was banned, 
but it has been renewed again):1 Pilate appears as an official, 
boorish, coarse, arrogant; the soldiers, entirely in keeping with 
the vulgarity of our time, offer to Christ in extremis a pinch of 
tobacco ; he disdains it and they force snuff into his nose; and the 
whole audience have their joke at this, while being perfectly pious 
and devout at the same time; indeed the more devout they are in 
this exhibition, the more does the inwardness of religious ideas 
become livelier for them in this immediate presence, in their own 
world, of this external portrayal of the Passion. 
Of course in this sort of transformation and perversion of the 
past into our own views and the shape of our world there is some 
justification, and there may seem something great in Hans Sachs's 
audacity in being so familiar with God and these ancient ideas and, 
with all piety, assimilating them to the ideas of a narrow-minded 
bourgeoisie. But nevertheless it is an outrage on the heart, and 
a cultural and spiritual deprivation, not merely to deny to the 
subject mattet in any connection the right to its own objectivity, 
but even to bring it into a form wholly opposed thereto, with the 
result that nothing then appears but a burlesque contradiction. 
(/3) On the other hand, the same subjective outlook of the artist 
may proceed from pride in his own culture, because he treats the 
views of his own age and its own moral and social conventions as 
the only ones valid and acceptable, and therefore his audience 
cannot be expected to bear any subject-matter until it has assumed 
the form of that same culture. This sort of thing was exemplified 
in the so-called classical good taste of the French. What was to 
1 Some liturgical dramas did include elements of rough comedy, but I have 
been unable to discover to which of them Hegel is referring. The mention of 
tobacco may date it later than Sachs. Oberammergau started in 1634, but I am 
not implying that it is to that that Hegel is referring. 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE I DEAL 
267 
please had to be frenchified; what had a different nationality and 
especially a medieval form was called tasteless and barbaric, and 
was rejected with complete contempt. Therefore Voltaire was 
wrong to say1 that the French had improved on the works of 
antiquity; they have only nationalized them, and in this transforma­
tion they treated everything foreign and distinctive with infinite 
disgust, all the more so as their taste demanded a completely 
courtly social culture, a regularity and conventional universality 
of sentiment and its representation. The like abstraction involved 
in cultural delicacy they carry over too into the language used in 
their poetry. No poet might use the word cochon or speak of spoons 
and forks and a thousand other things. Hence the prolix defini­
tions and circumlocutions: e.g. instead of 'spoon' or 'fork', 'an 
instrument wherewith liquid or solid food is brought to the 
mouth', and more of the same kind. But just because of this their 
taste remained extremely narrow; for art, instead of smoothing and 
flattening its content out into such polished generalities, particu­
larizes it rather into living individuality. This is why the French 
have been least able to come to terms with Shakespeare, and when 
they put him on the stage cut out every time precisely those 
passages that are our favourites. Similarly Voltaire makes fun of 
Pindar because he could say /J.p,aTov f-'tv IJSwp. 2. And so, after all, in 
French dramatic works, Chinese, Americans, or Greek and Roman 
heroes must speak and behave exactly like French courtiers. 
Achilles, e.g., in lphigenie en AulideJ is through and through a 
French prince, and if his name were not there no one would dis­
cover an Achilles in him. On the stage indeed his clothing was 
Greek, and he was equipped with helmet and breastplate; but at 
the same time his hair was curled and powdered; his hips were 
broadened by pockets, and he had red spurs fastened to his shoes 
with coloured ribbons. In Louis XIV's time Racine's Esther 
(1689] was popular chiefly because, when Ahasuerus came on the 
scene, he looked like Louis XIV himself entering the great hall 
of audience; true, Ahasuerus had oriental trappings, but he was 
powdered from head to foot and had an ermine royal robe, and 
1 Siecle de Louis XIV, ch. xxii. The context is drama and a pane gyric on 
Racine. 
• 'Water is best', the first line of Pindar's first Ode. The meaning is probably 
that water is the most translucent of liquids. In his Ode sur le carosse de l' Imp&a­
triu de Rusrie, Voltaire describes Pindar as verbose and unintelligible. 
• Racine's Play, 1674. 
K 

z68 
I. THE I D EA O F  A R T I S T I C  BEAUTY 
behind him a great crowd of curled and powdered chamberlains, 
en habit franfais, with wigs, feathered bonnets on their arm, vests 
and hose of drap d' or, silk stockings and red heels on their shoes. 
What only the Court and specially privileged persons could get, 
was seen on the stage by the other classes-the entry of the King, 
brought into verse. 
On the like principle, historiography in France has been pur­
sued not for its own sake or on account of its subject-matter, but 
to serve the interest of the time, in order, we may suppose, to give 
good lessons to the government or to make it detested. Similarly, 
many dramas contain allusions to contemporary events, either 
expressly in their whole content or only incidentally, or, if similar 
allusive passages occur in older pieces, they are deliberately 
emphasized and received with the greatest enthusiasm. 
(y) As a third mode of this subjective outlook we may cite 
abstraction from all proper and genuine artistic content drawn 
from the past and the present, so that what is put before the public 
is merely its own casual subjectivity, i.e. the man in the street in his 
ordinary present activity and concerns. Thus this subjectivity then 
means nothing else but the characteristic mode of everyday con­
sciousness in our prosaic life. In that, of course, everyone is at once 
at home; and only someone who approaches such a work with the 
demands of art cannot be at home in it, since art should precisely 
free us from this sort of subjectivity. Kotzebue, 1 e.g., has only had 
such a great effect in his day by such representations because 'our 
misery and distress, the pocketing of silver spoons, the risk of 
the pillory' and, further, 'parsons, trade councillors, lieutenants, 
secretaries, or majors of hussars'2were brought before the eyes and 
ears of the public, and now everyone was confronted with his own 
domesticity or with that of an acquaintance or relative, etc., or, in 
general, experienced where the shoe pinched in his own particular 
circumstances and special ends. Such subjectivity inherently fails 
to rise to the feeling and imagination of what constitutes the 
genuine content of the work of art, even if it can reduce interest 
in its subject-matters to the ordinary demands of the heart and to 
so-called moral commonplaces and reflections. In all these three 
1 A. F. F. Kotzebue, I76r-r8 r9, dramatist. His murder resulted in the sup­
pression of student clubs. See my note on pp. 299-300 of my translation of the 
Philosophy of Right. 
• The quotations are not from Kotzebue but from Schiller's Shnkespearu 
Schntten. 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE I D EAL 
269 
aspects the representation of external circumstances in a one-sided 
way is subjective and cannot do justice at all to their actual ob­
jective form. 
(b) The second mode of interpretation, on the other hand, is the 
opposite of the first, in that it tries to reproduce the characters and 
events of the past so far as possible in their actual locality and in 
the particular characteristics of their customs and other external 
details. In this matter it is we Germans especially who have led the 
way. For, unlike the French, we are in general the most careful 
recorders of all that is peculiar to other nations, and therefore 
require in art also faithfulness to time, place, usages, clothes, 
weapons, etc. Neither have we any lack of patience in putting our­
selves to the painful trouble of engaging in the scholarly study of 
the modes of thought and perception of foreign countries and of 
centuries long past, in order to be at home with their particular 
characters. And this interpretation and understanding of the 
spirit of other nations from each and every point of view makes us 
in art too not only tolerant of foreign oddities but even all too 
scrupulous in our demand for the most exact accuracy in such 
trivial external matters. True, the French appear likewise versatile 
and active, but, however supremely cultivated and practical they 
may be, they have all the less patience for calm and knowledgeable 
interpretation. With them the first thing is always to judge. We, 
on the other hand, especially in foreign works of art, allow the 
value of every faithful picture : exotic plants, products of nature, 
no matter from what realm, utensils of every kind and shape, dogs 
and cats, even disgusting objects, all are acceptable to us ; and so 
we can make friends with the most foreign ways of looking at 
things, with sacrifices, legends of the saints and their numerous 
absurdities, as well as with other anomalous ideas. Thus what may 
seem to us to be the most important thing in the representation of 
characters in action is to make them come on the scene in their 
speech, costume, etc., for their own sake, and as they actually 
lived, in their mutual relation or opposition, in accordance with 
the character of their period or nation. 
In recent times, especially since Friedrich von Schlegel's work, 
the idea has arisen that the objectivity of a work of art should be 
established by this sort of fidelity. It followed that objectivity had 
to be the chief consideration and that even our subjective interest 
had to be confined mainly to delight in this fidelity and its vivacity. 

270 
I. THE IDEA OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
When such a demand is raised, what is expressed in it is that we 
should not bring with us any interest of a higher sort in regard to 
the essential basis of the represented material or any closer interest 
involved in our contemporary culture and purposes. It is very 
much in this way after all that in Germany, as a result of Herder's' 
instigation, attention began to be paid to folk-song again in a more 
general way, and all sorts and kinds of songs in. the national style 
of peoples and tribes at a primitive stage of culture-Iroquois, 
modern Greek, Lappish, Turkish, Tartar, Mongolian, etc.-have 
been composed, and it was taken to be great genius to think one­
self into foreign customs and the insights of foreign peoples, and 
make poetry entirely out of them. But even if the poet himself 
works his way completely into such foreign oddities and sympa­
thizes with them, they can yet be only something outside the ken 
of the public which is supposed to enjoy them. 
But, in general, if this view is maintained one-sidedly, it rests in 
the purely formal characteristic of historical exactitude and fidelity, 
because it abstracts from the subject-matter and its substantial 
importance, as well as from modern culture and the content of our 
present-day outlook and contemporary sentiment. Yet there should 
be no abstraction from either of these; both sides demand their 
equal satisfaction, and they have to bring into harmony with them 
the third demand, i.e. that for historical fidelity, in a totally dif­
ferent way from what we have seen hitherto. This brings us to 
a consideration of the true objectivity and subjectivity to which 
the work of art has to do justice. 
(c) What can be said in general on this point consists primarily 
in this, that neither of the aspects considered just now may be 
emphasized one-sidedly at the expense and to the detriment of the 
other; but that purely historical exactitude in external matters, 
locality, morals, usages, institutions, constitute that subordinate 
part of the work of art, which must give way to the interest of a 
genuine content that even the culture of the present-day regards 
as imperishable. 
In this matter we may likewise contrast in the true sort 
of representation the following relatively defective modes of 
treatment: 
(ex) First, the representation of the special features of a period 
1 ]. G. von Herder, 1744-xSoJ. See, e.g., 'Ober Ossian und die Lieder alter 
Volker' in Von deutscher Art und Kunst, 1773· 

THE B EA U TY OF ART O R  THE IDEAL 
271 
may be entirely faithful, correct, vivid and intelligible throughout 
even to the modern public, yet without escaping from the ordinary 
language of prose and becoming poetic in itself. Goethe's Gotz 
von Berlichingen, e.g., provides us here with striking samples. We 
only need to open the beginning which brings us into an inn at 
Schwarzenberg in Franconia: 
Metzler and Sievers [two Swabian peasants, leaders in the peasants' 
rebellion] at table ; two groms [from Bamberg] at the fire ; inn­
keeper : 
Sievers : Hansel, another glass of brandy, and good Christian measure. 
Innkeeper : Thou never gettest thy fill. 
Metzler, sotto voce to Sievers : Tell that once again about Berlichingen. 
The Bambergers there are so angry that they are nearly black in 
the face. 
The same sort of thing is in the third Act: 
Enter Georg with a rhone [a gutter taking rain from the roof] : 
There is lead for thee. If thou hittest with only half of it, no one 
will be able to tell His Majesty : 'Lord, we have come off badly'. 
Lerse (cuts off a bit) : A fine bit. 
Georg : The rain may look for another way. I am not frightened for 
it. A brave knight and a proper rain never lack a path. 
Lerse pours [the lead) : Hold the gunner's ladle. (He goes to the 
window.) There's an imperial chap prowling around with a musket. 
They think we have shot our bolt. He shall have a taste of the 
bullet, warm from the pan. (He loads.) 
Georg puts the ladle down : Let me see. 
Lerse shoots : There lies the game. 
All this is sketched most vividly and intelligibly in the character 
of the situation and the grooms, but nevertheless these scenes are 
extremely trivial and inherently prosaic since they take for con­
tent and form purely ordinary objective occurrences and their 
mode of appearance which of course is familiar to everybody. The 
same thing is found too in many of Goethe's other youthful 
productions which were directed especially against everything 
that previously counted as a rule, and they created their chief 
effect through the nearness into which they brought everything 
home to us owing to the maximum comprehensibility of the vision 
and feeling expressed. But the nearness was too great and the 
inner content of the material in part so slight that, just for this 
reason, they were trivial. This triviality we really notice above all, 

272 
I. THE I DE A  OF ART I S T I C  BEAUTY 
in the case of dramatic works, only during the play's performance 
because, so soon as we enter the theatre, numerous arrangements 
-the lights, elegantly dressed people-put us in the mood to 
want to find something other than two peasants, two grooms, and 
yet another glass of schnapps. Gotz, after all, has had its special 
attraction for a reader; on the stage it has not be_en able to have a 
long run. 
({3) On the other hand, the history of an earlier mythology, 
foreign historical political conditions and customs, may become 
familiar to us and assimilated, because, owing to the general 
culture of our time, we have acquired a varied acquaintance with 
the past too. For example, acquaintance with the art and mythology, 
the literature, the religion, the customs, of antiquity is the starting­
point of our education today; from his schooldays every boy knows 
about Greek gods, heroes, and historical characters; therefore, 
because the figures and interests of the Greek world have become 
ours in imagination, we can take pleasure in them too on the ground 
of imagination, and there is no saying why we should not be able 
to get so far with Indian or Egyptian or Scandinavian mythology 
too. Besides, in the religious ideas of these peoples the universal 
element, God, is present too. But the specific element, the particu­
lar Greek or Indian divinities have no longer any truth for us; we 
no longer believe in them and they give us pleasure only for our 
imagination. But therefore they always remain foreign to our real 
deeper consciousness, and nothing is so empty and cold as when 
in opera we hear, e.g., '0 ye gods' or '0 Jupiter' or even '0 Isis 
and Osiris', 1 not to speak of the addition of wretched oracular 
utterances-and seldom does an opera get along without an oracle 
-nowadays replaced in tragedy by insanity and clairvoyance. 
It is just the same with other historical material̘customs, laws, 
etc. True, this historical material is, but it has been, and if it has 
no longer any connection with our contemporary life, it is not 
ours, no matter how well and how precisely we know it; but our 
interest in what is over and done with does not arise from the pure 
and simple reason that it did once exist as present. History is only 
ours when it belongs to the nation to which we belong, or when 
we can look on the present in general as a consequence of a chain 
of events in which the characters or deeds represented form an 
essential link. After all, the mere connection with the same land 
' Sarastro's first aria in The Magic Flute (1791). 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
273 
and people as ours does not suffice in the last resort; the past even 
of one's own people must stand in closer connection with our 
present situation, life, and existence. 
In the Nihelungenlied, for example, we are geographically on our 
own soil, but the Burgundians and King Etzel 1 are so cut off from 
all the features of our present culture and its national interests 
that, even without erudition, we can find ourselves far more at 
home with the Homeric poems. So Klopstock2 has been induced 
by a patriotic urge to substitute Scandinavian gods for Greek 
mythology; but Wotan, Valhalla, and Freya have remained mere 
names which belong less to our imagination than Jupiter and 
Olympus, and they speak less to our heart. 
In this connection we must make clear that works of art are not 
to be composed for study or for the learned, but must be im­
mediately intelligible and enjoyable in themselves without this 
circuitous route of far-fetched and far-off facts. For art does not 
exist for a small enclosed circle of a few eminent savants but for 
the nation at large and as a whole. But what is valid for the work of 
art as such is equally applicable to the external aspect of the 
historical reality there represented. We too belong to our time and 
our people, and this reality must be clear and apprehensible for 
us without wide learning, so that we can become at home in it and 
are not compelled to remain confronted by it as by a foreign and 
unintelligible world. 
(y) Now in this way we have approached the true artistic mode 
of portraying objectivity and assimilating materials drawn from 
past epochs. 
(a:a:) The first point that we may adduce here affects the genuine 
national poetry which, amongst all peoples, has, from time im­
memorial, been of such a kind that its external, historical, side has 
of itself belonged already to the nation and not remained foreign 
to it. This is the case with the Indian epics, the Homeric poems, 
and the dramatic poetry of the Greeks. Sophocles did not allow 
Philoctetes, Antigone, Ajax, Orestes, Oedipus, and his choragi and 
choruses to speak as they would have done in their own day. The 
same sort of thing is true of the Spanish in their romances of the 
Cid; Tasso in his Jerusalem Delivered chanted the universal cause 
of Catholic Christianity; Camoens, the Portuguese poet, depicted 
' i.e. Attila, King of the Huns, resident in Vienna at the time of the poem. 
z F. G. Klopstock, 1724-r8o3. The reference is to his Odes. 

274 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
the discovery of the sea-route to the East Indies round the Cape 
of Good Hope and the infinitely important deeds of the heroic 
seamen, and these deeds were those of his nation; Shakespeare 
dramatized the tragic history of his country, and Voltaire himself 
wrote his Henriade. Even we Germans have at last got away from 
the attempt to work up into national epic poems remote stories 
which no longer have any national interest for us. Bodmer's 
Noachide' and Klopstock's Messiah are out of fashion, just as, 
after all, there is no longer any validity in the view that the honour 
of a nation requires it to have its Homer, and, into the bargain, its 
Pindar, Sophocles, and Anacreon. Those Bible stories2 do come 
nearer to our imagination because of our familiarity with the Old 
and New Testaments, but the historical element in these obsolete 
modes of life still always remains for us an alien affair of erudition; 
actually it confronts us as merely the familiar element in the 
prosaic threads of events and characters which, in the process of 
composition, are only thrust into a new phraseology, so that in this 
respect we get nothing but the feeling of something purely artificial. 
(fJ{J) But art cannot restrict itself to native material alone. In 
fact, the more that • particular peoples have come into contact 
with one another, by so much the more has art continually drawn 
its subject-matter from all nations and centuries. Nevertheless, 
it is not to be regarded as a mark of great genius, as may be 
supposed, when the poet wholly familiarizes himself with periods 
not his own. On the contrary, the historical aspect must be so put 
on one side in the representation that it becomes only an insig­
nificant accessory to what is human and universal. In such a way, 
the Middle Ages, e.g., did borrow material from antiquity, but 
they introduced into it the contents of their own epoch, and it is 
true that they went to the opposite extreme and left nothing over 
[from the past] but the mere names of Alexander, or Aeneas, or 
Octavian, the Emperor [Augustus]. 
The most fundamental thing is and remains immediate·intel­
ligibility; and actually all nations have insisted on what was to 
please them in a work of art, for they wanted to be at home in it, 
living and present in it. Calderon dramatized his Zenobia and 
Semiramis within this independent nationality, and Shakespeare 
understood how to imprint an English national character on the 
1 J. }. Bodmer, I698-1783. His biblical epic, Noah, appeared in 1750. 
1 i.e. in Bodmer and Klopstock. 

THE B EAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
275 
most variegated materials, although, far more deeply than the 
Spaniards, he could preserve in its essential basic traits the histori­
cal character of foreign nations, e.g. the Romans. Even the Greek 
tragedians had their eye on the contemporary character of their 
time and the city to which they belonged. Oedipus at Colonus, e.g., 
has not only a closer relation to Athens because Colonus is near 
Athens but also for the reason that, dying at Colon us, Oedipus was 
to be a safeguard for Athens. In other connections the Eumenides 
of Aeschylus too has a closer domestic interest for the Athenians 
owing to the judgement of the Areopagus. On the other hand, 
despite the numerous ways in which it has been used, and always 
anew since the Renaissance of arts and sciences, Greek mythology 
will not be perfectly at home amongst modern peoples, and it has 
remained cold more or less even in the visual arts, and still more 
in poetry, despite poetry's wide scope. For example, it would not 
now occur to anyone to make a poem to Venus or Jupiter or 
Athene. Sculpture indeed cannot yet ever subsist without the 
Greek gods, but its productions are therefore for the most part 
accessible and intelligible only to connoisseurs, scholars, and the 
narrow circle of the most cultivated people. In a similar sense, 
Goethe has given himself a great deal of trouble1 to explain to 
painters, and to bring closer to their warm consideration and 
imitation, the Eikones2 of Philostratus, but he had little success; 
ancient subjects of that kind in their ancient present and actuality 
remain always something foreign to the modern public, as to the 
painters too. On the other hand, in a far deeper spirit Goethe has 
succeeded, in the later years of his free inner inspiration, in bring­
ing the East into our contemporary poetry by his West-ostliche 
Divan [1819] and assimilating it to our contemporary vision. In this 
assimilation he has known perfectly well that he is a westerner and 
a German, and so, while striking throughout the eastern keynote 
in respect of the oriental character of situations and affairs, at the 
same time he has given its fullest due to our contemporary con­
sciousness and its own individuality. In this way the artist is of 
course allowed to borrow his materials from distant climes, past 
ages, and foreign peoples, and even by and large to preserve the 
1 In his essay Philostrats Gemiilde (t8t8). 
2 Two sets of descriptions in prose of pictures which the author purports to 
have seen. There was more than one Philostratus. This one may have flourished 
about A.D. 210. 

276 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
historical form of their mythology, customs, and institutions; but 
at the same time he must use these forms only as frames for his 
pictures, while on the other hand their inner meaning he must 
adapt to the essential deeper consciousness of his contemporary 
world in a way in which the most marvellous example hitherto is 
always there before us in Goethe's Iphigenie. 
In relation to such a transformation the individual arts once 
again have a different position. Lyric, e.g., requires in love songs 
the minimum of external, historical surroundings sketched with 
precision, since for it the chief thing is feeling, the movement of 
the heart. Of Laura herself, e.g., in Petrarch's Sonnets, we have 
in this respect only very little information, hardly more than the 
name, which could equally well be another; of the locality, etc., we 
are told only in the most general terms-the fountain of Vaucluse, 
and the like. Epic, on the other hand, demands the maximum of 
detail, which, if only it is clear and intelligible, most readily gives us 
pleasure, after all, in the matter of those external historical facts. 
But these externalities are the most dangerous reef for dramatic 
art, especially in theatrical performances where everything is 
spoken to us directly or comes in a lively way before our percep­
tion and vision, so that we are ready at once to find ourselves 
acquainted and familiar with what is there. Therefore here the 
representation of historical external actuality must remain as 
subordinate as possible and a mere frame; there must, as it were, 
be retained the same relation which we find in love poems where, 
even though we can completely sympathize with the feelings 
expressed and the manner of their expression, the name of the 
beloved is not that of our own beloved. Here it does not matter at 
all if pedants deplore the inaccuracy of manners, feelings, level of 
culture. In Shakespeare's historical pieces, e.g., there is plenty 
which remains strange to us and can be of little interest. In reading 
them we are satisfied indeed, but not in the theatre. Critics and 
connoisseurs think of course that such historical splendours 
should be represented on their own account, and then they 
vituperate about the bad and corrupt taste of the public if it makes 
known its boredom with such things; but the work of art and its 
immediate enjoyment is not for connoisseurs and pedants but for 
the public, and the critics need not ride the high horse; after all, 
they too belong to the same public and they themselves can take 
no serious interest in the exactitude of historical details. Knowing 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
277 
this, the English, e.g., nowadays produce on the stage only those 
scenes from Shakespeare which are absolutely excellent and self­
explanatory, for they have not got the pedantry of our aesthetic 
experts who insist that all these now strange external circum­
stances in which the public can no longer take any part should 
nevertheless be brought before its eyes. Therefore, if foreign 
dramatic works are staged, every people has the right to ask for 
remodellings. Even the most excellent piece requires remodelling 
from this point of view. It could of course be said that what is 
really excellent must be excellent for all time, but the work of art 
has also a temporal, perishable side, and this it is which requires 
alteration. For the beautiful appears for others, and those for 
whom it has been brought into appearance must be able to be at 
home in this external side of its appearance. 
Now in this assimilation of historical material we find the basis 
and exculpation of everything which has customarily been called 
anachronism in art, and has generally been reckoned a great defect 
in artists. Anachronisms occur primarily in merely external things. 
If Falstaff, e.g., talks of pistols,' this is a matter of indifference. 
It is worse when Orpheus stands there2 with a violin in his hand 
because the contradiction appears all too sharply between mythical 
days and such a modern instrument, which everyone knows had 
not been invented at so early a period. Therefore nowadays 
astonishing care is taken in the theatre with such things, and the 
producers have kept carefully to historical truth in costume and 
scenery-as e.g. a great deal of trouble has been taken in this matter 
with. the procession in the Maid of Orleans,J a trouble in most 
cases just wasted, because it concerns only what is relative and 
unimportant. 
The more important kind of anachronism does not consist in 
dress and other similar externals, but in the fact that in a work of 
art the characters, in their manner of speech, the expression of 
their feelings and ideas, the reflections they advance, their accom­
plishments, could not possibly be in conformity with the period, 
level of civilization, religion, and view of the world which they are 
representing. To this kind of anachronism the category of natural­
ness is usually applied, and the view is that it is unnatural if the 
characters represented do not speak and act as they would have 
' e.g. I Henry IV, Act v, scene iii. 
a Presumably in Gluck's opera, Orjeo, 1762. 
3 Schiller's play, 1802. 

278 
I. THE I D E A  OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
acted and spoken in the period they are representing. But the 
demand for such naturalness, if it be maintained one-sidedly, leads 
at once to perversities. For when the artist sketches the human 
heart with its emotions and its inherently substantial passions, he 
should still, while always preserving individuality, not so sketch 
them as they occur in the ordinary daily life of today, for he 
ought to bring every 'pathos' to light in an appearance which 
absolutely corresponds with it. He is alone an artist because he 
knows what is true and brings it in its true form before our con­
templation and feeling. Therefore, to express this, he has to take 
into account in each case the culture of his time, its speech, etc. 
At the time of the Trojan war the kind of expression and the whole 
mode of life had a level of development quite different from what we 
find in the Iliad. Similarly the mass of the people and the pre­
eminent figures in the Greek royal families did not have that 
polished sort of outlook and speech which we have to marvel at 
in Aeschylus or in the perfect beauty of Sophocles. Such a trans­
gression of so-called naturalness is, for art, a necessary anachronism. 
The inner substance of what is represented remains the same, but 
the development of culture makes necessary a metamorphosis in 
its expression and form. True, it is a quite different matter if 
insights and ideas of a later development of the religious and 
moral consciousness are carried over into a period or nation whose 
whole earlier outlook contradicts such newer ideas. Thus the 
Christian religion brought in its train moral categories which were 
foreign throughout to the Greeks. For example, the inner reflec­
tion of conscience in deciding what is good or bad, remorse, and 
penitence belong only to the moral development of modern times; 
the heroic character knows nothing of the illogicality of penitence 
-what he has done, he has done. Orestes1 has no penitence for 
his mother's murder; the Furies arising from his deed do pursue 
him, but the Eumenides are at the same time represented as 
universal powers and not as the gnawing of his purely subjective 
conscience. This essential kernel of a period and a people must be 
within the poet's ken, and only if he inserts into this innermost 
central core something opposite and contradictory is he guilty of 
an anachronism of a higher kind. In .this respect, that is, the artist 
must be required to familiarize himself with the spirit of past ages 
' Here the reference again is to the Oresteia, the trilogy of Aeschylus. But see 
above, p. 227, note, and the relevant passage. 

THE B EAUTY O F  ART OR THE I D EAL 
279 
and foreign peoples; for this substantial element, if it is of a 
genuine sort, remains clear to all ages; but to propose to reproduce 
with complete accuracy of detail the purely external appearance 
of the rust of antiquity is only a puerile pedantry undertaken for 
what is itself only an external end. Of course, even in this matter, 
a general exactitude is to be desired, but it must not be robbed of 
its right to hover between Dichtung·und Wahrheit.1 
(yy) All this said, we have now penetrated to the true mode of 
appropriating what is strange and external in a past period, and 
to the true objectivity of the work of art. The work of art must 
disclose to us the higher interests of our spirit and will, what is 
in itself human and powerful, the true depths of the heart. The 
chief thing essentially at issue is that these things shall gleam 
through all external appearances and that their keynote shall 
resound through all other things in our restless life. Thus true 
objectivity unveils for us the 'pathos', the substantive content of 
a situation, and the rich, powerful individuality in which the 
fundamental factors of the spirit are alive and brought to reality 
and expression. In that case for such material there can in general 
be required only a determinate reality, something appropriately 
and intelligibly circumscribed. When such material is found and 
unfolded in conformity with the principle of the Ideal, a work of 
art is absolutely objective, whether the external details are histori­
cally accurate or not. In that event the work of art speaks to our 
true self and becomes our own property. For even if the material 
with its superficial form is taken from ages past long, long ago, its 
abiding basis is that human element of the spirit which as such 
is what truly abides and is powerful, and its effect can never fail, 
since this objective basis constitutes the content and fulfilment of 
our own inner life. On the other hand, the purely historical ex­
ternal material is the transient side, and to this, in the case of 
works of art lying far away from us, we must try to reconcile 
ourselves, and we must be able to disregard it even in works of 
art of our own time. So the Psalms of David with their brilliant 
celebration of the Lord in the goodness and wrath of his omni­
potence, like the deep grief of the Prophets, is appropriate and 
still present to us today, in spite of Babylon and Zion, and even 
a moral theme like what Sarastro sings in the Magic Flute will 
1 Poetry Qfld Truth, the title of Goethe's autobiography (z8u). 

28o 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
give pleasure to everyone, Egyptians included, because of the inner 
kernel and spirit of its melodies. 
Confronted with such objectivity in a work of art, the individual 
must therefore give up the false demand of wishing to have him­
self before him in it with his purely subjective characteristics and 
idiosyncrasies. When Wilhelm Tell1 was first produced in Weimar, 
not a single Swiss was satisfied with it; similarly, many a man 
seeks in vain in the most beautiful love-songs for his own feelings 
and therefore declares that the description is false, just as others, 
whose knowledge of love is drawn from romances alone, do not 
now suppose themselves to be actually in love until they encounter 
in and around themselves the very same feelings and situations 
[as those described in the romances]. 
C. THE ARTIST 
In this First Part we have treated first the general Idea of the beauti­
ful, secondly its inadequate existence in nature, in order to press 
on, thirdly, to the Ideal as the adequate actuality of the beautiful. 
The Ideal we developed first, once again in accordance with its 
general nature, which led us, secondly, to the specific mode of 
representing it. But since the work of art springs from the spirit, 
it needs a subjective productive activity as its cause, and as a 
product thereof it is there for others, i.e. for the contemplation and 
feeling of the public. This activity is the imagination of the artist. 
Therefore we have now still, in conclusion, to deal with the third 
aspect of the Ideal, i.e. to discuss how the work of art belongs to 
the subjective inner consciousness, though as its product it is not 
yet born into actuality, but is shaped only by creative subjectivity, by 
the genius and talent of the artist. Yet strictly we need to mention 
this aspect only to say of it that it is to be excluded from the area 
of scientific discussion, or at least that it permits of a few generali­
ties only-although a question often raised is: whence does the 
artist derive his gift and his ability to conceive and execute his 
work, how does he create a work of art? We might just as well ask 
for a recipe or prescription for managing this, or for the circum­
stances and situations in which a man must place himself in order 
to produce the like. Thus [Ippolito] Cardinal d'Este asked Ariosto 
about his Orlando Furioso: 'Master Ludovico, where have you got 
1 Schiller's play, 1804. 

THE B EAUTY O F  ART OR THE I D EAL 
z8r 
all this damned stuff from?' Raphael, asked a similar question, 
answered in a well-known letter1 that he was striving after a certain 
'idea'. 
The finer details we can treat under three heads, since first, we 
establish the Concept of artistic genius and inspiration, secondly, 
we discuss the objectivity of this creative activity, and thirdly, we 
try to discover the character of true originality. 
1. Imagination (Phantasie), Genius, and Inspiration 
When a question is asked about 'genius', more precise definition 
is at once required, because 'genius' is an entirely general ex­
pression used not only of artists but of great kings and military 
commanders, as well as of the heroes of science. Here once again 
we may distinguish three aspects for the sake of greater precision. 
(a) First, when we come to the general capacity for artistic 
production, then, as soon as there is talk of 'capacity', 'fancy' 
(Phantasie) is said to be the most prominent artistic ability. Yet 
in that case we must immediately take care not to confuse fancy 
with the purely passive imagination (Einbildungskraft). Fancy is 
creative.z 
(ex) Now in the first place this creative activity involves the gift 
and the sense for grasping reality and its configurations which, 
attentively heard or seen, impress on the spirit the greatest multi­
plicity of pictures of what is there; this activity also presupposes 
a retentive memory of the variegated world of these manifold 
pictures. In this respect, therefore, the artist is not relegated to 
what. he has manufactured by his own imagination but has to 
abandon the superficial 'ideal' (so-called) and enter reality itself. 
To embark on art and poetry with an ideal is always very suspect, 
for the artist has to create out of the abundance of life and not out 
of the abundance of abstract generalities, since, while the medium 
of philosophy's production is thought, art's is actual external 
configurations. Therefore the artist must live and become at home 
in this medium. He must have seen much, heard much, and re­
tained much, just as in general great individuals are almost always 
signalized by a great memory. For what interests a man he engraves 
1 to Baldassare Castiglione. He was asked where he had found such a beautiful 
model for his Galatea. 
• For the terminology used in this paragraph and not elsewhere, see p. 5, 
note z. 

282 
I. THE I DEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
on his memory, and a most profound spirit spreads the field of his 
interests over countless topics. Goethe, e.g., began like this and 
throughout his life has widened more and more the scope of his 
observations. This gift and this interest in a specific grasp of the 
actual world in its real shape, together with a firm retention of what 
has been seen, is thus the first requirement of an artist. On the 
other hand, bound up with precise knowledge of the external form 
there must be equal familiarity with man's inner life, with the 
passions of his heart, and all the aims of the human soul. To this 
double knowledge there must be added an acquaintance with the 
way in which the inner life of the spirit expresses itself in the real 
world and shines through the externality thereof. 
(/3) But secondly imagination does not stop at this mere assimila­
tion of external and internal reality, because what the ideal work 
of art properly provides is not only the appearance of the inner 
spirit in the reality of external forms; on the contrary, it is the 
absolute truth and rationality of the actual world which should 
attain external appearance. This rationality of the specific topic 
he has chosen must not only be present in the artist's consciousness 
and move him; on the contrary, he must have pondered its essen­
tiality and truth in its whole range and whole depth. For without 
reflection a man does not bring home to his mind what is in him, 
and so we notice in every great work of art that its material in all 
its aspects has been long and deeply weighed and thought over. 
From the facile readiness of fancy no solid work proceeds. Yet this 
is not to say that the artist must grasp in a philosophical form the 
true essence of all things which is the general foundation in reli­
gion, as well as in philosophy and art. For him philosophy is not 
necessary, and if he thinks in a philosophical manner he is working 
at an enterprise which, so far as the form of knowing is concerned, 
is the precise opposite of art. For the task of imagination consists 
solely in giving us a consciousness of that inner rationality, not in 
the form of general propositions and ideas, but in concrete con­
figuration and individual reality. What therefore lives and fer­
ments in him the artist must portray to himself in the forms and 
appearances whose likeness and shape he has adopted, since he 
can so subdue them to his purpose that they now on their side 
too become capable of adopting what is inherently true and ex­
pressing it completely. 
In order to achieve the interpenetration of the rational content 

THE B EA UTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
283 
and the external shape, the artist has to call in aid (i) the watchful 
circumspection of the intellect, and (ii) the depth of the heart and 
its animating feelings. It is therefore an absurdity to suppose that 
poems like the Homeric came to the poet in sleep. Without 
circumspection, discrimination, and criticism the artist cannot 
master any subject-matter which he is to configurate, and it is 
silly to believe that the genuine artist does not know what he 
is doing. Equally necessary for him is a concentration of his 
emotional life. 
(y) Through this feeling, I mean, which penetrates and 
animates the whole, the artist has his material and its configura­
tion as his very own self, as the inmost property of himself as 
a subjective being. For the pictorial illustration estranges every 
subject-matter by giving it an external form, and feeling alone 
brings it into subjective unity with the inner self. In accord with 
this point of view, the artist must not only have looked around at 
much in the world and made himself acquainted with its outer and 
inner manifestations, but he must have drawn much, and much 
that is great, into his own soul; his heart must have been deeply 
gripped and moved thereby; he must have done and lived through 
much before he can develop the true depths of life into concrete 
manifestations. Consequently genius does burst forth in youth, 
as was the case with Goethe and Schiller, but only middle or 
old age can bring to perfection the genuine maturity of the 
work of art.1 
(b) Now this productive activity of imagination whereby the 
artist takes what is absolutely rational in itself and works it out, 
as his very own creation, by giving it an external form, is what is 
called genius, talent, etc. 
(ex) The elements of genius we have therefore already considered 
just now. Genius is the general ability for the true production of 
a work of art, as well as the energy to elaborate and complete it. 
But, even so, this capacity and energy exists only as subjective, 
since spiritual production is possible only for a self-conscious 
subject who makes such creation his aim. However, it has been 
common for people to go into more detail and make a specific 
difference between 'genius' and 'talent'. And in fact the two are 
not immediately identical, although their identity is necessary for 
1 One of Hegel's more hazardous generalizations-Mozart, Keats, etc., come 
to mind. 

:z84 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
perfect artistic creation. Art, I mean, in so far as in general it 
individualizes and has to issue in the objective appearance of its 
productions, now demands also for the particular kinds of this 
accomplishment different particular capacities. One such may be 
described as talent, as, e.g., when one man may have a talent for 
perfect violin-playing and another for singing, and so on. But 
a mere talent can only attain to excellence in one such entirely 
separate side of art, and, if it is to be perfect in itself, it still requires 
always over again the capacity for art in general, and the inspira­
tion, which genius alone confers. Talent without genius therefore 
does not get far beyond an external skill. 
(fJ) Now further, it is commonly said, talent and genius must 
be innate. Here too this is right enough in a way, although in 
another it is equally false. For man as man is also born to religion, 
e.g., to thinking, to science, i.e. as man he has the capacity to 
acquire a consciousness of God and to come to intellectual 
reflection. Nothing is needed for this but birth as such and educa­
tion, training, and industry. With art the thing is different; it 
requires a specific aptitude, in which a natural element plays an 
essential part too. Just as beauty itself is the Idea made real in the 
sensuous and actual world, and the work of art takes what is 
spiritual and sets it out into the immediacy of existence for appre­
hension by eye and ear, so too the artist must fashion his work not 
in the exclusively spiritual form of thought but within the sphere 
of intuition and feeling and, more precisely, in connection with 
sensuous material and in a sensuous medium. Therefore this 
artistic creation, like art throughout, includes in itself the aspect 
of immediacy and naturalness, and this aspect it is which the 
subject cannot generate in himself but must find in himself as 
immediately given. This alone is the sense in which we may say 
that genius and talent must be inborn.1 
Similarly the different arts too are more or less national, 
connected with the natural side of a people. The Italians, e.g., 
have song and melody almost by nature, while although the cultiva­
tion of music and opera has been urgently pursued with great suc­
cess amongst northern peoples, they have no more been completely 
at home there than orange trees. What the Greeks have as their 
1 With this remark compare: 'Anyone can make verses like F. von Schlegel, 
but to get beyond this and produce real art needs an inborn talent' (Lasson, 
p. 69). 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE ID EAL 
285 
own is the most beautiful elaboration of epic poetry and, above 
all, the perfection of sculpture, whereas the Romans had no 
really independent art but had to transplant it from Greece on to 
their own soil. Therefore the art most universally spread is poetry 
because in it the sensuous material and its formation makes the 
fewest demands. Yet, within poetry, folk-song is in the highest 
degree national and tied up with the natural side of a people's life, 
and on this account folk-song belongs to periods of lesser spiritual 
development and preserves to the maximum the simplicity of a 
natural existence. Goethe has produced works of art in all forms 
and sorts of poetry, but it is his earliest songs which are the most 
intimate and unpremeditated. In them there is the minimum of 
cultural elaboration. Modern Greeks, e.g., are even now a people 
of poetry and songs. Bravery of today or yesterday, a death and its 
particular circumstances, a burial, every adventure, every single 
oppression by the Turks-each and every episode they bring at once 
into song; and there are plenty of examples that often, on the 
day of the battle, songs are sung at once about the newly-won 
victory. Fauriel has published a collection of modern Greek songs, 1 
taken partly from the lips of women, nurses, and schoolgirls, who 
could not be more surprised that he was astonished by their 
songs. 
In this way art and its specific mode of production hangs to­
gether with the specific nationality of peoples. Thus improvisers 
are especially at home ,in Italy and their talent is marvellous. Even 
today an Italian improvises dramas in five acts, and nothing there 
is memorized; everything springs from his knowledge of human 
passions and situations and from deep immediate inspiration. An 
impecunious improviser; after poetizing for a long time, at last 
went round with a miserable hat to collect from the audience; but 
he was still so full of enthusiasm and fever that he could not stop 
declaiming, and he gesticulated so long, waving his arms and 
hands, that at the end all his beggings were scattered. 
(y) Now the third characteristic of genius, for all that genius 
does include a natural gift as one of its elements, is facility in 
producing ideas from within and in the external technical dexterity 
required in the several arts. In this connection a lot is talked, for 
example in the case of a poet, about the fetters of metre and rhyme, 
• C. Fauriel, I772-1844: Chants populaires de Grece moderne, 1824-5. In 1 827 
Hegel met him at diner in Paris. 

286 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
or, in the case of a painter, about the manifold difficulties which 
draughtsmanship, knowledge of colours, light and shade, put in 
the way of invention and execution. Of course all the arts require 
lengthy study, constant industry, a skill developed in many ways; 
but the greater and more abundant the talent and genius, the less 
it knows of laboriousness in the acquisition of the skills necessary 
for production. For the genuine artist has a natural impulse and 
an immediate need to give form at once to everything that he feels 
and imagines. This process of formation is his way of feeling and 
seeing, and he finds it in himself without labour as the instrument 
proper and suited to him. A composer, e.g., can declare only in 
melodies what moves and stirs him most deeply. What he feels, 
immediately becomes melody, just as to a painter it becomes form 
and colour, or to a poet the poetry of the imagination, clothing its 
structure in euphonious words. And this gift for formation the 
artist does not possess merely as theoretical idea, imagination, and 
feeling, but also immediately as practical feeling, i.e., as a gift for 
actual execution. Both are bound together in the genuine artist. 
What lives in his imagination comes to him, therefore, as it were 
to his finger-tips, just as it comes to our lips to speak out our 
thoughts, or as our inmost thoughts, ideas, and feelings appear 
directly on ourselves in our posture and gestures. From time 
immemorial the true genius has easily mastered the external side 
of technical execution, and has also so far mastered the poorest and 
apparently most intractable material that it has been compelled to 
assimilate and display the inner shapes devised by imagination. 
What in this way lies in him immediately, the artist must indeed 
work over until his proficiency with it is complete, but yet the 
possibility of immediate execution must all the same be there in 
him as a natural gift; otherwise a purely learnt proficiency never 
produces a living work of art. Both sides, the inner production and 
its external realization, go hand in hand in accordance with the 
essential nature of art. 
(c) Now the activity of imagination and technical execution, 
considered in itself as the fundamental condition of the artist, is 
what is generally called, in the third place, 'inspiration'. 
(ar:) In this matter the first question raised is about the manner 
of its origin, in regard to which the most varied ideas are in 
circulation: 
(ar:ar:) Since genius in general involves the closest connection 

THE B EA UTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
z87 
between the spiritual and the natural, it has been believed that 
inspiration can be produced primarily through sensuaus stimulus. 
But the heat of the blood achieves nothing by itself; champagne 
produces no poetry, as Marmontel, e.g., tells how in a cellar in 
Champagne he had six thousand bottles confronting him and yet 
nothing poetic flowed out of them for him.' So too the finest 
genius may often enough lie on the grass morning and evening, 
enjoying a fresh breeze and gazing up into the sky, but of tender 
inspiration not a breath reaches him. 
(jJf3) On the other hand, neither can inspiration be summoned 
by a spiritual intention to produce. A man who simply resolves 
to be inspired in order to write a poem, paint a picture, or compose 
a tune, without already carrying in himself some theme as a living 
stimulus and must just hunt around here and there for some material, 
then, no matter what his talent, cannot, on the strength of this 
mere intention, form a beautiful conception or produce a solid work 
of art. Neither a pure! y sensuous stimulus nor mere will and decision 
procures genuine inspiration, and to make use of such means 
proves only that the heart and the imagination have not yet 
fastened on any true interest. But if the artistic urge is of the right 
kind, this interest has already in advance been concentrated on 
a specific object and theme and kept firmly to it. 
(yy) Thus true inspiration takes fire on some specific material 
which the imagination seizes with a view to expressing it artistic­
ally; moreover inspiration is the state of the artist in his active 
process of forming both his subjective inner conception and his 
objective execution of the work of art, because for this double 
activity inspiration is necessary. Thus the question is raised again: 
In what way must such a material come to the artist? In this 
connection too there are all sorts of views. How often have we not 
heard the demand thatthe artist shall create his material solely out 
of his own self! Of course this can be the case when, e.g., the poet 
'sings like the bird that dwells in the bough'.2 His own joy is then 
the incentive which from within can offer itself at the same time 
as material and theme for external expression, since it drives him 
on to the artistic enjoyment of his own cheerfulness. In that case 
1 In book ii of his memoirs, Marmon tel says that his imagination was warmed 
when he was in congenial feminine company and surrounded by so,ooo bottles 
of champagne. He does not say whether he was influenced by them or by the 
lady. Hegel's remark may be a confused recollection of this passage. 
• Thi& quotation and the next are from Goethe's ballad Der Sanger, 1783. 

288 
I. THE IDEA OF ARTI STIC BEAUTY 
too is 'the song which comes straight from the heart a reward which 
rewards richly'. Yet, on the other side, the greatest works of art 
have often owed their creation to some quite external stimulus. 
Pindar's Odes, e.g., were frequently commissioned; similarly the 
aim of buildings and the subject of paintings has countless times 
been prescribed to artists, who yet have been able to acquire the 
necessary inspiration for executing their commission. Indeed there 
is even frequently noticeable a complaint of artists that they lack 
topics on which they could work. Such external material and the 
impulse it gives to production is here the factor of the natural and 
the immediate which belongs to the essence of talent and which 
therefore has likewise to raise its head in connection with the 
beginning of inspiration. From this point of view, the sort of 
position that the artist is in is that he enters, with a natural talent, 
into relation with an available given material; he finds himself 
solicited by an external incentive, by an event (or, as in Shake­
speare's case for example, by sagas, old ballads, tales, chronicles), 
to give form to this material and to express himself in general on 
that. Thus the occasion for production may come entirely from 
without, and the one important requirement is just that the artist 
shall lay hold of an essential interest and make the subject-matter 
become alive in itself. In that event the inspiration of genius 
arises automatically. And a genuinely living artist finds precisely 
through this aliveness a thousand occasions for his activity and 
inspiration-occasions which others pass by without being touched 
by them. 
({3) If we ask further wherein artistic inspiration consists, it is 
nothing but being completely filled with the theme, being entirely 
present in the theme, and not resting until the theme has been 
stamped and polished into artistic shape. 
(y) But if the artist has made the subject-matter into something 
entirely his own, he must on the other hand be able to forget his 
own personality and its accidental particular characteristics and 
immerse himself, for his part, entirely in his material, so that, as 
subject, he is only as it were the form for the formation of the theme 
which has taken hold of him. An inspiration in which the subject 
gives himself airs and emphasizes himself as subject, instead of 
being the instrument and the living activation of the theme itself, 
is a poor inspiration.-This point brings us on to the so-called 
'objectivity' of artistic productions. 

THE BEAUTY O F  A RT OR THE IDEAL 
z89 
2. Objectivity of the Representation 
(a) In the ordinary sense of the word, 'objectivity' is taken to 
mean that in the work of art every subject-matter must assume the 
form of an otherwise already existent reality and confront us in this 
familiar external shape. If we wanted to be content with objectivity 
of that kind, then we could call even Kotzebue an 'objective' poet. 
In his case it is commonplace reality that we find over and over 
again throughout. But the aim of art is precisely to strip off the 
matter of everyday life and its mode of appearance, and by spiritual 
activity from within bring out only what is absolutely rational and 
give to it its true external configuration. Therefore the artist should 
not make straight for purely external reality if the full substance 
of the subject-matter is not there. For although the treatment of 
what is otherwise already there may indeed rise to be in itself of 
supreme vitality, and, as we saw earlier in some examples from 
Goethe's youthful· works, may exercise great attraction on the 
strength of its inner animation, nevertheless if it lacks genuine 
substance, then it cannot reach the true beauty of art. 
(b) Therefore a second type of art does not aim at the external 
as such; on the contrary, the artist has seized his theme with the 
deep inwardness of his heart. But this inwardness remains so very 
reserved and concentrated that it cannot struggle out to conscious 
clarity and reach true deployment. The eloquence of the 'pathos' 
is restricted to indicating and alluding to the 'pathos' through 
external phenomena with which it is in harmony, without having 
the strength and cultivation to develop the full nature of what the 
'pathos' contains. Folk-songs in particular belong to this manner of 
representation. Externally simple, they point to a wider deep 
feeling which lies at their roots, but which cannot be clearly 
expressed; for at this stage art itself has not developed so far as to 
bring its content to light openly and transparently and must be 
satisfied by means of externals to make the content guessable by 
the mind's foreboding. The heart is driven and pressed in upon 
itself, and, in order to be intelligible to itself, is mirrored only in 
purely finite external circumstances and phenomena, which of 
course are expressive, even if their echo in mind and feeling is 
only quite slight. Even Goethe has produced extremely excellent 
songs in this manner. The Shepherd's Lament, e.g., is one of the 
most beautiful of this kind: the heart broken with grief and longing 

290 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
is dumb and reserved, making itself known in plain external traits, 
and yet the most concentrated depth of feeling resounds through­
out, though unexpressed. In the Erl-King and in so many others 
the same tone prevails. Nevertheless this tone may sink to the 
barbarism of an obtuseness which does not bring the essence of 
the thing and the situation into consciousness, and which simply 
stops at externals, partly crude, partly tasteless. As, e.g., praise has 
been given, on the ground that they are extremely touching, to 
the words of the drummer in The Boy's Magic Horn:1 '0 gallows, 
thou noble house' or 'Adieu, corporal'. When, on the other hand, 
Goethe sings: 'The nosegay I have plucked, may it greet thee 
many thousand times, I have often bowed before it, och! a thou­
sand times, and I have pressed it to my heart how many thousands 
of times', 2 here the depth of feeling is indicated in a quite different 
way which brings before our eyes nothing trivial or in itself repug­
nant. But what in general this whole sort of objectivity lacks is the 
actual clear manifestation of feeling and passion which in genuine 
art should not remain in that reserved profundity which only 
resounds weakly through the external; on the contrary, feeling 
must completely either disclose itself on its own account or shine 
clearly and thoroughly through the external material in which it 
has enshrined itself. Schiller, e.g., is present with his whole soul 
in his 'pathos', but with a great soul which familiarizes itself with 
the essence of the thing in hand, the depths of which it can at 
the same time express most freely and brilliantly in the fullness 
of the wealth and harmony [of his verse]. 
(c) In this connection, keeping to the essential nature of the 
Ideal, we may affirm as follows what true objectivity is, even here 
as regards subjective expression: from the genuine subject-matter 
which inspires the artist, nothing is to be held back in his subjec­
tive inner heart; everything must be completely unfolded and 
indeed in a way in which the universal soul and substance of the 
chosen subject-matter appears emphasized just as much as its 
individual configuration appears completely polished in itself and 
permeated by that soul and substance in accord with the whole 
representation. For what is supreme and most excellent is not, as 
1 A collection of folk-songs made by L. J. von Arnim and C. Brentano, 
published rBos-8. The drummer has been condemned to death, and he speaks 
to his former companions as he is being led out of prison to the place of execution. 
a This is from the poem Blumengruss, c. r8ro. 

THE B EAUTY O F  ART O R  THE IDEAL 
291 
may be supposed, the inexpressible1-for if so the poet would 
be still far deeper than his work discloses. On the contrary, his 
works are the best part and the truth of the artist; what he is [in 
his works], that he is; but what remains buried in his heart, that 
is he not. 
3· Manner, Style, and Originality 
But however far an objectivity in the sense indicated just now must 
be demanded of the artist, his production is nevertheless the work 
of his inspiration. For, as subject, he has entirely identified himself 
with his topic, and fashioned its embodiment in art out of the 
inner life of his heart and his imagination. This identity of the 
artist subjectively with the true objectivity of his production is 
the third chief point which we still have to consider briefly, because 
in this identity we see united what hitherto we have separated as 
genius and objectivity. We can describe this unity as the essence of 
genuine originality. 
Yet before we push on to give body to this conception, we have 
still to keep in view two points, and their one-sidedness is to be 
superseded if true originality is to be able to appear. These are 
(a) subjective manner, and (b) style. 
(a) Mere manner [i.e. mannerism] must be essentially dis­
tinguished from originality. For manner concerns the particular 
and therefore accidental idiosyncrasies of the artist, and these, 
instead of the topic itself and its ideal representation, come out 
and assert themselves in the production of the work of art. 
(a:) Manner, then, in this sense [of mannerism] does not concern 
the general kinds of art which in and for themselves require 
different modes of representation, as, e.g., the landscape painter 
has to view his subjects in a way different from that of the histori­
cal painter, the epic poet differently from the lyric or dramatic 
one; on the contrary, 'manner' is a conception appropriate only to 
this personality and the accidental idiosyncrasy of his accomplish­
ment, and this may go so far as to be in direct contradiction with the 
true nature of the Ideal. Looked at in this way, manner is the worst 
thing to which the artist can submit because in it he indulges 
simply in his own restricted and personal whims. But art as such 
cancels the mere accidentality of the topic as well as of its external 
1 This is a hit at F. von Schlegel who had maintained the contrary in his 
Prosaische Jugendschriften (ed. by Minor), vol. ii, p. 364. 

292 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
appearance and therefore demands of the artist that he shall 
extinguish in himself the accidental particular characteristics of 
his own subjective idiosyncrasy. 
(fJ) Therefore, secondly, manner after all may perhaps not be 
directly opposed to the true artistic representation, but its sphere 
is confined rather to the external aspects of the work of art. In 
the main it has its place in painting and music, because these arts 
provide for treatment and execution the widest scope for external 
matters. A special mode of representation belonging to a particular 
artist and his disciples and school, and developed by frequent 
repetition into a habit, constitutes 'manner' here, and this provides 
us with an opportunity to consider it in two aspects. 
(1X1X) The first aspect concerns treatment. In painting, e.g., the 
atmospheric tone, the foliage, the distribution of light and shade, 
the whole tone of colour as a whole, permit of an infinite variety. 
Especially in the sort of colour and illumination we therefore find 
the greatest difference between painters, and their most individual 
modes of treatment. For example, there may even be a tone of 
colour which in general we do not perceive in nature, because, 
although it occurs, we have not noticed it. But it has struck this 
or that artist; he has made it his own and has now become ac­
customed to see and reproduce everything in this kind of colouring 
and illumination. As with colouring, his procedure may be equally 
individual with the objects themselves, their grouping, position, 
and movement. Especially in the Netherlands painters we com­
monly meet with this aspect of manner: van der Neer's (r6o3-17] 
night pieces, e.g., and his treatment of moonlight, van Goyen's 
[1596-r6s6] sandhills in so many of his landscapes, the continually 
recurring sheen of satin and other silken materials in so many 
pictures by other masters belong to this category. 
({Jfj) Secondly, manner extends to the execution of the work of 
art, the handling of the brush, the laying on of the paint, the 
blending of colours, etc. 
(yy) But since such a specific kind of treatment and representa­
tion, owing to its constantly returning anew, is generalized into 
a habit and becomes second nature to the artist, there is a serious 
risk that, the more specialized the manner is, the more easily does 
it degenerate into a soulless and therefore cold repetition and 
fabrication, in which the artist is no longer present with full 
sensibility and entire inspiration. In that event art sinks to mere 

THE BEAUTY O F  ART OR THE IDEAL 
293 
manual skill and professional dexterity, and the manner, not in 
itself objectionable, may become something jejune and lifeless. 
(y) Thus the more genuine manner must rid itself of this re­
stricted idiosyncrasy, and so broaden itself within that these 
specialized modes of treatment cannot mortify into a pure matter 
of habit; for the genuine artist clings in a more general way to the 
nature of the things in hand and ·can make his own this more 
general mode of treatment in the way that its essence implies. In 
this sense we can speak of 'manner' in Goethe, e.g., because of his 
knack in rounding off not only his convivial poems, but also other 
more serious elements, with a happy turn of phrase in order to 
supersede or remove the seriousness of the reflection or situation. 
Horace too in his Epistles adopts this manner. This is a turning 
of the conversation and social conviviality in general which, in 
order not to go into the matter more deeply, stops, breaks off, and 
adroitly changes the deeper topic into something cheerful. This 
way of treating the thing is indeed manner too and it belongs to 
the subject's handling of his topic, but to a subjective procedure 
which is of a more general kind and so within the intended kind 
of representation works all the time in a necessary way. From this 
final level of manner we can pass on to the consideration of style. 
(b) 'Le style c'est l'homme meme' is a familiar French saying.1 
Here style as such means the idiosyncrasy of the artist, completely 
ascertainable in his mode of expression, the way he turns his 
phrases, etc. On the other hand, von Rumohr (op. cit., i, p. 87) 
tries to explain the word 'style' as a 'self-accommodation, de­
veloped into a habit, into the inner demands of the material in 
which the sculptor actually shapes his forms and the painter makes 
them appear', and in this connection he provides us with extremely 
important remarks about the mode of representation which the 
specific sensuous material, e.g. of sculpture, permits or forbids. 
Yet we need not restrict the word 'style' simply to this aspect of 
the sensuous element; we can extend it to characteristics and rules 
of artistic representation arising from the nature of a species of 
art within which a work is executed. Thus in music we distinguish 
the style of church music from that of opera, and, in painting, the 
historical style from that of genre. 'Style', so interpreted, is applic­
able to a mode of representation which complies with the condi­
tions of its material as well as corresponding throughout with the 
1 From Discours sur le Style, by G. L. L. de Buffon, 1707-88. 

294 
I. THE IDEA O F  ARTISTIC BEAUTY 
demands of definite species of art and the laws originating in their 
essence. In this wider meaning of the word, consequently, defec­
tiveness of style is either the artist's inability to make his own such 
an inherently necessary mode of representation, or else his subjec­
tive caprice which gives free play to his own whims instead of to 
conformity with rules, and sets up in their place a bad mannerism 
of his own. It follows that, as von Rumohr has already noticed, it 
is inadmissible to carry over the stylistic rules of one species of art 
into those of the others, as Mengs, e.g., did in his well-known 
group of the Muses in the Villa Albani, where he 'treated and 
executed the coloured forms of his Apollo on the principle of 
sculpture' .1 Similarly we see in many of Diirer' sz pictures that he 
has made the style of the woodcut entirely his own and has had 
it in mind in his painting too, especially in the drapery. 
(c) Now, lastly, originality does not consist in merely following 
the rules of style, but in the subjective inspiration which, instead 
of succumbing to a mere mannerism, grasps an absolutely rational 
material, and from within, by the subjective activity of the artist, 
gives it external form both in the essence and conception of a 
definite species of art and also appropriately to the general nature 
of the Ideal. 
(a:) Thus originality is identical with true objectivity and links 
together the subjective and factual sides of the representation in 
such a way that the two sides are no longer opposed or strangers to 
one another. Therefore, in one respect, it is the most personal 
inner life of the artist, yet on the other hand it reveals nothing but 
the nature of the object, so that the special character of the artist's 
work appears only as the special character of the thing itself and 
proceeds therefrom, just as the thing does from his productive 
subjective activity. 
(/3) Therefore originality is above all to be entirely distinguished 
from the caprice of mere fancies. For people are commonly 
accustomed to understand by 'originality' only the production of 
peculiarities, proper precisely only to the individual, which would 
never enter anyone else's head. But in that case this is only a bad 
idiosyncrasy. No one, e.g., in this meaning of the word is more 
'original' than the English; i.e. every one of them resorts to some 
1 The reference seems to be to the ceiling Mount Parnassus. The villa is in 
Rome. Apollo is the leader of the Muses. The quotation is from von Rumohr. 
• A. Durer, I47I-ISZ8. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
295 
specific folly, which no reasonable man will imitate, and in the 
consciousness of his folly calls himself 'original'. 
Connected with this, after all, is what is especially famous today, 
namely, originality of wit and humour. Here the artist starts from 
his own subjective life and continually comes back to it, so that the 
proper topic of his production is treated only as an external occa­
sion for giving free play to witticisms, jokes, fancies, and the 
extravagances of his most subjective mood. But, since this is so, 
the topic arid this subjective side fall apart from one another, and 
the material is treated capriciously throughout, so that the idio­
syncrasy, yes the idiosyncrasy, of the artist may be conspicuous as 
the chief thing. Such a humour may be full of spirit and deep 
feeling and commonly appears as extremely impressive, but on the 
whole it is easier than is supposed. For steadily to interrupt the 
rational course of the thing, to begin, proceed, and end capriciously, 
and to throw into mutual confusion a series of witticisms and 
feelings, and thereby to produce fantastic caricatures, is easier 
than to develop from oneself and round off an inherently solid 
whole, stamped with the true Ideal. But the present-day humour 
likes to present the unpleasantness of an ill-bred talent, and all the 
same wobbles after all from true humour into banality and drivel. 
True humour we have seldom had; but nowadays the flattest 
trivialities with only a pretence of humour and its external colour 
are supposed to be ingenious and deep. Shakespeare, on the con­
trary, had great and deep humour, and yet, even in him, trivialities 
are not lacking. Similarly, Jean Paul's1 humour often surprises us 
by its depth of wit and beauty of feeling, but equally often, in an 
opposite way, by its grotesquely combining things which have no 
real connection with one another, and the relations into which his 
humour brings them together are almost indecipherable. Even the 
greatest humourist has not relations of this kind present in his 
memory and so after all we often observe that even Jean Paul's 
interconnections are not the product of the power of genius but 
are brought together externally. Thus in order always to have new 
material, Jean Paul looked into books of the most varied kind, botani­
cal, legal, philosophical, descriptive of travel, noted at once what 
struck him and wrote down the passing fancies it suggested; when 
it was a matter of actual composition, he brought together the most 
heterogeneous material-Brazilian plants and the old Supreme 
• J. P. F. Richter, I76J-IB2s. 

296 
I. THE I DEA OF ARTI S T I C  BEAUTY 
Court of the Empire. 1 This is then given special praise as originality 
or as humour by which anything and everything is excused. But 
such caprice is precisely what true originality excludes. 
This gives us an opportunity after all to allude once more to 
the irony which likes to pass itself off as the highest originality, 
especially when it treats nothing seriously and carries on the 
business of joking merely for the sake of joking. In another aspect 
it brings together in its representations a mass of external details, 
the inmost meaning of which the poet keeps to himself. Then the 
cunning and loftiness of this procedure is supposed to consist in 
enlarging the imagination on the ground that precisely in these 
collocations and external details there lie concealed the 'poetry of 
poetry' and everything most profound and excellent, which, purely 
and simply because of its depth, cannot be expressed. So, e.g., 
in F. von Schlegel's poems at the time when he imagined himself 
a poet, what is unsaid is given out as the best thing of all; yet this 
'poetry of poetry' proved itself to be precisely the flattest prose. 
(y) The true work of art must be freed from this perverse 
originality, for it evinces its genuine originality only by appearing 
as the one personal creation of one spirit which gathers and com­
piles nothing from without, but produces the whole topic from its 
own resources by a single cast, in one tone, with strict interconnec­
tion of its parts, just as the thing itself has united them in itself. 
If on the other hand we find scenes and motives brought together 
not by themselves but purely from outside, then the inner neces­
sity of their unification is not there, and they appear as linked 
accidentally by a third and alien subjective activity [i.e. that of the 
artist]. So we marvel at Goethe's Gotz, especially for its great 
originality, and of course, as we have said above already, in this 
work Goethe, greatly daring, has given the lie to, and trodden 
underfoot, whatever at that time was firmly held in aesthetic 
theories as a law of art. Yet the execution of the play is not of true 
originality. For in this early work we still see the poverty of 
Goethe's own material, because many traits and whole scenes, 
instead of being worked out from the great topic itself, appear here 
and there to have been scraped up out of the interests of the time 
in which the play was written, and inserted into it in an external 
way. For example, the scene [Act 1, scene ii] of Gotz with Brother 
Martin, which hints at Luther, contains only ideas drawn by 
1 At Wetzlar; see Hegel's Political Writings (Oxford, 1964), p. 170. 

THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL 
297 
Goethe from the things which in his own period in Germany began 
to make people pity the monks again [Martin bewails his lot and 
theirs] : they might not drink any wine, must sleep off their meals, 
and therefore are subject to all sorts of desires, and must above all 
have taken the three intolerable vows of poverty, chastity, and 
obedience. On the other hand, Brother Martin is enthusiastic for 
Gotz's life as a knight: let Gotz recall how, when he was laden with 
the booty of his enemies, 'I struck him from his horse before he 
could shoot and then I ran him down, horse and all'; and then 
how Gotz goes to his castle and finds his wife. Martin drinks 
Elizabeth's health and wipes his eyes.-But with these mundane 
thoughts Luther did not begin; as a pious monk he drew from 
Augustine a totally different depth of religious insight and con­
viction. Similarly there follow in the next scene pedagogical notions 
contemporary with Goethe which Basedow1 in particular had 
instigated. For example, it was said in his time that children learnt 
a lot of unintelligible stuff, while the right method was to teach 
them facts by sight and experience. Now Karl speaks to his father 
entirely from memory, just as was customary in Goethe's youth: 
'Jaxthausen is a village and a castle on the Jaxt, belonging to the 
Lords of Berlichingen for two centuries by inheritance', yet when 
Gotz asks him: 'Knowest thou the Lord of Berlichingen ?', the 
boy stares him in the face and not having been explicitly taught, 
does not know who his own father is. Gotz asserts that he was 
acquainted with every path, road, and ford before he knew the 
names of any river, village, and town. These are alien appendages 
not affecting the matter itself; while when the thing at issue could 
ha:ve been treated in its proper depth, e.g. in the conversation of 
Gotz and Weislingen [ibid.], nothing appears except cold and 
prosaic reflections on the times. 
A similar collection of individual traits which do not arise from 
the subject-matter we find over again even in Goethe's Wahlver­
wandschaften [Elective Affinities, 1809]: the parks, the tableaux 
vivants, and the swingings of the pendulum, the feel of metals, 
the headaches, the whole picture, derived from chemistry, of 
chemical affinities are of this kind. In a novel, set in a specific 
prosaic time, it is true that this sort of thing is more permissible, 
especially when, as in Goethe's case, it is used so skilfully and 
gracefully, and, besides, a work of art cannot entirely free itself 
I J. B. Basedow, 1723-90. 

298 
I. TH E I D E A  OF ARTISTIC BEA U TY 
from the culture of its time; but it is one thing to mirror this 
culture itself, and another to search outside and collect materials 
together independent of the proper subject of the representation. 
The genuine originality of the artist, as of the work of art, lies 
solely in his being animated by the rationality of the inherently 
true content of the subject-matter. If the artist has made this 
objective rationality entirely his own, without mixing it and 
corrupting it either from within or without with particular details 
foreign to it, then alone in the topic to which he has given form 
does he give himself in his truest subjective character, a character 
that will be but the living corridor for a work of art perfect in 
itself. For in all true poetry, in thinking and action, genuine 
freedom makes what is substantial prevail as an inherent power; 
and this power at the same time is so completely the very own 
power of subjective thinking and willing itself that, in the perfect 
reconciliation of both, no separation between them can remain over 
any longer. So the originality of art does indeed consume that 
accidental idiosyncrasy of the artist, but it absorbs it only so that 
the artist can wholly follow the pull and impetus of his inspired 
genius, filled as it is with his subject alone, and can display his own 
self, instead of fantasy and empty caprice, in the work he has 
completed in accordance with its truth. To have no manner has 
from time immemorial been the one grand manner, and in this 
sense alone are Homer, Sophocles, Raphael, Shakespeare, to be 
called 'original'. 

PART II 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEAL INTO 
THE PARTICULAR FORMS OF ART 
INTRODUCT ION 
What up to this point we have dealt with, in Part I, concerned 
the actuality of the Idea of the beautiful as the Ideal of art, but 
[no matter] under how many aspects we also developed the Con­
cept of the ideal work of art, still all our distinctions bore only on 
the ideal work of art in general. But, like the Idea, the Idea of the 
beautiful is a totality of essential differences which must issue as 
such and be actualized. Their actualization we may call on the 
whole the particular forms of art, as the development of what is 
implicit in the Concept of the Ideal and comes into existence 
through art. Yet if we speak of these art forms as different species 
of the Ideal, we may not take 'species' in the ordinary sense of the 
word, as if here the particular forms came from without to the 
Idea as their universal genus and had become modifications of it: 
on the contrary, 'species' should mean nothing here but the dis­
tinctive and therefore more concrete determinations of the Idea of 
the beautiful and the Ideal of art itself. The general character of 
[artistic] representation, i.e., is here made determinate not from 
without but in itself through its own Concept, so that it is this 
Concept which is spread out into a totality of particular modes of 
artistic formation. 
Now, in more detail, the forms of art, as the actualizing and 
unfolding of the beautiful, find their origin in the Idea itself, in the 
sense that through them the Idea presses on to representation and 
reality, and whenever it is explicit to itself either only in its abstract 
determinacy or else in its concrete totality, it also brings itself into 
appearance in another real formation. This is because the Idea as 
such is only truly Idea as developing itself explicitly by its own 
activity; and since as Ideal it is immediate appearance, and indeed 
with its appearance is the identical Idea of the beautiful, so also at 
8243715 
L 

300 
I I. INTRODUCTION 
every particular stage on which the Ideal treads the road of its 
unfolding there is immediately linked with every inner deter­
minacy another real configuration. It is therefore all one whether 
we regard the advance in this development as an inner advance of 
the Idea in itself or of the shape in which it gives itself existence. 
Each of these two sides is immediately bound up with the other. 
The consummation of the Idea as content appears therefore 
simultaneously as also the consummation of form ; and con­
versely the deficiencies of the artistic shape correspondingly prove 
to be a deficiency of the Idea which constitutes the inner meaning 
of the external appearance and in that appearance becomes real 
to itself. Thus if in this Part we encounter art-forms at first 
which are still inadequate in comparison with the true Ideal, this is 
not the sort of case in which people ordinarily speak of unsuccess­
ful works of art which either express nothing or lack the capacity to 
achieve what they are supposed to represent ; on the contrary, the 
specific shape which every content of the Idea gives to itself in 
the particular forms of art is always adequate to that content, and 
the deficiency or consummation lies only in the relatively untrue or 
true determinateness in which and as which the Idea is explicit to 
itself. This is because the content must be true and concrete in 
itself before it can find its truly beautiful shape. 
In this connection, as we saw already in the general division of 
the subject [on pp. 76-81], we have three chief art-forms to 
consider: 
(i) The Symbolic. In this the Idea still seeks its genuine ex­
pression in art, because in itself it is still abstract and indeter­
minate and therefore does not have its adequate manifestation on 
and in itself, but finds itself confronted by what is external to 
itself, external things in nature and human affairs. Now since it 
has only an immediate inkling of its own abstractions in this objec­
tive world or drives itself with its undetermined universals into a 
concrete existence, it corrupts and falsifies the shapes that it finds 
confronting it. This is because it can grasp them only arbitrarily, 
and therefore, instead of coming to a complete identification, it 
comes only to an accord, and even to a still abstract harmony, 
between meaning and shape; in this neither completed nor to be 
completed mutual formation, meaning and shape present, equally 
with their affinity, their mutual externality, foreignness, and 
incompatibility. 

DEVELOPMENT O F  THE IDEAL 
JOI 
(ii) But, secondly, the Idea, in accordance with its essential 
nature, does not stop at the abstraction and indeterminacy of uni­
versal thoughts but is in itself free infinite subjectivity and appre­
hends this in its actuality as spirit. Now spirit, as free subject, is 
determined through and by itself, and in this self-determination, 
and also in its own nature, has that external shape, adequate to 
itself, with which it can close as with its absolutely due reality. On 
this entirely harmonious unity of content and form, the second 
art-form, the classical, is based. Yet if the consummation of this 
unity is to become actual, spirit, in so far as it is made a topic for 
art, must not yet be the purely absolute spirit which finds its 
adequate existence only in spirituality and inwardness, but the 
spirit which is still particular and therefore burdened with an 
abstraction. That is to say, the free subject, which classical art 
configurates outwardly, appears indeed as essentially universal and 
therefore freed from all the accident and mere particularity of the 
inner life and the outer world, but at the same time as filled solely 
with a universality particularized within itself. This is because the 
external shape is, as such, an external determinate particular 
shape, and for complete fusion [with a content] it can only pre­
sent again in itself a specific and therefore restricted content, while 
too it is only the inwardly particular spirit which can appear per­
fectly in an external manifestation and be bound up with that in an 
inseparable unity. 
Here art has reached its own essential nature by bringing the 
Idea, as spiritual individuality, directly into harmony with its 
bodily reality in such a perfect way that external existence now for 
the first time no longer preserves any independence in contrast 
with the meaning which it is to express, while conversely the inner 
[meaning], in its shape worked out for our vision, shows there only 
itself and in it is related to itself affirmatively.1 
(iii) But, thirdly, when the Idea of the beautiful is compre­
hended as absolute spirit, and therefore as the spirit which is free 
in its own eyes, it is no longer completely realized in the external 
world, since its true determinate being it has only in itself as spirit. 
It therefore dissolves that classical unification of inwardness and 
external manifestation and takes flight out of externality back into 
itself. This provides the fundamental typification of the romantic 
1 The translation of this paragraph rests on accepting Hotho's text, and 
rejecting Bassenge's emendation of it. 

302 
I I. I NTRODUCTION 
art-form; the content of this form, on account of its free spirituality, 
demands more than what representation in the external world and 
the bodily can supply ; in romantic art the shape is externally more 
or less indifferent, and thus that art reintroduces, in an opposite 
way from the symbolic, the separation of content and form. 
In this way, symbolic art seeks that perfect unity of inner meaning 
and external shape which classical art finds in the presentation 
of substantial individuality to sensuous contemplation, and which 
romantic art transcends in its superior spirituality. 

SECTION I 
THE SYMB OLIC FORM O F  ART 
Introduction-The Symbol in general 
The symbol, in the meaning of the word used here, constitutes 
the beginning of art, alike in its essential nature and its historical 
appearance, and is therefore to be considered only, as it were, as 
the threshold of art. It belongs especially to the East and only after 
all sorts of transitions, metamorphoses, and intermediaries does it 
carry us over into the genuine actuality of the Ideal as the classical 
form of art. Therefore from the very start we must at once dis­
tinguish the symbol in its own independent characteristic form, in 
which it serves as the decisive type for artistic vision and represen­
tation, from that sort of symbolism which is just reduced to a mere 
external form, explicitly not independent. In this latter mode we do 
find the symbol recurring in the classical and romantic art-forms, 
in just the same way as single aspects even in the symbolic may 
assume the shape of the classical Ideal or present the beginning of 
romantic art. But, in that event, this interplay of characteristics 
always affects only subsidiary productions and individual traits, 
without constituting the proper soul and determining nature of 
entire works of art. 
On the other hand, when the symbol is developed independently 
in its own proper form, it has in general the character of sublimity, 
because at first, on the whole, it is only the Idea which is still 
measureless, and not freely determined in itself, that is to be given 
shape, and therefore it cannot find in concrete appearance any 
specific form corresponding completely with this abstraction and 
universality. But in this non-correspondence the Idea transcends its 
external existence instead of having blossomed or been perfectly 
enclosed in it. This flight beyond the determinateness of appear­
ance constitutes the general character of the sublime. 
As for what, to begin with, concerns the formal [side of our 
subject], we have now to explain in purely general terms what is 
understood by 'symbol'. 
Symbol as such is an external existent given or immediately 

304 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
present to contemplation, which yet is to be understood not simply 
as it confronts us immediately on its own account, but in a wider 
and more universal sense. Thus at once there are two distinctions 
to make in the symbol : (i) the meaning, and (ii) the expression 
thereof. The first is an idea or topic, no matter what its content, 
the second is a sensuous existent or a picture of some kind or 
other. 
1. Now the symbol is prima facie a sign. But in a mere sign the 
connection which meaning and its expression have with one 
another is only a purely arbitrary linkage. In that case this ex­
pression, this sensuous thing or picture, so far from presenting 
itself, brings before our minds a content foreign to it, one with 
which it does not need to stand in any proper affinity whatever. So 
in languages, for example, the sounds are a sign of some idea, 
feeling, etc. But the predominant part of the sounds in a language 
is linked purely by chance with the ideas expressed thereby, so far 
as their content is concerned, even if it can be shown, by an his­
torical development, that the original connection was of another 
character; and the difference between languages consists chiefly 
in the fact that the same idea is expressed by a difference in sounds. 
Another example of such signs is afforded by the colours1 (les 
couleurs) which are used in cockades and flags to express the 
nationality to which an individual or a ship belongs. Such colours 
likewise have in themselves no quality in common with their 
meaning, i.e. with the nation which is represented by them. There­
fore, when symbol is taken in this sense as a mere sign with such 
an indifference between meaning and its expression, we may not 
take account of it in reference to art, since art as such consists 
precisely in the kinship, relation, and concrete interpenetration of 
meaning and shape. 
2. Therefore it is a different thing when a sign is to be a symbol. 
The lion, for example, is taken as a symbol of magnanimity, the 
fox of cunning, the circle of eternity, the triangle of the Trinity. 
But the lion and the fox do possess in themselves the very qualities 
whose significance they are supposed to express. Similarly the 
circle does not exhibit the endlessness or the capricious limitation 
of a straight or other line which does not return into itself, a limi­
tation likewise appropriate enough for some limited space of time; 
and the triangle as a whole has the same number of sides and angles 
1 i.e. a regiment's colours, or the colours that are nailed to the mast. 

INTRODUCTION 
305 
as that appearing in the idea of God when the determinations 
which religion apprehends in God are liable to numeration. 
Therefore in these sorts of symbol the sensuously present 
things have already in their own existence that meaning, for the 
representation and expression of which they are used ; and, taken 
in this wider sense, the symbol is no purely arbitrary sign, but 
a sign which in its externality comprises in itself at the same time 
the content of the idea which it brings into appearance. Yet never­
theless it is not to bring itself before our minds as this concrete 
individual thing but in itself only that universal quality of meaning 
[which it signifies]. 
3· Further, thirdly, we must notice that, although the symbol, 
unlike the purely external and formal sign, should not be wholly 
inadequate to its meaning, still conversely in order to remain a 
symbol it must not be made entirely adequate to that meaning. 
This is because even if, on the one hand, the content, which is the 
meaning, and the shape, which is used for the signalization thereof, 
harmonize in one property, still, on the other hand, the symbolic 
shape contains yet other characteristics of its own utterly indepen­
dent of that common quality which the symbolic shape signified 
once; just as, similarly, the content does not need to be an abstract 
one like strength or cunning, but may be a more concrete one 
which now for its part may contain qualities, again peculiar to 
itself, different from the first property which constitutes the meaning 
of its symbol, and, in the same way, still more different from the 
other peculiar characteristics of this [symbolic] shape. So, for 
example, the lion is not only strong, the fox not only cunning, but 
God especially has quite different properties from those which 
can be comprised in number, a mathematical figure, or an animal 
shape. Therefore the content remains also indifferent to the shape 
which portrays it, and the abstract determinacy which it constitutes 
can equally well be present in infinitely many other existents and 
configurations. Likewise a concrete content has in it many charac­
teristics which other configurations containing the same charac­
teristic may serve to express. Exactly the same holds good for the 
external existent in which some meaning or other is expressed 
symbolically. It too, as a concrete thing, similarly has in it numerous 
characteristics for which it may serve as a symbol. So, for example, 
the obviously best symbol for strength is of course the lion, but 
nevertheless the bull or a horn can serve too, and, conversely, the 

306 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  A RT 
bull over again has a mass of other symbolical meanings. But 
altogether endless is the mass of figures and pictures used as 
symbols to represent God. 
Now it follows from all this that the symbol by its very 
nature remains essentially ambiguous. 
(a) In the first place, the look of a symbol as such raises at once 
the doubt whether a shape is to be taken as a symbol or not, even 
if we set aside the further ambiguity in respect of the specific mean­
ing which a shape is supposed to signify amongst the several 
meanings for which it can often be used as a symbol through 
associations of a more remote kind. 
What we have before us at first sight is, in general, a shape, 
a picture which gives us only the idea of an immediate existent. 
A lion, for example, an eagle, the colours, present themselves and 
can count as satisfying in themselves. Hence the question arises 
whether a lion, whose picture is brought before us, is to express 
and mean only itself or whether besides it is supposed to portray 
and signify something still further, the more abstract meaning of 
mere strength or the more concrete meaning of a hero or a season 
or agriculture ; whether such a picture, as we say, is to be taken 
literally or at the same time metaphorically, or even perhaps only 
metaphorically. 
The latter is the case, e.g., with symbolical expressions in 
speech, with words like begreijen, schliessen,I and so forth. When 
these signify spiritual activities [i.e. comprehending or conclud­
ing], we have immediately before our minds only their meaning of 
a spiritual activity without recalling at all at the same time the 
visible actions of touching or closing. But in the picture of a lion 
there confronts us not only the meaning which it may have as a 
symbol, but also this visible shape and existent. 
Such dubiety disappears only when each of the two sides, the 
meaning and its shape, are expressly named and thereby their re­
lation is enunciated at once. But in that case the concrete existent 
set out before us is no longer a symbol in the strict sense of the 
word but just an image, and the relation between image and mean­
ing acquires the familiar form of comparison, i.e. simile. In the 
simile, that is to say, there must float before our minds both, first, 
the general idea and then its concrete image. Whereas if reflection 
1 Begreifen is literally to touch or handle ; figuratively, to comprehend or 
understand ; schliessen is to close, and so to conclude [an argument]. 

INTROD UCTION 
307 
has not yet advanced far enough to take good note of universal 
ideas independently and so to set them out by themselves, then the 
related sensuous shape in which a more general meaning is sup­
posed to find its expression is not yet thought to be separate from 
that meaning; both are still immediately at one. As we shall see 
later on [in Chapter 3], this constitutes the difference between 
symbol and comparison. So, for example, Karl Moor cries out1 at 
the sight of the setting sun : 'Thus dies a hero.' Here the meaning 
is expressly separated from what is presented to our eyes and at 
the same time the meaning is annexed to what is seen. In other 
cases, indeed, this separation and relation is not so clearly empha­
sized in similes ; on the contrary, the connection remains more 
immediate ; but in that event it must already be clear from the 
further connection of the narrative, from the context and other 
circumstances, that the image is not supposed to suffice on its own 
account but that there is meant by it this or that specific signi­
ficance which cannot remain uncertain. When, for example, 
Luther says [in his hymn] 'A safe stronghold our God is still', or 
when it is said that 'Youth sails the ocean with a thousand masts ; 
quietly on the boat that has been saved old age drives into har­
bour',2 there is no doubt about the meaning 'protection' in the 
case of 'stronghold', 'a world of hopes and plans' in the case 
of the picture of the ocean and the thousand masts, 'the restricted 
aim and possession, the small safe piece of ground' in the case of 
the picture of the boat and the harbour. Similarly, when we read in 
the Old Testament [Ps. 58 : 6] : 'Break their teeth, 0 God, in their 
mouth, break out the great teeth of the young lions', we recognize 
at once that the teeth, the mouth, the great teeth of the young 
lions, are not meant literally ; they are only pictures and sensuous 
images, to be understood metaphorically, and in their case it is 
only a matter of what their meaning is. 
But this dubiety enters in the case of the symbol as such all 
the more as a picture with a meaning is in the main called a symbol 
only when this meaning is not, as in comparison, explicitly ex­
pressed or is otherwise clear already. No doubt its ambiguity is 
removed from the symbol, strictly so-called, if, on account of 
this very uncertainty, the linkage of the sensuous picture with the 
t In Schiller, The Robbers, Act III, scene ii. 
2 Schiller, Erwartung und Erfiillung (Expectation and Fulfilment), a 'votive­
tablet'. 

308 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
meaning is made customary, and becomes more or less conven­
tional-as is indispensably requisite in a mere sign ; whereas the 
simile announces itself as something invented for only a momen­
tary purpose, something individual, clear in itself, because it 
carries its meaning along with itself. Still, even if to those living in 
such a conventional range of ideas, the specific symbol is clear 
because they are accustomed to it, it is on the other hand a totally 
different matter with all others who do not move in the same 
circle or for whom that range of ideas is something past and gone. 
To them what is given at first is only the immediate sensuous 
representation, and for them it remains every time doubtful 
whether they have to content themselves with what confronts 
them or whether thereby they are referred to still other ideas and 
thoughts. If, for example, in Christian churches we see the triangle 
in a prominent place on the wall, we recognize at once from this 
that here it is not the sensuous perception of this figure as a mere 
triangle that is meant, but that we have to do with a meaning of it. 
In a different place, however, it is equally clear to us that the same 
figure is not to be taken as a symbol or sign of the Trinity. But other, 
non-Christian peoples, who lack the same habit and knowledge, may 
swither in doubt on this matter, and even we ourselves may not 
in all circumstances determine with the same assurance whether 
a triangle is to be considered as a triangle proper or as a symbol. 
(b) Now it is not at all a matter of encountering this uncertainty 
in restricted cases; on the contrary, it is a matter of encountering it in 
quite extended realms of art, in the content of a prodigious material 
confronting us: the content of almost the whole of Eastern art. 
Thus when we first enter the world of the old-Persian, Indian, 
Egyptian shapes and productions, our footing is not really secure ; 
we feel that we are wandering amongst problems; in themselves 
alone these productions say nothing to us; they do not please us or 
satisfy us by their immediate appearance, but by themselves they 
encourage us to advance beyond them to their meaning which is 
something wider and deeper than they are. In the case of other 
productions, on the contrary, we see at first glance that, like nursery 
tales, for example, they are meant to be a mere play with images 
and casual far-fetched connections. This is because children are 
content with the superficiality of such pictures and with their unin­
tellectual and idle play and staggering juxtapositions. But nations, 
even in their childhood, demanded more substantial material, and 

I NTRO D U CT I O N  
309 
this in fact we do find even in the art-forms of the Indians and 
Egyptians, although in these enigmatic productions of theirs, the 
elucidation is only hinted at, and great difficulty is put in the way 
of a solution. But in such incongruity between meaning and the 
immediate artistic expression, how much is to be ascribed to the 
deficiency of art, the turbidity of imagination itself and its lack of 
ideas ? Or how much of it has the character it has because the 
clearer and more accurate configuration was incapable by itself of 
expressing the deeper meaning, and because the fantastic and gro­
tesque is just used instead on behalf of a more far-reaching idea ? 
All this is precisely what at first sight may to a very great extent 
admit of doubt. 
Even in the field of classical art a similar uncertainty enters 
here and there, although the classical element in art consists in its 
not being symbolical by nature but in its being, in itself and 
throughout, distinct and clear. In fact the classical ideal is clear be­
cause it compasses the true content of art, i.e. substantial subjec­
tivity, and precisely thereby it finds too the true form, which in 
itself expresses nothing but that genuine content. That is to say, 
the significance, the meaning, is no other than that which actually 
lies in the external shape, since both sides correspond perfectly; 
whereas in the symbol, simile, etc., the image always still presents 
something other than the meaning alone for which it furnishes the 
image. But even classical art has an aspect of ambiguity since in the 
case of the mythological productions of antiquityit may seem doubt­
ful whether we are to stick to the external shapes as such and marvel 
at them as merely a charming play of a happy fancy-because 
mythology is indeed in general only an idle invention of fables-or 
whether we still have to search for a further and deeper meaning. 
This latter demand may make things specially difficult when the 
content of these fables affects the life and works of the Divine 
itself, since the stories reported to us would have to be regarded 
both as wholly beneath the dignity of the Absolute and as purely 
inadequate and tasteless inventions. When, for example, we read of 
the twelve labours of Hercules, or even hear that Zeus has hurled 
Hephaestus down from Olympus on to the island of Lemnos so 
that as a result Hephaestus has a limp, we believe that this is to 
be understood as nothing but a fabulous picture drawn by imagi­
nation. Similarly it may appear to us that Jupiter's numerous love­
affairs are invented purely arbitrarily. But, conversely, because 

310 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
such stories are told precisely of the supreme divinity, it may all 
the same be credible that still another, wider meaning, than what 
the myth provides on the surface, lies concealed under them. 
In this matter there are therefore especially two opposed ideas 
which have come into prominence. The first takes mythology as 
purely external stories, beneath God's dignity, even though, when 
considered in themselves, they may be graceful, delightful, in­
teresting, nay even of great beauty, yet cannot afford any induce­
ment for the further elucidation of deeper meanings. Mythology is 
therefore on this view to be considered purely historically-accord­
ing to the form in which it is present to us, for the reason that, on 
the one hand, looked at on its artistic side, it is sufficient in itself in 
its configurations, pictures, gods and their actions and adventures, 
and indeed in itself affords the elucidation by making the meanings 
conspicuous ; while, on the other hand, from the point of view of 
its historical origin, it has developed out of historical events, 
foreign tales and traditions, out of local origins, out of the caprice 
of priests, artists, and poets. But the second point of view will not 
be content with the purely external side of mythological shapes 
and tales, but insists that a general deeper sense dwells in them, 
and that to know this sense nevertheless, by unveiling it, is the 
proper business of mythology as the scientific treatment of myths. 
On this view mythology must therefore be interpreted symbolically. 
For 'symbolically' means here only that the myths, as a product 
of spirit (no matter how bizarre, jocular, grotesque they may look, 
no matter how much too of the casual external caprices of fancy 
is intermingled with them) still comprise meanings, i.e. general 
thoughts about the nature of God, i.e. philosophical theories. 
On these lines in recent times Creuzer1 especially has begun 
again in his Symbolik to study the mythological ideas of the ancients 
not, in the usual manner, externally and prosaically, nor according 
to their artistic value; on the contrary, he has sought in them 
inner rational meanings. In this enterprise he is guided by the 
presupposition that the myths and legendary tales took their 
origin in the human spirit. This spirit may indeed make play with 
its ideas of the gods, but, when the interest of religion enters, it 
treads on a higher sphere in which reason is the inventor of shapes, 
even if it too remains saddled with the defect of being unable yet 
• F. Creuzer, 1 77I-J 858, one of Hegel's colleagues at Heidelberg. The 
reference is to his Symbolik und Mytho/ogie (I8IO-ZJ). 

I NTRODUCTION 
3I I  
at this first stage to unfold their inner core adequately. This 
hypothesis is absolutely true : religion has its source in the spirit, 
which seeks its own truth, has an inkling of it, and brings the same 
before our minds in some shape or other more closely or more dis­
tantly related to this truthful content. But when reason invents the 
shapes, there arises also the need to know their rationality. This 
knowledge alone is truly worthy of man. Whoever leaves this aside 
aquires nothing but a mass of external facts. If on the other hand 
we dig down for the inner truth of mythological ideas, without in 
the process rejecting their other side, namely the fortuitousness 
and caprice of imagination, the locality, etc., we may then justify 
even the different mythologies. But to justify man in his spiritual 
images and shapes is a noble preoccupation, nobler than the mere 
collection of historical external details. Now it is true that Creuzer 
has been pounced upon with the reproof that, following the ex­
ample of the Neo-Platonists, he just first reads these wider mean­
ings into the myths and looks in the myths for thoughts whose 
presence there is a supposition without any historical basis ; indeed 
it can even be proved historically that in order to find these mean­
ings there the investigator must first have dragged them there. For, 
it is argued, the people, the poets and priests-although on the 
other side much is said again about the great secret wisdom of the 
priests!-knew nothing of such thoughts which were incompatible 
with the whole culture of their age. This latter point is of course 
entirely correct. The peoples, poets, priests did not in fact have 
before their minds in this form of universality the universal 
thoughts lying at the root of their mythological ideas ; and only if 
they had had them in this way could they have then intentionally 
veiled them in a symbolic form. But that they had such an inten­
tion was not maintained even by Creuzer. Yet if the Greeks did 
not think in their mythology the thoughts that we now see there, it 
does not follow in the least that their ideas are not implicitly symbols 
and so of necessity to be taken as such-on the ground that the 
peoples at the time when they composed their myths lived in 
purely poetical conditions and so brought their inmost and deep­
est convictions before their minds not in the form of thought but 
in shapes devised by imagination without separating the universal 
abstract ideas from the concrete pictures. That this is actually the 
case is something which here we have essentially to maintain and 
assume, even if it be granted as possible that, in such a symbolic 

312 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
mode of explanation, purely droll and ingenious deductions may 
often slip in, as happens with [the quest for] etymologies. 
(c) But however firmly we may assent to the view that myth­
ology with its tales of the gods and its vast productions of a persis­
tent poetic imagination contains in itself a rational content and 
deep religious ideas, yet the question arises in relation to the sym­
bolic form of art whether in that event all mythology and art is 
to be understood symbolically-as Friedrich von Schlegel main­
tained 1 that in every artistic representation an allegory was to be 
sought. In that case the symbolical or allegorical is so understood 
that for every work of art and every mythological shape there 
serves as a basis a universal thought which, then explicitly 
emphasized in its universality, is supposed to provide the ex­
planation of what such a work, such an idea, really means. This 
method of treatment has likewise become very common in recent 
times. So, for example, in the more recent editions of Dante, where 
of course manifold allegories occur, attempts have been made to 
explain every stanza allegorically throughout ; and in his editions 
of the classical poets, Heynez also tries in his notes to explain in 
terms of abstract categories of the Understanding the universal 
sense of every metaphor. This is because the Understanding 
especially runs quickly to symbol and allegory, since it separates 
picture and meaning and therefore destroys the form of art, a form 
with which this symbolical explanation, aimed only at extricating 
the universal as such, has nothing to do. 
This extension of symbolism to every sphere of mythology and 
art is by no means what we have in view here in considering the 
symbolic form of art. For our endeavour does not rise to finding 
out how far artistic shapes could be interpreted symbolically or 
allegorically in this sense of the word 'symbol' ;  instead, we have 
to ask, conversely, how far the symbolical itself is to be reckoned 
an art-form. We want to establish the artistic relation between 
meaning and its shape, in so far as that relation is symbolical in 
distinction from other modes of representation, especially the 
classical and the romantic. Our task must therefore consist, not in 
accepting that diffusion of the symbolic over the entire field of 
art, but conversely expressly limiting the range of what in itself 
' In the passage cited in the note on p. 291. 
2 C. G. Heyne, 1729-1812. Carlyle wrote an interesting essay on his life and 
works. 

INTR O D U C TION 
313 
is presented to us as a symbol proper and therefore is to be treated 
as symbolical. In this sense there has already been advanced [on 
pp. 76-81] the division of the ideal of art into the forms of the 
Symbolic, the Classical, and the Romantic. 
The symbolic, that is to say, in our meaning of the word at 
once stops short of the point where, instead of indefinite, general, 
abstract ideas, it is free individuality which constitutes the content 
and form of the representation. For the person is what is sig­
nificant for himself and is his own self-explanation. What he feels, 
reflects, does, accomplishes, his qualities, his actions, his character, 
are himself; and the whole range of his spiritual and visible 
appearance has no other meaning but the person who, in this 
development and unfolding of himself, brings before our contem­
plation only himself as master over his entire objective world. 
Meaning and sensuous representation, inner and outer, matter 
and form, are in that event no longer distinct from one another ; 
they do not announce themselves, as they do in the strictly sym­
bolic sphere, as merely related but as one whole in which the 
appearance has no other essence, the essence no other appearance, 
outside or alongside itself. What is to be manifested and what is 
manifested are lifted into a concrete unity. In this sense the Greek 
gods, in so far as Greek art represents them as free, inherently and 
independently self-sufficient individuals, are not to be taken 
symbolically ; they content us in and by themselves. For art the 
actions of Zeus, Apollo, Athene, belong precisely to these in­
dividuals alone, and are meant to display nothing but their power 
and passion. Now if from such inherently free personalities a 
general concept is abstracted as their meaning and set beside 
their particular aspect as an explanation of the entire individual 
appearance, then what in these figures is in conformity with art is 
left unnoticed and destroyed. For this reason artists too cannot re­
concile themselves to such a mode of interpreting all works of art 
and their mythological figures. For what we may think is left as an 
actually symbolic indication or allegory in the Classical and Roman­
tic sort of artistic representation affects incidentals and is in that 
case expressly degraded to a mere attribute and sign, as e.g. the 
eagle stands beside Zeus, and Luke the Evangelist is accompanied 
by an ox ; but the Egyptians had in Apis [the bull] a vision of God 
himself. 
But the difficult point in this artistically adequate appearance of 

3 I4 
I I. I. THE SYMBOL I C  FORM O F  ART 
free subjectivity lies in distinguishing whether what is represented 
as person has also actual individuality and subjectivity or whether 
it carries in itself only the empty semblance of the same as mere 
personification. In this latter case, that is to say, the personality is 
nothing but a superficial form which both in particular actions 
and in the bodily shape does not express its own inner being and 
thereby permeate the entire externality of its appearance as its 
own; on the contrary, it has for the meaning of the external reality 
still another inner being, which is not this personality and sub­
jectivity itself. 
This is the chief consideration in relation to the delimitation of 
symbolic art. 
Now, to sum up, our interest in considering symbolism con­
sists in recognizing the inner process of the origin of art, in so far 
as this can be derived from the Concept of the Ideal in its develop­
ment up to true art, and so of recognizing the sequence of stages 
in the symbolic as stages on the way to genuine art. Now, how­
ever close the connection between religion and art may be, we 
still have not to go over the symbols themselves (or religion as 
comprising ideas which in the wider sense of the word are sym­
bolic or allegorical); we have only to consider that element in them 
in accordance with which they belong to art as such. The re­
ligious element we must hand over to the history of mythology. 
Division of the subject 
For the more detailed division of the symbolic form of art, the 
first thing is to settle the boundaries within which the development 
proceeds. 
In general, as has been said already, this whole sphere is on the 
whole only the threshold of art, since at first we have before us 
only abstract meanings, not yet in themselves essentially indi­
vidualized, and the configuration immediately linked with them is 
just as adequate as inadequate. The first boundary line is therefore 
the disengaging of the artistic vision and representation in general; 
while the opposite boundary is provided by art proper to which 
the symbolic lifts itself as to its truth. 
In proposing to discuss the subjective aspect of the first origin of 
symbolic art, we may recall the saying that the artistic intuition as 
such, like the religious-or rather both together-and even scien-

I NTRODUCTION 
315 
tific research, have begun in wonder.1 The man who does not yet 
wonder at anything still lives in obtuseness and stupidity. Nothing 
interests him and nothing confronts him because he has not yet 
separated himself on his own account, and cut himself free, from 
objects and their immediate individual existence. But on the other 
hand whoever wonders no longer regards the whole of the external 
world as something which he has become clear about, whether in 
the abstract intellectual mode of a universally human Enlighten­
ment, or in the noble and deeper consciousness of absolute spiritual 
freedom and universality, and thus he has changed the objects and 
their existence into a spiritual and self-conscious insight into them. 
Whereas wonder only occurs when man, torn free from his most 
immediate first connection with nature and from his most elemen­
tary, purely practical, relation to it, that of desire, stands back 
spiritually from nature and his own singularity and now seeks 
and sees in things a universal, implicit, and permanent element. 
In that case for the first time natural objects strike him ; they are 
an 'other' which yet is meant to be for his apprehension and in 
which he strives to find himself over again as well as thoughts 
and reason. Here the inkling of something higher and the con­
sciousness of externality are still unseparated and yet at the same 
time there is present a contradiction between natural things and 
the spirit, a contradiction in which objects prove themselves to be 
just as attractive as repulsive, and the sense of this contradic­
tion along with the urge to remove it is precisely what generates 
wonder. 
Now the first product of this situation consists in the fact that 
man sets nature and objectivity in general over against himself on 
the one hand as cause, and he reverences it as power ; but even so 
on the other hand he satisfies his need to make external to himself 
the subjective feeling of something higher, essential, and universal, 
and to contemplate it as objective. In this unification there is im­
mediately present the fact that the single natural objects-and 
above all the elemental ones, like the sea, rivers, mountains, 
stars-are not accepted just as they are in their separation, but, 
lifted into the realm of our ideas, acquire for our ideas the form of 
universal and absolute existence. 
Now these ideas in their universality and essential implicit 
character art concentrates again into a picture for contemplation by 
' ... g. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 982b r 1 ff. 

316 
I I. I. T H E  S Y M B O L I C  F O R l\'1 O F  A R T  
direct consciousness and sets them out for the spirit i n  the objec­
tive form of a picture. This is the beginning of art. The immediate 
reverence for natural objects-nature worship and fetish worship 
-is therefore not yet art. 
On its objective side the beginning of art stands in the closest 
connection with religion. The earliest works of art are of a mytho­
logical kind. In religion it is the Absolute as such, even if in its 
most abstract and poorest definition, which is brought to men's 
minds. Now the first self-revelation available for the Absolute is 
natural phenomena; in their existence man divines the Absolute 
and therefore makes it perceptible to himself in the form of natural 
objects. In this endeavour art finds its basic origin. Yet, even in 
this respect, it has not come on the scene when man merely des­
cries the Absolute directly in the objects actually present, and is 
satisfied with that mode of divine reality, but only when the mind 
produces from its own resources both the apprehension of its 
Absolute in the form of what is external in itself and also the 
objectivity of this more or less adequate connection [of spirit with 
nature]. For art appropriates a substantial content grasped through 
the spirit, a content that does not appear externally, but in an ex­
ternality which is not only present immediately but is first produced 
by the spirit as an existent comprising that content in itself and ex­
pressing it. But the first interpreter of religious ideas, one which 
brings them nearer to us by giving them shape, is art alone, be­
cause the prosaic treatment of the objective world only prevails 
when man, as spiritual self-consciousness, has battled himself 
free from nature as immediacy and now confronts it with the in­
tellectual freedom which envisages objectivity as a pure externality. 
Yet this cleavage [between subject and object] is always only a 
later stage. The first knowledge of truth, on the other hand, proves 
to be a middle position between the purely spiritless immersion in 
nature and the spirituality altogether freed therefrom. This middle 
position in which spirit sets its ideas before our eyes in the shape of 
natural things just because it has still won no higher form (though 
in this linkage [of ideas and things] it struggles to make both sides 
adequate to one another) is, in general, the standpoint of poetry 
and art in distinction from that of the prosaic intellect. It is for this 
reason, after all, that the completely prosaic consciousness only 
arises when the principle of subjective spiritual freedom, [first] in 
its abstract and [later in its] genuinely concrete form, succeeds in 

I NTRODUCTION 
317 
attaining actuality, i.e. in the Roman and then later in the modern 
Christian world. 
The goal, secondly, which the symbolic art-form strives to reach 
is classical art, and the attainment of this goal marks the dissolu­
tion of the symbolic form as such. Classical art, however, though it 
achieves the true manifestation of art, cannot be the first form of 
art; it has the multiple intermediate and transitional stages of the 
symbolic as its presupposition. This is because its appropriate 
content is spiritual individuality which, by being the content and 
form of what is absolutely true, can appear in consciousness only 
after complex mediations and transitions. The beginning is always 
constituted by what is abstract and indeterminate in its meaning. 
But spiritual individuality must be absolutely concrete, essentially 
and inherently; it is the self-determining Concept in its adequate 
actualization, and this Concept can be grasped only after it has 
sent ahead, in their one-sided development, the abstract aspects 
which it reconciles and harmonizes. Once it has done so, the Con­
cept makes an end of these abstractions by its own appearance as 
a totality at the same time. This is the case in classical art. The 
classical form puts a stop to the purely symbolizing and sublime 
preliminary experiments of art, because spiritual individuality now 
has its shape, its adequate shape, in itself, just as the self-determin­
ing Concept generates out of itself the particular existence ade­
quate to it. When this true content and therefore the true form is 
found for art, then the seeking and striving after both of these, 
wherein the deficiency of symbolic art precisely consists, ceases 
immediately. 
If we ask, within these boundaries which have been indicated, 
for a narrower principle of division for symbolic art, then, in so far 
as symbolic art just struggles towards true meanings and their 
corresponding mode of configuration, it is in general a battle be-
· 
tween the content which still resists true art and the form which is 
not homogeneous with that content either. For both sides [content 
and form, meaning and shape], although bound into an identity, 
still coincide neither with one another nor with the true nature of 
art, and therefore they struggle none the less to escape from this 
defective unification. In this respect the whole of symbolic art 
may be understood as a continuing struggle for compatibility of 
meaning and shape, and the different levels of this struggle are not 
so much different kinds of symbolic art as stages and modes of one 

3 18 
I I. I. THE S Y M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
and the same contradiction [of incompatibility between meaning 
and shape]. 
At first, however, this battle is present only implicitly, i.e. the 
incompatibility between the two sides, set and forced into a unity, 
has not yet become something confronting the artistic consciousness 
itself, because this consciousness cannot understand the universal 
nature of the meaning which it grasps, nor can it interpret the real 
shape independently in its separate existence. For this reason, in­
stead of setting before its eyes the difference between the two, it 
starts from their immediate identity. Therefore what forms the 
beginning is the unity of the artistic content and its attempted 
symbolical expression-an enigmatic unity still undivided and 
fermenting in this contradictory linkage. This is the proper uncon­
scious original symbolism, the configurations of which are not yet 
made into symbols. 
The end, on the other hand, is the disappearance and dissolution 
of the symbolic, since the hitherto implicit battle has now come into 
the artistic consciousness ; and symbolizing therefore becomes a 
conscious severance of the explicitly clear meaning from its sensu­
ous associated picture ; yet in this separation there remains at the 
same time an express relation, but one which instead of appearing 
as an immediate identity, asserts itself only as a mere comparison of 
the two, in which the difference, previously unconscious, comes to 
the fore just as clearly. This is the sphere of the symbol known as 
a symbol : the meaning known and envisaged on its own account 
in its universality, the concrete appearance of which is expressly 
reduced to a mere picture and is compared with the meaning for 
the purpose of its illustration by art. 
In the middle between the beginning and the end just mentioned 
; there stands sublime art. Here the meaning, as spiritual explicit 
universality, is separated for the first time from the concrete exis­
tent, and makes that existent known as its negative, external to it, 
and its servant. In order to express itself therein, the meaning can­
not allow this existent to subsist independently, but must posit it 
as the inherently deficient, something to be superseded-although 
it has for its expression nothing other than precisely this existent 
which is external to it and null. The splendour of this sublimity of 
meaning naturally precedes comparison strictly so-called, because 
the concrete singleness of natural and other phenomena must first 
be treated negatively, and applied only as decoration and ornament 

INTRODUCTION 
319 
for the unattainable might of the absolute meaning, 1 before there 
can be set forth that express severance and selective comparison of 
phenomena which are allied to and yet distinct from the meaning 
whose picture they are to provide. 
These three chief stages which have been indicated are inwardly 
articulated in more detail in the following way. 
A. (ex) The first stage is itself neither to be called symbolic proper 
nor properly to be ranked as art. It only builds the road to both. 
This is the immediate substantial unity of the Absolute as spiritual 
meaning with its unseparated sensuous existence in a natural 
shape. 
({3) The second stage forms the transition to symbol proper, in 
that this first unity begins to be dissolved and now, on the one 
hand, the universal meanings lift themselves explicitly above the 
single natural phenomena, yet, on the other hand, thus envisaged 
in their universality they are all the same to come into conscious­
ness again in the form of concrete natural objects. Next in this 
double struggle to spiritualize the natural and to make the spiritual 
perceptible, there is revealed at this stage of the difference between 
spirit and nature the whole fantastic character and confusion, all 
the fermentation and wild medley, staggering hither and thither, of 
symbolic art. This art has indeed an inkling of the inadequacy of 
its pictures and shapes and yet can call in aid nothing but the dis­
tortion of shapes to the point of the boundlessness of a purely 
quantitative sublimity. At this stage, therefore, we live in a world 
full of blatant contrivances, incredibilities, and miracles, yet with­
out meeting works of art of genuine beauty. 
(y) By this battle between meanings and their sensuous repre­
sentation we reach, thirdly, the standpoint of the symbol proper, 
at which the symbolical work of art is first developed in its com­
plete character. Here the forms and shapes are no longer those sen­
suously present which-as at the first stage-coincide immediately 
with the Absolute as its existence, without having been produced 
by art; or-as at the second stage-which can annul their differ­
ence from the universality of meanings only through imagi­
nation's sprawling extension of particular natural objects and events; 
on the contrary, what is now brought before our vision as a sym­
bolic shape is a production generated by art. This production is on 
' It appears from the summary of this passage in ch. III, c, below that 'absolute 
meaning' is a synonym for 'God'. 

3zo 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
the one hand to present itself in its own special character, but on 
the other hand is to manifest not only this isolated object but a 
wider universal meaning, to be linked therewith and recognized 
therein. Thus these shapes stand before us as problems, making 
the demand that we shall conjecture the inner meaning lying in 
them. 
On these more specific forms of the still original symbol we may 
in general premise that they proceed from the religious world out­
looks of entire peoples, and therefore in this connection we will 
call history too to mind. Yet the lines of division between them 
cannot be drawn in full strictness, because the individual ways 
of treatment and configuration, like the art-forms in general, are 
mixed, so that we find over again in earlier or later ages, even 
if subordinated and isolated, the form which we regard as the 
fundamental type for the world-outlook of a single people. But 
in essence we have to look for the more concrete outlooks and 
examples for (a:) in the ancient Parsi religion, for ({3) in the Indian, 
and for (y) in the Egyptian. 
B. Through the course indicated above, the meaning which 
hitherto has been more or less obscured owing to its particular 
sensuous shape has at last wrung its way to freedom and so comes 
explicitly into consciousness in its clarity. Thereby the strictly 
symbolic situation is dissolved, and, since the absolute meaning 
is grasped as the universal all-pervading substance of the entire 
phenomenal world, there now enters the art of substantiality-as 
· the symbolism of sublimity-in the place of purely symbolical 
and fantastic allusions, disfigurations, and riddles. 
In this regard there are especially to be distinguished two points of 
view which have their basis in the varying relation of substance, as 
the Absolute and the Divine, to the finitude of appearance. This re­
lation, that is to say, can be double, positive and negative; although 
in both forms-because it is always the universal substance which 
has to emerge-what is to come before our vision in things is not 
their particular shape and meaning but their universal soul and 
their position relatively to this substance. 
(a:) At the first stage this relation is so conceived that sub­
stance, as the All and One liberated from every particularity, is 
immanent in the specific appearances as the soul that produces and 
animates them, and now in this immanence is viewed as affirma­
tively present, and is grasped and presented by the individual 

INTRODUCTION 
J21 
who is self-abandoning owing to his ecstatic immersion in this 
essence that dwells in all these things. This affords the art of sub­
lime pantheism, as we see it already in its beginnings in India, and 
then developed in the most brilliant way in Mohammedanism and 
its mystical art, and finally as we find it again in a more profound 
and subjective way in some phenomena of Christian mysticism. 
({J) The negative relation, on the other hand, of sublimity 
strictly so called, we must seek in Hebrew poetry: this poetry of 
sublimity can celebrate and exalt the imageless Lord of heaven and 
earth only by using his whole creation as merely an accident of his 
power, as the messenger of his sovereignty, as the praise and 
ornament of his greatness, and in this service by positing even the 
greatest [earthly] splendour as negative. This is because it cannot 
find an adequate and affirmatively sufficient expression for the 
power and dominion of the supreme being, and can aquire a 
positive satisfaction only through the servitude of the creature, 
who is only adequate to himself and his significance in the feeling 
and establishment of his own unworthiness. 
c. Through this process whereby the meaning, explicitly known 
in its simplicity, gains independence, its severance from the ap­
pearance which at the same time is established as inadequate to it, is 
already implicitly accomplished. Now if, within this actual cleavage, 
shape and meaning are to be brought into a relation of inner 
affinity, as symbolic art requires, then this relation lies directly 
neither in the meaning nor in the shape, but in a subjective third 
thing [the spectator's, or artist's, consciousness] which, in its sub­
jective vision, finds aspects of similarity in both, and in reliance 
thereon illustrates and explains the independently clear meaning 
through the cognate individual picture. 
But in that case the picture, instead of being as before the sole 
expression [of the meaning], is only a mere ornament, and there­
fore there arises a relation not in correspondence with the nature 
of the beautiful, since picture and meaning are contrasted with 
one another instead of being moulded into one another-as was 
the case, even if in a less complete way, in symbolic art strictly so­
called. Works of art which make this form their foundation re­
main therefore of a subordinate kind, and their content cannot be 
the Absolute itself but some different and restricted situation or 
occurrence ; on this account the forms belonging here are used in 
the main only occasionally as accessories. 

322 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
Yet, in more detail, we have to distinguish in this section too 
three principal stages. 
(a:) To the first there belongs the mode of representation used 
in fables, parables, and apologues; in these the separation of shape 
from meaning, characteristic of this whole sphere, is not yet expressly 
established, and the subjective activity of comparing is not yet 
emphasized; consequently the presentation of the single concrete 
appearance, which is to illumine the universal meaning, remains 
the predominant thing. 
({3) At the second stage, on the other hand, the universal mean­
ing comes explicitly into dominion over the explanatory shape 
which can still only appear as a mere tribute or capriciously chosen 
picture. To this class there belong allegory, metaphor, simile. 
(y) The third stage, finally, completely reveals the utter sun­
dering of the two sides which hitherto in symbolic art were either 
united immediately-despite their relative hostility, or, in their 
independently established cleavage, were yet still related. To the 
content explicitly known in its prosaic universality the art-form 
appears thoroughly external, as in didactic poetry, while on the 
other side the explicitly external is treated and represented in its 
mere externality in so-called descriptive poetry. But in this way the 
symbolic linkage [of shape and meaning] and their relation has 
vanished and we have to look for a further unification of form and 
content which truly corresponds to the real nature of art. 

Chapter I 
U N C O N S C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
If, to consider the matter in more detail, we now proceed to the 
stages of development of the symbolic, we have to make a begin­
ning with the beginning of art as it proceeds from the Idea of art 
itself. This beginning, as we saw in the Introduction to this Sec­
tion, is the symbolic form of art in its still immediate shape, 
a shape not yet known and made a mere image and simile-­
unconscious symbolism. But before this can acquire its strictly 
symbolical character in itself and for our consideration, there must 
be taken up still more presuppositions determined by the nature 
of the symbolic itself. 
The nearer point of departure may be established in the follow­
mg way. 
The symbol on the one hand has its basis in the immediate 
unification of the universal and therefore spiritual meaning with 
the sensuous shape which is just as adequate as inadequate ; but 
as yet there is no consciousness of their incongruity. But, on the 
other hand, the linkage must already be shaped by imagination 
and art and not merely apprehended as a purely immediately 
present actuality of the Divine. This is because the symbolic only 
arises for art with the detachment of a universal meaning from 
what is immediately present in nature, although in the existence 
of the latter the Absolute is envisaged, but now envisaged by 
imagination as actually present. 
Thus the first presupposition of the symbolical's coming into 
being is precisely that immediate unity of the Absolute with its 
existence in the phenomenal world, a unity not produced by art 
but found, without art, in actual natural objects and human 
activities. 
A. I M M E D I A T E  UN I TY O F  MEAN I N G  A N D  S H A PE 
In this intuited immediate identity of the Divine, the Divine which 
is brought before consciousness as one with its existence in nature 
and man, neither is nature as such accepted as it is, nor is the 

324 
I I. I. THE SYMBO L I C  FORM O F  ART 
Absolute explicitly torn free from it and given independence­
so that in consequence there is strictly no question of a difference 
between inner and outer, meaning and shape, because the inner 
has not yet been explicitly separated as meaning from its im­
mediate actuality in what is present. If therefore we speak here 
of meaning, this is our reflection which proceeds for us from the 
need to regard the [external] form (which affords [to others] 
a [mere direct] intuition of the spiritual and the inward) as in 
general something external, and, to be in a position to understand 
it, we want to look into its heart, its soul and its meaning. But, 
therefore, in the case of such general intuitions [of the Divine] 
we must make the essential distinction between whether the inner 
itself was envisaged as inner and meaning by those peoples who 
originally apprehended these intuitions, or whether it is only we 
who recognize in them a meaning which receives its external 
expression in what is intuited. 
Now, in other words, in this first unity there is no such dif­
ference between soul and body, concept and reality. The bodily 
and the sensuous, the natural and the human, is not merely an 
expression of a meaning to be distinguished therefrom ; on the 
contrary, what appears is itself apprehended as the immediate 
actuality and presence of the Absolute. The Absolute does not 
acquire for itself still another independent existence, but has only 
[as its existence] the immediate presence of an object which is 
God or the Divine. In Lamaism, for instance, this individual 
actual man is immediately known and reverenced as God, just as 
in other nature-religions the sun, mountains, rivers, the moon, 
single animals, the bull, the monkey, etc., are regarded as im­
mediate divine existents and reverenced as sacred. A similar thing, 
even if in a deeper way, still appears in many respects even in the 
Christian outlook. In Catholic doctrine, for example, the conse­
crated bread is the actual flesh, the wine the actual blood of God, 
and Christ is immediately present in them ; and even in the 
Lutheran faith bread and wine are transformed by the believer's 
enjoyment into actual flesh and blood. In this mystical identity 
there is nothing purely symbolical ; the latter only arises in the 
Reformed [i.e. Calvinist] doctrine, because here the spiritual is 
explicitly severed from the sensuous, and the external object is 
taken in that case as a mere pointing to a meaning differentiated 
therefrom. In the miracle-working images of the Madonna too the 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYMB O L I S M  
325 
power of the Divine operates by immediate presence in them and 
is not, as might be thought, only hinted at symbolically through 
the images. 
But in the most thoroughgoing and widespread way we find the 
intuition of this wholly immediate unity in the life and religion 
of the ancient Zend people whose ideas and institutions are pre­
served for us in the Zend-Avesta. 
1. The Religion of Zoroaster1 
The religion of Zoroaster, namely, takes light as it exists in nature 
-the sun, the stars, fire in its luminosity and flames-to be the 
Absolute, without explicitly separating this divinity from light, as 
if light were a mere expression and image or symbol. The Divine, 
the meaning, is not severed from its existence, from the lights. 
This is because, even if light is taken all the same in the sense of 
the good, the just, and therefore of what is rich in blessing, up­
holding and propagating life, then it still is not thought at all 
to be a mere image of the good ; on the contrary, the good is itself 
light. The same is the case with the opposite of light-the sombre 
and the dark as the impure, the harmful, the bad, the destructive, 
and the deadly. 
In more detail this view is particularized and articulated in the 
following way. 
(a) In the first place, the Divine as inherently pure light and as 
its opposite, darkness and impurity, is personified and is then called 
Ormuzd and Ahriman ; but this personification remains entirely 
superficial. Ormuzd is no inherently free imperceptible subject, 
like the God of the Jews, or truly spiritual and personal, like the 
God of the Christians who is made known to us as actually 
personal and self-conscious spirit; on the contrary, Ormuzd, how­
ever much he is also called king, great spirit, judge, etc., still 
remains unseparated from his sensuous existence as light and lights. 
He is only the universal in all particular existents in which the 
light, and therefore the Divine and the pure, is actual ; he is in 
them without abstractly withdrawing, out of everything present, 
into himself as the universal spirit independent of these existents. 
He remains in the existing particulars and individuals just as the 
• The transliteration of proper names in the Zend-A vesta differs in different 
translations. I have preserved many of Hegel's, but see notes on pp. 328 and 329 
and note 2 on p. 332, all of which I owe to Professor R. C. Zaehner. 

326 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
genus remains in the species and individuals. As this universal he 
indeed acquires precedence over everything particular, and is the 
first, the supreme, the gold-shining king of kings, the purest and 
best, but he has his existence solely in everything light and pure, 
just as Ahriman has his in everything dark, evil, pernicious, and sick. 
(b) Therefore this view expands at once into the further idea 
of a realm of light and darkness and the battle between them. In 
the realm of Ormuzd it is the Amshaspands as the seven chief lights 
in heaven who enjoy divine worship first, because they are the 
essential particular existences of light and therefore, as a pure and 
great heavenly people, constitute the determinate being of the 
Divine itself. Each Amshaspand (Ormuzd too is of their company 
in this) has its days of presiding, blessing, and beneficence. In 
further specification, the !zeds and Fervers1 are subordinate to 
them ; like Ormuzd himself they are personified indeed but without 
more detailed human configuration for contemplation, so that 
what remains the essential thing for contemplation is neither 
spiritual nor bodily subjectivity but determinate being as light, 
brightness, splendour, illumination, radiation, etc. 
Similarly there are also treated as an existence of Ormuzd indi­
vidual natural things which do not themselves exist externally as 
lights and luminous bodies-animals, plants, the phenomena of 
the human world whether spiritual or corporeal, individual actions 
and situations, the entire life of the state, the king, surrounded by 
seven great men, the division of classes, the cities, the provinces 
with their governors who as the best and purest people have to 
serve as a model and protection-in short the whole of reality. 
For everything which carries in itself and propagates growth, life, 
maintenance, is a mode in which light and purity and therefore 
Ormuzd really exist ; every single truth, goodness, love, justice, 
mercy, spirit, bliss, every single living thing, everything beneficent 
and protective, etc., is regarded by Zoroaster as inherently light 
and divine. The realm of Ormuzd is what is actually present as 
pure and luminous, and in this realm there is no difference between 
the phenomena of nature and those of spirit, just as in Ormuzd 
himself light and goodness, spiritual and sensuous qualities, im­
mediately coincide. The splendour of a creature is therefore for 
Zoroaster the sum of spirit, power, and every kind of stirring of 
' These are the spirits or genii of individuals. By 'Izeds' Yazatas may be 
meant. For 'Fen•ers' read 'Fravashis'. 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
life, in so far as, that is to say, they promote the maintenance of 
everything positive and the banishment of everything in itself evil 
and harmful. What in animals, men, and plants, is real and good 
is light, and by the measure and condition of this luminosity the 
higher or lower splendour of all objects is determined. 
The like articulation and gradation occurs also in the realm of 
Ahriman, except that in this province the spiritually bad and the 
naturally evil, in short what is destructive and actively negative, 
acquires actuality and dominion. But the might of Ahriman is not 
to be extended, and the aim of the whole world is therefore put 
in annihilating and smashing the realm of Ahriman, so that 
Ormuzd alone shall be living, present, and dominant in everything. 
(c) To this one and only end the whole of human life is conse­
crated. The task of every individual consists in nothing but his 
own spiritual and bodily purification, and in the spreading of this 
blessing and the struggle against Ahriman throughout human and 
natural situations and activities. Thus, the supreme, most sacred 
duty is to glorify Ormuzd in his creation, to love and venerate 
everything which has proceeded from this light and is pure in 
itself, and to make oneself pleasing to it. Ormuzd is the beginning 
and end of all veneration. Before everything else the Parsi has 
therefore to call on Ormuzd in thoughts and words, and to pray 
to him. After praising him from whom the whole world of the 
pure emanates, the Parsi must next turn in prayer to particular 
things according to their level of majesty, dignity, and perfection ; 
for, says the Parsi, so far as they are good and unalloyed, Ormuzd 
is in them and loves them as his pure sons in whom he takes 
pleasure as at the beginning of creation, since everything proceeded 
by his agency new and pure. So prayer is directed first to the 
Amshaspands as the nearest antitypes of Ormuzd, as the first and 
most brilliant beings who surround his throne and further his 
dominion. Prayer to these heavenly spirits is precisely related to 
their properties and functions, and, if they are stars, to the time of 
their uprising. The sun is called upon by day, and always in a 
different way according to whether it is rising, standing at midday, 
or setting thereafter. From dawn to midday the Parsi asks especially 
that Ormuzd may be pleased to heighten his splendour, and in the 
evening he prays that the sun may complete its career through the 
protection of Ormuzd and all the Izeds. But Mithras is especially 
venerated ; as the fructifier of the earth and the deserts he pours 

328 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  FORM OF ART 
forth nourishment over the whole of nature, and as the mighty 
struggler against all the Devas' of contention, war, disorder, and 
wreck, he is the author of peace. 
Further, the Parsi in his on the whole monotonous prayers of 
praise emphasizes as it were the ideals, the purest and truest in 
man, the Fervers as pure spirits of men, no matter where on earth 
they live or have lived. Especially is prayer made to the pure 
spirit of Zoroaster, but after him to the governors of classes, cities, 
and provinces ; and the spirits of all men are now already con­
sidered to be exactly bound together as members in the living 
society of light, which one day is to be still more of a unity in 
Gorotman.z 
Finally, even animals, hills, trees are not forgotten, but they are 
called on with eyes fixed on Ormuzd ; their goodness, the service 
they afford to man, is praised, and especially the first and most 
excellent of its kind is venerated as a determinate being of Ormuzd. 
Over and above this praying, the Zend-A vesta insists on the actual 
practice of goodness and of purity in thought, word, and deed. 
The Parsi in the whole conduct of his inner and outer man should 
be as the light, as Ormuzd, the Amshaspands, Izeds, Zoroaster and 
all good men live and work. This is because these live and have 
lived in the light, and all their deeds are light ; therefore every man 
must have their pattern in view and follow their example. The 
more a man expresses in his life and accomplishment goodness 
and the purity of light, the nearer the heavenly spirits come to him. 
Just as the Izeds with beneficence bless everything, vivify it, make 
it fruitful and friendly, so the Parsi too seeks to purify nature, to 
exalt it, above all to spread the light of life and its cheerful fruit­
fulness. In this spirit he feeds the hungry, cares for the sick, to the 
thirsty he gives the refreshment of drink, to the traveller shelter and 
lodging ; to the earth he gives pure seeds, he digs tidy canals, plants 
the deserts with trees and promotes growth wherever he can ; he 
provides for the nourishment and fructifying of what lives, for the 
pure splendour of fire ; he banishes dead and impure animals, 
arranges marriages ; and the holy SapandomadJ herself, the Ized of 
the earth, delights therein and stops the harm which the Daevas 
and Darwands are actively preparing. 
1 
'Daevas ' is meant. In Persian, daeva is a demon. Deva belongs to Indian 
religion, and is a god there. 
• The House of Song, i.e. Heaven. 
I i.e. righteousness. 

UNCONSC I O U S  S Y M B O L I S M  
329 
2. The Non-symbolic Character of Zoroastrianism 
What we called the symbolic is still not present at all in these 
fundamental views. On the one hand, it is true that light is existent 
naturally, and on the other hand it means the good, the upholder, 
full of blessing, so that we might say that the actual existence of 
light is a purely cognate image for this universal meaning which 
permeates nature and the human world. But, looked at from the 
point of view of the Parsis themselves, the separation between 
existence and its meaning is false, because for them the light, 
precisely as light, is goodness and is so interpreted that, as light, 
it is present and effective in all particular goods, in all living and 
positive things. The universal and the Divine does pervade the 
differences of particular mundane reality, but in this its particu­
larized and separated existence there still remains subsistent the 
substantial and undivided unity of meaning and shape, and the 
differentiation of this unity has nothing to do with the difference 
between meaning as meaning and its manifestation, but only with 
the differentiation of existent objects, as, e.g., the stars, organic 
life, human dispositions and actions, in which the Divine, as light 
or darkness, is intuited as present. 
In further [Persian] ideas there is of course an advance to some 
beginnings of symbolism, but these do not afford the proper type 
of this whole manner of viewing things ; they can count only as 
isolated achievements. So Ormuzd says once, for example, of his 
darling, J amshid: 'The holy F erver of J amshid, the son of Viveng­
ham,1 was great before me. His hand took from me a dagger, the 
edge of which was gold and its point was gold. Therewith J amshid 
marked out three hundred parts of the earth. He split up the 
kingdom of the earth with his gold-plate, with his dagger, and 
spake : "Let Sapandomad rejoice". With prayer he spake the holy 
word to the tame cattle, to wild animals, and to men. So his 
passage was good fortune and blessing for these countries, and in 
great masses there thronged together men, domestic animals, and 
beasts of the field'. Now here the dagger and the splitting of the 
earth is an image whose meaning may be taken to be agriculture. 
Agriculture is still no explicitly spiritual activity, but neither is it 
something purely natural ; instead it is a universal work of man, 
proceeding from deliberation, intelligence, and experience, and 
1 Yima, son of Vivanghvan, was originally the Persian 'patriarch of mankind'. 
He was later called Jamshid. 

330 
I I. I. THE SYMB O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
spreading through all relations of his life. The fact that this split­
ting of the earth with the dagger may be supposed to hint at 
agriculture is certainly not expressly said at all in the idea of 
Jamshid's progress, and nothing is said in connection with this 
splitting about any fertilizing or about any crops; yet since in 
this single action there seems at the same time to lie more than this 
single upturning and loosening of the soil, something symbolically 
indicated is to be looked for in it. It is similar with later ideas as 
they occur especially in the subsequent development of Mithras 
worship, where Mithras is portrayed [e.g. on Roman reliefs] as 
a stripling in the twilight of the grotto raising the head of the bull 
on high and plunging a dagger into its neck, while a snake licks its 
blood and a scorpion gnaws at its genitals. This symbolic repre­
sentation has been explained, now astronomically and now otherwise. 
Yet in a more general and deeper way the bull can be taken as the 
natural principle in general over which man, the spiritual being, 
carries off the victory, although astronomical associations too may 
have their part to play here. But that such a revolution, like this 
victory of spirit over nature, is therein contained, is hinted at too 
by the name of Mithras, the mediator, especially in a later time 
when elevation above nature became a need of the peoples. 
But symbols like these, as was said above, occur in the views of 
the ancient Persians only incidentally and do not constitute the 
all-pervading principle of their total manner of looking at things. 
Still less is the cult prescribed by the Zend-A vesta of a symbolic 
kind. Here we do not find any symbolic dances which are supposed 
to celebrate or imitate the interlaced course of the stars, or other 
sorts of activities counting only as an allusive image for universal 
ideas ; on the contrary, all actions made into religious duties for the 
Parsis are activities which concern the actual propagation of 
purity internally and externally and they appear as a purposeful 
accomplishment of the universal end, namely the actualization 
of Ormuzd's dominion in all men and in all natural objects-an 
end, therefore, not just alluded to in this business itself, but 
wholly and completely attained. 
3· Non-artistic Interpretation and Presentation of 
Zoroastrianism 
Now since what is typical of the symbolic is absent from this 
whole outlook the character of what is strictly artistic is also 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYMB O L I SM 
JJI 
missing. In general, this way of visualizing things may be called 
poetic, since in it neither the individual objects in nature nor 
individual human attitudes, situations, deeds, actions, are to be 
construed in their immediate and therefore accidental and prosaic 
lack of significance ; on the contrary, they are seen in accordance 
with their essential nature, in the light of the Absolute, which is 
light ; and, conversely, the universal essence too of concrete natural 
and human reality is not grasped in its universality, devoid of 
existence and shape, but, on the contrary, this universal and that 
individuality are visualized and expressed as immediately one. 
Such a view may be counted as beautiful, broad, and great, and, 
compared with bad and senseless idols, light as this inherently 
pure and universal element is of course an adequate image for the 
good and the true. But the poetry in this does not get beyond the 
universal at all and it never reaches art and works of art. For 
neither are the good and the Divine inwardly determinate, nor are 
the shape and form of this content generated by the spirit ; on the 
contrary, as we have seen already, what is really present-the sun, 
the stars, actual plants, animals, men, existent fire-is apprehended 
as the Absolute's shape which is already in its immediacy adequate 
thereto. The sensuous representation is not, as art demands, 
formed, shaped, and invented by the spirit ; on the contrary the 
adequate expression of the Divine is found and enunciated directly 
in the external existent. True, the individual, on the other hand, 
is fixed, independently of its reality, by imagination, as, e.g., in 
the !zeds and Fervers, the genii of individual men ; but in this 
start of separation [between meaning and shape] poetic invention 
is of the weakest kind, because the difference remains entirely 
formal, so that the genius, Ferver, lzed, does not and is not meant 
to acquire any special configuration of its own, but has, for one 
thing, only just the same content as any individual, and, for another 
thing, only the mere explicitly empty form of subjectivity which 
the existent individual already possesses. On this account imagina­
tion produces neither another deeper meaning nor the indepen­
dent form of an inherently richer individuality. And even if, 
moreover, we see particular existents gripped together into general 
ideas and genera to which a real existence, conformably to the 
genus, is given by imagination, still this elevation of multiplicity 
to a comprehensive essential unity, as germ and basis for indivi­
duals of the same species and genus, is only in a rather vague sense 
8248715 
M 

332 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
an activity of imagination and no proper work of poetry and art. 
So, e.g., the holy fire of Bahram is the essential fire, and amongst 
the waters, equally, one water precedes all others.1 Hom [the drink 
of immortality] counts as the first, purest, and most powerful 
amongst all trees, the original tree in which the sap of life flows 
full of immortality. Amongst hills Albordsch,2 the holy hill, is 
visualized as the original germ of the whole earth ; he stands in 
radiance ; from him proceed the human benefactors who had 
knowledge of the light and on him rest the sun, moon, and stars. 
But on the whole the universal is intuited in immediate unity with 
the present reality of particular things and only here and there are 
universal ideas illustrated by particular images. 
Still more prosaically the cult has as its aim the actual accom­
plishment and dominion of Ormuzd in all things, and it demands 
only this appropriateness and purity of every object, without even 
merely making of it a work of art existing as it were in immediate 
life, as in Greece the warriors and wrestlers, etc., could present 
such a work in their trained bodies. 
In all these respects and relations the first unity of spiritual 
universality with sensuous reality constitutes only the groundwork 
of the symbolic in art, yet without being itself already strictly 
symbolical and bringing works of art into existence. In order to 
attain this next objective there must be an advance from our 
subject hitherto, i.e. from this first unity, to difference and the 
battle between meaning and shape. 
B. F A N TA S T I C  SYMB O L I S M  
If consciousness does advance out of the immediately intuited 
identity between the Absolute and its externally perceived exis-
1 The meaning of this obscure passage seems to be the following: Meaning 
and shape begin to be differentiated when, e.g., the individual as such, taken 
abstractly apart from the reality of a concrete individual, is imaged as Ferver, 
the genius of an individual man. But the Ferver does not differ from the indi­
vidual in either content or form. In content, or general character, the Ferver is just 
an abstract individual over again and in form he has the same sort of subjectivity 
as the individual has. Thus the 'poetry' here does not create a deeper meaning 
than abstract individuality, or a better form than abstract subjectivity. There 
may seem to be an advance when hills, e.g., are brought together under an idea 
or genus hill, and then the genus is given a real embodiment in a special hill. 
But this reality is then just a pattern for the genus. Alburz is the hill, Bahram 
the fire or the essence of fire. The universal is not differentiated in the particulars 
but is simply directly present in them. 
• i.e. Alburz, a mythical mountain supposed to support the sky. 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYMBOL I S M  
333 
tence, then what confronts us as the essential point is the cleavage 
between the hitherto united aspects, i.e. the battle between 
meaning and shape, which immediately provokes the attempt to 
heal the breach again by building the separated parts together in 
a fanciful way. 
It is with this attempt alone that there arises the proper need 
for art. For if the content of ideas is established independently, 
freed now from its existence and no longer only intuited directly 
in present reality, then thereby the task is set before spirit of giving 
for contemplation and perception-in a renewed mode produced 
by spirit-a richly fanciful shape to universal ideas and in this 
activity creating artistic productions. Now since in the first 
sphere, where still we are at present, this task can be dis­
charged symbolically only, it may seem as if we are already 
standing on the ground of the strictly symbolic. But this is not 
the case. 
The first thing that we encounter is configurations produced by 
a fermenting imagination which in the unrest of its fantasticalness 
only indicates the way which can lead to the genuine centre of 
symbolic art. That is to say that, at the first appearance of the 
difference and the relation between meaning and the form of 
representation, both the separation and the linkage are still of a 
confused kind. This confusion is necessitated by the fact that 
neither of the different sides has yet become a totality carrying in 
itself the feature constituting the fundamental character of the 
other side, whereby alone the really adequate unity and reconcilia­
tion can be established. Spirit in its totality, determines, e.g., its 
external appearance out of its own resources, just as the inherently 
total and adequate appearance is explicitly only the external 
existence of the spirit. But, in this first separation of meanings, 
apprehended by the spirit, from the existing world of appearances, 
the meanings are not those of the concrete spirit but abstractions, 
and their expression is likewise unspiritualized and therefore, in 
its abstraction, only external and sensuous. The pressure for 
distinction and unification is therefore a frenzy which from 
sensuous individual details ranges over directly, indefinitely, and 
wildly to the most general meanings, and for what is inwardly 
grasped in consciousness can find only the precisely opposite form 
of sensuous configurations. It is this contradiction which is sup­
posed to produce a genuine unification of the elements which 

334 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
struggle against one another; yet from one side it1 is driven into 
the opposite one, and out of this is pushed back again into the first; 
without rest it is just thrown hither and thither, and in the oscilla­
tion and fermentation of this striving for a solution thinks it has 
already found appeasement. As a result, instead of genuine satisfac­
tion it is precisely only the contradiction itself which passes for the 
true unification, and thus the most imperfect unity passes for what 
properly corresponds to art. True beauty, therefore, we may not 
seek in this field of murky confusion. For in the restless sudden 
leap from one extreme to the other, on the one hand we find the 
breadth and might of universal meanings linked to the sensuous 
taken both in its individuality and in its elementary appearance, 
linked therefore in a wholly inadequate way ; on the other hand, 
what is most universal, if a start is made from that, is shamelessly 
shifted, in the converse manner, into the heart of the most 
sensuous present ; and moreover if the sense of this incompatibility 
comes to mind, imagination here can have no recourse but to 
distortions, since it drives particular shapes beyond their firmly 
limited particular character, stretches them, alters them into in­
definiteness, and intensifies them beyond all bounds; it tears them 
apart from one another and therefore in this struggle towards accord 
brings to light only the very opposite in its lack of reconciliation. 
These first, still wildest, attempts of fancy and art we find 
especially amongst the ancient Indians.2 Their chief defect, com­
patibly with the general nature of this stage, consists in this, that 
they cannot grasp either the meanings themselves in their clarity, 
or existing reality in its own proper shape and significance. There­
fore the Indians have proved themselves incapable of an historical 
interpretation of persons and events, because an historical treat­
ment requires sang-froid in taking up and understanding the past 
on its own account in its actual shape with its empirical links, 
grounds, aims, and causes. This prosaic circumspection is at 
variance with the Indian pressure to refer each and everything 
back to the sheerly Absolute and Divine, and to contemplate in 
the commonest and most sensuous things a fancifully created 
• i.e. the contradiction, which is the subject of this sentence. But Hegel 
really means that a person caught by the frenzy above-mentioned is tossed to 
and fro in an endeavour to find unity instead of contradiction. 
2 Hegel's reports of Indian vie•vs are based on an exhaustive study of the 
relevant books and periodicals in English and French, as well as in German. 
Cf. above, p. :us, note. 

UNCONSC I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
335 
presence and actuality of the gods. In their confused intermixture 
of finite and Absolute, therefore, since the order, intelligibility, and 
fixity of everyday life and prose remains totally disregarded, they 
fall, despite all their exuberance and magnificent boldness of 
conception, into a monstrous extravagance of the fantastic which 
runs over from what is inmost and deepest into the most common­
place present in order to turn one extreme directly into the other 
and confuse them. 
For the more determinate traits of this continuing intoxication, 
this crazing and crazedness, we have here to go through not the 
religious ideas as such, but only the chief features in accordance 
with which this way of looking at things belongs to art. These 
chief points are the following. 
1 .  The Indian Conception of Brahma 
One extreme in the Indian mind is the consciousness of the 
Absolute as what in itself is purely universal, undifferentiated, and 
therefore completely indeterminate. Since this extreme abstrac­
tion has no particular content and is not visualized as a concrete 
personality, it affords in no respect a material which intuition 
could shape in some way or other. For Brahma, as this supreme 
divinity, is entirely withdrawn from sense and observation, indeed 
he is not even properly an object for thought. For thinking re­
quires self-consciousness which sets an object before itself in 
order to find itself therein. All understanding is already an 
identification of self and object, a reconciliation between two 
terms which, outside this understanding, are separated ; what I do 
not understand or know remains something foreign to me, dif­
ferent from me. But the Indian way of unifying the human self 
with Brahma is nothing but the steadily enhanced 'screwing one­
self up' to this extreme abstraction itself, wherein not only the 
entire concrete content but even self-consciousness must perish 
before man can attain to this abstraction. Therefore the Indian 
knows no reconciliation and identity with Brahma in the sense 
of the human spirit's reaching knowledge of this unity ; on the 
contrary, the unity consists for the Indian precisely in the fact 
that consciousness and self-consciousness and therefore all the 
content of the world and the inner worth of the man's own 
personality totally disappear. This emptying and annihilation, 

336 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
reaching absolute pointlessness, counts as the highest condition 
which makes man into the supreme god himself, into Brahma. 
This abstraction, which is amongst the harshest things that man 
can lay on himself, on the one hand as Brahma and, on the other, 
as the purely theoretical inner cult of dullness and mortification, is 
no object for imagination and art. Art, we may suppose, acquires 
here an opportunity of indulging in manifold productions only in 
the course of sketching the way to this end [of self-annihilation]. 
2. Sensuousness, Boundlesmess, and the Activity of 
Personifying 
But, conversely, the Indian outlook nevertheless springs directly 
out of this super-sensuousness into the wildest sensuousness. Yet 
since the immediate and therefore peaceful identity of the two 
sides is superseded and, instead of it, diference within the identity 
has become the fundamental model, this contradiction pushes us, 
with no mediation, out of the most finite things into the Divine and 
then back again ; and we live amongst configurations arising out 
of this mutual perverse transposition of one side into the other as 
in a witches' world where no determinacy of form, when we hope 
to fix our attention on it, stays firm but suddenly is changed into 
its opposite or swells and spreads into extravagance. 
Now the general ways in which Indian art comes before us are 
the following. 1 
(a) In the first place, imagination places the most tremendous 
content of the Absolute into what is immediately sensuous and 
individual so that this individual thing, just as it is, is supposed to 
represent such a content perfectly in itself and to exist for con­
templation as so representing it. In the Ramayana, for instance, 
the friend of Rama, Hanuman, the Prince of Apes, is a chief 
figure and he accomplishes the boldest deeds. To speak generally, 
in India the ape is revered as divine, and there is a whole city of 
apes. In the ape as this individual ape the infinite content of the 
Absolute is gazed at with wonder and is deified. Similarly the cow 
Sabala appears likewise in the Ramayana, in the episode of Vish­
wamitra's penances, clothed with boundless might. Furthermore 
there are families in India in which the Absolute itself vegetates in 
the form of this actual man, even if an entirely dull and simple one, 
' Here again transliterations vary. I have followed Hegel except where a 
different spelling has become current in English. 

U NCONSCIOUS SYM B O L I S M  
337 
who in his immediate life and presence is venerated as god. The 
same thing we find in Lamaism too where also a single individual 
man enjoys supreme adoration as a present god. But in India this 
veneration is not paid exclusively to one man only ; on the contrary, 
every Brahman counts from the beginning, by his birth in his caste, 
as Brahma already ; he has achieved in a natural way, through his 
physical birth, the spiritual rebirth which identifies the man with 
god, so that thus the pinnacle of the supremely Divine itself falls 
back immediately into the purely commonplace physical reality 
of existence. For although Brahmans are under the most sacred 
obligation to read the Vedas and thereby acquire an insight into 
the depths of the Divine, this duty can be discharged adequately 
all the same with the greatest lack of spirituality without depriving 
the Brahman of his divinity. In a similar way one of the most 
general matters which the Indians portray is procreation and the 
beginning of life, just as the Greeks specify Eros as the oldest god. 
Now this procreation, the divine activity, is again taken entirely 
sensuously in numerous portrayals, and the male and female 
sexual organs are regarded as supremely holy. So too, even if the 
Divine enters reality explicitly in its divinity, it is drawn into the 
midst of everyday life in an entirely trivial way. For example, in 
the beginning of the Ramayana there is a story of how Brahma 
came to Valmikis, the mythical singer of the [poem] Ramayana. 
Valmikis welcomes him entirely in the ordinary Indian way, 
compliments him, places a chair for him, brings him water and 
fruit; Brahma actually sits down and compels his host to sit like­
wise ; they sit for a long time until at last Brahma commands 
Valmikis to compose the Ramayana. 
This likewise is still not a properly symbolic conception, for 
although here, as symbol requires, the figures are drawn from the 
contemporary world and applied to universal meanings, still there 
is missing here the other aspect of symbols, i.e. the fact that the 
particular existents are not supposed actually to be the absolute 
meaning for our vision, but only to indicate it. For Indian imagina­
tion the ape, the cow, the individual Brahman, etc., are not a 
cognate symbol of the Divine ; they are treated and represented as 
the Divine itself, as an existent adequate thereto. 
But herein lies the contradiction which drives Indian art on to 
a second mode of conception. For, on the one hand, the purely 
invisible, the Absolute as such, the bare meaning, is grasped as 

338 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  F O R M  OF ART 
the truly Divine, while, on the other hand, individual things in 
concrete reality are also, in their sensuous existence, directly 
regarded by imagination as divine manifestations. In part, indeed, 
they are supposed to express only particular aspects of the Abso­
lute, yet even then the immediate individual thing, represented as 
an adequate existence of this specific universality, is plainly simply 
inadequate to this its content; the individual is in contradiction 
with the content all the more sharply as the meaning is here al­
ready seized in its universality and yet, expressly in this universality, 
is posited immediately by imagination as identical with what is 
most sensuous and most individual. 
(b) The first resolution of this disunion is sought by Indian art, 
as was already indicated above, in the extravagance of its produc­
tions. In order, as sensuous figures themselves, to reach universality, 
the individual figures are wildly tugged apart from one another 
into the colossal and grotesque. For the individual figure which is 
to express not itself and the meaning appropriate to it as a par­
ticular phenomenon but a universal meaning lying outside its own, 
does not satisfy contemplation until it is torn out of itself into 
monstrosity without aim and measure. For here above all there is 
the most extravagant exaggeration of size, alike in the spatial 
figure and in temporal immeasurability, as well as the multiplica­
tion of one and the same characteristic, the many heads, the mass 
of arms, etc., whereby attainment of the breadth and universality 
of meanings is pursued. The egg, for example, includes the bird. 
This individual existent is expanded to the immeasurable idea of 
a world-egg as enveloping the universal life of all things, in which 
life Brahma, the procreating god, without action of his own, spends 
a year in creation until by his mere thought the halves of the egg 
fall apart. Now besides natural objects, human individuals and 
events are also equally elevated to having the meaning of an actual 
divine act in such a way that neither the Divine by itself nor the 
human can be retained apart, but both appear continually en­
tangled hither and thither with one another. To this category 
there belong particularly the incarnations of the gods, especially of 
Vishnu, the conserving god, whose deeds provide a main subject­
matter of the great epic poems. In these materializations divinity 
passes over immediately into mundane manifestation. So, for ex­
ample, Rama is himself the seventh incarnation of Vishnu (Ram­
chandra). In individual needs, actions, situations, forms and modes 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
339 
of behaviour, the contents of these poems are clearly drawn in 
part from actual events, from the deeds of ancient kings who were 
strong enough to found new conditions of order and legality, and 
we are therefore in the midst of humanity on the firm ground of 
reality. But then conversely everything is expanded again, stretched 
into nebulosity, played over into the universal once more, so that 
we lose again the ground that had scarcely been won and we know 
not where we are. The same thing meets us in the Shakuntala. 
At the start we have before us the tenderest, most fragrant world 
of love where everything goes on its appropriate way in a human 
fashion, but then we are suddenly snatched away from this entirely 
concrete reality and carried up into the clouds of Indra's heaven 
where everything is changed and broadened out of its limited 
sphere into universal meanings of the life of nature in relation to 
Brahmans and that power over the gods of nature which is granted 
to man on the strength of his severe penances. 
Even this mode of representation cannot be strictly called 
symbolical. For the determinate shape which the symbolic mode 
uses is allowed, in symbolism proper, to persist just as it is, because 
symbolism does not seek to see in the shape the immediate existence 
of the meaning in its universality, but merely hints at the meaning 
by reference to the properties of the object that are cognate to the 
meaning. But Indian art, although severing universality from 
individual existence, nevertheless demands the immediate unity 
of both as well, a unity produced by imagination ;  it must therefore 
deprive the determinate existent of its limitedness and, in a purely 
sensuous way, enlarge it into indefiniteness and, in general, trans­
form and disfigure it. In this dissolution of determinacy and in the 
confusion arising from the fact that the loftiest content is always 
introduced into things, phenomena, incidents, and deeds which in 
their limitedness are incapable either of actually having the might 
of such a content in themselves or of expressing it, we may there­
fore look for a touch of sublimity rather than what is properly 
symbolical. In the sublime, that is to say, as we shall learn later on 
[in Chapter 2], the finite appearance expresses the Absolute, which 
it is supposed to bring before our vision, but only in such a way 
that the Absolute withdraws from the appearance and the appear­
ance falls short of the content. This is the case with eternity, for 
example. The idea of eternity becomes sublime if it is to be ex­
pressed in temporal terms, since every greatest number is always 

340 
I I. I. T H E  SYMBOLIC FORM OF A RT 
not yet sufficient and must be increased on and on without end ; 
as it is said of God : 'A thousand years are in thy sight one day.'1 
In this way and the like, Indian art contains many things which 
begin to strike this note of sublimity. Yet the great difference from 
sublimity, properly so-called, consists in this, that the Indian 
imagination in such wild configurations does not succeed in posit­
ing negatively the phenomena that it presents, but precisely by 
that immeasurability and unlimitedness thinks that the difference 
and contradiction between the Absolute and its configuration has 
been obliterated and made to vanish. 
However little we can allow Indian art in its excess to count as 
strictly symbolical or sublime, neither is it, strictly speaking, 
beautiful. For we may concede that, especially in sketching 
human life as such, it affords us much that is delightful and 
gentle, many friendly images and delicate feelings, the most 
brilliant descriptions of nature and the most charming and most 
chilldike traits of love and naive innocence, as well as much that is 
grand and noble ; but, so far as the universal fundamental meanings 
are concerned, the spiritual, on the other hand, still always remains 
entirely sensuous again ; the most commonplace is set on a level 
with the supreme, determinacy is destroyed, the sublime is just 
boundlessness, and what belongs to myth gets involved for the 
most part only in the fantasticalness of a restless inquisitive 
imagination and an unintelligent talent for configuration. 
(c) Finally, the purest manner of portraying universal meanings 
which we find at this stage is personifying them by using the 
human form in general. Nevertheless since the meaning here is not 
yet conceived as free spiritual subjectivity and what is meant 
instead is either some abstract characteristic taken in its universa­
lity, or else mere nature, e.g. the life of rivers, hills, stars, and the 
sun, it is properly below the dignity of the human form to be used 
as an expression for this sort of subject-matter. For in accordance 
with their true specific character the human body, as well as the 
form of human activities and events, express only the concrete 
spirit and its inner content, and the spirit therefore remains with 
its whole self in this its real embodiment which thus is no mere 
symbol or external sign. 
It follows [that personification here is unsatisfactory in two ways : 
for (i)] if the meaning, which the personification is summoned to 
1 Hegel's version of Ps. 90: 4· 

UNCONS C I OU S  SYMBOL I S M  
341 
portray, is to belong to the spiritual sphere as much as to the 
natural one, then, owing to the abstractness of the meaning at this 
stage, the personification is still superficial and for its clearer 
elucidation requires manifold figures in addition; and with these 
it is confused and thereby is itself vitiated. [ii] It is not subjectivity 
and its shape which is the indicative thing here, but its expressions, 
deeds, etc., for it is in doing and acting alone that there lies the 
more determinate particularization which can be brought into 
relation with the determinate content of the universal meanings. 
But in that case there enters again the defect that not the subject 
but only his expression is the significant thing, and there is also 
the confusion that events and deeds, instead of being the reality 
and self-actualizing determinate being of the subject, derive their 
content and their meaning from elsewhere [i.e. from being per­
sonified]. A series of such actions may therefore in itself have 
a sequence and a logicality derived from the content which such 
a series serves to express, but by personification and humanization 
this logicality is nevertheless interrupted again and partly super­
seded, because the imposition of a subject on them [i.e. by per­
sonifying them] leads conversely to the caprice of actions and 
expressions, so that thus the meaningful and the meaningless are 
turned topsy-turvy in a varied and irregular way, all the more so 
the less is imagination capable of bringing its meanings and their 
shapes into a fundamental and fixed interconnection.-But if the 
purely natural is adopted as the sole subject-matter, the natural for 
its part does not deserve to be clothed with the human form, and 
this latter, appropriate only to the expression of spirit, is for its 
part incapable of portraying the merely natural. 
In all these respects this personification cannot be true, because 
truth in art, like truth in general, requires the harmony of inner 
and outer, of concept and reality. Greek mythology does personify 
even the Black Sea and the Scamander ; it has its river-gods, 
nymphs, dryads, and, in general, it makes nature in many ways 
the content of its anthropomorphic gods. Yet it does not leave 
personification purely formal and superficial, but shapes out of it 
individuals whence the purely natural meaning retires, and the 
human element, which has adopted such natural content into itself, 
becomes the predominant thing. But Indian art does not get beyond 
the grotesque intermixture of the natural and the human, so that 
neither side gets its right, and both are reciprocally vitiated. 

J4Z 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
To speak generally, these personifications too are not yet properly 
symbolical, because, on account of their superficiality of form, 
they do not stand in any essential relation and close affinity with 
the specific content which they were supposed to express sym­
bolically. But at the same time, in respect of the particular further 
figures and attributes with which such personifications appear 
intermingled and which are supposed to express the more specific 
qualities ascribed to the gods, there begins a striving after sym­
bolical representations, for which personification in that event re­
mains rather only the universal and comprehensive form. 
As for the more important views belonging to this context, in 
the first place mention must be made of Trimurti, the tri-formed 
divinity. This divinity is composed, first, of Brahma, the produc­
tive generating activity, the creator of the world, lord of the gods, 
etc. On the one hand, Trimurti is distinct from Brahma (in the 
neuter), from the supreme being, and is its first-born; but, on the 
other hand, he coincides again with this abstract divinity, since in 
general, in the case of the Indians, differences cannot be retained 
within fixed limits but are partly confused and partly pass over 
into one another. Now his shape in detail has much that is sym­
bolical; he is portrayed with four heads and four hands, with 
sceptre, ring, etc. In colour he is red, which hints at the sun, 
because these gods always at the same time bear universal natural 
significances which they personify. The second god in Trimurti 
is Vishnu, the god who preserves, and the third is Shiva, who 
destroys. The symbols for these gods are innumerable. For along 
with the universality of their meanings they comprise infinitely 
many single effects, partly in connection with particular pheno­
mena in nature (especially elemental ones, as e.g. Vishnu has the 
quality of fire-Wilson's Lexicon,r s.v. 2) but partly also with 
spiritual ones ; this material then ferments confusedly in various 
ways and frequently brings the most repulsive shapes into appear­
ance for contemplation. 
In this tri-form god it appears at once most clearly that here the 
spiritual shape cannot yet emerge in its truth, because here the 
spiritual does not constitute the proper and decisive meaning. 
This trinity of gods would be spirit if the third god were a con­
crete unity and a return into itself out of difference and duality. 
For, according to the true conception, God is spirit as this active 
1 i.e. H. H. Wilson, A Dictionary in Sanskrit and English (Calcutta, 1819). 

U N C ON S C I O U S  SYMBOLISM 
343 
absolute difference and unity which, in general terms, constitutes 
the essence of spirit. But in Trimurti the third god is not a con­
crete totality at all; on the contrary, it is itself only one, side by 
side with the two others, and therefore is likewise an abstraction: 
there is no return into itself, but only a transition into something 
else, a change, procreation, and destruction. Therefore we must 
take great care not to try to recover the supreme truth in such 
first inklings of reason or to recognize the Christian Trinity already 
in this hint, which in its rhythm does of course contain threefold­
ness, a fundamental idea in Christianity. 
Starting from Brahma and Trimurti Indian imagination pro­
ceeds still further fantastically to an infinite number of most 
multitudinously shaped gods. For those universal meanings, viewed 
as what is essentially divine, are met again in thousands and 
thousands of phenomena which now themselves are personified 
and symbolized as gods; and they put the greatest hindrances in the 
way of a clear understanding because of the indeterminacy and con­
fusing restlessness of imagination which in its inventions deals with 
nothing in accordance with its proper nature and overturns each 
and every thing. For these subordinate gods, with Indra, air and sky, 
at their head, the more detailed content is provided above all by the 
universal forces of nature, by the stars, streams, mountains, in the 
different features of their efficacy, their alteration, their influence 
whether beneficent or harmful, preservative or destructive. 
But one of the chief topics of Indian fancy and art is the origin 
of the gods and of all things, i.e. theogony and cosmology. For 
Indian imagination is in general caught in the steady process of 
introducing into the midst of external appearance whatever is most 
non-sensuous and, at the same time, conversely, of obliterating 
again the most natural and sensuous realm by the most extreme 
abstraction. In a similar way the origin of the gods out of the 
supreme divinity and the operation and determinate existence of 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva are represented in particular things, 
in hills, waters, and human affairs. The same content may then, 
on the one hand, acquire on its own account a particular shape of 
the gods, but, on the other hand, these gods pass over again into 
the universal meanings of the highest gods. Of such theogonies and 
cosmogonies there is a great number and endless variety. If there­
fore it is said that thus have the Indians represented to themselves 
the creation of the world, the origin of all things, this can be valid 

344 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  FORM OF ART 
always for one sect only or one specific book, for elsewhere you can 
always find the same thing stated differently. The fancy of this 
people in its images and shapes is inexhaustible. 
A principal idea running through the stories of origins is the 
continually recurring description of natural generation instead of 
the idea of a spiritual creation. Once we are acquainted with these 
modes of looking at things, we have the key to many representa­
tions which entirely confound our sense of shame, for shameless­
ness is pushed to an extreme and in its sensuousness proceeds 
to the incredible. A brilliant example of this manner and mode of 
treatment is afforded by the famous and familiar episode in the 
Ramayana, the descent of Ganga. The tale is told of the occasion 
when Rama comes accidentally to the Ganges. The wintry ice­
covered Himavan, Prince of Mountains, had two daughters 
by the slender Mena, namely Ganga, the elder, and the beautiful 
Uma, the younger. The gods, especially Indra, had begged the 
father to send Ganga to them in order that they might celebrate 
the sacred rites, and, since Himavan showed himself ready to 
accede to their petition, Ganga rose on high to the blessed gods. 
Now follows the further history of Uma who, after accom­
plishing many wonderful deeds of humility and penitence, is 
married to Rudra, i.e. Shiva. From this marriage rugged and 
barren mountains are engendered. For a century long, without 
intermission, Shiva lay with U rna in a conjugal embrace, with the 
result that the gods, alarmed by Shiva's progenitive powers and 
full of alarm about the child to be born, begged him to turn his 
seed to the earth. (This passage the English translator [Sir Charles 
Wilkins] had no mind to translate word for word because it is all 
too wanting in decency and shame.) Shiva after all heeds the request 
of the gods; he gives up further procreative activity in order not 
to destroy the universe, and casts his seed on the earth ; from it, 
fecundated by fire, there comes to birth the white mountain which 
separates India from Tartary. But Uma falls into anger and fury 
at this and curses all wedlock. These are in a way horrible and 
grotesque compositions at variance with our imagination and any 
intelligence, so that, instead of actually presenting what is to be 
taken as their real meaning, they only hint at it. 
[A. W.] Schlegel has not translated this part of the episode. 
He only recounts how Ganga descended to earth again. This 
happened in the following way. An ancestor of Rama, Sagara, had 

U N C O N S C I O U S  S Y M B O L I S M  
345 
a bad son, but from a second wife had sixty thousand sons who 
came to the world in a pumpkin, but, in jars with clarified butter, 
grew up to be strong men. One day Sagara wished to sacrifice 
a steed, but it was snatched from him by Vishnu in the form of 
a snake. Thereupon Sagara sends out the sixty thousand. Vishnu's 
breath, as they approached him after great hardships and much 
searching, burnt them to ashes. At last after a protracted wait 
a grandson of Sagara, Ansuman, the resplendent one, son of 
Asamanja, set forth to rediscover his sixty thousand uncles and 
the sacrificial horse. He did indeed actually come across the horse, 
Shiva, and the heap of ashes; but the bird-king Garudas told him 
that his relatives would never return to life again unless the river 
of the holy Ganga flowed down from heaven over the heap of 
ashes. Then the stalwart Ansuman undergoes the strictest penances 
throughout thirty-two thousand years on the peak of Himavan. 
In vain. Neither his own mortifications nor those of his son 
Dwilipa for thirty thousand years help in the slightest. Only in 
the son of Dwilipa, the excellent Bhagiratha, is the great work 
successful after a further thousand years of penance. Now Ganga 
rushes down, but, to prevent her from ruining the earth, Shiva holds 
his head underneath so that the water flows away into the locks of 
his hair. Thus then again new penances are required from Bhagi­
ratha in order to free Ganga from these locks so that she can stream 
on. Finally, she pours forth into six streams; the seventh stream 
Bhagiratha, after enormous difficulties, diverts to the sixty thousand 
who mount to heaven, while Bhagiratha himself rules over his 
people for yet a long time in peace. 
Other theogonies, e.g. the Scandinavian and the Greek, are 
similar to the Indian. In all of them the chief category is generation 
and being generated ;  but none of them lets itself go so wildly [as 
the Indian] and, in the main, with such caprice and inappropriate­
ness of invention in its configurations. The theogony of Hesiod 
especially is far more perspicuous and definite, so that every time 
we know where we are and we clearly recognize the meaning, 
because it is more brightly prominent and shows that the external 
shape is only its external manifestation. The theogony begins1 with 
Chaos, Erebus, Eros, and Gaia; Gaia produces Uranus by herself 
alone, and then, mated with him, brings forth the mountains, 
the Black Sea, etc., as well as Cronus, the Cyclopes, and the 
• Theogony, u6 ff. 

346 
I I. I. THE S Y M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
hundred-handed giants whom, soon after their birth, Uranus 
shut up in Tartarus. Gaia induces Cronus to unman Uranus; this 
happens ; the blood is caught by the earth and hence grew the 
Furies and the Giants, while the castrated member is caught by 
the sea and the Cytherean [i.e. Aphrodite] springs from its foam. 
All this is clearer and brought more firmly together, and also it 
does not stop at the circle of gods of mere nature. 
3· View of Purification and Penance 
If we look now for a transitional point to symbol proper, we may 
already find its first beginnings in Indian imagination also. For 
however preoccupied Indian fancy may be with the task of screw­
ing sensuous appearance up into a polytheism which no other 
people has to exhibit in the like boundlessness and mutability, still 
on the other hand in all sorts of insights and narratives it is always 
mindful again of that spiritual abstraction of the supreme god, 
compared with whom the individual, the sensuous, and the pheno­
menal spheres are apprehended as non-divine, inappropriate, and 
therefore as something which must be negatived and superseded. 
For, as was said at the outset, it is just this conversion of one side 
into the other which constitutes the peculiar type, and the un­
appeased lack of reconciliation, of the Indian outlook. Indian art 
therefore, has never been tired of giving shape in the most varied 
ways to the self-sacrifice of the sensuous and to the force of spiritual 
abstraction and immersion in one's inner being. To this category 
there belong the portrayals of protracted penances and profound 
meditations, of which not only the oldest epic poems, the Rama­
yana and Mahabharata, but also many other poetic works of art 
provide the most important samples. Such penances were indeed 
often undertaken from ambition or at least for specific ends which 
are not supposed to lead to the supreme and final unification with 
Brahma and to the destruction of the mundane and the finite­
as, e.g., the end of acquiring the power of a Brahman, etc. Yet, at 
the same time, there is always implicit the view that penance, and 
the continued meditation which turns away more and more from 
everything specific and finite, far surpass birth in a specific caste 
as well as the dominion of mere nature and the gods of nature. 
Wherefore Indra in particular, the Prince of Gods, opposes strict 
penitents and tries to lure them away, or, if no allurement is any 

UNCONSCIOUS SYMB OLISM 
347 
use, calls on the higher gods to aid him, because otherwise the 
whole heaven would get into confusion. 
In the portrayal of such penances and their different kinds, 
stages, and grades Indian art is almost as inventive as it is in its 
polytheism, and it pursues the business of such invention with 
great seriousness. 
This is the point from which we can extend our inquiry further. 
C. SYMBO L I S M  P R O P E R  
For symbolic art, as well as for fine art also, it is essential that the 
meaning to which it undertakes to give shape shall not only (as 
happens in Indian art) emerge from the first immediate unity with 
its external existence, a unity still basic there prior to all division 
and differentiation, but shall also become explicitly free from the 
immediate sensuous shape. This liberation can only take place in 
so far as the sensuous and natural is apprehended and envisaged 
in itself as negative, as what is to be, and has been, superseded. 
Yet further it is necessary that the negative, coming into ap­
pearance as the passing and self-transcendence of the natural, shall 
be accepted and shaped as the absolute meaning of things in general, 
as a factor in the Divine. Yet thereby we have already forsaken 
Indian art. Indian imagination, it is true, does not lack a vision of 
the negative; Shiva is the destroyer, and Indra, the procreator, 
dies; indeed even Time, the annihilator, personified as Kala, the 
fearsome giant, destroys the whole universe and all the gods, even 
Trimurti who likewise passes away into Brahma, just as the indivi­
dual, in his identification with the supreme god, lets himself and his 
whole knowing and willing dwindle away. But in these views the 
negative is partly only a changing and altering, partly only the 
abstraction which sheds the determinate in order to press on to 
the undetermined and therefore empty universality utterly devoid 
of all content. Against this, the substance of the Divine remains 
unaltered, one and the same in changes of form, in transition, 
advance to polytheism, and elevation from many gods to a single 
supreme god once more. This is not the one God who in himself, 
as this one, has the negative as his own determinate character 
necessarily belonging to his essential nature. 1 In a way similar to 
' The necessary presence of the finite, i.e. the negative of the infinite, within 
God himself, is a cardinal point in Hegel's philosophy of Christianity. See. e.g., 
my A Layman's QtUst (London, 1969), ch. 6. 

348 
I I. I. THE SYMB O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
the Indian, in the Parsi outlook the bringer of corruption and 
harmfulness lies outside Ormuzd in Ahriman and therefore pro­
duces only an opposition and a battle which does not belong to 
the one god, Ormuzd, as an allotted factor in him. 
The further step we now have to take consists in this, that (a) the 
negative is fixed independently by consciousness as the Absolute, 
but (b) is regarded as only ane factor in the Divine-yet as a factor 
which does not merely fall outside the true Absolute into another 
god [like Ahriman], but is so ascribed to the Absolute that the true 
God appears as the negativing of himself and therefore has the 
negative as his own immanent determinate character. 
In virtue of this further idea the Absolute becomes for the first 
time inherently concrete, by having its determinateness within 
itself and therefore by being a unity in itself, and the factors of this 
unity reveal themselves to contemplation as the different deter­
minations of one and the same God. This is because what is 
principally at issue here is the first satisfaction of the need for the 
determinateness of the absolute meaning in itself. The meanings 
previously considered remained, on account of their abstraction, 
purely indeterminate and therefore shapeless, or, if alternatively 
they advanced to determinacy, either coincided immediately with 
natural existence or fell into a battle between shapes, a battle which 
never came to either peace or recon͑iliation. This double defect is 
now to be remedied in the following way by the inner process of 
thought and by the external progress of national convictions. 
(i) A closer bond is forged between inner and outer by the fact 
that every determining of the Absolute is inherently already 
a beginning of an outward passage into expression. For every 
determining is inherent differentiation ;  but the external as such 
is always determinate and differentiated, and therefore an aspect is 
present in which the external is more in correspondence with the 
meaning than was the case at the stages hitherto considered. But 
the first determinateness and negation of the Absolute in itself 
cannot be the free self-determination of the spirit as spirit, but is 
itself only the immediate negation. The immediate and therefore 
natural negation in its most comprehensive mode is death. Thus 
the Absolute now is interpreted as having to enter this negation 
as a determination accruing to its own essence and to tread the 
path of extinction and deatl1. Therefore we see the glorification 
of death and grief arising in the consciousness of peoples as 

U N C O N S C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
349 
primarily the death of the expiring sensuous sphere; the death of 
what is natural becomes known as a necessary constituent in the 
life of the Absolute. Yet the Absolute, on the one hand, in order 
to experience this factor, i.e. death, must come into being and 
have a determinate existence, while on the other hand it does not 
stop at annihilation in death but out of it is re11tored to a positive 
unity in itself in an exalted way. Here, therefore, dying is not taken 
at all as the whole meaning, butonly as one aspect of it; the Abso­
lute is indeed apprehended as a transcendence of its immediate 
existence, as a passing and a passing away of that existence, but 
also, conversely, through this process of the negative, as a return 
into itself, as a resurrection to a life inherently eternal and divine. 
This is because death has a double meaning: (a) it is precisely the 
immediate passing away of the natural, (b) it is the death of the 
purely natural and therefore the birth of something higher, namely 
the spiritual realm to which the merely natural dies in the sense 
that the spirit has this element of death in itself as belonging to 
its essence. 
(ii) But therefore the natural shape in its immediacy and sen­
suous existence can no longer be interpreted as coinciding with 
the meaning glimpsed in it, because the meaning of the external 
itself just consists in its dying in its real existence and transcending 
itself. 
(iii) In the like manner the mere battle between meaning and 
shape dies away along with that ferment of imagination which 
produced the fantastic in India. True, the meaning is even now not 
yet known in that pure unity with itself which is liberated from 
present reality, not yet so known as meaning in its perfectly 
purified clarity that it could be contrasted with the shape illustra­
tive of it. But, conversely, the individual shape, as this individual 
animal, or this human personification, or event, or action, cannot 
bring before contemplation an immediate adequate existence of the 
Absolute. This inadequate identity is already surpassed just to the 
same extent that that perfect liberation is not yet attained. In 
place of both there is set that kind of representation which we have 
already described above as the strictly symbolic. On the one hand, 
the symbol can come to the fore now, because what is inward, 
and comprehended as meaning, no longer, as in Indian concep­
tions, merely comes and goes, now sinking here and there directly 
into externality, now withdrawing therefrom into the solitude of 

350 
I I. I. THE S Y M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
abstraction; on the contrary, it begins to establish itself explicitly in 
face of purely natural reality. On the other hand, the symbol must 
now attain configuration. For although the meaning completely 
pertinent up to this point has for its content the element of the 
negation of the natural, still the truly inward only now begins to 
wrest its way out of the natural and is therefore still intertwined 
with the external mode of appearance, with the result that it 
cannot without an external shape enter our minds on its own 
account in its clear universality. 
To the essential nature of what in general constitutes the funda­
mental meaning in symbolic art there now corresponds the manner 
of configuration, in the sense that the specific natural forms and 
human actions in the individualized features proper to them are 
neither to portray and mean themselves alone nor to bring the 
Divine before the spectator's mind as immediately present and 
perceptible in them. Their specific determinate being in its par­
ticular shape is to have only qualities hinting at a more comprehen­
sive meaning cognate with them. On this account, it is precisely 
that universal dialectic of life-birth, growth, passing away, and 
rebirth out of death-which constitutes in this matter too the 
adequate content for the strictly symbolic form; this is so because 
in almost all departments of natural and spiritual life there are 
phenomena which have this process as the basis of their existence 
and therefore can be used for illustrating such meanings and for 
pointing to them. For between the two sides [meaning and ex­
pression] there occurs in fact a real affinity. For example, plants 
spring from their seed, they germinate, grow, blossom, produce fruit, 
and then the fruit decays and brings forth new seeds. The sun, 
similarly, stands low in winter, rises high in spring, until in summer 
it reaches its zenith and now bestows its greatest blessings or 
wreaks its destructiveness, but then it sinks down again. The 
different ages in life-childhood, youth, manhood, and old age-­
also display the same universal process. But above all, to particu­
larize further, specific localities too enter this list of illustrations, 
for instance the Nile valley. Since the purely fantastic is displaced 
solely by these more fundamental traits of affinity and by the 
closer correspondence between meaning and its expression, there 
enters a circumspect choice between symbolizing shapes in respect 
of their adequacy or inadequacy; and that restless frenzy is 
quietened into a more intelligent sobriety. 

UNC ONS C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
35 1 
We see therefore coming forward again a more reconciled unity, 
as we found it at the first stage, but with the difference that the 
identity of the meaning with its real existence is no longer an 
immediate unification but one re-established out of difference and 
therefore not just met with but produced by spirit. The inner life 
in general begins here to grow towards independence and self­
knowledge; it seeks its counterpart in the natural which, on its 
side, has a like counterpart in the life and fate of the spiritual. The 
tremendous impulse towards symbolic art proceeds here from this 
urge which seeks to recognize the one side in the other, which seeks 
to present to our contemplation and imagination the inner meaning 
through the outward shape and the significance of the outward 
shapes through the inner meaning, the two being linked. Only 
when the inner becomes free and yet preserves the impulse to 
picture to itself, in a real shape, what it is in its essence, and to 
have this very picture before itself as also an external work, only 
then does there begin the proper impulse towards art, especially 
the visual arts. In other words, hereby alone is there present the 
necessity of giving to the inner by spiritual activity an appearance 
not merely met with in advance [in nature] but no less devised by 
spirit. 1 Imagination in that event makes a second shape which does 
not count by itself as an end but is used only to illustrate a meaning 
allied to it and therefore is dependent on it. 
Now this situation could be so conceived that it might be 
thought that the meaning is what consciousness starts from and 
that only then does it look around, in the next place, for an ex­
pression of its ideas in analogous shapes. But this is not the way 
of strictly symbolical art. For its special character consists in the 
fact that it does not yet penetrate to the comprehension of meanings 
in and by themselves, independently of every external shape. On 
the contrary it takes its departure from the present and the present's 
concrete existence in nature and spirit, and then and only then 
expands it to [enshrine] universal meanings whose significance is 
contained likewise in such a real existent for its part, even if only 
in a rather restricted manner and in a purely approximate way. 
But at the same time symbolic art seizes on these objects only to 
1 Hegel's emphasis on 'vorgefundene' (met with) and 'erfundene' (devised) 
I cannot reproduce in English. 'Second shape', i.e. the one devised by spirit, 
as distinct from the first one which is just met with in the external world. See 
p. 2, note. 

352 
I I. I. THE SYMB O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
create out of them by imagination a shape which makes the uni­
versality in them something that the mind can contemplate and 
picture in this particular reality. Therefore, as symbolic, artistic 
productions have not yet gained a form truly adequate to the spirit, 
because the spirit here is itself not yet inwardly clear to itself, as it 
would be if it were the free spirit; nevertheless at least there are con­
figurations which reveal in themselves at once that they are not 
merely chosen to display themselves alone, but that they are meant 
to hint at meanings that lie deeper and are more comprehensive. 
The purely natural and sensuous object presents itself; whereas 
while the symbolic work of art may bring before our eyes natural 
phenomena or human forms, it hints at once outside and beyond 
itself at something else which yet must have an inwardly grounded 
affinity with the shapes presented and have an essential relationship 
with them. The connection between the concrete shape and its uni­
versal meaning may be of many kinds, now more external and there­
fore less clear, but now also more fundamental, if, that is to say, the 
universality to be symbolized constitutes in fact the essential element 
in the concrete appearance; in that case the comprehensibility of 
the symbol is made much more easy. 
In this connection the most abstract sort of expression is number, 
which yet is only to be used as a clearer allusion when the meaning 
itself contains a numerical determination. The numbers 7 and 12, 
for example, occur frequently in Egyptian architecture, because 
seven is the number of the planets, twelve the number of the 
months or of the feet by which the waters of the Nile must rise in 
order to fructify the land. Such a number is in that case regarded 
as sacred, because it is a numerical determination in the great 
relations of the elements which are reverenced as the powers 
governing the whole life of nature. Twelve steps, seven columns, 
are to this extent symbolical. The like symbolism of numbers 
extends indeed to still more advanced mythologies. The twelve 
labours of Hercules, for example, seem also to originate from the 
twelve months of the year, since Hercules on the one hand comes 
on the scene as the entirely humanly individualized hero, but on 
the other hand he still carries in himself a meaning symbolical of 
nature, and he is a personification of the sun's course. 
Then further on there are spatial configurations which are more 
concrete: paths in labyrinths are a symbol for the revolution of the 
planets, just as dances too in their intricacies have the more secret 

UNCONS C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  
353 
sense of imitating symbolically the movement of the great elemental 
bodies. 
Then, still further on, animal shapes afford symbols; but in the 
most perfect way the form of the human body is a symbol, a form 
which appears elaborated in a higher and more appropriate way 
because the spirit at this stage already begins in general to give 
shape to itself, disengaging itself from the purely natural and rising 
to its own more independent existence. 
This constitutes the general nature of symbol proper and the 
necessity of art for its presentation. Now in order to review the 
more concrete conceptions underlying this stage, we must, in 
connection with this first descent of spirit into itself, leave the East 
and turn rather to the West. 
As a general symbol indicative of this standpoint we may put at 
the top the picture of the phoenix which sets fire to itself but rises 
again rejuvenated out of ashes and death in the flames. Herodotus 
[ii. 73] tells us that he had never seen this bird in Egypt except 
in pictures, and in fact it is the Egyptians who provide the focus 
for the symbolical art-form. Yet before we go forward to a more 
detailed consideration of this, we may mention some other myths 
which form the transition to that symbolism which is completely 
worked out in all its aspects. These are the myths of Adonis, his 
death, Aphrodite's lament for him, the funeral ceremonies, etc., 
insights with their home on the coast of Syria. Cybele worship in 
Phrygia has the same meaning, and this reverberates too in the 
myths of Castor and Pollux, Ceres and Proserpine. 
As a meaning, what is here principally emphasized and made 
explicitly perceptible is the already mentioned factor of the nega­
tive, the death of what is natural, as a factor absolutely grounded 
in the Divine. Hence the funeral ceremonies in connection with 
the death of the god, the extravagant laments over the loss which, 
however, is then compensated by rediscovery, resurrection, re­
newal, so that now ceremonial festivities can follow. This universal 
meaning has over again in this case its more specific natural sense: 
in winter the sun loses its force, but in spring it, and nature along 
with it, is rejuvenated again, and then it dies and is reborn. Here, 
in other words, the Divine, personified in a human occurrence, has 
its meaning in the life of nature, which then, on the other hand, is 
once more a symbol for the essential character of the negative in 
general alike in spirit and in nature. 

354 
I I. I. THE SYMBO L I C  F O R M  O F  ART 
But the complete example of the thorough elaboration of sym­
bolic art, both in its special content and in its form, we have to 
seek in Egypt. Egypt is the country of symbols, the country which 
sets itself the spiritual task of the self-deciphering of the spirit, 
without actually attaining to the decipherment. The problems re­
main unsolved, and the solution which we can provide consists there­
fore only in interpreting the riddles of Egyptian art and its symbolic 
works as a problem remaining undeciphered by the Egyptians 
themselves. In this way spirit here still looks for itself in externality, 
out of which it then struggles again, and it now labours in tireless 
activity to exhibit for perception, not thought, (a) its own essence 
by its own effort in the phenomena of nature, and (b) nature in its 
being a shape of spirit. For this reason the Egyptians, amongst the 
peoples hitherto mentioned, are the properly artistic people. But 
their works remain mysterious and dumb, mute and motionless, 
because here spirit itself has still not really found its own inner 
life and still cannot speak the clear and distinct language of spirit. 
Spirit's unsatisfied urge and pressure to bring this wrestling with 
itself before perception by means of art in so mute a way, to give 
shape to the inner life, and to attain knowledge of its own inner life, 
as of inner life in general, only through external cognate shapes, 
is characteristic of Egypt. The people of this wonderful country 
were not only agriculturalists, they were builders; they dug the 
ground everywhere, excavated canals and lakes ; in this instinct for 
art they not only produced the most prodigious edifices above 
ground but also with great vigour constructed equally immense 
buildings, of the most enormous dimensions, in the bowels of the 
earth. The erection of such monuments, as Herodotus relates, 1 
was a principal occupation of the people and a chief accomplish­
ment of its rulers. The buildings of the Indians too were colossal 
indeed, but we cannot find this endless variety anywhere else but 
in Egypt. 
1 .  Egyptian View and Representation of the Dead: Pyramids 
If we consider the Egyptian artistic outlook in its particular 
aspects, we find here in the first place the inward kept firmly in 
view on its own account contrasted with the immediacy of existence : 
1 Not explicitly, but this is a fair enough inference from all that he does say, 
in book ii, about the construction of the Pyramids, etc. 

U N C O N S C I O U S  SYMBOLISM 
355 
the inward indeed as the negative of life, as death-not as the 
abstract negation which the evil and perishable is, like Ahriman 
in opposition to Ormuzd, but in even a concrete shape. 
(a) The Indian rises only to the emptiest abstraction and there­
fore the abstraction which is likewise negative in contrast to every­
thing concrete. Such an Indian process of becoming Brahma does 
not occur in Egypt; on the contrary, the invisible has a deeper 
meaning for the Egyptians; the dead acquires the content of the 
living itself. Deprived of immediate existence, the dead still pre­
serves in its separation from life its relation to the living, and in 
this concrete shape it is made independent and maintained. It is 
well known that the Egyptians embalmed and worshipped cats, 
dogs, hawks, ichneumons, bears, wolves, 1 but especially men who 
had died (Herodotus, ii. 67, 8ɱo). The honour paid to the dead 
by the Egyptians is not burial, but their perennial preservation as 
corpses. 
(b) Moreover, the Egyptians go beyond this immediate and even 
still natural duration of the dead. What is preserved naturally is 
also interpreted in their ideas as enduring. Herodotus says [ii. 123] 
of the Egyptians that they were the first to teach the immortality 
of the human soul. With them, that is, there first emerges in this 
higher way too the separation between nature and spirit, since it 
is not merely the natural which acquires independence for itself. 
The immortality of the soul lies very close to the freedom of the 
spirit, because [the conception of immortality implies that] the 
self comprehends itself as withdrawn from the naturalness of 
existence and as resting on itself; but this self-knowledge is the 
principle of freedom. Now of course this is not to say that the 
Egyptians had completely reached the conception of the free spirit, 
and in examining this faith of theirs we must not think of our 
manner of conceiving the immortality of the soul ; but still they 
did already have the insight to take good account, both externally 
and in their ideas, of the body in its existence separated from life. 
Therefore they have made the transition of mind to its liberation, 
although they have only reached the threshold of the realm of 
freedom.-This insight of theirs is broadened into the conception 
of an independent realm of the dead in contrast to the presence 
of what is immediately real. In this kingdom of the invisible 
1 Herodotus says that all these animals were sacred, but he speaks of embalm­
ing only in reference to cats. 

356 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
a judgement of the dead is held, and Osiris as Amenthes1 presides 
over it. The same tribunal is then also present in immediate reality, 
since among men too the dead are judged, and after the decease 
of a king, for example, anyone could bring his grievances to that 
court of judgement. 
(c) If we ask further for a symbolical art-form to express this 
idea, we have to look for it in the chief structures built by the 
Egyptians. Here we have before us a double architecture, one 
above ground, the other subterranean: labyrinths under the soil, 
magnificent vast excavations, passages half a mile long, chambers 
adorned with hieroglyphics, everything worked out with the 
maximum of care; then above ground there are built in addition 
those amazing constructions amongst which the Pyramids are to 
be counted the chief. On the purpose and meaning of the Pyramids 
all sorts of hypotheses have been tried for centuries, yet it now 
seems beyond doubt that they are enclosures for the graves of 
kings or of sacred animals, Apis for example, or cats, the ibis, etc.2 
In this way the Pyramids put before our eyes the simple prototype 
of symbolical art itself; they are prodigious crystals which conceal 
in themselves an inner meaning and, as external shapes produced 
by art, they so envelop that meaning that it is obvious that they 
are there for this inner meaning separated from pure nature and 
only in relation to this meaning. But this realm of death and the 
invisible, which here constitutes the meaning, possesses only one 
side, and that a formal one, of the true content of art, namely 
that of being removed from immediate existence; and so this realm 
is primarily only Hades, not yet a life which, even if liberated 
from the sensuous as such, is still nevertheless at the same time 
self-existent and therefore in itself free and living spirit. On 
this account the shape for such an inner meaning still remains 
just an external form and veil for the definite content of that 
meamng. 
The Pyramids are such an external environment in which an 
inner meaning rests concealed. 
1 Here Hegel seems to have been misreported. Amenthes is the Egyptian 
word for Hades, the kingdom of the dead, over which Osiris presides, and this is 
what Hegel says in his Philosophy of Religion (Lasson's edn., Die Naturreligion, 
1927, p. 216). 
• Hegel is drawing again on Herodotus ii. For the ibis, a bird, see ch. 76. 
For Herodotus Apis is a god (chs. 38 and 153) but he is better regarded as the 
sacred bull. 

UNCONSCI O U S  SYMBOLISM 
351 
2. Animal Worship and Animal Masks 
Now while in general the inner life should be presented to our 
vision as something present externally, the Egyptians have fallen 
into the opposite extreme by worshipping an actual existence of 
the Divine in living animals like the bull, cats, and many others. 
The living thing stands higher than inorganic externality, for the 
living organism has something inner at which its external shape 
hints, but which yet remains inner and therefore rich in mystery. 
So here animal worship must be understood as an intuition of 
a secret inner being which, as life, is a higher power over the purely 
external. Of course it always remains repugnant to us to see animals, 
dogs, and cats, instead of what is truly spiritual, regarded as 
sacred. 
This worship, taken by itself, has in it nothing symbolic, because 
in it the actual living animal, Apis for example, was itself wor­
shipped as an existence of god. But the Egyptians have used the 
animal form symbolically too. In that event this form is no longer 
valued on its own account but is debased to the expression of 
something more general. In its most naive form this is the case 
with animal masks which occur especially in portrayals of em­
balming; in this occupation the persons who dissect the corpse 
and take out the entrails are painted wearing animal masks. Here 
it is clear at once that such an animal head is supposed not to mean 
itself but to have a different and more general significance. More­
over, the animal form is used intermingled with the human; we 
find human figures with lions' heads, and these are taken for 
shapes of Minerva; hawks' heads occur too, and horns are left on 
the heads of Ammon. Symbolic connections cannot be missed 
here. Similarly the hieroglyphic script of the Egyptians is also 
largely symbolic, since either it tries to make us acquainted with 
the meanings by sketching actual objects which display not them­
selves but a universal related to them, or, more commonly still, in 
its so-called phonetic element this script indicates the individual 
letters by illustrating an object the initial letter of which has in 
speech the same sound as that which is to be expressed. 
3· Complete Symbolism-Memnons, Isis and Osiris, the Sphinx 
In Egypt, on the whole, almost every shape is a symbol and 
hieroglyph not signifying itself but hinting at another thing with 

358 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC F ORM OF ART 
which it has affinity and therefore relationship. Yet symbols 
proper are only really complete when this relation is of a more 
fundamental and deeper kind. In this connection I will mention 
briefly only the following frequently recurring ideas. 
(a) Just as on one side the Egyptian superstition has an inkling, 
in the animal form, of a secret inwardness, so on the other side we 
find the human form so represented that it still has the inner 
element of subjectivity outside itself and therefore cannot unfold 
itself into free beauty. Especially remarkable are those colossal 
statues of Memnon which, resting in themselves, motionless, the 
arms glued to the body, the feet firmly fixed together, numb, stiff, 
and lifeless, are set up facing the sun in order to await its ray to 
touch them and give them soul and sound. Herodotus at least 
relates1 that statues of Memnon gave a sound automatically at 
sunrise. Of course higher criticism has cast doubt on this, yet the 
fact of this sound has lately been established again by Frenchmen 
and Englishmen; and if the sound is not produced by contrivances 
of some sort, it may still be explained by assuming that, just as 
there are minerals which rustle in water, the voice of these stone 
monuments proceeds from the dew and the cool of the morning 
and then from the falling of the sun's rays on them, if small rifts 
arise consequentially and vanish again. But taken as symbols, the 
meaning to be ascribed to these colossi is that they do not have the 
spiritual soul freely in themselves and therefore, instead of being 
able to draw animation from within, from what bears proportion 
and beauty in itself, they require for it light from without which 
alone liberates the note of the soul from them. The human voice, 
on the other hand, resounds out of one's own feeling and one's 
own spirit without any external impulse, just as the height of art in 
general consists in making the inner give shape to itself out of its 
own being. But the inner life of the human form is still dumb in 
Egypt and in its animation it is only a natural factor that is kept 
in view. 
(b) A further type of symbolical presentation is Isis and Osiris. 
Osiris is begotten, born, and then done to death by Typhon. But 
Isis looks for the scattered limbs, finds, collects, and buries them. 
Now this story of the god has, prima facie, purely natural signifi­
cances for its content. On the one hand Osiris is the sun and his 
1 No. Hegel's memory is at fault. His authority was probably Tacitus, Annals, 
ii. 6 1 ,  where one such statue is mentioned. 

U NCONSC IOUS SYMBOL I S M  
359 
story is a symbol for the sun's yearly course ; on the other hand, he 
means the rising and falling of the Nile which has to bring fertility 
to the whole of Egypt. For in Egypt there are often years without 
rain and it is the Nile alone which waters the country by its floods. 
In winter it flows shallowly within its bed, but then (Herodotus, 
ii. 19) from the summer solstice onwards it begins to rise for a 
hundred days together, bursts its banks, and streams far over the 
country. Finally the water dries up again owing to the heat and hot 
winds from the desert, and it returns again into its river-bed. 
Thereafter the ground is cultivated with little effort, the lushest 
vegetation burgeons, everything germinates and ripens. Sun and 
Nile, their weakening and strengthening, are the natural powers 
over the Egyptian soil, and the Egyptian illustrates them to himself 
symbolically in the humanly shaped story of Isis and Osiris. After 
all there belongs to this context too the symbolism of the signs of 
the zodiac which is connected with the year's course, just as the 
number of the twelve gods is with the months. But conversely 
Osiris means humanity itself: he is held sacred as the founder 
of agriculture, of the demarcation of fields, of property, of laws, 
and his worship is therefore no less related to human spiritual 
activities which have the closest affinity with morality and law. 
So too he is the judge of the dead and wins thereby a meaning 
entirely detached from the pure life of nature; in this meaning the 
symbolical begins to disappear, because here the inner and the 
spiritual becomes itself the content of the human form which 
thereby begins to portray its own inner being. But this spiritual 
process adopts the external life of nature again all the same as its 
inner content and makes that content perceptible in an external 
way: in temples, e.g., in the number of steps, floors, pillars; in 
labyrinths in their variety of passages, windings, and chambers. 
In this way Osiris is just as much natural as spiritual life in the 
different features of his process and transformations, and the 
symbolic shapes become symbols for the natural elements, while 
the natural situations are themselves over again only symbols of 
spiritual activities and their variation. Therefore it turns out that 
the human form remains here no mere personification, because 
here what is natural, although appearing on the one hand as the 
proper meaning, becomes on the other hand itself only a symbol 
of spirit, and in general it has to be subordinate in this sphere, 
where the inward is extricating itself from the vision of nature. 

36o 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
Nevertheless the human bodily form acquires a quite different 
formation and therefore already reveals the struggle to rise upward 
to the inner and spiritual life ; but this effort here attains its proper 
aim, the freedom of spirit in itself, in only a defective way. The 
shapes remain colossal, serious, petrified ; legs without freedom 
and serene distinctness, arms and head closely and firmly affixed 
to the rest of the body, without grace and living movement. The 
art of cutting the arms and the feet free and giving movement to 
the body is ascribed to Daedalus1 first of all. 
Now owing to this alternating symbolism, the symbol in Egypt 
is at the same time an ensemble of symbols, so that what at one 
time appears as meaning is also used again as a symbol of a related 
sphere. In a symbolism which confusedly intertwines meaning and 
shape, presages a variety of things in fact or alludes to them, and 
therefore already comes close to that inner subjectivity which 
alone can develop itself in many directions, the associations are 
ambiguous, and this is the virtue of these productions, although 
their explanation is of course made difficult owing to this ambiguity. 
In deciphering such a meaning we often, to be sure, go too far 
today because in fact almost all the shapes present themselves 
directly as symbols. In the same way in which we try to explain 
this meaning to ourselves, it might have been clear and intelligible 
as a meaning to the insight of the Egyptians themselves. But the 
Egyptian symbols, as we saw at the very beginning, contain 
implicitly much, explicitly nothing. There are works undertaken 
with the attempt to make them clear to themselves, yet they do 
not get beyond the struggle after what is absolutely evident. In this 
sense we regard the Egyptian works of art as containing riddles, the 
right solution of which is in part unattained not only by us, but 
generally by those who posed these riddles to themselves. 
(c) The works of Egyptian art in their mysterious symbolism 
are therefore riddles ; the objective riddle par excellence. As a symbol 
for this proper meaning of the Egyptian spirit we may mention the 
Sphinx. It is, as it were, the symbol of the symbolic itself. In 
innumerable quantities, set up in rows in hundreds, there are 
sphinx shapes in Egypt, constructed out of the hardest stone, 
polished, covered with hieroglyphics, and [one] near Cairo is of 
1 Athenian sculptor and architect, who was said to have made statues which 
could move themselves. He also constructed the Labyrinth in Crete for Minos. 
See, e.g., Apollodorus, I I I. xv. 8 ;  Euripides: Hecuba, 836 ff. ; et al. 

UNCONSCIOUS SYMBOLISM 
such colossal size that the lion's claws alone amount to a man's 
height. Some of them are recumbent animal bodies out of which 
as an upper part, the human body struggles; here and there again 
there is a ram's head, but elsewhere most commonly a female head. 
Out of the dull strength and power of the animal the human spirit 
tries to push itself forward, without coming to a perfect portrayal 
of its own freedom and animated shape, because it must still 
remain confused and associated with what is other than itself. This 
pressure for self-conscious spirituality which does not apprehend 
itself from its own resources in the one reality adequate to itself 
but only contemplates itself in what is related to it and brings itself 
into consciousness in precisely what is strange to it, is the symbolic 
as such which at this peak becomes a riddle. 
It is in this sense that the Sphinx in the Greek myth, which we 
ourselves may interpret again symbolically, appears as a monster 
asking a riddle. The Sphinx propounded the well-known conun­
drum: What is it that in the morning goes on four legs, at mid-day 
on two, and in the evening on three ? Oedipus found the simple 
answer: a man, and he tumbled the Sphinx from the rock.1 The 
explanation of the symbol lies in the absolute meaning, in the 
spirit, just as the famous Greek inscription calls to man: Know 
thyself. The light of consciousness is the clarity which makes its 
concrete content shine clearly through the shape belonging and 
appropriate to itself, and in its [objective] existence reveals itself 
alone. 
1 According to Apollodorus, Ill. v. 8, the Sphinx threw herself down after the 
riddle had been guessed. 'Know thyself' was the inscription on the temple of 
Apollo at Delphi (Plato, Protagoras, 343 s). 

Chapter II 
SYMBOL I S M  O F  THE SUBLIME 
The unenigmatic clarity of the spirit which shapes itself out of its 
own resources in a way adequate to itself is the aim of symbolic art, 
but it can only be reached if in the first place the meaning comes 
into consciousness on its own account, separated from the entire 
world of appearance. For in the immediately intuited unity of the 
two [meaning and shape] lay the absence of art in the case of the 
ancient Parsis; the contradiction between the separation of the two 
and what was nevertheless demanded, i.e. their immediate linkage, 
produced the fantastic symbolism of the Indians; while even in 
Egypt knowledge of the inner life and the absolute meaning was still 
not free, still not released from the world of appearance, and this 
provided the reason for the riddles and the obscurity of Egyptian 
symbolism. 
Now the first decisive purification of the absolute [meaning] and 
its express separation from the sensuous present, i.e. from the 
empirical individuality of external things, is to be sought in the 
sublime. Sublimity lifts the Absolute above every immediate existent 
and therefore brings about the liberation which, though abstract 
at first, is at least the foundation of the spirit. For although the 
meaning thus elevated is not yet apprehended as concrete spirit, 
it is nevertheless regarded as the inner life, self-existent and repos­
ing on itself, which by its very nature is incapable of finding its 
true expression in finite phenomena. 
Kant has distinguished the sublime from the beautiful in a very 
interesting way, and his detailed discussion of this in the first part 
of the Critique of Judgment from § 20 onwards1 still always retains 
its interest despite all prolixity and the premissed reduction of all 
categories to something subjective, to the powers of mind, imagina­
tion, reason, etc. In its general principle, this reduction must be 
recognized as correct to this extent, that sublimity-as Kant says 
himself-is not contained in anything in nature but only in our 
1 Kant's distinction is made in § 23. Thereafter he goes on to deal with the 
sublime in detail. 

S Y M B O L I S M  O F  TH E S U B L I M E  
minds, in so far as we become conscious of our superiority to the 
nature within us and therefore to nature without. In this sense 
Kant's view is that 'the sublime, in the strict sense of the word, 
cannot be contained in any sensuous form but concerns only Ideas 
of Reason which, although no adequate representation of them is 
possible, may be aroused and called to our mind precisely by this 
inadequacy which does admit of sensuous representation' (Critique 
of Judgment, 1799, p. 77 [§ 23]). The sublime in general is the 
attempt to express the infinite, without finding in the sphere of 
phenomena an object which proves adequate for this representa­
tion. Precisely because the infinite is set apart from the entire 
complex of objectivity as explicitly an invisible meaning devoid of 
shape and is made inner, it remains, in accordance with its infinity, 
unutterable and sublime above any expression through the finite. 
Now the first content which the meaning gains here is this, that 
in contrast to the totality of appearance it is the inherently sub­
stantial unity which itself, as a pure thought, can be apprehended 
only by pure thought. Therefore this substance is now no longer 
able to have its configuration in something external, and thus far 
the strictly symbolical character vanishes. But if this inherent unity 
is to be brought before our vision, this is only possible if, as sub­
stance, it is also grasped as the creative power of all things, in 
which it therefore has its revelation and appearance and to which 
it thus has a positive relation. But at the same time this essentially 
expresses the fact of substance's elevation above individual 
phenomena as such, and above their totality, with the logical 
result that the positive relation is transposed into the negative one 
in which the substance is purified from everything apparent and 
particular and therefore from what fades away in it and is in­
adequate to it. 
This outward shaping which is itself annihilated in turn by what 
it reveals, so that the revelation of the content is at the same time 
a supersession of the revelation, is the sublime. This, therefore, 
differing from Kant, we need not place in the pure subjectivity of 
the mind and its Ideas of Reason; on the contrary, we must grasp 
it as grounded in the one absolute substance qua the content which 
is to be represented. 
The classification of the art-form of the sublime is likewise 
derived from the above-indicated double relationship of substance, 
as meaning, to the phenomenal world. 
82.43715 
N 

364 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  FORM OF ART 
The character common to the two sides of this relation-i.e. 
the positive and the negative-lies in this, that the substance is 
raised above the single phenomenon in which it is to acquire 
representation, although it can be expressed only in relation to the 
phenomenal in general, because as substance and essentiality it is in 
itself without shape and inaccessible to concrete vision. 
As the first mode of apprehension, the affirmative one, we may 
cite pantheistic art as it occurs partly in India and partly in the 
later freedom and mysticism of the Mohammedan Persian poets, 
and as we find it again also in the deeper inwardness of thought 
and sentiment in the Christian west. 
In its general character at this stage substance is envisaged as 
immanent in all its created accidents, which thus are not yet 
degraded to serving, and merely adorning, the glorification of the 
Absolute, but are preserved affirmatively through the substance 
dwelling in them, although in every single thing it is only the One 
and the Divine which is to be imaged and exalted. Wherefore the 
poet, who in everything descries and marvels at this One and 
immerses himself, as well as things, in this contemplation, can 
preserve a positive relation to the substance to which he links 
everything. 
The second [mode of] apprehension, namely the negative praise 
of the power and glory of the one God, we encounter as sublimity 
in the strict sense in Hebrew poetry. It cancels the positive im­
manence of the Absolute in its created phenomena and puts the 
one substance explicitly apart as the Lord of the world in contrast 
to whom there stands the entirety of his creatures, and these, in 
comparison with God, are posited as the inherently powerless and 
perishable. Now when the power and wisdom of the One is to be 
represented through the finitude of natural things and human 
fates, we no longer find here any Indian distortion into the shape­
lessness of the boundless; on the contrary, the sublimity of God 
is brought nearer to contemplation by reason of the fact that what 
exists in the world, with all its splendour, magnificence, and glory, 
is represented as only a serving accident and a transient show in 
comparison with God's being and stability. 
A. THE PANTH E I S M  O F  A R T  
Nowadays the word 'pantheism' is at once liable to the crassest 
misunderstandings. This is because in one way 'everything' means 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE S U B L IME 
in our modern sense 'all and everything in its purely empirical 
individuality', e.g. this mull with all its own qualities, with this 
colour, size so and so, shape, weight, etc., or that house, book, 
animal, table, chair, oven, cirrus clouds, etc. Now many con­
temporary theologians accuse philosophy of turning 'everything' 
into God, but when 'everything' is taken precisely in the sense 
just mentioned, what they allege about philosophy is as a matter of 
fact entirely false and their complaint against it is thus quite un­
justified. Such an idea of Pantheism can only arise in crazy heads 
and is not found in any religion, not even amongst the Iroquois and 
the Eskimos, let alone in any philosophy. The 'everything' in what 
has been called 'Pantheism' is therefore not this or that individual 
thing, but rather is 'everything' in the sense of the All, i.e. of the 
one substance which indeed is immanent in individuals, but is 
abstracted from individuality and its empirical reality, so that what 
is emphasized and meant is not the individual as such but the 
universal soul, or, in more popular terms, truth and excellence 
which also have their presence in this individual being. 
This constitutes the proper meaning of 'Pantheism' and under 
this meaning alone have we to talk of Pantheism here. It belongs 
primarily to the East which grasps the thought of an absolute 
unity of the Divine and the thought of all things as comprised in 
this unity. Now, as unity and All, the Divine can come into con­
sciousness only through the vanishing of the particular individuals 
in which the Divine is expressed as present. On the one hand, that 
is to say, the Divine is envisaged here as immanent in the most 
various objects and indeed, more particularly, as the most excellent 
and most pre-eminent thing amongst and in the different existents; 
but, on the other hand, since the One is this thing and another and 
another again and rolls through all things, the individuals and 
particulars for this very reason appear as superseded and vanishing; 
for it is not any and every individual thing which is this One ; on 
the contrary, the One is this totality of individuals which for 
contemplation coalesce into the totality. For if the One is life, for 
example, it is also death, and therefore precisely not only life ; so 
that thus life or the sun or the sea do not, as life, sea, or sun, consti­
tute the Divine and the One. Yet at the same time the accidental 
is not here posited expressly as negative and as a servant, as it is 
in sublimity proper, but, on the contrary, since the substance in 
everything particular is this One, the substance becomes implicitly 

366 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
something particular and accidental ; yet, conversely, this indivi­
dual thing changes all the same, and imagination does not restrict 
the substance to a specific existent but advances over each determi­
nacy, abandoning it in order to proceed to another, and thus the 
individual existent becomes for its part something accidental, 
away and above which the one substance rises and therefore is 
sublime. 
Such a way of looking at things can, on this account, be ex­
pressed artistically only in poetry, not in the visual arts which 
bring to our vision only as existent and static the determinate and 
individual thing which is to disappear in face of the substance 
present in such existents. Where Pantheism is pure, there is no 
visual art for its representation. 
1. Indian Poetry 
As the first example of such pantheistic poetry we may once again 
cite the Indian which alongside its fantasticalness has brilliantly 
developed this aspect also. 
The Indians, as we saw, have as their supreme Divinity the 
most abstract universality and unity, which does thereupon become 
specified in particular gods, Trimurti, Indra, etc. ; but there is no 
holding fast to the specific; the subordinate gods revert all the same 
into the higher ones, and these into Brahma. Thus it is already 
clear that this universal constitutes the one permanent and self­
identical foundation of everything. The Indians of course display 
in their poetry the double struggle (a) so to magnify the individual 
existent that in its sensuousness it may already appear adequate to 
the universal meaning, and (b) conversely, in face of the abstraction 
of the One, to waive all determinacy in a purely negative way. On 
the other hand, there appears even in the Indians the purer mode 
of representation of the above-mentioned Pantheism which empha­
sizes the immanence of the Divine in the individual who for the eye 
of contemplation is present and vanishing. In this mode of looking 
at things we could propose to find once more something of a re­
semblance to that immediate unity of pure thought and sense 
which we encountered in the Parsis; but in their case the One and 
the Excellent, considered on its own account, is itself something 
natural, i.e. light; whereas in the case of the Indians the One, 
Brahma, is merely the formless One which, only when transformed 
into the infinite multiplicity of terrestrial phenomena, provides an 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE SUBL IME 
opportunity for the pantheistic mode of representation. So it is 
said, e.g., of Krishna (Bhagavad Gita, 7· iv): 'Earth, water and 
wind, air and fire, spirit, understanding, and self-hood are the 
eight syllables of my essential power; yet recognise thou in me 
another and a higher being who vivifies the earth and carries the 
world: in him all beings have their origin ; so know thou, I am the 
origin of this entire world and also its destruction; beyond me 
there is nothing higher, to me this All is linked as a chaplet of 
pearls on a thread; I am the taste in flowing water, the splendour 
in the sun and the moon, the mystical word in the holy scrip­
tures, in man his manliness, the pure fragrance in the earth, the 
splendour in flames, in all beings the life, contemplation in the 
penitent, in living things the force of life, in the wise their wisdom, 
in the splendid their splendour; whatever natures are genuine, are 
shining or dark, they are from me, I am not in them, they are in 
me. Through the illusion of these three properties the whole world 
is bewitched and mistakes me the unalterable; but even the divine 
illusion, Maya, is my illusion, hard to transcend; but those who 
follow me go forth beyond illusion.' 1 Here such a substantial unity 
is expressed in the most striking way, in respect both of imma­
nence in what is present and also transcendence over everything 
individual. 
In a similar way, Krishna says of himself that amongst all 
different existents he is always the most excellent ( ro. xxi) : 'Among 
the stars I am the shining sun, amongst the lunary signs the moon, 
amongst the sacred books the book of hymns, amongst the senses 
the inward, Meru amongst the tops of the hills, amongst animals 
the lion, amongst letters I am the vowel A, amongst seasons of the 
year the blossoming spring', etc. 
But this recitation of the height of excellence, like the mere 
change of shapes in which what is to be brought before our eyes is 
' Professor R. C. Zaehner translates the closing section of this passage as 
follows : 'Know too that all states of being whether they be of Nature's con­
stituent purity, energy, or lethargy proceed from me ; but I am not in them, they 
are in me. By these three states of being inhering in the constituents the whole 
universe is led astray and does not understand that I am far beyond them and 
that I neither change nor pass away. For all this is my Maya, composed of the con­
stituents, divine, hard to transcend. Whoso shall put his trust in me alone, shall 
pass beyond this my Maya' (Concordant Discord, Oxford 1 970, pp. 1 24, 1 35). 
Professor Zaehner points out that at this stage of Indian thought 'Maya' means 
creative power, not illusion. The 'three properties' are the three 'constituents' 
through which Nature acts. 

368 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
always one and the same thing over again, despite the wealth of 
fancy which seems at first sight to be deployed there, still remains, 
precisely on account of this similarity of content, extremely 
monotonous and, on the whole, empty and wearisome. 
2. Mohammedan Poetry 
Secondly, in a higher and more subjectively free way, oriental 
Pantheism has been developed in Mohammedanism, especially 
by the Persians. 
Now here a characteristic relation appears, especially on the 
part of the individual poet: 
(a) Since the poet longs to descry the Divine in everything and 
does actually descry it, in face of it he now sacrifices his own 
personality, but he all the same apprehends the immanence of the 
Divine in his inner being thus enlarged and freed; and therefore 
there grows in him that serene inwardness, that free good fortune, 
that riotous bliss characteristic of the Oriental who, in renouncing 
his own particularity, immerses himself entirely in the Eternal and 
the Absolute, and feels and recognizes in everything the picture 
and presence of the Divine. Such a self-penetration by the Divine 
and a blissful intoxicated life in God borders on mysticism. In this 
connection Jalal-ed-Din Rumi [1207-73] is to be praised above 
all ; Riickert1 has given us most beautiful examples of his work; 
Ruckert's marvellous power of expression enables him to play in 
the most ingenious and free way with words and rhymes, just as 
the Persians do. The love of God-with whom man identifies his 
personality by the most boundless surrender and whom, the One, 
he now glimpses in all spaces of the universe, to whom he relates 
each and everything, and to whom he brings everything back­
constitutes here the centre which radiates in the widest way in 
every direction and region. 
(b) Furthermore, in sublimity, strictly so-called, as will be 
shown directly, the best objects and most splendid configurations 
are used only as a mere adornment of God and serve as a procla­
mation of the magnificence and glorification of the One, since 
they are set before our eyes only to celebrate him as the lord of all 
creation. In Pantheism, on the other hand, the immanence of the 
Divine in objects exalts mundane, natural, and human existence 
itself into a more independent glory of its own. The personal life of 
1 F. Ruckert, Poet and Orientalist, 1788-1 866. 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE SUBLIME 
the spirit in natural phenomena and human affairs animates and 
spiritualizes them in themselves and founds anew a special rela­
tion between the subjective feeling, and soul, of the poet and the 
objects of his song. Filled by this soulful glory, the heart in itself is 
peaceful, independent, free, self-subsistent, wide, and great; and 
in this affirmative identity with itself the heart imagines and now 
makes its own the soul of things until it attains a like peaceful 
unity with it; it grows into the most blissful and cheerful intimacy 
with objects in nature and their splendour, with the beloved and 
the tavern, in short with everything worth praise and love. The 
western romantic deep feeling of the heart does display a similar 
absorption in nature's life, but on the whole, especially in the 
north, it is rather unhappy, unfree, and wistful, or it still remains 
subjective, shut in upon itself, and therefore becomes self-seeking 
and sentimental. Such oppressed and troubled deep feeling is ex­
pressed especially in the folksongs of barbarian peoples. On the 
other hand, a free, happy, depth of feeling is characteristic of 
Orientals, especially the Mohammedan Persians, who openly and 
cheerfully sacrifice their entire selves to God and to everything 
praiseworthy, yet in this sacrifice they do precisely retain the free 
substantiality which they can preserve even in relation to the 
surrounding world. So we see in the glow of passion the most 
widespread bliss and parrhesia of feeling through which, in the 
inexaustible wealth of brilliant and splendid images, there resounds 
the steady note of joy, beauty, and good fortune. If the Oriental 
suffers and is unhappy, he accepts this as the unalterable verdict of 
fate and he therefore remains secure in himself, without oppression, 
sentimentality, or discontented dejection. In the poems of Hafiz1 
we find complaints and outcries enough about the beloved, filling 
the glass, etc., but even in grief he remains just as carefree as he is 
in good fortune. So, e.g., he says once: 'Out of thanks that the 
presence of thy friend enlightens thee, in woe burn like the candle 
and be satisfied.' 
The candle teaches us to laugh and cry; through the flame it 
laughs in cheerful splendour, while at the same time it melts away 
in hot tears; in its burning it spreads cheerful splendour. This is 
the general character of this whole poetry. 
Just to mention a few more detailed pictures, the Persians have 
1 Shamsud-Din-Mohammed, c. IJZ0-89. 

370 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
much to do with flowers and jewels, but above all with the rose and 
the nightingale. Especially common with them is the representa­
tion of the nightingale as the bridegroom of the rose. This gift of 
soul to the rose and the love of the nightingale is common, e.g., in 
Hafiz. 'Out of thanks, 0 rose, that thou art the queen of beauty', 
he says, 'beware that thou disdain not the nightingale's love.' He 
himself speaks of the nightingale of his own heart. Whereas if we 
speak in our poems of roses, nightingales, wine, this occurs in 
a quite different and more prosaic sense; the rose serves us as an 
adornment, 'garlanded with roses', etc., or we hear the nightingale 
and it just arouses our corresponding emotions; we drink wine and 
call it the banisher of care. But with the Persians the rose is no 
image or mere adornment, no symbol; on the contrary, it appears 
to the poet as ensouled, as an affianced beloved, and with his 
spirit he is engrossed in the soul of the rose. 
The same character of brilliant Pantheism is still displayed in the 
most recent Persian poetry too. von Hammer,1 e.g., has informed 
us of a poem sent by the Shah with other gifts to the Emperor 
Francis in 1819. In 33,000 distichs it recounts the deeds of the 
Shah who has conferred his own name on the Court poet. 
(c) Goethe too, in contrast to his troubled youthful poems and 
their concentrated feeling, was gripped in his later years by this 
broad and carefree serenity, and, as an old man, inspired by the 
breath of the East, and with his soul filled with boundless bliss, 
turns in the poetic fervour of his heart to this freedom of feeling, 
a freedom that even in polemics keeps the most beautiful tran­
quillity. The songs in his West-ostliche Divan2 are neither jeux 
d'esprit nor insignificant social gallantries, but are the products of 
such a free feeling and abandon. He calls them himself in a song 
to Suleika: 'Poetic pearls, which the mighty surge of your passion 
cast up on my life's deserted shore, tenderly gathered with careful 
fingers, they are ranged on a necklace of jewels and gold.' 'Take', 
he calls to his beloved, 'Take them on thy neck, to thy bosom­
raindrops of Allah, ripened in a modest shell.'J 
For such poems there needed a sense self-confident in all storms 
and of the widest range, a depth and childlikeness of heart and 
1 Joseph, Freiherr von Hammer-Purgstall, Orientalist, •774-1856. 
• Goethe, who lived to be eighty-three, was sixty-four when he published 
this in 181 3. 
> The idea is that the pearl is a raindrop that fell into the sea and was 'ripened' 
in an oyster shell. 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE SUBLIME 
371 
' a  world of living buds which in their thrusting abundance presaged 
the nightingale's love and her soul-stirring song'. 
3· Christian Mysticism 
Now the pantheistic unity, emphasized in relation to the subject 
who feels himself in this unity with God and senses God as this 
presence in subjective consciousness, is afforded in general by 
mysticism, developed as it has been in this more subjective way 
within Christianity too. As an example I will only cite Angelus 
Silesius, who, with the greatest audacity and depth of intuition and 
feeling, has expressed in a wonderfully mystical power of represen­
tation the substantial existence of God in things and the unification 
of the self with God and of God with human subjectivity.1 The 
strictly Eastern Pantheism, on the other hand, emphasizes rather 
the contemplation of the one substance in all phenomena and 
their sacrifice by the subject who thereby acquires the supreme 
enlargement of consciousness as well as, through entire liberation 
from the finite, the bliss of absorption into everything that is best 
and most splendid. 
B. THE ART OF THE S U B LIME 
But the one substance, grasped as the proper meaning of the entire 
universe, is in truth only established as substance when it is 
brought back into itself, as pure inwardness and substantial might, 
out of its presence and actuality in the vicissitudes of phenomena, 
and thereby is made independent itself over against finitude. Only 
through this intuition of the being of God as the purely spiritual 
and imageless, contrasted with the mundane and the natural, is 
spirit completely wrested from nature and sense and released from 
existence in the finite. Yet conversely the absolute substance 
remains in a relation to the phenomenal world, out of which it is 
reflected back into itself. This relation now acquires the above­
mentioned negative aspect, namely that the entire mundane sphere, 
despite the fullness, force, and splendour of its phenomena, is 
expressly established, in relation to the substance, as only the 
inherently negative, created by God, subjected to his power, and 
1 e.g. 'God in my nature is involved, As I in the divine' (Hours with the Mystics, 
by R. A. Vaughan, London, r895, vol. ii, pp. s ff.) .  Angelus Silesius is probably 
the pseudonym of Johannes Scheffler, x6(4-77. 

372 
I I. I. THE SYM B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
his servant. The world is therefore indeed regarded as a revelation 
of God, and he himself is the goodness which, although the created 
world has in itself no right to subsist and to relate itself to itself, 
yet permits it to thrive and gives it stability; still, the stability of 
the finite is without substance, and the creature, held over against 
God, is what is perishing and powerless, so that in the creator's 
goodness his justice has to be manifested at the same time; and this 
justice brings into actual appearance also, in the inherently negative, 
the powerlessness thereof and therefore the substance as that alone 
which has power. 
This relation, when art asserts it as the fundamental one for both 
its content and its form, affords the art-form of sublimity, strictly 
so-called. Beauty of the Ideal must of course be distinguished from 
sublimity. For in the Ideal the inner life pervades external reality, 
whose inner being the inner life is, in the sense that both sides 
appear as adequate to one another and therefore precisely as per­
vading one another. In sublimity, on the contrary, external 
existence, in which the substance is brought before contemplation, 
is degraded in comparison with the substance, since this degrada­
tion and servitude is the one and only way whereby the one God 
can be illustrated in art; this is because the one God is explicitly 
without shape and is incapable of expression in his positive essence 
in anything finite and mundane. Sublimity presupposes the mean­
ing in an independence in comparison with which the external 
must appear as merely subordinate, because the inner does not 
appear in it but so transcends it that nothing comes into the 
representation except as this transcendence and superiority. 
In the symbol the shape was the chief thing. The shape was 
supposed to have a meaning, yet without being able to express it 
perfectly. In contrast to this symbol and its obscure content there 
is now the meaning as such and its clear intelligibility; and the 
work of art thus becomes the outpouring of the pure Being as 
the meaning of all things-but of the Being which establishes the 
incongruity of shape and meaning, implicitly present in the symbol, 
as the meaning of God himself, a meaning present in the mundane 
and yet transcending everything mundane [and this is incon­
gruous J ; and therefore the Being becomes sublime in the work of 
art which is to express nothing but this absolutely clear meaning. 
If therefore symbolic art in general may already be called sacred 
art because it adopts the Divine as the content of its productions, 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE SUBLIME 
373 
the art of sublimity is the sacred art as such which can be called 
exclusively sacred because it gives honour to God alone. 
Here on the whole the content, in its fundamental meaning, is 
still more restricted than it is in the symbol proper which does not 
get beyond striving after the spiritual, and in its reciprocal relations 
[between spirit and nature] affords a wide extension of spirit's 
transformation in natural productions and nature's transformation 
in echoes of the spirit. 
This sort of sublimity in its first original character we find 
especially in the outlook of the Jews and in their sacred poetry. 
For visual art cannot appear here, where it is impossible to sketch 
any adequate picture of God; only the poetry of ideas, expressed 
in words, can. In handling this stage in more detail we may set out 
the following general points. 
I .  God as Creator and Lord of the World 
For its most general content this poetry has God, as Lord of the 
world that serves him, as not incarnate in the external world but 
withdrawn out of mundane existence into a solitary unity. What 
in symbolism proper was still bound into one, thus falls apart 
here into the two sides-the abstract independence of God and the 
concrete existence of the world. 
(a) God himself, as this pure independence of the one sub­
stance, is necessarily without shape and, taken in this abstraction, 
cannot be brought nearer to our vision. What therefore imagina­
tion can grip at this stage is not what God is in his pure essentiality, 
since that inhibits representation by art in an appropriate shape. 
The sole divine topic which is left is therefore the relation of God 
to the world created by him. 
(b) God is the creator of the universe. This is the purest ex­
pression of the sublime itself. For the first time, that is to say, 
ideas of procreation and the mere natural generation of things by 
God vanish and give place to the thought of creation by spiritual 
might and activity. 'God said: Let there be light; and there was 
light' ; this Longinus1 quoted long ago as in every way a striking 
example of the sublime. The Lord, the one substance, does pro­
ceed to manifestation, but the manner of creation is the purest, 
even bodiless, ethereal manifestation; it is the word, the manifesta­
tion of thought as the ideal power, and with its command that 
1 Ou the Sublime, ix. 10, quoting Genesis 1 :  3· 

374 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
the existent shall be, the existent is immediately and actually 
brought into being in silent obedience. 
(c) Yet God does not pass over, as may be supposed, into the 
created world as into his reality; he remains, on the contrary, 
withdrawn into himself, though with this opposition no fixed 
dualism is created. For what is brought forth is his work, which 
has no independence in contrast with him; on the contrary it is 
there only as the proof of his wisdom, goodness, and justice as 
such. The One is Lord over all, and natural things are not the 
presence of God but only powerless accidents which in themselves 
can only show him, not make him appear.1 This constitutes the 
sublime so far as God is concerned. 
2. The Finite World bereft of God 
Since the one God is separated in this way on the one hand from 
the concrete phenomena of the world and settled in his indepen­
dence, while the externality of the existent is determined and 
disdained as the finite on the other hand, it follows that existence 
both natural and human now acquires the new position of being 
a representation of the Divine only because its finitude appears on 
its own surface. 
(a) For the first time, therefore, nature and the human form 
confront us as prosaic and bereft of God. The Greeks tell us that 
when the heroes of the voyage of the Argonauts made ship through 
the narrows of the Hellespont, the rocks, which hitherto had 
clanged shut and then opened again like shears, suddenly stood 
there for ever rooted to the ground.2 This is similar to what we 
find in the sacred poetry of sublimity: in contrast with the infinite 
Being, the finite becomes fixed in its intelligible determinacy; 
whereas in the symbolic outlook nothing keeps its right place, 
since the finite collapses into the Divine, just as the Divine 
proceeds out of itself into finite existence. 
If we turn from, e.g. the ancient Indian poems, to the Old 
Testament, we find ourselves at once on a totally different ground 
on which we can feel at home, no matter how strange and dif­
ferent from ours the situations, events, actions, and characters 
' Hegel's contrast between Scheinen (show) and Erscheinen (appear), a favourite 
one of his, has no English equivalent. 
2 The Argonauts passed safely through the Symplegades which were fated 
to come to rest if any ship passed safely through them. See Sir James Frazer's 
note to the Loeb edition of Apollodorus, I. ix. 22, for references 

SYM B O L I S M  OF THE S U B L I ME 
375 
displayed there may be. Instead of a world of riot and confusion 
we come into situations and have figures before us which appear 
perfectly natural, and their firm patriarchal characters in their 
determinateness and truth are closely connected with us by being 
perfectly intelligible. 
(b) For this outlook which can grasp the natural course of 
events and assert the laws of nature, miracle gets its place for the 
first time. In India everything is miracle and therefore no longer 
miraculous. On a ground where an intelligible connection is con­
tinually interrupted, where everything is torn from its place and 
deranged, no miracle can tread. For the miraculous presupposes 
intelligible consequences and also the ordinary clear consciousness 
which alone calls a 'miracle' that interruption of this accustomed 
connection which is wrought by a higher power. Yet miracles in 
this sense are not a strictly specific expression of sublimity because 
the normal course of natural phenomena, as well as this interrup­
tion, is produced by the will of God and the obedience of nature. 
(c) The sublime in the strict sense we must look for, on the 
contrary, when the whole created world appears entirely as finite, 
restricted, not bearing or carrying itself, and for this reason can 
only be regarded as a glorifying accessory for the praise of God. 
3· The Human Individual 
At this stage the human individual seeks his own honour, consola­
tion, and satisfaction in this recognition of the nullity of things and 
in the exaltation and praise of God. 
(a) In this connection the Psalms supply us with classic examples 
of genuine sublimity set forth for all time as a pattern in which 
what man has before himself in his religious idea of God is 
expressed brilliantly with the most powerful elevation of soul. 
Nothing in the world may lay claim to independence, for every­
thing is and subsists only by God's might and is only there in 
order, in praise of this might, to serve him and to express its own 
unsubstantial nullity. While therefore we found in the imagination 
of substantiality and its pantheism an infinite enlargement, here 
we have to marvel at the force of the elevation of the mind which 
abandons everything in order to declare the exclusive power of 
God. In this connection Psalm 104 [2 ff.] is of magnificent power. 
'Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment ; who stretchest 
out the heavens like a curtain' and so on. Light, heavens, clouds, 

376 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  A R T  
the wings of the wind are here nothing in and by themselves but 
only an external vesture, the chariot or the messenger for the 
service of God. Then, further on, God's wisdom is extolled, which 
has put everything in order: the springs which burst forth in the 
depths, the waters that flow between the mountains, and the birds 
of heaven sitting by the waters and singing under the boughs; 
grass, wine which delights the heart of man, and the cedars of 
Lebanon which the Lord hath planted; the sea where creatures 
swarm, and there are whales which God hath made to play therein. 
-And what God has created, he also maintains, but [v. 29] 'thou 
hidest thy face and they are troubled; thou takest away their 
breath; they die and return to their dust'. The nullity of man is 
spoken of more expressly in Psalm 90, 'a prayer of Moses, the man 
of God', when it says [vv. s-7] : 'Thou carriest men away as with 
a flood ; they are as a sleep, even as grass which in the morning 
flourisheth and in the evening is cut down and withereth. This is 
thy wrath for our transgressions, and thine anger that we must so 
suddenly be carried away'. 
(b) Therefore, so far as man is concerned, there are bound up 
with sublimity at the same time the sense of man's finitude and 
the insurmountable aloofness of God. 
( (}!) Therefore the idea of immortality does not arise originally 
in this sphere, for this idea involves the presupposition that the 
individual self, the soul, the human spirit, is something absolute. 
In sublimity, only the One is imperishable, and in contrast with 
him everything else is regarded as arising and perishing, but not 
as free and infinite in itself. 
({3) Therefore, further, man views himself in his unworthiness 
before God; his exaltation consists in fear of the Lord, in trembling 
before his wrath, and we find depicted in a penetrating and affect­
ing way grief over nullity, and the cry of the soul to God in com­
plaint, suffering, and lament from the depths of the heart. 
(y) Whereas if the individual in his finitude holds to himself 
firmly over against God, then this willed and intended finitude 
becomes wickedness, which, as evil and sin, belongs only to the 
natural and human, but, like grief and the negative in general, 
can find no sort of place in the one inherently undifferentiated 
substance. 
(c) Yet, thirdly, within this nullity man nevertheless gains 
a freer and more independent position. For on the one hand, along 

SYMB O L I S M  OF THE S U B L I M E  
377 
with the substantial peace and constancy of God in respect of his 
will and its commands for men, there arises the law; on the other 
hand, in man's exaltation there lies at the same time the complete 
and clear distinction between the human and the Divine, the 
finite and the Absolute, and thereby the judgement of good and 
evil, and the decision for one or the other, is transferred to the 
subject himself. Relationship to the Absolute and the adequacy or 
inadequacy of man thereto has therefore also an aspect accruing to 
the individual and his own behaviour and action. Thereby in his 
righteousness and adherence to the law he finds at the same time 
an affirmative relation to God, and has in general to connect the 
external positive or negative situation of his existence--prosperity, 
pleasure, satisfaction, or grief, misfortune, oppression-with his 
inner obedience to or stubbornness against the law, and therein 
accept well-being and reward or trial and punishment. 

Chapter III 
C O N S C I O U S  SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE 
CO MPARATIVE ART-F O R M  
What has emerged from sublimity as distinct from strictly un­
conscious symbolizing consists on the one hand in the separation 
between the meaning, explicitly known in its inwardness, and the 
concrete appearance divided therefrom ;  on the other hand in the 
directly or indirectly emphasized non-correspondence of the two, 
wherein the meaning, as the universal, towers above individual 
reality and its particularity. In the imagination of Pantheism, how­
ever, as in sublimity, the proper content, i.e. the universal sub­
stance of all things, could not become explicitly visualized without 
being related to created existence, even if that created existence 
were inadequate to its own essence. Yet this relation belonged to 
the substance itself which in the negativity of its accidents gave 
proof of its wisdom, goodness, might, and justice. Consequently, 
in general at least, the relation of meaning and shape is here of 
a still essential and necessary kind, and the two linked sides have 
not yet become external to one another in the strict sense of the 
word 'external'. But since this externality is present implicitly in 
symbolism, it must also be posited [explicitly] and it emerges in 
the forms which we now have to consider in this final chapter on 
symbolic art. We can call them conscious symbolism, or, more 
precisely, the comparative form of art. 
By conscious symbolism, I mean, we are to understand that the 
meaning is not only explicitly known but is expressly posited as 
different from the external way in which it is represented. In that 
case, as in sublimity, the meaning, thus explicitly expressed, does 
not essentially appear in and as the meaning of the shape given to 
it in such a way. But the relation of the two to one another no 
longer remains, as it did at the preceding stage, a relation grounded 
purely in the meaning itself; on the contrary, it becomes a more or 
less accidental concatenation produced by the subjective activity 
of the poet, by the immersion of his spirit in an external existent, 
by his wit and his invention in general. In this activity he may then 
start at one time rather from something perceived, and out of 

SYMBOLISM OF THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
379 
his own resources imagine for it a cognate spiritual meaning; at 
another time he may take his starting-point rather from an actual 
inner idea, or even from only a relatively inner one, in order to 
represent it by an image, or even merely to put one image in 
relation to another which has similar characteristics. 
From naive and unconscious symbolism this kind of connection 
is thus distinguished at once by the fact that now the subject kens 
both the inner essence of the meanings he has adopted as the con­
tent of his work and also the nature of the external phenomena 
which he uses in a comparative way for their better illustration, 
and he puts the two together consciously and intentionally on 
account of their discovered similarity. But the difference between 
the present stage and the sublime is to be sought in the fact that, 
on the one hand, the separation and juxtaposition of meaning and 
its concrete shape is expressly emphasized in the work of art itself 
in a lesser or greater degree; while, on the other hand, the sublime 
relation altogether disappears. For what is taken as content is no 
longer the Absolute itself but only some determinate and re­
stricted meaning; and within its intended severance from its 
representation in an image a relation is set up which, involving 
a conscious comparison, does what unconscious symbolism aimed at 
in its own way. 
Yet, for the content [here], the Absolute, the one Lord, can 
no longer be taken as the meaning because, simply by the sunder­
ing of concrete existence from the concept [or meaning] and by 
the juxtaposition of the two (even if by way of comparison), fini­
tude is at once established fact for the artistic consciousness in so 
far as that consciousness lays hold of this [comparative] form as 
the final and proper one. In sacred poetry, on the contrary, God 
alone gives meaning to all things which, compared with him, prove 
to be transient and null. But if the meaning is to find its like 
image and similitude in what is restricted in itself and finite, then 
it must itself be of a restricted kind, all the more so as, at the stage 
now occupying our attention, the image (of course external to 
its content and chosen by the poet only arbitrarily) is regarded 
precisely as relatively adequate on account of its similarities to the 
content. Therefore in the comparative form of art there remains 
of sublimity only the one trait that each image, instead of giving 
shape to the meaning and the topic in hand in a reality adequate 
to them, is to afford only an image and similitude of them. 

38o 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
Therefore this sort of symbolizing as a fundamental type of 
whole works of art remains a subordinate species. For the shape 
consists only in the description of an immediate perceptible 
existent or occurrence from which the meaning is to be expressly 
distinguished. But in works of art which are formed from one 
conception and in their configuration are one undivided whole, 
such comparison can assert itself, if at all, only incidentally as an 
adornment and accessory, as is the case, e.g., in genuine products 
of classical and romantic art. 
If therefore we regard this whole stage as a unification of the 
two previous stages, in that it comprises both that separation 
between meaning and external reality (which was the basis of 
the sublime) and also a concrete phenomenon's hinting at a related 
universal meaning (which we saw emerging in the symbol proper), 
still this unification is not a higher form of art at all but rather 
a clear but superficial [mode of] treatment which, limited in its 
content and more or less prosaic in its form, deserts the mysteriously 
fermenting depth of the symbol proper, and strays down from 
the height of sublimity into common consciousness. 
Now as concerns the more specific division of this sphere, the 
distinction involved in comparison presupposes the meaning by 
itself and relates to it, and in contrast with it, a sensuous or pic­
torial shape; in this situation it is almost always found that the 
meaning is taken as the chief thing and the configuration as a mere 
cloak and externality; yet at the same time a further distinction 
appears, namely that now the one, now the other of the two sides is 
selected first and so a beginning is made from that. In this way 
either the configuration exists as an explicitly external, immediate, 
natural event or phenomenon, and then a universal meaning is 
produced from it, or the meaning is procured otherwise inde­
pendently and only then is a configuration for it selected externally 
from somewhere or other. 
In this connection we may distinguish two chief stages: 
(a) In the first the concrete phenomenon, whether drawn from 
nature or from human affairs, events, and actions, constitutes the 
starting-point, but also the important and essential thing for the 
representation. It is selected indeed only on account of the more 
general meaning which it contains and alludes to, and it is only 
so far explained as the aim of illustrating this meaning in a related 
single situation or event demands; but the comparison between the 

S Y M BO L I S M  OF THE COMPARAT I V E  ART-FORM 
381 
universal meaning and the individual case is a subjective activity 
and it is not yet expressly revealed, and the whole represen­
tation will not be just an embellishment on a work independent 
without this adornment, but still appears with the pretension of 
serving on its own account as a whole. The kinds of thing that 
belong to this context are fable, parable, apologue, proverb, and 
metamorphoses. 
(b) At the second stage, on the other hand, the meaning is the 
first thing in the artist's mind, and its concrete illustration in an 
image is only something accessory and an accompaniment to it 
which in itself has no independence at all but appears as entirely 
subordinate to the meaning, so that now the subjective caprice of 
comparison, a caprice seeking precisely this and no other image, 
comes more clearly to light. This mode of representation cannot for 
the most part amount to independent works of art and must there­
fore content itself with annexing its forms, as purely incidental, 
to other artistic productions. As the chief kinds of thing at this 
stage riddle, allegory, metaphor, image, and simile may be 
enumerated. 
(c) Thirdly and lastly, we may by way of appendix make men­
tion of didactic and descriptive poetry. For in these kinds of poetry 
there are explicitly made independent (a) the mere disclosure of 
the general nature of objects as the poet's mind grasps it in the 
clarity of his intelligence, and (b) the depicting of its concrete 
appearance. Thus is developed the complete separation of the two 
sides whose unification and genuine mutual formation alone makes 
possible the production of genuine works of art. 
Now the separation of the two factors in the work of art implies 
that the different forms which have their place in this whole 
comparative sphere belong almost always solely to the art of speech, 
since poetry alone can express such a rendering of independence 
to both meaning and shape, while it is the task of the visual arts to 
exhibit in the outward shape as such its inner being. 
A. C O MP A R I S O N S  O R I G I N A T I N G  FROM THE 
EXTERNAL O B J E C T  
With the different kinds of poetry or prose to be allocated to this 
first stage of the comparative art-form we find ourselves every 
time in a perplexity, and we have great trouble if we undertake 

382 
I I. I. THE S Y M BO L I C  FORM OF ART 
to arrange them in definite chief species. There are subordinate 
hybrid kinds, I mean, which do not characterize any purely 
necessary aspect of art. In general, therefore, it is the same in 
aesthetics as it is in the natural sciences with certain classes of 
animals or other natural phenomena. In both spheres the difficulty 
lies in the fact that it is the very Concept of nature and art which 
partitions itself and posits its differentiations. As the differentia­
tions of the Concept, they are now the differentiations which are 
also truly adequate to the Concept, and therefore conceivable; but 
hybrid transitional stages will not fit into these because they are 
just merely defective forms which leave one chief stage without 
being able to attain the following one. This is not the fault of the 
Concept;1 and if we wished to take, as the basis of division and 
classification, such hybrids instead of the moments of the Concept 
of the thing at issue, then what is precisely inadequate to the 
Concept would be regarded as the adequate mode of its develop­
ment. The true classification, however, may proceed only out of 
the true Concept, and hybrid productions can only find their place 
where the proper explicitly stable forms begin to dissolve and pass 
over into others. This is the case here in relation to the symbolic 
form of art, as we have pursued it. 
But the kinds indicated belong to the praeambula or the sym­
bolic form of art because they are generally imperfect and there­
fore a mere search for true art; this search does contain the 
ingredients for a genuine mode of configuration, yet it views them 
only in their finitude, separation, and mere relation, and so it 
remains subordinate. Therefore when we speak here of fable, 
apologue, parable, etc., we have not to discuss these kinds as if 
they belonged to poetry as their art distinct alike from the visual 
arts and from music, but only in the relation which they have to 
the general forms of art; their specific character can be elucidated 
only from this relation, and not from the essential nature of the 
proper species of poetic art, namely, epic, lyric, and dramatic. 
We will articulate these kinds of art with more precision by 
dealing first with fable, then with parable, apologue, and proverb, 
and finally by considering metamorphoses. 
1 but of Nature, Hegel would add. In nature everything is external to every­
thing else, e.g. in parts of space or moments of time. Thus nature is powerless to 
embody without remainder the determinations or differentiations of the Concept, 
or categories of thought, since these are not external to one another in the same 
sense. 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
383 
1. Fable 
Since in this chapter we have always spoken so far only of the 
formal side of the relation between an expressed meaning and its 
shape, we have now to specify the content which proves fitting for 
this present mode of configuration. 
We have already seen that, in contrast to sublimity, at the present 
stage there is no longer any question of illustrating the Absolute 
and One in its undivided might by way of the nullity and insig­
nificance of created things; on the contrary, we are now at the stage 
of the finitude of consciousness and therefore of the finitude of 
content too. If conversely we turn our attention to the symbol 
strictly so-called, one aspect of which the comparative art-form 
too was to adopt, then the inner element which, as we have already 
seen in Egyptian symbolism, appears over against the hitherto 
always immediate shape, i.e. the natural, is the spiritual. Now 
since that natural element is left and envisaged as independent, 
so the spiritual too is something determinate and finite, i.e. man 
and his finite aims; and the natural acquires a relationship, albeit 
a theoretical one, to these aims by providing signs and revelations 
with a bearing on man's weal and interest. The phenomena of 
nature, storm, the flight of birds, character of the entrails, etc., 
are now therefore taken in a quite different sense from the one 
they have in the views of the Parsis, Indians, or Egyptians. For 
them the Divine is made one with the natural in such a way that 
in nature man wanders to and fro in a world full of gods, and his 
own activity consists in producing this same identity in his work; 
the result then is that this activity, so far as it is appropriate to the 
being of the Divine in nature, appears itself as a revelation and 
production of the Divine in man. But when man is withdrawn 
into himself, and, divining his freedom, shuts himself into himself, 
he becomes an end in himself on his own account in his indivi­
duality; he acts, works, and labours according to his own will, he 
has a selfish life of his own and feels the essentiality of his aims in 
himself, and to them the natural has an external relation. Con­
sequently nature disperses around him and serves him, so that, 
in regard to the Divine, he does not win in nature a vision of the 
Absolute, but treats nature only as a means whereby the gods 
afford recognition of themselves with a view to the best outcome 
of his ends; this is because they unveil their will to the human 

384 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM OF ART 
spirit through the medium of nature and so let men elucidate their 
will. Here, that is to say, there is presupposed an identity of the 
Absolute and the natural, in which human aims are the chief thing. 
But this sort of symbolism does not yet belong to art; it remains 
religious. For the Vales undertakes this interpretation of natural 
events only, in the main, for practical ends, in the interest whether 
of single individuals in relation to particular plans or of the entire 
people in respect of their common enterprises. Whereas poetry 
has to recognize and express even practical situations and relations 
in a more general theoretical form. 
But what must be taken into account in this context is a natural 
phenomenon, an occurrence, containing a particular relation or an 
issue, which can be taken as a symbol for a universal meaning 
drawn from the sphere of human activity and doings, for an 
ethical doctrine, for a prudential maxim : in other words for a mean­
ing which has for its content a reflection on the way in which 
things go or should go in human affairs, i.e. in matters of the will. 
Here we no longer have the divine will revealing its inwardness to 
man by natural events and their religious interpretation. Instead 
there is an entirely commonplace course of natural occurrences ; 
from its detailed representation there can be abstracted, in a way 
we can understand, an ethical maxim, a warning, a doctrine, 
a prudential rule, and it is presented for the sake of this reflection 
and displayed to contemplation. 
This is the setting which we may ascribe here to the fables of 
Aesop. 
(a) Aesop's fables, that is to say, in their original form, are 
such an interpretation of a natural relation or occurrence between 
single natural things in general, especially between animals, whose 
activities spring from the same vital needs which move men as 
living beings. This relation or occurrence, taken in its more general 
characteristics, is therefore of such a kind that it can occur in the 
sphere of human life too, and only by its bearing on this does it 
acquire significance for man. 
In keeping with this definition, the genuine fable of Aesop is the 
representation of some situation or other in animate and inanimate 
nature, or of an event in the animal world not devised capriciously, 
as may be supposed, but taken as it actually is in the world and 
truly observed ; and then it is so recounted that there may be 
drawn from it a general lesson related to human existence and more 

SYMBOL I S M  O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
385 
particularly to its practical side, to prudence and morality in action. 
The first requirement is consequently to be sought in the fact that 
the specific case which is to supply the so-called moral shall not be 
merely fabricated, and especially that it shall not be fabricated in 
a way contradicting similar phenomena actually existent in nature. 
Secondly, and more particularly, the narrative must report the 
case not in its universality (which would make it typical of every 
happening in external reality) but according to its concrete indi­
viduality and as an actual event. 
This original form of the fable gives to it, thirdly and lastly, the 
maximum of naivete, because the aim of teaching and consequently 
the emphasis on general and useful meanings appears only . as 
something arising later and not as what was intended from the 
beginning. Thus the most attractive of what are called Aesop's 
fables are those which correspond with the above definition and 
which relate actions-if you like to use that word-or relations 
and events which (a} have animal instinct as their basis, or 
(b) express some other natural relationship, or (c) in general, 
actually occur and are not merely put together by some capricious 
fancy. But thus it is then easily seen that the fabula docet attached 
to Aesop's fables in their present-day form1 either makes the 
representation flat or frequently is out of place so that often it 
is rather the opposite lesson that can be drawn, or many other 
better ones. 
A few examples may be cited here to illustrate this proper con­
ception of Aesop's fables. 
For example, an oak and a reed stand before a stormy wind; the 
weak reed is only bent, the strong oak breaks. This is something 
which has occurred often enough in a violent storm; interpreted 
morally, there is an unbending man of high .station contrasted with 
a man of lower degree who in adverse circumstances can preserve 
himself by pliancy, while the other is destroyed by his stubborn­
ness and haughtiness. 
A similar case is the fable, preserved by Phaedrus,2 of the 
1 i.e. and missing in their original form. But o ,..aeoĳ 8"1>.oi (fabula docet) is in 
the Greek text. Hegel, however, regarded these words as 'clearly a later addition, 
and often a very perverse one' (Lasson, p. 46). Aesop for him was originally 
a teller of tales who did not explicitly ascribe any obvious moral point to them. 
• Not, as Mr. Osmaston thinks, Plato's dialogue of that name, but the fabulist 
who, under the early Roman Empire, published five books of fables, some drawn 
from Aesop. See his Appendix, fable xii, for this story of the swallows. 

386 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
swallows. With other birds the swallows look on while a plough­
man sows flax out of which the cord is woven for bird-snaring. 
The swallows, with their foresight, fly away; the other birds are 
incredulous; they remain in their own nests without a care and are 
caught. Here too it is an actual natural phenomenon which is the 
basis. It is well known that in autumn swallows migrate to more 
southerly regions, and therefore are not there when birds are 
trapped. The like can be said about the fable of the bat which is 
despised by day and at night-time because it belongs neither to the 
one nor to the other. 
To such prosaic actual events a more general interpretation is 
given in relation to human affairs, just as even now some pious 
people can still draw from everything that happens an edifying 
and useful moral. Yet in this matter it is not necessary for the actual 
natural phenomenon to leap to the eyes every time. In the fable 
of the fox and the raven, 1 for instance, the actual fact is not to be 
recognized at a first glance, although it is not missing altogether; 
for it is the manner of ravens and crows to begin to caw when they 
see strange objects, men or animals, moving before them. Similar 
natural circumstances underlie the fable of the briar which tears 
the wool off the passer-by or wounds the fox that looks for pro­
tection in it; or the fable of the husbandman who warms a snake 
at his bosom, etc. Other incidents are represented which may also 
occur among animals; in the first fable of Aesop, e.g., the eagle 
devours the fox's cubs; later he snatches entrails from a sacrificial 
pyre and along with them a live coal; and then the coal burns the 
eagle's nest. [The eaglets fall out and the fox eats them.] Other 
fables, finally, contain traits drawn from ancient myths, like the 
fable2 of the beetle, the eagle, and Zeus, where there is presented 
' The fox sees a raven high up on a tree eating cheese which it has stolen. 
The fox calls up that it would like to hear the raven's lovely voice. Flattered, the 
raven caws, drops the cheese from its mouth, and the fox eats it (Phaedrus, 
i. IJ). 
• For further remarks on this fable (no. 223 in the Tauchnitz edition), see 
below, p. 447· A hare pursued by an eagle takes refuge with a beetle and begs 
him to save him. The beetle begs the eagle not to carry off the suppliant, but the 
eagle hits the beetle and eats the hare, thereby sinning against Zeus the protector 
of suppliants. The beetle destroys the eagle's eggs until, to protect the next 
clutch, the eagle lays its eggs on Zeus's lap. The beetle makes a ball of dung 
and deposits it there also. Zeus shakes it off and the eggs with it. Eventually, so 
that the race of eagles may not die out, Zeus arranges that eagles shall lay their 
eggs at a time when there are no beetles. 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE C OMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
387 
the circumstance of natural history-! leave aside the question 
whether this is accurate or not-that eagles and beetles lay their 
eggs at different times ; but there is perceptible too what is ob­
viously the traditional importance of the scarab, which yet appears 
here already drawn into the sphere of the comic, as has occurred 
still more in Aristophanes.1 A complete settlement of the ques­
tion how many of these fables emanated from Aesop himself may 
be passed over here anyhow, because it is well known either that 
only a few of them, including, e.g., this fable of the beetle and 
the eagle, can be shown to be Aesop's, or that antiquity has 
been conferred on them generally so that they can be regarded as 
Aesop's. 
Aesop himself is said to have been a misshapen humpbacked 
slave; his home is transferred to Phrygia, i.e. to the country where 
the transition is made from immediate symbolism, and attach­
ment to nature, to the country in which man begins to apprehend 
the spiritual and his own self. In this situation Aesop does not 
regard animals and nature in general, as the Indians and Egyptians 
do, as something lofty and divine on their own account; he treats 
them, on the contrary, with prosaic eyes as something where 
circumstances serve only to picture human action and suffering. 
But yet his notions are only witty, without any energy of spirit 
or depth of insight and substantive vision, without poetry and 
philosophy. His views and doctrines prove indeed to be ingenious 
and clever, but there remains only, as it were, a subtle investigation 
of trifles. Instead of creating free shapes out of a free spirit, this 
investigation only sees some other applicable side in purely given 
and available materials, the specific instincts and impulses of 
animals, petty daily events; this is because Aesop does not dare to 
recite his doctrines openly but can only make them understood 
hidden as it were in a riddle which at the same time is always being 
solved. In the slave, prose begins, and so this entire species is 
prosaic too. 
Nevertheless, almost all peoples and ages have run through 
these old stories and, however much any nation, generally ac­
quainted with fables in its literature, may boast of possessing more 
fabulists, still their poems are mostly reproductions of these first 
notions, only translated into the taste of every age; and what these 
1 The beetle has an important part in his play Peace. 

388 
I I. I. THE S Y M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
fabulists have added to the inherited stock of stories is left far 
behind by these originals. 
(b) But we also find amongst Aesop's fables a number which in 
invention and execution are of great barrenness, but above all are 
told with the aim of teaching, so that animals or even gods are 
a mere cloak. Yet these fables are far from doing violence to the 
nature of animals, as has possibly been the case with modern 
writers ; as e.g. with Pfeffel's1 fables of one hamster which collected 
a stock in the autumn, a foresight neglected by another who there­
fore is to be reduced to beggary and hunger-or of a fox, blood­
hound, and lynx, where the story is that they came before Jupiter 
with their one-sided talents, cunning, keen smell, and sharp sight, 
in order to acquire an equal distribution of their natural gifts; 
after they consented to judgement the verdict is: 'The fox is 
made stupid, the bloodhound is no longer any use for hunting, 
the Argus lynx acquires a cataract.' That a hamster puts by no 
produce, that these three other animals fall into an accidental or 
natural equal division of their qualities, is absolutely contrary to 
nature and therefore wearisome. Thus better than these fables is 
the one of the ant and the grasshopper, better than this again is the 
one of the stag with glorious antlers and thin shanks. 
With the sense of such fables in mind, we have after all become 
accustomed in fables as such so to represent the lesson as the first 
thing that the occurrence related is itself merely a cloak and there­
fore an event purely fabricated for the purpose of the lesson. But 
such cloaks, especially when the incident described cannot possibly 
have occurred in the life of real animals, i.e. in accordance with 
their natural character, are extremely wearisome inventions, mean­
ing less than nothing. The ingenuity of a fable consists only in 
conferring on what already exists otherwise, and has a shape, a still 
more universal sense beyond what it has directly. 
Then further, presupposing that the essence of fable is only to 
be sought in the fact that animals act and speak instead of men, 
the question has been raised about what constitutes the attractive 
thing in this exchange. Yet nothing much attractive can lie in such 
clothing of men like animals, if it is supposed to be more than or 
different from something in a comedy played by apes and dogs, 
where on the contrary the contrast between the nature of animals 
1 K. Pfeffel, 1736-J809. See his Fabeln .
. . (Basle, 1783). 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE CO MPARAT IVE ART-FORM 
389 
as it appears on the stage and human action remains the sole 
interest apart from the spectacle of skilfulness in the training of 
the actors. Breitinger1 therefore cites the wonderful as the proper 
attraction. But in the original fables the appearance of animals 
speaking is not set forth as something unusual and wonderful; for 
this reason Lessing2 thinks that the introduction of animals affords 
a great advantage for the intelligibility and abbreviation of the 
exposition owing to our acquaintance with the characteristics of 
animals, with the cunning of the fox, the magnanimity of the lion, 
the voracity and brutality of the wolf-so that instead of abstrac­
tions, like cunning, magnanimity, etc., a definite picture comes at 
once before our minds. Yet this advantage alters nothing essential 
in the trivial circumstance of the mere cloak, and, on the whole, 
there is just the disadvantage of bringing animals on the scene in­
stead of men, because the animal form in that case always remains 
a mask which veils the meaning, so far as its intelligibility goes, 
quite as much as it explains it. 
The greatest fable of this kind, consequently, is the old story 
of Reynard the Fox,J but this is not strictly a fable at all. 
(c) As a third stage we may here append the following way of 
treating fable, but with it we are already beginning to go beyond 
the sphere of fable. The ingenuity of a fable lies generally in find­
ing, amongst the manifold phenomena of nature, cases which can 
serve as a support for general reflections on human action and 
behaviour, but in which animals and nature are not withdrawn 
from their own proper mode of existence. For the rest, however, 
the juxtaposition and relation of the so-called moral and the indivi­
dual case remains only a matter of caprice and subjective wit and 
is therefore in itself only a matter of joking. Now it is this aspect 
which appears explicitly at this third stage. The form of fable is 
adopted as a joke. In this vein Goethe has composed many charm­
ing and ingenious poems. In one, entitled Der Kliiffer [The Barker], 
he writes, for example, as follows: 'We ride in all directions on 
pleasure and on business, but the barking dog always comes behind 
us and yelps with all his power. So the Pomeranian from our kennel 
1 J. ]. Breitinger, Swiss writer, 1701-76. See his Critische Dichtkunst (Zurich 
and Leipzig, 1740), ch. 7· Goethe prohibited performing dogs on the Weimar 
stage. 
• In his Abhandlungen uber die Fabel, ii : Von dem Gebrauche der Tiere in 
der Fabel (On the Use of Animals in Fables). 
, See above, p. I 87, note :z. 

390 
I I. I. T H E  SYMBOLIC FORM O F  A RT 
constantly accompanies us and the loud sound of his bark proves 
only that we are riding.' 1 
But it is inherent in this class that the natural shapes used are 
presented in their proper character, as in Aesop's fables, and in 
their action and doings develop for us human situations, passions, 
and traits of character which have the closest affinity with those of 
animals. Reynard, just mentioned, is of this kind, but it is rather 
something of a fairy tale than a fable in the strict sense. The back­
ground is provided by an age of disorder and lawlessness, of 
wickedness, weakness, baseness, force and arrogance, of unbelief 
in religion, of only apparent rule and justice in secular matters, 
so that cunning, ingenuity, and selfishness carry off the victory 
over everything. This is the situation of the Middle Ages, de­
veloped as it was especially in Germany. Powerful vassals do show 
some respect to the King, but, at bottom, every one of them does 
what he likes, robs, murders, oppresses the weak, betrays the 
King, can gain the favours of the Queen, so that the whole country 
keeps together but only just. This is the human background; but 
it consists here not at all in an abstract proposition, but in a 
totality of situations and characters, and, on account of its wicked­
ness, it turns out to be appropriate for the animal nature in the 
furm of which it is unfolded. Therefore there is nothing disturbing 
when we find the human subject-matter quite openly transferred 
into the animal world, while the cloak does not appear, as might be 
thought, as a purely individual cognate case, but is released from 
this singularity and acquires a certain universality whereby it 
becomes clear to us that 'that's how things go generally in the 
world'. Now the droll feature lies in this cloak itself; the joke and 
jest is mingled with the bitter seriousness of the thing, since it 
brings human meanness before our eyes in the most excellent way 
in animal meanness and emphasizes even in the purely animal 
world a mass of the most entertaining traits and most appropriate 
stories, so that despite all harshness we have before us a joke, not 
bad and just intended, but one actual and seriously meant. 
2. Parable, Proverb, Apologue 
(a) Parable 
Parable has with fable the general affinity that it takes up events 
drawn from the sphere of ordinary life but attributes to them 
1 The 'barking dog' is a captious critic of some of Goethe's later work. 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE CO MPARATIVE ART- FORM 
391 
a deeper and more general meaning with the aim of making this 
meaning intelligible and perceptible through this occurrence, an 
everyday one if considered by itself. 
But at the same time parable is distinct from fable by reason of 
the fact that it looks for such occurrences not in nature and the 
animal world, but in human action and doings as everyone has 
them familiarly before his eyes; and the chosen individual case 
that at first sight appears trivial in its particularity, it enlarges into 
something of a more general interest by hinting at a deeper 
meaning. 
Consequently, in respect of the content, the scope and solid 
importance of the meanings may be enlarged and deepened, while, 
in respect of form, the subjective activity of deliberate comparison 
and the presentation of a general lesson begin to come into ap­
pearance in a higher degree likewise. 
As a parable, still bound up with a purely practical aim, we can 
regard the means used by Cyrus in order to incite the Persians to 
revolt (Herodotus, i. 126). He writes to the Persians to the effect 
that they are to betake themselves, equipped with sickles, to a 
specified place. There on the first day he made them set to with 
hard labour to make cultivable a field overgrown with thistles. 
But on the next day, after they had rested and bathed, he led them 
to a meadow and feasted them royally on meat and wine. Then 
when they had risen from the banquet, he asked them which day 
they had enjoyed most, yesterday or today. They all voted for 
today which had brought them nothing but good, whereas the day 
just past had been one of toil and exertion. Thereupon Cyrus 
exclaimed : 'If you will follow me, good days like today will be 
multiplied for you; but if you will follow me not, then prepare 
yourselves for innumerable labours like yesterday's.' 
Of a related kind, though of the deepest interest and broadest 
universality in their meanings, are the parables that we find in the 
Gospels. The parable of the sower [in all the Synoptics], for 
example, is a story in itself trivial in content, and it is important 
only because of the comparison with the doctrine of the Kingdom 
of Heaven. In these parables the meaning throughout is a religious 
doctrine to which the human occurrences in which it is represented 
are related in much the same way as man and animal are related in 
Aesop's fables, where the former constitutes the meaning of the 
latter. 

392 
I I. I. THE SYMBOL I C  FORM O F  ART 
Of an equal breadth of content is the familiar story of Boccaccio1 
which Lessing has used in Nathan for his parable of the three 
rings. Here too the story, taken independently, is entirely common­
place, but it points to a matter of the widest scope, the difference 
and the truth of the three religions, Jewish, Mohammedan, and 
Christian. Precisely the same is the case, to refer to the most 
recent publications in this sphere, with Goethe's parables. In the 
Cat made into a Pasty, for example, a bold cook, to show himself 
a hunter too, went off, but shot a tom-cat instead of a hare; never­
theless he set the cat before the company, dressed with plenty of in­
genious herbs-this is to be taken as a reference to Newton. The 
hash that the mathematician made of the science of physics is, to be 
sure, always something higher than a cat which a cook futilely sub­
stituted for a hare in a pasty!-These parables of Goethe's, like his 
poems written in the manner of fables, often have a jocular tone 
through which he wrote his soul free from the annoyances of life. 
(b) Proverbs 
A middle stage within this sphere is formed by the proverb. 
Amplified, that is to say, proverbs may be changed now into fables, 
now into apologues. They adduce an individual case which is 
drawn for the most part from day-to-day human life, but which is 
then to be taken in a universal meaning. For example: 'One hand 
washes the other' [i.e. one good turn deserves another]. Or 'Let 
everyone sweep the front of his own door' [i.e. mind your own 
business, or 'and then the village will be clean'], '\Vho digs a grave 
for another falls into it himself' [i.e. hoist with his own petard], 
'Roast me a sausage and I will slake your thirst' [i.e. one good turn 
deserves another]. To this class there also belong the aphorisms of 
which Goethe, to mention him again, has made a number in recent 
times with infinite grace and often of great depth. 
These are not comparisons where the universal meaning and the 
concrete phenomenon appear outside one another and contrasted 
with one another. The former is immediately expressed with the 
latter. 
(c) Apologue [or Moral Fable] 
The apologue, thirdly, may be regarded as a parable which does 
not use the individual case merely as a simile to illustrate a universal 
1 Decameron, first day, third story. Lessing's drama Nathan the Wise appeared 
in 1779. 

SYM BOLISM O F  'l'HE CO MPARATIVE ART-FORM 
393 
meaning but in this cloak itself brings out and expresses the 
universal maxim-since the maxim is actually contained in the 
individual case which yet is recounted as only an individual 
example. Taken in this sense Goethe's God and the Bayadere1 is to 
be called an apologue. We find here the Christian story of the 
repentant Magdalene cloaked in Indian modes of thinking: the 
Bayadere shows the same humility, the like strength of love and 
faith; God puts her to the proof, which she completely sustains, 
and now her exaltation and reconciliation follow.-In the apologue 
the narrative may be so conducted that its conclusion provides the 
lesson itself without any mere comparison, as, e.g., in the Treasure 
Seeker: 'Work by day, guests at night, arduous weeks, joyful 
festivals, Be thy future talisman.' 
3· Metamorphoses 
The third class with which we have to deal, in contrast to fable, 
parable, proverb, and apologue, is metamorphoses. They are 
indeed of a symbolic, mythological kind, but at the same time they 
expressly oppose the natural to the spiritual, since they give to 
a natural existent, a rock, animal, flower, spring, the meaning of 
being a degradation and a punishment of spiritual existents, e.g. 
of Philomela, the Pierides, Narcissus, Arethusa, who through a 
false step, a passion, a crime, fall into infinite guilt or an endless 
grief, whereby the freedom of spiritual life is lost to them and 
they have become mere natural existents. 
Thus on the one hand the natural is not treated here purely 
externally and prosaically as a mere hill, spring, tree, etc., but there 
is given to it an import belonging to an action or event springing 
from the spirit. The rock is not just stone but Niobe who weeps 
for her children.2 On the other hand this human deed is guilt of 
some sort and the metamorphosis into a purely natural pheno­
menon is to be taken as a degradation of the spiritual. 
We must therefore clearly distinguish these metamorphoses of 
1 Indian female dancer. This and the Treasure Seeker are two of Goethe's 
Ballads. 
2 For Philomela and the Pierides, see below, pp. 449-51 ,  a further treatment 
of metamorphoses. Narcissus was punished by Aphrodite for rejecting the love 
of Echo and was changed into a flower; Arethusa fled from the passion of a 
river god and was changed into a fountain by Artemis ; Niobe boasted so 
much about her numerous children that Apollo and Artemis slew them all. 
Niobe was changed into stone and still wept for her children in streams trickling 
down the rock. 

394 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
gods and human individuals into natural objects from uncon­
scious symbolism proper. In Egypt (a) the Divine is immediately 
intuited in the closed rich mysteriousness of the inwardness of 
animal life, and (b) the symbol proper is a natural shape directly 
coincident with a wider cognate meaning, although this shape is 
not to constitute an actual adequate existence of the meaning, 
because unconscious symbolism is an outlook not yet liberated 
into a spiritual one, whether in form or content. The metamor­
phoses, on the contrary, make the essential distinction between the 
natural and the spiritual, and they form in this respect the transi­
tion from symbolic mythology to mythology strictly so-called­
mythology, i.e., if we so understand it that it starts in its myths 
from a concrete natural existent, the sun, the sea, rivers, trees, 
fertility, or the earth, but then expressly segregates this purely 
natural element; for it extracts the inner content of the natural 
phenomenon and artistically individualizes it, as a spiritualized 
power, into gods with a human shape alike in mind and body. 
In this way Homer and Hesiod first gave the Greeks their mytho­
logy,! not as merely significant of the gods, not as an exposition 
of moral, physical, theological, or speculative doctrines, but as 
mythology pure and simple, the beginning of spiritual religion in 
a human configuration. 
In Ovid's Metamorphoses, apart from the quite modern treat­
ment of the mythical, the most heterogeneous material is mixed up 
together. Apart from those metamorphoses which could be inter­
preted generally as just one mode of mythical representation, the 
specific viewpoint of this form is especially emphasized in those 
stories in which such figures [e.g. the wolf or the cat] as are usually 
taken to be symbolical or already even to be entirely mythical, 
appear transformed into metamorphoses, and what otherwise was 
united is brought into the opposition between meaning and shape 
and into the transition from one to the other. So, e.g., the Phrygian 
and Egyptian symbol of the wolf is so torn adrift [in Greek mytho­
logy] from its indwelling meaning that the meaning is referred 
to a previous existence, if not of the sun, then of a king, and the 
vulpine existence is represented as a consequence of a deed in that 
human existence.2 So too in the song of the Pierides the Egyptian 
1 This is derived from Herodotus, ii. 53· 
• This is a reference to Lycaon, King of Arcadia, who set human flesh before 
Zeus and was changed into a wolf. See a longer treatment of the story, below, 
pp. 448-9. 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
395 
gods, the ram and the cat, are represented as animal shapes in 
which the mythical Greek gods, Zeus, Aphrodite, etc., have hidden 
in fear. But the Pierides themselves are punished for daring to 
enter the lists against the Muses with their singing and are changed 
into magpies. 
On the other hand, on account of the more precise character 
implicit in the content constituting their meaning, metamorphoses 
must all the same be distinguished from fable. In the fable the 
connection between the moral maxim and the natural event is 
a harmless1 association which does not present in the natural 
occurrence the importance of being merely natural in distinction 
from spirit and so introduces this important distinction only into 
the meaning [of the fable]. Nevertheless, there are also single 
fables of Aesop which with slight alteration would become 
metamorphoses, as e.g. Fable 4-2z of the bat, the thorn, and the 
gull ; their instincts are explained from misfortune in earlier 
undertakings. 
With this we have gone through this first sphere of the com­
parative art-form, which starts from present reality and the concrete 
phenomenon, in order to go on from there to a further meaning 
illustrated therein. 
B .  C O M PA R I S O N S  W H I C H  S TA R T  F R O M  
THE M E A N I N G  
If the separation of meaning and shape is the consciously pre­
supposed form within which the relation of the two is to proceed, 
then, granted the independence of one side as well as of the other, 
a beginning can and must be made not only from what exists 
externally but just as much, conversely, from what is present 
internally, namely from general ideas, reflections, feelings, or 
maxims. For this inner element is, like the pictures of external 
things, something present to our minds and in its independence of 
1 In a metamorphosis the connection is harmful because it involves a 'degrada­
tion' of the spiritual. 
• 124 in the Tauchnitz edition. The three decide to go into business together. 
The bat borrows silver, the thorn contributes clothing and the gull bronze (or 
a halfpenny). They sail away together; the boat sinks ; the three are saved, but 
they have lost their goods. Thereafter the bat, fearing its creditors, goes out only 
at night; the gull keeps to the sea-shore, hoping that its bronze (or coin) may 
be jetsam; the thorn keeps seizing the clothes of passers-by in the hope of 
recognizing its own clothing. 
8263716 
0 

396 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
the external originates with itself. Now if the meaning is in this 
way the starting-point, then the expression, the reality, appears as 
the means, drawn from the concrete world for the sake of making 
the meaning, as the abstract content, definitely picturable, visible, 
and perceptible. 
But, as we saw earlier [in the preamble to this chapter], both 
sides being mutually indifferent to one another, the connection 
into which both are brought is not one in which they belong to 
one another by absolute necessity. Therefore their bearing on one 
another, not lying objectively in the nature of the case, is something 
manufactured subjectively which no longer conceals this subjective 
character but makes it recognizable through the manner of the 
representation. The absolute shape has the connection of content 
and form, soul and body, as concrete ensoulment, as the unifica­
tion of both, grounded absolutely in the soul as in the body, in the 
content as in the form. Here, however, the separatedness of the 
two sides is the presupposition and therefore their association is 
(a) a purely subjective enlivenment of the meaning through a 
shape external to it and (b) an interpretation of a real existent 
equally subjective through its bearing on the other ideas, feelings, 
and thoughts of the spirit. Therefore, as it turns out, what 
especially appears in these forms is the subjective art of the poet 
as maker, and in complete works of art, especially in this aspect, 
what belongs to the meaning and its necessary configuration can 
be distinguished from what the poet has added as decoration and 
adornment. These easily recognizable additions, especially images, 
similes, allegories, and metaphors, are the things for which we can 
commonly hear him praised to the skies; and part of the praise is 
supposed to redound to the sharp eyes and astuteness, as it were, 
which have made him out and noticed his peculiar subjective 
inventions. Yet the forms that belong here, as has been said 
already, should only appear in genuine works of art as mere 
accessories, although we find in older books1 on poetry that these 
incidental things in particular are treated as the very ingredients 
of poetic activity. 
But while at first the two sides which are to be connected are 
of course indifferent to one another, still, for the justification of the 
subject's relating and comparing, the shape must in its make-up 
include in a cognate way the same circumstances and properties 
1 Hegel probably has Aristotle's Poetics in mind, especially 1458"9. 

SYMB O L I S M  O F  THE C OMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
397 
which the meaning has in itself. This is because the apprehension 
of this similarity is the only basis for associating the meaning with 
precisely this specific shape and illustrating the former by the 
latter. 
Finally, since a beginning is not made from the concrete 
phenomenon from which something universal can be abstracted, 
but conversely from this universal itself which is to be mirrored in 
an image, it follows that the meaning can now shine out actually 
as the proper end and dominate the image which is its means of 
illustration. 
As the more detailed sequence in which we can discuss the 
particular kinds to be mentioned in this sphere, the following may 
be indicated: 
First, as the stage most related to the last one, we have to discuss 
the riddle. 
Secondly, allegory, in which it is especially the domination of the 
abstract meaning over the external shape that appears. 
Thirdly, comparison proper, namely metaphor, image, and 
simile. 
1. Riddle 
The symbol, strictly so-called, is i'nherently enigmatical because 
the external existent by means of which a universal meaning is to 
be brought to our contemplation still remains different from the 
meaning that it has to represent, and it is therefore open to 
doubt in what sense the shape has to be taken. But the riddle 
belongs to conscious symbolism and it is distinguished at once 
from the symbol, strictly so-called, by reason of the fact that the 
meaning is clearly and completely known to the inventor of the 
riddle; and the shape that veils it, through which the meaning 
is to be guessed, is therefore chosen deliberately for this semi­
veiling. Symbols in the strict sense are, both before and after, 
unsolved problems, while the riddle is absolutely solved, so that 
Sancho Panza says quite rightly after all: 'I would far rather be 
given the solution first and the riddle afterwards.' 1 
(a) In inventing a riddle, that is to say, the first step from which 
a start is made is the known sense or meaning of it. 
(b) But, secondly, individual traits of character and properties 
1 The remark is in character, but I am not the only person unable to find it 
in Don Quixote. 

398 
I I. I. T H E  S Y M B O L I C  F O R M  O F  A R T  
drawn from the otherwise known external world and, as in nature 
and in externality generally, lying there scattered outside one 
another, are associated together in a disparate and therefore 
striking way. Therefore they lack a subject embracing them to­
gether [as predicates] into a unity and their deliberate concatena­
tion and connection one with another has as such absolutely no 
sense; although, on the other hand, they do all the same point to 
a unity in relation to which even the apparently most hetero­
geneous traits nevertheless acquire sense and meaning again. 
(c) This unity, the subject of those scattered predicates, is 
precisely the simple idea, the word that solves the riddle, and the 
problem of the riddle is to discover or guess it out of this apparently 
confused disguise. The riddle in this respect is the conscious wit 
of symbolism which puts to the test the wit of ingenuity and 
the flexibility in combining things, and its mode of representation 
is self-destructive because it leads to the guessing of the riddle. 
Riddle therefore belongs especially to the art of speech, though 
it may find a place in the visual arts too, in architecture, horticul­
ture, and painting. Its appearance in history lies principally in the 
East, in the intervening and transitional period between more 
obtuse symbolism and more conscious wisdom and generalization. 
Whole peoples and periods have delighted in such problems. Even 
in the Middle Ages in Arabia and Scandinavia, and in the German 
poetry of the singing contests at the Wartburg, e.g., it plays a great 
part. In modern times it has sunk down more or less to conversa­
tion and mere witticisms and jokes in social gatherings. 
To the riddle we may append that infinitely wide field of witty 
and striking notions which are developed as plays on words, and 
epigrams in relation to some given situation, event, or topic. Here 
on the one side we have some indifferent object, on the other side 
a subjective notion which unexpectedly, with remarkable subtlety, 
emphasizes one aspect, one relation, which previously did not 
appear in the topic as it was and sets the topic in a new light as 
a result of the new significance given to it. 
2. Allegory 
The opposite of the riddle, in this sphere which begins from the 
universality of the meaning, is allegory. It too does try to bring 
the specific qualities of a universal idea nearer to our vision through 
cognate qualities of sensuously concrete objects; yet it does so not 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE COM PARATIVE ART-FORM 
399 
by way of the semi-veiling and the enigmas of the riddle, but 
precisely with the converse aim of producing the most complete 
clarity, so that the external thing of which the allegory avails itself 
must be as transparent as possible for the meaning which is to 
appear in it. 
(a) The first concern of allegory therefore consists in personify­
ing, and therefore conceiving as a subject, general abstract situa­
tions or qualities belonging to both the human and the natural 
world, e.g. religion, love, justice, discord, glory, war, peace, 
spring, summer, autumn, winter, death, fame. But this subjectivity 
in neither its content nor its external shape is truly in itself a subject 
or individual; on the contrary, it remains the abstraction of a 
universal idea which acquires only the empty form of subjectivity 
and is to be called a subject only, as it were, in a grammatical 
sense. An allegorical being, however much it may be given a 
human shape, does not attain the concrete individuality of a Greek 
god or of a saint or of some other actual person, because, in order 
that there may be congruity between subjectivity and the abstract 
meaning which it has, the allegorical being must make subjectivity 
so hollow that all specific individuality vanishes from it. It is there­
fore rightly said of allegory that it is frosty and cold and that, 
owing to the intellectual abstractness of its meanings, it is even in 
its invention rather an affair of the intellect than of concrete 
intuition and the heartfelt depth of imagination. Poets like Virgil 
are therefore especially concerned with allegorical beings, because 
they cannot create individual gods like the Homeric ones. 
(b) But, secondly, the meanings of allegories are, in their 
abstractness, at the same time determinate and they are recogniz­
able only owing to this determinacy. The result is that now the 
expression of such particular characteristics does not lie im­
mediately in the idea which at first is only personified in general, 
and therefore it must enter on its own account alongside the 
subject as its explanatory predicates. This separation of subject and 
predicate, universal and particular, is the second aspect of frosti­
ness in allegory. Now the illustration of the determinate qualities 
to be indicated is drawn from the expressions, effects, consequences 
which come into appearance through the meaning once it acquires 
reality in concrete existence, or from the instruments and means 
of which it avails itself in its actual realization. Battle and war, for 
example, are indicated by armed forces, side-arms, cannon, drums, 

400 
I I. I. THE SY M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
colours; seasons by flowers and fruits which flourish above all 
under the favourable influence of spring, summer, and autumn. 
Such things, again, may also have purely symbolical bearings, as 
justice is brought to our ken by scales and blindfolding, death by 
the hour-glass and scythe. But since the meaning is the dominant 
thing in allegory and its closer illustration is subordinate to it just 
as abstractly as the meaning itself is a pure abstraction, the shape 
of such definite things acquires here only the value of a mere 
attribute. 
(c) In this way allegory is in both aspects bleak; its general 
personification is empty, the specific externality is only a sign, 
meaningless iftaken by itself; and the centre [the idea personified] 
which ought to have unified the multiplicity of attributes does not 
have the force of a subjective unity shaping itself and relating itself 
to itself in its real existence, but becomes a purely abstract form, 
and its filling with such particular things, degraded to the position 
of attributes, remains for it something external. Consequently 
allegory is not to be taken really seriously with the independence 
into which it personifies its abstractions and their indication, with 
the result that to what is independent absolutely the form of an 
allegorical being should properly not be given. The Dike of the 
Greeks, for example, is not to be called an allegory; she is universal 
necessity, eternal justice, the universal powerful person, the 
absolutely substantial basis of the relations of nature and spiritual 
life, and therefore herself the absolutely independent being whom 
individuals, gods as well as men, have to follow. F. von Schlegel, 
as was remarked above, has observed that every work of art must 
be an allegory. Yet this saying is true only if it is to mean nothing 
but that every work of art must contain a universal idea and an 
inherently true meaning. Whereas what we have here called alle­
gory is a mode of representation subordinate in both form and 
content, only imperfectly corresponding to the essence of art. 
For every human event and imbroglio, every relationship, etc., has 
some sort of universality in itself which can also be extracted as 
universality; but such abstractions we have otherwise already in 
our minds, and with them in their prosaic universality and their 
external indication, to which alone allegory attains, art has nothing 
to do. 
Winckelmann too wrote an immature work on allegory1 in which 
1 V ersuch einer Allegorie, besonders fur die Kunst ( 1766 ). 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE CO MPARATI V E  A RT-FORM 
401 
he assembles a mass of allegories, but for the most part he con­
fuses symbol and allegory. 
Amongst the particular arts within which allegorical representa­
tions occur, poetry is wrong in taking refuge in such media, whereas 
sculpture cannot in the main be managed without them. This is 
specially true of modern sculpture which in many ways admits of 
being portraiture and so, for the closer indication of the multiple 
relations in which the represented individual stands, must avail 
itself of allegorical figures. On Blucher's memorial, erected here in 
Berlin, we see the genius of fame and victory, but when it comes 
to the general treatment of the war of liberation, the allegorical is 
avoided by a series of individual scenes as, e.g., the departure of 
the army, its march, and its victorious return. But on the whole in 
portrait-statues sculptors have been content to surround the simple 
statues with allegories and to multiply them. The ancients, on the 
other hand, rather availed themselves on sarcophagi, e.g., of 
general mythological representations of sleep, death, etc.1 
Allegory in general belongs less to ancient art than to the 
romantic art of the Middle Ages, even if as allegory it is not 
properly anything romantic. This frequent occurrence of allegorical 
treatment in the medieval epoch is to be explained in the following 
way. On the one side the Middle Ages had for their content par­
ticular individuals with their subjective aims of love and honour, 
with their vows, pilgrimages, and adventures. The variety of these 
numerous individuals and events provides imagination with a wide 
scope for inventing and developing accidental and capricious col­
lisions and their resolution. But, on the other side, over against the 
varied secular adventures, there stands the universal element in the 
relations and situations of life. This universal is not individualized 
r This treatment of allegory is made needlessly obscure by the vagueness, and 
sometimes the ambiguity, of such terms as 'universal idea', 'qualities', 'particular 
characteristics'. The 'universal idea' is the basic conception (e.g. justice) under­
lying the allegorical work. But this 'idea' is also called a 'quality'. Justice, e.g., 
is represented as a woman blindfolded and holding scales. She is not an indivi· 
dual woman, or genuinely a 'subject' or person, but only a generalized allegorical 
figure, and so is not living but cold. What is to be allegorized, however, has 
'particular characteristics' (also unfortunately called 'determinate qualities') and 
these cannot be 'expressed' (or treated artistically) in the allegorical generalized 
figure itself, which is completely determined by the 'idea' (or 'quality') allego­
rized, and so they have to be treated alongside it as its attributes. Blucher's 
monument, by C. D. Rauch, erected in r8z6, consists of a figure of Blucher on 
a pedestal surrounded by reliefs illustrating some of his campaigns and con­
taining allegorical figures of victory. 

402 
I I. I. THE S Y M B O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
into independent gods as it was with the ancients, and therefore it 
appears readily and naturally explicitly sundered in its univer­
sality alongside those particular personalities and their particular 
shapes and events. Now if the artist has an idea of such universali­
ties, and if he wishes to emphasize their universality as such and 
not to clothe them in the accidental form just described, there is 
nothing left to him but the allegorical manner of representation. 
This happens too in the religious sphere. Mary, Christ, the acts 
and fates of the Apostles, the saints with their penances and 
martyrdoms are, it is true, here again quite definite individuals; 
but Christianity is equally concerned with universal spiritual 
things which cannot be embodied in the definite character of 
living and actual persons because they should be represented 
precisely as universal relationships like love, faith, and hope. In 
general the truths and dogmas of Christianity are independently 
familiar as religious, and one chief interest even of poetry consists 
in this, that these doctrines shall appear as universal doctrines and 
that the truth shall be known and believed as universal truth. 
But in that case the concrete representation must remain sub­
ordinate and indeed external to the content, and allegory is the 
form which satisfies this need in the easiest and most appropriate 
way. In this sense Dante has much that is allegorical in his Divine 
Comedy. So there, e.g., theology appears fused with the picture of 
his beloved, Beatrice. But this personification hovers (and this 
constitutes its beauty) between allegory proper and a transfigura­
tion of his youthful beloved. He saw her for the first time when he 
was nine years old; she seemed to him to be the daughter, not of 
a mortal man, but of God; his fiery Italian nature conceived a 
passion for her which was never again extinguished. When it had 
awakened in him the genius of poetry, then, after the early death 
of his dearest love had lost her for him, he put into the chief work 
of his life this marvellous memorial of, as it were, this inner 
subjective religion of his heart. 
3· Metaphor, Image, Simile 
After riddle and allegory the third sphere is the figurative in 
general. The riddle still conceals the explicitly known meaning, 
and the chief thing was still clothing the meaning in related though 
heterogeneous and far-fetched ways. Allegory, on the other hand, 
made the clarity of the meaning so very much the sole dominating 

SYMBOL I S M  O F  THE COMPARAT IVE A RT-FORM 
403 
end that personification and its attributes appear degraded into 
purely external signs. Now the figurative unites the clarity of the 
allegorical with the pleasantry of the riddle. The meaning clearly 
confronting our minds is illustrated in the shape of some cognate 
external expression, yet so that thereby no problems arise which 
have first to be deciphered; what does arise is a figurative ex­
pression through which the envisaged meaning shines in perfect 
clarity and at once makes plain what it is. 
(a) Metaphor 
The first point concerning metaphor is that it is to be taken as 
implicitly already a simile, because it expresses the meaning, clear 
in itself, in a similar and comparable phenomenon of concrete 
reality. But in comparison as such both the sense proper and the 
image are specifically separated from one another, while this 
cleavage, though present implicitly, is not yet posited, in metaphor. 
On this account Aristotle1 distinguished comparison from metaphor 
long ago by pointing out that in the former an 'as' is added, while 
it is missing in the latter. The metaphorical expression, that is, 
names only one side, the image; but in the connection in which 
the image is used, the meaning proper which is intended is so 
near the surface that it is immediately given at the same time, as 
it were without direct separation from the image. When, e.g., 
we hear 'the springtime of these cheeks' or a 'sea of tears' we are 
compelled to take this expression not literally but only as an 
image, the meaning of which the context expressly indicates to 
us. In symbol and allegory the relation between the sense and the 
external shape is not so immediate and necessary. In the nine 
flights of an Egyptian stair and a hundred other things it is only 
the initiated, the cognoscenti, the scholars who can find a symbolic 
meaning; and, conversely, they sniff out and find something mysti­
cal or symbolical where to look for it is unnecessary, because it is 
not there. This may have happened many a time with my dear 
friend Creuzer, as well as with Neo-Platonists and commentators 
on Dante. 
(ex) The range, the variety of form, of metaphor is infinite, yet 
its definition is simple. It is an entirely compressed and abbreviated 
comparison, in that it does not oppose image and meaning to one 
1 Poetics, 1457b. This work of Aristotle is in Hegel's mind throughout this 
section. 

404 
I I. I. THE SYMB OLIC FORM O F  ART 
another but presents the image alone; the literal sense of the 
image, however, it extinguishes and it makes the actually intended 
meaning recognizable at once in the image through the context in 
which the image occurs, although this meaning is not expressly 
stated. 
But since the sense so figurated is clear only from the context, the 
meaning expressed in metaphor cannot claim the value of an 
independent artistic representation but only of an incidental one, 
so that metaphor therefore can arise · in an even enhanced degree 
only as a mere external adornment of a work of art which itself is 
independent. 
(f3) Metaphor has its principal application in linguistic ex­
pressions which in this connection we may treat under the 
following aspects. 
(cxcx) In the first place, every language already contains a mass 
of metaphors. They arise from the fact that a word which origi­
nally signifies only something sensuous is carried over into the 
spiritual sphere. Fassen, begreifen, and many words, to speak 
generally, which relate to knowing, have in respect of their literal 
meaning a purely sensuous content, which then is lost and ex­
changed for a spiritual meaning, the original sense being sensuous, 
the second spiritual. 1 
(f3f3) But gradually the metaphorical element in the use of 
such a word disappears and by custom the word changes from 
a metaphorical to a literal expression, because, owing to readiness 
to grasp in the image only the meaning, image and meaning are 
no longer distinguished and the image directly affords only the 
abstract meaning itself instead of a concrete picture. If, for example, 
we are to take begreifen in a spiritual sense, then it does not occur 
to us at all to think of a perceptible grasping by the hand. In living 
languages the difference between actual metaphors and words 
already reduced by usage to literal expressions is easily established; 
whereas in dead languages this is difficult because mere etymology 
cannot decide the matter in the last resort. The question does not 
depend on the first origin of a word or on linguistic development 
generally; on the contrary, the question above all is whether 
a word which looks entirely pictorial, depictive, and illustrative 
has not already, in the life of the language, lost this its first sensuous 
• Fassen is originally to 'grasp', and hence to 'apprehend'. Begreijen is similar, 
See p. 306, note. 

SYMB O L I S M  O F  THE C OMPARAT IVE ART-FORM 
405 
meaning, and the memory of it, in the course of its use in a spiritual 
sense and been endowed altogether with a spiritual meaning. 
(yy) This being the case, the invention of new metaphors, 
expressly first constructed by poetic imagination, is necessary. 
A principal task of this invention consists, first, in transferring, in 
an illustrative way, the phenomena, activities, and situations of 
a higher sphere to the content of lower areas and in representing 
meanings of this more subordinate kind in the shape and picture 
of the loftier ones. The organic, e.g., is inherently of higher worth 
than the inorganic, and to present death in the phenomenon of life 
enhances the expression. So Firdausi says long ago: 'The sharp­
ness of my sward devours the lion's brain and drz"nks the dark blood 
of the stout-hearted one;' 
In a more spiritualized degree a similar thing occurs if the 
natural and sensuous is imaged in the form of spiritual phenomena 
and therefore is elevated and ennobled. In this sense it is quite 
common for us to speak of 'laughz"ng fields', 'angry flood', or to 
say with Calderon 'the waves dgh under the heavy burden of the 
ships'. What is solely human is used here as an expression for the 
natural. Roman poets too use this sort of metaphor, as e.g. Virgil 
(Georgz"cs, iii. 132) says: 'Cum graviter tunsis gemit area frugibus' 
[when the threshing floor groans heavily under the threshing of 
the corn]. 
Next, · secondly, and conversely, something spiritual is also 
brought nearer to our vision through the picture of natural objects. 
Yet such illustrations may easily degenerate into preciousness, 
into far-fetched or playful conceits, if what is absolutely lifeless 
appears notwithstanding as personified and such spiritual activi­
ties are ascribed to it in all seriousness. It is especially the Italians 
who have let themselves go in the like hocus-pocus; even Shake­
speare is not entirely free from this when, e.g., in Richard II, IV. 
ii, 1 he makes the king say in taking leave of his spouse: 
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize 
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue, 
And in compassion weep the fire out ; 
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black, 
For the deposing of a rightful King. 
(y) Finally, as for the aim and interest of metaphor, a literal 
saying is in itself one intelligible expression, metaphor another. So 
1 Act v, scene i in our text. Hegel gives a prose translation. 

406 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLI C  FORM O F  ART 
the question arises: why this double expression, or, what is the 
same thing, why metaphor, which is this duality in itself? The 
usual answer is that metaphors are used for the sake of a more 
lively poetic representation, and this vivacity is especially what 
Heyne commends in metaphor. The liveliness consists in render­
ing things precise to the visual imagination, in providing a sen­
suous image to counteract the pure indefiniteness of the saying 
which is always general. Of course metaphor has a greater vivacity 
than ordinary literal expressions have; but true life must not be 
sought in metaphors whether separately or in an array of them; 
their imagery may indeed incorporate something which happily 
introduces into the expression both a perceptible clarity and a 
higher definiteness, but, all the same, when every detailed feature 
is independently imaged, it makes the whole thing ponderous and 
suffocates it by the weight of individual detail. 
Therefore the sense and aim of metaphorical diction in general, 
as we have still to explain in more detail in dealing with simile, 
must be found in the need and power of spirit and heart which are 
not content with the simple, customary, and plain, but place 
themselves above it in order to move on to something else, to 
linger over various things, and to join two things together into one. 
This conjunction has itself again more than one reason. 
(cxcx) First, the reason of reinforcement; heart and passion, full 
and moved in themselves, on the one hand make this power 
manifest by sensuous exaggeration; on the other hand, they strive 
to express their own stormy passion and their grip on all sorts of 
ideas by correspondingly transferring them out into all sorts of 
cognate phenomena and by moving in images of the most varied 
kinds. 
In Calderon's Devotion at the Cross, e.g., Julia says, as she sees 
the newly slain corpse of her brother, Lisardo, and as her lover, 
Eusebio, his murderer, stands before her: 'Glad would I close my 
eyes here before the innocent blood which cries for vengeance, 
pouring forth in purple flowers; would that thou mightest be for­
given by the tears that flow for thee; wounds are eyes, yes mouths 
that know naught of lies', etc. 
Far more passionately still, Eusebio recoils from Julia's glance 
when she is finally ready to give herself to him, and he cries: 
'Flames spark from thine eyes, the breath of thy sigh is burning; 
every word is a volcano, every hair a flash of lightning, every 

SYMBO L I S M  O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
407 
syllable is death, every one of thy caresses hell. Such a horror stirs 
in me from that crucifix upon thy breast, a wondrous symbol.'1 
This is the movement of the heart which for what is immediately 
envisaged substitutes another picture, and with this search and 
discovery of ever new modes of expression for its passion can 
scarcely ever reach an end. 
{ft/3) A second reason for metaphor lies in the fact that, when 
spirit is plunged by its inner emotion into the contemplation of 
cognate objects, at the same time it still wishes to free itself from 
their externality, because in the external it seeks itself and spiritu­
alizes it; and now by shaping itself and its passion into something 
beautiful, it evinces its power to bring into representation its 
elevation above everything external. 
(yy) But even so, thirdly, the metaphorical expression may arise 
from the purely bacchanalian delight of fancy which cannot put 
before us either an object in its own appropriate shape or a meaning 
in its simple absence of imagery, but longs above all for a concrete 
intuition cognate with both. Or metaphor may arise from the wit 
of a subjective caprice which, to escape from the commonplace, 
surrenders to a piquant impulse, not satisfied until it has succeeded 
in finding related traits in the apparently most heterogeneous 
material and therefore, to our astonishment, combining things 
that are poles apart from one another. 
In this connection it may be remarked that it is not so much 
a prosaic and a poetic style as a classical and a modern style that 
are to be distinguished from one another by the preponderance 
of either literal or metaphorical expressions. Not only the Greek 
philosophers, like Plato and Aristotle, or great historians and 
orators, like Thucydides and Demosthenes, but also the great 
poets, Homer and Sophocles, on the whole stick almost always to 
literal expressions, although similes do also occur. Their plastic 
severity and solidity does not tolerate the sort of blending involved 
in metaphor or permit them to stray hither and thither away from 
the homogeneous material and the simple, self-contained, complete 
cast,z in order to gather up so-called 'flowers' of expression here 
and there. But metaphor is always an interruption of the course of 
1 The first quotation is Act I, 8os-u; the second is Act n, t6os-u. Hegel 
quotes the translation by A. W. Schlegel. 
• Hegel is straying away from the literal and using the metaphor of casting 
e.g. a bronze statue. Cf. above, pp. 174, 296, et al. 

4o8 
I I. I. THE SYMB O L I C  FORM O F  ART 
ideas and a constant dispersal of them, because it arouses and 
brings together images which do not immediately belong to the 
matter in hand and its meaning, and therefore draw the mind 
away from that to something akin and foreign to it. The Greeks 
were saved from an all too frequent use of metaphors, in prose by 
the infinite clarity and suppleness of their language, in poetry by 
their quiet and fully developed taste. 
On the other hand, it is particularly the East, especially the later 
Mohamedan poetry, which uses figurative expressions and 
indeed has them of necessity. The same is true of modern poetry 
also. Shakespeare, e.g., is very metaphorical in his diction ; the 
Spaniards too, who have deviated into the most tasteless excess 
and agglomeration, love the florid style ; Jean Paul also ; Goethe, 
in his uniformly clear vision, less. But Schiller, even in prose, is 
very rich in images and metaphors ; in his case this arises rather 
from his effort so to express deep concepts as to bring them before 
our minds without pressing on to the strictly philosophical ex­
pression of thought. In his work, then, the inherently rational 
and speculative unity sees and finds its counterpart in the life of 
the present world. 
(b) Image 
Between metaphor on one side and simile on the other we may 
place the image. For it has such a close affinity with metaphor 
that it is strictly only a metaphor in extenso which therefore now 
acquires in turn a great resemblance to simile, but with this 
difference, namely that, in the image as such, the meaning is not 
explicitly separated out and contrasted with the concrete external 
object expressly compared with it. An image occurs especially 
when two phenomena or situations (more or less independent 
when taken by themselves) are unified, so that one situation affords 
the meaning which is to be made intelligible by the image of the 
other. In other words, the first thing here, the fundamental 
characteristic, is thus the independence, the separation, of the 
different spheres whence the meaning and its image are drawn ; 
and what is common to them (properties, relations, etc.) is not, as 
in the symbol, the undetermined universal and the substantial 
itself, but firmly determinate concrete existence on both the one 
side and the other. 
(ex) In this connection the image can have for its meaning 

SYMB OLISM O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART- FORM 
409 
a whole series of situations, activities, productions, modes of ex­
istence, etc., and it can illustrate the meaning by a similar series 
drawn from an independent but cognate sphere, without putting 
the meaning as such in so many words into the image itself. Of this 
kind Goethe's poem Mahomet's Song is an example: the image is 
that of a spring, issuing from a rock, which in the freshness of 
youth hurls itself over the crags into the depths, enters the plain 
reinforced by bubbling springs and brooks, absorbs brother­
streams, gives a name to localities, sees cities growing below its 
feet, until, its heart bubbling over with joy, it carries all these 
glories, its brothers, its treasures, its children to the creator who 
awaits it.-It is only the title that shows that what is happily 
represented in this spacious and brilliant image of a mighty 
stream is Mohammed's bold appearance, the quick dissemination 
of his doctrine, and the intended adoption of all people into the 
one faith. Of a similar kind are many of the Xenien of Goethe and 
Schiller; these are partly scornful, partly playful sayings addressed 
to authors and the public, e.g. 'In silence we pounded saltpetre, 
carbon, and sulphur, drilled holes; now enjoy the firework!' 'Some 
rose as shining balls and others exploded; many too we threw in 
play to delight the eye.' Many of these epigrams were in fact 
rockets and they have given annoyance-to the endless delight 
of the better part of the public which rejoiced when the mob of 
mediocre and bad authors, who had long made much of themselves 
and held the floor, were given a capital 'yin on the neb' and a cold 
douche into the bargain. 
({J) Yet in these last examples there already appears a second 
aspect to be emphasized in respect of images. The content, 
namely, is here a subject who acts, produces things, lives through 
situations and now, not as subject but only in respect of what he 
does or effects or what meets him, is represented in an image. 
Whereas as subject, he is himself introduced without an image 
and only his literal actions and affairs acquire the form of a 
metaphorical expression. Here too, as in the case of the image in 
general, the entire meaning is not severed from its cloak; on the 
contrary, the subject alone is revealed explicitly, while his de­
terminate content at once acquires an imaged shape; and thus the 
subject is represented as if he himself brought into being the 
objects and actions in this their imaged existence. To the expressly 
named subject something metaphorical is ascribed. This mixture 

410 
I I. I. THE SYMBO L I C  FORM OF ART 
of the literal and the metaphorical has often been blamed, but the 
grounds for this blame are weak. 
(y) In this kind of imagery the Orientals especially display great 
boldness since they bind together and intertwine into one image 
existents entirely independent of one another. So Hafiz, for 
example, says once: 'The course of the world is a bloody dagger, 
and the drops falling from it are crowns.'1 And elsewhere: 'The 
sun's sword pours out in the reddening dawn the blood of the 
night, over which it has won the victory.' Similarly: 'No one like 
Hafiz has torn the veil from the cheeks of thought since the locks 
of the word's betrothed were curled.' The meaning of this image 
seems to be this: thought is the word's betrothed (as Klopstock, 
e.g., calls the word the twinbrother of thought) and since the time 
when this fiancee was adorned in words like curls, no one has been 
more skilled than Hafiz in making the thought so adorned appear 
clearly in its unveiled beauty. 
(c) Simile 
From this last kind of imagery we can proceed directly to simile. 
For in it, since the subject of the image is named, there already 
begins the independent expression of the meaning without an 
image. Yet the difference lies in this, that whatever the image 
presents exclusively in the form of an image (even in its abstraction 
as a meaning which therefore appears alongside its image and is 
compared with it) can acquire for itself in the simile an independent 
mode of expression. Metaphor and image illustrate the meanings 
without expressing them, so that only the context in which meta­
phors and images occur makes known openly what their literal 
significance is supposed to be. In simile, on the contrary, both 
sides, image and meaning, are completely severed-if indeed with 
greater or lesser completeness, now of the image, now of the 
meaning; each is presented by itself, and only then, in this separa­
tion, are they related to one another on account of the similarities 
n their content. 
In this respect the simile may be called (a) a merely idle repeti­
ion, in that one and the same matter comes into the representation 
in a double form, indeed in a triple or quadruple form, and (b) an 
1 The first two quotations from Hafiz (and probably others) are taken from 
Hafts' Diwan, translated by J. von Hammer-Purgstall (1812}, part i, pp. 101 ff. 
(See Hegel's Berliner Schriften, ed. by ]. Hoffmeister, Hamburg 1956, p. 7 14.) 

SYMB O L I S M  O F  THE COMPARA TIVE ART-FO R M  
41 1 
often wearisome superfluity, since the meaning is explicitly present 
already and needs no further mode of configuration to make it 
intelligible. The question therefore presses in the case of com­
parison more than it does in that of image and metaphor: what 
essential interest and aim is there in the use of single or multiplied 
similes ? They are neither to be employed on account of mere 
vivacity (the common opinion) nor for the sake of greater clarity. 
On the contrary, similes all too often make a poem dull and 
ponderous, and a mere image or a metaphor can have just as much 
clarity without having its meaning set beside it in addition. 
The proper aim of the simile we must therefore find in the poet's 
subjective imagination. However clearly he makes himself aware 
of the subject-matter which he intends to express, however far 
he has brought this subject home to his mind in its more abstract 
universality and has expressed it [to himself] in this universality, 
still he finds himself equally driven to seek a concrete shape for 
the subject and to make perceptible to himself in a sensuous 
appearance the meaning already before his mind. From this point 
of view, the simile, like the image and the metaphor, therefore 
expresses the boldness of the imagination which, having something 
confronting it-whether a single perceptible object, a specific 
situation, or a universal meaning-works on it and evinces its 
power to bind together things lying poles apart and connected 
externally, and so to drag into our interest in one topic the most 
varied material, and, by the labour of the spirit, to chain to the 
given topic a world of heterogeneous phenomena. This power of 
imagination in inventing shapes and, by ingenious relations and 
connections, binding together the most diverse material is what in 
general lies at the root of simile. 
(o:) Now, first, the pleasure of comparing can be satisfied solely 
on its own account, with no aim of displaying anything in this 
splendour of images except the boldness of fancy. This is as it were 
the orgy of imagination's power, which especially in the Orientals 
and in the peace and dolce far niente of the south, delights in the 
wealth and brilliance of its images without any further aim, and 
it inveigles the listener into abandoning himself to the same dolce 
far niente. But often we are surprised by the wonderful power with 
which the poet launches out into the most variegated images and 
betrays a wit of combination which is more spirituel than a mere 
witticism. Even Calderon has many similes of this kind, especially 

41 2. 
I I. I. T H E  S Y M B O L IC F O R M  O F  A R T  
when he sketches great and magnificent pageants and ceremonies, 
describes the beauty of chargers and their riders, or when in 
speaking of ships he calls them every time 'birds without pinions, 
fish without fins'. 
(/3) But, secondly, looked at more closely, similes are a dwelling 
on one and the same topic which thereby is made the substantial 
centre of a series of other ideas remote from it; through their 
indication or portrayal the greater interest in the topic compared 
becomes objective. 
This dwelling on a topic may have several reasons. 
(cxcx) As the first reason we must cite the heart's absorption in 
the topic by which it is animated and which grips its depths so 
firmly that it cannot renounce an enduring interest in it. In this 
connection we can immediately emphasize once again an essential 
difference between eastern and western poetry, a difference that 
we had occasion to touch upon earlier in our treatment of Pan­
theism. The Oriental in his absorption is less self-seeking, and he 
therefore neither sighs nor languishes; his aspiration remains 
a more objective joy in the topic of his comparisons and therefore 
is more contemplative. With a free heart he looks about him in 
order to see in everything surrounding him, in everything he 
knows and loves, an image of what his sense and spirit are pre­
occupied with and of what engrosses him to the full. Imagination, 
freed from all concentration on self alone, cured from all sickliness, 
is satisfied in the comparative presentation of the topic itself, 
especially when that topic, by a comparison with what is most 
brilliant and beautiful, is to be praised, extolled, and transfigured. 
The West, on the other hand, is more subjective, and in complaint 
and grief sighing more and longing more. 
This dwelling (on one topic], secondly, is principally an interest 
of the feelings, particularly of love which rejoices in the object of 
its grief and pleasure, and, as it cannot free its inner being from 
these feelings, is now never tired of portraying their object anew 
over and over again. Lovers are especially rich in wishes, hopes, 
and changing fancies. Amongst such fancies we must include 
similes too; to these love in general has recourse all the more 
readily because the feeling occupies and permeates the whole soul 
and makes comparisons on its own account. What preoccupies love 
is e.g. a single beautiful feature, the mouth, the eye, the hair, of the 
beloved. Now the human spirit is active and disturbed, and joy 

SYM B O L I S M  O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
413 
and grief especially are not dead and at peace but restless and 
moved hither and thither in a way which yet brings all other 
material into relation with the one feeling which the heart makes 
the centre of its world. Here the interest in comparing lies in the 
feeling itself which experience forces to realize that there are other 
objects in nature just as beautiful or as much the cause of pain; 
consequently the feeling draws the whole of these objects into the 
circle of what it feels, compares them with that and thereby 
expands and universalizes it. 
But if the topic of the simile is something entirely singular and 
sensuous and is put into connection with similar sensuous pheno­
mena, then comparisons of this sort, especially when they are 
multiplied, are due to only a very shallow reflection and a scarcely 
developed feeling. The result is that the variety which merely 
circulates in an external material readily seems to us to be dull and 
cannot be of much interest because it is devoid of spiritual reference. 
So, e.g., it is said in chapter iv [1-6] of the Song of Solomon: 
'Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast 
doves' eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of goats, that 
appear from Mount Gilead. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep 
that are even shorn, which carne up from the washing; whereof 
every one bear twins, and none is barren among them. Thy lips are 
like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy temples are 
like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks. Thy neck is like the 
tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there hang a 
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. Thy two breasts are 
like two young roes that are twins, which feed among the lilies. 
Until the day break, and the shadows flee away [I will, etc.].' 
The same naivete is found in many of the poems called Ossian's, 
as e.g. it is said:1 'Thou art as snow on the heather; thine hair like 
a mist on Cromla when it curls on the rock and shimmers before 
the gleam in the west; thine arms are like two pillars in the halls of 
the mighty Fingal.' 
In a similar way, though rhetorically throughout, Ovid makes 
Polyphemus say: 'Thou art whiter, 0 Galatea, than the leaf of 
the snowy privet, more flowery than the meadows, taller than the 
high alder tree, more gleaming than glass, more playful than the 
1 The Poems of Ossian, translated by James Macpherson (London, 1785), 
Fingal, canto 1 (vol. i, p. 227). Macpherson imagines Cromla to be a hill on the 
coast of Ulster (ibid., p. 223, fn.). 

414 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
tender kid, smoother than shells polished by ocean's endless 
chafing, more grateful than winter's suns and summer's shade, 
more glorious than the palm tree and more striking than the tall 
plane tree' (Met. xiii. 789-807), and so it goes on through all 
nineteen hexameters, rhetorically fine, but, as the sketching of 
a scarcely interesting feeling, it is itself of slight interest. 
In Calderon too there are numerous examples of this kind of 
comparison, although such dwelling on a topic is fitted rather for 
lyrical feeling, and it fetters the progress of a drama all too rigidly 
if it is not appropriately motivated in the nature of the case. So, 
e.g., Don Juan in the complications of his fate describes at length 
the beauty of a veiled lady whom he has followed, and he says 
inter alia: 'Although many a time through the dark barriers of that 
impenetrable veil there broke a hand of most splendid sheen, it 
was the princess of the lilies and the roses and to it the snow's 
sheen did homage like a slave, a dark-skinned Mrican.' 
It is a very different thing when a more deeply moved heart 
expresses itself in images and similes revealing inner and spiritual 
emotional connections, for then the heart either turns itself as it 
were into an external natural scene or makes such a scene the 
reflection of a spiritual matter. 
In this connection too many images and comparisons occur in 
the so-called Ossianic poems, although the sphere of the topics 
used here for similes is poor and usually restricted to clouds, mist, 
storm, tree, stream, spring, sun, thistle, grass, etc. Thus, e.g., he 
says: 'Delightful is thy presence 0 Fingal! It is like the sun on 
Cromla, when the hunter has bewailed its absence for a whole 
year long, and now catches sight of it between the clouds.' 1 In 
another passage we read: 'Did Ossian not hear a voice just now ? 
or is it the voice of the days that are past ? Often there comes like 
the sunset into my soul the remembrance of times past.'2 Similarly 
Ossian relates: 'Pleasant are the words of the song, said Cuchulain, 
and delightful are the stories of times past. They are like the quiet 
dew of the morning on the hill of the roe-deer, when the sun 
shimmers faintly on its side and the lake lies motionless and blue 
in the vale.' J 
This dwelling on the same feelings and their similes is of such 
1 Fingal, canto 6 (The Poems of Osm:m, vol. i, p. 328). 
• Coulath and Cuthona (ibid., vol. ii, p. x 8J). 
l Fingal, canto J (ibid., vol. i, p. 263). 

SYM B O LI S M  OF THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
415 
a kind in these poems that it expresses an old age weary and 
fatigued in mourning and memories of grief. In general a melan­
choly and weak feeling readily overflows into comparisons. What 
such a soul desires, what constitutes its interest, is far off and past, 
and so, in general, instead of regaining courage it is induced to 
immerse itself in something else. The many comparisons [in 
Ossian) therefore correspond as much to this subjective mood as 
to mainly melancholy ideas and the narrow sphere in which that 
mood is compelled to dwell. 
Conversely, however, in so far as passion, despite its unrest, 
concentrates itself on one object, it may toss to and fro in a variety 
of images and comparisons which are only conceits about one and 
the same object, and it does this in order to find in the surrounding 
external world a counterpart to its own inner being. Of this kind 
is, e.g., Juliet's monologue in Romeo and Juliet when she turns to 
the night and cries out [Act III, scene ii] : 
Come night! come Romeo! come, thou day in night! 
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night 
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.-
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night, 
Give me my Romeo : and, when he shall die, 
Take him and cut him out in little stars, 
And he will make the face of heaven so fine, 
That all the world will be in love with night, 
And pay no worship to the garish sun. 
(/3/3) Contrasted with these similes, throughout almost lyrical, 
of a feeling immersing itself in what it feels, there are the epic 
similes which we find often in Homer, for example. Here the poet, 
dwelling in his comparison on one specific object, has, on the 
one hand, the interest of raising us over the as it were practical 
curiosity, expectation, hope, and fear which we cherish in respect 
of the issue of events connected with single situations and deeds 
of the heroes, raising us over the connection of cause, effect, and 
consequence, and riveting our attention on pictures which he sets 
before us like works of sculpture, peaceful and plastic, designed 
for theoretical consideration. This peace, this withdrawal from a 
purely practical interest in what he presents to our vision, gains 
its effect all the more if the object compared is drawn from another 
field. On the other hand, this dwelling on one topic in similes has 
the further sense of marking out a specific object as important, 

416 
I I. I. THE SYMBOL IC FO RM OF A RT 
as a result of this as it were double sketching, and not letting it 
just rustle away fleetingly with the stream of the song and its 
incidents. Thus Homer says, e.g. (Iliad, xx. 164-75) of Achilles 
who, inflamed with ardour for battle, stands up against Aeneas: 
'He got up like a ravenous lion which men aimed to slay, the whole 
city assembled to this end; at first the lion, as if despising them, 
pranced about but when one of the youths, eager for the fray, 
hurls a lance at him, he then crouches yawning, foaming at the 
mouth ; in his breast his strong heart groans, he lashes his sides and 
hips with his tail both left and right, and drives himself to battle. 
With glaring eyes he waits for battle whether he kills one of the 
men or perishes himself at the first onslaught. Thus Achilles is 
urged on by valour and high-hearted spirit to confront the haughty 
Aeneas.' Similarly Homer says (Iliad, iv. 130 ff.) of Pallas when 
she averted the arrow which Pandarus had launched against 
Menelaus: 'She forgot him not and repelled the deadly arrow as 
a mother flicks a fly away from her son when he lies in sweet 
slumber.' And further on (141-6), when the arrow did neverthe­
less wound Menelaus: 'As when a woman from Lydia or Caria 
bedecks ivory with purple to make a bridle for a horse, but it 
stands in her room and many riders have wished to carry it away; 
yet it stands as a king's prize; two things, adornment for the horse, 
fame for the rider: so the blood of Menelaus flowed down his 
thighs.' 
(y) A third reason for similes, contrasted with the mere riot of 
fancy as well as with self-deepening feeling or the imagination that 
dwells on important topics and compares them, is to be emphasized 
especially in reference to dramatic poetry. Drama has for its 
subject-matter warring passions, activity, 'pathos', action, ac­
complishment of what is innerly willed; these it does not present 
at all, as epic does, in the form of past events, but brings the 
individuals themselves before us and makes them express their 
feelings as their own and accomplish their actions before our eyes, 
so that thus the poet does not intrude as a third person [between 
actor and spectator]. Now in this connection it looks as if dramatic 
poetry demands the maximum naturalness in the expression of 
passions, and as if their impetuousness in grief, terror, or joy 
cannot, on account of this naturalness, permit of similes. To make 
the individual agents, in the storm of feeling and in the struggle to 
act, say much in metaphors, images, or similes is to be regarded 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE C O MPARATIVE A RT-FORM 
417 
as throughout 'unnatural' in the usual sense of the word, and 
therefore as disturbing. For by comparisons we are carried away 
from the present situation, and from the individuals who feel and 
act in it, into something external, foreign, and not immediately 
belonging to the situation itself; and thereby the tone of conversa­
tional interchange in particular meets with an obstructive and 
burdensome interruption. And after all in Germany, at the time 
when young spirits tried to free themselves from the shackles of 
the rhetorical taste of the French, they regarded the Spaniards, 
Italians, and French as mere craftsmen who put into the mouths 
of the dramatis personae their own subjective imagination, their 
wit, their conventional behaviour and elegant eloquence, at the 
very moment when wha:t alone should have dominated was the 
most violent passion and its natural expression. In many dramas of 
that time, therefore, in accordance with this principle of natural­
ness, we find the shriek of feeling, exclamation marks, and hyphens 
instead of a diction noble, elevated, rich in images, and full of 
similes. In a similar sense even English critics have often criticized 
Shakespeare for the multiplied and variegated comparisons which 
he frequently gives to his characters in the supreme oppression of 
their grief where the violence of feeling seems to provide the 
minimum of room for the peace of reflection inherent in every 
simile. Of course the images and comparisons in Shakespeare are 
now and then awkward and multiplied; but, on the whole, an essen­
tial place and effect must be allowed even in drama for similes. 
While feeling dwells on one topic because it is sunk in its object 
and cannot free itself from it, in the practical sphere of action 
similes have the aim of showing that the individual has not merely 
immersed himself directly in his specific situation, feeling, or 
passion, but that as a high and noble being he is superior to them 
and can cut himself free from them. Passion restricts and chains 
the soul within, narrows it, and concentrates it within limits, and 
therefore makes it inarticulate, talking in single syllables, or raging 
and blustering in vagueness and extravagance. But greatness of 
mind, force of spirit, lifts itself above such restrictedness and, in 
beautiful and tranquil peace, hovers above the specific 'pathos' by 
which it is moved. This liberation of soul is what similes express, in 
the first place quite formally. It is only a profound composedness 
and strength of soul which is able to objectify even its grief and its 
sorrows, to compare itself with something else, and therefore to 

.p8 
I I. I. THE SYMBOL I C  FORM O F  ART 
contemplate itself theoretically in strange things confronting it; 
or in the most frightful mockery of itself to confront itself with 
even its own annihilation, as if it were an external existent, and yet 
to be able to remain still calm there and preserve its sang-froid. 
In epic, as we saw, it was the poet who through ondwelling and 
graphic similes was intent upon communicating to his audience 
the contemplative calm which art requires. Whereas in drama it is 
the dramatis personae who appear as themselves the poets and 
artists, since they make their inner life an object to themselves, an 
object which they remain powerful enough to shape and form and 
thus to manifest to us the nobility of their disposition and the 
might of their mind. For here this absorption in something other 
and external is the liberation of the inner life from a purely 
practical interest or from the immediacy of feeling into free 
theoretical shapes, whereby that comparison for the sake of com­
parison, as we find it at the first stage, recurs in a deeper way 
because it can now come on the scene only as an overcoming of 
mere preoccupation [with passion] and as release from passion's 
power. 
In the course of this liberation the following chief points may 
be distinguished, of which Shakespeare in particular provides the 
most examples. 
(aa} When a heart is to meet with great misfortune whereby it is 
shaken to its depths, and the grief of this unavoidable fate is now 
actually present, then it would be the way of an ordinary man 
directly to scream out his horror, grief, and despair, and thereby 
to disburden himself. A stronger and nobler spirit suppresses his 
lamentation as such, imprisons his grief, and therefore in the deep 
feeling of his very suffering preserves freedom to occupy himself 
with some far-off idea and in this remote object to express his own 
fate to himself in an image. In that case the man surmounts his 
grief; he is not one with it in his entire self but is just as much 
distinct from it, and therefore he can linger in something else 
which as a cognate object is related to his feeling. So in Shake­
speare's Henry IV when old Northumberland asks the messenger 
who came to tell him of Percy's death 'How doth my son and 
brother ?' and gets no answer, he cries out in the composure of 
bitterest grief [2 Henry IV, Act r, scene i] : 
Thou tremblest ; and the whiteness in thy cheek 
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. 

SYMBO L I SM O F  THE C OMPARA TIVE ART-FORM 
419 
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless, 
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone, 
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night, 
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt ; 
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue, 
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it. 
But when Richard II has to atone for the youthful frivolity of 
his days of happiness, it is especially he who has a heart that how­
ever much it secludes itself in its grief yet retains the force to set 
it steadily before itself in new comparisons. And this is precisely 
the touching and childlike aspect in Richard's grief, that he 
constantly expresses it to himself objectively in felicitous images 
and retains his suffering all the more profoundly in the play of this 
self-expression. When Henry demands the crown from him, e.g., 
he replies1 : 
Here, cousin, seize the crown ; .
.
•
 
On this side my hand, and on that side yours. 
Now is this golden crown like a deep well 
That owes two buckets, filling one another, 
The emptier ever dancing in the air, 
The other down, unseen and full of water : 
That bucket down and full of tears am I, 
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high. 
({3{3) The other aspect in this context consists in the fact that 
a character who is already one with his interests, his grief and his 
fate, tries by comparisons to free himself from this immediate unity 
and makes the liberation actual and obvious by showing that he is 
still capable of making similes. In Henry VIII, for example, 
Queen Katharine, forsaken by her spouse, cries out in the deepest 
sadness [Act III, scene i] : 
I am the most unhappy woman living . . .  
Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom where no pity, 
No friends, no hope; no kindred weep for me ; 
Almost no grave allow'd me ; like the lily, 
That once was mistress of the field and flourish'd, 
I'll hang my head and perish. 
1 Richard II, Act IV, scene i. For 'when Henry demands the crown', read 
'when he realizes that Henry must have the crown'. 

42.0 
I I. I. THE SYMBO L I C  FORM O F  ART 
Still more splendidly Brutus in Julius Caesar says in his rage 
against Cassius whom he had striven in vain to spur on [Act IV, 
scene iii] : 
0 Cassius! you are yoked with a lamb, 
That carries anger as the flint bears fire; 
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark 
And straight is cold again. 
That Brutus can find in this context a transition to a simile proves 
by itself that he has repressed his anger and begun to make himself 
free from it. 
Shakespeare lifts especially his criminal characters above their 
evil passion by endowing them with a greatness of spirit alike in 
crime and in misfortune. Unlike the French, he does not leave 
them in the abstraction of always just saying to themselves that 
they intend to be criminals; on the contrary, he gives them this 
force of imagination which enables them to see themselves not 
just as themselves but as another shape strange to them. Macbeth, 
e.g., when his hour has struck utters the famous words [Macbeth 
Act v, scene v] : 
Out, out, brief candle! 
Life's but a walking shadow; a poor player 
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage 
And then is heard no more : it is a tale 
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, 
Signifying nothing. 
So too it is in Henry VIII with Cardinal Wolsey who, struck 
down from his greatness, exclaims at the end of his career: 
Farewell! a long farewell to all my greatness! 
This is the state of man : to-day he puts forth 
The tender leaves of hopes ; to-morrow blossoms, 
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him ; 
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost, 
And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely 
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root, 
And then he falls, as I do.1 
(yy) In this objectification and comparative expression there 
lies then at the same time the peace and inherent tranquillity of 
character by which a man appeases himself in his grief and fall. 
' Act !!1, scene ii. For 'state' Hegel substitutes 'fate' (Schicksal). 

SYM B O L I S M  OF THE COMPARATIV E  ART-FORM 
421 
So Cleopatra, after putting the deadly asp to her breast, says to 
Charmian [Antony and Cleopatra Act v, scene ii] : 
Peace, peace! 
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast, 
That sucks the nurse asleep ? . . .  
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle. 
The bite of the snake relaxes her limbs so softly that death itself 
is deceived and regards itself as sleep.-This image can itself be 
counted as an image for the gentle and tranquillizing nature of 
these comparisons. 
C. D I S A PPEARANCE O F  THE S Y MB O L I C  
F O R M  O F  ART 
Our interpretation of the symbolic form of art in general has been 
that in it a complete reciprocal interpenetration of meaning and 
expression could not be thoroughly established. In unconscious 
symbolism the incompatibility of content and form present there 
remained implicit, whereas in sublimity it appeared as an open 
incompatibility, in that both the absolute meaning (God) and its 
external reality, the world, were expressly represented in this 
negative relation. But, conversely, there was all the same dominant 
in all these forms the other aspect of the symbolic, namely the 
kinship between meaning and that external shape in which the 
meaning is brought into appearance; in original symbolism, which 
does not yet contrast the meaning with its concrete existence, the 
relationship is one in which the two sides exclude one another; it 
becomes an essential tie in sublimity which, in order to express 
God even in only an inadequate way, required natural phenomena, 
the events and deeds of God's people; and in the comparative 
form of art it becomes a subjective and therefore capricious bearing 
of the one on the other. But although this caprice is wholly there 
especially in metaphor, image, and simile, yet it is as it were even 
here hidden behind the kinship between the meaning and the 
image used [to express it] ; since caprice embarks on comparison 
precisely on the basis of the similarity of both [the things compared], 
the chief aspect of the comparison is not the external thing but 
precisely the relation, brought about by subjective activity, between 
inner feelings, intuitions, ideas, and their cognate configurations. 
Yet if it is not the Concept of the thing itself but only caprice 

422 
I I. I. THE SYMBOL I C  FORM OF ART 
which brings together the meaning and the artistic shape, then 
both are to be posited as wholly external to one another, so that 
their association is an unrelated attachment to one another and 
a mere adornment of one side by the other. Therefore, as an 
appendix, we have here to treat of those subordinate forms of art 
which proceed from such a complete diremption of the factors 
belonging to genuine art and, in this absence of relation, expose 
the self-destruction of the symbolic. 
Owing to the general standpoint of this stage, we have on the 
one side the meaning, cut and dried, explicitly defined but not 
given outward shape, so that for artistic purposes there is nothing 
left but to add to it a purely external and capricious adornment; on 
the other side, externality as such which, instead of being mediated 
into identity with its essential inner meaning, can be construed 
and described only as it becomes independent in contrast with this 
inner element and therefore only in the pure externality of its 
appearance. This difference between meaning and shape is the 
formal characteristic of didactic and descriptive poetry, a dif­
ference which only the art of poetry can maintain, at least in 
didactic poetry, because poetry alone can represent meanings in 
their abstract generality. 
But since the essence of art lies not in the dissociation but in the 
identification of meaning and shape, even at this stage what is 
conspicuous is not only their complete separation but equally a 
bearing of each side on the other. Once the character of the 
symbolic is transcended, however, this bearing can no longer be 
itself of a symbolic kind. It implies an attempt to cancel the proper 
character of the symbolic, namely the incompatibility and in­
dependence of form and content which all the previously con­
sidered forms were incapable of surmounting. But since the 
separation of the two sides which are to be united is presupposed 
here, this attempt must remain a mere 'ought', and the satisfaction 
of its demands is reserved for a more perfect form of art, the 
classicaL-We will now cast a brief glance at these final supple­
mentary forms in order to gain a clearer transition to the classical 
art-form. 
1 . Didactic Poetry 
The didactic poem arises when a meaning (even if forming a con­
crete and consistent whole) is apprehended on its own account as 

SYMBOLISM O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
423 
meaning and not given shape as such but only embellished ex­
ternally with artistic adornment. Didactic poetry is not to be 
numbered amongst the proper forms of art. For in it we find, on 
the one hand, the content already cut and dried and developed 
explicitly as meaning in its therefore prosaic form, and, on the 
other hand, the artistic shape which yet can only be tacked on to 
the content in an entirely external way because the content has 
already been completely characterized prosaically for apprehen­
sion; and in its prosaic aspect, i.e. its universal abstract significance, 
and in no other aspect, the content is to be expressed for intellec­
tual examination and reflection with the aim of instruction. There­
fore, given this external relation [between form and content], art 
can, in the didactic poem, concern itself with nothing but ex­
ternals such as metre, for example, elevated diction, interspersed 
episodes, images, similes, subjoined explosions' of feeling, faster 
development, quicker transitions, etc. These do not penetrate the 
content as such; they stand beside it as an appendage in order by 
their relative vivacity to enliven the seriousness and dryness 
of the doctrine and to make life more agreeable. What has 
become prosaic in itself is not to be reshaped poetically; it can 
only be dressed up ; just as horticulture, e.g., is for the most 
part just an external arrangement of a site already given by 
nature and not in itself beautiful, or as architecture by orna­
ment and external decoration makes pleasant the utility of 
premises devoted to prosaic circumstances and affairs. 
In this way Greek philosophy, e.g., adopted in its beginnings 
the form of a didactic poem ; Hesiod too may be cited as an example; 
although a really and properly prosaic treatment only makes its 
appearance in the main when the intellect with its reflections, 
inferences, classifications, etc., has mastered the topic and on that 
basis can teach pleasingly and elegantly. Lucretius in relation to the 
natural philosophy of Epicurus, Virgil with his agricultural instruc­
tions, afford examples of such a treatment which, despite all skilful­
ness, cannot attain a genuine free form of art. In Germany the 
didactic poem is now no longer popular; but apart from his earlier 
poem Les jardins, ou l'art d'embellir les paysages, and his L'homme 
1 Hegel's word is Expectorationen, expectorations. This may be an allusion 
to Expectorationen, ein Kunstwerk und zugleich ein Vorspiel zum Alarkos (Berlin, 
r8o3). This skit on Schlegel's Alarcos was published anonymously, but was by 
Kotzebue. 

424 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
des champs, Delille1 has in this century presented the French with 
a didactic poem, a compendium of physics, in which magnetism, 
electricity, etc., are treated seriatim. 
2. Descriptive Poetry 
The second form belonging to this context is the one opposed 
to the didactic. Its starting point is not drawn from a meaning 
explicitly cut and dried in consciousness but from the external 
as such, from natural surroundings, from buildings, etc., from 
seasons, times of the day, and their external shape. While in the 
didactic poem the content remains essentially in unshaped uni­
versality, here conversely the external material confronts us on its 
own account in its individuality and external appearance, not 
penetrated by spiritual meanings; this appearance is now on its 
side represented, sketched, and described in the way that we 
ordinarily see it. Such a sensuous content belongs entirely to only 
one side of true art, namely to the external existence which in art 
has the right of appearing solely as the reality of spirit, of indivi­
duality and its actions and events on the stage of a surrounding 
world, but not of appearing on its own account as mere externality 
cut adrift from spirit. 
3· The Ancient Epigram 
Consequently, as it turns out, the didactic and the descriptive 
cannot be retained in this one-sidedness whereby art would be 
entirely cancelled, and once more we see external reality brought 
into relation with what is grasped inwardly as meaning, and the 
abstract universal with its concrete appearance. 
(a) In this regard we have already mentioned didactic poetry. 
It can seldom get along without sketching external situations and 
individual phenomena, without relating episodically mythological 
and other examples, etc. But, by this parallelism of the spiritual 
universal and the external individual, what is established, instead 
of a completely developed unification, is only an entirely incidental 
relation which, not to mention its complete failure to take in the 
total content and its entire artistic form, comprises only single 
aspects and traits of these. 
(b) More of such a relativity is found to a great extent in the 
1 J Delille, t7J8-t8IJ. See Les Trois Regnes de la Nature (Paris, t8o8). 

SYMBO L I S M  O F  THE COMPARATIVE ART-FORM 
425 
case of descriptive poetry, seeing that it accompanies its sketches 
with feelings which can be aroused by the look of a natural land­
scape, the change in the times of day, the natural divisions of the 
year, a forest-clad hill, a lake or a murmuring burn, a churchyard, 
a friendly situated village, or a quiet cosy cottage. As in the didactic 
poem so too, therefore, in descriptive poetry episodes enter as 
enlivening decoration, especially the sketching of moving feelings, 
of sweet melancholy, e.g., or of trifling occurrences drawn from 
the circle of human life in its less significant spheres. But this 
connection between spiritual feeling and an external natural 
phenomenon may even here still be quite external. For the natural 
locality is presupposed as present on its own account as inde­
pendent; a man enters it and feels this and that about it, but the 
external shape and the inner sentiment remain external to one 
another in the case of moonlight, woods, or valleys. In such a case 
I am not the interpreter or inspirer of nature; I feel on this 
occasion only an entirelY' indefinite harmony between my inner 
being, excited by so and so, and the objective world confronting 
me. In the case of our German countrymen, this is by far the 
favourite form: namely, sketches of nature and, alongside them, 
whatever such natural scenes may suggest to an individual in the 
way of fine feelings and outpourings of heart. This is the general 
highway which anyone can travel. Even several of Klopstock's 
Odes are tuned to this key. 
(c) If therefore thirdly we ask for a deeper relation between the 
two sides in their presupposed separation, we can find it in the 
epigram of antiquity. 
(<X) The original essence of the epigram is expressed at once by 
its name: it is an inscription. Of course here too there stands a topic 
on one side and, on the other, something said about it; but in the 
oldest epigrams, of which Herodotus1 has preserved a few, we do 
not get the sketch of an object in association with some sentiment 
or other; we have the thing itself in a double way: (a) the external 
existent and (b) then its meaning and explanation; these are 
pressed together as an epigram with the most salient and most 
apposite touches. Yet even among the Greeks the later epigram 
has lost this original character and has proceeded more and more 
to take account of and to describe sketchy, ingenious, witty, 
agreeable, and touching notions about individual occurrences, 
1 e.g, vii. :uS, the inscriptions at Thennopylae. 

426 
I I. I. THE SYMBOLIC FORM O F  ART 
works of art, or persons, etc. These set forth not so much the topic 
itself as the author's clever relations to it. 
(fl) Now the less the topic itself enters as it were into this 
sort of representation, the more imperfect does the representation 
become as a result. In this connection passing mention may be 
made of more recent art-forms. In Tieck's novels, e.g., the matter 
in hand often consists of special works of art, or artists, or a specific 
art-gallery or piece of music, and then some little story or other is 
tacked on to it. But these specific pictures which the reader has not 
seen, the music which he has not heard, the poet cannot make 
visible and audible, and the whole form when it turns on pre­
cisely these topics and the like remains in this respect defective. 
So too in longer romances whole arts and their most beautiful 
works have been taken as the proper subject-matter, as Heinse1 
took music in his Hildegard von Hohenthal. Now if the whole work 
of art cannot represent its fundamental topic adequately, then in 
accordance with its basic character it retains an inadequate form. 
(y) The demand springing from the deficiencies that have been· 
cited is simply this, that the external appearance and its meaning, 
the thing itself and its spiritual interpretation, must not, as was the 
case just now, be altogether separated from one another; neither 
should there remain as their unification a linkage which is sym­
bolical or sublime and comparative. The genuine representation is 
to be sought, therefore, only where the thing itself through and in 
its external appearance affords the interpretation of its spiritual 
content, since the spiritual unfolds itself completely in its reality, 
and the corporeal and external is therefore nothing but the ade­
quate explication of the spiritual and the inward itself. 
But in order to consider the perfect fulfilment of this task we 
must take leave of the symbolical art-form, since the character of 
the symbolic consists precisely in the ever purely imperfect uni­
fication of the soul of the meaning with its corporeal shape. 
1 ]. ]. W., I749-z8o3. H. von H., 1796. 

SECTI O N  II 
THE CLASSICAL F O R M  OF ART 
Introduction-The Classical Type in General 
The centre of art is a unification, self-enclosed so as to be a free 
totality, a unification of the content with its entirely adequate 
shape. This reality, coinciding with the Concept of the beautiful, 
towards which the symbolic form of art strove in vain, is first 
brought into appearance by classical art. We have therefore in our 
earlier treatment of the Idea of the beautiful already settled in 
advance the general nature of the classical; the Ideal provides 
the content and form of classical art which in this adequate mode 
of configuration achieves what true art is in its essential nature. 
But there contributed to this perfection all the particular factors, 
the development of which we took as the content of the foregoing 
Section. For classical beauty has for its inner being the free in­
dependent meaning, i.e. not a meaning of this or that but what 
means [ Bedeutende] itself and therefore intimates [ Deutende] 
itself. This is spirit, which in general makes itself into an object 
to itself. In this objectivity of itself it then has the form of externa­
lity which, as identical with its own inner being, is therefore on 
its side the meaning of its own self and, in knowing itself, it points 
to itself. We started, even in the case of the symbolic sphere, from 
the unity of meaning and its sensuous mode of appearance pro­
duced by art, but this unity was only immediate and therefore 
inadequate. For the proper content either remained the natural 
itself in its substance and abstract universality, for which reason, 
although the isolated natural existent was regarded as the actual 
determinate being of that universality, it could not represent 
that universality in a corresponding way; or else when what was 
purely inner and graspable by spirit alone was made the content, it 
thereby acquired an equally inadequate appearance in something 
foreign to itself, namely in something immediately individual and 
sensuous. In general, meaning and shape stood only in a relation 
of mere affinity and allusiveness, and however nearly they could 
bЏ brought into connection in certain respects, they all the same 
8243716 
p 

428 
I I. I I. THE CLASSICAL FORM O F  ART 
in other respects fell apart from one another. This primitive unity 
was therefore broken: for Indian conceptions the abstractly 
simple inner and ideal stands on one side, the varied reality of 
nature and finite human existence on the other ; and imagination in 
the restlessness of its ardour rushed hither and thither from one 
to the other without being able to bring the Ideal on its own 
account to pure absolute independence or really to fill it with the 
available and transformed material of appearance and therein 
represent it in peaceful unification. The confusion and grotesque­
ness in the mixture of elements striving against one another did 
likewise disappear again but only to give place to an equally 
unsatisfying enigma which instead of solving the problem was 
only able to pose the task of solving it. For here too there was still 
absent that freedom and independence of the content which 
appears only through the inner's coming into consciousness as 
total in itself and therefore as overlapping the externality which at 
first is other than and strange to it. This independence in and by 
itself as the free absolute meaning is the self-consciousness which· 
has the Absolute for its content, spiritual subjectivity for its form. 
Contrasted with this self-determining, thinking, and willing power, 
everything else is only relatively and momentarily independent. 
The sensuous phenomena of nature, the sun, the sky, stars, plants, 
animals, stones, streams, the sea, have only an abstract relation to 
themselves, and in the steady process of nature are drawn into 
connection with other existents, so that only for finite perception 
can they count as independent. In them the true meaning of the 
Absolute does not yet emerge. Nature, it is true, emerges, but only 
in its self-externality; its inner being is not apprehended by itself 
as inner, but is poured out into the diverse multiplicity of appear­
ance and therefore is not independent. Only in spirit as the con­
crete free infinite relation to itself is the true absolute meaning 
really emergent and independent in its external existence.1 
On the way to this liberation of the meaning from the immedi­
ately sensuous and to its achievement of independence in itself, 
1 This presupposes Hegel's philosophy of Nature and Spirit. It is in and 
through embodying itself in something other than itself, e.g. nature, that spirit 
comes to consciousness of itself and its own inner being as spirit. The inner 
being of nature is the spirit which it embodies, but nature is not aware of this. 
Thus it is not only a realm of externality, everything in it being external to 
everything else, but also self-external, or self-estranged, because it is unaware 
of its own essence, i.e. the absolute meaning, the Absolute or God, its creator. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
429 
we met with the sublimity and sanctification produced by imagi­
nation. The absolutely meaningful, that is to say, is primarily the 
thinking, absolute, non-sensuous One, which, as the Absolute, 
relates itself to itself, and in this relation posits the other, its 
creation, i.e. nature and externality in general, as the negative, with 
no stability in itself. It is the universal absolutely, envisaged as the 
objective power over the whole of existence, whether this One be 
brought to consciousness and representation in its expressly nega­
tive bias towards its creation or in its positive pantheistic immanence 
therein. But the double deficiency of this outlook consists for art, 
first, in the fact that this one and universal [Being] which consti­
tutes the fundamental meaning has so far neither reached closer 
determination and differentiation in itself nor, therefore, the in­
dividuality and personality proper in which it could be grasped as 
spirit and brought before contemplation in an external shape belong­
ing and adequate to the spiritual content in its essential nature. The 
concrete Idea of spirit, on the other hand, demands that spirit be 
determined and differentiated in itself, and, making itself objective 
to itself, shall gain in this duplication an external appearance 
which, although corporeal and present, yet remains wholly pene­
trated by spirit and therefore, though taken by itself it expresses 
nothing, it reveals, as its inner being, spirit alone whereof it is the 
expression and reality. On the part of the objective world there is, 
secondly, bound up with this abstraction of the undifferentiated 
Absolute the deficiency that now too the real appearance, as what 
is without inherent substantiality, is incapable of exhibiting the 
Absolute in a concrete shape in a genuine way. 
As a contrast to those hymns and words of praise, triumphs of 
the abstract universal glorification of God, we have in this transi­
tion to a higher art-form to recall what we likewise found in the 
East, the factor of negativity, i.e. change, grief, and the process 
through life and death. There it was inner differentiation which 
appeared, without the collection of differences into the unity and 
independence of subjectivity. But both sides, the inherently in­
dependent unity and its differentiation and definite inner repletion 
afford only now in their concrete harmonized totality a genuinely 
free independence. 
In this connection we may mention incidentally alongside sub­
limity another view which likewise began to be developed in the 
East. Contrasted with the substantiality of the one God, there is 

430 
I I. I I. T H E  CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
an apprehension of the inner freedom, self-subsistence, and in­
dependence of the individual person in himself, so far as the East 
permitted a development in this direction. For a chief form of 
this outlook we must look to the Arabs who in their deserts, on 
the infinite sea of their plains, in the clear sky above them, in such 
natural surroundings have counted only on their own courage and 
the bravery of their fists, as well as on the means of their self­
preservation, namely the camel, the horse, the lance and the sword. 
Here in distinction from Indian feebleness and loss of self, and 
from the later Mohammedan pantheistic poetry, there arises the 
more inflexible independence of personal character, and objects 
too are allowed to possess their circumscribed and definitely fixed 
immediate reality. With these beginnings of the independence of 
individuality there are then bound up at the same time true 
friendship, hospitality, sublime generosity, but all the same an 
infinite thirst for revenge, an inextinguishable memory of a hatred 
which makes room and satisfaction for itself by pitiless passion and 
absolutely unfeeling cruelty. But what happens on this soil appears 
as human, within the sphere of human affairs; there are deeds of 
revenge, relations of love, traits of self-sacrificing generosity from 
which the fantastic and wonderful have vanished, so that every­
thing is presented fixedly and definitely in accordance with the 
necessary connection of things. 
A similar treatment of real objects as reduced to their fixed 
proportions and as coming into view in their free and not merely 
useful forcefulness we found earlier1 in the case of the Hebrews. 
Firmer independence of character, and the fierceness of revenge 
and hatred, are characteristic of the Jewish people in its origin. 
Yet the difference appears at once that here even the most forceful 
natural formations are not depicted on their own account but 
rather on account of the power of God, in relation to which they 
immediately lose their independence, and even hate and persecu­
tion are not directed personally against individuals, but, in the 
service of God, against whole peoples in a national quest for 
revenge. For example, the later Psalms and, above all, the Prophets 
can often wish and pray for the misfortune and downfall of other 
peoples and they find their chief strength not infrequently in 
cursing and execrating. 
At these points of view just mentioned, the elements of true 
' Not in so many words, but see Section I, ch. I I, B, The Art of Sublimity. 

INTRODUCTION 
43 1 
beauty and art are of course present, but at first torn asunder from 
one another, scattered, and set, not in genuine identity, but only 
in a false relationship. Therefore it is impossible for the purely 
ideal and abstract unity of the Divine to achieve a plainly adequate 
artistic appearance in the form of real individuality, while nature 
and human individuality in both inner and external aspects are 
either not filled with the Absolute at all or at least not positively 
pervaded by it. This mutual externality of the meaning which is 
made the essential content and the specific appearance in which 
this meaning is to be represented appeared, thirdly and lastly, in 
the comparative activity of art. In it both sides have become 
perfectly independent, and the unity holding them together is only 
the invisible subjective activity that is making the comparison. 
But thereby precisely the deficiency of such an external relation 
was presented in a steadily intensified measure, and for genuine 
artistic representation was proved to be something negative, and 
therefore something to be superseded. If this cancellation is 
actually effected, then the meaning can no longer be the inherently 
abstract ideal but the inner self, determined in and through itself, 
which in this its concrete totality has equally in itself the other side, 
i.e. the form of a self-contained and specific appearance. In the 
external existent, as something of its own, it expresses and means 
itself alone. 
1 .  Independence of the Classical as Interpenetration of Spirit 
and its Shape in Nature 
This inherently free totality remaining equal to itself in its oppo­
site which becomes its own self-determination, this inner life 
. which relates itself to itself in its object, is what is absolutely true, 
free, and independent, displaying in its existence nothing but 
itself. Now in the realm of art this content is not present in its 
infinite form (i.e. is not the thinking of itself, not the essential, the 
Absolute, which becomes objective to itself in the form of ideal 
universality and makes itself explicit to itself) but is present only 
in immediate natural and sensuous existence. But in so far as the. 
meaning is independent, it must in art produce its shape out of 
itself and have the principle of its externality in itself. It must 
therefore revert to the natural, but as dominant over the external 
which, as one side of the totality of the inner itself, exists no longer 
as purely natural objectivity but, without independence of its own, 

432 
I I. I I. THE C L A S S ICAL FORM OF ART 
is only the expression of spirit. Thus in this interpenetration the 
natural shape and externality as a whole, transformed by spirit, 
directly acquires its meaning in itself and points no longer to the 
meaning as if that were something separated and different from 
the corporeal appearance. This is that identification of the spiritual 
and the natural which is adequate to the spirit and which does not 
rest in the neutralization of the two opposed sides but lifts the 
spiritual to the higher totality where it maintains itself in its oppo­
site, posits the natural as ideal, and expresses itself in and on the 
natural. In this sort of unity the essential nature of the classical 
art-form is grounded. 
(a) Now here this identity of meaning and corporeality is to 
be conceived in more detail as follows: within their completely 
accomplished unity no separation of the sides occurs and therefore 
the inner does not, as purely inner spirituality, withdraw into 
itself out of corporeal and concrete reality because in that way a 
difference between the two, contrasted with one another, could 
appear. Now since the objective and external, in which spirit 
becomes visible, is, in accordance with its nature, determinate and 
particularized throughout at the same time, it follows that the free 
spirit, which art causes to appear in a reality adequate to it, can 
in its shape in nature be only spiritual individuality equally deter­
minate and inherently independent. Therefore humanity consti­
tutes the centre and content of true beauty and art; but as the 
content of art (as has been already explained [in Part I, ch. III, A 1] 
in extenso in connection with the Concept of the Ideal) humanity 
must appear essentially determined as concrete individuality and its 
adequate external appearance which in its objectivity is purified 
from the defect of finitude. 
(b) From this point of view it is obvious at once that the 
classical mode of representation cannot, by its very nature, be 
any longer of a symbolical kind, in the stricter sense of the word, 
even if here and there some symbolic ingredients have their part 
to play too. Greek mythology, e.g., which, so far as art possesses 
itself of it, belongs to the classical ideal, is when viewed at its 
heart not of symbolical beauty but is shaped according to the 
genuine character of the ideal of art, although some traces of the 
symbolic still cling to it, as we shall see. 
But if we now ask about the specific shape which can enter into 
this unity with spirit without being a mere indication of its content, 

I NTRODUCTION 
433 
it is clear from the determinate character of classical art, where 
content and form are meant to be adequate to one another, that 
even on the side of the shape there is a demand for totality and 
independence in itself. This is because the free independence of 
the whole, in which the fundamental characteristic of classical art 
consists, implies that each of the two sides, the spiritual content 
and its external appearance, shall be in itself a totality which is 
the essential nature of the whole. Only in this way, in other words, 
is each side implicitly identical with the other, and therefore their 
difference is reduced to a difference purely of form between two 
things that are one and the same, with the result that now the 
whole appears as free since the two sides are proved adequate to 
one another, the whole displaying itself in both of them and being 
one in both. The lack of this free duplication of itself within the 
same unity precisely carried with it in symbolic art absence of 
freedom in the content and therefore in the form too. Spirit was 
not clear to itself and therefore did not show its external reality 
to itself as its own, posited absolutely through and in spirit. 
ConАersely the shape was indeed intended to be meaningful, but 
the meaning lay there only partially, only on one side or another of 
it. Therefore by being external to its inner [meaning] as well, the 
external existent primarily presented not the meaning it was meant 
to represent but only itself, and if it was to show that it was meant 
to hint at something further, it would have to be interpreted in 
a forced way. Now in this distortion it neither remained itself 
nor became the other, i.e. the meaning, but showed only an 
enigmatic connection and confusion of foreign material, or fell, as a 
purely ancillary decoration and external adornment, into the mere 
glorification of an absolute meaning of all things, until at last it 
had to succumb to a purely subjective caprice of comparison with 
a far-fetched and indifferent meaning. If this unfree relation is to 
be dissolved, the shape must have its meaning already in itself and 
indeed, more precisely, the meaning of spirit. 
This shape is essentially the human form because the external 
human form is alone capable of revealing the spiritual in a sen­
suous way. The human expression in face, eyes, posture and air 
is material and in these is not what spirit is; but within this cor­
poreality itself the human exterior is not only living and natural, 
as the animal is, but is the bodily presence which in itself mirrors 
the spirit. Through the eye we look into a man's soul, just as his 

434 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM OF ART 
spiritual character is expressed by his whole demeanour in general. 
If therefore the bodily presence belongs to spirit as its existence, 
spirit belongs to the body as the body's inner being and is not 
an inwardness foreign to the external shape, so that the material 
aspect neither has in itself, nor hints at, some other meaning. The 
human form does carry in itself much of the general animal type, 
but the whole difference between the human and the animal body 
consists solely in this, that the human body in its whole demeanour 
evinces itself as the dwelling-place of spirit and indeed as the sole 
possible existence of spirit in nature. Therefore too spirit is imme­
diately present for others in the body alone. But this is not the 
place to expound the necessity of this connection and the special 
correspondence of soul and body;1 here we must presuppose this 
necessity. Of course in the human form there are dead and ugly 
things, i.e. determined by other influences and by dependence on 
them; while this is the case, it is precisely the business of art to 
expunge the difference between the spiritual and the purely natural, 
and to make the external bodily presence into a shape, beautiful, 
through and through developed, ensouled and spiritually living. 
It follows that in this mode of representation nothing symbolical 
remains in regard to the external shape, and every mere search, 
pressure, confusion, and distortion is cast away. For when the 
spirit has grasped itself as spirit, it is explicitly complete and clear, 
and so too its connection with the shape adequate to it on the 
external side is something absolutely complete and given, which 
does not first need to be brought into existence by way of a linkage 
produced by imagination in contrast to what is present. Neither 
is the classical art-form a purely corporeally and superficially 
presented personification, since the whole spirit, so far as it is to 
constitute the content of the work of art, comes out into the bodily 
form and can identify itself with it perfectly. This is the point of 
view from which to consider the idea that art has imitated the 
human form. According to the usual view, however, this adoption 
and imitation seems accidental, whereas we must maintain that 
art, once developed to its maturity, must of necessity produce its 
representations in the form of man's external appearance because 
only therein does the spirit acquire its adequate existence in 
sensuous and natural material. 
' Hegel expounds this in his EncyclDpaedia Df the PhilD<Dphical Science<, part 
iii, § 4I0. See also the Zusatz to that paragraph. 

I NTRODUCTION 
435 
What we have said about the human body and its expression 
applies also to human feelings, impulses, deeds, events, and 
actions; this externality too is characterized in classical art not 
only as alive in the natural way but as spiritual, and the inner side 
is brought into an adequate identity with the outer. 
(c) Now since classical art comprehends free spirituality as 
determinate individuality and envisages it directly in its bodily 
appearance, the charge of anthropomorphism has often been 
raised against it. In the case of the Greeks, e.g., Xenophanes spoke 
against the mode of picturing the gods by saying that if lions had 
been sculptors they would have given their gods the shape of 
lions.1 Of a similar kind is the witty French saying: 'God made 
men in his own image, but man has returned the compliment by 
making God in the image of man.' In relation to the following 
form of art, the romantic, it is to be remarked in this connection 
that the content of the classical beauty of art is of course still defec­
tive, like the religion of art itself; but so little does the deficiency 
lie in the anthropomorphic as such that on the contrary it is 
steadily to be maintained that classical art is anthropomorphic 
enough for art, but not enough for higher religion. Christianity 
has pushed anthropomorphism much further; for, according to 
Christian doctrine, God is not an individual merely humanly 
shaped, but an actual single individual, wholly God and wholly an 
actual man, drawn into all the conditions of existence, and no 
merely humanly shaped ideal of beauty and art. If our idea of the 
Absolute were only an idea of an abstract innerly undifferentiated 
being, then it is true that every sort of configuration vanishes; but 
for God to be spirit he must appear as man, as an individual sub­
ject-not as ideal humanity, but as actual progress into the tempo­
ral and complete externality of immediate and natural existence. 
The Christian view, that is to say, implies an endless movement 
and drive into an extreme opposition and into an inner reversion to 
absolute unity only by cancelling this separation. This moment of 
separation is that in which God becomes man, because, as an 
actual individual subject, he enters difference as opposed to both 
unity and substance as such; in this ordinary spatial and temporal 
existence he experiences the feeling, consciousness, and grief of 
disunion in order to come, through this opposition and likewise 
its dissolution, to infinite reconciliation. According to Christian 
1 Fragment 15 (Diels). 

436 
I I. I I. THE CLA S S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
ideas, this transition lies in the nature of God himself. In fact, 
through this process, God is to be apprehended as absolute free 
spirituality, in which the factor of nature and immediate individ­
uality is present indeed but must equally be transcended. Whereas 
in classical art while the sensuous is not killed and dead, it is also 
not resurrected from death to absolute spirit. Therefore classical 
art and its religion of beauty does not satisfy the depths of the 
spirit; however concrete it is in itself, it still remains abstract for 
spirit because it has as its element not that movement and that 
reconciliation of infinite subjectivity which has been achieved out 
of opposition, but instead only the untroubled harmony of deter­
minate free individuality in its adequate existence, this peace in 
that real existence, this happiness, this satisfaction and greatness 
in itself, this eternal serenity and bliss which even in misfortune 
and grief do not lose their assured self-repose. The opposition, 
grounded in the Absolute, classical art has not probed to its depths 
and reconciled. But, for this reason, classical art knows nothing of 
the aspect related to this opposition, namely (a) the obduracy of 
the subject in himself as abstract personality contrasted with the 
ethical and the Absolute, as sin and evil, and (b) the withdrawal 
of subjective inwardness into itself, the distraction, the helpless­
ness, the whole series, in short, of disunions which produce in 
their midst the ugly, the hateful, the repulsive, in both the sen­
suous and the spiritual spheres. Classical art does not pass beyond 
the pure ground of the genuine ideal. 
2. Greek Art as the Actual Existence of the Classical Ideal 
As regards the actualization of classical art in history, it is scarcely 
necessary to remark that we have to look for it in the Greeks. 
Classical beauty with its infinite range of content, material, and 
form is the gift vouchsafed to the Greek people, and we must 
honour this people for having produced art in its supreme vitality. 
The Greeks in their immediate real existence lived in the happy 
milieu of both self-conscious subjective freedom and the ethical 
substance.1 They did not persist on the one hand in the unfree 
Oriental unity which has a religious and political despotism as its 
consequence; this is because the subject, losing his self, is sub­
merged in the one universal substance, or in some particular 
1 i.e. the state. Hegel is using the terminology of his Philosophy of Right. 

I NTROD UCTION 
437 
aspect of it, since he has no right and therefore no support in 
himself as a person. Nor, on the other hand, did the Greeks make 
the advance to that deepening of subjective life in which the 
individual subject separates himself from the whole and the 
universal in order to be independent in his own inner being; and 
only through a higher return into the inner totality of a purely 
spiritual world does he attain a reunification with the substantial 
and essential. On the contrary, in Greek ethical life the individual 
was independent and free in himself, though without cutting 
himself adrift from the universal interests present in the actual 
state and from the affirmative immanence of spiritual freedom in 
the temporal present. The universal element in ethical life, and 
the abstract freedom of the person in his inner and outer life, 
remain, in conformity with the principle of Greek life, in undis­
turbed harmony with one another, and at the time when this 
principle asserted itself in the actual present in still undamaged 
purity there was no question of an independence of the political 
sphere contrasted with a subjective morality distinct from it; the 
substance of political life was merged in individuals just as much 
as they sought this their own freedom only in pursuing the 
universal aims of the whole. 
The beautiful feeling, the sentiment and spirit, of this happy 
harmony pervades all productions in which Greek freedom has 
become conscious of itself and portrayed its essence to itself. 
Therefore the world-view of the Greeks is precisely the milieu in 
which beauty begins its true life and builds its serene kingdom ; 
the milieu of free vitality which is not only there naturally and 
immediately but is genБated by spiritual vision and transfigured 
by art; the milieu of a development of reflection and at the same 
time of that absence of reflection which neither isolates the 
individual nor can bring back to positive unity and reconciliation 
his negativity, grief, and misfortune; a milieu which yet, like life 
in general, is at the same time only a transitional point, even if at 
this point it attains the summit of beauty and in the form of its 
plastic individuality is so rich and spiritually concrete that all 
notes harmonize with it, and, moreover, what for its outlook is 
the past still occurs as an accessory and a background, even if no 
longer as something absolute and unconditioned. 
In this sense even in its gods the Greek people has brought its 
spirit into its conscious perception, vision, and representation, and 

438 
I I. I I. THE CLASSICAL FORM O F  ART 
has given them by art an existent embodiment which is perfectly 
adequate to the true content. On account of this correspondence 
which lies in the essence of Greek art and of Greek mythology too, 
art in Greece has become the supreme expression of the Absolute, 
and Greek religion is the religion of art itself, while the later 
romantic art, although it is art, yet points already to a higher form 
of consciousness than art can provide. 
3· Position of the Productive Artist in Classical Art 
Now up to this point, on the one hand we have established as the 
content of classical art inherently free individuality, and on the 
other hand we have required the like freedom for the form. This 
thus implies that the entire blending of both sides, however far it 
may be represented as an immediacy, still cannot be an original 
and so a natural unity; clearly it must be an artificial link, forged 
by the subjective spirit. In so far as the form and content of 
classical art is freedom, it springs only from the freedom of the 
spirit which is clear to itself. It follows that the artist now acquires 
a position different from previous ones. His production, that is to 
say, is the free deed of the clear-headed man who equally knows 
what he wills and can accomplish what he wills, and who, in other 
words, neither is unclear about the meaning and the substantial 
content which he intends to shape outwardly for contemplation, 
nor in the execution of his work does he find himself hindered by 
any technical incapacity. 
If we take a closer look at this altered position of the artist, 
(a) his freedom is clear in respect of the content because he has 
not had to seek it with the restless fermentation of the symbolic. 
Symbolic art remains involved in the labour of first producing its 
content and making it clear to itself, and this content is itself only 
the first that comes to hand, i.e. on one side, being or nature in its 
immediate form, on the other, the inner abstraction of the uni­
versal, the One, transformation, change, becoming, rising and 
setting again. But at the first step success is not to be achieved. 
Therefore the representations of symbolic art which were intended 
to be expositions of the content remain themselves only enigmas 
and problems, and they testify only to a wrestling for clarity and 
to the struggle of the spirit which continually invents without 
finding repose and peace. In contrast to this troubled quest, for 

INTRODUCTION 
439 
the classical artist the content must already be there cut and dried, 
given, so that in its essential nature it is already determined for 
imagination as settled, as belief personal or national, or as a past 
event perpetuated by tales and tradition. Now the artist's relation 
to this objectively established material is freer because he does 
not enter himself into the process of its generation and parturition, 
nor does he remain caught in a pressure to obtain genuine meanings 
for art; on the contrary, an absolute content for art confronts him; 
he adopts it and freely reproduces it out of his own resources. The 
Greek artists obtained their material from the national religion 
in which what was taken over from the East by the Greeks had 
already begun to be reshaped. Phidias took his Zeus from Homer, 
and even the tragedians did not invent the fundamental material 
which they represented. Similarly, the Christian artists too, Dante 
and Raphael, only gave a shape to what was already present in the 
creeds and in religious ideas. In one way this is in a similar respect 
the case with the art of sublimity too, but with the difference that 
there the relation to the content as the one substance prevents 
subjectivity from coming into its rights and does not allow it any 
independent self-sufficiency. Conversely, the comparative art­
form does proceed from the choice of both the meanings and the 
images utilized, but this choice remains left to purely subjective 
caprice and lacks on its part over again the substantial indi­
viduality which constitutes the essential nature of classical art 
and therefore must also belong to the subject who is producing 
the work of art. 
(b) But the more the artist has available confronting him an 
absolute and free content in national faith, myth, and other 
realities, all the more does he concentrate himself on the task of 
shaping the external artistic appearance in a way congruent to such 
content. Now in this matter symbolic art tosses about in a thousand 
forms without being able to hit upon the plainly adequate one ; 
with an imagination that runs riot without proportion and defini­
tion, it gropes around in order to adapt to the meaning sought the 
shapes that ever remain alien. Here too the classical artist, on the 
other hand, is self-sufficient and restrained. In classical art, in 
other words, the content is determinate and the free shape is 
determined by the content itself and it belongs to it absolutely, so 
that the artist seems only to execute what is already cut and dried 
on its own account in essence. While the symbolic artist therefore 

440 
I I. I I. THE C LA S S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
strives to imagine a shape for the meaning, or a meaning for the 
shape, the classical artist transmutes the meaning into the shape 
since he only frees the already available external appearances, as it 
were, from an accessory which does not belong to them. But in this 
activity, although the artist's mere caprice is excluded, he does not 
simply copy or adhere to one fixed type, but is at the same time 
creative for the whole. Art which must first seek and invent its 
true content pays little attention besides to the formal aspect; but 
where the development of form is made the essential interest and 
proper task, there with the progress of the representation the 
content too is unnoticeably and unostentatiously developed, just as 
in general we have hitherto seen form and content going steadily 
hand in hand in their advance to perfection. In this respect the 
classical artist works for a present world of religion; its given 
materials and mythological ideas he develops cheerfully in the free 
play of art. 
(c) The same applies to the technical side of art. It too must be 
already cut and dried for the classical artist; the sensuous material 
in which the artist works must have already been rid of all brit­
tleness and stubbornness and must immediately obey the artist's 
intentions, so that the content, conformably to the nature of the 
classical sphere, may shine free and unhindered even through this 
external corporeality. Classical art therefore requires a high degree 
of technical skill which has subdued the sensuous material to 
willing obedience. Such technical perfection, if it is to carry out 
everything required by the spirit and its conceptions, presupposes 
the complete development of every craftsmanship in art, and this 
is achieved especially within a static religion. In other words, a 
religious outlook, like the Egyptian, e.g., first invents for itself 
specific external shapes, idols, colossal constructions whose type 
remains fixed, and now, by the established likeness of forms and 
figures, provides a considerable field for developing the steadily 
growing dexterity. This craftsmanship in the production of inferior 
and grotesque objects must have been there already before the 
genius of classical beauty transformed mechanical skill into techni­
cal perfection. For only when mechanical skill no longer puts any 
difficulty in the way on its own account can art go freely forward to 
the elaboration of form, and then the actual exercise of skill develops 
at the same time continually pari passu with the progress of content 
and form. 

INTRODUCTION 
4· Division of the Subject 
So far as concerns the division of this subject, it is usual in a more 
general sense to call every perfect work of art 'classical', whatever 
character it may otherwise have, whether symbolic or romantic. In 
the sense of the perfection of art we too have of course used the 
word 'classical', but with this difference, that this perfection was 
to be grounded in the complete interpenetration of inner free 
individuality and the external existent in which and as which 
this individuality appears. It follows that we expressly distinguish 
the classical art-form and its perfection from the symbolic and 
the romantic because their beauty in content and form is through­
out of another kind. Neither have we anything to do here yet, 
in connection with 'classical' art in the usual rather indefinite 
meaning of the word, with the particular kinds of art in which 
the classical ideal is displayed, e.g. sculpture, epic, definite kinds of 
lyric poetry, and specific forms of tragedy and comedy. Although 
these particular kinds of art bear the stamp of classical art, they 
come into consideration only in the Third Part of these Lectures 
where the development of the individual arts and their species is 
discussed. What therefore we have before us here for more detailed 
treatment is 'classical' art in the sense of the word that we have 
laid down, and as grounds for the division of the subject we can 
thus look only for the stages of development which proceed them­
selves from this conception of the classical ideal. The essential 
features of this development are the following. 
The first point to which we must direct our attention is this, 
that the classical art-form is not to be regarded, like the symbolic, 
as the direct commencement or the beginning of art, but on the 
contrary as a result. For this reason we have in the first place 
developed it out of the course of symbolic modes of representation 
which are its presupposition. The chief point on which this advance 
turned was the concentration of the content into the clarity of 
inherently self-conscious individuality which cannot use for its 
expression either the mere natural shape, whether inorganic or 
animal, or personification and the human shape, compounded 
with the natural one, though badly; on the contrary, it achieves 
expression in the vitality of the human body that is completely per­
vaded by the breath of the spirit. Now just as the essence of free­
dom consists in being what it is through its own resources, so what 

44z 
I I. I I. THE CLA S S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
at first appeared as mere presuppositions and conditions of art's 
origin outside the classical sphere must fall into that sphere's own 
territory, so that the actual appearance of the true content and 
genuine shape may be produced by overcoming what is negative 
and inappropriate for the ideal. This process of formation through 
which classical beauty proper, alike in form and content, engenders 
itself out of itself is therefore our point of departure and what we 
have to treat in a first chapter. 
In the second chapter, on the other hand, we have reached 
through this process the true ideal of the classical art-form. The 
centre here is formed by the beautiful new artistic world of Greek 
gods which we must develop and settle alike in its spiritual individ­
uality and the bodily form immediately bound up therewith. 
But, thirdly, the nature of classical art implies not only the 
growth of that art's beauty out of its own resources but, on the 
other hand, its dissolution too, which will conduct us on to a 
further sphere, i.e. to the romantic form of art. The gods and the 
human individuals of classical beauty arise but pass away again for 
the artistic consciousness which (a) turns against the relics of the 
natural aspect within which Greek art has precisely developed to 
the perfection of beauty, or (b) turns away out into a reality, bad, 
vulgar, godless, in order to bring to light its falsity and negativity. 
In this dissolution, the artistic activity of which we must take as 
the topic of the third chapter, there are separated the factors which 
were fused harmoniously into the immediacy of beauty and con­
stituted the truly classical art. The inner then stands by itself on 
one side, the external existent separated therefrom on the other, 
and subjectivity, withdrawn into itself because in the previous 
shapes it can no longer find its adequate reality, has to be filled 
with the content of a new spiritual world of absolute freedom and 
infinity and look around for new forms of expression for this 
deeper content. 

Chapter I 
THE PROCESS OF SHAPING THE 
CLA S SI CAL ART-FORM 
One essential factor directly present in the essence of the free 
spirit is that of self-concentration, coming to self, being self-aware 
and being determinately present to self, even if, as was indicated 
earlier, this absorption in the realm of inwardness need not go so 
far as either to a subjective independence gained by a negative 
attitude to everything substantial in spirit and stable in nature, or 
to that absolute reconciliation which constitutes the freedom of 
truly infinite subjectivity. But with the freedom of spirit, whatever 
form it may take, there is bound up in general the cancellation of 
the purely natural qua spirit's opposite. The spirit must first 
withdraw into itself from nature, lift itself above it, and overcome 
it, before it can prevail in it without hindrance as in an element 
which cannot withstand it, and transform it into a positive exis­
tence of its own freedom. But if we ask about the more specific 
object which in classical art spirit transcends, thereby acquiring 
its independence, this object is not nature as such but a nature 
already itself permeated by spiritual meanings, that is to say, the 
symbolic form of art; this form made use of immediate natural 
configurations for the expression of the Absolute, since its artistic 
consciousness either saw gods present in animals, etc., or struggled 
in vain and in a false way towards the true unity of the spiritual 
and the natural. It is by invalidating and transforming this false 
linkage that the Ideal first produces itself as the Ideal, and there­
fore has to develop within itself, as a factor belonging to itself, 
what is to be overcome. 
This enables us, in passing, to settle the question whether the 
Greeks adopted their religion from foreign peoples or not. We have 
seen already that subordinate stages are necessary as a presuppo­
sition of classical art in the nature of the case. So far as these 
actually appear and are separated in time, they are, in contrast 
to the higher form which is striving to extricate itself, something 
present from which the newly developing art proceeds-even 

444 
I I. I I  THE CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
if in the matter of Greek mythology this cannot be entirely proved 
by historical evidence. But the relation of the Greek spirit to 
these presuppositions is essentially a relation of formation and, 
first of all, of negative transformation. Were this not the case the 
ideas and shapes presupposed must have remained the same. 
Herodotus does say, in the passage [ii. 53] quoted earlier, that 
Homer and Hesiod gave the Greeks their gods, but he also says 
expressly of individual gods, that this or that one is Egyptian, etc. 
Therefore poetical composition does not exclude the reception of 
material from elsewhere but only points to its essential transfor­
mation. For the Greeks already had mythological ideas before the 
period which Herodotus ascribes to these two earliest poets. 
Now if we ask further about the more detailed aspects of this 
necessary transformation of what does of course belong to the 
Ideal, though in an unsuitable form at first, we find this transfor­
mation represented in a naive way as the content of mythology 
itself. The chief deed of the Greek gods is to engender and frame 
themselves out of the past belonging to the history of the origin 
and progress of their own race. Since the gods are supposed to exist 
as spiritual individuals in bodily shape, this involves that, on the 
one side, instead of contemplating its own essence in what is merely 
living and animal, the spirit regards the living being as unworthy 
of it, as its misfortune and its death, and, on the other side, over­
comes the elemental in nature and its own confused representation 
therein. But conversely it is equally necessary for the ideal of the 
classical gods that they should not merely stand contrasted with 
nature and its elemental powers, like the individual spirit in its 
abstract finite self-sufficiency, but have the elements of universal 
natural life in themselves as, conformably with their own essence, 
a factor constituting the life of the spirit. Just as the gods are in 
themselves essentially universal and in this universality are purely 
specific individuals, so too their corporeal side must contain in 
itself the natural at the same time as an essential far-reaching 
natural force and an activity intertwined with the spiritual. 
From this point of view we may divide the process of shaping 
the classical art-form in the following way: 
The first chief point concerns the degrading of the animal 
element and its removal from the sphere of free pure beauty. 
The second, more important, aspect concerns the elemental 
powers of nature, presented themselves at first as gods; only 

SHAP I N G  THE CLA S S I CA L  A RT-FORM 
445 
through their conquest can the genuine race of gods achieve un­
questioned dominion; this concerns the battle and war between 
the old and the new gods. 
But then, thirdly, this negative orientation all the same becomes 
affirmative again after the spirit has won its free right, and elemen­
tal nature constitutes a positive aspect of the gods, one permeated 
by individual spirituality, and the gods are now girt with the 
animal element, even if only as an attribute and external sign. From 
these points of view we will now try to emphasize, still briefly, 
the more specific traits which come under consideration here. 
I .  The Degradation of the Animal 
In the case of the Indians and Egyptians, and Asiatics in general, 
we see the animal kingdom, or at least specific kinds of animals, 
revered and regarded as sacred because in them the Divine itself 
was supposed to be visibly present. Therefore the animal form is a 
chief ingredient of their artistic representations, even if it is used 
besides only as a symbol and in connection with human forms at a 
time before the human and only the human came into conscious­
ness as what is alone true. The self-consciousness of spirit is what 
alone makes respect for the dark and dull inwardness of animal life 
disappear. This is already the case with the ancient Hebrews since 
they, as was already remarked above, regarded the whole of nature 
neither as a symbol nor as a presence of God, and they ascribed to 
external objects only that force and life which dwells in them in 
fact. Yet even in their case there is still, as it were accidentally, at 
least the remains of reverence for life as such, since Moses, e.g., 
forbids the consumption of animal blood because life is in the 
blood [Genesis, 9: 4; Leviticus, 17: I I ;  Deuteronomy, 12: 15 ff.]. 
But man must strictly be allowed to eat what is available to him. 
Now the next step that we have to mention in connection with the 
transition to classical art consists in debasing the high dignity 
and position of the animal world and making this degradation 
itself into the content of religious ideas and artistic productions. 
In this matter there is a variety of topics out of which I will select 
only the following as an illustration. 
(a) Animal Sacrifices 
Among the Greeks certain animals appear as preferred above 
others, e.g. the snake occurs in Homer (Iliad, ii. 308; xii. 208) as 

446 
I I. I I. THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
an especially popular genius in the case of sacrifices, and one kind 
of animal especially is sacrificed to one god, another kind to another; 
further, the hare crossing the road is noticed, birds in flight either 
to right or left are watched, entrails are examined for prophetic 
indications; all this still implies a certain veneration of the animal, 
for the gods declare themselves in this way and speak to man by 
omens, but in essence all this is only single revelations-something 
superstitious of course, yet only purely momentary indications of 
the Divine. Whereas what is important is the sacrifice of animals 
and the eating of the sacrifice. Among the Indians on the contrary, 
the sacred animals were entirely preserved and cherished, while the 
Egyptians kept them from putrefaction even after their death. To 
the Greeks sacrifice counted as sacred. In sacrifice a man shows 
that he wishes to renounce the object consecrated to his gods and 
cancel the use of it by himself. Now here there is obvious a charac­
teristic trait of the Greeks, namely that with them to slaughter for 
a 'sacrifice' means at the same time 'to slaughter for a feast' 
(Odyssey, xiv. 414; xxiv. 215), because they destined for the gods 
only one part of the animals and the inedible part at that, but the 
flesh they kept for themselves and had a grand feast. In Greece 
itself a myth has arisen from this. The ancient Greeks sacrificed to 
the gods with great solemnity, and the animals in their entirety 
were consumed by the sacrificial flames. Yet this great expense the 
poorer could not bear. Therefore Prometheus [Hesiod, Theog., 
521 ff.] by asking Zeus tried to obtain from him a ruling that their 
necessary obligation was limited to sacrificing only one part of the 
animal, while they might keep the rest for their own use. He 
slaughtered two oxen, burnt the liver of both, but put all the 
bones into the skin of one of the animals and the flesh into the 
skin of the other, and then gave Zeus the choice. Zeus, deceived, 
chose the bones because they made up the bigger package and so 
left the flesh to men. Therefore when the flesh of the sacrificial 
animals was eaten, the remains-the portion of the gods-were 
burnt in the same fire. But Zeus deprived men of fire, because 
without it their flesh portion was useless to them. But this was 
little help to him. Prometheus purloined fire and in his joy flew 
back quicker than he went, and therefore, as the tale goes, men 
bringing good news run quickly even now. In this way the Greeks 
have directed their attention to every advance in human culture 
and reshaped it in myths and so preserved it in their minds. 

(b) Hunts 
S H A P I N G  THE CLASSICAL ART-FORM 
447 
A similar example of a still further debasement of the animal 
world comes in here, namely the reminiscences of famous hunts 
ascribed to the heroes and continually commemorated with grati­
tude. In Greece the killing of animals which appear to be dan­
gerous foes, e.g. the strangling of the Nemean lion by Hercules, 
his slaying of the Lernaean hydra, and his hunting of the Eryman­
thian boar, counts as something lofty whereby the heroes fought 
their way to the rank of gods; whereas the Indians punished with 
death, as a crime, the killing of certain animals. Of course in 
exploits of this kind further symbols play their part or lie at their 
basis, as in the case of Hercules the sun and its course, so that such 
heroic actions afford also an essential aspect for symbolical exegesis ; 
nevertheless these myths are taken at the same time in their plain 
meaning as beneficial hunts, and it was thus that they were under­
stood by the Greeks. In a similar connection we must recall here 
some of Aesop's fables, especially the one mentioned earlier1 
about the beetle. The beetle [scarab], this old Egyptian symbol, in 
whose balls of dung the Egyptians, or the interpreters of their 
religious ideas, saw the ball of the world, occurs again in Aesop 
in relation to Zeus, and with the important point that the eagle 
does not respect Zeus's protection of the hare. Aristophanes, on the 
other hand, has degraded the beetle altogether into a joke. 
(c) Metamorphoses 
Thirdly, the degradation of the animal world is directly ex­
pressed in the stories of the numerous metamorphoses which Ovid 
has painted for us in detail, charmingly, ingeniously, with fine traits 
of feeling and sentiment, but he has also put them together with 
much loquacity as purely mythological and childish plays and 
external events without their great inner dominating spirit, and 
without recognizing any deeper sense in them. But they do not 
lack such a deeper meaning and we will therefore at this point 
make mention of it again. In great part the individual stories are 
baroque in their material and barbaric, not owing to the corrupt­
ness of a civilized environment but, as in the Nibelungenlied, 
owing to the corruptness of a [state of] nature still in the raw; up 
to Ovid's thirteenth book, subjects older than the Homeric stories, 
1 See above, p. 386, note 2. 

448 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
intermingled besides with cosmogony and foreign elements drawn 
from Phoenician, Phrygian, and Egyptian symbolism are, to be 
sure, treated in a human way, yet the uncouth background has 
even so remained, while the metamorphoses related in tales which 
belong to a time later than the Trojan War (although they also 
contain material drawn from fabulous times) clash in a blundering 
way with the names of Ajax and Aeneas. 
(ex) In general we may consider metamorphoses as the opposite 
of the Egyptian contemplation and veneration of animals. Looked 
at from the ethical and spiritual side, metamorphoses entail es­
sentially a negative tendency against nature, a tendency to make 
animals and inorganic forms into a presentation of the degradation 
of man, so that, i.e., while in the case of the Egyptians the gods of 
elemental nature were raised to animals and given life, here, on the 
other hand, as was noticed earlier [in Section I, ch. III, A 3], 
natural forms appear as a punishment for some slighter or more 
serious fault and monstrous crime, as the existence of something 
godless and miserable, and as a configuration of grief in which man 
can no longer hold his own. Therefore they are not to be inter­
preted as the transmigration of souls in the Egyptian sense, for 
that is a migration without guilt and it is regarded on the contrary 
as an elevation when a man becomes a cow. 
On the whole, however, no matter how different the natural 
objects may be into which the spiritual is banished, this cycle of 
myths does not form a systematic whole. A few examples may 
clarify my points. 
Among the Egyptians the wolf plays a great part; Osiris, e.g., 
appears [in the form of a wolf] as a helpful protector of his son 
Horus in the latter's struggle against Typhon, and in a series of 
Egyptian coins he stands beside Horus. In general the association 
of the wolf with the sun-god is extremely ancient. In the Meta­
morphoses of Ovid, on the other hand, the transformation of 
Lycaon into a wolf is represented as punishment for impiety 
against the gods. After the Giants had been overcome and their 
bodies crushed, the story goes (Met., i. 150-243), the earth, warmed 
by the blood of its sons, shed everywhere, animated the warm 
blood and, so that no trace of the savage stock might remain, 
brought forth a race of men. Yet this offspring too was con­
temptuous of the gods and eager for savage deeds and murder. 
Then Jupiter called the gods together to destroy this mortal race. He 

SHAP I N G  THE C LA S S I C A L  ART-FORM 
449 
related how Lycaon had cunningly laid a trap for him, the lord of 
lightning and the gods, when the worthlessness of the time had 
reached his ear and he had desended from Olympus and reached 
Arcadia. 'I gave a sign', he says, 'that a god had drawn nigh and 
the people began to pray'. But Lycaon first scoffed at these pious 
prayers and then cried out: 'I will make trial whether this be a god 
or a mortal, and the truth will admit of no doubt.' Jupiter proceeds 
'He prepares to slay me in a heavy sleep at night; this way of 
investigating the truth fascinates him. And not yet content with 
this, he cut the throat of a Molossian hostage with his sword, and 
he cooked some of the only half-dead limbs and baked others on 
the fire and set them both before me as a meal. With avenging 
flame I laid his house in ashes. Terrified, he flies outside and when 
he reaches the silent fields he howls all around and tries in vain to 
speak. With rage in his jaws, with avidity for the usual murder, he 
turns against the cattle and even now rejoices in their blood; his 
clothes have become hairs, his arms legs; he is a wolf and pre­
serves traces of his former shape.' 
The atrocity committed is of similar gravity in the story of 
Procne who was changed into a swallow (Met., vi. 440-676). When 
she stood well with her husband Tereus, she asked him to send 
her to see her sister or to let her sister come to her. He made haste 
to launch his ship into the sea and with sail and oar quickly reached 
the shore of the Piraeus. But scarcely does he set eyes on Philomela 
than he burns with passionate love for her. At their departure 
Pandion, her father, conjures him to protect her with a father's 
love and, as soon as may be, send her back to him, her the sweet 
comfort of his old age ; but the journey is hardly over before the 
barbarian locks her up, pale, trembling, fearing the worst, asking 
with tears where her sister is; by force he makes her his concubine, 
a twin-consort with her sister. Full of wrath and casting all shame 
aside, Philomela threatens to betray the deed herself. Then Tereus 
draws his sword, grabs her, ties her up, and cuts out her tongue, 
but he hypocritically tells his wife that her sister is dead. The 
wailing Procne tears her state-robes from her shoulders and dons 
mourning clothes, prepares an empty tomb and bewails the fate of 
her sister, who is not thus to be bewailed. What does Philomela do ? 
Imprisoned, deprived of speech and voice, she bethinks her of 
cunning. With purple threads she works into a white web the 
story of the crime, and sends the dress secretly to Procne. The 

450 
I I. I I. THE CLASSI CAL FORM O F  A RT 
wife reads her sister's pitiful communication, she says nothing and 
does not weep but she lives entirely in the imagination of revenge. 
It was the time of the festival of Bacchus; driven by the furies of 
grief, she forces her way to her sister, tears her out of her apart­
ment and carries her off with her. Then in her own house, as she 
still doubts what horrible revenge she is to take on Tereus, Itys 
comes to his mother. With wild eyes she looks at him: 'How like 
his father he is.' She says no more and accomplishes the melan­
choly deed. The sisters kill the boy and serve him at table to 
Tereus who gulps down his own blood. Now he asks for his son, 
and Procne says to him: 'Thou carriest in thyself what thou askest 
for' ; and as he looks around and searches for where the boy is, 
and asks and calls again, Philomela brings the bloody head for him 
to see. Thereupon with an awful yell of anguish he shoves away 
the table, weeps, and calls himself his son's grave; and then 
pursues the daughters of Pandion with naked steel. But given 
feathers they float away thence, one to the wood [Philomela, the 
nightingale] the other to the roof [Procne, the swallow], and Tereus 
too, made agile by his grief and eagerness for revenge, becomes a 
bird with a comb of feathers on the crown of his head and a dis­
proportionately protuberant beak; the name of the bird is the 
hoopoe. 
Other metamorphoses, on the other hand, arise from less seri­
ous guilt. So Cycnus is changed into a swan; Daphne, the first 
love of Apollo, becomes a laurel (Met., i. 451-567), Clytie a helio­
trope; Narcissus, who in his self-conceit despised girls, is in love 
with his reflection in a stream,! and Byblis (ibid., ix. 454-664) 
loved her brother Caunus and, when he spurned her, was 
changed into a spring which even now still bears her name and 
flows beneath a dark ilex. 
However, we must not lose ourselves in further details, and 
therefore for the sake of the transition to the next point I will 
' Phaethon, who stole the chariot of the sun and burnt the earth, was de­
stroyed by Zeus. Cycnus, his friend, gathered up his remains and was changed 
into a swan (Met., ii. 367 ff.). Daphne refused Apollo. Clytie followed Apollo's 
(the sun's) course daily but languished because she did not find favour with him 
and, pitying her, the gods changed her into a flower that always turned to the 
sun, i.e. heliotrope. (Ibid., iv. 234-70 tells a slightly different story, and others 
say that she was changed into a sunflower.) Narcissus tries to embrace his own 
reflection, thinking it to be a water sprite, and, a victim of love and despair, 
is changed into a flower which is said to grow beside quiet pools and to be 
reflected therein (ibid., iii. 339 ff.). 

SHAPING THE CLAS S I CA L  ART-FORM 
451 
mention no more than the metamorphosis of the Pierides, who 
according to Ovid (Met., v. 302) were the daughters of Pierus and 
challenged the Muses to a contest. For us the only important 
thing is the difference between what the Pierides and what the 
Muses sang. The former celebrated the battles of the gods (ibid., 
319-31) and give false honour to the Giants and disparage the 
deeds of the great gods: sent up from the bowels of the earth, 
Typhoeus1 struck terror into heaven; all the gods)led thence until, 
worn out, they rest on Egyptian soil. But even here, the Pierides 
tell, Typhoeus arrives and the high gods hide themselves in delusive 
shapes. Jupiter, the song says, was the leader of the herd [a ram], 
whence even now the Libyan Ammon is figured with crumpled 
horns; Apollo becomes a raven; the scion of Semele [Bacchus] a 
goat; the sister of Phoebus [Artemis] a cat; Juno a snow-white 
cow; Venus is concealed in a fish and Mercury in the feathers of 
the ibis. Thus here the gods suffer ignominy because of their 
animal shape, and, even if they have not been transformed as 
punishment for a fault or a crime, still cowardice is cited as the 
reason for their own self-imposed transformation. 
On the other hand, Calliope [Muse of Epic Poetry] hymns the 
good deeds and stories of Ceres: 'Ceres was the first', she says 
[ibid., 341], 'to dig up the ground with the curved ploughshare; 
the first to give fruits and fruitful nourishment to the earth ; the 
first to give us laws, and, in short, we ourselves are the gift of 
Ceres. Her have I to praise; would I could only sing songs worthy 
of the goddess! The goddess indeed is worthy of songs.' As she 
ended, the Pierides ascribed victory in the contest to themselves; 
but as they tried to speak, Ovid says (ibid., 67o), and with loud 
cries tried to brandish their insolent hands, they saw their nails 
become feathers, their arms bedecked with down, and each saw 
the other's mouth grown into a stiff beak; and while they want to 
bewail their lot they are carried away on outspread wings, and, 
screamers in the woods, they hover in the air as magpies. And to 
this day, Ovid adds, they still have their earlier readiness of tongue, 
their raucous chatter, and their huge delight in babbling. 
Thus it turns out that here again the metamorphosis is repre­
sented as punishment, and punishment indeed, as is the case with 
many of these stories, for impiety against the gods. 
1 A monster with the heads of a hundred serpents on his hands. Titans, 
giants, and monsters are often confused in the literature. 

452 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
(/3) As for the further metamorphoses of men and gods into 
animals that are familiar to us from other sources, there is at their 
basis no direct transgression on the part of those transformed ; 
Circe, e.g., had the power to bewitch men into animals, but in that 
case the animal condition appears as no more than a misfortune 
and a degradation which does not bring honour even to the person 
who works the transformation for selfish ends. Circe was only a 
subordinate and obscure goddess; her power appears as mere 
magic and when Ulysses takes measures to free his bewitched 
comrades, Mercury helps him [Odyssey, x]. 
Of a similar kind are the numerous shapes which Zeus assumes, 
as when he changes himself into a bull on account of Europa, 
approaches Leda as a swan, and impregnates Danae as a shower 
of gold ; his aim is always deception and his intentions are not 
spiritual but natural and indecorous, and he is incited to them by 
the constantlywell-founded jealousy of Juno. The idea of a universal 
procreative life of nature which was the chief characteristic in 
many older mythologies is here recast by fancy into single stories 
of the profligacy of the father of gods and men, but he achieves 
his exploits not in his own shape, for the most part not in human 
shape, but expressly in animal or some other natural shape. 
(y) Finally, associated with these are the hybrid shapes of man 
and beast which likewise are not excluded from Greek art, but the 
beast is assumed to be only something degrading and unspiritual. 
Amongst the Egyptians the goat, Mendes, was revered as god 
(Herodotus ii. 46-according to Jablonski's view, see F. Creuzer, 
Symbolik, i, p. 477, in the sense of a procreative natural force, 
especially the sun), and with such abomination that even women, 
as Pindar indicates, 1 gave themselves to goats. With the Greeks, 
on the other hand, Pan is the one who arouses awe of the divine 
presence, and, later, in fauns, satyrs, Pans, the goat shape appears 
only in a subordinate way in the feet and, in the most beautiful of 
them, only, if at all, in pointed ears and tiny horns. The rest of the 
shape is that of the human form, the animal being thrust into the 
background as a trivial remnant. And yet the fauns did not count 
with the Greeks as high gods and spiritual powers; their character 
remained one of sensuous unbounded joviality. They were indeed 
1 Fragment 201 (Snell). Hegel probably read this in Strabo, 17. i. 19. Hero­
dotus, Joe. cit., encountered this abomination, but he implies that it was very 
unusual. 

SHAP I N G  THE CLASSI CAL ART-FORM 
453 
represented also with a deeper expression as, e.g. the beautiful 
faun in Munich who holds the young Bacchus in his arms and looks 
on him with a laugh full of supreme love and affection. He is not 
meant to be the father of Bacchus, but only his foster-father, and 
now there is ascribed to him that beautiful feeling of joy in the 
innocence of the child which, as Mary's maternal feeling for Christ, 
has been raised to such a lofty spiritual topic in romantic art. But 
with the Greeks this most charming love belongs to the subordi­
nate sphere of fauns in order to indicate that its origin is derived 
from the animal and natural realm and that therefore it can be 
allotted to this sphere too. 
The Centaurs also are similar hybrid formations in which like­
wise the natural aspect of sensuousness and concupiscence is 
predominantly presented, while the spiritual side is pressed into 
the background. Chiron, of course, [though a Centaur] is of a 
nobler sort, a clever physician and the tutor of Achilles, but this 
instruction in his capacity as tutor to a child does not belong to the 
sphere of the Divine as such but is related to human skill and 
cleverness. 
Thus in classical art the character of the animal form is altered 
in every respect; here the animal form is used to indicate the evil, 
the bad, the trivial, the natural, and the unspiritual, whereas 
formerly it was the expression of the positive and the Absolute. 
2. The Battle between the Old Gods and the New 
The second stage, a higher one, of this debasement of the animal 
sphere consists in this, that since the genuine gods of classical art 
have for their inner character free self-consciousness as the 
self-reposing power of the individual spirit, they can also come 
into our view only as possessed of knowledge and will, i.e. as 
spiritual powers. In this way the human shape in which they are 
represented is not, as might be supposed, a mere form which is 
tacked on to their content purely externally by imagination, but is 
implied in the meaning, the content, the inner itself. But the 
Divine in general is to be apprehended essentially as the unity of 
the spiritual and the natural; both of these belong to the Absolute 
and, this being so, it is only the different ways in which this har­
mony is presented that make up the series of stages in the different 
art-forms and religions. According to our Christian ideas, God is 
the creator and lord of nature and the spiritual world and so is of 

454 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM OF ART 
course exempt from immediate existence in nature, because only 
as withdrawal into himself, as spiritual and absolute self-indepen­
dence, is he truly God; but the purely finite human spirit is 
bounded and restricted by its opposite, namely nature. This 
restriction, therefore, the human spirit in its existence only over­
comes, and thereby raises itself to infinity, by grasping nature in 
thought through theoretical activity, and through practical activity 
bringing about a harmony between nature and the spiritual Idea, 
reason, and the good. Now God is this infinite activity, in so far 
as dominion over nature is his prerogative, and, as this infinite 
activity, with its knowing and willing, he is explicit to himself. 
Conversely, as we saw, in the religions of strictly symbolic art 
the unity of the inner and the ideal with nature is an immediate 
linkage which therefore had nature as its chief characteristic both 
in content and form. Thus there were venerated as god's existence 
and life the sun, the Nile, the sea, the earth, the natural process of 
coming to be and passing away and of procreation and reproduc­
tion, the changing course of the universal life of nature. Yet these 
natural powers were already personified in symbolic art and there­
by put in opposition to the spiritual. Now if, as the classical art­
form demands, the gods are to be spiritual individuals in harmony 
with nature, mere personification is insufficient for attaining this 
result. For if what is personified is a mere universal power and 
natural agency, personification remains entirely formal without 
penetrating into the content and cannot in that content bring intc 
existence either the spiritual element or the individuality of that. 
Therefore the converse necessarily belongs to classical art: for we 
have just treated the animal world in its debasement, and so now 
the universal power of nature is degraded for its part, and the 
spiritual is contrasted with it as something higher. But in that 
case, instead of personification, it is subjectivity which constitutes 
the chief characteristic. Yet, on the other hand, in classical art the 
gods may not cease to be natural powers, because here God can­
not yet come into representation as inherently and absolutely free 
spirituality. But nature can stand in the relation of a merely 
created and subservient creature to a lord and creator separated 
from it, only if God is envisaged either, as in the art of sublimity, 
as inherently abstract and purely ideal domination by the single 
substance, or, as in Christianity, as concrete spirit raised into the 
pure element of spiritual existence and personal independence, and 

S H A P I N G  THE CLA S S I CA L  ART-FORM 
455 
so to complete freedom. Neither of these alternatives corresponds 
with the outlook of classical art. Its god is not yet lord of nature 
because he has not yet got absolute spirituality as his content and 
form; he is no longer lord of nature because the sublime relation 
between human individuality and god-forsaken natural things has 
ceased and been modified into beauty in which both sides, the 
universal and the individual, the spiritual and the natural, are to 
be given their full rights unrestrictedly for artistic representa­
tion. That is to say, in the god of classical art the natural power 
remains contained, but as a natural power, not in the sense of 
universal all-embracing nature, but as the specific and therefore 
restricted agency of the sun, the sea, etc., or in short as a particular 
natural power which appears as a spiritual individual and has this 
spiritual individuality as its own essence. 
Now since, as we saw already at the start of this chapter, the 
classical ideal is not present immediately but can only appear 
through the process in which the negative side of spirit's shape is 
transcended, this transformation and upward development of the 
raw, ugly, wild, baroque, purely natural or fantastic, which has its 
origin in earlier religious ideas and artistic insights, must be a 
chief interest in Greek mythology and therefore be portrayed in 
a specific group of particular meanings. 
If we now proceed to a closer consideration of this chief point, I 
must at once premiss that we have no business here with an his­
torical investigation of the variegated and manifold ideas of Greek 
mythology. What concerns us in this matter is only the essential 
factors in this upward development in so far as these prove to be 
universal factors in artistic configuration and its content; whereas 
the endless mass of particular myths, narrations, stories, and 
events related to a locality and a symbolism, which taken together 
maintain their right in the new gods also and occur incidentally in 
artistic images, but which are not strictly intrinsic to the central 
point which we are striving to reach along our route-all this is 
a breadth of material which we must leave aside here and we can 
only refer to one or two features by way of example. 
On the whole we may compare this route, along which we are 
proceeding, with the course of the history of sculpture. For since 
sculpture places the gods in their genuine shape before sense­
perception, it forms the proper centre of classical art, even if poetry 
complements it by describing gods and men in a way distinct from 

456 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
the self-reposing objectivity of sculpture or by presenting the 
divine and human world in their very activity and movement. 
Now just as in sculpture the chief feature at its start is the trans­
formation of the formless stone or block of wood fallen from 
heaven (o,orren}s'}I (as the great goddess2 from Pessinus in Asia 
Minor still was when the Romans took it to Rome by a solemn 
embassy) into a human shape and figure, so we have to begin here 
too with the formless uncouth natural powers and only indicate 
the stages by which they rise to individual spirituality and con­
tract into fixed shapes. 
In this connection we may distinguish three different aspects 
as the most important. 
The first that claims our attention is oracles in which the know­
ledge and will of the gods is declared, still formlessly, through 
natural existents. 
The second chief point concerns the universal powers of nature 
as well as the abstractions of law etc., which lie at the base of the 
genuine spiritual individual gods as their birthplace and serve as 
the necessary presupposition of their origin and activity-these 
powers are the old gods in distinction from the new. 
Thirdly and lastly, the absolutely necessary advance to the Ideal 
is exhibited in the fact that the originally superficial personifications 
of natural activities and the most abstract spiritual relationships 
are fought and suppressed as what is in itself subordinate and 
negative, and by this degradation independent spiritual indi­
viduality and its human form and action are enabled to acquire 
undisputed mastery. This transformation, which forms the proper 
centre in the history of the origin of the Greek gods, is represented 
in Greek mythology both naively and explicitly in the battle be­
tween the old and the new gods, in the downfall of the Titans, 
and in the victory won by the divine race of Zeus. 
(a) Oracles 
Now first, there is no need to make any extended mention of 
oracles here ; the essential point of importance rests only on the 
fact that in classical art natural phenomena are no longer venerated 
as such, in the way that the Parsis, e.g., worshipped naphtha springs 
1 i.e. that fell from Zeus; Euripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, 977. 
• Magna Mater (Cybele) removed by the Romans in 204 B.C. in obedience to 
a Sibylline oracle, She was worshipped in a block of stone (Livy, xxix. I I-14). 

SHAP ING THE CLAS S I CAL ART- FORM 
457 
or fire, nor do the gods remain inscrutable secret dumb enigmas, as 
was the case with the Eygptians; in classical art the gods, as them­
selves knowing and willing, declare their wisdom to men by way of 
natural phenomena. So the ancient Hellenes [Pelasgi] asked the 
oracle at Dodona (Herodotus, ii. 52) whether they should adopt the 
names of the gods imported from the barbarians, and the oracle 
replied: use them. 
(a:) The signs through which the gods revealed themselves were 
for the most part quite simple: at Dodona the rustling and sough­
ing of the sacred oak, the murmur of the spring, and the tone of the 
brazen vessel which resounded in the wind. So too at Delos the 
laurel rustled, and at Delphi too the wind on the brazen tripod was 
a decisive factor. But apart from such immediate natural sounds, 
man himself is also the voice of the oracle when he is stupefied and 
stimulated out of his alert and intelligent presence of mind into a 
natural state of enthusiasm, as, e.g., Pythia at Delphi, stupefied by 
vapours, spoke the oracular words, or in the cave of Trophonius1 
the man who consulted the oracle had visions, and from their 
interpretation the answer was given him. 
{/3) But there is still another aspect in the external signs. For in 
the oracles the god is indeed apprehended as the one who knows, 
and to Apollo, therefore, the god of knowledge, the most famous 
oracle [i.e. the one at Delphi] is dedicated; yet the form in which 
he declares his will remains something natural and completely 
vague, a natural voice or word-sounds without any connection. In 
this obscurity of form the spiritual content is itself dark and there­
fore needs clarification and explanation. 
(y) The pronouncement of the god is submitted at first purely 
in the form of something natural. But although the explanation 
makes the inquirer aware of it in a spiritualized form, it neverthe­
less remains obscure and ambiguous. For in his knowing and 
willing the god is concrete universality, and his advice or command, 
revealed by the oracle, must be of the same kind. But the universal 
is not one-sided and abstract but, as concrete, contains both one 
side of the ambiguity and the other. Now since the man stands 
there as ignorant opposite the god who knows, he accepts the 
oracle ignorantly too; i.e. its concrete universality is not obvious to 
him and when he decides to act in accordance with the ambiguous 
divine saying he can choose only one side of it; every action in 
1 There is a description of this in Pausanias, ix. 39· 

458 
I I. II. THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
particular circumstances is always determinate, and decision must 
be in accordance with one side of the oracle and exclude the other. 
But scarcely has he acted and the deed been actually accomplished, 
a deed therefore which has become his own and for which he 
must answer, than collision occurs; he suddenly sees turned 
against him the other side which was also implicit in the oracle, 
and, against his knowledge and will, he is caught in the toils of 
that fate of his deed which the gods know though he did not. 
Conversely again, the gods are determinate powers, and their utter­
ance, when it carries in itself this character of determinacy, as, e.g., 
the command of Apollo which drove Orestes to revenge, produces 
collision too on account of this determinacy. 
Since the form assumed in the oracle by the inner knowledge of 
the god is the entirely indefinite externality or the abstract inward­
ness of the saying, and the content itself comprises, owing to its 
ambiguity, the possibility of discord, it follows that in classical art 
it is not sculpture but poetry, especially dramatiC poetry, in which 
oracles constitute one aspect of the subject-matter and become of 
importance. But in classical art they do acquire an essential place 
because in such art human individuality has not pressed on to the 
extreme of inwardness at which the subject draws the decision for 
his action purely from within himself. What we call 'conscience' 
in our sense of the word has not yet found its place here. The 
Greek does often act from his own passion, good or bad, but the 
real 'pathos' which should and does animate him comes from 
the gods whose content and might is the universal element in such 
a 'pathos', and the heroes are either immediately full of it or they 
consult the oracle when the gods are not present in person to 
command the act. 
(b) The Old Gods in Distinction from the New 
In the oracle the content [of what is declared] lies in the knowing 
and willing of the gods, while the form of its external appearance is 
what is abstractly external and natural. Now, on the other hand, 
the natural with its universal powers and their agencies becomes 
the content out of which independent individuality has first to force 
its way and it acquires for its first form only the formal and super­
ficial personification [of these powers]. The repulse of these purely 
natural powers, the clash and opposition through which they are 
vanquished, is just the important point for which we have to 

SHAP I N G  THE CLASSICAL ART-FORM 
459 
thank strictly classical art alone and which on this account we will 
subject to a closer examination. 
(ex) The first point to notice in this connection is the fact that 
now we have not to do, as was the case in the world view of sub­
limity, or partly even in India, with an explicitly ready-made god, 
devoid of sensuous appearance, as the beginning of all things; on 
the contrary, the. beginning is provided here by nature-gods and 
primarily by the more universal powers of nature, Chaos the 
ancient, Tartarus, Erebus, all these wild subterranean beings, and 
further by Uranus, Gaia, the Titanic Eros, Cronus, etc. Then from 
these there first arose the more definite powers, such as Helios, 
Oceanus, etc., which become the natural basis for the later spirit­
ually individualized gods. Thus there here enters again a theogony 
and cosmogony invented by imagination and shaped out by art; 
but its first gods are viewed on the one hand as either still remain­
ing of an indefinite kind or as being enlarged beyond all measure, 
and, on the other hand, as still carrying in themselves much that is 
symbolical. 
(ft) As for the more definite difference within these Titanic 
powers themselves, they are, 
(cxcx) first, powers of earth and the stars, without spiritual and 
ethical content, and therefore ungovernable, a raw and savage race, 
misshapen, like products of Indian or Egyptian fancy, gigantic and 
formless. With other sorts of natural individuals, e.g. like Brontes 
and Steropes, 1 the hundred-handed Giants Briareus, Cottus, and 
Gyges, they stand under the dominion of Uranus first, then of 
Cronus, this chief Titan, who obviously signifies time: he swallows 
all his children just as time annihilates everything it has brought to 
birth. This myth is not lacking in symbolical meaning. For natural 
life is in fact subjected to time and brings into existence only the 
ephemeral, just as e.g. the prehistoric age of a people, which is 
only a nation, a tribe, but does not form a state or pursue aims that 
are inherently stable, falls a victim to the unhistorical power of time. 
Only in law, ethical life, and the state is there present something 
solid which remains as the generations pass, just as the muse gives 
duration and consolidation to everything which as natural life and 
actual action is only ephemeral, and in the course of time has 
passed away. 
1 Two of the Cyclopes, children of Earth and Sky, younger than the three 
Giants. 
8!48715 
Q 

460 
I I. I I. T H E  CLA S S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
(ft[3) But further there belong to this group of the ancient gods 
not only natural powers as such but also the first forces that master 
the elements. Especially important is the earliest working on metal 
through the power of the still raw elemental nature itself, of air, 
water, or fire. We may cite here the Corybantes, Telchins (demons 
of beneficent as well as of evil influence), Pataeci (pygmies, dwarfs 
skilled in mining work, small men with fat bellies).' 
As an especially prominent transitional point, however, mention 
must be made of Prometheus. He is a Titan of a special kind and 
his story deserves particular notice. With his brother Epimetheus 
he appears at first as a friend of the new gods; then he appears as a 
benefactor of men who otherwise have no concern with the relation 
between the new gods and the Titans; he brings fire to men and 
therefore the possibility of satisfying their needs, developing 
technical skills, etc., which yet are no longer something natural and 
therefore apparently stand in no closer connection with the Titans. 
For this act Zeus punishes Prometheus, until at last Hercules 
releases him from his agony. At a first glance there is nothing 
properly Titanic in all these chief details, indeed we could find an 
illogicality there, in that Prometheus, like Ceres, is a benefactor of 
mankind and yet is reckoned amongst the old Titanic powers. Yet 
on closer inspection the illogicality disappears at once, for a few 
passages from Plato, e.g., give us a satisfactory explanation. 
For example, there is the myth in which the guest of young 
Socrates tells that in the time of Cronus there was an earthborn 
race of men and the god himself took care of the whole, but then an 
opposed revolution took place and the earth was left to itself so that 
now the beasts became wild, and the men whose nourishment and 
other requirements previously came to them immediately were left 
without counsel or aid. In this situation, it is said (Politicus, 274), 
fire was given to men by Prometheus, but the technical skills ( ·dxva.') 
by Hephaestus and Athene, his partner in craftsmanship.-Here 
there is an express difference between fire and what is produced by 
skill in working on raw materials, and what is ascribed to Prom­
etheus is only the gift of fire. 
At greater length Plato relates the myth of Prometheus in the 
1 Corybantes were priests of Cybele in Phrygia but were associated with 
Telchins by Strabo. Telchins were metalworkers, the first inhabitants of Crete. 
Pataeci were Phoenician deities of strange dwarfish shape (Herodotus, iii. 37). 
All editions read 'Piitaken', but that is a mistake. 

SHAP I N G  TH E C L A S S ICAL ART- FORM 
461 
Protagoras. There (320-3) it is said: Once upon a time there were 
gods but no mortal creatures. When the appointed time came for 
their birth, the gods formed them within the earth out of a mixture 
of earth and fire and the substances compounded of earth and fire. 
Then when the gods were ready to bring them to light, they 
charged Prometheus and Epimetheus with the task of equipping 
them and allotting suitable powers to each. But Epimetheus begs 
Prometheus to let him make the division himself. 'When I have 
made it', he said, 'you can review it'. But Epimetheus stupidly 
used up all the powers on the animals, so that there was nothing 
left for human beings. So when Prometheus comes to review the 
scene, he sees the other living things wisely equipped with every­
thing, but men he finds naked, unshod, without clothing or 
weapons. But already the appointed day had come on which it was 
necessary for man to come up out of the earth into daylight. Now 
being at a loss to find help for men, he stole from Hephaestus and 
Athene both their skill and fire also (for without fire it was impossi­
ble for anyone to possess or use this skill) and so he bestows them 
on men. Now in this way man acquired the necessary skill to keep 
himself alive but he had no political wisdom, for this was still in the 
hands of Zeus, and Prometheus had no longer the right of entry to 
the citadel of Zeus around whom stood his frightening sentinels. 
But he goes stealthily into the dwelling shared by Hephaestus and 
Athene in which they practised their art, and after stealing the art 
of working with fire from Hephaestus and the other (the art of 
weaving) from Athene, he gives these arts to men. And through this 
gift men had the means of life (f.tmopla Tov f3lov) but Prometheus, 
thanks to Epimetheus, later, as is told, suffered punishment for theft. 
Plato then goes on in the immediately following passage to relate 
that men also lacked for their nurture the art of war against beasts, 
an art which is only one part of politics; therefore they collected 
together in cities, but there, for want of political skill, they injured 
one another and scattered again so that Zeus was compelled to give 
them, with Hermes as his messenger, respect for others and a sense 
of justice. 
In these passages there is specifically emphasized the difference 
between (a) the immediate aims of life, which are related to physi­
cal comfort and provision for the satisfaction of primary needs, 
and (b) political organization which makes its aim the spiritual 
realm, i.e. ethics, law, property rights, freedom, and community. 

46ē 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
This ethical and legal life Prometheus had not given to men; he 
only taught them the cunning to master things in nature and use 
them as a means to human satisfaction. Fire and the skills that 
make use of it are nothing ethical in themselves, and the art of 
weaving has nothing of the sort either; in the first instance they 
appear solely in the service of selfishness and private utility with­
out having any bearing on the community of human existence and 
the public side of life. Because Prometheus was not in a position to 
impart anything more spiritual and ethical to men, he belongs to 
the Titans and not to the race of new gods. Hephaestus indeed has 
likewise got fire and the techniques associated with it as the element 
of his agency, and yet is a newer god ; but Zeus hurled him down 
from Olympus and he has remained the god who limps. Neither, 
therefore, is it an illogicality when we find Ceres, who, like Prom­
etheus, proved herself a benefactor of the human race, included 
amongst the new gods. For what Ceres taught was agriculture with 
which property is connected at once, and, later, marriage, ethics, 
and law. 
(yy) Now a third group of the ancient gods contains neither 
personified powers of nature as such in their savagery or cunning 
nor the primary power over the separate elements of nature in the 
service of man's lower needs, but is one that already borders on 
what is inherently ideal, universal, and spiritual. But nevertheless 
what is lacking to the powers to be included in this group is spirit­
ual individuality and its adequate shape and appearance, so that 
now, more or less in relation to their agency, they retain a closer 
bearing on what is necessary and essential in nature. As examples 
we may refer to the idea of Nemesis, Dike, the Furies, the Eumen­
ides, and the Fates. Here of course the categories of right and 
justice already obtrude; but instead of being grasped and given 
shape as the inherently spiritual and substantial element in ethical 
life, this necessary right either does not go beyond the most 
general abstraction or else affects the obscure right of the natural 
element within spiritual relationships, e.g. love of kindred and its 
right. This docs not belong to the spirit which is conscious of 
itself in its clear freedom, and therefore it does not appear as a 
legal right but on the contrary in opposition thereto as the irrecon­
cilable right of revenge. 
For further detail I will mention only a few ideas. Nemesis, for 
example, is the power to bring down the lofty, to hurl the all too 

SHAP I N G  THE C LAS S I CAL ART-FORM 
463 
fortunate man from his height and so to restore equality. But the 
right of equality is the purely abstract and external right which 
does prove active in the sphere of spiritual situations and relation­
ships, yet their ethical organization is not made into the content of 
justice on the basis of equality. 
Another important aspect lies in the fact that the old gods are 
assigned the right of family situations in so far as these rest on 
nature and therefore are opposed to the public law and right of 
the community. As the clearest example for this point we may cite 
the Eumenides of Aeschylus. The direful maidens [the Furies or 
Eumenides] pursue Orestes on account of his mother's murder 
which Apollo, the new god, ordered him to commit so that 
Agamemnon, her slain husband and King, might not remain un­
avenged. The whole drama is therefore moulded into a battle 
between these divine powers which make their appearance against 
one another in person. On the one side we have the goddesses of 
revenge, but they are called here the beneficent, i.e. the Eumenides, 
and our usual idea of the Furies, into which we convert them, is 
crude and barbaric. For they have an essential right of persecution 
and therefore they are not just hateful, wild, and gruesome in the 
tortures they impose. Yet the right which they assert against 
Orestes is only the right of the family, rooted in blood-relationship. 
The most intimate tie between son 3,nd mother which Orestes has 
snapped is the substance which the Furies defend. Apollo [on the 
other side] opposes to this natural ethical order, felt and grounded 
physically in blood-relationship, the right of the spouse and 
prince whose deeper right has been transgressed. Prima facie this 
difference seems external because both parties are defending the 
ethical order within one and the same sphere, namely the family. 
Yet here the sterling imagination of Aeschylus, which on this 
account we must rate more and more highly, has laid bare a clash 
that is not superficial at all, but is throughout of an essential kind. 
The relation of children to parents, that is to say, rests on a natural 
unity, whereas the bond between husband and wife must be taken 
as a marriage which does not issue merely from purely natural love 
or from a natural- and blood-relationship ; it springs on the con­
trary from an inclination which is known and therefore from 
the free ethical life of the self-conscious will. Thus however far 
marriage is also linked with love and feeling, it is still distinct from 
the natural feeling of love because, independently of that, it still 

464 
I I. I I. THE C L A S S ICAL FORM O F  ART 
recognizes definite known obligations even if love be dead. The 
conception and knowledge of the substantial character of married 
life is something later and deeper than the natural concord of son 
and mother, and it constitutes the beginning of the state as the 
realization of the free and rational will. In a similar way the 
relation between prince and citizens implies the political connec­
tion of the same rights and laws, of self-conscious freedom and 
spiritual ends. This is the reason why the Eumenides, the old 
goddesses, are set on punishing Orestes, while Apollo defends 
clear conscious and self-conscious ethical life, the right of the 
spouse and prince, in that he rightly retorts to the Eumenides: 
Were Clytaemnestra's crime not avenged, 'truly would I be with­
out honour and deem as nought the pledges of Hera, goddess of 
marriage, and Zeus' (Eumenides, 206-9). 
More interesting still, although entirely transferred into human 
feeling and action, the same clash appears in the Antigone, one of 
the most sublime and in every respect most excellent works of art 
of all time. Everything in this tragedy is logical; the public law of 
the state is set in conflict over against inner family love and duty to 
a brother; the woman, Antigone, has the family interest as her 
'pathos', Creon, the man, has the welfare of the community as 
his. Polynices, at war with his native city, had fallen before the 
gates of Thebes, and Creon, the ruler, in a publicly proclaimed 
law threatened with death anyone who gave this enemy of the city 
the honour of burial. But this command, which concerned only the 
public weal, Antigone could not accept; as sister, in the piety of her 
love for her brother, she fulfils the holy duty of burial. In doing so 
she appeals to the law of the gods; but the gods whom she worships 
are the underworld gods of Hades (Sophocles; Antigone, 45 1, â 
ãovotKo<; rwv Krirw flEwv LllK7J), the inner gods of feeling, love, and 
kinship, not the daylight gods of free self-conscious national and 
political life. 
(y) The third point which we may emphasize in respect of the 
theogony envisaged by classical art concerns the difference be­
tween the old gods in relation to their power and the duration of 
their dominion. Here we have three aspects to notice. 
(a:a:) The first of these is that the gods originate successively. 
According to Hesiod, after Chaos came Gaia, Uranus, etc., then 
Cronus and his race, and finally Zeus with his. Now this series 
seems on the one hand to be a rise from the more abstract and 

SHAPING THE CLASS I CAL ART -FORM 
465 
shapeless natural powers to a more concrete and already more 
determinate shaping of them; but, on the other hand, it appears as 
the beginning of the superiority of the spiritual over the natural. So, 
for example, Aeschylus in the Eumenides makes Pythia in the temple 
at Delphi begin with the words: 'First with this prayer I put 
first in rank of the gods Gaia who first gave us oracles, and then 
Themis who as second after her mother had her seat of prophesy­
ing in this place' [Eum. 1-4]. Pausanias [x. 5· 5], on the other hand, 
who likewise names Earth as the first giver of oracles [at Delphi], 
says that Daphnis was then ordained by her to the prophetic office. 
In another series again, Pindar1 puts Night first, then he gives the 
succession to Themis, then to Phoebe until he comes finally to 
Phoebus. It would be interesting to pursue these specific differ­
ences, but this is not the place for that. 
(f3f3) Further, since the succession has all the same to be counted 
as an advance to more self-concentrated and richer gods, it appears 
also in the form of degrading the earlier and more abstract gods 
within the race of the old gods itself. Cronus, e.g., dethrones 
Uranus, and the later gods are substituted for them. 
(yy) Therefore the negative relation of re-formation which from 
the beginning we laid down as the essence of this first stage of the 
classical art-form now becomes its proper centre; and since per­
sonification is here the universal form in which the gods enter our 
ideas and since the progressive movement [of fancy] presses the 
gods on towards human and spiritual individuality, even if this 
enters at first in an indefinite and formless shape, fancy brings to 
our vision the negative relation of the younger gods to the older as 
battle and war. But the essential advance is from nature to the spirit 
which is the true content and proper form for classical art. This 
advance, and the battles through which we see it being realized, 
belongs no longer exclusively to the group of the old gods but 
takes place in the war whereby the new gods establish their endur­
ing dominion over the old. 
(c) The Conquest of the Old Gods 
The opposition between nature and spirit is necessary abso­
lutely. For the Concept of the spirit, as a genuine totality, is, as we 
1 This is a mistake. There is no such genealogy in Pindar, although Hegel 
cites it as Pindar's again in his Philosophy of Religion, Werke xii. 106. 

466 
I I. I I. THE C LA S S I CAL FORM OF ART 
saw earlier [in dealing with The Idea in Part I], implicitly only 
this, namely to divide itself as object in itself and subject in itself in 
order through this opposition to arise out of nature and then, as its 
conqueror and as the power over it, to be free and serene in con­
trast with it. This chief factor in the essence of spirit itself is there­
fore also a chief factor in the idea of itself which it gives to itself. 
Looked at historically or in reality this transition is the progressive 
transformation of man in a state of nature into a system of estab­
lished rights, i.e. to property, laws, constitution, political life; 
looked at sub specie deorum et aeternitatis this is the idea of the 
conquest of the natural powers by the spiritually individual gods. 
(o:) This battle presents an absolute catastrophe and is the essen­
tial deed of the gods whereby alone the chief difference between 
the old gods and the new becomes visible. For this reason we must 
not refer to the war, which discloses this difference, as if it were 
some myth with the same value as any other; on the contrary, we 
must regard it as the myth which marks the turning-point and 
expresses the creation of the new gods. 
(f1) The result of this violent strife among the gods is the over­
throw of the Titans, the victory exclusively of the new gods who in 
their assured dominion have thereupon been endowed by imagi­
nation with qualities of all kinds. The Titans on the contrary were 
banished and had to dwell in the heart of the earth or, like Oceanus, 
linger on the dark edge of the bright and serene world, or endure 
otherwise all sorts of punishments. Prometheus, for example, is 
chained to a mountain in Scythia where the eagle insatiably devours 
his liver which ever grows afresh; similarly Tantalus in the under­
world is tormented by an endless unquenched thirst, and Sisyphus 
has always uselessly to trundle up anew the rock that continually 
rolls down again. Like the Titanic powers of nature themselves, 
these punishments are the inherently measureless, the bad infinite, 1 
the longing of the 'ought', the unsatiated craving of subjective 
natural desire which in its continual recurrence never attains 
the final peace of satisfaction. For the Greek correct sense of the 
Divine, unlike the modern longing, did not regard egress into the 
boundless and the vague as what was supreme for men; the Greeks 
regarded it as a damnation and relegated it to Tartarus. 
(y) If we ask in general what from now on must fall into the 
1 Hegel's usual expression for the infinite regarded as a straight line going on 
indefinitely instead of returning into itself, like a circle. 

SHAP I N G  THE CLA S S I CAL A RT-FORM 
467 
background for classical art and can no longer be justified in 
counting as its final form and adequate content, then the first thing 
is the natural elements. Along with them everything murky, fan­
tastic, unclear, every wild confusion of the natural with the spirit­
ual, of meanings inherently substantial with casual externalities, is 
banished from the world of the new gods ; in that world the cre­
ations of an unbounded imagination which have not yet absorbed 
the proportion observed by the spiritual find room no longer and 
must rightly flee the pure light of day. For you may dress up as 
much as you like the great Cabiri,1 the Corybantes, the representa­
tions of procreative force, etc., nevertheless conceptions like these 
in all their details-to say nothing of old Baubo whom Goethe sets 
careering over the Blocksberg on a sowL-belong more or less to 
the twilight of consciousness. It is only the spiritual which presses 
on into the light; what does not manifest itself and make itself 
clearly self-explanatory is the non-spiritual which sinks back again 
into night and darkness. But the spiritual manifests itself and, by 
itself determining its outer form, purifies itself from the caprice of 
fancy, from overflowing configurations and other sorts of murky 
symbolical accessories. 
Similarly we now find human activity put into the background 
so far as it is restricted to merely natural needs and their satisfac­
tion. The old right ,(Themis, Dike, Вtc. ), by not being specified in 
laws deriving their origin from the self-conscious spirit, loses its 
unrestricted validity; and equally, but conversely, mere locality, 
although it still plays a part, is changed into the universal figures of 
the gods where it still remains as only a trace of the past. For just 
as in the Trojan war the Greeks fought and conquered as one 
people, so too the Homeric gods, with the battle against the Titans 
behind them, are an inherently fixed and determinate world of gods 
which thereafter at last became always more completely deter­
minate and fixed through later poetic and plastic art. This invin­
cible fixed relationship in the content of the Greek gods is alone 
the spirit; yet it is not the spirit in its abstract inwardness, but only 
as identical with its external adequate existence, just as in PlatoJ 
1 Pelasgic gods of fertility (Herodotus, ii. 5 1 ;  iii. 37) worshipped in Asia Minor 
and Samothrace. Hegel is probably alluding to Schelling's Die Gottheiten von 
Samothrace (1815) in which the Cabiri are certainly 'dressed up'. The Cory­
bantes were associated with them by Strabo. 
• Faust, pt. 1 ,  sc. xxi (Witches' Sabbath). Blocksberg is the Brocken. 
J Hegel seems to have the Timaeus in mind. 

468 
I I. I I. THE C LASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
soul and body, as brought into one nature and all of one piece in 
this solidity, is the Divine and the eternal. 
3· Affirmative Retention of the Negatived Features 
Despite the victory of the new gods, however, the old ones now 
still remain in the classical art-form partly in their original form as 
considered up to this point, partly retained and venerated in a 
transformed shape. Only the restricted national God of the Jews 
can tolerate no other gods beside himself, because he is supposed to 
be the All qua the One, although on account of his determinate 
character he cannot surmount the restriction of being the God of 
his own people alone. For he displays his universality as Lord of 
heaven and earth, but strictly only on the strength of his creation 
of nature; for the rest, he is the God of Abraham, the God who led 
the children of Israel out of Egypt, issued laws from Sinai, gave the 
land of Canaan to the Jews, and through his narrow identification 
with the Jewish people is quite particularly only the God of this 
people and therefore, to sum up, does not stand in positive harmony 
with nature nor does he really appear as absolute spirit withdrawn 
from his determinacy and objective manifestation into his univer­
sality. This is why this harsh national God is so zealous, and why in 
his jealousy he commands his people to see in other gods only 
downright false idols. The Greeks, on the other hand, found their 
gods amongst all peoples and made foreign material their own. For 
the god of classical art has spiritual and bodily individuality and is 
therefore not the one and only god but a particular divinity which, 
like everything particular, has a group of particulars around it, or 
confronting it as its opposite, out of which it emerges and which 
can retain its own validity and value. This is the same as what 
happens with the particular spheres of nature. Although the plant 
kingdom is the truth of geological natural formations, and the animal 
again the higher truth of vegetation, still the mountains and thalas­
sic1 land persist as the ground for trees, shrubs, and flowers which in 
turn do not lose their existence alongside the animal kingdom. 
(a) The Mysteries 
Now the first form in which we find the Greeks preserving the 
old gods is the Mysteries. The Greek Mysteries were not secret in 
1 aujgeschwemmte-Hegel may be thinking of the Nile valley again and this 
word may mean simply 'flooded', but 'deposited by geological action' is more 
probable. 

SHAPING THE CLASS ICAL ART-FORM 
469 
the sense that the Greek people were not generally familiar with 
their subject-matter. On the contrary, most Athenians and many 
strangers were amongst those initiated into the Eleusinian secrets, 
only they might not speak of what they had learnt through the 
initiation. In our time especially, great trouble has been taken to 
research into the details of the sort of ideas contained in the Mys­
teries and the sort of acts of divine worship entered upon at their 
celebration. Yet on the whole no great wisdom or profound know­
ledge seems to have been hidden in the Mysteries; on the contrary, 
they only preserved old traditions, the basis of what was later 
transformed by genuine art, and therefore they had for their con­
tents not the true, the higher, and the better, but the lower and the 
more trivial. This subject-matter, regarded as holy, was not clearly 
expressed in the Mysteries but was transmitted only in symbolical 
outlines. And in fact the character of the undisclosed and the 
unspoken belongs also to the old gods, to what was telluric, 
sidereal, and Titanic, for only the spirit is the revealed and the 
self-revealing. In this respect the symbolical mode of expression 
constitutes the other side of the secrecy in the Mysteries, because in 
the symbolical the meaning remains dark and contains something 
other than what the external, on which it is supposed to be repre­
sented, provides directly. So, e.g., the Mysteries of Demeter and 
Bacchus1 were spiritually interpreted and acquired therefore a 
deeper meaning, but this content could not clearly emerge from its 
form because the form remained external to it. For art, therefore, 
the Mysteries are of trivial influence, for even if it be said of 
Aeschylus that he wilfully betrayed something from the Mysteries 
of Demeter, this only amounted to his having said that Artemis is 
the daughter of Ceres [i.e. Demeter )2 and this is a trivial piece of 
wisdom. 
(b) Preservation of the Old Gods in Artistic Representation 
Secondly, the worship and preservation of the old gods appears 
more clearly in artistic portrayal itself. At the previous stage, e.g., 
we spoke of Prometheus as the Titan who was punished. But all 
1 i.e. the Eleusinian Mysteries. 
ö This seems to be Hegel's conflation of two passages otherwise unconnected. 
Herodotus (ii. 156) says that Aeschylus alone of the poets made Artemis the 
daughter of Ceres. For all others she was the daughter of Leto. Aristotle, E.N. 
1 1 I I" 9, presupposes that Aeschylus was accused (before the Areopagus) of be­
traying the Mysteries (he was acquitted). 

470 
I I. I I. THE CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
the same we find him freed again. For fire, which Prometheus 
brought down to men, and the eating of meat which he had taught 
them, are, like the earth and the sun, an essential feature in human 
existence, a necessary condition for the satisfaction of human needs, 
and so Prometheus too has his glory preserved. In the Oedipus 
Coloneus of Sophocles it is said (II. 54 ff.) :  
['The whole place is sacred ; the holy Poseidon possesses it, and 
the fire-bringing Prometheus, the Titan, is there too.'J And the 
Scholiast [on I. 56] adds that 'in the Academy too Prometheus was 
worshipped, like Hephaestus, along with Athene; and a temple is 
shown in the grove of the goddess and an old pedestal at the 
entrance on which there is an image of Prometheus and of Heph­
aestus too; but Prometheus, as Lysimachidesi adds, was repre­
sented as the first and the elder, holding a sceptre in his hand, 
Hephaestus as younger and second, and the altar on the pedestal 
is common to both'. As it turns out, according to the myth, 
Prometheus did not have to suffer his punishment for ever but was 
released from his chains by Hercules. In the story of this liberation 
too some remarkable traits occur, viz. : Prometheus is released 
from his agony because he tells Zeus of the danger threatening his 
rule from his thirteenth descendant. This descendant is Hercules 
to whom Poseidon in the Birds of Aristophanes (ll. 1645-8) says 
that he will do himself an injury if he joins a conspiracy for upset­
ting the rule of the gods, [for if it succeeds, he will get nothing, 
whereas if Zeus remains in power then] everything that Zeus 
leaves behind him at his death will surely be his. And in fact 
Hercules is the one man who was taken up to Olympus and became 
a god instead of a mortal man, and he is superior to Prometheus 
who remained a Titan. The overthrow of the old ruling families is 
also connected with Hercules and the name of the Heraclidae. The 
Heraclidae break the power of the old dynasties and royal houses 
in which a dominating self-will recognizes no law either for its 
own ends and its unruliness, or in relation to the inhabitants, and 
therefore perpetrates monstrous cruelties. Hercules himself, not as 
1 An historian, quoted by the Scholiast. 

SHAPING THE CLASS ICAL ART-FORM 
471 
a free man but in the service of a ruler, conquers the barbarity of 
this savage will. 
In a similar way, to abide by examples already used, we may here 
refer to the Eumenides of Aeschylus once more. The conflict be­
tween Apollo and the Eumenides is to be settled by the verdict of 
the Areopagus. A court, human on the whole, at the head of which 
stands Athene herself as the concrete spirit of the people, is to 
resolve the conflict. The judges give equal votes for condemnation 
and acquittal, because they honour the Eumenides and Apollo 
equally, but the white stone of Athene decides the case for Apollo. 
The Eumenides lift their voices in indignation against this judge­
ment of Athene, but she silences them because she promises them 
worship and altars in the famous grove at Colonus. What the 
Eumenides are to do for her people in return is (Eum., 11. 901 ff.) 
defence against the evil arising from natural elements, earth, sky, 
sea, and winds, protection from unfruitfulness in the crops, from 
failure of the human seed. But Athene undertakes for herself in 
Athens the charge of warlike strife and sacred battles.1-Similarly 
Sophocles in his Antigone does not make Antigone alone suffer and 
die; on the contrary, we also see Creon punished by the grievous 
loss of his wife and [his son] Haem on, who both likewise perish 
owing to the death of Antigone. 
(c) Natural Basis of the New Gods 
Thirdly and lastly, not only do the old gods preserve their place 
alongside the new ones but, what is more important, the natural 
basis remains in the new gods themselves and it enjoys an enduring 
veneration since, in conformity with the spiritual individuality of 
the classical ideal, it reverberates in them. 
(o:) For this reason people have often been deceived into in­
terpreting the Greek gods in their human shape and form as mere 
allegories of the elements of nature. This they are not. For example, 
we hear people speaking often enough of Helios as the god of the 
sun, of Diana as the goddess of the moon, or of Poseidon as the god 
of the sea. Such separation, however, of the natural element, as 
content, from the humanly shaped personification, as form, as well 
as the external connection of the two (i.e. the mere dominion of 
God over things in nature, a notion to which the Old Testament 
has accustomed us) is quite inapplicable to Greek ideas, because 
1 Aeschylus only says 'victory in renowned battles in war'. 

472 
II. II. THE CLASSI CAL FORM O F  ART 
nowhere in the Greeks do we find the expression o Oeos Tov T,>.lov, 
Tfjs Oa>t.aaC17)s etc. [the god of the sun, of the sea, etc.), while they 
would certainly have used this expression for this relation if it had 
been compatible with their outlook. Helios is the sun as god. 
({3) But in this connection we must at the same time take good 
note of the fact that the Greeks did not in any way regard the 
natural as such as divine. On the contrary, they had the distinct 
idea that the natural is not the divine; and while sometimes this 
remains unexpressed in [their description of) what their gods are, 
sometimes it was expressly emphasized about them. Plutarch, e.g., 
in his essay on Isis and Osiris comes to speak of the different ways 
of interpreting the myths and the gods. Isis and Osiris belong to 
the Egyptian outlook and had the elements of nature as their con­
tent to a greater extent than the corresponding Greek gods had; 
this is because they express only the longing and the struggle to 
advance out of the natural into the spiritual; later1 they enjoyed 
great reverence in Rome and constituted one of the chief Mys­
teries. Nevertheless Plutarch [Isis and Osiris § 64) thinks it would 
be disgraceful to interpret them as sun, earth, or water. Everything 
that in the sun, earth, etc. is measureless and without order, is 
defective or superfluous, and this alone must be ascribed to the 
natural elements; and only the good and orderly is the work of 
Isis, while intellect, Aoyos, is the work of Osiris. As the substance of 
these gods, therefore, it is not the natural as such which is to be 
adduced, but the spiritual, the universal, Aoyos, intellect, conformity 
to law. 
In virtue of this insight into the spiritual nature of the gods, it 
turns out that the Greeks nevertheless distinguished the more 
determinate natural elements from the new gods. Of course we are 
accustomed to identify e.g. Helios and Selene [sun and moon) 
with Apollo and Diana, but in Homer they appear distinguished 
from one another. The same is true about Oceanus [sea] and 
Poseidon, and others. 
(y) But, thirdly, there remains in the new gods an echo of the 
powers of nature, the agency of which belongs to the spiritual 
individuality of the gods themselves. The ground of this positive 
linkage of the spiritual and the natural in the ideal of classical art 
we have already expounded earlier [in the passage on the Classical 
1 i.e. in the early Roman Empire. The Mysteries are described in the closing 
chapters of Apuleius, c. A.D. ISS· Plutarch wrote c. A.D. roo. 

SHAP I N G  THE CLASS ICAL ART-FORM 
473 
in General], and therefore we may confine ourselves here to citing 
a few examples. 
(cxcx) In Poseidon, as in Pontus and Oceanus, lies the might of 
the sea that streams round the earth, but his power and activity 
stretches further: he built Troy and was a safeguard of Athens; in 
general he was worshipped as the founder of cities, because the sea 
is the element for shipping, trade, and the bond between men. 
Similarly Apollo, the new god, is the light of knowledge, and the 
giver of oracles, and yet preserves a reminiscence of Helios as the 
natural light of the sun. Of course there is a dispute, e.g. between 
Voss and Creuzer, whether Apollo is to betoken the sun or not, but 
in fact we may say that he is and is not the sun, because he does not 
remain restricted to this natural content but is elevated to meaning 
the spiritual. Indeed it must absolutely amaze us what an essential 
connection there is between knowledge and illumination, the light 
of spirit and of nature, in keeping with their fundamental character. 
Light, that is to say, as a natural element is that which manifests; 
without our seeing it itself, it makes illuminated and irradiated 
objects visible. By means of light everything becomes apprehen­
sible by something else. The same character of manifestation is 
possessed by spirit, by knowing and cognizing, by the free light of 
consciousness. Apart from the variation of the spheres in which these 
two manifestations display their activity, the difference between 
them consists only in the fact that spirit reveals itself and remains 
by itself in what it gives to us or what is made for it, while the light 
of nature makes apprehensible not itself but, on the contrary, what 
is other than itself and external to itself; and in this relation it does 
go out of itself, but unlike spirit does not return into itself and 
therefore does not win the higher unity of being by itself in the 
other. Just as light and knowing have a close connection, so we 
find in Apollo too as a spiritual god the reminiscence once again of 
the light of the sun. So, e.g., Homer [in Iliad, i. 9-10] ascribes 
the plague in the Grecian camp to Apollo who here is treated as the 
agency of the sun in the heat of summer. Similarly his death­
dealing arrows undoubtedly have a symbolical connection with the 
sun's rays. It follows that in the external representation there must 
be more detailed external indications to determine in what meaning 
the god is principally to be taken. 
It is especially when we trace the historical origin of the new 
gods that, as Creuzer above all has emphasized, we can recognize 

474 
I I. I I. THE CLAS S ICAL FORM O F  ART 
the natural element which the gods of the classical ideal preserve in 
themselves. So, e.g., in Jupiter there are indications of the sun; and 
the twelve labours of Hercules, for example his expedition in which 
he carried off the apples of the Hesperides, have likewise a relation 
to the sun and the twelve months. Fundamentally Diana has the 
office of being the universal mother of nature, e.g. as Diana of the 
Ephesians, who hovers between the old and the new, she has, as 
her chief content, nature in general, procreation and nutrition, and 
this meaning is indicated even in her external form, in her breasts, 
etc. Whereas in the case of the Greek Artemis, the huntress, who 
kills beasts, this natural aspect recedes altogether into the back­
ground in her humanly beautiful maidenly form and independence, 
although the half-moon and the arrows still always recall Selene 
(Selene, moon = Diana = Artemis]. In a similar way the more 
Aphrodite's origin is traced back to Asia, the more she becomes 
a natural (or sensual] power; when she comes over into Greece 
proper, she presents the spiritually more individual aspect of charm, 
grace, and love, an aspect yet in no way lacking a natural founda­
tion. Ceres in the same way has natural productivity as her starting­
point which then leads on to a spiritual content, the relations in 
which develop out of agriculture, property, etc. The Muses have 
the murmur of a spring as their natural basis, and Zeus himself is 
to be taken as a universal power of nature and is worshipped as the 
Thunderer, although in Homer thunder is a sign of misfortune or 
approval, an omen, and therefore it acquires a relation to the 
spiritual and the human. Even Juno has a natural echo of the vault 
of heaven and the airy region where the gods wander, for it is said, 
e.g., that Zeus put Hercules to Juno's breast, and from the milk 
that was spilt the milky way was hurled into being. 
({1{1) Now just as in the new gods the universal elements of 
nature are disparaged but yet retained, the same is true with the 
animal kingdom as such, which earlier we had to treat only in its 
degradation. At this point we can give a more positive position to 
the animal kingdom as well. Yet because the classical gods have 
been stripped of their symbolic mode of configuration, and now 
win for their content the spirit which is clear to itself, the symboli­
cal meaning of animals must be lost in proportion as the animal 
shape is deprived of the right of mingling with the human in an 
inappropriate way. This shape therefore occurs as a merely in­
dicative attribute and is placed alongside the human shape of the 

SHAP I N G  THE CLAS S I CAL ART-FORM 
475 
gods. So we see the eagle beside Jupiter, the peacock beside Juno, 
the doves accompanying Venus, the dog[-headed] Anubis as the 
guard of the underworld, etc. Even if, therefore, something sym­
bolical is still retained in the ideal figures of the spiritual gods, 
nevertheless it is not apparent in its original meaning, and the 
indication as such of nature, earlier constitutive of the essential 
content, remains in the background as only a relic and something 
particular and external which now here and there, on account of 
its accidental character, looks bizarre because the earlier meaning 
no longer dwells in it. Further, since the inner essence of these gods 
is the spiritual and the human, what is external about them now 
becomes a human accident and weakness. In this connection we 
may refer once again to the manifold love affairs of Jupiter. In 
their original symbolical meaning they are related, as we saw, to 
the universal activity of generation, to the life of nature. But since 
his marriage with Juno is to be regarded as his fixed substantial 
relationship, Jupiter's love-affairs appear as faithlessness to his 
spouse; and so they have the shape of casual adventures and 
exchange their symbolical sense for the character of capriciously 
invented and morally lax stories. 
With this degradation of purely natural powers and the animal 
kingdom, as well as the abstract universality of spiritual relation­
ships, and with the re-acceptance of these within the higher inde­
pendence of spiritual individuality permeated by and permeating 
nature, we have left behind us the proper presupposition of the 
essence of classical art, namely its necessary origin in history; 
this is so because along this route the Ideal has by its own effort 
reached what it is in accordance with its Concept. This concep­
tually adequate reality of the spiritual gods leads us to the proper 
ideals of the classical form of art which, contrasted with the old 
gods, now conquered, display what is immortal, for mortality in 
general lies in inadequacy between the Concept and its existence. 

Chapter II 
THE IDEA L  OF THE CLASSICAL FORM 
OF ART 
What the proper essence of the Ideal is we have seen already in our 
general treatment of the beauty of art. Here we must take it up in 
the special sense of the classical Ideal, the Concept of which is 
given to us already along with the Concept of the classical form of 
art. For the classical Ideal, our subject now, consists only in the 
fact that classical art actually attains and sets forth what constitutes 
its innermost Concept and essence. At this point it lays hold of the 
spiritual as its content, in so far as the spiritual draws nature and 
its powers into its own sphere and so is represented otherwise than 
as pure inwardness or as dominion over nature; but for its form it 
adopts the human shape, deed, and action, through which the 
spiritual shines clearly in complete freedom, making the sensuous 
shape its own, not at all as an external thing merely symbolically 
significant but as a reality which is the adequate existence of 
spirit. 
The more specific division of this chapter may be laid down as 
follows: 
First, we have to consider the universal nature of the classical 
Ideal which has the human for both its content and form and so 
works both sides in with one another that they come into the most 
complete correspondence with one another. 
Secondly, however, since here the human is entirely immersed in 
bodily shape and external appearance, it becomes shaped exter­
nally in a specific way to which only a specific content is adequate. 
Since as a result we have the Ideal before us at the same time as 
particularity, there is presented to us a range of particular gods and 
powers over human existence. 
Thirdly, particularity does not rest in the abstraction of being 
only a single determinate type, the essential character of which 
would constitute the entire content and one-sided principle for 
[artistic] representation; on the contrary, it is all the same a totality 
[of qualities] in itself and that totality's unity and harmony as an 

IDEAL O F  THE C LA S S I CAL FORM O F  A RT 
477 
individual. Without this filling, particularity would be cold and 
empty and it would lose the vitality which the Ideal can never lack 
in any circumstances. 
Keeping to these three aspects of universality, particularity, 
and single individuality, we will now study the Ideal of classical 
art in more detail. 
1. The Ideal of Classical Art in General 
Questions about the origin of the Greek gods, in so far as the gods 
afford the proper centre for ideal representation, we have already 
touched upon, and we have seen that the gods belong to a tradition 
transformed by art. Only as a result of a double depreciation, on 
the one hand of the universal powers of nature and their personi­
fication, on the other of the animal kingdom and its symbolical 
meaning and shape, could this transformation occur in order that 
thereby the spiritual might be won as the true content, and the 
human mode of appearance as the true form. 
(a) The Ideal as Originated by Free Artistic Creation 
Now since the classical Ideal comes essentially into being only 
through such a transformation of what went before, the first aspect 
which we must bring out in this connection is this, that this Ideal 
is generated by the spirit and therefore has originated in the most 
inward and personal being of poets and artists who have created it 
with clear and free deliberateness, consciously aiming at artistic 
production. But this creation seems to run counter to the fact that 
Greek mythology rests on older traditions and hints at something 
foreign and oriental. Although Herodotus, e.g., in the passage 
already cited above, says that Homer and Hesiod made their gods 
for the Greeks, he elsewhere brings the same Greek gods into 
close connection with the Egyptian, etc. For in Book ii. 49 he 
expressly tells that Melampus brought the name of Dionysus to the 
Hellenes [from Egypt] and introduced the phallus and the whole 
sacrificial festival ;  with one difference, however, because Herodo­
tus thinks that Melampus learnt the worship of Dionysus [not 
directly from Egypt but] from Cadmus the Tyrian and the Phoeni­
cians who came with Cadmus to Boeotia. In recent times these 
contradictory assertions have become of interest especially in 
connection with Creuzer's researches; he tries to discover in 
Homer, e.g., old Mysteries, and all the sources which converged 

478 
I I. I I. THE C LASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
in Greece, Asiatic, Pelasgic, Dodonian, Thracian, Samothracian, 
Phrygian, Indian, Buddhistic, Phoenician, Egyptian, Orphic, along 
with an endless number of domestic traditions associated with 
specific localities and other details. It is true that at a first glance 
there is a contradiction between these varied traditional origins and 
the view that those poets gave names and a shape to the gods. But 
both tradition and original creation can be wholly united. Tradition 
comes first, the starting-point which provides ingredients but does 
not yet bring with them the proper content and the genuine form 
for the gods. This content those poets took from their own spirit 
and found the true form for it in the course of their free transforma­
tion of this material and they have therefore become in fact the 
creators of the mythology at which we marvel in Greek art. 
Nevertheless, on the other hand, the Homeric gods are not for 
this reason, as might be supposed, a purely subjective invention or 
a purely artificial production; on the contrary, they have their root 
in the spirit and faith of the Greek people and its national religious 
foundations. They are the absolute forces and powers, the supreme 
height of Greek imagination, the centre of the beautiful in general, 
granted to the poet by the Muses themselves. 
Now in this free creation the artist acquires a position quite 
different from the one he has in the East.1 The Indian poets and 
sages also have material there for them as their starting-point; 
natural elements, sky, animals, rivers, etc., or the pure abstraction 
of the formless and empty Brahma; but their inspiration is a 
destruction of the inward life of subjectivity; the subject [i.e. the 
artist] is given the hard task of working on what is external to him­
self and, owing to the intemperance of his imagination which lacks 
any firm and absolute direction, he cannot create really freely and 
beautifully, but must continue to produce in an unruly way and 
range around in his material. He is like a builder who has no clear 
ground ; ancient debris of half-ruined walls, mounds, projecting 
rocks obstruct him, quite apart from the particular ends which are 
to dictate the construction of his building, and he can achieve 
nothing but a wild, unharmonious, fantastic structure. What he 
produces is not the work of his own imagination freely creating 
out of his own spiritual resources. Conversely, Hebrew poets give 
us revelations which the Lord bade them speak, so that here again 
the creative force is an unconscious inspiration, separate and 
1 Cf. above, Introduction to this Section, 3· 

IDEAL OF THE C LASSICAL FORM OF ART 
479 
distinct from the individuality and productive spirit of the artist, 
just as in sublimity generally what comes before contemplation 
and consciousness is the abstract and the eternal related essenti­
ally to something other than and external to itself. 
In classical art, on the contrary, the artists and poets are of course 
also prophets and teachers who proclaim and reveal to man what is 
absolute and Divine, but, 
(ea:) first, the content of their gods is not nature as purely 
external to the human spirit, or the abstraction of the one Divinity, 
in which case nothing would be left to them but a superficial 
formation or a shapeless inwardness; instead, their content is 
drawn from the human spirit and human existence, and therefore 
is the human breast's very own, a content with which man can 
freely associate himself as with himself, since what he produces is 
the most beautiful manifestation of himself. 
(fi) Secondly, the artists are also makers, fashioners of this 
material and content into a shape freely self-dependent. Accord­
ingly the Greek artists evince themselves as genuinely creative 
poets. All the varied foreign ingredients they have brought into the 
melting-pot, yet they have not made a brew out of them like what 
comes from a witches' cauldron; on the contrary, in the pure fire of 
the deeper spirit they have consumed everything murky, natural, 
impure, foreign, and extravagant; they have burnt all this together 
and made the shape appear purified, with only faint traces of the 
material out of which it has been formed. Their business in this 
connection consisted partly in stripping away the formless, sym­
bolic, ugly, and misshapen things which confronted them in the 
material of the tradition, partly in emphasizing the properly 
spiritual which they had to individualize and for which they had to 
seek or invent the corresponding external appearance. Here for the 
first time it is the human shape and the form of human actions and 
events (no longer used as mere personification) which, as we saw, 
enters necessarily as the one adequate reality. These forms too the 
artist finds in the real world, but nevertheless he has to extinguish 
the accidental and inappropriate element in them before they can 
be proved adequate to the spiritual content of man which, seized in 
its essence, comes to serve as the representation of the eternal 
powers and gods. This is the free, spiritual, and not merely arbi­
trary production of the artist. 
(y) Now, thirdly, since the gods do not merely stand aloof by 

48o 
I I. I I. THE CLASSICAL FORM OF ART 
themselves but are also active within the concrete reality of nature 
and human affairs, the business of the poets is directed to recog­
nizing the presence and agency of the gods in this relation to human 
matters, to interpreting the particular aspect of natural occurrences 
and human deeds and destinies wherein the divine powers appear 
as involved, and therefore to sharing the business of the priest and 
the prophet. At the standpoint of our modern prosaic reflection we 
explain natural phenomena in accordance with universal laws and 
forces, the actions of men by their inner intentions and self­
conscious aims, but the Greek poets looked for the Divine every­
where, and since they shaped human activities into actions of the 
gods, they create by this interpretation only the different aspects 
under which the gods exercise their power. For a mass of such 
interpretations is afforded by a mass of actions in which one god or 
another reveals what he is. If we open the Homeric poems, e.g., we 
find there scarcely any important event which is not more clearly 
elucidated as proceeding from the will or actual aid of the gods. 
These interpretations are the product of the insight, the self­
wrought faith, the intuition of the poets, since Homer after all 
often expresses them in his own name, and only occasionally puts 
them into the mouth of his characters, the priests or the heroes. 
For example, right at the beginning of the Iliad (i. 9-12) he has 
accounted for the plague in the Greek camp by the indignation of 
Apollo at Agamemnon's refusal to release Chryseis to her father 
Chryses, and then later (94-100) makes Calchas announce the same 
interpretation to the Greeks. 
In a similar way, in the last book of the Odyssey (xxiv. 41-63) 
when Hermes has conducted the souls of the suitors to the asphodel 
meadows and there they find Achilles and the other heroes who 
fought before Troy, and when finally Agamemnon too approaches 
them, Homer tells how Agamemnon sketches the death of Achilles: 
'All day the Greeks had fought and only when Zeus separated the 
combatants did they bear the noble corpse to the ships with many 
tears, wash it and anoint it. Then there burst forth on the sea a divine 
uproar, and the terrified Achaeans were ready to flock to their hollow 
ships, had they not been kept back by a man learned in ancient and 
many things, Nestor, whose counsel earlier had seemed the best.' 
He explains the phenomenon to them by saying: 'The mother 
(Thetis] yonder comes forth from the sea with the immortal 
sea-nymphs in order to meet with her dead son. At this saying the 

IDEAL O F  THE C LA S S I C A L  FORM OF ART 
481 
great-hearted Achaeans lost their fear.' Now, that is, they knew where 
they were: this was something human, the mother, mourning, meets 
her son, and it was only what they themselves were that struck 
their eye and ear. Achilles is her son, she herself is full of grief. And 
so after all Agamemnon, turning to Achilles, continues his sketch 
with a description of the universal grief: 'But around thee', he 
says, 'stand the daughters of the Father of the Sea, lamenting and 
clad in ambrosial garments; the Muses too, all nine, wailed by turns 
in beautiful song and then indeed no Argives were seen without 
tears, so moved were they by the clear-toned song.' 
But above all in this connection another divine appearance in the 
Odyssey has every time fascinated and preoccupied me. In his 
wanderings amongst the Phaeacians, Odysseus was taunted by 
Euryalus on the occasion of the games because he had declined 
to take part in the competition for discus-throwing; aroused, he 
answered with black looks and harsh words. Then he stands up, 
grasps the quoit that is bigger and heavier than all the others, and 
flings it far over the mark. One of the Phaeacians marks the place 
and calls to him: 'Even a blind man can see the stone; it does not 
lie mingled with the others but far beyond them; in this competi­
tion thou hast nothing to fear, no Phaeacian will reach or surpass 
thy throw.' So he spake, but the much-enduring divine Odysseus 
was delighted (viii. 159-200) to see in the contest a well-disposed 
friend. This word, the friendly nod of a Phaeacian, Homer attri­
butes to the friendly appearance of Athene [in the shape of the 
Phaeacian). 
(b) The New Gods of the Classical/deal 
Now the further question arises, what are the products of this 
classical mode of artistic activity, of what sort are the new gods of 
Greek art? 
(<X) The most general and at the same time the most perfect 
idea of their nature is afforded by their concentrated individuality; 
their individuality has pulled itself together out of the variety of 
appendages, single actions and events into the one focus of its 
simple unity with itself. 
(<X<X) What impresses us about these gods is in the first place the 
spiritual substantial individuality which, withdrawn into itself out 
of the motley show of the particularity of need and the unrest of 
the finite with its variety of purposes, rests secure on its own 

482 
I I. I I. THE CLASSICA L  FORM OF ART 
universality as on an eternal and clear foundation. Only thereby 
do the gods appear as the eternal powers whose untroubled 
dominion comes into view, not in the sphere of the particular, 
entangled with something other than and external to them, but in 
their own unalterability and intrinsic worth. 
(ĹĹ) Conversely, however, they are not by any means the pure 
abstraction of spiritual universalities and therefore so called uni­
versal ideals ; on the contrary, because they are individuals they 
appear as an ideal which has existence and therefore determinacy 
in itself, and which, i.e. as spirit, has character. Without character 
no individuality comes on the scene. In this respect, as has already 
been expounded [on pp. 471-5], even the spiritual gods have as 
their basis a specific natural power with which a specific ethical 
substance is fused and which assigns to each god a limited sphere 
for his more exclusive activity. The manifold aspects and traits 
which enter on account of this particularity constitute, when 
reduced to simple unity, the character of the gods. 
(yy) Yet neither, in the true Ideal, may this determinacy termin­
ate in a sharp restriction to one-sidedness of character but must 
equally appear as drawn back again into the universality of the 
Divine. In this way, since each god bears in himself the deter­
minate attribute of being a divine and therewith universal indi­
vidual, he is partly a determinate character and partly all in all, 
and he hovers in the very middle between pure universality and 
equally abstract particularity. This gives to the genuine ideal 
figure of classical art infinite security and peace, untroubled bliss 
and untrammelled freedom. 
(Ĺ) Now further, by being beauty in classical art, the inherently 
determinate divine character appears not only spiritually but also 
externally in its bodily form, i.e. in a shape visible to the eye as well 
as to the spirit. 
(ococ) Since this beauty has for its content not only a spiritual 
personification of the natural and the animal but the spiritual itself 
in its adequate existence, it may only incidentally assume the sym­
bolical form and what is related to the purely natural ; its proper 
expression is the external shape peculiar to spirit, and to spirit 
alone, in so far as what lies within spirit brings itself into existence 
in that shape and permeates it completely. 
(ƜƜ) On the other hand, classical beauty must not be called 
'sublime'. For what alone has the look of the sublime is the 

IDEAL O F  THE C LA S S ICAL FORM OF ART 
-483 
abstract universal which never coincides with itself in anything 
determinate; on the contrary, its attitude to the particular in 
general, and therefore to every embodiment also, is purely negative. 
But classical beauty carries spiritual individuality right into the 
midst of what is at the same time its natural existence and unfolds 
the inner only in the medium of external appearance. 
(yy) On this account, however, the external shape, like the 
spirit which fashions an existence for itself there, must be freed 
from every accident of external determinacy, from every dependence 
on nature, and from morbidity; it must be withdrawn from all 
finitude, everything transient, all preoccupation with what is purely 
sensuous; its determinacy, closely allied with the determinate 
spiritual character of the god, must be purified and elevated into a 
free harmony with the universal forms of the human shape. Only 
flawless externality, from which every trait of weakness and rela­
tivity has been obliterated and every tiny spot of capricious particu­
larity extinguished, corresponds to the spiritual inwardness which 
is to immerse itself in it and therein attain an embodiment. 
(y) But while the gods are at the same time reflected back from 
their determinacy of character into universality, there must be 
displayed at the same time in their appearance the self-subsistence 
of spirit as well as its self-repose and self-security in its opposite. 
(c.:c.:) Therefore in the concrete individuality of the gods as it is 
conceived in the properly classical Ideal we see all the same this 
nobility and this loftiness of spirit in which, despite spirit's entire 
absorption in the bodily and sensuous shape, there is revealed to us 
its distance from all the deficiency of the finite. Pure inwardness 
and abstract liberation from every kind of determinacy would lead 
to sublimity; but since the classical Ideal issues in an existence which 
is only its own, i.e. the existence of spirit itself, the sublimity of 
the Ideal too is fused into beauty and has passed over into it, as it 
were immediately. For the shapes of the gods this necessitates the 
expression of loftiness, of classical beautiful sublimity. An immortal 
seriousness, an unchangeable peace is enthroned on the brow of the 
gods and is suffused over their whole shape. 
({J{J) In their beauty these gods appear therefore raised above 
their own corporeality, and thus there arises a divergence between 
their blessed loftiness, which is a spiritual inwardness, and their 
beauty, which is external and corporeal. The spirit appears entirely 
immersed in its external form and yet at the same time immersed 

484 
I I. I I. THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
thence into itself. It is like the wandering of an immortal god 
amongst mortal men. 
In this connection the Greek gods produce an impression, 
despite all difference, similar to that made on me by Rauch's' bust 
of Goethe when I first saw it. You too have seen it, this lofty brow, 
this powerful commanding nose, the free eye, the round chin, the 
affable and well-formed lips, the intelligent placing of the head 
with a glance sideways and a little upwards; and at the same time 
the whole fullness of sensitive friendly humanity, and in addition 
these finished muscles of the forehead and face, [expressive of the] 
feelings and passions, and, in all the vitality of the bust, the peace, 
stillness, and majesty of an elderly man ; and now along with this 
the leanness of the lips which retreat into a toothless mouth, the 
looseness of the neck and cheeks whereby the bridge of the nose 
appears still greater and the sides of the forehead 6till higher.-The 
power of this fixed shape which at bottom suggests immutability 
especially, looks, in its loosely hanging mantle, like the raised head 
and the shape of the Oriental in his wide turban but loose outer 
garments and shuffling slippers ; it is the firm, powerful, and time­
less spirit which, in the mask of encircling mortality, is on the 
point of letting this veil fall away and still lets it just hang freely 
around itself. 
In a similar way the gods too, in virtue of this lofty freedom and 
spiritual peace, appear as raised above their body so that they feel 
their shape, their limbs, as if they were a superfluous appendage, 
amidst all the beauty and perfection of their figures. And yet the 
whole shape is vitally ensouled, identical with spiritual being, 
without any division, without that separation between what is 
inherently fixed and the weaker parts, the spirit neither escaping 
the body nor emergent from it, but both one solid whole out of 
which the inwardness of the spirit quietly peeps solely in the 
wonderful certainty of itself. 
(y) But since the above-mentioned divergence is present, yet 
without appearing as a difference and separation between inner 
spirituality and its external shape, the negative inherent in it is on 
this account immanent in this undivided whole and expressed 
therein itself. Within the loftiness of the spirit this is the breath and 
air of affliction which gifted men have felt in the ancient pictures 
1 C. D. Rauch, 1777-1857· There are several copies of this bust. Hegel 
probably refers to the bronze one in Berlin (1822). 

IDEAL O F  THE C LASS ICAL F O R M  O F  ART 
485 
of the gods even in their consummate beauty and loveliness. The 
repose of divine serenity may not be particularized into joy, plea­
sure, and contentment, and the peace of the eternal must not sink 
into the laughter of self-satisfaction and comfortable enjoyment. 
Contentment is the feeling of correspondence between our indi­
vidual self and the condition of our specific situation whether that 
be given to us or brought about by us. Napoleon, for example, has 
never more thoroughly expressed his contentment than when he had 
achieved some success by which the whole world showed itself 
discontented. For contentment is only the approval of my own 
being, acting, and doing, and the extreme of this approval can be 
recognized in that Philistine feeling to which every successful man 
must rise! But this feeling and its expression is not the expression 
of the plastic eternal gods. Free perfect beauty cannot be satisfied 
in compliance with a specific finite existence ; on the contrary, 
although its individuality, whether of spirit or shape, is character­
istic and specific in itself, it still coincides with itself only as being 
at once free universality and self-reposing spirituality. 
This universality is what in the case of the Greek gods some have 
proposed to accuse of frigidity. However, they are cold only for 
our modern fervour in the sphere of the finite; regarded by them­
selves, they have warmth and life; the blissful peace mirrored in 
their body is essentially an abstrac;tion from the particular, an 
indifference to the transient, a sacrifice of the external, a renunci­
ation neither sorrowful nor painful, yet all the same a renunciation 
of the earthly and evanescent, just as their spiritual serenity in its 
depth looks far away beyond death, the grave, loss, and time, and, 
precisely because it is deep, contains the negative in itself. But the 
more that seriousness and spiritual freedom appear in the shapes of 
the gods, so much the more can we feel a contrast between (a) this 
loftiness and (b) determinacy and bodily form. The blessed gods 
mourn as it were over their blessedness or their bodily form. We 
read in their faces the fate that awaits them, and its development, as 
the actual emergence of that contradiction between loftiness and 
particularity, between spirituality and sensuous existence, drags 
classical art itself to its ruin. 
(c) The Sort of External Representation 
If, thirdly, we now ask about the sort of external portrayal 
adequate to that concept of the classical Ideal which we have just 

486 
I I. I I. THE CLA S S I CA L  F O RM O F  A RT 
expounded, the essential points in this matter have already been 
expounded in more detail in connection with our consideration of 
the Ideal in general. Here therefore we need say no more than that 
in the strictly classical Ideal the spiritual individuality of the gods 
is not apprehended in its bearing on something else nor is it brought, 
through its particularization, into conflict and battle; on the con­
trary; it appears before us in its eternal self-repose and in this 
sorrow of the divine peace. The specific character [of the gods] is 
therefore not manifested by way of its provoking the gods to 
particular feelings and passions or compelling them to carry out 
specific aims. On the contrary, they are brought back out of every 
collision and complication, indeed out of every relation to what is 
finite and inherently discordant, into pure absorption in themselves. 
This most austere repose, not rigid, cold, and dead, but sensitive 
and immutable, is the highest and most adequate form of portrayal 
for the classical gods. On this account, if they enter into specific 
situations, then these may not be circumstances or actions which 
give an opening to conflicts, but such as, being harmless in them­
selves, leave the harmlessness of the gods also untouched. Amongst 
the particular arts, therefore, sculpture is above all adapted to 
represent the classical Ideal in its simple unity with itself, in which 
what is to come into appearance is universal divinity rather than 
particular character. It is especially the older, more austere, sculp­
ture which adheres to this aspect of the Ideal, and only later does 
sculpture proceed to an increased dramatic liveliness of situations 
and characters. Poetry, on the other hand, makes the gods act, 
which means relating themselves negatively to an existent, and 
thereby introduces them to battle and strife also. When the repose 
of plastic art remains within the sphere that is uniquely that art's 
own, it can express that feature of the spirit which is its negative 
relation to particulars, only in that seriousness of mourning which 
we have already indicated above [in (b)] in more detail. 
2. The Group of Particular Gods 
As individuality made visible, portrayed in immediate existence, 
and therefore specific and particular, the Godhead necessarily 
becomes a plurality of shapes. Polytheism is absolutely essential to 
the principle of classical art, and it would be a foolish undertaking 
to propose to shape in plastic beauty the one god of sublimity and 

IDEAL O F  THE C LASS ICAL F O RM O F  ART 
487 
pantheism or of that absolute religion1· which apprehends God as 
spiritual and purely inner personality, or to suppose that, in the 
case of the Jews, Mohammedans, or Christians, their original 
outlook could have produced the classical forms for the content of 
their religious faith, as happened in the case of the Greeks. 
(a) Plurality of Individual Gods 
In this plurality the universe of the Divine at this stage bursts 
asunder into a group of particular gods, each of which is an indepen­
dent individual and contrasted with the others. But these indi­
viduals are not of such a kind as to be taken merely as allegories of 
universal qualities, e.g. Apollo as god of knowledge, Zeus of 
dominion; on the contrary, Zeus is knowledge just as much, and 
Apollo in the Eumenides, as we saw, also protects Orestes, the son, 
the king' s son, whom he himself had stimulated to vengeance. The 
group of Greek gods is a plurality of individuals in which each 
single god, even if endowed with the specific character of a par­
ticular person, is still a comprehensive totality, containing also in 
itself the attribute of another god. For every shape, as Divine, is 
always also the whole. For this reason alone do the Greek indi­
vidual gods have a wealth of characteristics, and although their 
blessedness consists in their universal and spiritual self-repose and 
in their abstraction from the direct bent towards finitude and 
towards the dispersive manifold of things and relations, still they 
have all the same the power to evince themselves as active and 
effective in various ways. They are neither the abstract particular 
nor the abstract universal, but the universal which is the source of 
the particular. 
(b) Lack of a Systematic Arrangement 
But on account of this kind of individuality Greek polytheism 
cannot form a systematically organized totality in itself. At a first 
glance it seems imperative to demand of divine Olympus that the 
many gods assembled there must in their ensemble, if the particu­
larization of that ensemble is to have truth and its content to be 
classical, also express in themselves the totality of the Idea, ex­
haust the whole range of the necessary powers of nature and 
spirit, and be construed from that angle, i.e. be demonstrable as 
1 i.e. Christianity. 'Absolute Religion' is the title of the third and last part 
of Hegel's lectures on the Philosophy of Religion. 

488 
I I. I I. THE CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
necessary. But in that case this demand would at once have to be 
accompanied by a limitation because those powers of the heart and 
the absolute spiritual inner life in general, which only become 
effective in later and higher religion, remained excluded from the 
sphere of the classical gods, so that, for this reason, the scope of the 
content whose particular aspects could be brought before contem­
plation in Greek mythology was already diminished. But, this 
apart, on the one hand the inherently manifold character of indi­
viduality necessarily entails contingency in determining [viz., here, 
the forms of particular gods], and therefore determining them is 
not susceptible of the strict arrangement characteristic of the 
differences within the Concept because this contingency precludes 
the gods from being immobilized in the abstraction of a single 
determinacy; on the other hand, universality, the element in which 
the individual gods have their blessed existence, cancels fixed 
particularity, and the loftiness of the eternal powers rises serenely 
over the cold seriousness of the finite. In default of this inconsis­
tency, the divine shapes would be implicated in the finite by their 
restrictedness. 
(c) Fundamental Character of the Group of the Gods 
However far, therefore, the chief powers of the world, i.e. of the 
totality of nature and spirit, are portrayed in Greek mythology, 
this ensemble still cannot come on the scene as a systematic whole, 
because the gods possess both universal divinity and also indi­
viduality. Otherwise, instead of being individual characters, the gods 
would be more like allegorical beings, and instead of being divine 
individuals would in the end become restricted abstract characters. 
Therefore, if we consider more closely the group of the Greek 
divinities, i.e. the group of the so-called chief gods in their simple 
fundamental character as it appears consolidated by sculpture in a 
portrayal which is most universal and yet sensuously concrete, we 
do find the essential differences and their totality settled, but in 
particulars they are also always confused again and the rigour of the 
execution is tempered to an inconsistency between beauty and 
individuality. Thus Zeus has in his hands dominion over gods and 
men, yet without thereby essentially jeopardizing the free indepen­
dence ofthe other gods. He is the supreme god, but his power does 
not absorb the power of the others. He has a connection with the 
sky, with thunder and lightning, and with the generative life of 

IDEAL O F  THE CLA S S I C A L  FORM OF ART 
489 
nature, but still more, and more properly, he is the power over the 
state and the legal order of things; he is too the obligatoriness of 
contracts, oaths, and hospitality, and in short he is the bond of the 
substance of human, practical, and ethical life, and the might of 
knowing and the spirit. His brothers turn [for dominion] outward 
to the sea and beneath to the underworld. Apollo appears as the 
god of knowledge, as the expression and beautiful presentation of 
the interests of the spirit, as the teacher of the Muses; 'Know 
thyself' is the inscription on his temple at Delphi, a command 
which does not relate at all to the weaknesses and deficiencies of 
the spirit but to its essence and to art and every genuine conscious­
ness. Cunning and eloquence, mediation in general as it appears in 
those subordinate spheres which, although mixed with immoral 
elements, are yet within the scope of the perfect spirit-all these 
are a chief territory of Hermes who also conducts the souls of the 
dead to the underworld. Power over war is a chief trait of Ares. 
Hephaestus proves himself skilled in work in technical arts. And 
the enthusiasm which still carries in itself an element of the natural, 
the enthusing natural power of wine, as well as the games, dramatic 
productions, etc. are assigned to Dionysus. The female divinities 
run through a similar series of characteristics. In Juno the ethical 
bond of wedlock is a principal characteristic ;  Ceres has taught and 
propagated agriculture and therefore endowed man with both the 
aspects inherent in agriculture: first, provision for the growth of 
the natural products which satisfy man's most immediate needs, 
but, secondly, the spiritual element in property, wedlock, law, the 
beginnings of civilization and an ethical order. So too Athene is 
moderation, prudence, legality, the might of wisdom, technical 
skill, and bravery, and in her intelligent and warlike maidenhood 
embraces the concrete spirit of the people, the free proper substan­
tial spirit of the city of Athens, and displays it objectively as a ruling 
might to be reverenced as divine. Diana [i.e. Artemis J, on the other 
hand, entirely different from Diana of the Ephesians, has the 
inflexible independence of maidenly modesty as her essential trait 
of character; she loves the chase and is in general not the quietly 
pensive but the austere maiden with aspirations only beyond. 
Aphrodite with the seductive Amor, who out of the old Titanic 
Eros has become a boy, points to the human emotion of affection, 
sexual love, etc. 
This is the sort of content possessed by the spiritually shaped 

490 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
individual gods. As for their external portrayal, we may here again 
mention sculpture as the art which proceeds even to this particu­
larization of the gods. Yet if it expresses individuality in its more 
specific determinacy, it already passes beyond its original austere 
loftiness, although it does even then unify the variety and wealth of 
individuality into one determinacy, into what we call character; and 
it fixes this character, in its simpler clarity, for sense-perception, 
i.e. fixes it in divine shapes as what is externally most completely and 
finally determinate. For the imagination of the gods in respect of 
their external and real existence always remains vague, even if, as 
poetry, it develops the subject-matter into a mass of stories, utter­
ances, and events connected with the gods. Therefore sculpture is 
on the one hand more ideal, while on the other hand it individu­
alizes the character of the gods into an entirely specific human form 
and perfects the anthropomorphism of the classical Ideal. As this 
presentation of the Ideal in that externality which yet is entirely 
adequate to the inner essential content, the sculptures of the Greeks 
are the Ideals in and for themselves, the independent eternal shapes, 
the centre of plastic classical beauty, the type of which remains the 
basis even when these shapes enter into specific actions and appear 
involved in particular events. 
3· The Individuality of the Gods seriatim 
But individuality and its portrayal cannot be content with the ever 
still more or less abstract particularity of character. The star is 
exhausted by its simple law and brings this law into appearance; a 
few specific traits characterize the configuration of the world of 
rocks; but already in the nature of plants there arises an infinite 
copiousness of the most diversified forms, transitions, hybrids, and 
anomalies; animal organisms display a still greater range of differ­
ence and of interaction with the surroundings to which they are 
related; and if, finally, we rise to the spiritual and its appearance, 
we find a still infinitely wider many-sidedness of inner and outer 
existence. Now since the classical Ideal does not abide by the 
individuality that reposes in itself but has to set it in motion, bring 
it into relation with an opposite and show itself effective thereon, 
the character of the gods too does not stop at inherently substantial 
determinacy but enters into further particularizations. This self­
revealing movement into external existence and the mutability 
bound up with it provide only the more obvious traits for the 

IDEA L O F  THE CLASSICAL FORM OF ART 
491 
individuality of each god as they properly and necessarily do for a 
living individual. But with this sort of individuality there is bound 
up at the same time the contingency of the particular traits which 
are no longer brought back to the universal element in the substan­
tial meaning; therefore this particular aspect of the individual gods 
becomes something laid down arbitrarily which on this account 
may only surround them as an external accessory 'and re-echo 
within them. 
(a) Material for Individualization 
Therefore at once the question arises: Whence comes the 
material for this mode of appearance of the gods as individuals, how 
do they progress in their particularization ? For an actual human 
individual, for his character out of the resources of which he 
accomplishes his actions, for the events in which he is involved, for 
the fate in which he is caught, the positive material closer at hand 
is afforded by external circumstances, the date of his birth, his 
inborn aptitudes, his parents, education, surroundings, contem­
porary events, the whole range of relevant inner and outer circum­
stances. This material is contained in the present world, and, this 
considered, the biographies of individual men will vary from one 
another in the most manifold ways every time. But it is otherwise 
with the free figures of the gods which have no existence in con­
crete reality but are the product of imagination. But therefore we 
might believe that the poets and artists, who fashioned the Ideal 
in general out of their freedom of spirit, derived the material for 
accidental details purely from the subjective caprice of imagination. 
Yet this idea is false. For the position we gave to classical art in 
general was that only through reaction against the presuppositions 
belonging of necessity to its sphere was it elevated to what it is as 
genuinely Ideal. From these presuppositions there are spelt out 
the special particular characteristics which fashion for the gods 
their more detailed individual life. The chief factors in these pre­
suppositions have already been cited, and here we have only to 
refer briefly to what was said earlier [on pp. 440-4]. 
(ex) The primary abundant source is supplied by the symbolical 
nature religions. These serve Greek mythology with the basis 
which is transformed within it. But since such borrowed traits are 
here apportioned to the gods now represented as spiritual individu­
als, they must essentially lose the character of counting as symbols; 
82fS716 
R 

492 
I I. I I. THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
for now they may no longer preserve a meaning different from 
what the individual is himself and what he brings to light. The 
earlier symbolic content, therefore, now becomes the content of a 
divine subject himself, and since it does not concern the substan­
tial nature of the god but only his incidental particular character, 
such material falls to the level of an external story, an act or an 
event which is ascribed to the will of the gods in this or that particu­
lar situation. So there enter here again all the symbolical traditions 
of earlier sacred literature and they assume, transformed into the 
actions of a subjective individual, the form of human events and 
stories which are supposed to have happened to the gods and 
cannot at all have been merely invented by the poets at will. When 
Homer ,I e.g., tells us that the gods went off on a journey to feast 
for twelve days together amongst the blameless Ethiopians, this as 
a pure fancy of the poet would be a poor invention. The same is 
true of the narrative (Hesiod, 453 ff.] of the birth of Zeus. Cronus, 
it is said, devoured all the children he had begotten, so that now 
when Rhea, his spouse, was pregnant with Zeus the youngest, she 
went off to Crete ; there she bore her son, but what she gave to 
Cronus to devour was not the child but a stone swaddled in a 
skin. Then later Cronus vomited up all his children again, his 
daughters and Poseidon too. This story, as an artist's invention, 
would be silly; but the remains of symbolic meanings peep through, 
which yet, having lost their symbolic character, appear as a purely 
external event. It is the same with the story of Ceres and Proser­
pine. Here there is the old symbolic meaning of the dying and the 
burgeoning of the seed-corn. The myth represents this as follows: 
Proserpine played with flowers in a valley and plucked the fragrant 
narcissus which from one root sprouted a hundred blooms. Then 
the earth heaves. Pluto comes up out of the ground, puts the 
lamenting maiden into his golden chariot and carries her off to 
the underworld. Now Ceres in her maternal grief wanders over the 
earth for a long while in vain. At last Proserpine returns to the 
upper world, but Zeus has allowed this, subject only to the con­
dition that Proserpine has not yet eaten the food of the gods. But 
unfortunately she had once eaten a pomegranate in Elysium and 
therefore could pass only spring and summer in the upper world. 
Here too the general meaning has not preserved its symbolic shape 
but is worked up into a human event which only lets the universal 
' Iliad, i. 423 ff. 

IDEAL O F  THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART 
493 
sense shine from afar through the numerous external details. In 
the same way the cognomina of the gods often hint at such symbolic 
bases but these have been stripped of their symbolic form and only 
serve to give a fuller characterization to the individual god. 
(ft) Another source of the positive particular characterization of 
the individual gods is provided by relations to localities. These 
concern both the origin of ideas about the gods and also the advent 
and introduction of their service and the different places where 
their worship was chiefly to be found. 
(aa) Therefore although the portrayal of the Ideal and its 
universal beauty is raised above a particular locality and its special 
character, and although it has drawn together the external details 
contained in the universality of the artistic imagination into a 
total picture wholly in correspondence with the substantial mean­
ing, still, when sculpture brings the individual gods into separated 
connections and relations, these particular traits and local colours 
always play their part again in order to manifest something of that 
individuality, though something more specific only externally. 
Pausanias, e.g., cites a number of such local ideas, images, pictures, 
tales, which he had seen, or had had brought to his notice otherwise, 
in temples, public places, temple treasures, in regions where some­
thing important had occurred. On the same lines, similarly, locali­
ties and old traditions drawn from abroad run into native ones in 
the Greek myths, and all of them are more or less given a relation 
to the history, birth, and foundation of states, especially through 
colonization. But since this diverse special material in the univer­
sality of the gods has lost the meaning it originally had, the con­
sequence is that stories arise which are varied and outrageous and 
for us remain without sense. So, e.g., Aeschylus in his Prometheus 
presents the wanderings of Io [ll. 788 ff.] in their whole harshness 
and externality like a stone bas-relief, without alluding to an 
ethical, historical, or natural meaning. The same is the case with 
Perseus, Dionysus, etc., but especially with Zeus, his nurses, his 
infidelities to Hera whom after all he incidentally hung with an 
anvil on her legs and made her swing between heaven and earth. 1 
In Hercules too the most diverse and varied material is brought 
together, and then in such stories it assumes a thoroughly human 
look in the form of accidental events, deeds, passions, misfortunes, 
and other occurrences. 
' Cf. above, p. 224, note. 

494 
I I. I I. THE C LA S S I CA L  FORM OF ART 
({3{3) Apart from this, the eternal powers in classical art are the 
universal substances in the actual shape of the human world and 
action of the Greeks; therefore many particular remains of this 
world's original national beginnings, from the Heroic Age and 
other traditions, cling to the gods even in later days. After all, many 
traits in the various stories of the gods certainly hint at historical 
individuals, heroes, older races, natural events, and occurrences 
concerning battles, wars, and other sorts of affairs. And just as the 
family and the difference of clans is the starting-point of the state, 
so the Greeks also had their family gods, Penates, tribal gods, and 
moreover the protective deities of single cities and states. But in 
connection with this pointing to history the thesis is advanced that 
the origin of the Greek gods in general is to be derived from such 
historical facts, heroes, or ancient kings. This is a plausible view, 
but a superficial one, even in the form in which Heyne has once 
again given it currency in recent times. In an analogous way, a 
Frenchman, Nicolas Fn!ret, 1 has adopted as a general principle 
underlying the war of the gods, e.g. the quarrels of different 
priesthoods. That such an historical factor plays its part here, that 
certain clans have made their views of the Divine prevail, that like­
wise different localities have provided traits for the individualiza­
tion of the gods, all this is of course to be granted; but the real 
origin of the gods lies not in this external historical material, but in 
the spiritual powers that govern life, and it is as such that the gods 
have been conceived. From this point of view a wider scope may be 
allowed to the positive, local, and historical factors only for the sake 
of making the presentation of single individuality more specific. 
(yy) Now further, since the god enters human ideas and, still 
more clearly, is portrayed by sculpture in a bodily and real shape 
to which man then relates himself afresh in religion and the acts 
of divine worship, this relationship provides a new material for 
portrayal within the sphere of the arbitrary and contingent. For 
example, what animals or fruits are sacrificed to each god, in what 
attire priests and people appear, in what sequence the particular 
actions proceed, all this piles up into single traits of the most 
various kinds. For each such action has an infinite mass of aspects 
and external features which, accidental in themselves, might be 
this or something else; but by belonging to a sacred action they 
are meant to be something fixed, not arbitrary, and to pass over 
I 1688-1749• 

IDEAL O F  THE C LASSICAL F O RM OF A RT 
495 
into the sphere of the symbolic. In this context there falls, e.g., the 
colour of the clothing, in the case of Bacchus wine-colour, and also 
the deerskin in which those to be initiated into the Mysteries were 
veiled. The clothing and attributes of the gods, the bow of the 
Pythian Apollo, the whip, the staff, and innumerable other exter­
nals also have their place here. Yet such things gradually become 
just customary; in the practice of his religion no one thinks any 
longer of the ultimate origin of these things; and while by way of 
a little erudition we might exhibit their meaning, they still remain 
a mere external affair in which a man participates out of an immedi­
ate interest, a frolic, a pleasantry, a momentary pleasure, devotion, 
or because it is purely customary, immediately established thus, 
and participated in by others too. When in Germany, e.g., young 
people light St. John's fire1 in the summer-time or gambol else­
where or throw things at windows, this is a purely external usage 
in which the proper meaning has been relegated to the background, 
just as it has been too in the case of the festal dances of Greek 
youths and maidens where the interlacings of the dance and their 
figures imitate the criss-cross movements of the planets, as the 
twists and turns of a labyrinth do also. We do not dance in order to 
think about what we are doing; interest is restricted to the dance 
and the tasteful and charming solemnity of its beautiful movement. 
The whole meaning which was the original basis of the thing, and 
the portrayal of which for imagination and sense-perception was 
of a symbolic character, therefore becomes an imaginative idea in 
general, the details of which we can accept with pleasure as we 
accept a fairy-tale or as we accept in historiography a specific 
action in the external world of time and space; and in these cases 
we can only say 'It is said, so the tale goes' or 'It is so', etc. The 
interest of art can therefore only consist in picking out one aspect 
of this material which has become something positive and external, 
and making out of it something which sets the gods before our 
eyes as concrete living individuals and still carries no more than 
echoes of a deeper meaning. 
This positive element, worked on anew by imagination, gives to 
the Greek gods precisely the attraction of living men, since thereby 
what is otherwise purely substantial and mighty is drawn into the 
individual present, a present compacted as such of what is absolutely 
true and what is external and accidental; and the indeterminate 
1 Fires lit on hill-tops to celebrate St. John the Baptist's Day, 24 June. 

496 
1 1. 1 1. THE CLASSICAL FORM O F  ART 
element, otherwise always implicit in the idea of the gods, is more 
closely defined and more richly filled. But no further value can be 
attributed to detailed stories and particular characteristics; for this 
material, which earlier on had a symbolic significance in its ulti­
mate origin, is now only there for the purpose of perfecting the 
spiritual individuality of the gods in contrast to men by making it 
determinate for perception and adding to it through this element, 
undivine in content and appearance, the aspect of arbitrariness 
and contingency which belongs to the concrete individual. Since 
sculpture brings the ideal gods before our vision in their purity 
and has to portray character and expression in a living body alone, 
it is least able to make the final external individualization appear 
visibly, yet it does assert this even in its own sphere: as, e.g., the 
head-dress, the sort of coiffure and locks, are different for every 
god and are not there at all for symbolic purposes, but for more 
detailed individualization. So, e.g., Hercules has short locks, Zeus 
an abundant growth rising upwards, Diana a different curl of the 
hair from Venus; Pallas has the Gorgon on her helmet, and this 
sort of thing runs through weapons, girdles, scarves, bracelets, and 
the most varied externals in the same way. 
(y) Now finally, a third source of the closer determinacy [of 
their individuality] the gods acquire through their relation to the 
present concrete world and its varied natural phenomena and human 
deeds and events. For just as we have seen spiritual individuality, 
partly in its universal essence, partly in its particular singleness, 
emerging from earlier symbolically significant natural bases and 
human activities, so now, as a spiritually independent personality, 
it also remains in a steadily living relation to nature and human 
existence. Here, as has already been brought out above, the poet's 
imagination gushes forth as the steadily prolific source of particular 
stories, character traits, and deeds reported of the gods. The 
artistic aspect of this stage consists in vitally interweaving the 
individual gods with human actions and gathering up the indi­
vidual aspects of events into the universality of the Divine; just as 
we too say, e.g., of course in a different sense: this or that fate comes 
from God. Already in everyday life the Greek in the complications 
of his existence, in his needs, his fears, and his hopes took refuge in 
his gods. Therefore it was in the first place external accidents 
which the priests regarded as omens and interpreted in their 
bearing on human purposes and situations. If distress and mis-

IDEAL O F  THE C LAS S ICAL FORM O F  ART 
497 
fortune actually occur, the priest has to explain the reason for the 
affliction, recognize the wrath and will of the gods, and proclaim 
the means of meeting the misfortune. Now the poets go still 
further in their explanations, because what concerns the universal 
and essential 'pathos', the moving power in human decisions and 
actions, they ascribe for the most part to the gods and their deed, 
so that human activity appears at the same time as the deed of the 
gods who bring their decisions to execution through men. The 
material in the case of these poetic interpretations is drawn from 
everyday circumstances in respect of which the poet explains 
whether it is this or that god who is speaking in the event portrayed 
and showing himself active within it. In this way poetry especially 
enlarges the range of the many detailed stories told of the gods. 
In this connection we may recall a few examples which in a 
different context1 have already served as illustrations in our treat­
ment of the relation between the universal powers and human 
individual agents. Homer represents Achilles as the bravest of the 
Greeks before Troy. This pre-eminence of the hero he expresses 
by saying that Achilles is invulnerable in every part of his body 
except the ankle by which his mother had to hold him when she 
dipped him in the Styx. This story belongs to the imagination of 
the poet who is interpreting external fact. But if we take it as if 
it was supposed to be the expression of an actual fact which the 
ancients would have believed in as we believe in a fact on the evi­
dence of our senses, this is an entirely crude idea which makes 
Homer, as well as all the Greeks and Alexander (who admired 
Achilles [according to Plutarch] and praised his good fortune in 
having had Homer as his bard) into simpletons; as Adelungz does 
e.g. through his reflection that bravery was not difficult for Achilles 
because he knew of his invulnerability. But in this way the true 
bravery of Achilles is by no means lessened since he knew also of 
his early death and yet never evaded danger wherever it lay. 
A like situation is sketched quite differently in the Nibelungenlied. 
There [§ 6] the horned Siegfried is likewise invulnerable but besides 
he has his cap which makes him invisible. When in this invisibility 
he helps King Gunther in his contest with Brunhilde [§ 7], this is 
only the work of a crude barbaric wizardry which does not enhance 
our idea of the bravery of either Siegfried or King Gunther. 
Of course in Homer the gods often act for the safety of individual 
1 pp. zzs-J6. 
1 J. C., I7JZ-I8o6. 

4C)8 
I I. II. THE CLASS I CAL FORM OF ART 
heroes, but the gods appear only as the universal element in what 
the man is and achieves as an individual when he has to act with 
the whole energy of his heroic character. Otherwise the gods need 
only have slaughtered the whole of the Trojans in the battle in order 
to give the maximum aid to the Greeks. Whereas, when Homer de­
scribes the chief battle, he sketches in full the fights of individuals; 
and it is only when the scuffle and confusion become general, when 
the whole masses, the collective courage of the hosts, rage against 
one another that Ares himself storms across the field and gods are 
fighting against gods [Iliad, xx. 51 ff.]. And this is fine and splendid, 
not, as might be supposed, a mere heightening of the effect in ge­
neral; on the contrary there is implicit the deeper point that in 
what is individual and distinctive Homer recognizes the individual 
heroes, but in the ensemble and the universal the universal 
mights and powers. 
In another connection (ibid., xvi. 783-849) Homer makes Apollo 
appear too when it comes to the killing of Patroclus who wears 
the invincible armour of Achilles. Comparable to Ares, Patroclus 
thrice rushed into the Trojan host and thrice nine men had he 
slain. Then as he stormed in a fourth time, the god (Apollo], 
veiled in thick mist, wanders through the melee to confront him 
and smites him on the back and shoulders, tears his helmet from 
him, so that it rolled on the ground and clearly re-echoed from the 
hooves of the horses, and the plumes were soiled with blood and 
dust, a thing unthinkable before at any time. The god also breaks 
the brazen lance in the hands of Patroclus, slips his shield from his 
shoulders, and even deprives him of his breastplate.-This inter­
vention of Apollo we may take as a poetic explanation of the fact 
that it is exhaustion, as if it were a natural death, which seizes on 
Patroclus and overpowers him in the tumult and heat of the battle 
at his fourth onrush.-Only now can Euphorbus pierce Patroclus' 
back between the shoulders with a lance; Patroclus did once try to 
withdraw from the battle, but Hector overtook him and thrust his 
spear deep into the softness of his belly. Then Hector exults and 
mocks him as he is sinking; but Patroclus, with a weak voice, 
retorts to him: 'Zeus and Apollo have overcome me without 
trouble because they have taken the arms from my shoulders; 
twenty men such as thou art would I have laid low with my lance, 
but pernicious fate and Apollo killed me, Euphorbus a second time, 
and thou, Hector, a third.' 

IDEAL O F  THE CLASSI CAL FORM OF A R T  
499 
Here too the appearance of the gods is only the interpretation 
of the fact that, although Patroclus was protected by the arms of 
Achilles, he wearies, is stunned, and is killed. And this is not, as may 
be supposed, a superstition or idle play of fancy; indeed it is just 
chatter if it is held that Hector•s fame is diminished by Apollo•s 
entry on the ground that, since all that we can think of in the 
narrative is the god's power throughout the affair, Apollo does not 
exactly play the most honourable part-such reflections are only a 
tasteless and idle superstition of the prosaic intellect. For in every 
case where Homer explains special events by such theophanies, the 
gods are what is immanent in man himself, the power of his own 
passion and reflection, or the powers of his situation generally, the 
power and the ground of what meets him and happens to him as a 
result of this situation. If occasionally too there are quite external, 
purely positive, traits in the appearance of the gods, then they be­
come assimilated to jokes as, e.g., when the limping Hephaestus 
goes round as cup-bearer at a feast of the gods. But in general 
Homer is not in the last resort serious with these theophanies; 
at one time the gods act, at another they remain quite inactive 
again. The Greeks knew perfectly well that it was the poets who 
created these appearances; and if they believed in them, their belief 
touched on the spiritual which even so dwells in man's own spirit 
and is the universal actually effective. and moving in present events. 
For all these reasons we need not bring any superstition with us to 
the enjoyment of this poetic portrayal of the gods. 
(b) Preservation of the Moral Basis 
This is the general character of the classical Ideal; its further 
development we will have to consider in connection with the 
individual arts [in Part III]. At this point all that need be added is 
the remark that however much gods and men get involved in the 
external world and its detail, still in classical art the affirmative 
moral basis must appear maintained. The subject always remains 
in unity with the substantial content of his power. While in Greek 
art the natural preserves a harmony with the spiritual and likewise 
is subordinate to the inner life even when it is an existent adequate 
thereto, still the subjective inner life of man is always presented in 
solid identity with the genuine objectivity of spirit, i.e. with the 
essential content of the moral and the true. Viewed thus, the 
classical Ideal knows neither of a separation between inner life and 

soo 
I I. I I. THE CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
external shape, nor of one between the subject distracted in his aims 
and passions and therefore at the mercy of abstract caprice, on the 
one hand, and the therefore abstract universal on the other. The 
basis of the characters must therefore always be what is substantial; 
and the bad, the sinful, and the evil of subjective self-centredness 
are excluded from the representations of classical art; but, above 
all, the harshness, wickedness, infamy, and hideousness which gain 
a place in romantic art remain altogether foreign to classical. We 
do see many instances of transgression, e.g. matricide, parricide, 
and other crimes against family love and piety, treated repeatedly 
as subjects in Greek art, yet not as mere horrors, or, as was the 
fashion with us recently, as caused by the irrationality of a so-called 
fate with the false appearance of necessity; on the contrary, when 
transgressions are committed by men and partly commanded and 
defended by the gods, such actions are every time represented one 
way or another as possessed of an actually immanent justification. 
(c) Advance to Grace and Attractiveness 
Despite this substantial basis, however, we have seen the general 
artistic development of the classical gods emerge more and more 
out of the tranquillity of the Ideal into the variety of individual and 
external appearance, into the detailing of events, happenings, and 
actions which become ever more and more human. Therefore 
classical art proceeds at last, in its content to completing the process 
of individualization and its contingency, in its form to the agree­
able and the attractive. The agreeable, in other words, is the de­
velopment of the individuality of the external appearance at its 
every point, whereby the work of art now no longer grips the spec­
tator merely in respect of his own substantial inner life; but on the 
contrary it acquires a many-sided relation to him by addressing 
itself to the finitude of his own subjective character. For it is 
precisely in the existent work of art's involvement with the finite 
that there is implicit a closer connection with the spectator as such 
who is finite himself and who now without more ado finds himself 
again, and is satisfied, in the work of art. The seriousness of the gods 
becomes a gracefulness which does not agitate a man or lift him 
above his particular character but lets him remain at peace in it and 
claims only to please him. If, in general, imagination seizes upon 
religious ideas, and shapes them freely with beauty as its aim, it 
begins to make the seriousness of devotion disappear and to this 

IDEAL O F  THE C LAS S I C A L  FORM O F  ART 
501 
extent damages religion as such. This is what happens at the stage 
we have reached here, mostly owing to the agreeable and the 
pleasant. For what is developed further through the agreeable is 
not the substantial at all, the meaning of the gods and their uni­
versal element; on the contrary, it is the finite aspect, sensuous 
existence and the subjective inner life, which are to arouse interest 
and give satisfaction. Therefore the more the charm of the thing 
portrayed preponderates in beauty, so much the more does the 
thing's gracefulness entice us away from the universal and alienate 
us from the content through which alone could satisfaction be 
given to the deeper immersion [of the soul in itself]. 
Now with this externality and the determinacy of individuality 
into which the shape of the gods is introduced, there is linked the 
transition to another sphere of the forms of art. For externality 
implies the variety produced by finitude which, if given free play, 
finally opposes the inner Idea and its universality and truth and 
begins to awaken thought's discontent with the reality which is 
given to it and which no longer corresponds with it. 

Chapter III 
THE D I S S O LU T I O N  O F  THE C LA S S I CA L  
F O RM O F  A R T  
The germ of their decline the classical gods have in themselves, 
and when the deficiency implicit in them is revealed to our minds 
through the development of art itself they therefore bring in their 
train the dissolution of the classical Ideal. The principle of this Ideal, 
as it appears here, we have laid down as the spiritual individuality 
which finds its wholly adequate expression in an immediate cor­
poreal and external existent. But this individuality broke up into 
a group of divine individuals whose determinate character is not 
absolutely necessary and therefore from the start is surrendered to 
the contingency in which the eternally powerful gods acquire alike 
for the Greek mind and for artistic representation the source of 
their dissolution. 
1. Fate 
Sculpture in its full excellence does adopt the gods as substantial 
powers and gives them a shape in the beauty of which they repose 
on themselves in security at first, because the last thing which 
comes into appearance there is the contingent character of their 
external embodiment. But their plurality and difference is their 
contingency, and thought dissolves this into the determinate concep­
tion of the one divinity under whose might and necessity they fight 
and degrade one another reciprocally. For however universally the 
power of each particular god may be conceived, this power, as 
particular individuality, is still always of only limited range. Apart 
from this, the gods do not persist in their eternal repose ; they set 
themselves in motion with particular ends in view, because by the 
situations and collisions confronting them in concrete reality they 
are drawn hither and thither in order now to help here, now to 
hinder or destroy there. These separate relationships into which 
the gods enter as individual agents retain an aspect of contingency 
which obscures the substantiality of the Divine, however much 
that may remain also as the dominant basis, and lures the gods into 

D I SSOLUTION O F  THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART soJ 
the clashes and battles of the finite world and its restrictions. 
Through this finitude immanent in the gods themselves they 
become involved in a contradiction between their grandeur and 
dignity and the beauty of their existent embodiment, and this too 
brings them down into the field of caprice and contingency. 
The complete emergence of this contradiction the Ideal proper 
only escapes because, as is the case with genuine sculpture and its 
separate statues in temples, the divine individuals are portrayed as 
solitary, alone with themselves in blessed repose, and yet they 
retain an air of lifelessness, an aloofness from feeling, and that 
tranquil trait of mourning which we have already touched on 
[on pp. 485-6]. It is this mourning which already constitutes 
their fate because it shows that something higher stands above 
them, and that a transition is necessary from their existence as 
particulars to their universal unity. But, looking around for the 
manner and shape of this higher unity, we find it, contrasted with 
the individuality and relative determinacy of the gods, in what is 
inherently abstract and shapeless, namely necessity, the fate which, 
in this abstraction, is just the higher in general that overpowers gods 
and men but remains in itself incomprehensible and inconceivable. 
Fate is not yet an absolute independent end and therefore at the 
same time a subjective, personal, divine decree, but only the one 
universal power which surpasses the particular character of the 
individual gods and therefore cannot itself be represented over 
again as an individual because otherwise it would only appear as one 
amongst many individuals and would descend to their level. There­
fore it remains without configuration and individuality, and in this 
abstraction it is just necessity as such, the unalterable fate to which 
gods (and men too) must submit and which they must obey when, 
as particulars, they separate themselves from one another, contend 
with one another, assert their individual power one-sidedly, and 
seek to rise above their restricted sphere and authority. 
2. Dissolution of the Gods through their Anthropomorphism 
Now since absolute necessity is not an attribute of the individual 
gods, does not afford the content of their own self-determination, 
and only hovers over them as an indeterminate abstraction, the 
result is that the particular and individual side of them is at once 
given free play and it cannot evade the fate of running into the 
external characteristics involved in human life and the finitudes 

504 
I I. I I. THE CLASSI CAL FORM OF ART 
incidental to anthropomorphism; these pervert the gods into the 
reverse of what constitutes the essence of the substantial and 
Divine. The downfall of these beautiful gods of art is therefore 
necessitated purely by their own nature, since in the end the mind 
cannot any longer find rest in them and therefore turns back from 
them into itself. But, looked at more closely, the dissolution of the 
gods alike for religious and poetic faith is already implicit in the 
character of Greek anthropomorphism in general. 
(a) Deficiency in Inner Subjectivity 
For [in Greece the] spiritual individuality [of the gods] does 
enter, as Ideal, into the human shape, but into the immediate, i.e. 
corporeal, shape, not into humanity pure and simple [in our con­
ception of it as that] which in its inner world of subjective con­
sciousness does know itself as distinct from God, yet which all the 
same cancels this difference, and thereby, as one with God, is 
inherently infinite absolute subjectivity. 
(ex) Therefore the plastic Ideal lacks the aspect of being repre­
sented as inwardness knowing itself as infinite. The plastically 
beautiful shapes are not merely stone and bronze, but they lack 
in their content and expression the infinitely subjective element. 
While you may be as spiritually animated as you like by [Greek] 
beauty and art, this spiritual animation is and remains something 
subjective, not found in the object of your vision, i.e. in the [Greek] 
gods. But for true totality this aspect of subjective self-knowing 
unity and infinity is also required, because it alone constitutes the 
living and knowing God and man. If it is not also essentially given 
prominence as belonging to the content and nature of the Absolute, 
then the Absolute does not truly appear as a spiritual subject, but 
confronts our contemplation only in its objectivity without any 
conscious spirit of its own. Now it is true that the individuality of 
the gods does contain the element of subjectivity too, but as con­
tingency and in a development explicitly actuated outside that 
substantial repose and blessedness of the gods. 
(f3) On the other side, the subjectivity which has the plastic gods 
as its opposite is also not the inherently infinite and true subjecti­
vity. For this, as we shall see in more detail in the third form of art, 
the romantic, has confronting it as its corresponding object the 
inherently infinite self-knowing God. But since the subject at this 
present stage is not present to itself in the perfectly beautiful figures 

D I S SOLUTION OF THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART sos 
of the gods and, precisely on this account, does not in what it 
contemplates bring itself into consciousness as being objective too 
and as something confronting it, it is itself still only different and 
separate from its absolute object and therefore is just a contingent 
and finite subject. 
(y) The transition to a higher sphere, we might suppose, could 
possibly have been apprehended by imagination and art as a new 
war of the gods, like the original transition from the symbolism of 
nature gods to the spiritual Ideals of classical art. Yet the transition 
was by no means of this nature; on the contrary, it has been 
carried through on a totally different field as a conscious battle in 
the field of reality and the present. Consequently, in connection 
with the higher content which art has to embody in new forms, art 
acquires a totally different position. This new content is not vali­
dated as having been revealed by art, but is independently revealed 
without it; it enters subjective knowing, first on the prosaic ground 
of rational controversy, and then in the heart and its religious 
feelings, especially as a result of miracles, martyrdoms, etc.­
together with a consciousness of the opposition of everything finite 
to the Absolute which is now revealed in actual history as a course 
of events leading to a present not merely imagined but factual. 
The Divine, God himself, has become flesh, was born, lived, 
suffered, died, and is risen. This is material which art did not 
invent; it was present outside art; consequently art did not derive 
it from its own resources but found it ready for configuration. That 
original transition and battle of the gods had its origin, on the 
contrary, in artistic intuition and imagination which drew its 
doctrines and shapes out of its own inner being and gave their new 
gods to astonished men. But, for this reason, the classical gods have 
acquired their existent embodiment only through human imagina­
tion and are there only in stone and bronze or in contemplation, 
but not in flesh and blood or actual spirit. Therefore the anthropo­
morphism of the Greek gods lacked actual human existence, 
whether corporeal or spiritual. Christianity alone introduces this 
actuality in flesh and spirit as the determinate existence, life, and 
effectiveness of God himself. Now therefore this body, this flesh, 
is brought into honour, however much the natural and sensuous is 
known as the negative, and anthropomorphism is sanctified. Just 
as man was originally the image of God [Gen. 1 :  26], God is the 
image of man, and who sees the Son sees the Father, who loves the 

so6 
I I. I I. THE CLASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 
Son loves the Father also (John 14: 9, 21] ; God is to be known in 
an actual human being. Thus this new material is not brought to 
our minds by the conceptions of art but is given to art from outside 
as an actual happening, as the history of God made flesh. This 
transition could not have taken its starting-point from art; the 
clash of old and new would have been too disparate. The God of 
revealed religion, both in content and form, is the truly actual God; 
precisely for this reason his opponents would be mere creatures of 
men's imagination and they could not be matched with him on any 
terrain. On the other hand, the old and new gods of classical art 
both belong explicitly to the ground of imagination; their only 
reality is to be apprehended and represented by the finite spirit as 
powers of nature and spirit, and their opposition and battle is a 
serious matter. But if the transition from the Greek gods to the God 
of Christianity had been brought about by art, there would im­
mediately have been no true seriousness in the portrayal of a battle 
of the gods. 
(h) The Transition to Christianity is only a Topic of Modern Art 
Consequently, as it turns out, this strife and transition has only in 
more recent times become a casual and distinct topic for art, a topic 
which has been unable to mark an era or in this form to be a decisive 
feature in the entirety of the development of art. In this connec­
tion I will refer here by the way to a few publications that have 
become famous. In recent times a complaint about the downfall of 
classical art has often been heard, and the longing for the Greek 
gods and heroes has frequently provided a subject-matter for the 
poets too. This mourning is then expressed principally in opposi­
tion to Christianity; there was indeed a willingness to grant that 
Christianity contained a higher truth, but with the qualification 
that, so far as the standpoint of art went, the downfall of classical 
antiquity was only to be regretted. Schiller's Cotter Griechenlands 
[Gods of Greece] contains this theme, and it is worth while here 
not only to consider this poem as a poem in its beautiful presenta­
tion, its resounding rhythm, its living pictures, or the beautiful 
mourning of the heart from which it proceeded, but to take up its 
contents also, because Schiller's 'pathos' is always both truly and 
deeply thought. 
The Christian religion of course itself contains art as one of its 
features but in the course of its development up to the time of the 

D I S S O L U T I O N  O F  THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  ART 507 
Enlightenment it also reached a point at which thinking, the intel­
lect, suppressed the element that art certainly needs, namely God's 
actual human shape and appearance. For the human shape and 
what it expresses and says, whether human event, action, or feeling, 
is the form in which art must grasp and represent the content of 
the spirit. Now since the intellect made God into a mere ens 
rationis, believed no longer in the appearance of his spirit in concrete 
reality, and so exiled the God of thought from all actual existence, 
the result was that this sort of religious enlightenment necessarily 
arrived at ideas and demands incompatible with art. But when the 
Understanding rose out of these abstractions to Reason again, there 
at once entered the need for something concrete and also for that 
concrete thing which art is. The period of the enlightened intellect, 
it is true, did also practise art, but in a very prosaic way, as we can 
see in Schiller himself who took his departure from this period; 
but then, in the need for Reason, imagination, and passion which 
the Understanding no longer satisfied, he felt a vital longing for 
art in general and in particular for the classical art of the Greeks 
and their gods and world outlook. Out of this longing, pent up by 
the abstract thoughts of his day, there proceeded the poem I have 
mentioned. 
In the original version of the poem, Schiller's attitude to Christi­
anity is polemical throughout, but later he softened its severity 
because he was only opposed to the outlook of the intellect in the 
Enlightenment, and this at a later date began to lose its domination. 
He began by happily praising the Greek outlook for which the 
whole of nature was animated and full of gods; then he passes over 
to the present and its prosaic treatment of natural laws and man's 
position in relation to God, and says: 'This sad quiet, does it 
proclaim to me my creator? Dark like himself is his veil, the one 
thing that can glorify him is my renunciation.' 1 
Of course in Christianity renunciation is an essential feature, but 
only in monastic ideas does it require man to kill in himself his 
1 This quotation seems to be relevant only if Hegel took the 'veil' to be nature 
as no longer animated and full of gods but as governed by natural laws. This 
seems to be a misrepresentation, because the context is a contrast between the 
gay beauty of Greek temples and the gloom of Christian churches. Hegel omits 
part of the first line of the quotation; when it is included, the translation might 
be: 'What sort of place am I entering ? Does this sad place announce the 
presence of my creator ? Dark like himself is his habitation, and the only thing 
that can glorify him is my renunciation.' 

soB 
I I. I I. THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  A R T  
mind, his feeling, the so-called natural impulses, and not to embody 
himself in the moral, rational, and real world, in family and state­
just as the Enlightenment and its Deism gives out that God is 
unknowable and so lays on man the supreme renunciation, the 
renunciation of knowing nothing of God, of not comprehending 
him. Whereas, according to the truly Christian view, renunciation 
is only the factor of mediation, the point of transition in which the 
purely natural, the sensuous, and the finite in general sheds its 
inadequacy in order to enable the spirit to come to higher freedom 
and reconciliation with itself, a freedom and blessedness unknown 
to the Greeks. Of celebrating a solitary god, of his pure separation 
and detachment from the world emptied of gods there cannot in 
that case be any question in Christianity, for it is precisely in that 
freedom and reconciliation of spirit that God is immanent, and, 
looked at from this point of view, Schiller's famous saying : 'Since 
the gods were then more human, men were more godlike' is 
altogether false. Therefore we must emphasize as more important 
the later alteration of the ending, where it is said of the Greek gods : 
'Torn from the flood of time they hover, saved, o'er Pindus height ; 
what shall live undyingly in song must pass away in life.' 
With these words there is wholly ratified what we have just 
mentioned : the Greek gods had their seat only in ideas and imagi­
nation ; they could neither maintain their place in the reality of life 
nor give final satisfaction to the finite spirit. 
In another way, Parny,1 called the French Tibullus on the 
strength of his successful Elegies, turned against Christianity in a 
lengthy poem in ten books, a sort of epic, La guerre des Dieux, in 
order to make fun of Christian ideas by joking and jesting with an 
obvious frivolity of wit, yet with good humour and spirit. But these 
pleasantries went no further than frolicsome levity, and moral 
depravity was not made into something sacred and of the highest 
excellence as it was at the time of Friedrich von Schlegel's Lucinde. 2 
Mary of course comes off very badly in Parny's poem ; monks, 
Dominicans, Franciscans, etc. are seduced by wine and Bacchantes, 
and nuns by fauns, and thus it goes on perversely enough. But 
finally the gods of the Greek world are conquered and they with­
draw from Olympus to Parnassus. 
1 E. D. D., Vicomte de, I7SJ-I8I4. His epic reached a second edition at 
Paris, I 799· 
• Berlin, 1799· See Hegel's Philosophy of Right, Addition to § 164. 

D I S SO L U T I O N  O F  THE CLASS ICAL FORM O F  ART .509 
Lastly, in his Braut von Korinth1 Goethe has sketched in a living 
picture the banning of love more deeply, according less to the true 
principle of Christianity than to the misunderstood demand for 
renunciation and sacrifice; what he does is to contrast natural 
human feelings with the false asceticism which proposes to condemn 
a woman's vocation for wedlock and regard compulsory celibacy as 
something more sacrosanct than marriage. Just as in Schiller's case 
we find the opposition between the Greek imagination and the 
modern Enlightenment's abstractions of the Understanding, so here 
we see, contrasted with the Greek moral and sensuous justification 
of love and marriage, ideas which have belonged only to a one-sided 
and untrue view of the Christian religion. With great art a terrifying 
tone is given to the whole work, especially because it remains 
uncertain whether the action concerns an actual maiden or a dead 
one, a living one or a ghost, and in an equally most masterly way 
the love-affair is metrically interwoven with a solemnity which 
thereby becomes all the more dreadful. 
(c) Dissolution of Classical Art in its own Sphere 
But before we endeavour to get to the bottom of the new art­
form whose opposition to the old does not belong to the course of 
artistic development as we have to treat it here in its essential 
features, we must first bring to view in its clearest form that transi­
tion which falls within ancient art itself. The principle of this 
transition lies in the fact that, while the individuality of the spirit 
was hitherto visualized as in harmony with the true substances of 
nature and human existence, and while the spirit knew and found 
itself in this harmony throughout its own life, willing, and activity, 
now the spirit begins to withdraw into the infinity of its inner life, 
though instead of true infinity it wins only a formal, and indeed a 
still finite, return into itself. 
If we cast a closer glance at the concrete circumstances corres­
ponding to the principle mentioned, we saw already in the previous 
chapter that the Greek gods embodied the substances of actual 
human life and action. But man's highest vocation, and his universal 
interest and end, had now become present in the world outside 
religion, as something existent at the same time. Just as external and 
actual appearance was essential for the Greek spiritual art-form, 
' Often translated as the Bride of Corinth, but Braut means fiancee. 

510 
I I. I I. THE C LA S S I CAL FORM OF A RT 
so too the absolute spiritual destiny of man was accomplished in 
the phenomenal world as a real actuality (the state] with the sub­
stance and universality of which the individual demanded to be in 
harmony. This supreme end in Greece was the life of the state, the 
body of the citizens, and their ethical life and living patriotism. 
Beyond this interest there was none higher or truer. But political 
life as a mundane and external phenomenon, like the circumstances 
of mundane reality in general, falls a prey to transitoriness. It is not 
hard to show that a state with such a kind of freedom, so immedi­
ately identical with all the citizens who as such have in their hands 
the supreme agency in all public affairs, can only be small and 
weak and must either be destroyed by itself or demolished from 
without in the course of world history. 
For in this immediate coalescence of the individual with the 
universality of politics (a) the subject's own character and his 
private individuality does not yet come into its rights and it cannot 
find room to develop in a way harmless to the whole. But by being 
distinct from the substantial organization into which it has not been 
incorporated, it remains the restricted natural self-interest which 
now goes its own way independently, pursues interests far removed 
from the true interest of the whole and therefore leads to the ruin 
of the state itself which in the end, after a struggle, it succeeds in 
opposing with its subjective power. (b) On the other hand, within 
this freedom itself there is awakened the need for a higher freedom 
of the subject in himself; he claims to be free not only in the state, 
as the substantial whole, not only in the accepted ethical and legal 
code, but in his own heart, because he wants to generate out of his 
own resources the good and the right in his subjective knowing and 
to bring it into recognition. The subject wants to have the con­
sciousness of being substantial in himself as subject, and therefore 
there arises in this freedom a new conflict between an end for the 
state and one for himself as an inherently free individual. Such a 
clash had already begun at the time of Socrates, while on the other 
side vanity, self-interest, and the licentiousness of democracy and 
demagogy disrupted the actual state in such a way that men like 
Xenophon and Plato felt disgust at the condition of their native city 
in which the administration of public affairs lay in self-interested 
and frivolous hands. 
The spirit of the transition rests primarily, therefore, on the 
general cleavage between the explicitly independent spiritual realm 

D I S S O L U T I O N  OF THE CLAS S I CAL FORM OF ART s u  
and external existence. In this severance from its reality in which it 
finds itself no longer, the spiritual is the abstractly spiritual; yet not, 
as might be thought, the one oriental god, but on the contrary the 
actual knowing subject who produces and retains every intellectual 
universal, the true, the good, the moral, in his subjective inner 
consciousness, where he has no knowledge of present reality but 
only of his own thoughts and convictions. This situation, in so far 
as it does not transcend opposition, but sets its two sides over 
against one another as simply opposed, is of a purely prosaic nature. 
Yet to this prose we have not yet come at this stage. On the one 
hand, in other words, there is present the consciousness of a subject 
who, as firm in himself, wills the good and envisages the fulfilment 
of his desires and the realization of his essential being in the virtue 
of his heart as well as in the old gods, the old moral and legal life; 
but at the same time he is irritated by the present as it exists, by the 
actual political life of his time and by the dissolution of the old 
dispensation, i.e. of the earlier patriotism and political wisdom, and 
therefore is caught of course in the opposition between his subjec­
tive inner life and external reality. For in his own inner life he does 
not enjoy full satisfaction in those mere ideas of true ethical life 
and therefore he turns outward against the external situation to 
which he relates himself negatively, with hostility, with the aim of 
altering it. Therefore, as was said just above, on the one hand there 
is of course present to his mind an inner content which is self­
determined and, while he steadily expresses it, he has to do at the 
same time with a world confronting him, contradicting that content, 
and he has the task of sketching this reality in the traits of its 
corruption which is opposed to the good and the true; yet on the 
other hand this opposition still finds its resolution in art itself. In 
other words, a new art-form appears in which the struggle between 
the opposites is not conducted by thoughts which leave the oppo­
sition intact; on the contrary, what is brought into the artistic 
portrayal is reality itself in the madness of its ruin, destroying itself 
· within, whereby, precisely in this self-destruction of the right, the 
true can display itself on this mirror as a fixed and abiding power, 
and madness and unreason are not left with the power of directly 
contradicting what is inherently true. Of this kind of art an 
example is comedy as Aristophanes among the Greeks has handled 
it without anger, in pure and serene joviality, in relation to the 
most essential spheres in the world of his time. 

5 1 2  
I I. I I. THE CLAS S I CAL FORM O F  ART 
3· Satire 
Yet this still artistically adequate resolution we see disappearing al 
the same, because the antithesis itself persists in the form of oppo­
sition and therefore presents, in place of the poetic reconciliation, 
a prosaic relation between the two sides ; the result is that the 
classical art-form appears as superseded, since this relation leads to 
the downfall of the plastic gods and the beautiful world of men. 
Now here we have at once to look around for the art-form which 
can still be inserted in this transition to a higher mode of configura­
tion and can actually make this transition. We found the culmination 
of symbolic art likewise in a variety of forms, in fable, comparison, 
parable, riddle, etc., all having in common the separation of the 
shape as such from its meaning. If at this point too the ground of 
dissolution is a similar cleavage, the question arises about the 
difference between the present sort of transition and the earlier 
one. The difference is as follows. 
(a) Difference between the Dissolution of Classical Art and that of 
Symbolic Art 
In the strictly symbolic and comparative art-form the shape and 
meaning are strange to one another from the start, despite their 
affinity and relationship ; yet they stand in no negative relation but 
in a friendly one, for it is precisely the identity or similarity of 
the qualities and traits on both sides that proves to be the basis of 
their connection and comparison. Their persistent separation and 
strangeness within such a unification is not such as to be hostility 
between the separated sides, nor does it rend them apart and dis­
rupt their absolutely close amalgamation. On the other hand, the 
Ideal of classical art proceeds from the perfect interfusion of mean­
ing and shape, spiritual inner individuality and its corporeality ; 
and if therefore the sides joined together in such a perfect unity 
are detached from one another, this only happens because they can 
no longer agree with one another and must desert their peaceful 
reconciliation for incompatibility and enmity. 
(b) Satire 
Furthermore, with this form of relation, in distinction from 
the symbolic, the content of the two sides which now stand in 

D I SSOLUTION O F  THE C LASS I CAL FORM O F  ART 513 
opposition to one another is altered too. In the symbolic form of art, 
it is abstractions, more or less, general thoughts, or even specific 
propositions in the form of general reflections which acquire 
through the symbolic art-form an allusive illustration; whereas, in 
the form asserting itself in this transition to romantic art, although 
the content does consist of similar abstractions of universal 
thoughts, sentiments, and intellectual propositions, it is not these 
abstractions as such but their existence in subjective consciousness 
and self-subsistent self-consciousness which affords the content for 
one side of the opposition. For the first demand of this intermediate 
stage is that the spiritual, attained by the Ideal, shall emerge inde­
pendently on its own account. Already in classical art spiritual indi­
viduality was the chief thing although in respect of its reality it 
remained reconciled with its immediate existence. But now it is a 
matter of portraying a subjectivity which tries to gain dominion over 
its no longer adequate shape and over external reality in general. 
Thereby the spiritual world becomes explicitly free; it has liberated 
itself from the sensuous and therefore appears, through this with­
drawal into itself, as a self-conscious subject, self-contented only 
in its inner life. But this subject which spurns externality is on its 
spiritual side not yet the true totality which has for its content the 
Absolute in the form of self-conscious spirit; on the contrary, as 
afflicted with opposition to the real, it is a purely abstract, finite, 
unsatisfied subject. 
Contrasted with it there is an equally finite reality which now on 
its side also becomes free, yet just because the truly spiritual has 
reverted out of it into the inner life and no longer will or can find 
itself in it, this reality appears as a godless one and a corrupt ex­
istence. In this way, a thinking spirit, a subject reposing on himself 
as subject in abstract wisdom with a knowledge of the good and the 
virtuous and a will to achieve it, is brought by art into a hostile 
opposition to the corruption of the present. The unresolved nature 
of this opposition in which inner and outer remain in fixed dishar­
mony constitutes the prosaic character of the relation between the 
two sides. A noble spirit, a virtuous heart always deprived of the 
actualization of its convictions in a world of vice and folly, turns 
with passionate indignation or keener wit and colder bitterness 
against the reality confronting it, and is enraged with or scoffs at 
the world which directly contradicts its abstract idea of virtue and 
truth. 

514 
I I. I I. THE C LA S SICAL FORM OF ART 
This art-form which assumes this shape of the emerging opposi­
tion between finite subjectivity and degenerate externality is Satire 
to which common theories have been unable to do proper justice 
because they remain in perplexity about its classification. For 
Satire has nothing at all of Epic, and it does not properly belong to 
Lyric either, since in Satire what is expressed is not the feeling of 
the heart but the universality of the good and the inherently neces­
sary which, interwoven indeed with the personality of the indi­
vidual, appears as the virtuousness of this or that man; yet Satire 
does not enjoy the free unhindered beauty of imagination or pour 
forth this enjoyment; on the contrary, it clings discontentedly to the 
disharmony between its own subjectivity, with its abstract princi­
ples, and empirical reality, and to this extent produces neither true 
poetry nor true works of art. Therefore the satirical point of view is 
not to be understood by reference to one of those species of poetry 
but must be apprehended more generally as this transitional form 
of the classical Ideal. 
(c) The Roman World as the Soil where Satire Flourishes 
Now since what is disclosed in Satire is the dissolution of the 
Ideal, a dissolution prosaic in its inner content, we have not to look 
for its actual soil in Greece as the land of beauty. Satire in the form 
just described belongs properly to the Romans. The spirit of the 
Roman world is domination by abstraction (i.e. by dead law), 
the demolition of beauty and joyous customs, the suppression of 
the family qua immediate natural ethical life, in general the sacrifice 
of individuality which now surrenders itself to the state and finds 
its cold-blooded dignity and intellectual satisfaction in obedience to 
the abstract law. The principle of this political virtue is opposed to 
true art; abroad, its cold harshness subjugates all the individuality 
of nations, while, at home, formal law is developed to perfection in 
similar rigour. After all we find no beautiful, free, and great art 
in Rome. Sculpture and painting, lyric and dramatic poetry, the 
Romans took over from the Greeks and learnt their lesson from 
them. It is remarkable that what may be regarded as native in the 
case of the Romans is comic farces, Fescennine verses, and Atellan 
burlesques, whereas the more cultivated comedies of Plautus, and 
of Terence too, were borrowed from the Greeks and were more a 
matter of imitation than of independent production. Even Ennius 
drew on Greek sources and then made mythology prosaic. 

D I SSOLUTION OF THE C LA S S I CAL FORM O F  ART 515 
What is peculiarly Rome's own is only that mode of art which is 
prosaic in principle, didactic poetry, e.g. (especially if it has a 
moral content and gives to its general reflections merely the exter­
nal adornment of metre, images, similes, and a rhetorically fine 
diction), but above all Satire. Here it is the spirit of a virtuous ill­
humour about the surrounding world which strives to give itself 
some relief in hollow declamations. This form of art, prosaic in 
itself, can become poetic only if it so brings the corrupt shape of 
reality before our eyes that this corruption collapses in itself by 
reason of its own folly; Horace, e.g., who, as a lyric poet worked 
his way entirely into the Greek form and manner of art, outlines 
in his Satires and Epistles, where he is more original, a living 
picture of the manners of his time by sketching for us follies which, 
unskilled in the means they use, are self-destructive. Yet this is 
only a joviality satisfied with making the bad laughable; it may be 
exquisite and cultivated, but it is certainly not poetic. In the case of 
other writers, on the other hand, the abstract idea of law and virtue is 
directly contrasted with vices; and here it is ill-humour, vexation, 
wrath, and hatred which expatiate in abstract rhetoric about virtue 
and wisdom, or, with the indignation of a nobler soul and with bitter­
ness, launch out against the corruption and slavery of the times; or 
again, without any true hope or faith, they hold up before the vices 
of the day the picture of old mannerѭ, the old freedom, the virtues 
of a totally different world-situation in the past; yet they have 
nothing to set against the vacillation, the vicissitudes, the distress 
and danger of an ignominious present except stoic equanimity and 
the inner imperturbability of a virtuous disposition of heart. This 
dissatisfaction gives something of the same tone too to Roman 
historiography and philosophy. Sallust must declaim against the 
moral corruption to which he did not himself remain a stranger; in 
spite of his rhetorical elegance, Livy seeks consolation and satis­
faction in sketching the olden days; and above all it is Tacitus who, 
with discontent as magnificent as profound, without cold decla­
mation, indignantly and vividly discloses the evils of his time in 
sharp outlines. Among the satirists, Persius especially is full of 
harshness, more bitter than Juvenal. Later on, finally, we see 
Lucian, the Greek Syrian, turning with cheerful levity against 
everything, heroes, philosophers, and gods, and especially satirizing 
the old Greek gods on the score of their humanity and individuality, 
Yet he often fails to get beyond chatter about the externals of the 

516 
I I. I I. THE CLASS I CA L  FORM O F  ART 
shapes and actions of the gods and therefore becomes wearisome, 
especially for us. For, on the one hand, as a result of our faith we 
have already done with what he wanted to destroy, and on the 
other hand we know that these traits of the gods, considered in 
their beauty, have their eternal validity in spite of his jokes and 
ridicule. 
Nowadays satires will not succeed any more. Cotta 1 and Goethe 
have arranged prize-competitions for satires; no poems of this 
sort have been forthcoming. Satire entails fixed principles with 
which the present world stands in contradiction; but while a 
wisdom that remains abstract, a virtue that with inflexible energy 
clings only to itself, may well contrast itself with reality, it cannot 
achieve either the genuine poetic dissolution of the false and the 
disagreeable or a genuine reconciliation in the truth. 
But art cannot remain in this cleavage of the abstract inner 
disposition from external objectivity without abandoning its own 
principle. The subjective must be interpreted as what is inherently 
infinite and absolute which, even if it does not let finite reality 
subsist as the truth, yet does not relate itself to it negatively in bare 
opposition; on the contrary, it proceeds all the same to reconcili­
ation and in this activity alone comes to be portrayed, contrasted 
with the ideal individuals of the classical art-form, as absolute 
subjectivity. 
1 J. F., t764-I832, the publisher. 

SECTIO N I l l  
THE ROMANTIC F O RM O F  ART 
Introduction-Of the Romantic in General 
The form of romantic art is determined, as has been the case every 
time in our treatment hitherto, by the inner essence of the content 
which art is called upon to represent, and so we must in the first 
place endeavour to make clear the distinctive principle of the new 
content which now, as the absolute content of truth, comes into 
consciousness in the shape of a new vision of the world and a new 
artistic form. 
At the stage of the beginning of art the urge of imagination con­
sisted in striving out of nature into spirit. But this striving remained 
only a quest of the spirit, and therefore, not yet providing the 
proper content of art, the spirit could only assert itself as an 
external form for meanings drawn from nature or for impersonal 
abstract ideas drawn from the substantial inner life, and it was 
these which formed the real centre of this form of art. 
The opposite, secondly, we found in classical art. Here although 
the spirit could only struggle on to independence by annulling the 
natural meanings, it is the basis and principle of the content, 
while the external form is the natural phenomenon in a corporeal 
and sensuous shape. Yet this form did not remain, as it did at the 
first stage, purely superficial, indeterminate, and not penetrated by 
its content; on the contrary, the perfection of art reached its peak 
here precisely because the spiritual was completely drawn through 
its external appearance; in this beautiful unification it idealized the 
natural and made it into an adequate embodiment of spirit's own 
substantial individuality. Therefore classical art became a concep­
tually adequate representation of the Ideal, the consummation of · 
the realm of beauty. Nothing can be or become more beautiful. 
Yet there is something higher than the beautiful appearance of 
spirit in its immediate sensuous shape, even if this shape be created 
by spirit as adequate to itself. For this unification, which is achieved 
in the medium of externality and therefore makes sensuous reality 

518 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
into an appropriate existence [of spirit], nevertheless is once 
more opposed to the true essence of spirit, with the result that 
spirit is pushed back into itself out of its reconciliation in the 
corporeal into a reconciliation of itself within itself. The simple 
solid totality of the Ideal is dissolved and it falls apart into the 
double totality of (a) subjective being in itself and (b) the external 
appearance, in order to enable the spirit to reach through this 
cleavage a deeper reconciliation in its own element of inwardness. 
The spirit, which has as its principle its accord with itself, the 
unity of its essence with its reality, can find its correspondent 
existence only in its own native spiritual world of feeling, the 
heart, and the inner life in general. Thereby the spirit comes to the 
consciousness of having its opposite, i.e. its existence, on and in 
itself as spirit and therewith alone of enjoying its infinity and 
freedom. 
r. The Principle of Inner Subjectivity 
By this elevation of the spirit to itself the spirit wins in itself its 
objectivity, which hitherto it had to seek in the external and sen­
suous character of existence, and in this unification with itself it 
senses and knows itself. This spiritual elevation is the fundamental 
principle of romantic art. Bound up with it at once is the essential 
point that at this final stage of art the beauty of the classical ideal, 
and therefore beauty in its very own shape and its most adequate 
content, is no longer the ultimate thing. For at the stage of rom­
antic art the spirit knows that its truth does not consist in its 
immersion in corporeality; on the contrary, it only becomes sure of 
its truth by withdrawing from the external into its own intimacy 
with itself and positing external reality as an existence inadequate 
to itself. Even if, therefore this new content too comprises in itself 
the task of making itself beautiful, still beauty in the sense hitherto 
expounded remains for it something subordinate, and beauty be­
comes the spiritual beauty of the absolute inner life as inherently 
infinite spiritual subjectivity. 
But therefore to attain its infinity the spirit must all the same 
lift itself out of purely formal and finite personality into the 
Absolute; i.e. the spiritual must bring itself into representation as 
the subject filled with what is purely substantial and, therein, as the 
willing and self-knowing subject. Conversely, the substantial and 
the true must not be apprehended as a mere 'beyond' of humanity, 

I NTRODU C T I O N  
519 
and the anthropomorphism of the Greek outlook must not 
be stripped away; but the human being, as actual subjectivity, õ 
must be made the principle, and thereby alone, as we already 
saw earlier [on pp. 435-6, sos-6], does the anthropomorphic reach 
its consummation. 
2. The More Detailed Features of the Content 
and Form of the Romantic 
Out of the more detailed features implicit in this fundamental 
definition we have now to develop in a general way the group of 
topics [in romantic art] and their form. This altered form is con­
ditioned by the new content of romantic art. 
The true content of romantic art is absolute inwardness, and its 
corresponding form is spiritual subjectivity with its grasp of its 
independence and freedom. This inherently infinite and absolutely 
universal content is the absolute negation of everything particular, 
the simple unity with itself which has dissipated all external 
relations, all processes of nature and their periodicity of birth, 
passing away, and rebirth, all the restrictedness in spiritual exis­
tence, and dissolved all particular gods into a pure and infinite 
self-identity. In this Pantheon all the gods are dethroned, the flame 
of subjectivity has destroyed them, and instead of plastic poly­
theism art knows now only one God, one spirit, one absolute 
independence which, as the absolute knowing and willing of itself, 
remains in free unity with itself and no longer falls apart into those 
particular characters and functions whose one and only cohesion 
was due to the compulsion of a dark necessity.• 
Yet absolute subjectivity as such would elude art and be 
accessible to thinking alone if, in order to be actual subjectivity 
in correspondence with its essence, it did not also proceed into 
external existence and then withdraw out of this reality into itself 
again. This moment of actuality is inherent in the Absolute, 
because the Absolute, as infinite negativity, has for the result of its 
activity itself, as the simple unity of knowing with itself and there­
fore as immediacy. On account of this immediate existence which is 
grounded in the Absolute itself, the Absolute does not turn out to 
be the one jealous God who merely cancels nature and finite human 
existence without shaping himself there in appearance as actual 
• See above, p. 503. 

szo 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
divine subjectivity; on the contrary, the true Absolute reveals itself 
and thereby gains an aspect in virtue of which it can be appre­
hended and represented by art. 
But the determinate being of God is not the natural and sensuous 
as such but the sensuous elevated to non-sensuousness, to spiritual 
subjectivity which instead of losing in its external appearance the 
certainty of itself as the Absolute, only acquires precisely through 
its embodiment a present actual certainty of itself. God in his 
truth is therefore no bare ideal generated by imagination ; on the 
contrary, he puts himself into the very heart of the finitude and 
external contingency of existence, and yet knows himself there as 
a divine subject who remains infinite in himself and makes this 
infinity explicit to himself. Since therefore the actual individual 
man is the appearance of God, art now wins for the first time the 
higher right of turning the human form, and the mode of externa­
lity in general, into an expression of the Absolute, although the new 
task of art can only consist in bringing before· contemplation in 
this human form not the immersion of the inner in external cor­
poreality but, conversely, the withdrawal of the inner into itself, 
the spiritual consciousness of God in the individual. The different 
moments which constitute the totality of this world view as the 
totality of truth itself now therefore find their appearance in man 
in such a way that content and form are not afforded either by the 
natural as such, as sun, sky, stars, etc., or by the beautiful group of 
the Greek gods, or by heroes and external deeds wrought on the 
ground of family obligations and political life; on the contrary, it is 
the actual individual person in his inner life who acquires infinite 
worth, since in him alone do the eternal moments of absolute 
truth, which is actual only as spirit, unfold into existence and 
collect together again. 
If we compare this vocation of romantic art with the task of 
classical art, fulfilled in the most adequate way by Greek sculpture, 
the plastic shape of the gods does not express the movement and 
activity of the spirit which has retired into itself out of its corporeal 
reality and made its way to inner self-awareness. The mutability 
and contingency of empirical individuality is indeed expunged in 
those lofty figures of the gods, but what they lack is the actuality of 
self-aware subjectivity in the knowing and willing of itself. This 
defect is shown externally in the fact that the expression of the 
soul in its simplicity, namely the light of the eye, is absent from 

I NTRO D U CT I O N  
5:1.1 
the sculptures.1 The supreme works of beautiful sculpture are 
sightless, and their inner being does not look out of them as self­
knowing inwardness in this spiritual concentration which the eye 
discloses. This light of the soul falls outside them and belongs to · 
the spectator alone; when he looks at these shapes, soul cannot 
meet soul nor eye eye. But the God of romantic art appears seeing, 
self-knowing, inwardly subjective, and disclosing his inner being 
to man's inner being. For infinite negativity, the withdrawal of the 
spirit into itself, cancels effusion into the corporeal; subjectivity is 
the spiritual light which shines in itself, in its hitherto obscure 
place, and, while natural light can only illumine an object, the 
spiritual light is itself the ground and object on which it shines and 
which it knows as itself. But this absolute inner expresses itself at 
the same time in its actual determinate existence as an appearance 
in the human mode, and the human being stands in connection 
with the entire world, and this implies at the same time a wide 
variety in both the spiritually subjective sphere and also the 
external to which the spirit relates itself as something its own. 
The shape that absolute subjectivity may thus take in reality has 
the following forms of content and appearance. 
(a) The original starting-point we must take from the Absolute 
itself which as actual spirit gives itself an existence, knows itself 
and is active in reality. Here the human shape is so represented 
that it is immediately known as having the Divine in itself. The 
man [Jesus] appears not as man in a purely human character with 
restricted passions, finite ends and achievements, or as merely 
conscious of God, but as the self-knowing sole and universal God 
himself in whose life and suffering, birth, death, and resurrection 
there is now revealed even to man's finite consciousness what 
spirit, what the eternal and infinite, is in its truth. Romantic art 
presents this content in the story of Christ, his mother, his Dis­
ciples, and also of all others in whom the Holy Spirit is effective and 
the entire Godhead is present. For because it is God who appears 
in human existence, for all that he is universal in himself too, this 
reality is not restricted to individual immediate existence in the 
shape of Christ; it is unfolded into the whole of mankind in which 
the spirit of God makes itself present, and in this reality remains in 
unity with itself. The diffusion of this self-contemplation of spirit, 
of its inwardness and self-possession, is peace, the reconciliation of 
I Cf. pp. 153-4· 433-4· 

szz 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
spirit with itself in its objectivity-a divine world, a Kingdom of 
God, in which the Divine (which from the beginning had recon­
ciliation with its reality as its essence) is consummated in virtue of 
this reconciliation and thereby has true consciousness of itself. 
(b) But however far this identification is grounded in the essence 
of the Absolute itself, still, as spiritual freedom and infinity, it is no 
immediate reconciliation present from the beginning in mundane, 
natural, and spiritual reality; on the contrary, it is brought about 
only by the elevation of the spirit out of the finitude of its immedi­
ate existence into its truth. This implies that the spirit, in order to 
win its totality and freedom, detaches itself from itself and opposes 
itself, as the finitude of nature and spirit, to itself as the inherently 
infinite. With this self-diremption there is bound up, conversely, 
the necessity of rising out of this state of scission (within which the 
finite and the natural, the immediacy of existence, the natural 
heart, are determined as the negative, the evil, and the bad) and of 
entering the realm of truth and satisfaction only through the over­
corning of this negative sphere. Therefore the spiritual reconcili­
ation is only to be apprehended and represented as an activity, a 
movement of the spirit, as a process in the course of which a 
struggle and a battle arises, and grief, death, the mournful sense of 
nullity, the torment of spirit and body enter as an essential feature. 
For just as God at first cuts himself off from finite reality, so finite 
man, who begins of himself outside the Kingdom of God, acquires 
the task of elevating himself to God, detaching himself from the 
finite, abolishing its nullity, and through this killing of his immedi­
ate reality becoming what God in his appearance as man has made 
objective as true reality. The infinite grief1 of this sacrifice of 
subjectivity's very heart, as well as suffering and death, which were 
more or less excluded from the representations of classical art or 
rather appeared there as mere natural suffering, acquire their real 
necessity only in romantic art. 
We cannot say that the Greeks interpreted death in its essential 
meaning. Neither the natural as such nor spirit's immediate unity 
with the body counted with them as something inherently negative, 
and therefore death for them was only an abstract passing, without 
terrors and formidability, a ceasing without further immeasurable 
consequences for the dying individual. But when subjectivity in its 
spiritual inwardness is of infinite importance, then the negative 
1 In these words, which he often uses, Hegel refers to the Crucifixion. 

I N TRODUCT I O N  
5%3 
implicit in death is a negation of this loftiness and importance 
itself and is therefore frightening-an expiry of the soul which by 
death can find itself to be the absolutely negative itself, excluded 
from all happiness, absolutely unhappy and consigned to eternal 
damnation. 
Greek individuality, on the other hand, regarded as spiritual 
subjectivity, does not ascribe this value to itself and may therefore 
surround death with cheerful images. For man is afraid only for 
what is of great value to him. But life has this infinite value for our 
minds only if the person as spiritual and self-conscious is the one 
and only actuality, and now in a justified fear must image himself 
asnegatived by death. Yet on the other hand death does not gain for 
classical art the affirmative meaning which it acquires in romantic 
art. The Greeks did not take seriously what we call immortality. 
Only for the later reflection of subjective consciousness on itself, 
in the case of Socrates, has immortality had a deeper sense and 
satisfied a more far-reaching need. Odysseus, e.g. (Odyssey, xi. 
465-91), congratulates Achilles in the underworld on the ground of 
his happiness, greater than that of all those before or after him, 
because, hitherto honoured as though he were a god, he is now 
a ruler among the dead. Achilles, as everyone knows, puts the 
minimum of value on this happiness and answers: 'Odysseus 
should speak me no word of consolation for death; rather would I 
be a serf, and, poor myself, serve a poor man for wages, than rule 
here below over all the shades of the dead.' 
In romantic art, on the contrary, death is only a perishing of the 
natural soul and finite subjectivity, a perishing (related negatively 
only to the inherently negative) which cancels nullity and thereby 
is the means of liberating the spirit from its finitude and disunion 
as well as spiritually reconciling the individual person with the 
Absolute. For the Greeks what was affirmative was only the life 
united with natural, external, and mundane existence, and death 
therefore was just a negation, the dissolution of immediate reality. 
But in the romantic outlook death has the significance of negativity, 
in the sense of the negation of the negative, and therefore changes 
all the same into the affirmative as the resurrection of the spirit out 
of its mere natural embodiment and the finitude which is inade­
quate to it. The grief and death of the dying individual reverses 
into a return to self, into satisfaction, blessedness, and that recon­
ciled affirmative existence which spirit can attain only through the 
824S71S 
s 

524 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
killing of its negative existence in which it is barred from its proper 
truth and life. Therefore this fundamental principle does not 
merely affect the fact of death as it comes to man from the side of 
nature; on the contrary, death is a process through which the 
spirit, now independent of what negates it externally, must itself 
go in order truly to live. 
(c) · The third aspect of this absolute world of spirit is framed by 
man in so far as he neither brings immediately into appearance on 
himself the Absolute and Divine as Divine, nor presents the process 
of elevation to God and reconciliation with God, but remains 
within his own human sphere. Here, then, the subject-matter 
consists of the finite as such, both on the side of spiritual aims, 
mundane interests, passions, collisions, sorrows and joys, hopes 
and satisfactions, and also on the side of the external, i.e. nature 
and its kingdoms and most detailed phenomena. Yet for the mode 
of treating this matter a twofold position arises. On the one hand, 
namely, because spirit has won affirmation with itself, it issues on 
this ground as on an element justified and satisfying in itself, and of 
this element it presents only the purely positive character it has, 
out of which its own affirmative satisfaction and deep feeling are 
reflected; but, on the other hand, the same content is degraded to 
mere contingency which cannot claim any independent validity 
because in it the spirit does not find its true existence and therefore 
only comes into unity with itself by explicitly dissolving this 
finitude of spirit and nature as being something finite and negative. 
3· Relation of the Subject-matter to the Mode of Representation 
Now finally, with regard to the relation between this entire subject­
matter and its mode of representation, it appears in the first place, 
in conformity with what we have seen just now, that 
(a) the subject-matter of romantic art, at least in relation to the 
Divine, is very circumscribed. For, first, as we have already indi­
cated above [on pp. 507, 520], nature is emptied of gods; 
the sea, mountains, valleys, rivers, springs, time and night, as well 
as the universal processes of nature, have lost their value so far as 
concerns the presentation and content of the Absolute. Natural 
formations are no longer augmented symbolically; they have been 
robbed of their characteristic of having forms and activities capable 
of being traits of a divinity. For all the great questions about the 
origin of the world, about the whence, wherefore, and whither of 

INTRODUCTION 
525 
created nature and humanity, and all the symbolic and plastic 
attempts to solve and represent these problems, have disappeared 
owing to the revelation of God in the spirit; and even in the 
spiritual realm the variegated coloured world with its classically 
shaped characters, actions, and events is gathered up into one ray 
of the Absolute and its eternal history of redemption. The entire 
content [of romantic art] is therefore concentrated on the inner 
life of the spirit, on feeling, ideas, and the mind which strives after 
union with the truth, seeks and struggles to generate and preserve 
the Divine in the subject's consciousness, and now may not carry 
through aims and undertakings in the world for the sake of the 
world but rather has for its sole essential undertaking the inner 
battle of man in himself and his reconciliation with God ; and it 
brings into representation only the personality and its preservation 
along with contrivances towards this end. The heroism which may 
enter here accordingly is no heroism which from its own resources 
gives laws, establishes organizations, creates and develops situ­
ations, but a heroism of submission. It submits to a determinate and 
cut and dried [system of divine truth] and no task is left to it but to 
regulate the temporal order by that, to apply what is higher and 
absolutely valid to the world confronting it, and to make it prevail 
in the temporal. But since this absolute content appears compressed 
into one point, i.e. into the subjective heart, so that all process is 
transported into the inner life of man, the scope of the subject­
matter is therefore also infinitely extended again. It opens out into 
a multiplicity without bounds. For although that objective history 
constitutes the substantial basis of the heart, the artist yet runs 
through it in every direction, presents single points drawn from it 
or presents himself in steadily added new human traits; over and 
above this, he can draw into himself the whole breadth of nature as 
the surroundings and locality of spirit and devote it to the one 
great end. 
In this way the history of mentality becomes infinitely rich and 
it can adapt its shape to ever-altered circumstances and situations 
in the most multifarious ways. And if a man once leaves this 
absolute circle [of mind) and concerns himself with mundane 
affairs, then the range of interests, aims, and feelings becomes all 
the further beyond computation, the deeper the spirit has become 
in itself in accordance with this whole principle. The spirit therefore 
unfolds itself in the course of its development into an infinitely 

526 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
enhanced wealth of inner and outer collisions, distractions, grada­
tions of passion, and into the most manifold degrees of satisfaction. 
The purely inherently universal Absolute, in so far as it is conscious 
of itself in man, constitutes the inner content of romantic art, and 
so also the whole of mankind and its entire development is that 
art's inexhaustible material. 
(b) But it is not at all by being art that romantic art produces 
this content, as was the case to a great extent in the symbolic and 
above all from the classical form of art and its ideal gods. As 
we saw earlier [on p. 505 above], romantic art as art is not the 
didactic revelation which produces the content of truth for con­
templation simply and solely in the form of art; on the contrary, 
the content of romantic art is already present explicitly to mind 
and feeling outside the sphere of art. Religion, as the universal 
consciousness of the truth, constitutes here in a totally different 
degree the essential presupposition for art, and, even regarded in its 
manner of appearing externally to actual consciousness in the real 
perceptible world, it confronts us as a prosaic phenomenon in the 
present. Since, in other words, the content of the revelation to 
spirit is the eternal absolute nature of the spirit itself which detadles 
itself from the natural as such and devalues it, therefore the posi­
tion acquired by spirit's manifestation in what is immediately 
present is that this externality, so far as it subsists and has existence, 
remains only a contingent world out of which the Absolute 
gathers itself together into the inner world of the spirit and only so 
comes to truth in its own eyes. Therewith externality is regarded 
as an indifferent element in which spirit has no final trust or persis­
tence. The less the spirit regards the shape of external reality as 
worthy of it, the less can it seek its satisfaction therein and attain 
reconciliation with itself through union with it. 
(c) On this principle, therefore, the mode of actual configuration 
in romantic art, in respect of external appearance, does not essen­
tially get beyond ordinary reality proper, and it is by no means 
averse from harbouring this real existence in its finite deficiency 
and determinacy. Thus this means the disappearance of that ideal 
beauty which lifts the contemplation of the external away above 
time and the traces of evanescence in order to give to existence the 
bloom of beauty instead of its otherwise stunted appearance. 
Romantic art no longer has as its aim [the representation of] 
the free vitality of existence with its infinite tranquillity and the 

INTRO D U C T I O N  
immersion of the soul in the corporeal, or this life as such in its 
very own essential nature; on the contrary, it turns its back on this 
summit of beauty; it intertwines its inner being with the contingency 
of the external world and gives unfettered play to the bold lines 
of the ugly. 
Thus in romantic art we have two worlds: a spiritual realm, 
complete in itself, the heart which reconciles itself within and now 
bends back the otherwise rectilineal repetition of birth, death, and 
rebirth into the true rotation (i.e. return into self} and into the 
genuine phoenix-life of the spirit; on the other side, the realm of 
the external as such which, released from its fixedly secure unifica­
tion with the spirit, now becomes a purely empirical reality by the 
shape of which the soul is untroubled. In classical art, spirit 
dominated empirical appearance and permeated it completely 
because it was in this that it was to acquire its complete reality. But 
now the inner life is indifferent to the way in which the immediate 
world is configurated, because immediacy is unworthy of the soul's 
inner bliss. External appearance cannot any longer express the 
inner life, and if it is still called to do so it merely has the task of 
proving that the external is an unsatisfying existence and must 
point back to the inner, to the mind and feeling as the essential 
element. But just for this reason romantic art leaves externality to 
go its own way again for its part freely and independently, and in 
this respect allows any and every material, down to flowers, trees, 
and the commonest household gear, to enter the representation 
without hindrance even in its contingent natural existence. Yet this 
subject-matter, by being purely external material, carries with it at 
the same time the character of being indifferent and vulgar, and 
only attaining worth of its own if the heart has put itself into it and 
if it is to express not merely something inner but the heart's depth 
of feeling, which instead of fusing with the external appears only as 
reconciled with itself in itself. In this relation, the inner, so pushed 
to the extreme, is an expression without any externality at all; it is 
invisible and is as it were a perception of itself alone, or a musical 
sound as such without objectivity and shape, or a hovering over the 
waters,! or a ringing tone over a world which in and on its hetero­
geneous phenomena can only accept and re-mirror a reflection of 
this inwardness of soul. 
Therefore if we sum up in one word this relation of content and 
' Gen. r : 2 (in Luther's version). 

sĲS 
I I. I I I. THE R O MANTIC FORM O F  ART 
form in romantic art wherever this relation is preserved in its own 
special character, we may say that, precisely because the ever 
expanded universality and the restlessly active depths of the heart 
are the principle here, the keynote of romantic art is musical and, if 
we make the content of this idea determinate, lyrical. For romantic 
art the lyric is as it were the elementary fundamental characteristic, 
a note which epic and drama strike too and which wafts even round 
works of visual art as a universal fragrance of soul, because here 
spirit and heart strive to speak, through every one of their produc­
tions, to the spirit and the heart. 
+· Division of the Subject 
Now lastly, for the more detailed development of our consideration 
of this third great sphere of art we must settle the division of the 
subject; and the fundamental essence of the romantic in its inner 
ramification breaks up into the following three phases. 
The first sphere is formed by religion as such; its centre is 
supplied by the history of redemption, by the life of Christ, his 
death and Resurrection. The chief point to be made here is rever­
sion, the fact that the spirit turns negatively against its immediacy 
and finitude, overcomes it, and through this liberation wins for 
itself its infinity and absolute independence in its own province. 
Then, secondly, this independence passes out of the inherent 
divinity of the spirit, and out of the elevation of finite man to God, 
into mundane reality. Here it is primarily the subject as such who 
has become affirmative in his own eyes and has as the substance 
of his consciousness and as the interest of his existence the virtues 
of this affirmative subjectivity, namely honour, love, fidelity, and 
bravery, the aims and duties of romantic chivalry. 
The content and form of the third chapter may be described in 
general as the formal independence of character. If, in other words, 
subjectivity has advanced to the point of having spiritual indepen­
dence as the essential thing for it, so too the particular content, 
with which this subjectivity is linked as with what is its own, 
will share the like independence-which yet can only be of a 
formal kind because it is not implicit in the substantiality of the 
subjective life as it is in the sphere of absolute religious truth. 
Conversely, the shape of external circumstances, situations, and 
the complexity of events, also becomes explicitly free and therefore 

INTRODUCT I ON 
Ԛ9 
has its ups and downs in capricious adventures. Therefore we 
acquire as the culmination of the romantic in general the contin­
gency of both outer and inner, and the separation of these two 
sides, whereby art annuls itself and brings home to our minds that 
we must acquire higher forms for the apprehension of truth than 
those which art is in a position to supply. 

Chapter I 
THE RELIGIOUS DOMAIN O F  
ROMAN T I C  ART 
In its representation of absolute subjectivity as the whole of truth, 
romantic art has for its substantial content the reconciliation of 
God with the world and therefore with himself, the unification of 
the spirit with its essence, the satisfaction of the heart, and therefore 
at this stage the Ideal seems at last to be completely at home. For 
it was blessedness and independence, satisfaction, tranquillity, and 
freedom which we named1 as the chief characteristics of the Ideal. 
Of course we may not deny the Ideal to the essence and reality of 
romantic art, but in comparison with the classical Ideal it takes a 
quite different form there. Although this relation has already been 
indicated in general above [in the Introduction to this Section], we 
must here at the very beginning expound it in its more concrete 
meaning in order to make clear the fundamental type of the ro­
mantic way of portraying the Absolute. 
In the classical Ideal the Divine is on the one hand restricted to 
individuality; on the other hand, the soul and blessedness of the 
particular gods are entirely transfused through their corporeal shape; 
and, thirdly, since the underlying principle is the unseparated unity 
of the individual in himself and in his external world, there cannot 
appear as an essential factor the negativity of diremption within 
the self, of bodily and spiritual grief, of sacrifice and renunci­
ation. In classical art the Divine collapses indeed into a group of gods 
but it does not divide itself within itself as (a) universal essentiality 
and (b) individual subjective empirical appearance in the human 
form and the human spirit; and neither, as a non-appearing 
Absolute, has it confronting it a world of evil, sins, and error, and 
consequently with the task of reconciling these oppositions and 
being truly actual and divine only as this reconciliation. 
On the other hand, [i] in the Concept of absolute subjectivity 
there is implicit the opposition between substantial universality and 
personality, an opposition whose completed reconciliation fills the 
subject with his substance and raises the substance into a knowing 
1 On p. 1 57 above. 

REL I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTI C ART 
531 
and willing absolute subject. But, (ii) to the actuality of subjec­
tivity as spirit there belongs the deeper opposition to a finite world; 
through that world's cancellation as finite and its reconciliation 
with the Absolute, the Infinite makes its own essence explicit to 
itself through its own absolute activity and only so is absolute 
spirit. The appearance of this actuality on the soil and in the shape 
of the human spirit therefore acquires in respect of· its beauty a 
totally different relation from what it has in classical art. Greek 
beauty displays the inner life of spiritual individuality as entirely 
embodied in its corporeal shape, in actions and events, as expressed 
entirely in the outer, and living blissfully there. Whereas for ro­
mantic beauty it is absolutely necessary for the soul, although ap­
pearing in externality, to show itself at the same time as being 
brought back out of this corporeality into itself and as living in it­
self. Therefore at this stage the body can express the inwardness of 
the spirit only by revealing the fact that the soul has its congruent 
reality not in this real existence, but in itself. For this reason beauty 
will now reside, no longer in the idealization of the objective shape, 
but in the inner shape of the soul in itself; it becomes a beauty of 
deep feeling, as the manner in which every content in the subject's 
inner life is formed and developed, and without retaining the 
external shape penetrated by the spirit [as in Greece]. 
Now because in this way interest in clarifying real existence into 
this classical unity is lost and is concentrated instead on the oppo­
site aim of breathing a new beauty into the inner shape of the 
spiritual itself, art now gives itself little trouble with the external; 
it takes it up immediately, as it finds it, letting it, as it were, shape 
itself at will. In romantic art, reconciliation with the Absolute is an 
act of the inner life, an act which does appear externally but does 
not have the external itself in its real shape for its essential content 
and aim. With this indifference to the idealizing unification of 
soul and body there enters essentially, for the more special indi­
viduality of the external side, portraiture which does not blot out 
either particular traits and forms as they actually exist, 1 or the 
poverty of nature and the deficiencies of temporality, in order to 
put something more appropriate in their place. In general, even in 
this matter a correspondence (between soul and body] must indeed 
1 Previously Hegel has said that some portraits are 'disgustingly like' (Intro­
duction, p. 43) and that portraiture must 'flatter' (pp. ISS, 16s). Here the 
instructions to Lely seem to be approved. 

532 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
be demanded ; but the specific shape of it is indifferent and not 
purified from the contingencies of finite empirical existence. 
The necessity for this sweeping characterization of romantic art 
can be equally justified from another point of view. When the 
classical ideal figure is at its true zenith, it is complete in itself, 
independent, reserved, unreceptive, a finished individual which 
rejects everything else. Its shape is its own ; it lives entirely in it and 
in it alone and may not surrender any part of it to affinity with the 
purely empirical and contingent. Therefore, whoever approaches 
these ideal figures as a spectator cannot make their existence his 
own as something external related to his own external appearance ; 
although the shapes of the eternal gods are human, they still do not 
belong to the mortal realm, for these gods have not themselves 
experienced the deficiency of finite existence but are directly raised 
above it. Community with the empirical and the relative is broken 
off. Whereas infinite subjectivity, the Absolute of romantic art, is 
not immersed in its appearance ; it is in itself and just for this 
reason has its external expression not for [apprehension by] itself 
but by others as something external, set free, and surrendered to 
everyone. Further, this external side must enter the shape of 
common life, of empirical humanity, because here God himself 
descends into finite temporal existence in order to mediate and 
reconcile the absolute opposition inherent in the Concept of the 
Absolute. Owing to this [Incarnation] too, empirical man acquires 
an aspect from which a relationship and point of linkage [with God] 
opens up to him, so that in his immediate natural being he ap­
proaches himself with confidence because the external shape [i.e. 
the Incarnation] does not rebuff him with a classical rigorousness 
towards the particular and contingent, but offers to his sight what 
he himself has or what he knows and loves in others around him. 
It is the fact that it is so much at home in the commonplace that 
enables romantic art to attract us so familiarly by its external forms. 
But the externality which has been surrendered has the function, 
owing to this very surrender, of referring us back to beauty of soul, 
to the elevation of intimate feeling and the sanctity of the heart, and 
thus it encourages us at the same time to plunge into the inner life 
of the spirit and its absolute content and appropriate this inner 
life to ourselves. 
Finally, in this self-surrender [of the Incarnation] there is 
implicit in general the universal Idea, namely that in romantic art 

RE L I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTIC ART 
533 
infinite subjectivity is not lonely in itself like a Grecian god who 
lives in himself absolutely perfect in the blessedness of his isola­
tion ; on the contrary, it emerges from itself into a relation with 
something else which, however, is its own, and in which it finds 
itself again and remains communing and in unity with itself. This 
being at one with itself in its other is the really beautiful subject­
matter of romantic art, its Ideal which has essentially for its form 
and appearance the inner life and subjectivity, mind and feeling. 
Therefore the romantic Ideal expresses a relation to another spirit­
ual being which is so bound up with depth of feeling that only in 
this other does the soul achieve this intimacy with itself. This life in 
self in another is, as feeling, the spiritual depth of love. 
We may therefore name love as the general content of the ro­
mantic in its religious domain. Yet its truly ideal configuration love 
only acquires if it expresses the affirmative immediate reconcili­
ation of the spirit. But before we can considerthisstage of the most 
beautiful ideal satisfaction, we have first, on the one hand, to run 
through the process of negativity which the absolute subject enters 
in the course of overcoming the finitude and immediacy of his 
human appearance-a process which is unfolded in the life and 
suffering of God and his death for the world and mankind whereby 
mankind's reconciliation with God was made possible. On the 
other hand, it is now humanity, conversely, which for its part has 
to go through the same process in order to make explicit in itself 
what was implicit in that reconciliation. Between these stages (the 
heart of which is the negative aspect-the sensuous and spiritual 
entry to death and the grave) there lies the expression of the 
affirmative bliss of satisfaction which in this sphere characterizes 
art's most beautiful creations. 
For the more detailed division of our first chapter we have there­
fore to traverse three different spheres : 
First, the redemptive history of Christ; i.e. the moments of the 
absolute Spirit, represented in God himself in so far as he becomes 
man, has an actual existence in the world of finitude and its con­
crete relationships, and in this existence, individual at first, brings 
the Absolute itself into appearance. 
Secondly, love in its positive shape as the feeling of reconciliation 
between man and God : the Holy Family, Mary's maternal love, 
Christ's love, and the love of the Disciples. 
Thirdly, the Community [the Church] : the spirit of God as present 

534 
I I. I I I. THE ROMAN T I C  FORM O F  ART 
in humanity through the conversion of the heart and the annihila­
tion of the natural and the finite, in short through the reversion of 
mankind to God-a conversion in which penances and tortures in 
the first place mediate the union of man with God. 
r. The Redemptive History of Christ 
The reconciliation of the spirit with itself, the absolute history, the 
process of the truth, is brought to our view and conviction by the 
appearance of God in the world. The simple heart of this reconcili­
ation is the coalescence of absolute essentiality with the individual 
human subject; an individual man is God, and God an individual 
man. This implies that the human spirit, in its Concept and essence, 
is implicitly true spirit, and every individual subject, therefore, as 
man, has the infinite vocation and importance of being one of 
God's purposes and being in unity with God. But on this account 
man is all the same faced with the demand that he give actuality to 
this his Concept which at first is purely implicit, i.e. that he make 
union with God the goal of his being, and achieve it. If he has 
fulfilled this vocation, then in himself he is free infinite spirit. 
This is possible for him only because that unity is the original fact, 
the eternal basis of human and divine nature. [In the first place] 
this goal is at the same time the absolute beginning, the presupposi­
tion of the romantic religious consciousness that God himself is 
man, flesh, that he has become this individual person in whom 
therefore the reconciliation does not remain something implicit 
(in which case it would be known only in its Concept) but stands 
forth objectively existent for human senses and conscious contem­
plation as this individual actually existing man. It is on account of 
this moment of individuality that in Christ every individual has a 
vision of his own reconciliation with God which in its essence is no 
mere possibility; it is actual and therefore has to appear in this one 
man as really achieved. But, secondly, since this unity, as the 
spiritual reconciliation of opposed moments, is no mere immediate 
coalescence into one, it follows that in this one man the process of 
spirit too, through which alone consciousness is truly spirit, must 
attain existence as the history of this man. This history of the 
spirit, consummated in one individual, contains nothing except 
what we have already touched on above, namely that the individual 
man casts aside his individuality of body and spirit, i.e. that he 

R E L I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTIC ART 
535 
suffers and dies, but conversely through the grief of death rises out 
of death, and ascends as God in his glory, as the actual spirit which 
now has indeed entered existence as an individual, as this subject, 
yet even so is essentially truly God only as Spirit in his Church. 
(a) Apparent Superfluity of Art 
This history provides the fundamental topic for religious ro­
mantic art, and yet for this topic art, taken purely as art, becomes 
to a certain extent something superfluous. For the chief thing lies 
here in the inner conviction, feeling, and conception of this eternal 
truth, in the faith which bears witness to itself of the absolute truth 
and thereby imparts it to the inner life of mind. A developed faith, 
in other words, consists in the immediate conviction that the 
conception of the factors in this history suffices to bring truth 
itself before consciousness. But if it is a matter of the consciousness 
of truth, then the beauty of the appearance, and the representation, 
is an accessory and rather indifferent, for the truth is present for 
consciousness independently of art. 
(b) Necessary Emergence of Art 
Yet, on the other hand, the religious material contains in itself at 
the same time a factor whereby it is not only made accessible to art 
but does in a certain respect actually need art. In the religious ideas 
of romantic art, as has been indicated more than once already, this 
material involves pushing anthropomorphism to an extreme, in 
that it is precisely this material (i) which has as its centre the 
coalescence of the Absolute and Divine with a human person as 
actually perceived and therefore as appearing externally and 
corporeally, and (ii) which must present the Divine in this its 
individuality, bound as it is to the deficiency of nature and the 
finite mode of appearance. In this respect, for the appearance of 
God art provides to the contemplative consciousness the special 
presence of an actual individual shape, a concrete picture too of the 
external features of the events in which Christ's birth, life and 
sufferings, death, Resurrection, and Ascension to the right hand of 
God are displayed, so that, in general, the actual appearance of 
God, which has passed away, is repeated and perpetually renewed 
in art alone. 

536 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
(c) The Details of the External Appearance are Accidental 
But in so far as in this appearance the accent is laid on the fact 
that God is essentially an individual person, exclusive of others, 
and displays the unity of divine and human subjectivity not simply 
in general but as this man, there enter here again, in art, on account 
of the subject-matter itself, all the aspects of the contingency and 
particularity of external finite existence from which beauty at the 
height of the classical Ideal had been purified. What the free 
Concept of the beautiful had discarded as inappropriate, i.e. the 
non-Ideal, is here necessarily adopted and brought before our 
vision as a factor emerging from the subject-matter itself. 
(a) While therefore the Person of Christ as such is frequently 
chosen as a subject, every time those artists have proceeded in the 
worst possible way who have attempted to make out of Christ an 
ideal in the sense and in the manner of the classical ideal. For al­
though such heads and figures of Christ do display seriousness, 
calm, and dignity, Christ should have on the one hand subjective 
personality and individuality, and, on the other, inwardness and 
purely universal spirituality; both these characteristics are inconsis­
tent with the imprint of bliss on the visible aspect of the human 
form. To combine both these extremes in expression and form is of 
supreme dificulty, and painters especially found themselves in 
perplexity every time they departed from the traditional type. 
Seriousness and depth of consciousness must be expressed in 
these heads, but the features and forms of the face and the figure 
must neither be of purely ideal beauty nor deviate into the 
commonplace and the ugly or rise to pure sublimity as such. 
The best thing in relation to the external form is the mean between 
natural detail and ideal beauty. To hit this due mean correctly is 
difficult, and so in this matter what may be especially conspicuous 
is the skill, sense, and spirit of the artist. 
In general, in the case of representations throughout this whole 
sphere, we are referred, independently of the subject-matter, which 
belongs to faith, to the matter of the artist's subjective creation, 
more than is the case in the classical ideal. In classical art the 
artist aims at presenting the spiritual and the Divine directly in the 
forms of the body itself and in the organization of the human 
figure, and therefore the bodily forms in their modifications, 
when these diverge from the customary and the finite, afford 

R E L I G I O U S  DOMA I N  O F  ROMANTIC ART 
537 
a principal part of the interest. In the sphere now under considera­
tion the shape remains the customary and familiar one; its forms 
are to a certain extent indifferent, something particular, which may 
be thus or otherwise, and may in this respect be treated with great 
freedom. Therefore the preponderating interest lies on the one 
hand in the manner in which the artist still makes the spiritual and 
the most inward content shine, as this spiritual element itself, 
through this customary and familiar material; on the other hand, in 
the artist's execution, in the technical means and skills whereby he 
has been able to breathe spiritual vitality into his shapes and make 
the most spiritual things perceptible and comprehensible. 
(/3) As for the further subject-matter, it lies, as we have seen 
already, in the absolute history which springs from the Concept of 
spirit itself and which makes objective the conversion of bodily and 
spiritual individuality into its essence and universality. For the 
reconciliation of the individual person with God does not enter as 
a harmony directly, but as a harmony proceeding only from the 
infinite grief, from surrender, sacrifice, and the death of what is 
finite, sensuous, and subjective. Here finite and infinite are bound 
together into one, and the reconciliation in its true profundity, 
depth of feeling, and force of mediation is exhibited only through 
the magnitude and harshness of the opposition which is to be 
resolved. It follows that even the whole sharpness and dissonance 
of the suffering, torture, and agony involved in such an opposition, 
belong to the nature of spirit itself, whose absolute satisfaction is 
the subject-matter here. 
This process of the spirit, taken in and by itself, is the essence 
and Concept of spirit in general, and therefore it entails the charac­
teristic of being for consciousness the universal history which is 
to be repeated in every individual consciousness. For conscious­
ness, as a multiplicity of individuals, is precisely the reality and 
existence of the universal spirit. At first, however, because the 
Spirit has as its essential factor reality in the individual, that uni­
versal history itself proceeds only in the shape of one individual in 
whom it happens as his, as the history of his birth, his suffering, 
his death, and his return from death, though in this individual it 
preserves at the same time the significance of being the history of 
the universal absolute Spirit. 
The real turning-point in this life of God is theterminationofhis 
individual existence as this man, the story of the Passion, suffering 

538 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C  FORM O F  ART 
on the cross, the Golgotha of the Spirit, the pain of death. This 
sphere of portrayal is separated toto caelo from the classical plastic 
ideal because here the subject-matter itself implies that the external 
bodily appearance, immediate existence as an individual, is revealed 
in the grief of his negativity as the negative, and that therefore it 
is by sacrificing subjective individuality and the sensuous sphere 
that the Spirit attains its truth and its Heaven. On the one hand, 
in other words, the earthly body and the frailty of human nature in 
general is raised and honoured by the fact that it is God himself 
who appears in human nature, but on the other hand it is 
precisely this human and bodily existent which is negatived and 
comes into appearance in its grief, while in the classical ideal it 
does not lose undisturbed harmony with what is spiritual and 
substantial. Christ scourged, with the crown of thorns, carrying his 
cross to the place of execution, nailed to the cross, passing away in 
the agony of a torturing and slow death-this cannot be portrayed 
in the forms of Greek beauty; but the higher aspect in these situ­
ations is their inherent sanctity, the depth of the inner life, the 
infinity of grief, present as an eternal moment in the Spirit as 
sufferance and divine peace. 
The wider group around this figure is formed partly of friends, 
partly of enemies. The friends are likewise no ideal figures but, in 
accordance with the Concept, 1 particular individuals, ordinary men 
whom the pull of the Spirit brings to Christ. But the enemies are 
presented to us as inwardly evil because they place themselves in 
opposition to God, condemn him, mock him, torture him, crucify 
him, and the idea of inner evil and enmity to God brings with it on 
the external side, ugliness, crudity, barbarity, rage, and distortion 
of their outward appearance. In connection with all these there 
enters here as a necessary feature what is unbeautiful in comparison 
with the beauty of Greek art. 
(y) But the process of death is to be treated in the divine nature 
only as a point of transition whereby the reconciliation of the 
Spirit with itself is brought about, and the divine and human sides, 
the sheerly universal and the subjective appearance, whose medi­
ation is in question, close together affirmatively. This affirmation is in 
1 The moments or essential factors in the Concept are, as we have seen, the 
universal, the particular, and the individual. The Wliversal remains abstract 
until it is actualized in particulars or individuals, and this actualization is 
a necessary movement of thought or spirit. 

REL I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTIC ART 
539 
general the basis and the original foundation [of the divine history] 
and must therefore also be made evident in this positive way. For 
this purpose the most favourable events in the history of Christ are 
supplied especially by the Resurrection and the Ascension, apart 
from the scattered moments at which Christ appears as teacher. 
But here there arises, especially for the visual arts, a supreme 
dificulty. For (a) it is the spiritual as such which is to be portrayed 
in its inwardness, (b) it is the absolute Spirit which in its infinity 
and universality must be put affirmatively in unity with sub­
jectivity [i.e. in Christ] and yet, raised above immediate existence, 
must in the bodily and external shape bring before contemplation 
and feeling the entire expression of its infinity and inwardness. 
2. Religious Love 
The absolute Spirit is, as spirit, not an immediate topic for art. Its 
supreme actual reconciliation within itself can only be a reconcili­
ation and satisfaction in the spiritual as such; and this in its purely 
ideal element is not susceptible of expression in art, since absolute 
truth is on a higher level than the appearance of beauty which 
cannot be detached from the soil of the sensuous and apparent. But 
if the Spirit in its affirmative reconciliation is to acquire through 
art a spiritual existence in which it is not merely known as pure 
thought, as ideal, but can be felt and contemplated, then we have 
left as the sole form which fulfils the double demand (that of 
spirituality on the one hand and comprehensiblity and portraya­
bility by art on the other) only the deep feeling of the spirit, or the 
soul and feeling. This depth of feeling, which alone corresponds to 
the essential nature of the spirit which is free and satisfied in itself, 
is love. 
(a) Concept of the Absolute as Love 
In love, in other words, those phases are present, in its content, 
which we cited as the fundamental essence of the absolute Spirit: 
the reconciled return out of another into self. By being the other in 
which the spirit remains communing with itself, this other can only 
be spiritual over again, a spiritual personality. The true essence of 
love consists in giving up the consciousness of oneself, forgetting 
oneself in another self, yet in this surrender and oblivion having 

540 
I I. I I I. THE RO MANTIC FORM O F  ART 
and possessing oneself alone. This reconciliation of the spirit with 
itself and the completion of itself to a totality is the Absolute, yet 
not, as may be supposed, in the sense that the Absolute as a purely 
singular and therefore finite subject coincides with itself in another 
finite subject; on the contrary, the content of the subjectivity which 
reconciles itself with itself in another is here the Absolute 
itself: the Spirit which only in another spirit is the knowing and 
willing of itself as the Absolute and has the satisfaction of this 
knowledge. 
(b) The Heart [or Soul] 
Now, looked at more closely, this subject-matter, by being love, 
has the form of feeling, concentrated into itself, which, instead of 
revealing its content, bringing it into consciousness in its deter­
minacy and universality, rather draws directly together into the 
simple depth of the heart that content's extent and boundlessness 
without unfolding for our apprehension all the ramifications which 
its wealth contains. Therefore the same content which in its purely 
spiritually stamped universality would be denied to art, in this 
subjective existence as feeling is again prehensible by art; this is 
because on the one hand in view of its still undisclosed depth, 
characteristic of the heart, it is not compelled to explain itself to the 
length of complete clarity, while on the other hand it acquires from 
this form at the same time an element suitable to art. For however 
inward the soul, emotion, and feeling remain, they still always have 
a connection with the sensuous and corporeal, so that they can now 
disclose the inmost life and existence of spirit outwardly through 
the body itself, through a look, facial expressions, or, more spiritu­
ally, through words and musical notes. But the external can enter 
here only as being called upon to express this inmost inner life 
itself in its inwardness of soul. 
(c) Love as the Romantic Ideal 
Since we defined the Concept of the Ideal as the reconciliation of 
the inner life with its reality, we may now describe love as the ideal 
of romantic art in its religious sphere. It is spiritual beauty as such. 
The classical Ideal too displayed the mediation and reconciliation 
of the spirit with its opposite. But there the opposite of spirit was 

R E L I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  R O M ANTIC ART 
541 
the external permeated by spirit, spirit's bodily organism. In love, 
on the contrary, the spirit's opposite is not nature but itself a 
spiritual consciousness, another person, and the spirit is therefore 
realized for itself in what it itself owns, in its very own element. So 
in this affirmative satisfaction and blissful reality at rest in itself, 
love is the ideal but purely spiritual beauty which on account of its 
inwardness can also be expressed only in and as the deep feeling of 
the heart. For the spirit which is present to itself and immedi­
ately sure of itself in [another] spirit, and therefore has the 
spiritual itself as the material and ground of its existence, is in it­
self, is depth of feeling, and, more precisely, is the spiritual depth 
of love. 
(ex) God is love and therefore his deepest essence too is to be 
apprehended and represented in this form adequate to art in Christ. 
But Christ is divine love; as its object, what is manifest is on the one 
hand God himself in his invisible essence, and, on the other, man­
kind which is to be redeemed; and thus what then comes into 
appearance in Christ is less the absorption of one person in another 
limited person than the Idea of love in its universality, the Absolute, 
the spirit of truth in the element and form of feeling. With this 
universality of love's object, love's expression is also universalized, 
with the result that the subjective concentration of heart and soul 
does not become the chief thing in that expression-just as, even in 
the case of the Greeks, what is emphasized, although in a totally 
different context, in Venus Urania1 and the old Titanic deity, Eros, 
is the universal Idea and not the subjective element, i.e. individual 
shape and feeling. Only when Christ is conceived in the portrayals 
of romantic art as more than an individual subject, immersed in 
himself, does the expression of love become conspicuous in the 
form of subjective deep feeling, always elevated and borne, how­
ever, by the universality of its content. 
(/3) But in this sphere the most accessible topic for art is Mary's 
love, maternal love, the most successful object of the religious 
imagination of romantic art. For the most part real and human, it 
is yet entirely spiritual, without the interest and exigency of desire, 
not sensuous and yet present: absolutely satisfied and blissful 
spiritual depth. It is a love without craving, but it is not friendship ; 
for be friendship never so rich in emotion, it yet demands 
1 Originally the goddess of the sky, but later, as distinct from Aphrodite 
Pandemos, the goddess of higher and purer love. 

542 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
a content, something essential, as a mutual end and aim. Whereas, 
without any reciprocity of aim and interests, maternal love has an 
immediate support in the natural bond of connection. But in this 
instance the mother's love is not at all restricted to the natural side. 
In the child which she conceived and then bore in travail, Mary has 
the complete knowledge and feeling of herself; and the same child, 
blood of her blood, stands all the same high above her, and never­
theless this higher being belongs to her and is the object in which 
she forgets and maintains herself. The natural depth of feeling in 
the mother's love is altogether spiritualized; it has the Divine as its 
proper content, but this spirituality remains lowly and unaware, 
marvellously penetrated by natural oneness and human feeling. It 
is the blissful maternal love, the love of the one mother alone who 
was the first recipient of this joy. Of course this love too is not 
without grief, but the grief is only the sorrow of loss, lamentation 
for her suffering, dying, and dead son, and does not, as we shall see 
at a later stage,' result from injustice and torment from without, or 
from the infinite battle against sins, or from the agony and pain 
brought about by the self. Such deep feelingisherespiritual beauty, 
the Ideal, human identification of man with God, with the spirit 
and with truth: a pure forgetfulness and complete self-surrender 
which still in this forgetfulness is from the beginning one with that 
into which it is merged and now with blissful satisfaction has a 
sense of this oneness. 
In such a beautiful way maternal love, the picture as it were of 
the Spirit, enters romantic art in place of the Spirit itself because 
only in the form of feeling is the Spirit made prehensible by art, 
and the feeling of the unity between the individual and God is 
present in the most original, real, and living way only in the 
Madonna's maternal love. This love must enter art necessarily if, 
in the portrayal of this sphere, the Ideal, the affirmative satisfied 
reconciliation is not to be lacking. There was therefore a time when 
the maternal love of the blessed Virgin belonged in general to the 
highest and holiest [part of religion] and was worshipped and 
represented as this supreme fact. But when the Spirit brings itself 
into consciousness of itself in its own element, separated from the 
whole natural grounding which feeling supplies, then too it is only 
the spiritual mediation, free from such a grounding, that can be 
regarded as the free route to the truth ; and so, after all, in Protes-
1 See the following 3(a). 

REL I G I O U S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTIC ART 
543 
tantism, in contrast to mariolatry in art and in faith, the Holy 
Spirit and the inner mediation of the Spirit has become the higher 
truth. 
(y) Thirdly and lastly, the affirmative reconciliation of the spirit 
is displayed as feeling in Christ's Disciples and in the women and 
friends who follow him. These for the most part are characters who 
have experienced the austerity of the Idea of Christianity at the 
hand of their divine friend through the friendship, teaching, and 
preaching of Christ without going through the external and in­
ternal agony of conversion; they have perfected this Idea, mastered 
it and themselves, and they remain pensive and powerful in the 
same. True, they lack that immediate unity and deep feeling of the 
mother's love, but as their bond of union there is still left to them 
the presence of Christ, the habit of communal life, and the direct 
pull of the Spirit. 
3· The Spirit of the Community 
As for the transition into the last sphere of this topic, we may link 
it with what was already touched upon above in relation to the 
story of Christ. The immediate existence of Christ, as this one 
individual man who is God, is posited as superseded, i.e. what 
comes to light in the very appearancѮ of God as man is the fact that 
the true reality of God is not immediate existence but spirit. The 
reality of the Absolute as infinite subjectivity is just the spirit 
itself; God exists only in knowing, in the element of the inner life. 
This absolute existence of God as pure universality, alike ideal and 
subjective, is therefore not restricted to this individual [Jesus] who 
in his history has made visible the reconciliation of human and 
divine personality, but is broadened into the human consciousness 
which is reconciled with God, in short into mankind which exists 
as a plurality of individuals. Yet taken by himself as an individual 
personality, the man [Jesus] is not divine immediately at all; on the 
contrary, he is the finite and human being who only attains recon­
ciliation with God in so far as he actually posits himself as the 
negative which he is implicitly and so cancels his finitude. Only 
through this deliverance from the imperfection of finitude does 
humanity proclaim itself as the existence of the absolute Spirit, as 
the community's spirit in which the unification of the human spirit 
with the divine within human reality itself is completed as the 

544 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
mediation in reality of what implicitly, in the essential nature of 
spirit, is originally in unity. 
The chief forms which are of importance in relation to this new 
content of romantic art may be specified as follows: 
The individual person, separated from God, living in sin, in the 
battle of immediacy and in the poverty of finitude, has the infinite 
vocation of coming into reconciliation with himself and God. But 
since in the redemptive history of Christ the negativity of immedi­
ate individuality has appeared as the essential feature of the spirit, 
the individual person is able to rise to freedom and to peace in God 
as a result solely of the conversion of the natural element and finite 
personality. 
This transcendence of finitude enters here in a threefold way: 
First, as the external repetition of the Passion story; this becomes 
actual physical suffering-martyrdom. 
Secondly, the conversion is transferred into the inner life of the 
mind as an inner mediation through repentance, penance, and the 
return of the soul to God. 
Thirdly and lastly, the appearance of the Divine in mundane 
reality is so interpreted that the ordinary course of nature and the 
natural form of other happenings is superseded in order to make 
possible a revelation of the power and presence of the Divine: 
whereby miracle becomes the form in which this revelation is 
presented. 
(a) Martyrs 
The first phenomenon in which the spirit of the community is 
revealed as effective in the human person consists in man's mirror­
ing in himself the reflection of the divine process and making him­
self a new determinate embodiment of the eternal history of God. 
Here the expression of that immediately affirmative reconciliation 
disappears again, because man has to secure it only through the 
cancellation of his finitude. What therefore was the centre at the 
first stage [i.e. the negative], returns here again in a thoroughly 
enhanced degree because the inadequacy and unworthiness of man 
is the presupposition, and to extinguish this counts as the supreme 
and sole task of man. 
(()() The proper subject-matter of this sphere, therefore, is en­
durance of cruelties, and a man's own freely willed renunciation, 

R E L I G I O U S  D O M A I N  O F  R O M A N T I C  A R T  
545 
sacrifice, and privation. These he imposes on himself for the sake 
of privation and for the sake of occasioning his suffering, torments, 
agonies of every kind by means of which the spirit may be trans­
figured within and feel itself at one, satisfied, and blissful in its 
Heaven. In martyrdom this negative-grief-is an end in itself, 
and the magnitude of the transfiguration is measured by the awful­
ness of what the man has suffered and the frightfulness to which he 
has submitted. Now given his still unfulfilled inner life, the first 
thing that can be negatived in the martyr, with a view to his 
sanctification and his release from the world, is his natural being, 
his life, and the satisfaction of the most elementary needs necessary 
for his existence. Thus the chief topic in this sphere is provided by 
physical tortures inflicted on the believer; they are partly perpe­
trated out of hatred and vindictiveness by enemies and persecutors 
of the faith, partly undergone, with complete renunciation and at 
his own instigation, as an expiation of sins. Both of these he 
accepts in a fanaticism of resignation, not as an injustice, but as a 
blessing through which alone the hardness of the heart, the flesh, 
and the mind conscious of original sin are to be broken and recon­
ciliation with God achieved. 
But since in such situations the conversion of the inner life can 
only be portrayed in dreadfulness and in the brutality of the tor­
tures, the sense of beauty is easily damaged and the topics in this 
sphere constitute a very hazardous material for art. For on the one 
hand, in a much higher degree than what we required in the history 
of Christ's Passion, the individuals must be shown as actual single 
individuals stamped with the mark of temporal existence and 
caught in the deficiency of finitude and natural life; on the other 
hand, the agonies, the unheard-of frightfulnesses, the distortions 
and dislocations of limbs, the physical torments, the scaffolds, 
the beheadings, roastings, burning at the stake, boiling in oil, fasten­
ing to the wheel, etc.-all these are inherently hateful, repugnant, 
disgusting externals; their distance from beauty is too great to allow 
any healthy art to select them as its subject-matter. The artist's 
way of treating [these subjects] may indeed be excellent in its execu­
tion, but in that case the interest in this excellence always relates 
only to the artist's subjective activity which, even if it may seem to 
be in accord with art, yet labours in vain to create a perfect har­
mony between itself and this material. 
(/3) Therefore the portrayal of this negative process requires still 

546 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF A RT 
another feature which overrides this agony of body and soul and 
leans towards the affirmative reconciliation. This is the reconcili­
ation of the spirit in itself which is won as the aim and result of all 
the horror that has been suffered. From this point of view the 
martyrs are the preservers of the Divine against the crudity of 
external power and the barbarity of unbelief; for the sake of the 
Kingdom of Heaven they endure grief and death, and this courage, 
strength, endurance, and blessedness must therefore appear in them 
equally. Yet this deep feeling of faith and love in its spiritual 
beauty is not the spiritual health which permeates the body 
healthily; on the contrary, it is an inwardness which grief has 
wrought upon, or which is portrayed in suffering and even still 
contains in transfiguration the element of grief as the strictly essen­
tial thing. Painting especially has often made such piety its subject­
matter. Having done so, it has as its chief task the expression of the 
bliss of torment, contrasted with the abominable lacerations of the 
flesh, simply in the lines of the face, the look, etc., as resignation, 
the overcoming of grief, and satisfaction in achieving the living 
presence of the divine spirit in the inner life of the martyr. If, on 
the other hand, sculpture proposes to bring the same material 
before our eyes, it is less capable of portraying concentrated deep 
feeling in this spiritualized way and therefore will have to empha­
size what is grievous and distorted because this is manifested in a 
more developed form in the bodily organism. 
(y) But, thirdly, the aspect of self-denial and endurance is at 
this stage not concerned merely with natural existence and imme­
diate finitude; on the contrary, it exaggerates the heart's bent 
towards heavenly things to such an extreme that the human and the 
mundane sphere, even if in itself it is of an ethical and rational kind, 
is thrust into the background and disdained. The spirit here, that 
is to say, vitalizes in itself the idea of its conversion ; but the less the 
spirit is developed to begin with, all the more barbarically and 
abstractly does it turn with its concentrated force of piety against 
everything that, as the finite, stands contrasted with this inherently 
simple infinity of religious feeling: against all specific human 
feeling, against the many-sided moral inclinations, relations, cir­
cumstances, and duties of the heart. For ethical life in the family, 
the bonds of friendship, blood, love, the state, calling-all these 
belong to the mundane sphere; and in so far as here the mundane 
is not yet penetrated by the absolute ideas of faith, and developed 

RELI G I OU S  DOMAIN O F  ROMANTIC ART 
547 
into unity and reconciliation therewith, it is not adopted into the 
sphere of inner feeling and obligation, but instead appears to the 
abstract deep feeling of the believing heart as null in itself and 
therefore hostile and detrimental to piety. The ethical organization 
of the human world is therefore not yet respected, because its parts 
and duties are not yet recognized as necessary and justified links in 
the chain of an inherently rational actuality; in such an actual 
organization nothing one-sided may rise to an isolated indepen­
dence, yet must all the same be retained as a valid factor and not 
sacrificed. In this respect the religious reconciliation itself remains 
here in an abstract form, and it is displayed in the inherently simple 
heart as an intensity of faith without extension, as the piety of a 
heart lonely with itself which has not yet framed itself into a uni­
versal and developed confidence and into a discerning compre­
hensive certainty of itself. Now if the force of such a heart clings 
to itself in itself against the actuality which it has treated purely 
negatively, and if it violently detaches itself from all human ties, 
even were they those originally most firm, then this is a crudity of 
spirit and a barbaric power of abstraction which must revolt us. 
Therefore, from the standpoint of our modern consciousness, we 
may be able to respect and value highly that germ of religious 
feeling in representations of such an attitude, but if piety goes 
so far that we see it exaggerated into violence against what is 
inherently rational and moral, not only can we not sympathize with 
such fanaticism of sanctity, but this sort of renunciation must appear 
to us as immoral and contrary to religious feeling because it rejects, 
demolishes, and tramples underfoot what is absolutely justified 
and sacrosanct. 
Of this sort there are many legends, stories, and poems. For 
example, the story of the man full of love for his wife and family 
and loved by them in return who leaves his home and goes away on 
a pilgrimage, and when at last he comes back in the guise of a 
beggar, he does not reveal himself; alms are given him, and out of 
sympathy a little place is reserved for him to stay in under the 
stairs; in this way he lives in his house for twenty years long, looks 
on at his family's sorrow for him, and only on his deathbed does he 
make himself known. This is a horrible selfishness of fanaticism 
which we are supposed to reverence as sanctity. This persistence in 
renunciation may remind us of the profound penances which the 
Indians likewise impose on themselves of their own free will for 

548 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
religious ends. Yet the sufferings of the Indians have a quite differ­
ent character, because in their case the penitent transposes himself 
into dullness and unconsciousness; whereas here grief and the 
deliberate consciousness and feeling of grief is the real end which is 
supposed to be attained all the more purely the more the suffering 
is bound up with a consciousness of the value of the relationships 
that have been surrendered and love for them, and also with a 
continuous contemplation of renunciation. The richer the heart 
that loads itself with such trials, the more it possesses a noble 
treasure while yet believing itself forced to condemn this possession 
as null and to stamp it as sin, all the harsher is the lack of reconcili­
ation, a lack that can generate the most frightful hysteria and the 
most raving disunion. Indeed such a heart which is at home only in 
the intelligible and not in the mundane world as such, which there­
fore also feels itself just lost in the absolutely valid spheres and aims 
of this specific reality, and which, although held and bound in it 
with its whole soul, treats this moral order as negative in contrast to 
its own absolute vocation-yes, indeed, such a heart must appear to 
us according to our outlook as mad in its self-created suffering and 
in its renunciation, so that we cannot feel pity for it or draw any 
edification from it. Such actions lack a valid and solid end, for what 
they achieve is only purely subjective, is an end of the individual 
man himself alone, for the salvation of his soul and for his bliss. But 
it matters very little whether a man just like this is blissful or not. 
(b) Repentance and Conversion 
In the same sphere, the opposite mode of representation disre­
gards the external torture of the body, on the one hand, and, on the 
other, the negative bent against what is absolutely justified in 
mundane reality, and thereby, both in content and form, wins 
ground more adequate to ideal art. This ground is the conversion 
of the inner life which expresses itself solely in its spiritual grief, in 
its change of heart. Therefore here, for one thing, the ever-repeated 
horrors and dreadfulnesses of bodily torture have no place; for 
another thing, the barbaric religiosity of the heart is no longer kept 
so rigidly in opposition to the ethical life of humanity that, in the 
abstraction of its purely intellectual satisfaction, it can trample 
violently under foot every other kind of enjoyment, satisfied as it is 
in the grief of an absolute renunciation; now, on the contrary, it 

RE L I G I O U S  DOMAIN OF ROMANTIC ART 
549 
turns only against what is in fact sinful, criminal, and evil in human 
nature. It is a lofty conviction that faith, this inner bent of the 
spirit towards God, is capable of making into something alien to the 
agent the deed that has been committed, even if it be sin and crime, 
of making it undone and washing it away. This retreat from evil, 
from the absolute negative, is actual in the person after his sub­
jective will and spirit has scorned and extinguished the ·evil self that 
it has been. This return to the positive, which is now established as 
what is really actual in contrast with earlier existence in sin, is the 
truly infinite power of religious love, the presence and actuality of 
the absolute Spirit in the person himself. The sense of the strength 
and endurance of one's own spirit which, through God to whom it 
turns, conquers evil, and by harmonizing itself with him knows 
itself one with him, thus affords the satisfaction and bliss of seeing 
God as absolutely other than the sins of temporality, yet of know­
ing this infinite Being as at the same time identical with me as this 
person, and of carrying in me, with the same assurance as I have of 
my own being, this self-consciousness of God as my self, as myself­
consciousness. It is true that such a revolution proceeds entirely 
in the inner life and therefore belongs rather to religion than to 
art; yet since it is the deep feeling of the heart which is principally 
the master of this act of conversion and which can also shine 
through the external, it follows that visual art itself, i.e. [here] 
painting, acquires the right of bringing before our eyes the history 
of such conversions. Yet if it portrays the entire course of such 
histories completely, then here again much that is not beautiful 
may creep in, because in this case after all the criminal and repug­
nant must be presented as, e.g., in the story of the prodigal son. 
Therefore things go most favourably for painting when it concen­
trates the conversion into one picture alone, without further detail­
ing the crime. An example of this is Mary Magdalene, who is 
to be reckoned one of the most beautiful subjects in this sphere and 
is treated excellently, and consistently with art, especially by 
Italian painters. Here she appears both in soul and in presence as 
the beautiful sinner in whom the sin is as attractive as the conver­
sion. Yet in this case neither the sin nor the sanctity is taken very 
seriously; much was forgiven her because she had loved much 
[Luke 7: 4 7] ; because of her love and beauty she is forgiven, and 
the touching thing consists in the fact that she yet makes a con­
science for herself out of her love, and in her beauty of soul and 

sso 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
richness of feeling pours forth tears of grief. It is not that she loved 
so much that is her error; on the contrary, what is as it were her 
beautiful touching error is that she believes herself to be a sinner, 
for her deep feeling and her beauty give rise only to the impression 
that in her love she has been noble and moved profoundly. 
(c) Miracles and Legends 
The final aspect, which is associated with the two previous ones 
and which may be prevalent in both, concerns the miracles which 
in general play a leading role in this whole sphere. In this connec­
tion we may describe miracles as the history of the conversion of 
immediate natural existence. Reality confronts us as a common 
contingent fact; this finite existent is touched by the Divine which, 
by entering directly upon what is purely external and particular, 
breaks it up, inverts it, makes it into something sheerly different, 
and interrupts what we commonly call the natural course of things. 
Now it is a chief theme of many legends to represent the heart as 
having its ideas of the finite upset because it has been captivated by 
such unnatural phenomena in which it believes that it recognizes 
the presence of the Divine. In fact, however, the Divine can touch 
and rule nature only as reason, i.e. as the unchangeable laws of 
nature itself which God has implanted in it; and the Divine is not 
to be shown precisely as the Divine in individual circumstances and 
effects which are breaches of natural laws; for it is only the eternal 
laws and categories of reason that actually make their way into nature. 
This is why the legends often pass over without difficulty into what 
is abstruse, tasteless, senseless, and laughable, because spirit and 
heart are supposed to be moved towards faith in the presence 
and activity of God precisely by what is absolutely irrational, false, 
and non-divine. In these legends, emotion, piety, conversion may 
still be of interest, but these are only one aspect, the inner and 
subjective one; if these enter into relation with their opposite, i.e. 
with something external, and if this external thing is to bring about 
the conversion of the heart, then this external thing must not be in 
itself something senseless and irrational. 
These we may take to be the chief elements in the substantial 
subject-matter which in this sphere amounts to God's explicit 
nature and the process through and in which he is Spirit. This is 
the absolute theme which art does not create and reveal from its 
own resources, but which it has received from religion and which 

REL I G I O U S  DOMA I N  OF ROMANTIC ART 
551 
it approaches, with the consciousness that it is the absolute truth, 
in order to express and display it. This is the content of the believ­
ing and yearning heart which in and for itself is the infinite totality, 
so that now the external sphere remains more or less external and 
contingent without coming into complete harmony with the inner 
sphere and therefore it often becomes a repellent material not 
thoroughly conquerable by art. 

Chapter II 
C HIVALRY 
As we saw in Section III, 1 ,  the principle of inherently infinite 
subjectivity has primarily as the content of faith and art the 
Absolute itself, the Spirit of God as it is mediated and reconciled 
with human consciousness, and thereby is truly explicit to itself. 
Since this romantic mysticism is restricted to the achievement of 
bliss in the Absolute, it remains an abstract depth of feeling because, 
instead of permeating the mundane and accepting it affirmatively, 
this feeling contrasts itself with it and spurns it. In this abstraction 
faith is separated from life, and removed from the concrete reality 
of human existence, from a positive relation of men to one another 
who only in faith and on account of faith know their identity 
with one another and love one another in a third thing, i.e. the 
spirit of the community. This third thing is alone the clear spring 
in which their picture is mirrored; at this stage men do not look one 
another in the face, enter into a direct relation with each other, and 
sense as something concrete and alive the unity of their love, trust, 
confidence, aims, and actions. What constitutes the hope and long­
ing of the inner life, man finds in his abstract religious depth of 
feeling only in the form of life in the Kingdom of God, in commun­
ity with the Church; he has not yet dismissed this identity in a third 
thing from his consciousness in order to have immediately before 
himself, in the knowing and willing of others too, what he is in his 
concrete self. The entire religious subject-matter therefore does 
assume the form of reality, but it still remains in the inwardness of 
ideas which consumes existence in its living expansion, and is far 
from satisfying in life itself the higher demand of its own life, even 
if that life be filled with the mundane and unfolded into reality.1 
The heart which is only now perfected in its simple bliss has 
therefore to leave the heavenly kingdom of its substantive sphere, 
to look into itself, and attain a mundane content appropriate to the 
1 See the Introduction to ch. III below. Even though religion necessarily 
takes an external form, it knows itself to be too elevated ever to be satisfied 
in real life. 

CHIVALRY 
553 
individual subject as such. Therefore the earlier religious inward­
ness now becomes one of a worldly kind. Christ did say: 'Ye must 
leave father and mother and follow me', and likewise 'Brother will 
hate brother; men will crucify you and persecute you',' etc. But 
when the Kingdom of God has won a place in the world and is 
active in penetrating worldly aims and interests and therefore in 
transfiguring them, when father, mother, brother, meet in the 
community, then the worldly realm too for its part begins to claim 
and assert its right to validity. If this right be upheld, the emotion 
which at first is exclusively religious loses its negative attitude to 
human affairs as such; the spirit is spread abroad, is on the lookout 
for itself in its present world, and widens its actual mundane heart. 
The fundamental principle itself is not altered; inherently infinite 
subjectivity only turns to another sphere of the subject-matter. 
We may indicate this transition by saying that subjective individ­
uality now becomes explicitly free as individuality independently 
of reconciliation with God. For precisely in that reconciliation, in 
which individuality rid itself of its purely finite restriction and 
natural character, it has traversed the road of negativity, and now, 
after it has become affirmative in and for itself, it emerges freely 
as subject with the demand that, as subject in its infinity (even if 
here still primarily formal infinity), it shall secure complete rever­
ence for itself and others. In this its. subjectivity, therefore, it places 
the entire inwardness of the infinite heart which hitherto God 
alone had filled. 
Yet if we ask what then at this new stage is the human breast in 
its inwardness full of, [we reply that] the content is concerned only 
with subjective infinite self-relation ; the subject is only full of 
himself by being inherently infinite individuality; he does not need 
the importance or further concrete development of an inherently 
objective substantial content of interests, aims, and actions. But, in 
more detail, there are especially three feelings which in the person 
rise to this infinity: subjective honour, love, and fidelity. These are 
not strictly ethical qualities and virtues, but only forms of the 
romantic self-filled inwardness of the subject. For honour's fight 
for personal independence is not bravery defending the common 
weal and the call of justice in the same or of rectitude in the sphere 
of private life; on the contrary, honour's struggle is only for the 
recognition and the abstract inviolability of the individual person. 
I Matt. 23 : 34. 24: 10. Luke 14 :  26. John 15 :  20. 

554 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
So too love, the centre of this sphere, is only the accidental passion 
of one person for another and, even if it be widened by imagination 
and deepened by spiritual profundity, is still not the ethical relation 
of marriage and the family. Fidelity indeed has more the look of an 
ethical character since it does not merely will something on its own 
behalf; on the contrary, it keeps in view something higher, some­
thing in common with others; it surrenders itself to another's will, 
to the wish or command of a master and therefore renounces the 
selfishness and independence of the agent's own particular will; but 
the feeling of fidelity does not touch the objective interest of the 
common weal explicitly developed in its freedom into the life of 
the state; it is linked, on the contrary, only with the person of the 
master who acts for himself in an individual way or keeps together 
more general relationships and is active on their behalf. 
These three aspects taken together and interpenetrated by one 
another constitute-apart from the religious associations which 
may play their part here too-the chief conten.t of chivalry and 
provide the necessary transition from the principle of religious 
inwardness to its entry into mundane spiritual life. In the sphere of 
these aspects romantic art now gains a position from which it can 
create independently from its own resources• and become as it were 
a freer beauty. For it stands here freely midway between the 
absolute content of explicitly fixed religious ideas and the varied 
particularity and restrictedness of finitude and the world. Amongst 
the particular arts it is especially poetry which has been able to 
master this material in the most appropriate way, because it is the 
one most competent to express both the inwardness which is 
concerned solely with itself, and also its aims and adventures. 
Since we now have before us a material which man takes from 
his own heart, from the world of the purely human, it might seem 
that here romantic art stands on the same ground with the classical, 
and thus this is the best place to compare and contrast the two with 
one another. We have already earlier [in Part II, ch. II] described 
classical art as the ideal of objectivelyandinherentlytruehumanity. 
Its imagination requires as its centre a subject-matter of a substantial 
kind with an ethical 'pathos'. In the Homeric poems and the 
tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles the treatment is concerned 
with the interests of something really solid, with a strict check on 
1 i.e. its content or material is not now given to it by religion, and so the 
beauty which it creates is freer. 

CH I VALRY 
555 
the passions involved, and with a profound diction and execution 
adequate to the thought lying in the topic ; and above the group of 
heroes and figures, who are individually independent only when 
animated by such a 'pathos', there stands a group of gods with 
still more greatly enhanced objectivity. Even where art becomes 
more subjective in the endless plays of sculpture, in bas-reliefs e.g., 
and in the later elegies, epigrams, and other elegances of lyric 
poetry, the manner of presenting the subject-matter is more or less 
given by that matter itself because it already has its objective form; 
imaginative pictures come on the scene, like Venus, Bacchus, the 
Muses, fixed and determinate in their character, and similarly the 
later epigrams contain descriptions of what is there, or familiar 
flowers are tied together, as by Meleager,1 into a garland and, 
through feeling, the bond which they acquire becomes an exquisite 
sentiment. All this is a cheerful activity in a house richly furnished, 
filled with a store of resources, products, and utensils ready for any 
purpose ; the poet and artist is only the magician who evokes them, 
collects and groups them. 
In romantic poetry it is quite different. In so far as it is mundane 
and not directly rooted in sacred history, the virtues and aims of 
its heroic characters are not those of the Greek heroes whose moral 
actions early Christianity regarded as only splendid vices.z For 
Greek ethical life presupposes a fully formed present condition of 
human life ; there the will is supposed to pursue its activity abso­
lutely in accordance with its essential nature, and there it has 
attained a specific area for its exercise in which the actualized rela­
tionships are free and absolutely valid. These are the relations 
between parents and children, husband and wife, citizens and 
their city, and within the state in its realized freedom. Since this 
' i.e. the Garland, forty-six poems in the Greek Anthology, collected by 
Meleager, poet and philosopher, c. So B.c. 
• tlirtutes gentium splendida tlitia is a phrase commonly ascribed to Augustine 
though it is apparently not in his works. In the following sentence Bassenge sub­
stitutes 'Christian' for 'Greek', the reading of both of Hotho's editions. The 
argument of the paragraph may not be wholly clear, but this emendation seems 
to me to be misconceived. Hegel is contrasting the 'objective' morality of 
Greece with the 'subjective' morality of the Christian conscience. The latter is 
found in chivalry, i.e. at a time when social institutions were undeveloped. 
A combination of the two sides is what Hegel discerns in the modern world 
(see part iii of the Philosophy of Right). For those who emphasize conscience or 
inner c:onvictio11 alone, habitual instead of conscientious acceptance of the pre­
vailing etho1 is just a vice, however splendid. 
8243711> 
T 

ss6 
I l. I l l. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
objective content of action has been produced by the development 
of the human spirit on the positively recognized and assured basis of 
nature, it is now at variance with that concentrated inwardness of 
religion which strives to extinguish the natural side of man and 
must give way to the opposed virtue of humility, the sacrifice both 
of human freedom and the fixed resting of the self on itself. The 
virtues of Christian piety in their abstract attitude1 kill the mun­
dane and make the subject free only if he absolutely repudiates 
himself in his humanity. The subjective freedom of this present 
sphere [of chivalry] is indeed no longer conditioned by mere suffer­
ance and sacrifice but is affirmative in itself and in the world, yet, as 
we saw, the infinity of the person has still once again as its content 
only inwardness as such, the subjective heart as inherently self­
moving, as having its mundane ground in itself. In this respect 
poetry is not confronted here by any presupposed objectivity, any 
mythology, any imagery, any configurations lying there already 
cut and dried for it to express them. It rises entirely free, with no 
[given] material, purely creative and productive; it is like the bird 
which sings its song freely from its heart. 
But even if here too the subject has a noble will and deep soul, 
still what enters into his actions and their relations and existence is 
only capriciousness and contingency, because freedom and its aims 
themselves originate from internal self-reflection which, so far as an 
ethical content goes, is still without substance. And so we find in 
these individuals not a particular 'pathos' in the Greek sense and, 
bound up therewith in the closest connection, a living indepen­
dence of individuality, but rather only degrees of heroism in respect 
of love, honour, bravery, and fidelity, degrees the difference of 
which depends especially on iniquity or nobility of soul. Yet what 
the champions in the Middle Ages have in common with the heroes 
of antiquity is bravery, though even this acquires a quite different 
position here. It is less the natural courage which rests on healthy 
excellence and the force of the body and will which has not been 
weakened by civilization and serves to support the execution of 
objective interests; rather does it proceed from the inwardness of 
the spirit, from honour and chivalrousness, and is on the whole 
fantastic since it resigns itself to adventures of inner caprice and the 
contingencies of external entanglements, or to impulses of mystical 
1 i.e. the negative attitude of penance and martyrdom, or of conscience 
pursued a outrance. 

C H I VALRY 
557 
piety, but in general to the subjective relation of the subject to 
himself. 
Now this form of romantic art is at home in two hemispheres; in 
the West, in this decline of the spirit into its own subjective inner 
life, and, in the East, in this first expansion of consciousness 
unfolding itself into liberation from the finite. In the West, poetry 
rests on the heart that has withdrawn back into itself and has expli­
citly become the centre of its life, set midway between the two 
aspects of that life, the mundane world and the higher world of 
faith. In the East, it is especially the Arab who, as a single point 
which at first has nothing before itself but its dry deserts and its 
sky, emerges vigorously to the splendour and first extension of his 
world 1 and thereby still preserves his inner freedom at the same 
time. In the Orient it is in general the Mohammedan religion which 
has as it were cleared the ground by expelling all the idolatry of a 
finite and imaginative outlook, but has given to the heart the 
subjective freedom which entirely fills it. The result is that worldly 
things do not constitute a merely different province, but blossom 
into a realm of universal freedom where heart and spirit, without 
framing for themselves an objective embodiment of their god, live 
cheerfully at peace with themselves; they are like beggars, happy in 
eating and loving, satisfied and blissful in contemplating and 
glorifying their objects. 
1. Honour 
The motif of honour was unknown to ancient classical art. True, in 
the Iliad the wrath of Achilles constitutes its burden and moving 
principle, so that the whole further course of events is dependent 
on it; but what we understand by honour, in the modern sense, is 
not in view here at all. At bottom Achilles feels himself injured 
only because the actual share of the booty which belongs to him 
and is his reward of honour, his yf.pas, has been taken from him by 
Agamemnon. The injury occurs here in respect of something real, a 
gift which of course implied a privilege, a recognition of fame and 
bravery, and Achilles is angry because Agamemnon treats him 
disgracefully and publicly deprives him of respect among the 
Greeks; but the injury does not pierce right to the very heart of 
personality as such, so that Achilles is now satisfied by the return 
of the share of which he had been deprived and by the addition of 
1 i.e. the spread of Mohammedanism. 

558 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
more gifts and goods, and Agamemnon finally does not deny him this 
reparation, although according to our ideas both have insulted one 
another in the grossest possible way. Yet through the invective they 
have only made themselves angry, whiie the particular factual 
injury is cancelled in a way just as particular and factual. 
(a) The Concept of Honour 
Romantic honour, however, is of a different kind. In it the injury 
affects not the positive real value infringed, i.e. property, position, 
duty, etc., but the personality as such and its idea of itself, the 
value which the individual ascribes to himself on his own account. 
This value at this stage is just as infinite as the individual is infinite 
in his own eyes. In honour, therefore, the man has the first affirma­
tive consciousness of his infinite subjectivity, no matter what the 
circumstances. Now in what the individual possesses, in what is 
only some particular aspect of himself and despite the loss of which 
he could subsist just as well as before, honour has placed the 
absolute validity of his whole subjective personality and in that 
possession has given him and others an idea of that personality. 
The measure of honour thus does not depend on what the man 
actually is but on what this idea of himself is. But this idea makes 
everything particular into the universal, so that my whole subjec­
tive personality lies in this particular possession of mine. Honour 
is only a show [Schein], it is often said. Of course this is the case; 
but, according to the view now under consideration, it is to be 
regarded, looked at more closely, as the shining [Scheinen] and 
reflection of subjectivity into itself, which, as the shining of some­
thing infinite, is infinite itself. Precisely owing to this infinity the 
show of honour becomes the real existence of the subject, his 
supreme actuality, and every particular quality which honour 
shines into, and which it makes its own, is through this shining 
itself already exalted to infinite worth. This kind of honour is 
a fundamental category in the romantic world and involves the 
presupposition that man has stepped out of purely religious ideas 
and the inner life and into living reality; and in the material of 
reality he now brings into existence only himself in his purely 
personal independence and absolute validity. 
Now honour may have the most varied content. For everything 
that I am, that I do, that is done to me by others, belongs to my 
honour. Therefore I can make a point of honour of what is itself 

C H I VALRY 
559 
purely substantive, fidelity to princes, to country, to calling, fulfil­
ment of paternal duties, fidelity in marriage, honesty in buying and 
selling, conscientiousness in scientific research, and so on. But from 
the point of view of honour all these relationships, valid and true in 
themselves, are not already sanctioned and recognized on their own 
account, but only because I put my personality into them and 
thereby make them a matter of honour. Therefore in evety case the 
man of honour always thinks first of himself; and the question is 
not whether something is absolutely right or not, but whether it 
suits him, whether it befits his honour to concern himself with it or 
to stay aloof from it. And thus he may well do the worst of things 
and still be a man of honour. Accordingly he fabricates capricious 
aims for himself, presents himself in a certain [assumed] character, 
and therefore binds himself in his own eyes and those of others to 
something which has neither obligatoriness nor necessity in itself. 
In that event it is not the thing itself but his subjective idea which 
puts difficulties and complications in his way because it becomes 
a point of honour to uphold the character he has assumed. So, for 
example, Donna Diana regards it as contrary to her honour to 
bestow on anyone the love that she feels, because she has once set 
a great value on not giving ear to love.1 
In general, therefore, because the content of honour depends for 
its worth only on the man and does. not arise from his own imma­
nent essence, it remains a victim of contingency. Therefore, in the 
romantic plays, we see on the one hand what is absolutely justified 
expressed as a law of honour, since the individual links with his 
consciousness of the right the infinite self-consciousness of his 
personality at the same time. In that case, . the fact that honour 
demands or forbids something expresses the insertion of the agent's 
entire personality into the content of this demand or this prohibi­
tion, with the result that a transgression cannot be overlooked, 
indemnified, or compensated through some sort of transaction, 
and the man cannot now heed anything else. But, on the other hand 
honour may also become something entirely formal and without 
worth, when it contains nothing but the arid self which is in­
finite in its own eyes or even adopts an entirely bad action as obli­
gatory. In this case, especially in dramatic works, honour remains 
a thoroughly cold and dead topic, because its aims express not an 
1 A Donna Diana appears in many Spanish plays but the reference here is 
probably to the El Desden con el Desden of A. Moreto y Cabana, 16 18-69. 

s6o 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
essential content but only an abstract subjectivity. But only an 
inherently substantial content has necessity and it alone can be 
developed, throughout its varied connections, in this necessity and 
brought into consciousness as necessary. This lack of a deeper content 
is especially in evidence when the subtlety of reflection also intro­
duces into the scope of honour inherently contingent and meaning­
less matter which touches the man personally. For this purpose 
there is never any lack of material, for subtlety carries analysis on 
with the great ingenuity of its gift for making distinctions, and 
therefore many aspects are discovered and made points of honour 
though taken in themselves they are matters of complete indiffer­
ence. The Spaniards especially have developed this casuistry of 
reflection on points of honour in their dramatic poetry and, as 
ratiocination, have put it into the mouths of their honour-conscious 
heroes. So, e.g., the fidelity of a married woman is investigated 
down to the most trivial possible details, and the mere suspicion of 
others, indeed the mere possibility of such suspicion-even when 
the husband knows that the suspicion is false-can become a 
matter of honour. If this leads to collisions, then their development 
involves no satisfaction for us because we have nothing substantial 
before us, and therefore instead of drawing from them the appease­
ment of a necessary antagonism, we have only a painfully straitened 
feeling. Even in French dramas it is often an arid honour, wholly 
abstract in itself, which is supposed to count as the essential 
interest. But still more in Friedrich von Schlegel's Alarcos [r8oz] 
we have this ice-cold and dead material: the hero murders his 
noble, loving wife-why ?-to obtain honour, and this honour 
consists in his being able to marry the King's daughter, for whom 
he cherishes no passion at all, and thereby become the son-in-law 
of the King. This is a contemptible 'pathos' and a bad idea which 
prides itself on being something lofty and infinite. 
(b) Vulnerability of Honour 
Now since honour is not only a shining in myself, but must also 
be envisaged and recognized by others who again on their side may 
demand equal recognition for their honour, honour is something 
purely vulnerable. For how far I will extend my demand, and in 
relation to what, is something dependent entirely on my caprice. 
The tiniest offence may in this respect be of importance for me; 
and because a man stands within concrete reality in the most varied 

CHIVALRY 
s6x 
relations with a thousand things and may expand ad infinitum the 
range of what he reckons as his own and on which he stakes his 
honour, there is no end to strife and quarrelling owing to the inde­
pendence of individuals and their inflexible singularity which like­
wise is implicit in the principle of honour. Even in the case of the 
injury, as of honour in general, the thing in which I must feel 
myself injured does not matter; for what is negated affects the 
personality which has made such a thing its own and now considers 
that what is attacked is itself, this ideal infinite point. 
(c) Reconstitution of Honour 
Therefore every injury to honour is regarded as something infi­
nite in itself and can thus be indemnified only in an infinite way. 
True, once again there are many degrees of offence and just as 
many degrees of satisfaction; but what in general I regard in this 
sphere as an injury, how far I will feel myself offended and demand 
some satisfaction, this entirely depends here too once more on the 
subjective caprice which has the right to proceed to the utmost 
scrupulosity of reflection and the most irritable sensitivity. Thus in 
the case of such a demanded satisfaction both the man who has 
injured me and I myself must be recognized as men of honour. For 
I require him on his side to recognize my honour; but if he is to 
have honour in my eyes and through his action, he must count to 
me as a man of honour, i.e. he must count in my eyes as an infinite 
being in his personality, despite the injury he has done me and my 
subjective enmity towards him. 
So then in the principle of honour in general it is a fundamental 
characteristic that no man in his actions may grant to any other a 
right over himself, and therefore whatever he may have done and 
perpetrated, he regards himself both before and afterwards as an 
unaltered infinite being, and in this capacity intends to be accepted 
and treated. 
Now because in its quarrels and their satisfaction honour rests in 
this regard on personal independence which cannot be restricted 
by anything but which acts out of its own resources, we see here 
returning once again above all what was a fundamental character­
istic of the Greek heroic-ideal figures, namely the independence of 
individuality. But in honour we have not only an adherence to self 
and an action from personal resources; on the contrary, indepen­
dence is bound up here with the idea of itself; and this idea does 

s6z 
I I. I II. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
precisely constitute the proper content of honour, so that in what 
is external and present honour perceives its own, and in its own 
it envisages itself in its entire subjectivity. Honour is thus that 
independence reflected into itself which has as its essence this re­
flection alone, and it leaves to pure contingency whether what is 
at stake is what is inherently ethical and necessary or contingent 
and meaningless. 
2. Love 
The second feeling which plays a preponderating role in the pro­
ductions of romantic art is love. 
(a) Concept of Love 
While in honour the fundamental characteristic is personal 
subjectivity envisaged in its absolute independence, in love the 
supreme thing is rather the surrender of the person to an individual 
of the opposite sex, the sacrifice of one's independent consciousness 
and one's separate self-awareness; the sacrifice is made because one 
feels compelled to have one's knowledge of oneself solely in the 
consciousness of the other. In this respect love and honour are 
(jpposed to one another. But conversely we may regard love as also 
the realization of what was already implicit in honour, because 
honour needs to see itself recognized, and the infinity of the person 
accepted, in another person. This recognition is only genuine and 
total when my personality is not respected by others merely in 
abstracto or in a concrete separate and therefore restricted instance, 
but when with my whole subjective personality-with all that it 
is and contains-! penetrate the consciousness of another as this 
individual as I was, am, and will be, and constitute the other's real 
willing and knowing, striving and possessing. In that event this 
other lives only in me, just as I am present to myself only in her; in 
this accomplished unity both are self-aware for the first time and 
they place their whole soul and world in this identity. In this 
respect it is the same inner infinity of the person which gives love 
its importance for romantic art, an importance further enhanced by 
the higher wealth which the concept of love entails. 
The next point is that love does not rest, as may so often be the 
case with honour, on intellectual reflections and casuistry; instead, 
it has its origin in feeling, and at the same time it has a foundation 
in spiritualized nature, because difference of sex plays its part in it. 

CH IVALRY 
Yet essentially this foundation is present here only because the 
person is absorbed in this sex-relation in accordance with his inner 
life, his infinity in himself. What constitutes the infinity of love is 
this losing, in the other, one's consciousness of self, this splendour of 
disinterestedness and selflessness through which alone the person 
finds himself again and becomes a self, this self-forgetfulness in 
which the lover does not exist, live, and care for himself, but finds 
the roots of his being in another, and yet in this other does entirely 
enjoy precisely himself; and beauty is chiefly to be sought in the 
fact that this emotion does not remain mere impulse and emotion 
but that imagination builds its whole world up into this relation; 
everything else which by way of interests, circumstances, and aims 
belongs otherwise to actual being and life, it elevates into an adorn­
ment of this emotion; it tugs everything into this sphere and assigns 
a value to it only in its relation thereto. It is especially in female 
characters that love is supremely beautiful, since for them this 
surrender, this sacrifice, is the acme of their life, because they draw 
and expand the whole of their actual and spiritual life into this 
feeling, find a support for their existence in it alone, and, if they are 
touched by a misfortune in connection with it, dwindle away like 
a candle put out by the first unkind breeze. 
As this subjective spiritual depth of feeling, love does not occur 
in classical art, and when love does make its appearance there it is 
generally only a subordinate feature in the representation or only 
connected with sensuous enjoyment. In Homer either no great 
weight is laid on love or else it appears in its most dignified form: as 
marriage in the sphere of domesticity, e.g. in Penelope, or as the 
solicitude of wife and mother, e.g. in Andromache, or in other 
ethical relationships. On the other hand, the bond between Paris 
and Helen is recognized as unethical and the cause of the horrors 
and distress of the Trojan war; and the love of Achilles for Briseis 
has little depth and inwardness of feeling, for Briseis is a slave 
entirely at the hero's disposal. In the Odes of Sappho the language 
of love is indeed heightened to lyrical enthusiasm, yet it is the 
insidious and devouring flame of the blood which is expressed 
rather than the deep feeling of the subjective heart and mind. In 
the slight and graceful songs of Anacreon, love has a different 
aspect; it is a more cheerful and general enjoyment which, without 
endless sufferings, without this domination of the whole of ex­
istence or the pious devotion of an oppressed, silent, languishing 

564 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
heart, lets itself go cheerfully in immediate enjoyment as in some­
thing innocent with this or that character; and the endless impor­
tance of possessing this girl and no other remains just as unnoticed 
as the monk's notion of renouncing the sexǄrelationship altogether. 
The high tragedy of the Greeks likewise knows nothing of the 
passion of love in the romantic sense. Especially in Aeschylus and 
Sophocles it lays claim to no essential interest in itself. For al­
though Antigone is the intended bride of Haemon and he intercedes 
for her before his father, and even goes so far as to kill himself for 
her sake because he is in no position to save her, still before Creon 
[his father] he emphasizes objective ties only and not the subjective 
power of his passion, which also he does not feel in the sense that 
a modern heartfelt lover does. As a more essential 'pathos' love is 
treated by Euripides in the Phaedra, for example ; yet even here it 
appears as a criminal aberration of the blood, a sensual passion, 
provoked by Venus who wants to destroy Hippolytus because he 
will not sacrifice to her. Similarly we have in the Medici Venus 
what is indeed a plastic picture of love, and nothing can be said 
against its elegance and the beautiful elaboration of its lines ; but 
the expression of inwardness, as romantic art demands it, is al­
together lacking. The same is the case in Roman poetry where, 
after the Republic and the strictness of ethical life had been 
destroyed, love appears as more or less a sensual enjoyment. 
Whereas, even if Petrarch himself regarded his Sonnets as jeux 
d' esprit, and if it was on his Latin poems and works that he based 
his fame, what has made him immortal is just this imaginative love 
which, under the Italian sky and in the artistically developed 
ardour of the heart, formed a close union with religion. Dante's 
elation too emanated from his love for Beatrice which then was 
transfigured in him into religious love, while his courage and bold­
ness were raised into an energy of religious and artistic vision in 
virtue of which he did what no one else would venture, for he made 
himself the judge of mankind and assigned men to Hell, Purgatory, 
and Paradise. As a contrast to this elation, Boccaccio displays 
love, sometimes in its vehemence of passion, sometimes quite light­
heartedly regardless of morality, when he brings before us in his 
colourful tales the customs of his time and his country. In the 
German medieval love-poetry love is full of feeling, tender, without 
abundance of fancy, playful, melancholy, and monotonous. The 
Spanish love-poems are richly fanciful in expression, chevaleresque, 

C H I VA LRY 
subtle sometimes in searching out and defending love's rights and 
duties as a personal matter of honour, and ecstatic here too in 
expressing love's supreme splendour. Among the French, however, 
love becomes in later times more a matter of gallantry verging on 
emptiness, a feeling manufactured into poetry often with the aid 
of the maximum of esprit and also of ingenious sophistry, now a 
sensuous pleasure without passion, now a passion without pleasure, 
a sublimated feeling and sensitivity, full of reflection.-But I must 
break off these observations which this is not the place to pursue 
in detail. 
(b) Love's Collisions 
Next, mundane interests are divided into two spheres. On the 
one hand stands the objective world as such, family life, political 
ties, citizenship, laws, droit, ethics, etc., and [on the other hand], 
contrasted with this explicitly firm sphere, [subjective] love bur­
geons in noble and fiery hearts; this secular religion of the heart 
now unites itself with religion in every way, now subordinates it to 
itself and forgets it. Since it makes itself alone into the essential 
and even the sole or supreme business of life, not merely can it 
decide to sacrifice everything else and fly with the beloved into a 
desert, but in its extreme, where indeed it is unbeautiful, it pro­
ceeds to the unfree, slavish, and shɰeless sacrifice of the dignity 
of man, as, e.g., in Kiitchen von Heilbronn.1 Now owing to this 
diremption [of spheres] the aims of love cannot be achieved in 
concrete reality without collisions, because the other relations of 
life assert their demands and rights apart from love and may there­
fore impair the sole dominion of the passion of love. 
(a:) The .first and commonest collision that we have to mention 
in this context is the conflict between love and honour. Honour, i.e., 
has on its side the same infinity as love, and some point of honour 
may stand in love's way as an absolute hindrance. The duty of 
honour may demand the sacrifice of love. From a certain point of 
view, for example, it would be contrary to the honour of a man in a 
higher class to love a girl of a lower class. The difference of classes 
is necessary and given in the nature of civil life. Now if mundane 
life has not yet been regenerated by the infinite concept of true 
freedom wherein class, calling, etc. are adopted by the person him­
self and his free choice, it is more or less always nature, i.e. birth, 
1 A drama (1807) by H. von Kleist, 1777-ISII. 

566 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANT I C  FORM O F  ART 
which assigns to man his fixed position, and the differences pro­
ceeding from birth, besides those proceeding from honour when it 
makes its own class a point of honour, become fixed as absolute 
and infinite. 
(ft) But apart from honour, secondly, the eternal substantial 
powers themselves, the interests of the state, patriotism, family 
duties, etc., may come into conflict with love and inhibit its realiza­
tion. Especially in modern plays, in which the objective relations of 
life have been brought out in their validity, this is a very popular 
collision. In such a case, love as itself a vital right of subjective 
emotion is either so opposed to other rights and duties that the 
heart disembarrasses itself of these duties as being subordinate to 
itself, or else it recognizes them and engages in a fight with itself 
and the power of its own passion. [Schiller's] Maid of Orleans, 
e.g., rests on this latter collision. 
(y) Yet, thirdly, there may in general be external circumstances 
and hindrances which stem the flood of love: e.g. the usual course 
of events, the prose oflife, misfortunes, passion, prejudices, restric­
tions, stubbornness of others, and incidents of the most varied kind. 
With these there is then often mixed much that is hateful, frightful, 
and base, because it is the wickedness, barbarity, and savagery of 
some other passion which opposes love's tender beauty of soul. 
Especially in recent times we have often seen, in dramas, tales, and 
novels, external collisions like these which are then supposed to 
interest us especially by our participation in the sufferings, hopes, 
and frustrated prospects of the unhappy lovers, and to touch and 
satisfy us according as the denouement is bad or good, or in general 
merely to entertain us. But this manner of conflicts rests on pure 
accident and therefore is of a subordinate kind. 
(c) Love's Contingency 
In all these aspects love has of course a high quality in it in so far 
as it does not remain in general a sexual attraction but is a senti­
ment in itself rich, beautiful, and noble which abandons itself and, 
for the sake of unity with another, is living, active, bold, and 
sacrificing, etc. But at the same time romantic love also has its 
limitation. What its content lacks, that is to say, is absolute univer­
sality. It is only the personal feeling of the individual subject, and it 
is obviously not filled with the eternal interests and objective con­
tent of human existence, with family, political ends, country, 

CHIVJ\LRY 
duties arising from one's calling or class, with freedom and re­
ligious feeling, but only with its own self, the self that wishes to 
receive again the feeling that is reflected back from another self. 
This content of deep feeling, once more itself still formal, does not 
truly correspond with the totality which an inherently concrete 
individual must be. In the family, marriage, duty, and the state, it 
is not subjective feeling as such and the consequential unification 
with just this individual and no other, which should be the chief 
thing at issue. But in romantic love everything turns on the fact 
that this man loves precisely this woman, and she him. The sole 
reason why it is just this man or this individual woman alone is 
grounded in the person's own private character, in the contingency 
of caprice. Although they can very commonly find others, there 
is no man who does not regard his beloved as the most beautiful, 
no girl who does not regard her lover as the most magnificent, in 
all the world, beyond comparison with anyone else. But precisely 
because this exclusion is made by everyone, or at least by many 
people, and the object of a man's love is not the unique Aphrodite 
herself, for it is true rather that every man has an Aphrodite (or 
quite likely better than an Aphrodite) of his own, it is obvious that 
there are many women who count as the most beautiful ; as, after 
all, everyone knows in fact that there are many pretty, or good and 
excellent girls in the world who all---:-or at least most of them-find 
their lovers, suitors, and husbands to whom they appear as beauti­
ful, lovable, and paragons of virtue. To give absolute preference to 
one woman and precisely to this one alone is therefore in every case 
a private matter of the subjective heart and the particularity or 
peculiarity of the person, and the endless stubbornness of neces­
sarily finding his life, his supreme consciousness, precisely in this 
woman alone is seen to be an endless caprice of fate. Of course in 
this situation the higher freedom of subjectivity and its absolute 
choice are recognized-the freedom of not being subjected, like the 
Phaedra of Euripides, to a 'pathos', to a divinity ; but since 
the choice proceeds from a purely individual will, it appears at 
the same time as an idiosyncrasy and a pertinacity of personal 
caprice. 
Therefore, especially when love is . opposed and hostile to 
substantial interests, its collisions always retain an aspect of 
contingency and lack of justification, because it is subjective ca­
price as such which with its not absolutely valid demands opposes 

568 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  A RT 
what has to claim recognition on the score of its own essential 
character. The individuals in the high tragedy of the Greeks, 
Agamemnon, Clytemnestra, Orestes, Oedipus, Antigone, Creon, 
etc., do likewise have an individual aim ; but the substantial thing, 
the 'pathos' which, as the essence of their action, drives them on, 
has absolute justification and for that very reason is in itself of 
universal interest. What falls to their lot on account of their action 
is therefore not touching on the strength of its being an unfortunate 
fate but because it is a misfortune which at the same time does 
them absolute honour, since the 'pathos' which does not rest until 
it is satisfied has an explicitly necessary content. If the guilt of 
Clytemnestra in this concrete case is not punished, if the injury 
suffered by Antigone as a sister is not expunged, this is a wrong in 
itself. But those sufferings of love, those shattering hopes, that 
mere being in love, those endless griefs felt by a lover, that endless 
happiness and bliss which he foresees for himself, are in themselves 
of no universal interest but something affecting himself alone. 
Every man does have a heart for love and a right to become happy 
through it ; but if here, precisely in this instance, under such and 
such circumstances, he does not achieve his end in relation to 
precisely this girl, then no wrong has occurred. For there is nothing 
inherently necessary in his taking a fancy for this girl alone, and we 
are therefore supposed to be interested in supreme contingency, 
in the man's caprice which has neither universality nor any scope 
beyond itself. This remains the aspect of coldness which freezes us 
despite all the heat of passion in its presentation. 
3· Fitklity 
The third feature which is of importance for romantic subjectivity 
within its mundane sphere is fidelity. Yet by 'fidelity' we have 
here to understand neither the consistent adherence to an avowal of 
love once given nor the firmness of friendship of which, amongst 
the Greeks, Achilles and Patroclus, and still more intimately, 
Orestes and Pylades counted as the finest model. Friendship in this 
sense of the word has youth especially for its basis and period. 
Every man has to make his way through life for himself and to 
gain and maintain an actual position for himself. Now when indivi­
duals still live in actual relationships which are indefinite on both 
sides, this is the period, i.e. youth, in which individuals become 

CH IVALRY 
intimate and are so closely bound into one disposition, will, and 
activity that, as a result, every undertaking of the one becomes the 
undertaking of the other. In the friendship of adults this is no 
longer the case. A man's affairs go their own way independently 
and cannot be carried into effect in that firm community of mutual 
effort in which one man cannot achieve anything without someone 
else. Men find others and separate themselves from "them again ; 
their interests and occupations drift apart and are united again; 
friendship, spiritual depth of disposition, principles, and general 
trends of life remain, but this is not the friendship of youth, in the 
case of which no one decides anything or sets to work on anything 
without its immediately becoming the concern of his friend. It is 
inherent essentially in the principle of our deeper life that, on the 
whole, every man fends for himself, i.e. is himself competent to 
take his place in the world. 
(a) Fidelity in Service 
While fidelity in friendship and love subsists only between 
equals, fidelity as we have to consider it now affects a superior, 
someone higher in rank, or a master. Fidelity like this we find 
already among the Greeks in the fidelity of servants to the master's 
family and his house. The finest example of this is afforded by 
Odysseus's swineherd who sweats by night and in bad weather to 
tend the swine ; he is full of concern for his master and in the end, 
as it turns out, lends him loyal aid against the suitors. The picture 
of similarly touching fidelity, though here it becomes a matter 
entirely of the mind alone, is sketched for us by Shakespeare, e.g. 
in Lear (I. iv) where Lear asks Kent, who wants to serve him, 
'Dost thou know me, fellow ?' 'No, sir', Kent replies, 'but you 
have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.' 
This gets very near to what we have defined here as romantic 
fidelity. For fidelity at the stage we have reached is not the fidelity 
of slaves and serfs, which may indeed be beautiful and touching, 
yet it lacks the free independence of the individual and his own 
aims and actions and therefore is of a subordinate kind. 
What confronts us, on the contrary, is the vassal's fidelity in 
chivalry in which, despite his devotion to one of higher rank, 
whether Prince, King, or Emperor, he preserves his free self­
dependence throughout as his preponderating characteristic. Yet 
this fidelity is so lofty a principle in chivalry because on it depends 

570 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C FORM O F  ART 
the chief bond of a community's connection and its social organiza­
tion, at least when that is originating. 
(b) Fidelity's Subjective Independence 
But this new unification of individuals brings into appearance a 
more concrete end. This is not; as may be supposed, patriotism as 
an interest in something objective and universal; on the contrary it 
is bound up with only one person, the superior; and therefore once 
again it is conditioned by the vassal's own honour, particular 
advantage, and personal opinion. In its greatest splendour fidelity 
appears in an unformed, uncouth, external world where rights and 
laws have no dominion. Within such a lawless world the mightiest 
and most overpowering individuals get into the position of being 
fixed centres, i.e. leaders and princes, round which others group 
themselves of their own free will. Then, later on, such a relation­
ship was itself developed into a legal bond of feudal overlordship 
where now each vassal claims rights and privileges for himself too. 
But the fundamental principle on which the whole rests, in its 
origin, is the vassal's free choice both of the superior on whom he 
is to depend and also of persistence in that dependence. Thus 
chivalry's fidelity can very well uphold property, law, the personal 
independence and honour of the individual, and therefore it is not 
recognized as a duty as such, which would have to be performed 
even against the arbitrary will of the vassal. On the contrary. Every 
individual takes it that the persistence of his obedience along with 
the persistence of the universal order is dependent on his pleasure, 
inclination, and private disposition. 
(c) Fidelity's Collisions 
Fidelity and obedience to the overlord may therefore very easily 
come into collision with subjective passion, the susceptibility of 
honour, the feeling of injury, love, and other inner and outer 
accidents and thereby become something extremely precarious. 
A knight, e.g., is true to his Prince, but his friend gets into a dispute 
with the Prince; therefore he has at once to choose between one 
loyalty and the other; and firstof all he has to be faithful to himself, 
his honour, and his advantage. The finest example of such a colli­
sion we find in the Cid. He is true both to the King and to himself. 

CHIVALRY 
S7I 
If the King acts rightly, he lends him his arm; but yet if his Prince 
acts wrongly or he, the Cid, is injured, he withdraws his powerful 
support.-The same relation appears in Charlemagne's Paladins.1 
There is a bond of obedience to an overlord, but it is rather like 
what we became acquainted with [above, on pp. rn, 187] 
in the relation between Zeus and the other gods. The overlord 
commands, blusters, and disputes, but the independent and 
powerful individuals oppose him how and when they like. But the 
truest and most graceful picture of the looseness and slackness of 
this association is in Reynard the Fox. Just as in this poem the 
magnates of the Kingdom really only served themselves and their 
independence, so the German Princes and knights in the Middle 
Ages were not at home when they were supposed to do something 
for the whole Empire and their Emperor; and perhaps the Middle 
Ages have been rated so highly precisely because in such a state of 
affairs everyone is justified, and is a man of honour, if he follows 
his own caprice-something that cannot be allowed him in a 
rationally organized political life I 
At all these three stages, Honour, Love, and Fidelity, the basis is 
the independence of the subject in himself, the heart which yet 
alwaysopensitselftowiderandricher interests and in them remains 
reconciled with itself. It is here that romantic art comes into 
possession of the fairest part of the s_phere lying outside religion as 
such. The aims here concern what is human; with this, in one of its 
aspects at least, namely the aspect of subjective freedom, we can 
sympathize, and, unlike what is now and again the case in the 
religious field, we do not find the material or the manner of 
presenting it in collision with our conceptions. But nevertheless 
this sphere may be brought into relation with religion in many 
ways, so that now religious interests are interwoven with those of 
worldly chivalry, as, e.g., the adventures of the Knights of the 
Round Table in connection with the search for the Holy Grail. 
Then in this interlacing of divine and secular there comes into the 
poetry of chivalry much that is mystical and fanciful, as well as 
much that is allegorical. But, even so, the mundane sphere of love, 
honour, and fidelity may also appear quite independently of ab­
sorption in religious aims and dispositions and bring before our eyes 
only the earliest movement of the heart in its inner mundane 
' Hegel probably has the Chanson de Roland (c. 1170) in mind and perhaps 
Wieland's Oberon (1782) also. 

572 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C FORM O F  ART 
subjective life. Yet what is still lacking at this present stage is the 
filling of this inwardness with the concrete content of human 
relations, characters, passions, and real existence in general. In 
contrast to this variety, the inherently infinite heart remains still 
abstract and formal, and therefore gets the task of adopting this 
wider material too into itself and presenting it transformed in an 
artistic way. 

Chapter III 
THE FO RMAL I N D EPENDENCE O F  
I N D IVI DUAL C HARACTERISTICS 
To glance back over what lies behind us, we first considered sub­
jectivity in its absolute sphere: consciousness in its reconciliation 
with God, the universal process of the spirit reconciling itself 
within. Here the abstraction consisted in the fact that the heart, 
sacrificing the mundane, the natural and human as such (even 
when this was moral and therefore justified), withdrew into itself 
in order to find its satisfaction in the pure heaven of the spirit. 
Secondly, human subjectivity did become affirmative for itself and 
others, without displaying the negativity implicit in that reconcili­
ation; yet the content of this mundane infinite as such was only the 
personal independence of honour, the deep feeling of love, and the 
vassalage of fidelity-a content which can come before our eyes in 
many kinds of relationships, in a great variety and gradation of 
feeling and passion amid a great change of external circumstances, 
but which yet displays within these things only that same inde­
pendence of the person and his inner life. The third point now 
therefore remaining to us for consideration is the manner and way 
in which there can enter into the form of romantic art the further 
material of human existence, both outer and inner-nature and 
its interpretation and significance for the heart. Thus here it 
is the world of the particular, of the existent in general, which 
becomes explicitly free and, because it does not appear permeated 
by religion and compression into the unity of the Absolute, 
stands on its own feet and treads independently in its own 
domain. 
In this third sphere of the romantic form of art, therefore, the 
religious materials have vanished together with chivalry and the 
lofty views and aims which it generated out of its inner being and 
to which nothing in the present and in reality directly corresponds. 
On the other hand, the thing which gives new satisfaction is the 
thirst for this present and this reality itself, the delight of the self 
in what is there, contentment with self, with the finitude of man 

574 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
and, generally, with the finite, the particular, and with paintings 
like portraits.1 In his present world man wants to see the present 
itself as it is-even at the cost of sacrificing beauty and ideality of 
content and appearance-as a live presence recreated by art, as his 
own human and spiritual work. As we saw at the outset, the 
Christian religion, unlike the oriental and Greek gods, has not 
grown up, either in content or form, on the ground of imagination. 
Now while imagination [in the East] creates the meaning from its 
own resources in order to [try, though in vain, to] bring about the 
unification of the true inner with its perfect shape, and while it 
does actually bring about this linkage in classical art, we find on the 
contrary in the Christian religion the mundane particularity of 
appearance, just as it is immediately from the start, accepted as one 
factor in the Idea},2 and the heart is satisfied in the familiarity and 
contingency of the external, without making any demand for 
beauty. But nevertheless man is at first only implicitly and po­
tentially reconciled with God; all are indeed called to felicity, but 
few are chosen;J and the man to whose heart the kingdom alike 
of heaven and this world remains a 'beyond' must in the spirit 
renounce the world and his selfish presence therein. His point of 
departure is infinitely far away ; and to make what is at first merely 
sacrificed into an affirmative 'here' for him, i.e. to bring about the 
positive discovery and willing of himself in his present world, 
which elsewhere is the beginning-this endeavour is but the conclu­
sion of the development of romantic art and is the last thing which 
man reaches by plumbing his own depths and concentrating his 
whole experience into a single point. 4 
As for the form for this new content,s we found romantic art 
from its beginning onwards afflicted with the opposition that the 
inherently infinite subjective personality is in itself irreconcilable 
with the external material and is to remain unreconciled. This 
1 i.e. true to nature in detail, like the genre pictures discussed below in 3(a). 
• i.e. Jesus is a particular individual in the world, but as the Second Person 
of the Trinity is one essential moment in the life of God. The religious con­
sciousness is content to contemplate the individual without asking for beauty. 
! Matt. zz: 14. But read 'many' for 'all' and omit 'to felicity'. 
• i.e. only in religion, not in art, can this endeavour succeed. Man's inner self­
concentration is ultimate in art ; his reconciliation with the world, for which 
he strives in art, is achieved only in a higher sphere. In romantic art his thirst 
for presence in objective actuality is not quenched. Where art ends, religion 
begins. 
• i.e. the development of the person's inner life. 

I N D I V I D UAL CHARACTE RISTICS 
575 
independent confrontation of the two sides and the withdrawal of 
the inner into itself is what constitutes the subject-matter of 
romantic art. Developing themselves inwardly, these sides separate 
again ever anew until at the end they fall apart from one another 
altogether and therefore show that they have to seek their absolute 
unification in a field other than art. Owing to this falling apart from 
one another, the sides, in respect of art, become forinal [i.e. ab­
stract] since they cannot appear as one whole in that full unity 
which the classical ideal gives to them. Classical art stands in a 
circle of fixed shapes, in a mythology and its indissoluble products 
perfected by art; therefore, as we saw in the transition to the 
romantic form of art, the dissolution of classical art, apart from the, 
on the whole, more restricted sphere of comedy and satire, is a 
development towards something pleasing or an imitation which 
loses itself in pedantry, in death and frostiness, and finally degener­
ates into a perfunctory and bad technique. The topics, however, 
remain the same on the whole and only exchange the earlier 
spirited mode of production for an ever more spiritless presen­
tation and a mechanical external tradition. Whereas the progress 
and end of romantic art is the inner dissolution of the artistic 
material itself which falls asunder into its elements; its parts be­
come free and in this process, conversely, subjective skill and the 
art of portrayal are enhanced, and thǍ more the substantial element 
is discarded, all the more are these perfected. 
The more clear-cut division of this final chapter may now be 
made in the following way: 
First of all, we have before us the independence of the character 
which yet is a particular character, a specific individual shut in 
upon himself with his world, his particular qualities and aims. 
Secondly, contrasted with this formalism of the particularity of 
character there is the external shape of situations, events, and 
actions. Now since romantic inwardness as such is indifferent to 
the external environment, real phenomena enter here explicitly 
free, as neither penetrated by the inner significance of aims and 
actions nor shaped adequately thereto, and, in their unfettered, 
disconnected mode of appearance, they assert the contingency of 
complications, circumstances, sequence of events, mode of execu­
tion, etc., in the form of adventures.' 
1 The meaning of this term is explained and illustrated in 2 below. Since 
romantic art is concerned with inwardness, external events are for it devoid of 

576 
I I. III. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
Thirdly and lastly, we see the severance of the sides, whose 
complete identity affords the proper essence of art, and therefore 
the decay and dissolution of art itself. On the one hand, art passes 
over to the presentation of common reality as such, to the presenta­
tion of objects as they exist in their contingent individuality with 
its particular characteristics, and it now has the interest of trans­
forming this existence into a show by means of artistic skill; on the 
other hand, it turns vice versa into a mode of conception and 
portrayal completely contingent on the artist, i.e. into humour as 
the perversion and derangement of everything objective and real 
by means of wit and the play of a subjective outlook, and it ends 
with the artist's personal productive mastery over every content 
and form. 
1. The Independence of the Individual Character 
The subjective infinity of man in himself, from which we started 
in the romantic art-form, remains the fundamental characteristic 
in this present sphere too. What on the other hand enters this 
explicit independent infinity as something new is (a) the particu­
larity of the material which constitutes the world of the individual 
subject; (b) the immediate coalescence of the subject with this his 
particularity and its wishes and aims; (c) the living individuality 
to which character in itself is confined. Therefore by the word 
'character'1 we must not mean here what, e.g., the Italians pre­
sented in their masques. For the Italian masqueraders, though 
indeed determinate characters too, display this determinacy only 
in its abstraction and universality, i.e. without subjective indi­
viduality. Per contra the characters at the present level of our 
discussion are each of them independently a special character, 
explicitly a whole, an individual person. If here, therefore, we 
nevertheless speak of formalism and abstraction of character, 
this is relevant only to the fact that the chief material, the 
world of such a character, appears on the one hand as restricted 
and therefore abstract, and on the other hand as accidental. What 
spirit and are matters of chance, like episodes in a tale of adventure which might 
well occur in a different order. Hegel is using the word 'adventure' in the sense 
common in eighteenth-century English (if not more recently). In this sense 
'adventure' has nothing to do with peril or risk, but means a chance occurrence, 
something happening without any design in unplanned circumstances. 
1 Cf. abovl', pp. 67-8, 236-44. 

INDIVIDUAL C HARACTER I STICS 
577 
the individual is, is not carried and sustained by the substantial 
inherently justified element in his make-up, but by his character's 
mere subjectivity, which therefore instead of resting on something 
substantial and on an explicitly firm 'pathos' rests only formally 
on its own individual independence. 
Within this formalism two chief differences may be dis-
tinguished. 
· 
On the one side there is the energetically self-sustaining firmnes 
of character which limits itself to specific ends and puts the whole 
power of its one-sided individuality into the realization of these 
ends; on the other side, character appears as a subjective totality, 
but one which persists undeveloped in its inwardness and un­
disclosed depth of heart and cannot unbosom itself and completely 
express itself. 
(a) Formal Firmness of Character 
Thus what we have before us in the first place is the particular 
character who wishes to be simply what he immediately is. Just 
as animals are different and explicitly submit to this difference, the 
same is true here of different characters whose sphere and par­
ticularity remains contingent and cannot be firmly delimited 
through the Concept. 
(a) Such a purely self-dependent individual has therefore no 
meditated ir.tentions and ends which he has linked to some univer­
sal 'pathos' ; on the contrary, what he has, does, and accomplishes, 
he draws immediately, without any further reflection, from his 
own specific nature which is just what it happens to be; he does 
not wish to base himself on something higher, to be lost in it, 
and to be justified in something substantive, but instead, un­
bending and unbent, he rests on himself and in this firmness 
either realizes himself or perishes. Such an independence of 
character can only occur when the fullest importance is given to 
what is external to the Divine, i.e. to the particular element in man. 
Shakespeare's characters especially are of this kind; in them it is 
precisely this taut firmness and one-sidedness that is supremely 
admirable. In them there is no question of religious feeling, of an 
action due to the man's own religious reconciliation, or of morality 
as such. On the contrary, we have individuals before us, resting 
independently on themselves alone, with particular ends which 
are their own, prescribed by their individuality alone, and 

578 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
which they now set themselves to execute with the unshakeable 
logic of passion, without any accompanying reflection or general 
principle, solely for their own satisfaction. The tragedies especially, 
like Macbeth, Othello, Richard Ill, and others, have as their chief 
topic one such character surrounded by others less prominent and 
energetic. So, for example, Macbeth's character is determined by 
his passion of ambition. At the start he hesitates, but then stretches 
out his hand to the crown, commits murder to get it, and, in order 
to maintain it, storms away through every atrocity. This reckless 
firmness, this identity of the rnim with himself and the end arising 
from his own decision, gives him an essential interest for us. Not 
respect for the majesty of the monarch, not the frenzy of his wife, 
not the defection of his vassals, not his impending destruction, 
nothing, neither divine nor human law, makes him falter or draw 
back; instead he persists in his course. Lady Macbeth is a similar 
character, and only the tasteless chatter of modern criticism has 
been able to regard her as affectionate. At her very first entrance 
(1. v), as she [reads] Macbeth's letter which tells of his meeting 
with the witches and their prophecy: 'Hail to thee, Thane of 
Cawdor, hail to thee, King thou shalt be', she exclaims, 'Glarnis 
thou art and Cawdor; and shalt be what thou art promised. Yet do 
I fear thy nature. It is too full of the milk of human kindness to 
catch the nearest way.' In her no affectionate comfort appears, no 
joy for her husband's good fortune, no moral emotion, no co­
operation, none of the pity that becomes a noble soul; she is merely 
frightened that her husband's character will stand in the way of his 
ambition; him she treats as a mere means, and in her there is no 
hesitation, no uncertainty, no reflection, no weakness like what 
even Macbeth had himself at first, no remorse, but only the pure 
abstraction and severity of character which carries out, without 
more ado, what is in line with it, until at last it breaks. What 
shatters Macbeth after he has done the deed is a storm from with­
out, whereas his Lady is shattered by madness within her feminine 
soul. And the same is the case with Richard III, Othello, Queen 
Margaret, and so many others: the opposite of the miserableness of 
modern characters, Kotzebue's for example, which seem extremely 
noble, great, excellent, and yet within they are at the same time 
only trumpery. In a different way, others later who had a supreme 
contempt for Kotzebue have done no better, as, e.g., Heinrich von 
Kleist in his Kathchen and his Prince of Hornburg: characters in 

INDIVIDUAL CHARACTE R I S T I C S  
.579 
whom, in contrast to a wideawake situation with fixed logical 
consequences, magnetism, somnambulism, and nightmares are 
presented as what is supreme and most excellent. The Prince of 
Homburg is the most contemptible General; distracted in making 
his military dispositions, he pens his orders badly, in the night 
before action he agitates himself with morbid stuff, and on the day 
of battle he acts like a bungler. Despite such duality; disruption, 
and inner dissonance in their characters, these authors suppose 
themselves to be disciples of Shakespeare. But they are far from 
being so, for his characters are self-consistent; they remain true to 
themselves and their passion, and in what they are and in what 
confronts them they beat about according only to their own fixed 
determinacy of character. 
({3) Now the more idiosyncratic the character is which fixedly 
considers itself alone and which therefore is easily on the verge of 
evil, the more has the individual not only to maintain himself in 
concrete reality against the hindrances standing in his way and 
blocking the realization of himself, but the more he is also driven to 
his downfall through this very realization. In other words, because 
he succeeds, he is met by the fate proceeding from his own deter­
minate character, i.e. by a self-prepared destruction. But the 
development of this fate is not merely a development out of the 
individual's action, but is at the same time an inner growth, a 
development of his character itself in its storming, brutishness, and 
violence, or in its fatigue. In the case of the Greeks, with whom the 
'pathos', the substantial content of the action, and not the agent's 
personal character, is the important thing, fate is less inherent in 
this determinate character which is not further developed essenti­
ally within its action but at the end is what it was at the begin­
ning. But at the stage we are now considering, the achievement of 
the action is eo ipso a further development of the individual in his 
subjective inner life and not merely the march of events. The 
action of Macbeth, e.g., appears at the same time as a demoraliz­
ation of his heart with a consequence which, once indecision ceases 
and the die is cast, can no longer be averted. His spouse is decided 
from the start; in her the development is only an inner anguish 
which intensifies into physical and spiritual wreck, into the mad­
ness in which she perishes. And so it is with most of Shakespeare's 
characters, important and unimportant alike. The Greek characters 
are indeed shown as firm too, and so in their case there arise 

s8o 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
oppositions where no help is any longer possible, and a deus ex 
machina must come on the scene for their resolution; yet this 
firmness, like that of Philoctetes, for example, is fully concrete and 
on the whole penetrated by an ethically justified 'pathos'. 
(y) In the characters at this stage of our discussion, owing to the 
contingency of what they take as their end and the independence of 
their individuality, no reconciliation with objectivity is possible. 
The connection between what they are and what befalǎ them 
remains indefinite, and whence and whither is an unsolved riddle 
for them. Fate as the most abstract necessity comes back here once 
again, and the sole reconciliation for the individual is his infinite 
being in himself, his own firmness in which he surmounts his 
passion and its destiny. 'It is so', and what he meets, whether 
from the rule of fate, from necessity, or from chance, likewise just 
is, without his reflecting on whither or why ; it happens, and the 
man makes himself inflexible and intends to remain inflexible in 
face of this rule. 
(b) Character as Inner but Undeveloped Totality 
But in a completely contrasted way, secondly, the formal 
character may be based in inwardness as such, in which the indi­
vidual steadily remains without being able to expand and develop 
it in outward expression. 
( cx) This is the situation of the substantial hearts which incorpo­
rate a totality but in their simple compactness generate every deep 
feeling only in themselves without developing it outwardly and 
unbosoming themselves of it. The formalism which we have just 
considered was related to the determinacy of the object aimed at, 
the complete concentration of the individual on the one purpose 
which he made emerge completely in its firm severity, which he 
expressed and carried through, and therein, depending on the 
circumstances granted to him, perished or survived. The present 
second formalism consists conversely in undisclosedness, in ab­
sence of outward shape, in the lack of expression and development. 
Such a heart is like a costly precious stone which catches the 
light only on single facets and they then shine like a flash of 
lightning. 
({3) If such a reserve is to be of worth and interest, there must be 
an inner richness of heart, but it lets us recognize its infinite depth 
and fullness only through precisely this stillness in a few, so to say 

I N D I V I D UAL CHARACTE R I S T I CS 
dumb, expressions. Such simple, unselfconscious, and silent natures. 
may exercise a supreme attraction. Yet, in that case, their silence 
must be the stillness of the unruffled surface of the sea, concealing 
unfathomable depths, not the silence of what is shallow, hollow, 
and pointless. For it may sometimes happen that a very common­
place man, through a demeanour which expresses little but which 
here and there provides something half intelligible; arouses an 
impression of his great wisdom and inner resources, so that one 
thinks marvellous all that lies hidden in this heart and spirit, while 
at the end it is obvious that there is nothing behind his faěade. 
Whereas the infinite content and depth of those still hearts is 
revealed (and this is something that demands great genius and 
skill on the part of the artist) through separate, scattered, naive, 
and unpremeditated spirituel expressions which, without any eye 
on others who could understand them, show that such a heart 
grasps with deep feeling the substance of existing circumstances; 
yet that its reflection is not complicated by the whole concatenation 
of particular interests, concerns, and finite ends, and so is clear of 
them and unacquainted with them ; and that such a heart cannot be 
distracted by ordinary emotions or by the seriousness and sympa­
thies ordinarily involved. 
(y) But nevertheless for a heart so shut in upon itself a time 
must come when it is touched at onĜ specific point of its inner life, 
when it throws its undivided force into one feeling determining its 
life, clings to it with undispersed strength, and is fortunate, or else, 
lacking support, perishes. For as a support man needs the de­
veloped breadth of an ethical substance [like the state] which alone 
supplies objective firmness. Amongst characters of this sort are the 
most charming figures of romantic art, e.g. those created likewise 
by Shakespeare in the most beautiful perfection. Juliet in Romeo 
and Juliet is to be included in this class. You have seen the present 
performance of this play with Madame Crelinger as Juliet.1 It is 
worth the trouble of seeing her. This is a production extremely 
moving, living, warm, glowing, intelligent, perfect, and noble. Yet 
Juliet can not otherwise be taken at the beginning than as a quite 
childlike simple girl, fourteen or fifteen years old ; we perceive 
1 The text gives a reference to a 'Berlin performance in z8zo'. The date is 
not impossible, because Hegel did lecture on Fine Art in Berlin in I8zo-I. But 
Auguste Stich, whom Hegel knew personally, did not become, on her marriage, 
Madame Crelinger until later. In Hegel's letters she is Madame Stich until 
1827. 

582 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
that she still has no inner consciousness of herself and the world, 
no movement, no emotion, no wishes; on the contrary, in all 
naivete she has peeped into her surroundings in the world, as into 
a magic-lantern show, without learning anything from them or 
coming to any reflection on them. Suddenly we see the develop­
ment of the whole strength of this heart, of intrigue, circumspec­
tion, power to sacrifice everything and to submit to the harshest 
treatment; so that now the whole thing looks like the first blossom­
ing of the whole rose at once in all its petals and folds, like an infinite 
outpouring of the inmost genuine basis of the soul in which 
previously there was no inner differentiation, formation, and 
development, but which now comes on the scene as an immediate 
product of an awakened single interest, unbeknown to itself, in its 
beautiful fullness and force, out of a hitherto self-enclosed spirit. 
It is a torch lit by a spark, a bud, only now just touched by love, 
which stands there unexpectedly in full bloom, but the quicker it 
unfolds, the quicker too does it droop, its petals gone. Miranda in 
Tlu! Tempest is a still better example; brought up in seclusion, she 
is shown to us by Shakespeare in her first knowledge of men ; he 
sketches her in only a few scenes but in them he gives us a cmn­
plete unrestricted idea of her. Although Schiller's Thekla' is 
a product of reflective poetry, she too can be reckoned a member 
of this class. In the midst of a life so great and rich she is untouched 
by it but remains without vanity, without reflection, in the naivete of 
the one interest which alone engrosses her soul. In general it is 
beautiful and noble feminine characters especially for whom the 
world and their own inner being is first disclosed in love, so that 
now alone are they born spiritually. 
In the same category of this inner depth of feeling which cannot 
be unfolded or completely unbosomed, there belong in the main 
also the folk-songs, especially Germanic ones, which show in their 
sterling compactness of heart how strongly the heart is gripped too 
by some one interest, yet can only bring itself to fragmentary ex­
pressions and reveal in them its depth of soul. This is a mode of 
presentation which in its taciturnity goes back again as it were 
into symbolism, since what it affords is not the open clear mani­
festation of the whole inner life but is only a sign and indication 
of it. Yet we get here not a symbol the meaning of which remains, 
as previously, something abstract and universal, but an expression 
' In two plays, Wallemtein, parts ii and iii (1799). 

I N D I V ID UAL C HARACTE R I S T ICS 
of something inner, i.e. of precisely this subjective living actual 
heart itself. In more recent times, with our thoroughly reflective 
consciousness which is far removed from that self-absorbed 
naivete, portrayals of such a heart have become of the greatest 
difficulty and provide proof of an originally poetic spirit. We have 
already seen earlier that Goethe, especially in his songs, is a master 
of symbolic depiction too, i.e. of laying open the whole fidelity 
and infinity of the heart in simple, apparently external, and 
indifferent traits. Of this kind, e.g., is The King in Thule, one of 
Goethe's most beautiful poems. The King discloses his love only 
through the drinking cup which this old man preserved as a gift 
from his beloved. In his death throes the old carouser stands in his 
lofty royal hall, surrounded by his knights ; his kingdom, his 
treasures he bequeaths to his heir, but the drinking cup he flings 
into the waves ; no one else. is to have it. 'He saw it fall, fill, and 
sink to the bottom of the sea ; then fell his eyelids and never a drop 
did he drink again.' 1 
But such a deep tranquil heart, which keeps its energy of soul 
pent up like the spark in the flint, which does not give itself outward 
form, and which does not develop its existence and reflection on it, 
has after all not freed itself through an imagery of this kind. When 
the discord of misfortune resounds through its life, it remains 
exposed to the grim contradiction of having no skill, no bridge to 
reconcile its heart with reality and so to ward off external circum­
stances, to be supported against them, and to be its own support. 
If it comes to a collision, it therefore knows of no help, it rushes 
rashly and thoughtlessly into activity or is passively involved in 
complications. So, e.g., Hamlet is a beautiful and noble heart; 
not inwardly weak at all, but, without a powerful feeling for life, 
in the feebleness of his melancholy he strays distressed into error ; 
he has a keen sense of how the weather lies ; no external sign, no 
ground for suspicion is there, but he feels uncanny, everything is 
not as it ought to be ; he surmises the dreadul deed that has been 
done. His father's ghost gives him more details. Inwardly he is 
quickly ready for revenge ; he steadily thinks of the duty pre­
scribed to him by his own heart ; but he is not carried away, like 
Macbeth ; he does not kill, rage, or strike with the directness of 
1 This poem occurs in Faust, part I, scene viii. From this precious goblet, 
according to a previous stanza, the King always drank, and as he did so his eyes 
filled with tears. 
82,3716 
u 

s84 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
Laertes; on the contrary, he persists in the inactivity of a beautiful 
inner soul which cannot make itself actual or engage in the 
relationships of his present world. He waits, looks in the beautiful 
uprightness of his heart for objective certainty, but, even after he 
has found it, he comes to no firm decision but lets himself be led 
by external circumstances. In this unreality he now makes a 
mistake, even in what confronts him, and kills old Polonius instead 
of the King; he acts too hastily when he should have investigated 
prudently, while when the right energy was needed he remains 
sunk into himself-until, without his action, in this developed 
course of circumstances and chances, the fate of the whole realm 
and of himself has steadily been developed in his own withdrawn 
inner life. 
But in modern times this attitude appears especially in the case 
of men belonging to the lower classes who are without education 
enough to understand national purposes and without a variety of 
objective interests, and therefore when one purpose of their own 
fails, they cannot now find in another a stay for their inner life 
or a fin footing for their activity. The more rooted this lack of 
education is, the more stiffly and obstinately do self-enclosed minds 
cling to what, be it ever so one-sided, has made a claim on them 
involving their whole individuality. Such a monotony in buttoned­
up, speechless men is principally characteristic of Germans who 
therefore in their reserve easily appear headstrong, stubborn, 
gnarled, unapproachable, and perfectly unreliable and contra­
dictory in their actions and speech. As a master in depicting and 
representing such dumb minds in the lower orders of the people, 
I will mention here only Hippe!, the author of Lebensliiufe in 
aufsteigender Linie, 1 one of the few original German works of 
humour. It keeps far away throughout from Jean Paul's situations 
with their sentimentality and tastelessness, and has instead a 
wonderful individuality, freshness, and vitality. He can depict, 
extremely grippingly, repressed characters especially who cannot 
disburden themselves and, when it comes to action, act violently 
in a frightful way. In a dreadful way too they resolve the endless 
contradiction between their inner life and the unfortunate circum-
1 i.e. Careers in an ascending Line, by T. G. Hippe!, 1741-96. This bok was 
a favourite of Hegel's from his university days. His judgement on it here has 
been found 'astounding' and even shocking (see, e.g., H. Glockner's Hegel, 
Stuttgart, I 929, vol. i, pp. 4 IZ ff. ). 

INDIVI D UAL CHARACTERI STICS 
s8s 
stances in which they see themselves involved, and by this means 
bring about what elsewhere an external fate does-as, e.g., in 
Romeo and Juliet where external accidents frustrate the cleverness 
and artfulness of the go-between Friar and bring about the death 
of the lovers. 
(c) What the Substantial Interest is in the Presentation of Formal 
Character 
Thus, then, these formal characters either display generally only 
the endless will-power of the particular person who asserts himself 
just as he is and storms ahead at will, or alternatively, they present 
an inherently total and unrestricted heart which, touched on some 
specific side of its inner being, now concentrates the breadth and 
depth of its whole individuality on this one point, yet, by possess­
ing no development into the external world, falls into a collision 
and cannot find itself and help itself prudently. 
A third point which we now have to mention consists in this, 
that if these one-sided characters, restricted in their aims but 
developed in their consciousness, are to interest us not only super­
ficially but profoundly, we must at the same time come to see in 
them that this restrictedness of their personality is itself only a fate, 
i.e. an entanglement of their peculiar restricted character with a 
deeper inner life. Now this depth and this wealth of spirit Shake­
speare does in fact let us find in them. He exhibits them as men 
of free imaginative power and gifted spirit, since their reflection 
rises above and lifts them above what they are in their situation 
and specific ends, so that, as it were, it is only through the ill-luck 
of the circumstances, through the collision involved in their 
own situation, that they are impelled on to what they accomplish. 
Yet this is not to· be taken as if in Macbeth's case, e.g;, what he 
ventures were to be blamed only on the evil witches; rather are 
the witches only the poetic reflection of his own fixed will. What 
the Shakespearean figures carry out, their particular end, has its 
origin and the root of its force in their own individuality. But in 
one and the same individuality they preserve at the same time the 
loftiness which wipes away what they really are, i.e. in their aims, 
interests, and actions; it aggrandizes them and enhances them 
above themselves. Thus Shakespeare's vulgar characters, Stephano, 
Trinculo, Pistol, and the absolute hero of them all, Falstaff, remain 
sunk in their vulgarity, but at the same time they are shown to be 

s86 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
men of intelligence with a genius fit for anything, enabling them 
to have an entirely free existence, and, in short, to be what great 
men are. Whereas in French tragedies even the greatest and best 
characters, closely examined, prove to be nothing but strutting 
evil brutes with only enough brains to justify themselves by 
sophistry. In Shakespeare we find no justification, no condem­
nation, but only an observation of the universal fate; individuals 
view its necessity without complaint or repentance, and from that 
standpoint they see everything perish, themselves included, as 
if they saw it all happening outside themselves. 
In all these respects the sphere of such individual characters is 
an infinitely rich field but it is readily in danger of declining into 
emptiness and banality, so that there have been only a few masters 
with enough poetry and insight to apprehend its truth. 
2. Adventures 
Now after considering the inner side which can be portrayed at 
this stage, we must secondly turn our eyes also to the outer side, 
to the particular circumstances and situations which stir the 
character, to the collisions in which it is involved, and also to the 
whole form which the inner life assumes within concrete reality. 
As we have seen several times already, a fundamental charac­
teristic of romantic art is that spirituality, the mind as reflected into 
itself, constitutes a whole and therefore it is related to the external 
not as to its own reality permeated by itself, but as to something 
purely external separated from it, a place where everything goes on 
released from spirit into independence, and which is a scene of 
complications and the rough and tumble of an endlessly flowing, 
mutable, and confusing contingency. For the fixedly enclosed 
mind, it is just as much a matter of indifference to which circum­
stances it turns as it is a matter of accident which circumstances 
confront it. For, in the case of its action, to complete a work 
grounded in itself and persisting through itself matters less to it 
than asserting itself in general and getting something done. 
(a) The Contingency of Aims and Collisions 
Here we have before us what in another connection 1 may be 
called the rejection of God from nature. The spirit has withdrawn 
into itself out of the externality of appearances which now on 
1 See, e.g., pp. 374•5 above. 

INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 
their side are shaped no matter how, for they are unconnected 
with the subject since his inner world no longer sees itself in them. 
In its truth, the spirit is in itself mediated and reconciled with the 
Absolute; since, however, as we stand here on the ground of 
independent individuality which has no point of departure but 
itself just as it directly is, and so clings to itself, the same rejection 
of the Divine affects the character of the agent in his· action also ; 
he, therefore, with his own contingent ends, comes out into a con­
tingent world with which he does not set himself in one to form 
a consistent whole. Adventure, which provides for the form of 
events and actions the fundamental type of the romantic, is con­
stituted by this relativity of ends in a relative environment, the 
specific character and complication of which do not lie in the 
individual person but are determined from without and acci­
dentally, and so lead to accidental collisions as the extraordinarily 
intertwined ramifications of the situation. 
Action and event, taken in the stricter sense of the Ideal and 
classical art, require an inherently true and absolutely necessary 
end ; such an end includes in itself what determines both its 
external shape and also the manner of carrying it out in the real 
world. In the case of the deeds and events of romantic art this is 
not so. For if here too inherently universal and substantial ends 
are displayed in their realization, still these ends in themselves 
neither determine the action nor order and articulate its inner 
course; on the contrary, this aspect of actualization they must let 
go and therefore yield it to contingency and accident. 
(ex) The romantic world had only one absolute work to complete, 
the spread of Christianity and the continued activity of the spirit 
of the [Christian] community. Within a hostile world, first of 
unbelieving antiquity, later of barbarism with its crudity of mind, 
this work, when it left doctrines for deeds, became chiefly a passive 
work of enduring grief and martyrdom, the sacrifice of one's own 
temporal existence for the eternal salvation of the soul. The 
further act, related to the like end, is in the Middle Ages the work 
of Christian chivalry, the expulsion of the Moors, the Arabs, 
Mohammedans in general, from Christian countries, and then, 
above all, the conquest of the Holy Sepulchre in the Crusades. 
Yet this was not an end affecting men as human beings, but one 
which had to be achieved by a mere collection of single individuals 
who just streamed together at will as individuals. From this point 

588 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C F O R M  O F  ART 
of view, the Crusades may be called a collective adventure of the 
Christian Middle Ages, an adventure inherently broken in twain 
and fantastic: of a spiritual kind and yet without a truly spiritual 
aim and, in relation to actions and characters, a sham. For, con­
sidered from the religious point of view, the Crusades have an 
aim extremely external to religion. Christendom is supposed to 
have· its salvation in the spirit alone, in Christ who, risen, has 
ascended to the right hand of God and has his living actuality, his 
abode, in the Spirit, not in his grave and in the visible immediately 
present places where once he had his temporal abode. But the 
incentive and the religious longing of the Middle Ages was con­
centrated only on the place, the external locality of the Passion and 
the Holy Sepulchre. Just as contradictorily there was immediately 
bound up with the religious aim the purely mundane aspect of 
conquest and gain, which in its externality bore a character quite 
different from the religious one. So men wanted to gain something 
spiritual and inward, and they made their aim the purely external 
locality from which the spirit had vanished ; they strove for 
temporal gain and linked this mundane thing to religion as such. 
This discordance constitutes here the broken and fantastic situa­
tion in which externality perverts the inner, and vice versa, instead 
of both being brought into harmony. Therefore it turns out that 
in the execution of the enterprise opposites are linked together 
without any reconciliation. Piety turns into inhumanity and 
barbaric cruelty, and the same inhumanity which leads to the 
outbreaks of every selfishness and passion of which men are 
capable, turns round again into the eternal deep emotion and 
penitence of the spirit which was properly the thing at issue. In 
these opposed elements, deeds and events with one and the same 
end turn out after all to lack all unity and consistency of leader­
ship : the whole collection of Crusaders was scattered, split away 
into adventures, victories, defeats, and various accidents, and the 
outcome does not correspond to the means used and the great 
preparations made. Indeed the aim itself is cancelled by its 
achievement. For the Crusades wished to make the word true 
again: 'Thou lettest him not rest in the grave, neither wilt thou 
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.'• But precisely this 
longing to look for Christ, the living one, in such places and 
localities, even in the grave, the place of death, and to find satis-
• Hegel's adaptation of Ps. x6: xo. 

I N D I V I DUAL CHARACTERI STICS 
s89 
faction for the spirit in this search, is itself, no matter what a sub­
stantial thing Chateaubriand makes of it, a corruption of the spirit 
out of which Christendom was to arise in order to revert to the 
fresh full life of concrete reality. 
A similar aim, mystical on one side, fantastic on the other, and 
adventurous in its accomplishment, is the search for the Holy Grail. 
(ft) A higher work is that which every man has to achieve in 
himself, i.e. his life, whereby he settles for himself his eternal 
fate. This topic Dante has taken up from a Catholic point of view 
in his Divine Comedy, where he conducts us through Hell, Purga­
tory, and Paradise. But here, despite the strict organization of the 
whole, there is no lack of fantastic ideas or adventures in so far 
as this work of salvation and damnation comes before us not only 
absolutely in its universality but as a list of practically innumerable 
individuals brought forward in their particular characteristics­
and, besides this, the poet claims for himself the right of the 
Church, holds the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in his hands, 
pronounces salvation and damnation, and so makes himself the 
world's judge who removes into Hell, Purgatory, or Paradise the 
best known individuals of the classical and the Christian world, 
poets, citizens, warriors, Cardinals, and Popes. 
(y) Consequently, on mundane ground the other basic causes 
of actions and events consist of the endlessly varied adventurous­
ness of ideas and of the external and internal contingency of love, 
honour, and fidelity; here we see men hitting around for the sake 
of their own fame, there we see them leaping to the aid of perse­
cuted innocence, accomplishing the most astounding exploits for 
their lady's honour, or restoring the rights of the oppressed by the 
force of their fists or the skill of their arm, even if the 'innocence' 
thus freed be only a gang of rascals.1 In most of these things 
there is no state of affairs, no situation, no conflict which would 
make the action necessary ; the heart just wants out and looks for 
adventures deliberately. So here the actions on behalf of love, 
e.g., in their more detailed character have in them, in great part, 
no other determining factor save affording proofs of firmness, 
fidelity, and constancy in love, and showing that the surrounding 
reality with the whole complex of its relationships counts only as 
material for the manifestation of love. Thereby the specific act of 
this manifestation, since it is only the proof [of love] that matters, 
1 This is an allusion to Don Quixote, part i, ch. 22. 

590 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
is not determined by itself but is left to the fancy or mood of the 
lady and to the caprice of external contingencies. Exactly the same 
is the case with the aims of honour and bravery. They belong for 
the most part to the individual who still keeps far aloof from all 
wider substantive content [for his action] and who can put his 
personality at stake in every matter casually confronting him and 
find himself injured as a result, or look in it for an opportunity 
to display his courage and adroitness. Just as here there is no 
measuring-rod for what must be made an object of the agent's 
action and what not, so there is missing also a criterion for what 
can actually be an injury to honour or be the true objective of 
bravery. With the administration of law, likewise an aim of 
chivalry, there is no difference. Here, in other words, right and 
law do not yet evince themselves as an absolutely fixed situation 
and end which is being steadily realized in accordance with law 
and its necessary provisions, but as only a purely subjective fancy, 
so that both judicial proceedings and the judgement of what in this 
or that case is right or wrong remains remitted to the person's 
purely capricious estimate. 
(b) The Comic Treatment of Contingency 
Thus what in general, especially on the field of the mundane, 
we have before us (i) in chivalry and (ii) in the formal independence 
of characters is more or less the contingency, both of the circum­
stances within which actions are done, and also of the mind that 
wills. For those one-sided individual figures may take as their aim 
something wholly contingent which is sustained only by the 
energy of their character and which is carried out, or results in 
failure, under the influence of collisions conditioned from without. 
The same is true of chivalry which nevertheless contains in honour, 
love, and fidelity a higher justification similar to that belonging to 
the truly ethical. On the one hand, owing to the individuality of 
the circumstances to which it reacts, chivalry directly becomes 
a matter of contingency because, instead of a universal work, only 
particular ends are to be accomplished, and absolutely necessary 
connections are missing ; on the other hand, consequentially, on 
the side of the subjective spirit of the individuals, caprice or 
deception occurs in relation to projects, plans, and undertakings. 
Carried through consistently, this whole field of adventures proves 
in its actions and events, as well as in their outcome, to be an 

I NDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 
59 I 
inherently self-dissolving and therefore comical world of incidents 
and fates. 
This dissolution of (i) chivalry from within and of (ii) those 
individual characters in their singularity has come home to our 
minds and achieved its most appropriate portrayal above all, 
(i) in Ariosto and Cervantes, and (ii) in Shakespeare. 
(ex) In Ariosto we are amused in particular by the endless com­
plications of fates and ends, the fictitious entanglement of fantastic 
relations and foolish situations with which the poet plays ad­
venturously up to the point of frivolity. What the heroes are 
supposed to be serious with is pure downright folly and madness. 
Love especially is degraded from the divine love of Dante, and 
from the fanciful tenderness of Petrarch, down to sensual and 
obscene stories and ludicrous collisions, while heroism and bravery 
are screwed up to such a pitch that what is aroused is not so much 
a credulous astonishment as mere laughter at the fabulousness of 
the deeds. But along with indifference in regard to the manner in 
which situations are brought about, we find marvellous ramifica­
tions and conflicts introduced, begun, broken off, re-entangled, 
cross-cut, and finally resolved in a surprising way. In the comic 
treatment of chivalry, however, Ariosto can safeguard and empha­
size what is noble and great in knighthood, courage, love, honour, 
and bravery just as well as he can depict other passions excellently, 
e.g. astuteness, cunning, presence of mind, and so much else. 
(fl) Now while Ariosto leans rather to the fairy-tale side of 
adventurousness, Cervantes develops the romance side. His Don 
Quixote is a noble nature in whom chivalry becomes lunacy, 
because we find his adventurousness inserted into the midst of the 
stable specific situation of a real world precisely depicted with its 
external relationships. This provides the comic contradiction 
between an intelligible self-ordered world and an isolated mind 
which proposes to create this order and stability solely by himself 
and by chivalry, whereby it could only be overturned. Despite this 
comic aberration, however, there is wholly contained in Don 
Quixote what we previously eulogized in Shakespeare. Cervantes 
too has made his hero into an originally noble nature, equipped 
with many-sided spiritual gifts which always truly interest us at 
the same time. In his lunacy Don Quixote is a heart completely 
sure of itself and its business, or rather this only is his lunacy that 
he is and remains so sure of himself and his business. Without this 

592 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
peaceful lack of reflection in regard to the object and outcome of his 
actions, he would not be genuinely romantic, and this self-assur­
ance, if we look at the substance of his djsposition, is throughout 
great and gifted, adorned with the finest traits of character. Even 
so, the whole work is on the one hand a mockery of romantic 
chivalry, genuinely ironical from beginning to end, while in the 
case of Ariosto the adventurousness remains as it were only a 
frivolous joke ; on the other hand, the adventures of Don Quixote 
are only the thread on which a row of genuinely romantic tales is 
strung in the most charming way in order to exhibit as preserved 
in its true worth what the rest of the romance dissipates comically. 
(y) Just as here we see chivalry turning into the comic even in 
its most important interests, Shakespeare too either places comic 
figures and scenes alongside his firm individual characters and 
tragic situations and conflicts, or else by a profound humour lifts 
these characters away above themselves and their crude, restricted, 
and false aims. For example, Falstaff, the Fool in Lear, the 
Musicians' scene in Romeo and Juliet [IV, v] are examples of the 
first kind, Richard III of the second. 
(c) Romantic Fiction 
This dissolution of the romantic, in the form of the romantic 
hitherto considered, closes, thirdly and finally, with romance in the 
modern sense of the word which the knightly and pastoral romances 
precede in time. This romantic fiction is chivalry become serious 
again, with a real subject-matter. The contingency of external 
existence has been transformed into a firm and secure order of 
civil society and the state, so that police, 1 law-courts, the army, 
political government replace the chimerical ends which the knights 
errant set before themselves. Thereby the knight-errantry of the 
heroes as they act in more modern romances is also altered. As 
individuals with their subjective ends of love, honour, and ambi­
tion, or with their ideals of world-reform, they stand opposed to 
this substantial order and the prose of actuality which puts 
difficulties in their way on all sides. Therefore, in this opposition, 
1 In Hegel's day this word had a much wider sense than it has now. P. 
Colquhoun, Treatise on the Police of the Metropolis (1795), has virtually nothing 
to say about 'police' in the modern sense. At that date the word meant 'the whole 
system of public regulations and agencies for the preservation of the morals, 
order, and comfort of civil society' (N. Gash, Mr. Secretary Peel, London, 
1961, p. 31 1). 

I ND I V I D UAL CHARACTE R I S T I C S  
593 
subjective wishes and demands are screwed up to immeasurable 
heights ; for each man finds before him an enchanted and quite 
alien world which he must fight because it obstructs him and in 
its inflexible firmness does not give way to his passions but inter­
poses as a hindrance the will of a father or an aunt and civil 
relationships, etc. Young people especially are these modern 
knights who must force their way through the course "of the world 
which realizes itself instead of their ideals, and they regard it as a 
misfortune that there is any family, civil society, state, laws, 
professional business, etc., because these substantive relations of 
life with their barriers cruelly oppose the ideals and the infinite 
rights of the heart. Now the thing is to breach this order of things, 
to change the world, to improve it, or at least in spite of it to carve 
out of it a heaven upon earth : to seek for the ideal girl, find her, 
win her away from her wicked relations or other discordant ties, 
and carry her off in defiance.1 But in the modern world these 
fights are nothing more than 'apprenticeship', the education of the 
individual into the realities of the present, and thereby they acquire 
their true significance. For the end of such apprenticeship consists 
in this, that the subject sows his wild oats, builds himself with his 
wishes and opinions into harmony with subsisting relationships 
and their rationality, enters the concatenation of the world, and 
acquires for himself an appropriate .attitude to it. However much 
he may have quarrelled with the world, or been pushed about in it, 
in most cases at last he gets his girl and some sort of position, 
marries her, and becomes as good a Philistine as others. The 
woman takes charge of household management, children arrive, the 
adored wife, at first unique, an angel, behaves pretty much as all 
other wives do ; the man's profession provides work and vexations, 
marriage brings domestic affliction-so here we have all the head­
aches of the rest of married folk.-We see here the like character 
of adventurousness except that now it finds its right significance, 
wherein the fantastic element must experience the necessary 
corrective. 
3· Dissolution of the Romantic Form of Art 
The last matter with which we now still have to deal in more 
detail is the point at which romanticism, already implicitly the 
1 This passage elucidates Hegel's sarcastic remark above (p. 571) about the 
popularity of the Middle Ages in his day. 'Apprenticeship' is an obvious allusion 
to Goethe's Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. 

594 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANT I C  FORM O F  ART 
principle of the dissolution of the classical ideal, now makes this 
dissolution appear clearly in fact as dissolution. 
Now here above all there at once comes into consideration the 
complete contingency and externality of the material which artistic 
activity grasps and shapes. In the plastic figures of classical art the 
subjective inner element is so related to the external one that this 
external is the very own shape of the inner itself and is not released 
therefrom into independence. In romantic art, on the contrary, 
where inwardness withdraws itself into itself, the entire material 
of the external world acquires freedom to go its own way and 
maintain itself according to its own special and particular character. 
Conversely, if subjective inwardness of heart becomes the essential 
feature to be represented, the question of which specific material 
of external actuality and the spiritual world is to be an embodiment 
of the heart is equally a matter of accident. For this reason the 
romantic inwardness can display itself in all circumstances, and 
move relentlessly from one thing to another in innumerable 
situations, states of affairs, relations, errors, and confusions, con­
flicts and satisfactions, for what is sought and is to count is only 
its own inner subjective formation, the spirit's expression and 
mode of receptivity, and not an objective and absolutely valid 
subject-matter. In the presentations of romantic art, therefore, 
everything has a place, every sphere of life, all phenomena, the 
greatest and the least, the supreme and the trivial, the moral, 
immoral, and evil ; and, in particular, the more art becomes secular, 
the more it makes itself at home in the finite things of the world, 
is satisfied with them, and grants them complete validity, and the 
artist does well when he portrays them as they are. So, for example, 
because in Shakespeare's plays actions as a rule run their course 
in the most limited connection with others, for they are isolated 
and broken up into a series of accidents and every situation has its 
own importance, we see alongside the loftiest regions and most 
important interests the most insignificant and incidental ones: 
as, in Hamlet, the sentries alongside the King's Court; in Romeo 
and Juliet, the domestics; apart from this, in other pieces there are 
fools, louts, all sorts of everyday vulgarities, taverns, carters, 
chamber-pots, and fleas, just precisely, as in the religious sphere of 
romantic art, in the case of the birth of Christ and the Adoration 
of the Kings, oxen and asses, the manger and straw must not be 
left out. And it is the same throughout, so that even in art the 

INDIVI DUAL CHARACTE R I S T I C S  
595 
saying is fulfilled that 'They that humble themselves, the same 
shall be exalted'. 1 
Within this contingency of the objects which come to be 
portrayed partly as a mere environment for an inherently more 
important subject-matter, but partly also as independent on their 
own account, there is presented the collapse of romantic art, which 
we have already touched on above. On one side, in other words, 
there stands the real world in, from the point of view of the ideal, 
its prosaic objectivity: the contents of ordinary daily life which is 
not apprehended in its substance (in which it has an element of 
the ethical and divine), but in its mutability and finite transitori­
ness. On the other side, it is the subjectivity of the artist which, 
with its feeling and insight, with the right and power of its wit, 
can rise to mastery of the whole of reality ; it leaves nothing in its 
usual context and in the validity which it has for our usual way 
of looking at things ; and it is satisfied only because everything 
drawn into this sphere proves to be inherently dissoluble owing to 
the shape and standing given to it by its subjective opinion, mood, 
and originality ; and for contemplation and feeling it is dissolved. 
We have therefore in this connection to speak first of the 
principle of those numerous works of art whose mode of portraying 
common life and external reality approaches what we are accus­
tomed to call the imitation of nature ; 
secondly, of the subjective humour which plays a great role in 
modern art and provides, especially for many poets, the funda­
mental type of their works ; 
thirdly, in conclusion, what still remains to us is only to indi­
cate the standpoint from which art can pursue its activity even in 
these days. 
(a) The Subjective Artistic Imitation of the Existent Present 
The group of topics which this sphere can comprise widens 
indefinitely because art takes for its subject-matter not the 
inherently necessary, the province of which is complete in itself, 
but contingent reality in its boundless modification of shapes 
and relationships, i.e. nature and its variegated play of separate 
products, man's daily active pursuits in his natural necessities 
and comfortable satisfaction, in his casual habits and situations, 
in the activities of family life and civil society business, but, in 
I Hegel's memory of Matt. 23 : 12. 

596 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF A RT 
short, the incalculable mutability of the external objective world. 
Thereby art becomes not only what romantic art is more or less 
throughout, i.e. portrait-like, but it completely dissolves into the 
presentation of a portrait, whether in plastic art, painting, or 
descriptive poetry ; and it reverts to the imitation of nature, i.e. 
to an intentional approach to the contingency of immediate 
existence which, taken by itself, is unbeautiful and prosaic. 
Therefore the question soon arises whether such productions 
in general are still to be called works of art. If in considering them 
we keep before our eyes the essential nature of works of art proper 
(i.e. of the Ideal), where the important thing is both a subject­
matter not inherently arbitrary and transient and also a mode of 
portrayal fully in correspondence with such a subject-matter, then 
in the face of works of that kind the art-products of the stage we 
are now considering must undoubtedly fall far short. On the other 
hand, art has still another feature which is here essentially of 
special importance : the artist's subjective conception and execution 
of the work of art, the aspect of the individual talent which can 
remain faithful both to the manifestations of spirit and also to the 
inherently substantial life of nature, even in the extreme limits of 
the contingency which that life reaches, and can make significant 
even what is in itself without significance, and this it does through 
this fidelity and through the most marvellous skill of the portrayal. 
Then in addition there is the subjective vivacity with which the 
artist with his spirit and heart breathes life entirely into the existence 
of such topics according to their whole inner and outer shape and 
appearance, and presents them to our vision in this animation. In 
view of these aspects we may not deny the name of works of art 
to the creations of this sphere. 
In more detail, amongst the particular arts it is poetry and 
painting especially which have applied themselves to such topics. 
For on the one hand it is what is essentially a particular emotion 
that provides the content ; on the other hand, the form of the 
presentation is to be external appearance in its own character, 
contingent but in its own sphere genuine. Neither architecture nor 
sculpture nor music is qualified to fulfil such a task. 
(a:) In poetry, common domestic life, which has the honesty, 
worldly wisdom, and morality of its day as its substance, is 
portrayed in the complications of ordinary civil life, in scenes and 
figures drawn from the middle and lower classes. In the case of the 

I N D I V I D UAL CHARACTE R I STICS 
597 
French, it is Diderot' especially who has insisted in this sense on 
naturalness and the imitation of the present. Amongst our Ger­
mans, on the contrary, it was Goethe and Schiller who, in a higher 
sense, took a similar road in their youth, but within this living 
naturalness with its particular details they sought a deeper content 
and essential conflicts full of interest ; while at that time Kotzebue 
and IfHand,Z the one with superficial swiftness of coŖception and 
production, the other with more serious precision and common­
place bourgeois morality, counterfeited the daily life of their time 
in prosaic rather narrow respects with little sense for true poetry. 
But in general our art has adopted this tone as its greatest favourite, 
even if most recently, and reached a measure of virtuosity in it. 
For art, long since until now, was something more or less strange 
to us, borrowed and not our own creation. Now this turning to 
the reality confronting the artist implies that the material for art 
requires to be immanent, indigenous, the national life of the poet 
and the public. When art began to appropriate this material and 
when purely in subject-matter and presentation it was to be our 
own and at home with us even at the sacrifice of beauty and the 
ideal, the urge which led to such representations was let loose. 
Other nations have rather despised such things or are only now 
coming to a livelier interest in such materials drawn from what 
exists today and every day. 
({3) Yet if we wish to bring to our notice the most marvellous 
thing that can be achieved in this connection, we must look at the 
genre painting of the later Dutch painters. What, in its general 
spirit, is the substantial basis out of which it issued, is a matter 
on which I touched above in the consideration of the Ideal as 
such [on pp. 168-9]. Satisfaction in present-day life, even in the 
commonest and smallest things, flows in the Dutch from the fact 
that what nature affords directly to other nations, they have had 
to acquire by hard struggles and bitter industry, and, circum­
scribed in their locality, they have become great in their care and 
esteem of the most insignificant things. On the other hand, they 
are a nation of fishermen, sailors, burghers, and peasants and there­
fore from the start they have attended to the value of what is 
necessary and useful in the greatest and smallest things, and this 
1 See his Essay on Painting (1765, published 1796). It was translated by 
Goethe, but with severe critical conunents . 
• A. w .. I7S9-I8I4. 

598 
I I. I l l. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
they can procure with the most assiduous industry. In religion the 
Dutch were Protestants, an important matter, and to Protestantism 
alone the important thing is to get a sure footing in the prose of 
life, to make it absolutely valid in itself iridependently of religious 
associations, and to let it develop in unrestricted freedom. To no 
other people, under its different circumstances, would it occur to 
make into the principal burden of its works of art subjects like 
those confronting us in Dutch painting. But in all their interests 
the Dutch have not lived at all in the distress and poverty of 
existence and oppression of spirit ; on the contrary, they have 
reformed their Church themselves, conquered religious despotism 
as well as the Spanish temporal power and its grandeur, and 
through their activity, industry, bravery, and frugality they have 
attained, in their sense of a self-wrought freedom, a well-being, 
comfort, honesty, spirit, gaiety, and even a pride in a cheerful 
daily life. This is the justification for their choice of subjects to 
paint. 
A deeper sense arising from an inherently true subject-matter 
cannot be satisfied by subjects like these ; but if heart and thought 
remain dissatisfied, closer inspection reconciles us to them. For 
the art of painting and of the painter is what we should be de­
lighted and carried away by. And in fact if we want to know what 
painting is we must examine these little pictures in order to say of 
this or that master : He can paint. Therefore it is not at all the 
painter's business, as may be supposed, to give us through his work 
of art an idea of the subject that he brings before us. Of grapes, 
flowers, stags, trees, sandhills, the sea, the sun, the sky, the finery 
and decoration of the furnishings of daily life, of horses, warriors, 
peasants, smoking, teeth-extraction, domestic scenes of the most 
varied kind, of all these we have the most complete vision in 
advance ; the world provides us with plenty of things like this. 
What should enchant us is not the subject of the painting and its 
lifelikeness, but the pure appearance which is wholly without the 
sort of interest that the subject has. The one thing certain about 
beauty is, as it were, appearance for its own sake, and art is mastery 
in the portrayal of all the secrets of this ever profounder pure 
appearance of external realities. Especially does art consist in 
heeding with a sharp eye the momentary and ever changing traits 
of the present world in the details of its life, which yet harmonize 
with the universal laws of aesthetic appearance, and always faith-

INDIVIDUAL C HARACTE R I S T I C S  
599 
fully and truly keeping hold of what is most fleeting. A tree, or 
a landscape, is something already fixed, independent and perma­
nent. But the lustre of metal, the shimmer of a bunch of grapes by 
candlelight, a vanishing glimpse of the moon or the sun, a smile, 
the expression of a swiftly passing emotion, ludicrous movements, 
postures, facial expressions-to grasp this most transitory and 
fugitive material, and to give it permanence for our contemplation 
in the fulness of its life, is the hard task of art at this stage. While 
classical art essentially gave shape in its ideal figures only to what 
is substantial, here we have, riveted and brought before our eyes, 
changing nature in its fleeting expressions, a burn, a waterfall, the 
foaming waves of the ocean, still-life with casual flashes of glass, 
cutlery, etc., the external shape of spiritual reality in the most 
detailed situations, a woman threading a needle by candlelight, a 
halt of robbers in a casual foray, the most momentary aspect of 
a look which quickly changes again, the laughing and jeering of 
a peasant ; in all this Ostade, Teniers, and Steen are masters. 1 
It is a triumph of art over the transitory, a triumph in which the 
substantial is as it were cheated of its power over the contingent 
and the fleeting. 
While here it is just the pure appearance of the things depicted 
that provides the true subject of the picture, art goes still further 
by making the fugitive appearance stationary. In other words, 
apart from the things depicted, the means of the portrayal also 
becomes an end in itself, so that the artist's subjective skill and his 
application of the means of artistic production are raised to the 
status of an objective matter in works of art. The older Dutch 
painters made a most thorough study of the physical effects of 
colour ; van Eyck, Hemling, and Scorel2 could imitate in a most 
deceptive way the sheen of gold and silver, the lustre of jewels, 
silk, velvet, furs, etc. This mastery in the production of the most 
striking effects through the magic of colour and the secrets of its 
spell has now an independent justification. While the spirit repro­
duces itself in thinking, in comprehending the world in ideas and 
thoughts, the chief thing now-independently of the topic itself­
is the subjective re-creation of the external world in the visible 
element of colours and lighting. This is as it were an objective 
1 A. van Ostade, 16Io-85. D. Teniers, 1610-<)0. ]. Steen, 1626--79· 
• For 'Hemling' read Memling'. J. van Eyck, 1370-I4fi. H. Memling, 
1433-94· ]. van Score!, 1495-1562. 

6oo 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
music, a peal in colour. In other words, just as in music the single 
note is nothing by itself but produces its effect only in its relation 
to another, in its counterpoint, concord, modulation, and harmony, 
so here it is just the same with colour. If we look closely at the 
play of colour, which glints like gold and glitters like braid under 
the light, we see perhaps only white or yellow strokes, points of 
colour, coloured surfaces ; the single colour as such does not have 
this gleam which it produces ; it is the juxtaposition alone which 
makes this glistening and gleaming. If we take, e.g., Terburg's1 
satin, each spot of colour by itself is a subdued gray, more or less 
whitish, bluish, yellowish, but when it is looked at from a certain 
distance there comes out through its position beside another 
colour the beautiful soft sheen proper to actual satin. And so it is 
with velvet, the play of light, cloud vapour, and, in general, with 
everything depicted. It is not the reflex of the heart which wishes 
to display itself in subjects such as these, as it often does in the 
case of a landscape, for example ; on the contrary, it is the entire 
subjective skill of the artist which, as skill in using the means of 
production vividly and effectively in this objective way, displays 
its ability by its own efforts to generate an objective world. 
(y) But therefore interest in the objects depicted is inverted, 
so that it is the stark subjectivity of the artist himself which intends 
to display itself and to which what matters is not the forming 
of a finished and self-subsistent work, but a production in which 
the productive artist himself lets us see himself alone. When this 
subjectivity of the artist no longer infects the external means of 
representation only, but the subject-matter itself, art thereby 
becomes the art of caprice and humour. 
(b) Subjective Humour 
In humour it is the person of the artist which comes on the 
scene in both its superficial and deeper aspects, so that what is at 
issue there is essentially the spiritual worth of his personality. 
(c.:) Now humour is not set the task of developing and shaping 
a topic objectively and in a way appropriate to the essential nature 
of the topic, and, in this development, using its own means to 
articulate the topic and round it off artistically ; on the contrary, 
it is the artist himself who enters the material, with the result 
that his chief activity, by the power of subjective notions, flashes 
r G. Terborch. r617-8 r. Not his 'Atlas', as Osmaston has it. 

I N D I V I D UA L  C HARACTERISTICS 
6oi 
of thought, striking modes of interpretation, consists in destroying 
and dissolving everything that proposes to make itself objective 
and win a firm shape for itself in reality, or that seems to have 
such a shape already in the external world. Therefore every 
independence of an objective content along with the inherently 
fixed connection of the form (given as that is by the subject­
matter) is annihilated in itself, and the presentation is only a sport­
ing with the topics, a derangement and perversion of the material, 
and a rambling to and fro, a criss-cross movement of subjective 
expressions, views, and attitudes whereby the author sacrifices 
himself and his topics alike. 
(ft) The natural error in this connection is to suppose that it is 
very easy to make jests and to be funny about oneself and every­
thing available, and that this is why the form of the humorous is 
commonly snatched at ; but it happens equally commonly that the 
humour becomes flat if the author lets himself go in the field of the 
contingency of his notions and pleasantries which, strung loosely 
together, deviate into indefiniteness, and, often with deliberate 
bizarrerie, conjoin the most heterogeneous things. Some nations 
are more indulgent to this sort of humour, others are more severe. 
In the case of the French, the humorous in general meets with 
little success, in our case with more, and we are more tolerant of 
aberrations. So with us Jean Paul, e.g., is a favourite humourist, 
and yet he is astonishing, beyond everyone else, precisely in the 
baroque mustering of things objectively furthest removed from 
one another and in the most confused disorderly jumbling of topics 
related only in his own subjective imagination. The story, the 
subject-matter and course of events in his novels, is what is of the 
least interest. The main thing remains the hither and thither course 
of the humour which uses every topic only to emphasize the sub­
jective wit of the author. In thus drawing together and concatenat­
ing material raked up from the four corners of the earth and every 
sphere of reality, humour turns back, as it were, to symbolism 
where meaning and shape likewise lie apart from one another, 
except that now it is the mere subjective activity of the poet which 
commands material and meaning alike and strings them together 
in an order alien to them. But such a string of notions soon wearies 
us, especially if we are expected to acclimatize ourselves and our 
ideas to the often scarcely guessable combinations which have 
casually floated before the poet's mind. Especially in the case of 

6oz 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C FORM O F  A RT 
Jean Paul one metaphor, one witticism, one joke, one simile, kills 
the other ; we see nothing develop, everything just explodes. But 
what is to be resolved in a denouement must previously have been 
unfolded in a plot and prepared in advance. On the other side, if 
the artist himself is devoid of the core and support of a mind 
filled with genuine objectivity, humour readily slips into what is 
namby-pamby and sentimental, and of this too Jean Paul provides 
an example. 
(y) True humour which wishes to hold aloof from these out­
growths therefore requires great depth and wealth of spirit in order 
to raise the purely subjective appearance into what is actually 
expressive, and to make what is substantial emerge out of con­
tingency, out of mere notions. The self-pursuit of the author in the 
course of his expressions must, as is the case with Sterne and 
Hippe!, be an entirely naive, light, unostentatious jogging along 
which in its triviality affords precisely the supreme idea of depth ; 
and since here there are just individual details· which gush forth 
without any order, their inner connection must lie all the deeper 
and send forth the ray of the spirit in their disconnectedness as 
such. 
Herewith we have arrived at the end of romantic art, at the 
standpoint of most recent times, the peculiarity of which we may 
find in the fact that the artist's subjective skill surmounts his 
material and its production because he is no longer dominated by 
the given conditions of a range of content and form already in­
herently determined in advance, but retains entirely within his own 
power and choice both the subject-matter and the way of pre­
senting it. 
(c) The End of the Romantic Form of Art 
Art, as it has been under our consideration hitherto, had as its 
basis the unity of meaning and shape and so the unity of the 
artist's subjective activity with his topic and work. Looked at more 
closely, it was the specific kind of this unification [at each stage] 
which provided, for the content and its corresponding portrayal, 
the substantial norm penetrating all artistic productions. 
In this matter we found at the beginning of art, in the East, that 
the spirit was not yet itself explicitly free ; it still sought for its 
Absolute in nature and therefore interpreted nature as in itself 
divine. Later on, the vision of classical art represented the Greek 

I N D I V I D UA L  CHARACTER I ST I C S  
6o3 
gods as naive and inspired, yet even so essentially as individuals 
burdened with the natural human form as with an affirmative 
feature. Romantic art for the first time deepened the spirit in its 
own inwardness, in contrast to which the flesh, external reality, 
and the world in general was at first posited as negative, even 
though the spirit and the Absolute had to appear in this element 
alone ; yet at last this element could be given validity for itself 
again in a more and more positive way. 
(ex) These ways of viewing the world constitute religion, the 
substantial spirit of peoples and ages, and are woven into, not art 
alone, but all the other spheres of the living present at all periods. 
Now just as every man is a child of his time in every activity, 
whether political, religious, or scientific, and just as he has the task 
of bringing out the essential content and the therefore necessary 
form of that time, so it is the vocation of art to find for the spirit 
of a people the artistic expression corresponding to it. Now so 
long as the artist is bound up with the specific character of such 
a world-view and religion, in immediate identity with it and with 
firm faith in it, so long is he genuinely in earnest with this material 
and its representation ; i.e. this material remains for him the infinite 
and true element in his own consciousness-a material with which 
he lives in an original unity as part of his inmost self, while the 
form in which he exhibits it is for him as artist the final, necessary, 
and supreme manner of bringing before our contemplation the 
Absolute and the soul of objects in general. By the substance of his 
material, a substance immanent in himself, he is tied down to the 
specific mode of its exposition. For in that case the material, and 
therefore the form belonging to it, the artist carries immediately in 
himself as the proper essence of his existence which he does not 
imagine for himself but which he is; and therefore he only has the 
task of making this truly essential element objective to himself, 
to present and develop it in a living way out of his own resources. 
Only in that event is the artist completely inspired by his material 
and its presentation ; and his inventions are no product of caprice, 
they originate in him, out of him, out of this substantial ground, 
this stock, the content of which is not at rest until through the 
artist it acquires an individual shape adequate to its inner essence. 
If, on the other hand, we nowadays propose to make the subject of 
a statue or a painting a Greek god, or, Protestants as we are today, 
the Virgin Mary, we are not seriously in earnest with this material. 

6o4 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM O F  ART 
It is the innermost faith which we lack here, even if the artist in 
days when faith was still unimpaired did not exactly need to be 
what is generally called a pious man, for after all in every age 
artists have not as a rule been the most pious of men ! The require­
ment is only this, that for the artist the content [of his work] shall 
constitute the substance, the inmost truth, of his consciousness 
and make his chosen mode of presentation necessary. For the 
artist in his production is at the same time a creature of nature, his 
skill is· a natural talent ; his work is not the pure activity of com­
prehension which confronts its material entirely and unites itself 
with it in free thoughts, in pure thinking ; on the contrary, the 
artist, not yet released from his natural side, is united directly with 
the subject-matter, believes in it, and is identical with it in ac­
cordance with his very own self. The result is then that the artist 
is entirely absorbed in the object ; the work of art proceeds entirely 
out of the undivided inwardness and force of genius ; the produc­
tion is firm and unwavering, and in it the full intensity [of creation] 
is preserved. This is the fundamental condition of art's being 
present in its integrity. 
({3) On the other hand, in the position we have been forced to 
assign to art in the course of its development, the whole situation 
has altogether altered. This, however, we must not regard as 
a mere accidental misfortune suffered by art from without owing 
to the distress of the times, the sense for the prosaic, lack of 
interest, etc. ; on the contrary, it is the effect and the progress of 
art itself which, by bringing before our vision as an object its own 
indwelling material, at every step along this road makes its own 
contribution to freeing art from the content represented. What 
through art or thinking we have before our physical or spiritual 
eye as an object has lost all absolute interest for us if it has been 
put before us so completely that the content is exhausted, that 
everything is revealed, and nothing obscure or inward is left over 
any more. For interest is to be found only in the case of lively 
activity [of mind]. The spirit only occupies itself with objects so 
long as there is something secret, not revealed, in them. This is 
the case so long as the material is identical with the substance of 
our own being. But if the essential world-views implicit in the con­
cept of art, and the range of the content belonging to these, are in 
every respect revealed by art, then art has got rid of this content 
which on every occasion was determinate for a particular people, 

INDIVI DUAL CHARACTE RI STICS 
6os 
a particular age, and the true need to resume it again is awakened 
only with the need to turn against the content that was alone valid 
hitherto ; thus in Greece Aristophanes rose up against his present 
world, and Lucian against the whole of the Greek past, and in 
Italy and Spain, when the Middle Ages were closing, Ariosto and 
Cervantes began to turn against chivalry. 
Now contrasted with the time in which the artist owing to his 
nationality and his period stands with the substance of his being 
within a specific world-view and its content and forms of portrayal, 
we find an altogether opposed view which in its complete develop­
ment is of importance only in most recent times. In our day, in 
the case of almost all peoples, criticism, the cultivation of reflec­
tion, and, in our German case, freedom of thought have mastered 
the artists too, and have made them, so to say, a tabula rasa in 
respect of the material and the form of their productions, after the 
necessary particular stages of the romantic art-form have been 
traversed. Bondage to a particular subject-matter and a mode of 
portrayal suitable for this material alone are for artists today some­
thing past, and art therefore has become a free instrument which 
the artist can wield in proportion to his subjective skill in relation 
to any material of whatever kind. The artist thus stands above 
specific consecrated forms and configurations and moves freely 
on his own account, independent of the subject-matter and mode 
of conception in which the holy and eternal was previously made 
visible to human apprehension. No content, no form, is any longer 
immediately identical with the inwardness, the nature, the un­
conscious substantial essence of the artist ; every material may be 
indifferent to him if only it does not contradict the formal law of 
being simply beautiful and capable of artistic treatment. Today 
there is no material which stands in and for itself above this 
relativity, and even if one matter be raised above it, still there is 
at least no absolute need for its representation by art. Therefore 
the artist's attitude to his topic is on the whole much the same as 
the dramatist's who brings on the scene and delineates different 
characters who are strangers to him. The artist does still put his 
genius into them, he weaves his web out of his own resources but 
only out of what is purely universal or quite accidental there, 
whereas its more detailed individualization is not his. For this 
purpose he needs his supply of pictures, modes of configuration, 
earlier forms of art which, taken in themselves, are indifferent to 

6o6 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTI C  FORM OF ART 
him and only become important if they seem to him to be those 
most suitable for precisely this or that material. Moreover, in most 
arts, especially the visual arts, the topic comes to the artist from 
the outside ; he works to a commission, and in the case of sacred 
or profane stories, or scenes, portraits, ecclesiastical buildings, 
etc., he has only to see what he can make of his commission. For, 
however much he puts his heart into the given topic, that topic yet 
always remains to him a material which is not in itself directly the 
substance of his own consciousness. It is therefore no help to him 
to adopt again, as that substance, so to say, past world-views, i.e. 
to propose to root himself firmly in one of these ways of looking 
at things, e.g. to turn Roman Catholic as in recent times many have 
done for art's sake in order to give stability to their mind and to 
give the character of something absolute to the specifically limited 
character of their artistic product in itself. The artist need not be 
forced first to settle his accounts with his mind or to worry about 
the salvation of his own soul. From the very beginning, before he 
embarks on production, his great and free soul must know and 
possess its own ground, must be sure of itself and confident in 
itself. The great artist today needs in particular the free develop­
ment of the spirit ; in that development all superstition, and all 
faith which remains restricted to determinate forms of vision and 
presentation, is degraded into mere aspects and features. These 
the free spirit has mastered because he sees in them no absolutely 
sacrosanct conditions for his exposition and mode of configura­
tion, but ascribes value to them only on the strength of the higher 
content which in the course of his re-creation he puts into them 
as adequate to them. 
In this way every form and every material is now at the service 
and command of the artist whose talent and genius is explicitly 
freed from the earlier limitation to one specific art-form. 
(y) But if in conclusion we ask about the content and the forms 
which can be considered as pecult'ar to this stage of our inquiry in 
virtue of its general standpoint, the answer is as follows. 
The universal forms of art had a bearing above all on the abso­
lute truth which art attains, and they had the origin of their 
particular differences in the specific interpretation of what counted 
for consciousness as absolute and carried in itself the principle for 
its mode of configuration. In this matter we have seen in symbolic 
art natural meanings appearing as the content, natural things and 

IND I V I D UAL CHARACTERISTICS 
human personifications as the form of the representation ; in 
classical art spiritual individuality, but as a corporeal, not in­
wardized, present over which there stood the abstract necessity of 
fate ; in romantic art spirituality with the subjectivity immanent 
therein, for the inwardness of which the external shape remained 
accidental. In this final art-form too, as in the earlier ones, the 
Divine is the absolute subject-matter of art. But the· Divine had 
to objectify itself, determine itself, and therefore proceed out of 
itself into the secular content of subjective personality. At first 
the infinity of personality lay in honour, love, and fidelity, and 
then later in particular individuality, in the specific character 
which coalesced with the particular content of human existence. 
Finally this cohesion with such a specific limitation of subject­
matter was cancelled by humour which could make every deter­
minacy waver and dissolve and therefore made it possible for art 
to transcend itself. Yet in this self -transcendence art is nevertheless 
a withdrawal of mail.lrito himself, a descent into his own breast, 
whereby art strips away from itself all fixed restriction to a specific 
range of content and treatment, and makes Humanus its new holy 
of holies : i.e. the depths and heights of the human heart as such, 
mankind in its joys and sorrows, its strivings, deeds, and fates. 
Herewith the artist acquires his subject-matter in himself and is 
the human spirit actually self-determining and considering, medi­
tating, and expressing the infinity of its feelings and situations :  
nothing that can be living in the human breast i s  alien to that 
spirit any more.1 This is a subject-matter which does not remain 
determined artistically in itself and on its own account ; on the 
contrary, the specific character of the topic and its outward forma­
tion is left to capricious invention, yet no interest is excluded­
for art does not need any longer to represent only what is absolutely 
at home at one of its specific stages, but everything in which man 
as such is capable of being at home. 
In face of this breadth and variety of material we must above all 
make the demand that the actual presence of the spirit today shall 
be displayed at the same time throughout the mode of treating this 
material. The modern artist, it is true, may associate himself with 
the classical age and with still more ancient times ; to be a follower 
of Homer, even if the last one, is fine, and productions reflecting 
1 Hegel is obviously alluding to the familiar line of Terence. See p. 46, 
note. 

6o8 
I I. I I I. THE ROMANTIC FORM OF ART 
the medieval veering to romantic art will have their merits too ; but 
the universal validity, depth, and special idiom of some material is 
one thing, its mode of treatment another. No Homer, Sophocles, 
etc., no Dante, Ariosto, or Shakespeare can appear in our day ; 
what was so magnificently sung, what so freely expressed, has been 
expressed ; these are materials, ways of looking at them and treat­
ing them which have been sung once and for all. Only the present 
is fresh, the rest is paler and paler. 
The · French must be reproached on historical grounds, and 
criticized on the score of beauty, for presenting Greek and Roman 
heroes, Chinese, and Peruvians, as French princes and princesses 
and for ascribing to them the motives and views of the time of 
Louis XIV and XV ; yet, if only these motives and views had been 
deeper and finer in themselves, drawing them into present-day 
works of art would not be exactly bad. On the contrary, all 
materials, whatever they be and from whatever period and nation 
they come, acquire their artistic truth only when imbued with 
living and contemporary interest. It is in this interest that artistic 
truth fills man's breast, provides his own mirror-image, and brings 
truth home to our feelings and imagination. It is the appearance 
and activity of imperishable humanity in its many-sided signi­
ficance and endless all-round development which in this reservoir 
of human situations and feelings can now constitute the absolute 
content of our art. 
If after thus determining in a general way the subject-matter 
peculiar to this stage, we now look back at what we have considered 
in conclusion as the forms of the dissolution of romantic art, we 
have stressed principally how art falls to pieces, on the one hand, 
into the imitation of external objectivity in all its contingent shapes ; 
on the other hand, however, into the liberation of subjectivity, in 
accordance with its inner contingency, in humour. Now, finally, 
still within the material indicated above, we may draw attention 
to a coalescence of these extremes of romantic art. In other words, 
just as in the advance from symbolic to classical art we considered 
the transitional forms of image, simile, epigram, etc., so here in ro­
mantic art we have to make mention of a similar transitional form. In 
those earlier modes of treatment the chief thing was that inner mean­
ing and external shape fell apart from one another, a cleavage partly 
superseded by the subjective activity of the artist and converted, 
particularly in epigram, so far as possible into an identification. 

I ND IVIDUAL CHARACTER I S T I C S  
Now romantic art was from the beginning the deeper disunion 
of the inwardness which was finding its satisfaction in itself 
and which, since objectivity does not completely correspond with 
the spirit's inward being, remained broken or indifferent to the 
objective world. In the course of romantic art this opposition 
developed up to the point at which we had to arrive at an exclusive 
interest, either in contingent externality or in equally contingent 
subjectivity. But if this satisfaction in externality or in the sub­
jective portrayal is intensified, according to the principle of 
romantic art, into the heart's deeper immersion in the object, and 
if, on the other hand, what matters to humour is the object and its 
configuration within its subjective reflex, then we acquire thereby 
a growing intimacy with the object, a sort of objective humour. Yet 
such an intimacy can only be partial and can perhaps be expressed 
only within the compass of a song or only as part of a greater whole. 
For if it were extended and carried through within objectivity, 
it would necessarily become action and event and an objective 
presentation of these. But what we may regard as necessary here is 
rather a sensitive abandonment of the heart in the object, which is 
indeed unfolded but remains a subjective spirited movement of 
imagination and the heart-a fugitive notion, but one which is not 
purely accidental and capricious but an inner movement of the 
spirit devoted entirely to its object and retaining it as its content 
and interest. 
In this connection we may contrast such final blossomings of 
art with the old Greek epigram in which this form appeared in its 
first and simplest shape. The form meant here displays itself only 
when to talk of the object is not just to name it, not an inscription 
or epigraph which merely says in general terms what the object is, 
but only when there are added a deep feeling, a felicitous witticism, 
an ingenious reflection, and an intelligent movement of imagina­
tion which vivify and expand the smallest detail through the way 
that poetry treats it. But such poems to or about something, a tree, 
a mill-lade, the spring, etc., about things animate or inanimate, 
may be of quite endless variety and arise in any nation, yet they 
remain of a subordinate kind and, in general, readily become lame. 
For especially when reflection and speech have been developed, 
anyone may be struck in connection with most objects and circum­
stances by some fancy or other which he now has skill enough 
to express, just as anyone is good at writing a letter. With such 

61o 
I I. I I I. THE ROMAN TIC F O RM OF ART 
a general sing-song, often repeated even if with new nuances, we 
soon become bored. Therefore at this stage what is especially at 
stake is that the heart, with its depth of feeling, and the spirit and 
a rich consciousness shall be entirely absorbed in the circumstances, 
situation, etc., tarry there, and so make out of the object something 
new, beautiful, and intrinsically valuable. 
A brilliant example of this; even for the present and for the 
subjective spiritual depth of today, is afforded especially by 
the 
Persians and 
Arabs 
in the eastern splendour of their 
images, in the free bliss of their imagination which deals with 
its objects entirely contemplatively. The Spaniards and Italians 
too have done excellent work of this kind. Klopstock does say1 of 
Petrarch : 'Petrarch sang songs of his Laura, beautiful to their 
admirer, but to the lover-nothing.' Yet Klopstock's love-poems 
are full only of moral reflections, pitiable longing, and strained 
passion for the happiness of immortality-whereas in Petrarch we 
admire the freedom of the inherently ennobled feeling which, 
however much it expresses desire for the beloved, is still satisfied 
in itself. For the desire, the passion, cannot be missing in the 
sphere of these subjects, provided it be confined to wine and love, 
the tavern and the glass, just as, after all, the Persian pictures are 
of extreme voluptuousness. But in its subjective interest imagina­
tion here removes the object altogether from the scope of practical 
desire ; it has an interest only in this imaginative occupation, 
which is satisfied in the freest way with its hundreds of changing 
turns of phrase and conceits, and plays in the most ingenious 
manner with joy and sorrow alike. Amongst modern poets those 
chiefly possessed of this equally ingenious freedom of imagination, 
but also of its subjectively more heartfelt depth, are Ruckert, and 
Goethe in his West-ostliche Divan. Goethe's poems in the Divan 
are particularly and essentially different from his earlier ones. In 
Willkommen und Abschied [Welcome and Farewell], e.g., the 
language and the depiction are beautiful indeed, and the feeling 
is heartfelt, but otherwise the situation is quite ordinary, the conclu­
sion trivial, and imagination and its freedom has added nothing 
further. Totally different is the poem called Wiederfinden [Meeting 
again] in the Divan. Here love is transferred wholly into the 
imagination, its movement, happiness, and bliss. In general, in 
similar productions of this kind we have before us no subjective 
1 In Dԛ kiinftige Geliebte (The Future Sweetheart), I747· 

I N D I V I D UAL CHARACTE R I STICS 
6J J 
longing, no being in love, no desire, but a pure delight in the 
topics, an inexhaustible self-yielding of imagination, a harmless 
play, a freedom in toying alike with rhyme and ingenious metres­
and, with all this, a depth of feeling and a cheerfulness of the 
inwardly self-moving heart which through the serenity of the out­
ward shape lift the soul high above all painful entanglement in the 
restrictions of the real world. 
With this we may close our consideration of the particular forms 
into which the ideal of art has been spread in the course of its 
development. I have made these forms the subject of a rather 
extensive investigation in order to exhibit the content out of which 
too their mode of portrayal has been derived. For it is the content 
which, as in all human work, so also in art is decisive. In accordance 
with its essential nature, art has nothing else for its function but 
to set forth in an adequate sensuous present what is itself inherently 
rich in content, and the philosophy of art must make it its chief 
task to comprehend in thought what this fullness of content and 
its beautiful mode of appearance are. 

